Jesus Maria Joseph Teresia.

THE SOVL'S DELIGHT COMPOSED BY THE R. F. PAVL OF St. VBALD, RELIGIOUS OF THE
HOLY REFORMED ORDER, OF THE MOST BLESSED Virgin. MARY, of the MOUNT CARMELL,
For the benefit of all devout Soul's, but chiefly, of those that are given to
mental prayer, and are desirous of spiritual perfection.

Accedite ad eum and illuminamini, and facies vestrae non confundentur.

Come ye to him, and be illuminated and your faces shall not be confunded.
psalm. 33. v. 5.

Delectare in Domino, and dabit tibi petitiones cordis tui.

Be delighted in our Lord, and he will give thee, the petitions of thy heart.
psalm. 36. v. 4.

IN ANTWARP By WILLIAM LESTEEMS in Hoochstrat at the sign of the Pelican.
1654.

printer's or publisher's device Joh. Colbatche, S.T.P.

Trin. Coll. Cant. Socius Sen.



TO THE MOST HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY FRANCIS BVTLER OF KILKASH,
The author wishes all health and happiness.
Madame
1. WHen I finished this little work, called the Soul's delight, I knew not,
to whom I should dedicate or direct it; until at length, reflecting on the
piety and devotion, which in your, ladyship I observed being at Kilkash: and
with all, considering the orderly composition of your Chapel, with those
devout pictures of the Altar, decent vestments, fine and clean Altar clothes,
the observance of hours, for prayer, the great content which you took in
speaking, and conuersing of spiritual matters; and above all, the seruent
desire you had, to advance your soul, in the way of perfection, and the love of
God; for which end (if you remember) you told me, that somtymes, your sisters,
and your self, of purpose, did visit the most honorable, and truly virtuous
Lady of Thurles, your Mother in law, though living a far of; and parting
thence, as from the school, and Mistrisse of virtue, all of you were wholly
renewed in spirit, with great fervor, and desire of more seriously loving, and
serving God, the only goodness, and faithful spouse of all devout and loving
souls.

2. Reflecting (I say) on these, (with which certainly I was not a little
edified) I did resolve for your spiritual comfort, and partly their's, to
dedicate this Soul's delight, to your Ladyship, with whom, I know, it will
receive a better welcome, then those books, which treat of the vain
delights, and pleasures, of this transitory world. And though the bulk and
substance be but small, yet your humility, and piety, is such, that I fear you
will prise it, beyond its worth, through that high esteem you have, of the
smallest treatise (though never so simple) which speaks of God; this being a
true token of the love you bear to his divine Majesty.

3. Madame, I have considered it; and well may all that knows your Ladyship,
admire, to see so many virtues (but chiefly so great humility) in a soul of so
worldly an outward show. Yet truly, I cannot but confess, that it is the
prerogative of a virtuous soul, and not the least of virtues, to know, how to
cloak and hyde without note, the inward graces and gifts of God. But as the
sweetest perfumes which are closely shutvp, being openned, with greater vigor
and fragrancy of their odours, do recreat and delight such as are present,
even so those sweet hidden virtues, closely shutvp in the secret cabinet of
your devout soul, venting themselves, by that spiritual language of yours,
cannot but very much comfort, and delight the hearers; which, and your actions,
do tell us, what fire that smoke com's from; and more then so, it leaves in
the hearts, of such as you converse with, no small desire to burn with the
same fire; experience teaches what I speak, I say no more; but do acknowledge
that it has been a motive to me, not only daily to commend your Ladyship to
God, in my poor prayers, but also to address this little work, unto you,
which treats of prayer being an excellent mean to forvvard a soul so pious,
and amynd so virtuous, in true perfection, and the love of God.

4. Accept therefore of it, I beseech you, not so much for its vvorth, as for
the affection vvherevvith it is given, and give it no more praise, nor esteem,
(though called the Soul's delight) then you shall find profit thereby. Yet
peruse it well, and read it with attention, then with your understanding, and
will, by a serious consideration, and pious affection, walk in every sort of
prayer here laid down for each state of life, as in the alleyes of a
pleasant garden, delighting your spirit, with the varieties of such nosegaies
of virtuous flovvers as there are found, and God is wont to bestovv on his
own. Or suppose, that here is a table set before you, with many diuersityes
of banqueting stuff, and dishes of rare, and comfortable meats; taste now of
the one, then, of the other, and doubtless you shall not onlly please your
pallat, but also receive a svveet refection, and spiritual nourishment, by an
admirable satisfaction with divine consolation, in the appetites, and inward
powers of your soul; This is the way to delight your self, in, and with our
Lord, who seeing your diligence herein, will easily grant you the petitions
of your heart, and replenish you abundantly, with his grace, and love, in this
very life; and in the other, afford you his glorious fight, in which all true
happiness, and endless delight, does consist: this, he heartely wishes unto
your Ladyship, and vvil pray for, who is.

Madame Your must humble servant in Christ Jesus, Fr. PAVL or St. VBALD alias
S. B.

THE PREFACE
1. AMong the many ways, and means, helping us, to attain to, and gain out
final end, beatitude, and eternal felicity, (consisting in the blessed sight,
and joyful fruition of the ever living God, in whom alone all goodness is)
Prayer holds the leading way, and that chiefly, which is used mentally, the
sweetness, delight, and benefit whereof are so surpassing sense (when God so
pleases) that none though yet very learned, is able to express, unless, God
of his goodness does give him the experimental knowledge thereof; which his
divine Majesty most willingly affords to all, that will dispose themselves to
receive so great a favor, and blessing. It is 3. kings 10. v. 1. and
said in holy Scripture that the queen of Saba, hearing of the wisdom, and
greatness, of the Glory of Solomon, King of Israel, came from a far, to see
and hear him, which when she did, and had considered all; she was so raui^ht
with admiration, that her spirits failed her, and she esteemed those happy,
who were always in his presence, hearing his admirable wisdom, and beholding
the greatness of his Majesty. But much more we do daily hear, of our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus, who is more then Solomon, being the eternal wisdom
of God the Father; how happy then must they be, who are, and can be, when
they please in his Holy presence, in prayer, there considering, his greatness,
Majesty, and glory; and in the secret of their heart, hearing those mellifluous
speeches, and delightful words of life, falling from his blessed mouth, to
their great joy and comfort; for often here, their spirits fail them and they
are elevated far beyond themselves. he admits all persons to his presence,
conversation, and familiarity, without exception; he is always ready to give
audience, and the oftenner they come to him; the better is their welcome, yea
the more he does favor them, and bestow his gifts and graces upon them; and
his goodness is such, that he is not displeased with their presence, nor
troubled at their importunity, as worldly princes are, but joyful to see them,
delighted to hear them, much pleased to have the occasion to show his
willingness to grant what they demand, and he often gives more, then they know,
to ask.

2. Prayer makes one so inward with God, so great, and Gracious in his sight,
and so confident of his favor, that his divine Majesty can hardly deny him
any request what soever. Examples of this truth, you may read daily in Holy
Scripture, and the lives of Saints; as when God in his wrath and anger, said,
that he would utterly destroy the children of Israel for their wickedness and
grievous sins; Moses familiarly, and Exo. 32. v. 31.
confidently prayed, saying unto God, either forgive them, or blot me out of
the book of life, wherein thou have written me; at which presently they were
forgiven. The holy Prophet Elias our 3 kings 17. v. 1. Iac. 5. v. 17. 4 kings
1. v. 10. 3 kings 17 v. 22. 4. kings v. ^6.
Father, and founder, was so Gracious in the sight of God, that at his request,
it did not rain for three years, in punnishment of the sins of the enemies
of God; which past, he prayed again, that it should rain, and instantly it
was granted; at several other times he prayed that fire should descend from
heaven, and consume the persecutors of the holy Prophets, which instantly was
done, two companyes with their commanders being by fire from heaven destroyed
and consumed to dust. he also, and Blessed Eliseus, his disciple, by prayer,
brought the dead to life again. Also our Holy Mother S. Teresa writes in her
life, that (...) 39.
God ^ould her, that what she should demand he would always grant. to be
brief, by prayer, many are so powerful with his divine Majesty, that they
seem in a manner, Gods on earth, they are so wonderful in their lives, and
works, made spectatours (yet living in this vale of tears) of the glory of
heaven, where they see, and know the divine and hidden misteryes of God,
foretelling things to come, and revealing the secrets of peoples hearts.

3. And you must observe, that in prayer, there is no exception of persons with
God; for he gives his graces, as well to the poor, as to the rich and to the
ignorant's women, as to the learned men. neither must I here let pass, what
some with little reason say; to wit; that books treating of prayer, high and
mystical things, are not fit for, nor to be dedicated to women. But with their
favor, women are as capable and apt according to their natural disposition
for this exercise of prayer, and receiving divine impressions, and
illuminations of eternal verities, from the Father of light, as men. for they
have a reasonable soul, as well as men, which, God when he please may eleuat to
supernatural things; for he is not tied to any, nor his power limited, but
well knows, how, when, and to whom, to give his gracious favors, this
depending only of his own will; and his holy Spirit, where, and when he
please, inspireth, lightneth, inflameth with divine love, and instructs the
soul of men and women, in the knowledge of most high and hidden misteryes.

4. For the whole frame of prayer is grounded upon two points, which are
humility, and love; in these, it is well known, that women are ^^ore forward
then men; and this natural disposition of theirs being applied to God, by
frequent prayer, through his Holy Grace, disposes them to be partakers of
those divine illuminations, and they come sooner, to be in God's favor, and
receive supernatural gifts, then men. many other reasons there be, for the
same, which I here omit; and Blessed Peter of Alcantara did affirm this same
to our holy Mother S. Teresa, as she relates in her life; and experience has
taught from age to age, that they were eminent in the love of God, and that
their lives, and books written of divine Matters, even at this day, gives
admiration to the world. The declaration of supernatural things in visions and
revelations written by S. Heldegardis, S. Mathild, S. Birgitta, S. Isabell, S.
Catherin of Siena, and diverse of that sex, are testimonies of this truth, and
for a more ample probation thereof, what shall we say of the rare works,
books, and doctrine of our holy Mother S. Teresa which, as the sun at
midday, does illuminate the whole Church, in the knowledge of prayer, and the
ways, by which God does communicate himself in it, to such as do truly serve
and love him. Who can express the great good which has been done by this
one poor Virgin alone, by her exemplary life, angelical conversation, and
books, replenished with celestial documents, and instructions, for such as
are desirous, to gain true virtue, and perfection: o how many thousand souls
of all sorts of people are by her means saved? how many men and women, by her
example, and advise, became religious, forsakeing all that could give delight,
or content in this life? what part of the world are not those religious now in,
with their exemplary life and spiritual doctrine, illuminating Christian souls
in the way of virtue and true perfection? O how many myraculous Saints of both
sexes, were, and are of her reformation, (but a few years since began) whose
admirable lives, are daily a writing, and several of their bodies after being
many years in the earth, in token, and testimony of their Virginity, and
internal purity, found whole, and entire? and though afterward kept above
ground, and exposed to the air and weather, yet still Miraculously preserved,
and uncorrupted; of which I have seen some to my great comfort; so that God
(as she Prophet says) is truly Ps 67. v. ^6.
wonderful in his saints.

5. But to conclude (after my long digression) I could heartely wish, that all
men and women, would use this mental prayer; for it is the offspring, or
fountain of true knowledge, the ornament of Mental prayer.
the memory, the joy of the will, the peace of the mind, the treasure and glory
of the soul; for by it, we come to the true, and feeling knowledge of our
selves, and God; there, in our necessityes, and dangers we have recourse to
him, who is powerful, can, and will help us: for as long as we live in this
bannishment, we are like to a city strongly beseiged by our enemies, the
world, the flesh and the devil, who night and day, yea every hour does watch to
find an occasion, or any opportunity, to overcome, destroy, and devour us.
Therefore S. Peter prescribes, and advises, as the only remedy, for 1. Pet. 4.
v. 7. 1 Thesal. 5. v. 16. Mare. 14. v. 58.
prevention, and defense; to watch in prayer, and S. Paul, to pray without
intermission, and our Savior did admonish his Apostles to watch and pray,
least they should fall into temptation.

6. Prayer, S. Isidor says, is a scourge to our enemies, the relief and
refuge of a sinner, a comfort to our neighbors, and a sacrifice to God most
acceptable; our holy Mother S. Teresa had therefore good reason to extol it
with high praises, as being worthy, to be esteemed, used, and daily practiced
by all sort of people, and as that wherein their greatest safety does consist;
and whence all good, and spiritual happiness in this life, does proceed; and
without which, it is impossible to escape the dangers, and hurts of our enemies,
whiles we are in this mortality. So that prayer, as is said, being the leading
way, to the kingdom of heaven; and that in the house of God, there are many
mansions, and not one, and the same way, leading to all; nor each one, apt, or
fit, to walk, or go on in every way; I thought good to divide this treatise,
into three parts, out of which each one according to his state of life, and
occasions, may choose what way to take, and what exercise, to use.

7. In the first, I do declare what prayer is, in a general manner, the abuse
thereof, and how to pray with profit: and then a daily exercise to that end.
also I do set down some pious considerations of man's creation, moving us to
the knowledge of our selves, and our obligation, and duty to God: then the great
hurt of sin, and man's condemnation, Christ's love, in redeeming us,
instructions, how to go well prepared to confession, and communion, and to be
disposed, to dye well, with some devout prayers, and short meditations.

8, In the second, the benefit and parts of mental prayer, are expressed, and
explicated, with aduises for the better use, and practice thereof, after this,
the declaration of the purgative, illuminatiue, and unitive life, and what to
them are proper.

9. In the third part, there is a brief relation of supernatural prayer much
according to the mind of our Holy Mother S. Teresa, not that I intend to teach
what it is, but that pious souls (reading the great effects of it, and the
many graces, and favors which God is wont to bestow on those that give
themselves seriously to his service) may be animated, and encourraged to go
forward with great alacrity of spirit in this Holy exercise of prayer, which is
not the least of his great benefits, and blessings; and which I humbly beseech
his divine Majesty, to grant unto many, by the use of this book, for his
honor and glory, and the good of his Holy Church, which is the scope I aim
at, and the end, of all my desires, and labor. Amen.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
GEntle reader, although in this age, people are more curious, then pious, and
thence some may expect, in this treatise, elegancy (which in other books
written in English they do find) rather then sufficiency, or substance,
regarding that, far more, for their content, then this; yet I beseech thee,
to look here, for no such thing (whereas I do not make profession, of that
matter, being sufficiently satisfied, if for the profit of the readers, I can
make my self but to be understood in plain, and significant words) but read
it carefully, attending more, to the substance, then to the style, and to
piety, rather, then to curiosity; for in so doing, I do confide in god's
mercy, and goodness, that thou shall enjoy the fruit, and benefit of my labor,
with the spiritual comfort of thy soul, and the amendment of thy life: In the
mean while I entreat thee, charitably to excuse my defects, and the errors
escaped in the printing, being done in an other country, and by those that are
ignorant of the language, And pray for me. Vale.

JESUS MARIA.
Fr. Ioachimus a Jesus Maria Praepositus Generalis Fratrum Carmelitarum
Discalceatorum, Congregationis S. Eliae, Ordinis Beatissimae Virginis Mariae de
Monte Carmelo, ac eiusdem Sti Montis Prior.

CVm opus, cui titulus, Animae delectamentum, a R. P. F. PAVLO a Sto. VBALDO
Congregationis nostrae Sacerdote professo, compositum, duo eiusdem nostrae
Congregationis Theologi, quibus illud commissum fuerat, recognouerint, and in
lucem edi posse probauerint, faculratem impartimur, vt typis mandetur. In
quorum fidem praesentes dedimus sigillo nostro munitas, ac propria manu
subscriptas, Romae in Conuentu nostro Stae Mariae de Scala die Sexta Septembris
1653.

Fr. Joachimus a Jesu Maria Praepositus Generalis.

Fr. Faustus a Sto. Basilio Secret.

Fr. Ioannes a Matre Dei Fratrum Carmelitarum Discalceatorum Prouinciae S.
Joseph per Belgium Prouincialis.
EXcommissione R. Adm. P. N. Praepositi Generalis, facultatem, quantum ad nos
attinet, concedimus, vt liber cui titulus Animae delectamentum a R. P. F. PAVLO
a Sto. VBALDO Religionis nostrae Sacerdote professo compositus, and a duobus
Theologis nostrae Congregationis prius approbatus, Typis mandari possit. Datum
Gandaui in Conuentu nostro Sti. Joseph die 22. Augusti 1653.

Fr. Ioannes a Matre Dei Prouincialis.

Fr. Ioannes Augustinus a S. Teresia Secretarius.

OBlectamentum hoc animae, R. P. F. PAVLI a Sto. VBALDO Ordinis Carmeli
Discalceatorum, cura concinnatum, diligenter inspexi, quod and absque vlla
offensa tutum, iucundum, pium, ac deuotum, aestimaui; quo tanquam in salutifera
quadam mentis solitudine, inter fragantium odoramentorum, flores, rosarum and
liliorum amaenitudines afflicta ludit anima; recolligit se peccator; vulnera
sua videt and plangit; opem implorat, resurgit, and sanatur. Datum Bruxellis ex
Conuentu Fratrum Minorum hac 22. Nouembris 1651.

Fr. Raymundus Caronius S. Theolog. Lector.

DElicias animae a R. P. Patre F PAVLO a S. VBALDO collectas, and concinnatas,
non sine magna animi voluptate and delectatione perlegi, in quibus, nihil, aut
fidei Catholicae, aut Misticae Theologiae (de qua varijs in locis huius libri
tractatur) contrarium reperire potui: quinimo, omnia sunt valde pia, valde
deuota; and animabus religiosis, deuotis, and mentali orationi deditis,
perutilia; quapropter praelo and luce publica dignissimum censeo, 10 Sept. 1652.

Fr. Gregorius a Sto. Elia Carm. Disc. Theol.

LIbrum hunc, cui titulus, Animae delectamentum, a R. P. F. PAVLO a Sto. VBALDO
Carm. Disc. compositum, attente, magna cum deuotione and satisfactione perlegi,
in quo, nihil Catholicae doctrinae, aut bonis motibus, contrarium, sed omnia,
pia, cunctis que tam religiosis quam saecularibus serio Christo Domino
inseruire desiderantibus perutilia, notaui, Quippe homines in Oratione ac
mortificatione instruit, and pro quolibet statu, planam, facilem, nec non
suauem, ad omnem perfectionem, viam, ostendit; ideo publica luce dignissimum
censeo. Datum Bruxellis 16. Iulij 1653.

Fr. Angelus Joseph a Conceptione Carm. Discal. Theol.

APPROBATIO.
HOc Oblectamentum animae a R. P. F. PAVLO a Sto, VBALDO, Carmelita
Discalceato, compositum, ab eruditissimis S. Theologiae Lectoribus examinatum,
and nihil Catholicae fidei, aut bonis moribus repugnans, continere iudicatum,
Typis evulgari permitto. Actum 2. Septembris 1654

GVILELMVS BOLOGNINO S. Th. L. Can. and Lib. Censor Aniv.

THE FIRST PART What Prayer is, and of the abuse thereof.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
1. MAny that are given to prayer, do gain little profit thereby, because they
do not well know, nor consider what prayer is; for if they had known it, it is
like they would be more attentive in it, and use it as they ought; and so we
should have more saints then there are, and heaven more souls.

2. You must therefore understand, that prayer generally taken, is an elevation
or application of the mind to God; so, that notwithstanding a man pronounces
many Good words with his mouth, and seems to pray; not having this elevation;
it is no prayer, by reason the mind is not elevated, or applied to God. As for
example, a child required by his Father, or Master, to read very Godly prayers
in some devout, book, either to pass the time, or know whether he can read,
or no; is not said to pray, though he read's the most devout prayer that can
be. Why so? because he intended not to pray, and the principal thing (which is
the application of the mind to God) is wanting, and therefore Christ our
Savior speaking to the Pharisees, said, ye hipocrits, did not Esaias Prophecy
well of you saying, this people does praise me with their lips or Matt. 15. v.
7.
mouth, but their heart is far from me. this he said in the behalf of God,
by which you may observe, that our savior does term him an hypocrit, and
dissembler, who makes show of that which is not, moving his lips, as in
prayer, but not applying his heart or mind to God.

3. But alas, how many Pharisees and Hypocrites, may be found this day, even
among the very Catholics, that make show of praying, and serving God, their
hearts and mynds being far from him? We have the Pater noster, or Lords
Prayer, appointed by our Savior, to be said, Matt. 6. v. 9.
as the most excellent of all prayers, and many Godly books with devout
prayers, and hymns approved by the church, for the use, and benefit of all
Christians; and though vocally said, yet they are of great merit in the sight
of God, being well and attentively used, according to the former application.
Yet I am sorry, that there be many, so worldly and negligent, that they pray no
way, though in Christian duty obliged to pray; nay, they scarce call to mind,
whether there be a God, or no. which the Turks do not forger; so that going
to bed, or getting up, before meat, or after, they give no thanks, but couch,
and feed, as the brute beast's do; or, as if they were not obliged, (being
reasonable creatures) to praise, and give God thanks, for their being, life,
health, food, conservation night and day, from sudden death, and other
dangers; which (as others) they are subject to. And if by chance they go to
church on holy days to hear mass, or divine service, being thereunto bound,
under pain of mortal sin, they mind more to gase here and there, on this
or that body, attire, or new fashion, or give their mind to wander on idle
things, then what they ought to do in that place; and if they say some prayer,
as their beads, (for books they do not use) they know not what, or how they
say it, they are so much distracted, and their mind perhaps in the marker,
tavern, or some worsse place; and to those, the mass (though short, as not a
full half hour) seems so long, that they are there weried, and think it will
never end; and often they do not expect till then, but are away before time,
that their body may be present, where their heart, and mind were all the time
of mass.

4. Truly the light of faith is very much obscured, and darkened in these repid,
and luke warm Catholics; are not they in a poor case? what can they
expect, or hope for, at the hour of death, from God; whom in their life they
did so little respect and regard? for though his divine majesty be merciful, he
is also just; and when his mercy is not accepted, but abused, his justice will
in due time inflict a condign punnishment; God's mercy was great (note this
well) who endured with patience so many years such wrongs, and abuses (as
their grievous sins, and did not cast them suddenly into hell fire, as he did
the Angels of heaven, for one only sin,) graciously expecting their
conversion and repentance, which they think not of, putting all off, either
till they grow old, or fall sick, intending then to repent; as if the time, and
certainty of repentance were in their power, and at their disposal. but what
if they be short taken, and the thread of their life cut off by a sudden
death? (which does daily happen to many) what will become of them? which they
ought rather to consider; o then for a moment, wherein they might have made use
of gods mercy, when they lived, (an did not) and gained the joys of heaven by
repentance, which they neglected, they must endure without remission the rigor
of Gods justice, and suffer the torments of hell fire, for all eternity. woe be
unto them; O dear Christian beware of this, and repent whiles thou have time,
not knowing but that very hour, is the last of thy life;

5. There be others whose devotion is but small, and some times they have a
confused memory of their obligation, to serve God; and thence they fear his
punnishments: which make them some time go to prayer, mass, and those things,
to which they are bound; as to confess and receive, at least once a year;
which they do very coldly, and god grant they do it, to their profit: which I
fear they do not, for want of due preparation, though the salvation or
damnation of their souls, depend upon it. their prayers are not many, and in
haste, thinking that to say them, is enough, and that they have done well, and
a great matter too: but surely they are mistaken, (though they do better then
the former): for what honor have they done to God therein, or what great
profit, to them selves? that considered not for what, or to whom they praid;
whereas they minded him not, all the time of prayer; but rather when they
should end, to be gone away; which is a great abuse of prayer, and disrespect
to God. there are many of this sort, whose case is dangerous enough, and they
are to be pitied, instructed, and admonished by their Pastors.

6. An other sort of people I find, that have a good custom to go every day
to prayer, and to hear mass, which is laudable, but if they should truly
examen themselves, when all is done, perhaps they would find, that they were
thinking of their worldly affairs most of the time, and did scarce reflect
upon what prayers they said, being smoothly carried away with some thoughts,
which the devil does suggest according to their inclination, or natural
disposition; wherein, they take such content, that they, easily forget what in
prayer they are saying; for he does know how to sit every man's humor; yet by
reason their first intention was good, it makes the rest somewhat meritorious,
when their distraction was not wholly woluntary; but they cannot be excused for
their negligence, and disrespect to God, who is present, and to whom they ought
in prayer, to address their speech with great humility and reverence.

7. Others there are, that have that good custom, and they task them selves
with a certain number of prayers, which when they have performed, they think,
that they have done much; but whiles they pray, their mind runns more on when
they shall end their task; then how to please or praise God, and therefore,
they often lift their beads, or turn the leaf of the book, to see where
abouts they are; and in the mean time; their mind is a wandering, and their
tongue runns in all post, not knowing why, or whither; but makes have to come
to his iorney's end, that is. till all is said: and so very speedily they part.
yet though this be an abuse, it is of more importance then the others; for they
have not only an intention going to prayer, to serve God, but also to spend
time to perform that task which they have obliged themselves to; though
afterward they be distracted, or carried away, with vain thoughts; an other
good, it has, that they are never quiet, nor satisfied, till they have
performed the said number of prayers both morning and evening, which makes them
myndfull of God, when they are about business, and have not ended all.

8. But what shall we say of men that seem to be of understanding and know
much? and can discourse of our obligation to God, when they are among those
that speak of that matter, yet are as careless of their duty to god, as
others, and perhaps more; they seldom pray at home, and when they frequent the
churches, they stand and gase; they come to see, and be seen; and often, for
company's sake, rather then to pray; as to attend this nobleman, or that lady
whom they lead by the hand, more then for the love of god; and many times, to
meet this or that friend, or party, with whom they have some business; on
which their mind is more busied, then on their prayers; but those young
gallants and damicell's are worst of all, that prate, and laugh even at mass
and even song; they lightly say some Pater and Aue, and then they look about,
and if occasion be, they prate again, and perhaps speak of their neighbors
attire, or fashion, or of the priests behavior, or preachers doctrine if it
does not please them; they go to church, as it were but a bare ceremony, not
valuing that holy action as they ought; and they whose sex requires more
modesty, in the church, where it ought to be most, do show but leuity and
vanity, little devotion, and no recollection, though many are very Pious. in
short, though these caualliers and ladies, seem to be of some capacity more
then others, yet they so forget them selves, and their duty to god; that they
may be without offense, compared to the Jews, who kneeling Matt. 27. v. 29.
before our Savior, adored him in scorn; and then laughing, looked on each
other; in like manner, these say some prayer, carelesy (which is to undervalue
our Savior and little esteem him) and speedily they turn faces about, prate,
and smile at each other; and they do scarcely leave off, at the very
elevation, which is no sooner done, then they are up, and prate again. I
leave it to their censure; (this considered) whether it be not a foul abuse, a
great irreuerence and disrespect to that great god of glory; their creator and
redeemer?

9. Many also frequent the churches and Sacraments, that they may not be noted
to be cold Catholics, or indeuout; and many times, when they see others of
their quality communicating, not having thought of confession till then,
without any great sorrow for their sins, or due preparation, they confess and
receive; this is a great abuse; diverse other abuses in this kind. I omit, least
to be tedious, returning to what I said in the beginning; that whether the
prayer be vocal, or mental, without that elevation or application of the mind
to god, it is of lirle, or no profit at all.

10. For, who going to treat with a gentleman of fashion about some weighty
matter, by which he intends to benefit himself, would not court him the best
he could, or at least, give him that respect, as well in conversation, as
salutation, which to him is due, according to his quality and calling? much
more to a King when a petition is to be presented to him. For it is known in
all kingdoms, with what low submission and respect; and with how many bowings
or conjues, he is first saluted; before the petition be delivered; and then how
obseruant the petitioner is, of the kings gesture, whiles he reads it, how
carefully does he fix his eyes, to see when he will look at him, and how
attentively, and patiently does he expect his answer; Be you now judge dear
Christian in this case, whether a wrong be not done to the king of kings, and
lord of all things, when by those that go to speak and petition to him, he is
not so much regarded, as a temporal King, or worldly man of a mean degree:
for they scarce begin to pray, when most irreuerently they turn (as we may
say) their backsyde, to his divine Majesty, who is there present attending to
give audience, and hear their request: their mind busily speaking with the
world, and he left as a Cyphar there quite forgotten. O foul abuse? o great
irreuerence! o unspeakable ingratitude! my God how can thou endure it? my
dearest Lord, how do thou bear with such rude, and ungrateful people?
Verily thou art the God of patience, and goodness, the meanest man of any
fashion would not take the like affront at any others hands, though some what
beyond his degree. O true lover of our soul's, what can they expect by such
prayers, or I may better say, by such mockeryes? for though thou art most
merciful and gracious, and very willing to receive our petitions, and grant
what we desire; if we come to thee with that humble reverence, and true
confidence, which is fitting, and all ought to have in thee, or with that very
respect, and attention which they afford even to thy creatures. when (I say)
thy so great goodness and mercy are not regarded, (but they disesteeme thee
so much, and turn their hearts and mynds from thee) and the day of reckoning
come; doubtless thou will turn thy blessed face from them, and they may hear
to their cost; depart from me ye cursed into hell fire for ever. which is an
exclusion from the joys of heaven, and the sight of Gods glory eternally.

11. I beseech thee therefore, my merciful lord, that thou will peruent this
so great evil, and grant us most frail sinners, thy holy grace in this life,
to forsake this great irreuerence, and continual abuse of thy divine Majesty,
in time of prayer, which through negligence and inconsideration, we commonly
fall into, that thy sweet face may not be turned from us, at the hour of our
death, nor we be forsaken by thee for all eternity. Amen.

THE 2. CHAPTER.
How to pray with profitt.
1. FIrst dear soul I would have you understand, that in conversation with God
(for prayer is no other thing) neither rethoricall eloquence, subtilty of wit,
or great learning, is requisite, but a plain, humble, and simple declaration of
what you intend; for his divine Majesty understands our intention: therefore it
will be fitting, whenever you go to prayer, to have a certain intention, or
to propose to your self, some end, for which you intend then to pray, that
your prayer may not be in vain. As for example; I will go to prayer, to give
God thanks, for his many benefits bestowed on me; as for my creation,
redemption, and such like; and in token of gratitude, I will say such prayers,
or spend so long time at my devotions, or hear one mass, or more: or I will
confess and receive this day, in unfeigned thankfullnes, for the love which our
Savior did bear toward me, coming from heaven to earth, to suffer what he
did, in his life and death, to satisfy his heavenly father, for the sins of
such a vile and base wretch as I am. and then purpose through his grace, to
serve and love him ever after, with more fidelity and sincerity then formerly;
and crave his holy assistance and grace to that end: also at other times to
obtain true sorrow, repentance, and forgiveness of your sins; likewise
amendment of your life, or the ouercoming of some vice, or passion, to which
you are must inclined; or to gain some virtue; as patience, humility, love of
your neighbor, chastity. etc. moreover you may apply your prayers for the
souls in purgatory, your friends and parents that are dead; in like manner for
the conversion of sinners, the necessityes of our holy Mother the Catholic
Church, or for any other thing, that is commended to your prayers, or you
intend to obtain of his divine Majesty; for surely it is much simplicity and
ignorance in any, to go to prayer, and speak wirh this so great a king, and
gracious a Lord, and not know what about, nor considering to what end.

2. Therefore going to prayer (which is, as I said, to speak to that great
King, and lord of heaven and earth) remember allwaies to do and direct it, for
one of the former ends, or the like; which done, in the place of prayer,
suppose in your mind, that god is there present very gloriously (as truly he
is) accompanied and attended with many quires of Angels that are always
praising him with unspeakable reverence and love: and that he is then there, to
give you audience, and know your intent, and request. After this with great
submission and humility, address your petition to dis divine Majesty, by some
devout prayer, or if you say your beads; say, my God I offer this prayer, or
pair of beads, to thy divine Majesty for this end, (naming for what,) lookeing
sweetly on him with the eyes of your mind, or inwardly remembering that you are
speaking to him. And though the prayer be in latin (which some rather use) and
that you understand it not, yet because it is appointed, and approved by the
Holy Church, instructed, and directed by the Holy Ghost, for the use, and
spiritual good of the faithful, and that you say it, with an intention, and
desire to honor and please God, in that act: his divine Majesty will accept of
it most gratefully, and doubtless will grant you your request, or that which
you pray for; for he looks into the heart, and the desires thereof; and
regardes more the intention of the mind, and the affection where with you pray,
then the words which are pronounced; in so much, that let the prayer be never
so sweet in the vulgar tongue, and not addressed to his divine Majesty, with
attention and respect, it pleases him not, and avails you little or nothing.

3. So that let the prayer be in latin, or vulgar tongue, God does not regard,
the language, but the intention of the heart. wherefore you must always
endeavor to have your mind well applied (as is said) and for some particular
end, when soever you go to prayer; and in case through frailty, or some
suggestion of Satan, you be distracted, so it be not willingly admitted, by
reason of your first good, direction, intention, and application, your prayer
will not be void of merit; but be careful, in prayer to reflect some times on
what you do, and how you pray, and if you find your mind wandering, and not
applied as it ought; with humility cry God mercy, for that irreuerence, your
negligence and disrespect, acknowledging your frailty and carelessnesse, in
these or the like words. My God, thou se'est my frailty, inconstancy, and
negligence, and how easily with vain thoughts I am taken away, which plainly
show my little love to thee, forgive me my good God, and give me the assistance
of thy holy grace, that hereafter I may apply all my thoughts, and mind on
thee alone: this manner of proceeding in prayer, is very pleasing to his divine
Majesty; and believe it, he will not deny, what you so desire, or grant you a
better thing; for which end, you may also crave the assistance, and mediation
of those celestial, and most gracious courteours, which are about him, for
they do highly rejoice, to see their Lord (whom they dearly love) respected
and honored; and they will not fail to beseech his divine Majesty to grant
what you so humbly and earnestly shall demand, or desire.

4. This is the true way to pray with profit, and it will bring you with
facility, to mental prayer; for in deed vocal prayer so used, is both
vocal, and mental; and certainly God does concur particularly with those
that give them selves to prayer, granting them, not only many inward comforts
and consolations, but also such an exemplary life, that they are observed, and
beloved by most people. for the inward grace cannot but manifest it self, in
their outward works, so that you may see them often visiting the Churches,
hearing sermons, and divine service; frequenting the Sacraments with much
devotion, spending long time in prayer, with so great inward feeling, that
often outwardly the tears abundantly slow from the inward sweetness; they
read good books, to keep in, the little fire of devotion; they are also full
of compassion, works of mercy, and charity, spiritual and corporal, they
endeavor as near as they can to keep a pure and clean conscience, and are
desirous to serve, please, and praise God in all things; and thus they are
inflamed with divine love. I could wish that there were many more of this sort;
then there are; do you your endeavor to be one, for his grace will never be
wanting to a willing mind, and then remember me.

THE III. CHAPTER.
A daily exercise very profitable.
1. GOd Almighty (as we read in holy Exodus 13. v. 2. and 22. v. 29.
Scripture) commanded, that all first fruits should be offered unto him, in
acknowledgment, that he is creator, and absolute Lord of all, and that all
creatures have their being, and dependence of him alone. Therefore, in the
morning when you awake, lift up your heart suddenly to God, and offer unto his
divine Majesty, and ardent act of love, as the first fruit of your heart and
soul^ in these or the like words; my dear God omnipotent, thou art well worthy
of all love, in heaven and earth; and to be always praised by thy creatures
for, thy goodness, which is incomprehensible, and for thy wonderful, and
sweet love to us, without any merit, or desert of ours, and for thy singular
care, to provide for, and preserve us, poor sinners; and me chiefly this last
night, from many euiles, suggestions of the devil, a sudden and unprovided
death. wherefore my loving Lord, I do offer, unto thee, my heart, and soul,
yea, my self wholly, wishing that I had as great love to thee, a^ ever any had;
that I might not affect, nor desire any thing in heaven, or earth, but thy
sweet self alone; this, or the like will be acceptable to his divine Majesty,
who will receive it as a token of gratitude, and it will induce him to bestow
greater favors upon you; for he does love a thankful soul.

2. This done, if you be to get up; first bless your self with the sign of
the cross, and your clothes likewise; then putting them on with decency,
desire God to inuest your soul, with the fair garment of his divine grace;
being up, betake your self without delay to your oratory, or wonted place of
prayer, (though it be but in some corner of the chamber, or behind your
bedcurtine) placeing your self on your knees with reverence in his divine
Maiestyes presence; as is formerly said;

3. Then with a feeling sincerity, say the morning prayer, that follows this
exercise, or some other, in thanks for your being preserved that night past
and that his divine Majesty may likewise preserve you that day, chiefly, from
sin.

4. And do not as some, (too Careless of their salvation,) who being up,
fall a dancing and; singing, of idle things, as I have seen, or as others very
effeminat, lookeing in a glass, now walking hither, then thither, in the
chamber; then to the glass again: now they cast their hair on one side, then
on the other, and kembe it up and down, I know not how often, poudering it
with some trash; in which vanity, they spend not a little time, never thinking
once of God; or as others whose eyes are no sooner open, then they think on
their secular affairs, in which they are so drowned, that it seems to be more
their God, and adored by them, then he who gave them their being, and all that
transitory wealth which blind them, and is like unto a flower which seems
fair this day, but next morninge perhaps it is gone, withered, and decayed.

5. Do not I say, as they do, but after being up, and thanks given for that
good night, call to mind, the vice or passion, which you are most inclined to,
(as anger, envy, cursing, swearing, lying, dishonesty, detraction, or any
other) and considering that thereby you do often offend God, resolve, not to
offend therein that day; and crave his holy assistance, that you may perform
your good resolution, and overcome your passion, or vice; for which end, offer
some prayers, as five Paters, and Aues, in the honor of the five wounds of
Christ our Savior, or three, in honor of the holy Trinity, or some others
according to your occasions, or state as life; or as thus.

6. My God, thou know, that I am given to anger, (or name what it is) by
which I do often offend thy divine Goodness, and deserve thy wrath and
indignation, yet for love of thee, with the assistance of thy holy grace (which
I humbly beg of thee) I do resolve, and purpose to dye rather then give way
to my passion, or wicked inclination this day, though all the occasions and
iniuryes possible should be offered unto me, that I may not displease thee my
God.

7. This practice, and daily resolution will not only make you wary in
occasions, but also hearty, and courragious to overcome your self, and resist,
and suppress the passion, or vice; this requires no long time, but may be
speedily and with facility done.

8. When you have ended, order your household affairs, giving such directions
to your servants, (if you have any) as your state requires, or speedily go to
mass, (if you can conveniently,) if not, go about your worldly occasions,
and endeavor to hear mass after; for it is of great merit, and God will
bless your affairs the better all day after. But observe that what thing
soever spiritual or corporal you go about, or intend to do, allwaies, to
direct it, to Gods honor and glory (who is present with you every where,)
saying these or the like words;

9. I beseech thee my God, that this which I am to do, or go about, may be
highly to thy honor and glory. Or thus. I wish my dear Lord, that I could
please thee in this act, or business, as the greatest saints, and Angels do
in heaven. You see, that to do this, is but a small and easy thing; and you
may say it, in your mind, which none but God, who knows and sees the secrets
of all hearts, can observe, to whom certainly it will be very acceptable, and
to you meritorious and profitable; for in making this short act, there is no
labor, trouble, difficulty, or austerity; but this direction may be practiced,
with great sweetness and facility, by every Christian, poor and rich, great
and small, sick and healthy, in all occasions and affairs, and it is to be
taught to children, even from their infancy, for the use and daily practice of
it, will make it pleasing, and easy; and it being so small a matter, though
great before God, none can excuse himself from performing this little in Gods
service, saying, I have no time, by reason of my many occasions and affairs,
whereas, so few words my be inwardly said in the very going, or acting any
business what soever.

10. For in the most serious employment that can be, they may remember, to
think once of God in their mind; neither ought they so to employ them selves
in worldly affairs, as wholly to forget God, being created to serve him in this
life. which if they do, in the other, they shall enjoy him in glory, for ever;
and for those that do very little or no service to his divine Majesty, the
least they ought to do; is, to offer unto him a desire, to serve and please
him, in directing (as is said) what they do, by so few words to his honor and
glory, or wishing in their heart, that they could please him; which is quickly
done without pain o^ trouble; they give way to, and intertaine many vain and
idle thoughts; why not then a few good thoughts? this being to their spiritual
profit, and that to their great hurt. for truly God will not leave the least
good act, or thought unrewarded. Moreover this has an other benefit; for
beside the merit of those acts, they preserve the mind, from those which are
evil and sinful. Also they dispose a man, and keep him myndfull, to resist
his passions, if by chance in occasions he find him self moved; and withal
they procure a quiet and pure conscience, and a strict friendship, and
familiarity with God, this is a blessing and happiness, to those only known,
who by use thereof, have the delightful feeling of it; there is none so
ignorant or dull, but may practice it being in so few words, and so easy.

11. But they that can spare time, may remain longer in prayer, both morning
and evening, then they, whose occasions do not astord them that benefit; and
commodity; and for their comfort, it will much avail, to read, or hear a
chapter of the life of Christ, his saints, or of some other spiritual, and
devout book, gathering thence, some pious document, wherein to employ their
mind, and move their affections to God, who is always present (as is said)
looking on, and considering what we think and do.

12. Note also, that when you read, any pious thing, you must not run it
over, as a horse galloping in haste, but slowly, and attentively, with a desire
rather to be moved to devotion, the love of God, and other spiritual
affections, then to know, through curiosity, what it is, or what is contained
in the book; which is a cammon temptation of the devil; for when in reading,
one is moved inwardly, by the holy ghost, to devotion; he ought to rest in it,
and go no further; but Satan who allways watches to hinder our good, does
edge us on, to read more, and more, under a pretense, of getting greater
knowledge, and to be more moved to devotion but in the mean while his intention
is, that the inward motion of devotion, may decay, (least by it, any spiritual
profit might be gained) and when you think it will continue, and that you may
have it, when you please, by too much reading you shall find your self dry,
and void of any good motion, by reason you did not accept, and make good use
thereof when he gave it.

13. We read, to be moved, to devotion; if we gain it; what need we seek
further, till we have fed on that, it being our spiritual food? we find, that
when S. Francis had any holy inspiration, (though travailing) he would desire
his compagnion, to go on a little before, and he did sit him down, till he had
eaten that holy bitt, by due consideration, and some pious affection, with
thanks to his divine Majesty.

14. Therefore, in reading, being moved; instantly shut the book, or lay it a
side; then ruminat, or quietly consider in your mind, what you read, and to
what in particular you are moved; and accordingly make some act of virtue; as
for example, being moved considering that by your sins, you often offended God,
and deserved his displeasure, endeavor to be grieved, make an act of
contrition and desire God to pardon and forgive you. if you are moved to the
love of God, considering his benefits, and love to you; endeavor to be
thankful, making acts of gratitude, and desire his holy grace, that you may
serve him more seriously ever after, then formerly; and so of other things;
this is the manner to read with merit, and profit, and it will delight the mind
very much, and induce the soul, by degrees, sweetly to take content and joy, in
spiritual things, and the service of God; this is a necessary digression from
my first purpose, and a profitabile advise.

15. Now returning to what we left; and supposing that your affairs were
directed, and disposed according to your occasions and state of life, till
dinner time; then, be take your self for a little space, to the oratory, or
place of prayer, there briefly, desire God to give you light, and grace, to
call to mind, what you did amisle, in thought, word, and deed all day, till
then; examine your conscience, and if you find any fault committed, cry God
mercy, ask forgiveness, and purpose to amend, saying. My God, I have sinned
against thee, for which I am heartely sorry; sweet Jesus for thy bitter passion,
have mercy on me, and forgive me; for I resolve to dye rather then offend thee
more. and desire the B. V. Mary, the Mother of God, to pray for you; but if you
committed no offense, give God thanks, for having preserved you, acknowledging
that if he had not so done, through his holy grace; dubtlesse you had fallen
into many sins.

16. This humble acknowledgment is very grateful to his divine Majesty, and if
you have time, you may say the littanyes of our lady; if not, nor, conueniency
of place; make this examination mentally in the same place; whilst you expect
dinner, that you may not omit so good a custom and exercise: The table set,
and grace said, according to the Catholic custom, sit down; calling to mind,
that the heavenly banquet (to which you are invited by the Son of God, who
came in proper person for that end, from heaven to this world) is prepared for
you; and that they be most happy, who are now sitting with him in glory, at
that joy full, and endless feast; therefore with true affection, wish
heartely, that you were there among them. At other times, whilst you are at the
table, consider how carefully God does provide for your sustenance; and that
many better then you, and greater servants to his divine Majesty, and far
more deserving then you, often have not meat to eat; think then on those
pious souls that for Gods love, live in wods and desert places, content with
bread and water, few herbs, and roots; and others, in cloisters or
monasteryes, that feed meanly, only on fish and such like; they fast long, and
lie hard; and you having such varietyes, or at least, more then sufficient; for
want of dainties, are scarce well contented, or not so thankful, as you ought.
lience inwardly produce an act of mortification, and gratitude, for this his
care had of you, providing so well for you, not loving, nor serving his divine
Majesty, as others do, and as you ought.

17. With these, and the like good considerations, you shall feed your soul
spiritually, as with these meats you feed your body corporally; and always
seek rather to satisfy nature, that you may be able to serve God, and perform
the duties, and obligations, of your state; then in any wise; please your
taste, or seek sensuality, and delightful gust, in eating and drinking; then
dinner ended, and grace said, recreat your self, with some indifferent
pastime, and honest conversation, for an hour; or go about your household, or
other worldly affairs, as your occasions shall require, directing all, to
God's honor, and glory, as is formerly said; and if you can afford so much
time, in the after noone, you may read, some chapter, as is said for the
morning.

18. About five of the clock. (I speak to those that can spare time,) go to
prayer, either vocal, or mental, or at any certain hour in the evening, and
spend such time in it, as you can afford; yet. commonly if it be in mental
prayer, exceed not an hour; and at supper, and after, observe what is said,
for, and after dinner; at nine of the clock, or soon after, go to the place
of prayer, examine your conscience, say the litanyes, and if you please, ad to
it, the evening prayer, or act of contrition, which here follows; then
sprinkle some holy water, on your self, your chamber, and bed; for beside,
that it increases grace, in the soul, (as learned divines hold), it is of
great force, to bannish thence, any evil spirit, and it produces many other
good effects; this the holy church and daily experience teaches; and our holy
Mother S. Teresa writes much In her life 31. chap.
of the efficacy and good thereof. then laying your clothes of, desire God, to
stripp you, of all sin, wherewith your soul is covered; this done, go to
bed, bless your self, making the sign of the cross; and setting your self,
to sleep, desire his divine Majesty, to give you good rest, that night, that
the next day, you may be better able, to serve him, and perform your other
obligations, according to your state of life; and to this end, crave the
assistance of the B. V. Mary, your good Angel, and the saint to whom you are
most devoted; then with some good thought, of the passion of our Savior, or
some other spiritual matter, put your self to sleep.

19. This is a plain and very easy way to serve God, and it is of such
sweetness, merit, and profit, that in a little time, they that use it
carefully, will gain great perfection in the love of God.

20. I have known a gentlewoman of good fashion, married, of many businesses,
and having, not a few children, who gave her self to this exercise, not a full
year, when she told me, that she not thinking, of God, her soul would be often
inwardly employed with him, making acts of love, by reason whereof, she
began in a short time, to take such delight in it; that she did spend some
hours in mental prayer every day, with great facility and content of mind;
thus she became spiritual, full of charity, and good works, which happiness,
I wish unto thee dear Christian by the practice of this exercise, desiring
thee to pray for me.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
The morning Prayer after you are up.
1. O Most blessed Trinity, God omnipotent, most bountiful; whose sovereign
power, is over all thy creatures, and who do continually desire their
weldoing; I do adore thee, in the presence of thy blessed Angels,
acknowledging, and confessing thy benefits, to me, thy unworthy servant, to be
very many, and that by thy holy ptouidence, and power, I was preserved this
last night, from sin, and an unprovided death; for which, and all thy other
gracious favors, I am most heartely thankful, and would, if that I could, in
some kind return love for this thy love and mercy, but know not how; yet my
dear and loving lord; I do most humbly beseech all thy blessed Angels,
saints, and creatures, in my name, and behalf, to be thankful unto thee, and
praise thee, for all eternity; and all my bowels, powers and senses, of body
and soul, praise thee, with them, for ever; for thou art God omnipotent,
goodness indeficient, our gracious king, our provident lord, our most
merciful father, and bountiful benefactor, from whom we enjoy our being, and
what else we have thou art therefore highly worthy, of all adoration, worship,
love, service, and praise, yea, and of all thanks, honor, and glory, in
heaven and earth; I wish, my God, that I had as many hearts in flamed with
diaine love, as there has been, or shall be creatures, till the worlds end;
that I might employ them all, in thy holy service, praise, and thanks giving;
though this had been but little, in comparison of the much I owe unto thee; o
lord accept of my desire, and true affection, which, with my body and soul, all
the thoughts, words, and deeds, of my whole life, and chiefly of this day, I
willingly and freely do offer unto thee, that all may be to thy honor, and
glory; assist me herein with thy holy grace o lord, and so direct, and protect
me, this day, that I may not fall, from the observance of thy holy laws, but
in all, fulfill thy blessed will, serve thee with more fidelity, love thee
with more sincerity, and rather dye then once offend thee. to whom be all
thanks, and praise, in heaven and earth, world without end. Amen.

The evening Prayer.
2. O Most gracious, and merciful God, of whose goodness it comes that thou
art served, and praised, by all thy creatures; thy eyes, are always looking
on thy servants, and thy ears, open to hear their prayers, and thy loving
heart, inclined, and ready to grant what they desire. thou have o lord
vouchsafed, to hear my voice (though a wicked sinner) and grant me my request,
having preserved me this day from many dangers, the power of Satan, and the
slavery of sin, to walk in thy sight, according to thy holy will, and laws;
thanks infinitely be unto thee; for I do confess, my God, that every moment,
I had fallen to sin, if thy holy grace, had not supported, and kept me up,
being of my self frail, unconstant, and prone to all evil; blessed may
thou be my God for ever; and all thy creatures, with thy own goodness, and
mercyes, praise thee, for all eternity. Let thy name, o lord, thy power, and
bounty be known to all, that know thee not, that they may honor and magnify
thee. bring all, my dear God, by thy great power to love, serve, and praise
thee. O my most loving, and living lord, my good, and gracious Father, my
merciful and sweet redeemer, make me thankful, for all thy blessings, and
holy gifts; and as thou have mercifully, preserved me this day, so I humbly
beseech thy divine Majesty, through thy goodness, to keep me, this night,
from all illusions of Satan, unprovided death and sin; that rising in the
morning with sweet Jesus, the true sune of justice, I may with all thy creatures
thankfully bless, and praise, thy holy name, through Christ, thy said dear
son, our lord. Amen.

A Prayer, or act of contrition, going to bed.
3. MOst merciful IESV, my sweet Savior, and dear lord, I am thy creature,
and the work of thy hands, redeemed with thy precious blood, and one to whom
thou have been always bountiful, and beneficial, which, my God, I
regarded not, as I ought; but sinned wilfully, against thee, who art worthy of
all love; and therefore I am unworthy, to lift my eyes, or behold the heavens,
or to appear in thy holy presence. I do confess that in the wickedness of
my heart, I have contemned thy holy will, not observed thy commandments,
neglected, thy sweet inspirations, the wholesome counsels, of thy servants, and
the good aduises, of my ghostly fathers; I followed the foul, and unjust
desires, of my heart, and by my wicked life, was the cause, of thy Bitter
Passion, Blody wounds, and painful death; I have often troubled thy holy soul,
and afflicted, thy loving heart; my iniquityes, are great, and many; and like a
heavy load, do vehemently oppress me; I deserved, thy wrath, and
indignation, and am not fit to live on earth, or enjoy the benefit, of the
air, by which I breath, for having so grievously offended thee. o my dear
Jesus, I am very wicked, I have not kept mine eyes. from beholding vain
objects, nor mine ears, from hearing detraction, nor my tongue, from lies, and
lascivious talk, nor my hands from unclean, and uncivil touchings, nor my
heart from malice, and desire of reueng. O my God, what shall I say, whither
shall I go, or what shall I do? my heart, would burst with grief, and now
do loath to live, for having offended thee; o cursed sin, I wish, I had
never known thee; I do abhor thee; I do derest thee; O beauty of the
Angels. o comfort of the world sweet Jesus: I am most heartely sorry for having
so displeased thee; and at thy holy feet, I accuse, and condemn my self, I
am the worst of sinners, and justly deserved hell. have mercy on me, o have
mercy on me, dear Jesus; forgive and pardon me; o grant me, for thy Precious
Wounds, a sorrowful and repentant heart, and forgiveness of my sins. free me
from hell, and Satan, receive me to thy mercy, and favor; afford me, thy holy
grace, hereafter to amend, and live, and dye, in true faith, hope, and
charity, who do live, with the father, and holy Ghost, true God, for ever
and ever. Amen.

A profitable advise, to be observed.
4. Dear Christian, though God be highly pleased with devout prayers, and is
very willing, to hear us; yet you must not come to him, at any time, being in
sin; unless you first resolve to forsake it, and discharge your conscience,
with the first opportunity; for otherwise, you do but tempt God; which is a
great offense; for where sin is, there the devil is; how can you then pray,
and desire God, come unto you, and give you his holy grace, if you do not
resolve to forsake the devil. but intertaine him, in your soul; and the opposite
of grace, which is sin? this were truly, to deride and affront his divine
Majesty, with an open contempt. for as light, and dacknesse, cannot be
together: so God and the devil, sin and grace, cannot be together, in the
same soul; what fruit can be expected from a withered tree? the soul in
sin, is dead, and withered, what fruit of grace, or merit, can thence
proceed? do not offer so foul an abuse to God. but as often, as you find, your
self guilty, of any crime; first, cry God heartely mercy; be truly sorrowful,
for having offended his divine Majesty, and resolve to go to confession, with
all speed. then your prayers, may be grateful, and acceptable; and you may
find him more forward to forgive and grant you his grace, then you, to ask or
demand it. But perhaps you not knowing the hurt, and evil of sin, and your
obligation, to forsake, and abhor it, and to serve God, with all your heart;
you do not truly weigh (as you ought) what it is, to offend God. Therefore you
may often read, the following considerations.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
Brief considerations, induceing, man, to the knowledge of himself, his duty
to God, and a love to heavenly happiness.
1. A Man that knows not his obligation, or what benefits he received, from an
other, can hardly love the party deserving, or be as thankful to him, as he
ought, or would have been, if he knew them, or were informed of them. he
therefore that shall read these following considerations cannot be excused, if
he be unmindful of God, his chief benefactour; neither can he be ignorant
of his benefits, and obligation, to love, and serve him.

2. First consider, how that great God, of all goodness (who was from all
eternity, without beginning; and shall be forever, without end, maker of heaven,
and earth, created man, according to his Genesis 1. v. 26. and 27.
own similitude, and likeness; that is. with a reasonable soul, free will,
memory, and understanding: adorning him, with original justice, sanctifijng
grace, faith, hope, and charity; and by a special gift, the body, without
contradiction, or rebellion, of the sensitive part, was subject, and obedient,
to the spirit, or superior part. so that, both being well ordered, to wards
God, might claim a right, to the kingdom of heaven, if Adam had so pleased;
Also he being created in this happy state of innocence; for his more content,
was placed by God, in paradise; Gen 2. v. 15.
the only place, on earth, of all delight, and pleasure; what obligation,
arises hence, to love, serve, and praise God, appears plainly to all, but to
the ungrateful;

3. Secondly consider, that for the use and service of man, God created, this
visible world, with all things contained therein; and gave him, the dominion,
over all creatures, as being their lord. King Psalm. 8. v. 8. and 9.
David said; thou have, o lord, appointed him, to have the government of all
creatures, and have subjected all, under his feet, the foul, of the air, the
fish, of the sea, and the beasts, of the earth; so that Adam's call, to any of
them, was command sufficient, to lie at his feet. hence also proceeds, an
obligation, to praise God.

4. Thirdly consider, that the end, for which, man, was thus created, placed,
in paradise, and made lord over all things, on earth. was, and, is; that he
considering, God's goodness, and power, his great benefits, the wonderful
order, the sweet disposition, the rare varietyes, and admirable beauty, and
fairness, of these visible creatures, might come to understand, and know his
creator, and those invisible things of God, as the Apostle affirms, that
neither eye, has seen, 1. Cor. 2. v. 9.
ear, has heard, or the heart of man, can reach unto; and consequently,
love, serve, and praise his divine Majesty, in this life, and enjoy him, in the
other, for ever where his glory is; which is man's true felicity. Observe this
well, that, you are created, and beautified, with so many inward graces, and
ontward ornaments to love, serve, and praise God in this life: and for so
doing, you are promised, life everlasting in glory; but if you do not serve
him, as you ought, after so many benefits, and obligations; surely, you cannot
be without fault, and you will be rebuked, as an unprofitable servant, and
deprived of that great glory, and endless happiness.

5. Who looking on the heavens, will not consider, and admire the power,
greatness, wisdom, and beauty of God, their creator? what is the sun, the
moon, and stars, in their greatest light, beauty, and glory, but a shadow, of
that great, unlimited, and indeficient light, and brightness, of that infinite
splendor, incomprehensible beauty, immense Majesty, and inaccessable glory, of
God, the maker and supreme lord, of all, who created them in so great
fairness for our sakes, and benefit? by that means to induce us, to consider,
and understand, that the beauty, and glory, of the creator, is
incomprehensible, and infinitely exceeding theirs; for we may well conceive,
that he who gave them, so fair a being, of a mere nothing, must far,
without any comparison, exceed them, in all their perfections; and is
therefore, worthy to be served, loved, and praised, even for his own
goodness, and perfections, besides that we are thereunto obliged, by all those
benefits.

6. Moreover what is, I beseech you, the sweetest air, that breathes content,
and the cleerest skies, which give delight, in the fairest summer day; but a
cloud of darkness, in comparison, of the more then cristaline skies, clear
brightness, infinite light, and endless day, which is, and for ever shall be,
in heaven? for if these corruptible things, are so glorious, how far, more
glorious without any proportion, must those be, which are incorruptible in
heaven, where the king of kings, creator, and lord, of all things, has made
his kingdom, his dwelling seat, his throne of Majesty, and glory; the
habitation of his blessed Angels; the land promised to his faithful servants,
the true and eternal Paradise, of endless delight, where all with joyful
hearts, shall sing forth his divine praises, for ever and ever? for, what God
of his goodness, has prepared there, for those that truly love and serve him
here; is so far Surpassing sense, and all understanding; that S. Gregory
admiring, Homil. 37. in euang.
said, my dear brethren if we consider, what, and how great, the things be,
which are promised and prepared for us in heaven: all what soever is on earth,
will seem vile and base, yea, and contemptible, in comparison of them; and
grow loathsome to the mind. for this temporal life, compared with that life,
which is eternal, is rather to be termed, death, then life; what tongue,
(says he) is able, to express, or what understanding, can conceive, how
great the joys are; of that supernall city? to be among the quires of
Angels; to stand with those most blessed spirits, before the glory, of their
creator, to behold God's beautiful countenance present, to see that unlimited
light, to be free from ever dijng. to rejoice, in enjoying, the perpetual gift
of incorruption? if then the only consideration, of these celestial things be
of such force, as to make men hate, and forsake all wealth, and pleasures, by
reason of the great content, which inwardly it works; what will it be, and
cause in us, when we shall be there present, where we shall see clearly, all
things as they are in themselves; and above all; that divine essence
comprehending all things, and incomprehensible in it self, which only can
perfectly fill, and satisfy the heart, and capacity, of man.

7. This consideration, and desire, to be there, caused Emperors, Kings,
Princes, and thousands of the Potentates, of this world, to forsake their
Scepters, Kingdoms, and Dominions, with all the pomp, and pleasures, of this
life, and became abject, in the house of God; to wit, in a religious state, in
great austerity, and poverty; King David being, so powerful, Ps. 16. v. 15.
and having what content, this world could afford; said; then only, o lord, I
shall be satisfied, and fully contented, when thy glory shall appear; as if he
said; my God, though I should enjoy, all the happiness, and content of this
world, and that they were never so great, yet should not I be at rest,
satisfied, or have true content, without the joyful sight of thy glory, face
to face; for he well knew, that in this, man's true felicity, and endless
happiness does consist; and that for this end, he was created, as is formerly
said; the reason of this, is manifest, for man's capacity, is in a manner
infinite, and therefore, nothing, but that which is infinite, can fully content
it; for if he should enjoy all that is contained, in heaven and earth, not
enjoying the blessed sight of God's divine essence and glory; his capacity
would not be satisfied nor his heart, at rest; because always, there would be
some what more, then all that, to be desired, enjoyed, and could give more
content; which, is God; in seeing whom alone, and enjoying his blessed presence,
there can be nothing beyond him, to be desired, all other things whatsoever,
being finit, and of a limited being; and God only infinite, without beginning,
or, ending; and in whom, all creatures, and such as possibly can be, are
contained, may be seen, and enjoyed; so that man's capacity and desire, not
being able to go further, must of necessity, be thereby satisfied, and fully
set at rest, with all, endless content, and joy; which is his bliss. o happy
and high dignity of man, who is created for so eminent, and Noble an end; as
not to rest nor be truly satisfied, with any thing inferior to God, who alone
can completely give him all content?

8. Consider hence, o man, thy great obligation, to serve, love, and praise
God; and once (I pray thee) shoot a right, and with a true feeling, say unto
thy self; what a bassenesse it is, beyond all measure, and understanding, that
I, a creature so Noble, ordained for so glorious an end, should (this
notwithstanding) employ this great, and rare capacity, in deceauing shadows,
or in affecting any vile, transitory, and vain creature, or any thing
whatsoever, inferior, to God; but principally the foulness of filthy sin? o
who would be so ungrateful, and injurious, as to prefer in his heart, and
esteem any thing, before, or more then God? O Noble Christian, affect none
such, and do not vilify, and undervalue thy self, whom thy God, does so
highly esteem, and affect; as to create thee, to his own likeness, make thee
a citizen of heaven, his familiar friend, his beloved fauorit, partaker of his
glory, and Kingdom; and to feast at his table with delight, for all eternity,
if the fault, be not thine; o dear soul, I beseech thee, once again, for his
love, and thy endless good, always to place thy thoughts, beyond all that is
created, and with blessed S. Augustine, let not thy heart be at quiet, until
it rest with peace in the abisse of Gods divine essence and goodness, where
thou shall enjoy all true happiness, and sweet content, world without end,
Amen.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
Of the fall of Adam, from his happiness, by sin.
1. Daily experience teaches, that flowing wealth, worldly content, and
pleasing prosperity, in this life so steals the heart of man, even from
himself; that he easily forgetts, what he was, is, or shall be; or by whom, he
has his very being; and so falls blind fold (as we may say) into the pit of
sin. Therefore, that a man may come to know himself, and his own misery;
and to prevent so great an evil; it will be good, often to consider, that he
was a mere nothing, before God created his soul, by his infinite power: and as
for his body, it is framed, of the filthy slime, of the earth; Gen 2 v. 7. Job
14. v. 1.
and when it comes, to the best, it is but a vessel, of corruption, subject to
many diseases, full of uncleanness, and ofren, by these, and his other evil
conditions, and qualityes, he is both noisome, troublesome, and intolerable to
himself, and others; and weary of his life; though his wealth, or calling be
never so great; and to understand his greater misery, let him carefully
reflect, on what, his body and soul, shall come unto, after his death; as
touching the body, which is so much pampered, and cared for, as we daily see;
it is but a dead, insensible thing, by all friends forsaken, and speedily turned
out of his own house, taken to the Church, and cast into a hole of the earth,
there to rot, and putrify, and become meat for worms, but which is worst of
all; what shall become of the poor soul? to heaven it goes not, to purgatory,
it may; but to hell, is most like; for if he dyed in sin, he is not only the
enemy of God, but also, the slave of the devil, and fuel, to burn in hell
fire, for all eternity; the Matt. 7. v. 14.
way, that leads to heaven, is narrow, and few go therein; but the way, that
leads to hell, is large, and many go thither. live therefore dear
christian, as thou do intend to dye, and always do, what at thy death
thou would wish, thou had done. then pride, and worldly vanity, shall
take no hold in thee, nor cause thee, to forget thy self, and thy duty toward
God.

2. What caused Lucifer, to forget Esa. 14. v. 13 and 14.
himself? but his to great beauty, of which, he took the occasion (through
pride) to aspire to be like unto God, in glory; for which sin, he was cast
hedlong, from the height of heaven, to the depth, of hell, where he must
remain in perpetual torments, and endless flames;

3. In like manner, Adam, having all Genesis ^. v 5. and 23.
content, and pleasure, of this life, placed in Paradise, forgot himself, and
his duty toward God, his sweet creator, and benefactour, from whom he had
all; and through ambition, and pride, desirous, to be as God, knowing good and
bad, lost gods favor, and grace, the happy state of innocence, wherein he was
created, and was bannished, from paradise, and deprived of all the delights and
pleasures thereof. this fatal fall, of these two, is well expressed in this
verse, which I read, in the life of a saint (primus ad ima ruit, magna de luce,
superbus, sic homo cum tumuit, primus, ad ima ruit,) in English thus; (of too
great beauty proud, the first of angels fell; so did the first of men, when he
with pride did swell.)

4. King David, that blessed Prophet, considering the fall of Adam, and the Ps.
48. v. 13.
misery he came unto, said; when man was in honor, and dignity, he understood
it not, that is, he did not consider it, as he ought; and therefore forgot him
self and his duty, toward god (of whom he depended and had his being, and
that noble, and rare capacity, that great honor, and glory, of original
justice, the happiness, of being placed, in paradise, and ordained, to enjoy
God for ever in glory,) and would be like unto him; and thus he fell into
sin, as Lucifer did; and so was deprived of all; and compared, to the brute
beasts, and became like unto them, (as we see most d^e even at this day)
following sensual or bestiall appetites, and not the light and conduct of
reason; by which he ought to moderat, and rule those bestiall inclinations, and
order all, to god's honor and glory.

5. This want of considering, what we ought to do, in all occasions, according
to our obligation, is the ruin of many thousand souls, and the great sea,
wherein most of the world, are drowned. I wish to God, men would be like
themselves, reasonable creatures; and reflect more, on them selves, and their
actions, then they do; then surely, no wealth, no world's content, no pride,
nor ambition, no pleasure, nor prosperity, would so hood wink their eyes. and
understanding as to make them, forget their obligation, and duty, to God; by
placeing their hearts, and affections, on creatures, and not upon their
sovereign lord, and loving creator; or on transitory, and not eternal
things. woe be unto them, that spend their days, in pleasures, and in an
instant they descend to hell.

6. Now let us consider more in particular, the manner of Adam's fall; he, as
Job. 21. v. 13.
is formerly said, being so nobly created, placed in paradise, having the fish,
of the sea, the beasts, of the earth, and the foul of the air, to come at his
call, as to their lord, (a great dignity) and the earth, without labor,
yealding all sort of flowers, herbs, and fruit; that he might eat what he
listed, and do what he would', to the end, therefore that he might not forget,
that he had a superior, over him; and a lord, from whom he had those benefits;
God gave him a command; which was; not to eat of the tree, of the knowledge Genesis
2. v. 17.
of good, and bad; which was sufficient (chiefly with the punnishment
threatened that they should dye if they did the contrary,) to keep him
myndfull, of his dependence, duty, and obligation, unto God; But the Serpent
(says the scripture) being craftier, then all others, (this, Genesis 3. v 1. etc.
was the devil, enui^ng that great happiness of man, (who was to enjoy in
heaven, those places, which he, and his apostatat angels, lost, for their
pride) did endeavor, by all means, to work his fall, ruin and destruction;
you see what the fruit of envy, and malice is.

7. And to compasle this (being apt, and knowing, how to deceive, and make
things, appear, otherwise, then really they are in themselves) with a cunning
slight, he came to Eua, (not to Adam, she being easier, to be wrought upon)
and said; why do not ye eat of that tree, meaning the forbidden tree, of
which, the fruit was very fair? she answered, that God commanded them, not to
eat thereof, saying, that whenever we do eat of it, we shall dye; the
subtle devil, replied, you shall not dye; as if he said; believe it not, there
is no such matter, but God knowing, that if you do eat of that tree, you shall
be like gods, knowing good, and bad, has therefore threatened, that you should
dye, and commanded you not to eat thereof, least you should be like himself,
knowing good and bad; this was a strong temptation, by which Eua, was allured
(through ambition, and pride, aspiring to that great dignity, to be as God) to
consent, and did eat, of it: she also gave of it to Adam, who by her
persuasion, did eat thereof, to his cost, and our's.

8. O unhappy happiness, so much desired, by which, true happiness was lost;
For Adam had no sooner offended, (breaking gods command,) but instantly he was
deprived of original justice, and that fair garment of innocence, with which
he was invested; and then saw his own nakedness, and filthiness; which,
through shame, caused him, to hyde himself, among the tree's; God demanded of
him, where he was, and why he hid himself? he answered, that he was naked; who
told thee, that thou were naked, (God said to him) but because thou did eat,
of the forbidden tree? and without delay, both he, and Eua, were bannished from
Paradise, woyde of all grace; and then, he who a little before, commanded all
creatures, had all things, without toil, and labor; and could delight
himself, in what he pleased; was forced, to labor, gain his bread, and earne
his living, by the sweat of his brows, turning and digging the earth; yea the
very fishes, foul and beasts, regarded him not euerafter.

9. For as he rebelled against God, and Disobeyed him, being the common lord,
of all; so they rebelled against him; by which, he might be sensible of his
crime; but to conclude, Adam, by the persuasion of Eua, and the lie, of the
devil, through ambition of greatness,) eating of the forbidden fruit, lost the
felicity he had, and got not the other, which he aimed at this unlawful desire
of Adam, is so crept, and rooted in the hearts of men, that to compass their
ambitious ends, or some pretended, or affected pleasure, they little care, to
break gods command; and the devil is so cunning, that he makes things appear
so pleasing, according to the humor, and disposition, of every one, which he
well knows, and under the color of some great happiness, or delight, he
deceaues them, they eat the forbidden fruit, that is, they commit the sin
prohibited, by God; and instantly, they see their own nakedness, and become
most unhappy.

10. Many do aim at riches; to compass this, the devil will suggest: make
such and such a bargain, there is a good occasion offered, thou may gain
much; and though it be usurious, and forbidden, the desire of wealth, blinds
him, and the hope of daily profit to come in; makes him willingly yeald
thereunto. and, if he be a man in office, that may profit thereby; then to
compass his intent, he oppresses the poor, exacteth more, then he ought;
troubles any, that can give him some what, to redeem their vexation; though
it be never so unjust; if he be a receauer of rents, alas, how much do the
poor tennants, suffer, and how much does he gain, to bear with them, from
time, to time, and afterward, how false will his account be unto his lord? if
he be one, that is in suit, of law; how many false surmises, he will pretend,
how many friends he will procure, to speak to the judge, how many bribes gives
he under hand, though in his conscience he knows, that he has an, unjust
cause? if he be one that pretends some dignity or honor, and has a competitor
in court, how many falsehoods he inuents, how many crimes, he does relate in
private, of him, though he knows, they are untrue? and how many great promises
do these fellows make, to get their intent?

11. If he be a fauorit in the court, how many protestations, and expressions,
and often not without great oaths, that he will be a friend, and that, he, who
stands in need of his assistance, needs not doubt of his sincerity, though
he has no mind to perform it; or perhaps, he did as much, to the man's
adversary, and took a bribe, of both parties. And if he be a judge,
peradventure he does the same. Also aduocats for gain, defending unjust
causes; merchants and trad'smen, selling bad ware, for good; and using deceit
in weight, and measure; and so of diverse others, that do use many unjust ways
to attain to what they pretend, and aim at; very little careing whether it be
against god's command or no.

12. But when all is done, they see themselves naked, and void of grace, where
with the soul was fairly invested, they see their own filthiness, that is,
the foulness and ugliness of their sins, they are troubled at it; they are
ashamed, to appear before God, or their Ghostly Father, who is in his place
over them; they hyde themselves, they shune his sight, least they should be
repr^hended; they loose their inward quiet, and peace of conscience, the
remorse and worm of sin, g^awing and ^earing the poor soul, in pieces;
which is turned out of Paradise, to wit, the joy and contenr, it had, while
she was in the state of grace, and God's favor, in so much, that prayer it
self, which formerly, was wont to be sweet, and pleasing, and any thing, that
may put them in mind, of their offense, becomes loath some to them.

13. But they must dye for ever, as Lucifer did, without repentance; or live as
Adam did, by the sweat of his brows (if they be so favored) sorrowing,
weepeing, digging, and laboring the earth of their soul, turning it over, and
over, by a careful examination, and good confession, to bring forth the worthy
fruits of pernuance; which is forgiveness of the offense, against God, and
recovery of his holy grace; and then they may eat the bread of life, Christ
Jesus, in the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar and be eternally saved, and
live for ever, as Adam does in glory.

14. I said before (if they be so favored) as Adam was, to get time of
repentance, which perhaps will not be granted to every one; nor to thee, if
thou do continue long in sin; and not make good use of the time, which God
does give thee to repent. do not therefore procrastinat thy conversion, but
repent in time, least the thread of thy life, be suddenly cut, and then, it
will be too late; and consequently, thou must perish both body and soul for
ever. for as the body and soul did partake of original justice, so they did
partake of the original sin, and offense of God; and therefore both must
endure the punnishment; the punnishment is death: which Ada^ did not only
deserve to himself, but likewise to all his posterity, as touching the body;
for S. Paul says, by one mansinne Romans 5. v. 2.
entered into the world, and by sin, death, and so death passes to all men,
because they are of Adam's nature, that for sin was condemned to dye; whereas
if he had not sinned, learned divines affirm, that all had been translated
alive into the Kingdom of glory. by this you see, dear Christian, how Adam
fell, by sin; and how great a good is lost thereby; and how great an evil,
does follow, as a punnishment, beside the eternal punnishment, and death, of
the soul, that dies in sin.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
Of the hurt and euiles of sin, more in particular.
1. THe hurt of sin (beside what is formerly said) is such, and so great,
both in this, and the other life, that being well considered, it is able to
dismay, and terrify, any man, from ever offending, the high majesty of almighty
God; for, as touching the body, which was created to live immortally, (if Adam
had done right,) by sin, (as we daily see, and the scripture does declare)
its Eccli. 7. v. 46. Genesis 3. v 19.
become mortal; remember man, that thou art dust, and into dust thou shall
return, that is, by death; but good God, how many miseryes, daily
indispositions, and alterations, with grievous diseases, is man subject to?
truly it is able to move the hardest heart, to compassion, and grief, to see
and observe them? O what a torment does the poor woman in travail of
childbering, suffer, o what does, he not endure, that is troubled, with the
stone, collik shrinking of the veins, conuulsions of sinews, canckers, and
many other ugly ulcers, and diseases, so noisome, that they desire rather to
dye, then live; ad also, to these, the affliction of mind (with the trouble of
their disordered passions which alters body and soul; as fear, grief,
anger, envy, desire of reueng; the rebellion likewise, of the flesh, against
the spirit, beside the outward motives of grief; as wars, famine, poverty,
plague, losses at sea and land, cross children, wives, husbands, and evil
neighbors; persecutions and imprisonments and innumerable other causes of
affliction, where with man is continually vexed; all these as forerunners, and
messengers of death; do putt us in mind, of sin, by which, it crept into the
world.

2. And as for the soul; beside the ignorance, (whence all errors proceed)
the dullness of spirit, inconstancy in good, malice, and other euiles, which
come by sin; the soul that was most beautiful by grace, God's own
likeness, and image, his seat, and throne, on 2. Cor. 6. v. 16.
earth; his living temple, his Kingdom, where he desires to delight himself,
with the children of men; where he keeps court, accompanied doubtless and
attended, with the blessed quires of Angels, his gracious courteours; this
soul (I say) by sin, is deprived, of all that grace, beauty, and glory; of
the Society of those blessed angels, and of the favor, and love of God, whom
the sinner, takes by the shoulders (as we may say) and turns him out of
d^ores, being the light of heaven, the beauty of the Angels, his own
creator, and only good: and then smiles on the devil, bids him welcome, and
taking him by the hand, leads him in, and delivers him possession of his
soul, which God made choice of for himself, as is said': and so the sweet and
most beautiful image of God, is altered, made foul, ugly, and black; his
pleasant seat, destroyed, his temple, profaned; his holy altar, defaced; the
house of God, made the habitation of Satan; and his court, the den of
thiues, ugly spirits, abominoble deuiles, and is deprived of all right to the
Kingdom of heaven, the Society of the Saints, and Angels, the glorious sight
of he divine essence, the infinite Majesty, and the incomprehensible, and
endless goodness of God, wherein man's true fe^icity, does consist, as is said
formerly.

3. And thus the poor desolat soul, vo^de of all grace, falls from sin, to
sin, and at leingth, parting this world, in that miserable case, under the
cruel tyranny, of the devil, is cast into perpetual darkness, to the
profound pit, and stinking lake, of the damned, still burning in fiery flames,
but never a consumeing, crying, and lamenting, without redress, or hope of
help, suffering the most furious iniuryes, and crueltyes, of those hellish
sins, the most fearful, and horrid sights, of the filthy, and terrible
infernal impes, in most abominable, and ugly shapes; and the dreadful
torments, of those hideous beasts, whose raging spite, against the cursed soul,
is inexplicable; and thus in hell, they must remain, as long as God, is God,
that is, without end.

4. O what hurt does man receive in body and soul by sin? o who would not
abhor it? are not these dear Christian, well considered, able to cause any
reasonable man, to forsake it, and at all times fear it? O what pleasure on
earth, should not man forgo, though never so great, rather, then fall into so
many endless euiles? O blindness, yea madness, of the children of Adam, who
for a moment of pleasure, or a transitory content of mind; which they take in
the creatures, of this miserable world, or a little wealth, or vain honor,
which are mere nothings; are well pleased, to make so foul, and unhappy an
exchang; as hell, for heaven, the devil, for God; eternal pain, for endless
joy? And which is much to be lamented; these worldlings do seem to grieve
heavily, when any of their friends do part this life being but the death of the
body, though perhaps, the soul is in glory; but if any of them, in their
presence, or company, commit a mortal sin, by which, the soul is truly dead,
and both it, and the body, subject to all the former miseryes, and to the
endless pains, of hell; they do not once grieve, or sigh for it, nay, they
often boast of it, and make it but a cause of laughter; this is too well
known; and I have seen and heard it often. and I wish it had not been so;
but Ieremias Ier. 12. v. 11.
said, that they take it not to heart, they do not truly consider, nor reflect
seriously, upon it as they ought; and therefore they will feel the severe
punnishment thereof, to their cost for ever.

5. Our holy Mother S. Teresa, relates a fearful example, which she saw, and
was a true witness thereof to wit, of one who dyed, in deadly sin. she was
present at the interring of the body, and office of the dead: but while the
office was a saying, the corpse lay on a hearse; about which, she saw, a number
of deuiles, in most ugly, and fearful shapes, with flesh hooks, and other
cruel instruments expecting until the body, was after the office, a putting
into the grave; then all of them, with those instruments, did most pitifully,
and spitefully, draw, tear, and mangell it, with the greatest cruelty, and
rage, that could be. at this she was terribly affrighted, and if God had not
preserved her, she had been deprived, of her life; the sight was so fearful,
and the spirits so over ugly, and cruel; and thus she concludes; whereas these
wicked deuiles, used the body, with so great cruelty, o with what rage, fury,
and malicious spite, did they use, and torment, the poor miserable soul; which
must be under their cruelty, for ever, and ever? are not they hard hearted, and
very insensible, that believe, there is a hell, with horrid, and most grievous
torments, appointed for sinners; and yet do not fear; but freely fall, and
commit sin; esteeming more, to have the present content (though momentall;)
and the suffering of endless flames, and pains of hell for all eternity; then
the love of God, and eternal glory; which by that sinful content, they loose.
by this you may take occasion, to consider daily, what you do; and as a help
to preserve you from sin; to have before your eyes written, in the rooms of
the house, in great letters. Remember thy end, and thou shall hardly offend.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
Of the great love of God, to mankind.
1. IN the former chapters, you have seen, in what a noble condition, and for
how glorious an end, man was created* and yet how Adam, and in him, all
mankind; fell from that happiness, by sin, the breach of Gods command; and
therefore, were justly condemned to death, and hell. it rests now, to consider,
how, and by what means, man was delivered, and freed, from sin, and that
eternal punnishment; for as is said formerly, the greatness of the benefit,
being well considered, and acknowledged; the obligation, and thanks, will be
the more. But hitherto, we have not declared, what sin, is; or wherein, it
does consist; for thence depend the conclusion of our discourse; and you may
easily perceive, how justly, that great punnishment, is deserved, and by God
inflicted.

2. Sin therefore, is a thought, word, or deed, against the law, or command
of God; in which, thou art to consider two things, the first is, an auersion
from God, the second, a conversion to some creature; that is to say. to forsake
God, and his love; for the love of a creature; which doubtless, is a most
grievous offense, and an injury intolerable; being a contempt, and
vnderualuing of the divine Majesty, and goodness of God.

3. For the sinner does attribuit unto that creature, somewhat, more worthy of
his love, for that present, then the infinite goodness, of God; which is the
complete object of all love, and from whom all other goodness that is in
creatures, love worthy, does proceed, and depend; which is a great
vnderualuing of God, our creator, of whom we have our being; and therefore,
ought to love him, above all other things, what soever, as he commands us, to
do, in the first of the tenn commandments, he infinitely exceeding all his
creatures in perfection; and therefore, the more to be esteemed, honored,
loved, and praised, then any of them, yea, then they all together; and hence
the offense, and injury, is so much the greater, by how much he exceeds them
all, in goodness and perfection; neither were they, ever able to make due
satisfaction, to his divine Majesty, for so great a crime.

4. For the greatness of the offense, and injury, done to any, has its
proportion, and value, according to the quality, or dignity, of the party, or
person offended; there is none so simple, but know that it is a greater crime,
to abuse a Noble man, then a mean country man; and a King, then a Noble Man;
the party, and person offended, by sin; is the great God, and King, of heaven
and earth, of infinite dignity, majesty, and goodness; therefore the offense
against this infinite person, is of infinite malice, which requires, an infinite
satisfaction, to wit, of infinite value, this, no creature, could afford, being
of a limited, and finit being, depending of an other, and this is the reason,
why all their actions are of a limited value, and consequently, their
satisfaction could not be proportionable, to the offense, being of infinite
malice, as the abuse of an infinite person; which considered; none can admire,
that God all omnipotent, so grievously wronged an iniuried, should condemn,
the offender, to so great, and severe a punnishment.

5. But what remedy, that this creature, so Noble, should not utterly perish,
(though justly condemned) but be delivered, from the slavery and tyranny, of
sin, and Satan; and then restored, to Gods favor, and grace, in this life,
and to glory, in the other? I must confess, that the wotke is great, and hard;
though nothing, is difficult, to love, Therefore, that great God (whose nature
is goodness, and works mercy, and whose mercy, far Surpasses all his other
works) seeing man. (his own likeness, and image) in that misery; was moved
with tenderness, of heart, and took compassion, on him; and there upon, in
that cabinet council, of the most blessed Trinity, held in the great, and high
court, of heaven; a way, and remedy, was found, that due satisfaction, should
be made, and man set free, from his captivity, and slavery, and restored
again, to God's friendship, and a right, to endless glory; which was thus.

6. The second person, of the most holy Trinity, the true son of God, through
love, did offer himself, for the glory of his heavenly Father, and the
salvation, of mankind, to become man; and in our flesh wherein his Father, was
offended, and in our behalf, to make condign and full satisfaction, to his
Father, for all the sins of the world; by his holy life, bitter Passion, and
painful death on the cross; for he was equal to his Father; and as the
injury, was of infinite malice, because done, to an infinite person, so the
satisfaction, was infinite, as proceeding from an infinite person; to wit the
son of God, whose works, were of infinite merit, and value; this being
concluded, and agreed upon, in that divine council; at, and according to the
time determined, and appointed, from all eternity; the son of God, came into
this world, became man, taking on him, our human nature, and most graciously,
and lovingly, without any desert of ours, by the means aforesaid', made
satisfaction, paid, our debt, freed us, from sin hell, and Satan;
reconciled us to his heavenly Father, who was offended, and with the price, of
his Precious Blood, did purchase, the kingdom, of heaven, for us; made us,
coheires, with himself, of that most happy country, of all felicity, true joy,
and life everlasting. by which, you see, how true, and loving a friend, our
Savior, Christ Jesus, was, and still is, unto us.

7. Nay more then so, knowing how frail, and apt we are to fall to sin, and
how strong, and full of wyles, the devil is, to deceive; that we might not
perish, if by chance, we should fall, he provided, and furnished us, with all
necessary helps, and means, to rise again, to strengthen and encourrag us,
with alacrity of spirit, to pass the dangerous way of this our peregrination,
and come at length, to the safe port, of eternal salvation. for beside
preachers and teachers, to instruct, and direct us, their godly books, to
comfort, and help us, their exemplary life, to encourage us, and their
miracles, to confirm us, and the holy scriptures, to illuminat us; he
appointed Seven Sacraments, by which, we may be secured, from all dangers, and
rise, as often, as through temptation, of the world, the flesh, or the devil,
we happen to fall; if we do not neglect, to make use of them, in all like
occasions, as shall be fit, and requisite; Some, are for prevention, some, for
recovery, others, for strengthing, and fortifying, against all euiles. and
thus, like an expert doctor, or physician he has left us, salues for all
soars; all which, are toakens of his love.

8. And more then so; for the greater expression, and manifestation, of his
sincere affection, toward us; and to make us confident, of his love, and
assistance, in all afflictions, and difficultyes, which by the intisements, or
malice, of our enemies, may occur; He left, him self, Math. 26. v. ^6. Math.
28. v. 18.
true God, and man unto us, in the most blessed Sacrament, of the altar, who
has all power in heaven, and earth, given him, (as he says,) to help us, and
grant, what we shall humbly, and confidently, desire.

9. Of this our Holy Mother Saint Teresa, had often experience. For she many
times, saw him, most gloriously, in the consecrated host, and did obtain,
several graces, and favors of him, as she does testify, in her life.

10. Moreover, to show his love further; after his passion, and death, he went
to limbus patrum, and brought from thence, the souls of the Holy Fathers; and
after his resurrection; in triumphant wise, he ascended into heaven accompanied
with them; and caused the gates thereof, (which were shutt, by the sin of
Adam, to all mankind.) to be opened, for their, and our entrance, euerafter;
and then took possession, of that glorious Kingdom, which he had purchased
for us, (as is formerly said,) and with those blessed souls, he began that new
plantation, for them, and us; which to his heavenly Father, was so acceptable,
that he placed him, with our flesh and blood, at his righthand in the throne;
of his glory, with all power and Majesty, as Lord, and King, of heaven and
earth, men and angels, where, (the Apostle says, as our aduocat, what soever
1. Joan. 2. v. 1.
he does demand, for us; or we desire of his Father, in his name; or humbly
crave, of himself, with love, and confidence, we shall infallibly obtain.

11. Consider hence, I beseech thee, o Christian soul, those unspeakable
benefitts, and the tender love, and sincere affection, of our sweet savior,
Jesus Christ, unto thee, who, to free thee, from hell fire, was contented, and
pleased, so to become man, be borne, in great poverty, Luke^. v. 7. Math. 14.
and 15.
to live in much misery, suffer all affronts, and abuses; to be scorned, spitt
at, buffited, whipped in most pitiful wise, crowned with thorns, set at
naught, forsaken by all; and lastly to endure many reproaches, blasphemys, and
that most ignominious and painful death of the crosle with great patience and
love.

12. Then remember, how heerby, he has provided everlasting glory, for thee,
in his kingdom; exalted thee, to a higher dignity; and made thee more Noble
far, then thou were formerly; for though thou were created, to Gods
likeness, yet inferior, to the Angels, by nature; but now, thy nature, thy
flesh, and Blood, is placed, above them all, at the right hand, of God the
Father, in thy Brother, Christ Jesus; who is created, Lord of the Angels, and
appointed judge of the living, and dead; which is a dignity, far surpassing
all Angelical dignity, whatsoever. So that thou art truly, of the blood
royal, of the Kingdom of heaven; O what a dignity! O what a great gift and
blessing, it is?

13. Thou must therefore observe that thou being brought to so high a calling,
thy thoughts, and conversation, as the Apostle said, must be in heaven, and of
Philip 3. v. 20.
such spiritual things, as do conduce thither. One time, considering the
largnesse, or spaciousness, fairness and beauty, of the place; an other time,
the amenity, wealth, treasure, and excessive goodness, of the soil; then, the
admirable and rare palaces, thereof; the number and glory, of the inhabitants;
the spirirituall graces, and benefitts the^ joy, comfort, delight, and content
of mind, which shall be there enjoyed; the inexplicable brightness, and glory,
o^ body and soul, which, all shall have there; yea, life, without, fear of
death, health, without fear of sickness, joy, without fear of trouble,
endless day, without any fear of night, all proceeding, from the blessed
sight of the immense essence, of that great God, of infinite goodness, in whom
all things, are seen; whose excellency, and perfections, are incomprehensible;
then that celestial harmony, music, and sweet conversation, of the angelical
spiritts, and Glorious Saints, and (which is forever to be desired) the joyful
company, familiarity, and true love, of Christ Jesus, thy dear Brother, now
Lord of the soil, who rules, commands, and directs all; for whose sake
and love, the very Angels, will honor thee.

14. O what heart will not rejoice, to call to mind, that at length, after all
our misery se here; by his means, we shall be inhabitants in that happy
kingdom, and enjoy this so great felicity for all eternity? to which of the
Angels (said S. Paul) did God ever say; what he said Heb. 1. v 5.
to our Savior Christ Jesus, true God and man; thou art my son, this day, I
did beget thee? O what love, and tender affection, ough'st thou to bear, to
this thy dear Brother, thy King, and judge? what hope of succurre, in thy
necessitys, and afflictions, and what confidence May thou not have in time
of prayer, to obtain thy request? For I do assure thee, that he is so loving,
and good, that he cannot, neither will he deny thee, any thing, which thou
shall demand with love, and sincerity. Blessed be for ever, so good, and loving
a friend.

15. With these sweet thoughts, dear christian, delight thy self, and pass
the time, of thy peregrination; keep them company, for they are compagnious
befitting thy calling, and dignity; our conversation, said S. Paul, is in
heaven; for in deed there, a man's heart, and thoughts, ought to be, where his
treasure is; and where he does intend to dwell, and settle for all eternity.

16. Do not then dishonor, nor disgrace thy self, and thy family; do not
degenerate, from that Noble condition, and dignity of thine, by keeping evil
company, which are bad thoughts, or casting thy affection, on the terrene,
base, and transitory things, of this fading, and deceauing world, after that
thou have been, so graciously, and lovingly, released from thy imprisonment,
freed from thy misery, and thy great debt of sin, and exalted so highly, as to
be coheire with Christ, of the Kingdom of glory; a dignity which thou could
not expect, or wish for; do not, (I say) keep that evil company, for they
are compagnions, for the Cittisens of Babylon, which is hell, subject to the
dominion of the devil, and not for the inhabitants, of heavenly Jerusalem, who
do abhor, all that is not pure, to the honnour and glory, of their King, and
the endless praise, of their dear and loving Lord God;

17. May not our Sauiout well say unto thee; what could, I do more for thee,
then I have done? having done what he did, and expressed his love, to thee with
so great pain, to thy most great comfort, and glory; and if thou will not
requite, this love, with loving him, (for he requires no more) look into hell,
and see what the ungrateful, do there suffer, and the same, or worsse, thou
shall endure, for all eternity. Now to conclude, perusing these considerations,
thou can not be ignorant of thy obligation; Sweet Jesus, I beseech thee, to
make us thankful, and keep us, from this horrid, and monstrous ingratitude.
Amen.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
How to prepare your self, before confession, and communion.
1. THe first stepp, that a sinner must make, to approach to God, whom he
offended; ought to be arhumble confession, and acknowledgment, of the injury,
and offense committed, with sorrow of mind, and a detestation, of the offense;
and a firm purpose, and resolution, never more to offend. The next step, is,
to come to his presence, and after the acknowledgment, and declaration, of his
offenses, to crave pardon, and forgiunesse, of all; which is done, in
confession. The third; to reconcile himself, to his friendship, love, and
familiarity; which is done, in communion, to which the rest are preparatiues;

2. But that this may be done, with that requisite respect, which to so great a
God, is due; you must first consider, that if a King had invited himself, to
your house, to eat, and drink, and be merry, on such a day, not for your
cheer, for he needed it not. but of mere love, and thereby, to take an
occasion, to bestow some great gift, or special favor upon you; what would
you then do, or what preparation to your ability, would you make against the
day appointed? Doubtless, you would have your house neatly swept, and made
clean, that noe cobweb, or unseemly thing, might appear, or be seen, which
might be offensive, or displeasing to him, but all things well sorted, and
ordered, to give him, the greatest content you could.

3. This King, the great God, of heaven, and earth, by a Holy inspiration, the
preachers instruction, or your Ghostly Fathers admonition, of mere love, on
some certain day, that thou do resolve upon, inuiteth himself, to feast,
and delight himself with thee, in the house of thy soul; not having need of
any thing, thou have; but thereby to take an occasion, to bestow on thee, some
great blessing, particular grace, or gift; I beseech thee then, not to make
less account of thy God, coming to thee, then of a temporal King, (who could
give thee, but some transitory favor, or gift) whearas his coming, brings
heavenly and eternal blessings to thee; therefore sweep, and make clean, the
house of thy soul, and let all things be in order; for which purpose you may
observe the following aduises.

4. If you do often frequent the Sacraments; the day before confessing, and
receiving; but if seldom, three or four days, keep your self retired, from
company, and much conversation, as far forth as you can, considering the
greatenesse, and dignity of him, whom you are to entertain, and the greatness
of his love, who does vouchsafe, to be myndfull, or think of you, and come unto
your house, which is a great favor. You being a poor and miserable sinner, a
mere nothing.

5. Then employ your self, in preparing this house of your soul, with all
diligence, examining, and Searching every corner, that no cobweb of sin, be
there left, which might displease his divine Majesty; but by a penitent, and
good confession, all be clearly swept away, and the place of his receipt, made
very clean; which will be the better done, if you take some book, that
explicateth, the ten commandments, and seven deadly sins, as the memorial
of Lewis of Granada; for there, as in a looking glass, you shall see, what
otherwise, in your self you could not observe, or discern; all which you may
reduce, to three heads: as, what you committed against God, against your self,
and against your neighbor. against God, in not observing his precepts, and the
precepts of his Holy Church, not keeping your vows and promises, made to God,
and being negligent in his service. Against your self, in not performing your
duty and obligation, according to your state of life, as if you be religious,
single, or married, in service, or office, a lord, Gentleman, a tradsman, with
tennants, children, servants; for each of these, have many ways, to offend in,
which would fill a great volume. and all is comprised, in these two. love God,
above all; and thy neighbor, as thy self; and what thou will not have done,
to thee; do it Math. 7. v. 12. Ps. 36. v. 27.
not to an other; so shall thou decline from evil, as the scripture
commands, and do good. by this rule you may examine all.

6. Moreover you must understand, that this confession, must be entyre; that
is; without omission, of any thing, that after a diligent examination, you did
call to mind, though it be doubtful, that you consented; it must be also,
clear, and distinct, without cloakeing, or in any wise excusing, either your
self, or the fact, or using such obscure words, or phrases, as may hinder, the
Ghostly Father, to understand the truth. In like manner, it must not be in
generrall terms; as I have lied, or sworn by the name of God often, but in
particular, how often you committed that sin; As I have sworn by God, ten
times, more or less, or there abouts; or, if it was so often, that you cannot
bring the number by any means, to memory, either guess at it, saying these
words, after (more or less) as a hundred times, more or less; or at least; or
how long, you have given way to offend God, in that sin; as every day, or
every week, or month for a year, or half a year; and often in the day, as
occasion was offered, which in the custom of swearing, cursing, or being
angry, is usual, when they are passionat, and careless people.

7. It mu^t be without stories, (which many do use) and impertinent things,
but simple and brief, with such circumstances only, as may, either aggrauat
much, or change the nature, or quality of the sin. as if in a sacred place,
in hearing mass, a nun, single, or married, a Priest, Friar, Kinsman, or
woman these, in some sins, must be expressed: for it is not enough for one
married, to say, I had to do with a woman; but he must say, I am married, and
yet had the company, of an other, the condition of the other being also
expressed; as if a nun single, and so of the rest; but you must be careful,
not to accuse or name any, in confession, but your self; nor to use any words;
or circumstances, by which the Ghostly Father, may come to the knowledge of the
other party, unless it be in a case, which cannot be otherwise expressed, when
the sin is great; and in that occasion, it were better sometimes, to change
the Ghostly Father; though commonly, you must not go, but to one, if he be a
sufficient, and able man; for the devil does use, to cause people, to change
often, that they may not be known, by their Ghostly Father, to be such; and
that they may with more freedom, commit sin, by how much the less, they are
known by their Ghostly Father, to fall into it:

8. But commonly these confessions, are little worth, for by that; they show ^
very little feeling of sorrow; or purpose, to forsake the sin, or amend their
life; which is absolutely necessary for a good confession, and without which,
it is void; and these libertines, do for the most part, go to strangers, and
simple or ignorant confessors; but let them not think, that God will forgive,
or pardon any injury, or offense, which they are not griued to have committed,
against his divine Majesty, and do not intend to amend.

9. Therefore, before you go to confession, you must purpose to amend; and
make many acts of contrition, as near and as feelingly, as you can, in this,
or the like manner.

10. O Lord, my God, infinitely good, I am very sorry, from the bottom of my
heart, for having offended thy divine Majesty, and therefore do now detest all
sin, for the love of thee.

11. O most amiable Jesus, for thy worth, infinite love, and goodness, I am
heartely griued to have sinned against thee, and therefore do abhor all
sin, and resolve to dye rather, then offend thee any more.

12. O my dear God, I am very wicked, and abominable; and unworthy, to behold
the heavens, or tread on the earth, for having offended thy infinite goodness,
who art worthy of all honor, glory, and love.

13. O my sweet redeemer, I do confess, that for my cursed sins, I have
justly deserved, thy anger, and to be cast from thy blessed fight, into hell;
yet for the merits of thy most Holy Passion, and through the intercession of
thy Holy Mother, have mercy on me, and forgive me; for I do resolve with thy
holy grace, to endure and suffer all torments of this world, yea, and of hell,
rather then offend thee hereafter.

14. O most loving Savior of the world, I wish I had as great sorrow, and
grief of mind, for having offended thy divine Majesty, as blessed Magdalen, or
any that ever lived, had, for offending thee. After these, say the prayer
before confession.

THE X. CHAPTER.
The prayer before confession.
1. O God omnipotent, whose judgments, are fearful and very terrible against
sinful, unpenitent hearts, and whose mercy (through thy goodness) is always
inclined to the petitions, and cries of humble souls, that dare not lift up
their eyes, to thee, through shame, and confusion; yet with true submission,
and sorrow for their sins with the publican, craving pardon from thee; behold
my God, and most loving Lord, this my poor soul, lying prostrat, before thy
dredfu^l throne, acknowledging, my sins, to be great and many; yet thy
goodness, and mercy, to be far greater, and more; do not therefore, O Lord,
I beseech thee, in thy fury, and wrath, (which I justly deserved) cast me from
thy blessed sight; let me not feel, the rigor of thy heavy hand, in justice;
nor the bitter Smart of thy eternal punnishment; for I do confess unto thee,
my merciful God, my most grievous faults, my fraylty, and neglect, in thy holy
service; I do condemn, this unconstant heart of mine; there is no truth, nor
trust in me, and though my sins are more, then the sands of the sea, yet o
Pious Lord, I know thou can for give, more, then I can commit, which makes me
confide, in thy mercy; therefore judge me not, according to my desert; put me
not of, unto the day, of wrath; have mercy on me, o, have mercy on me; most
gracious Father of mercy; regard not my wicked sins, though great and many,
but look on that goodness, which thou art, on that compassionat and loving
heart, of thine, on those thy bowels of piety, and infinite mercyes, which were
from the beginning in all eternity, and never yet denied to such, as cried to
thee, in truth, and sincerity; look I say, on these, and according to them,
proceed with me, and not according to my iniquityes; for thou know'est o most
loving Father, our weak and stippery condition, and how at every moment, and
step, we should slide, and fall, if not supported, and held up, by the staff
of thy holy grace, which I most humbly crave, that I may not hereafter fall
from thee, my only good; for I do resolve to dye rather, then offend thee
more, and do abhor, and detest what soever I did, in thought, word, or
work, against thy holy law, and will; and am very sorry, that I offended thee,
my God; forgive me then, my dear Lord, receive me, as a loving Father, unto
thy mercy, and favor; refuse me not, coming with a humble heart unto thee;
accept I beseech thee, those heavy sighs of my sorrowful, and repentant
heart; for thou will not refuse, nor despise a contrite and humble heart as thy
prophet said, look on me, o Jesus, with those Ps 50. v. 19. Luke 22. v. 61.
pious eyes, with which thou did behold Peter, and penetrat his heart to
penance, that he wept bitterly, and so melt mine, with the heat of thy divine
love, that I may always, bewail my sins, walk in truth, live in thy fear,
dye in thy grace, and favor; and enjoy thee, in eternal glory. Amen.

How to go to confession.
2. THen go to confession, and first kneeling before your Ghostly Father,
bless your self, making the sign of the cross, then say, I crave your
blessing, or benediction, then with humility, and submission, say the
Consiteor, very slowly in latin, or english, until you come to, mea maxima
culpa; or my most grievous fault, and begin your confession. But to move you,
to more devotion, and feeling; it will be good, to suppose, or frame, in your
mind, the presence of our Savior there; to whom, inwardly, address your
affection, as you do your words, outwardly, to your Ghostly Father; and you
may keep the eyes of your mind, fixed on him, whiles you are confessing, as if
he were attending, to what you say. This will be very beneficial, and move to
great feeling; at the end of confession, having no more to speak; you may say;
not only of these, but also, of all the sins, of my whole life, and what I
cannot call to mind since my last confession I do accuse my self, and am
cartely sorry for them; do purpose to amend; and humbly desire penance, and
absolution of you my Ghostly Father; and presently say, Ideo precor. or,
therefore etc. then be attentive, to hear, what advise, you get; and remember,
to follow, it, and perform the penance, which shall be enjoined. and when the
Father is absoluing you; in your mind; you may say; Sweet Jesus have mercy on
me, and forgive me, mine offenses, then after absolution recollecting your
self, say the following prayer or the like in thanks, for that great benefit.
and always be careful from one confession to an other, tu purpose every day,
not to commit the sins which you lastly confessed.

A prayer after confession.
O Most merciful lord, my God, who with great patience, have most graciously
expected me, and caused me, to return to thee, my only good, and comfort;
that I might not perish, in my sinnfull ways; as many thousands did, that are
in hell; to which, thou might have justly thrown me, and did not; to
thee therefore, I am heartely, and most humbly thankful, for this mercy, and
special favor; which thou have not done, to many others, more, and far
better deserving; blessed Mai'st thou be for ever.

4. O Lord how many are thy mercyes, how great thy goodness, how sincere thy
love, to me poor sinner, whom by this confession, thou have freed from
death, and brought to life, from darkness, to light, from Satan, to thy sweet
self, my God; and so from hell, to heaven? all thy creatures, my dear Lord,
praise thee, let all glorify thee, and with perpetual thanks, sing forth thy
mercyes for ever. O supreme goodness, thou will not have any to perish, but
all, to live with 1. Tim. 2. v. 4.
thee, in glory, (except such as to thy sweet voice, and inward call, inuiting
them, to thy holy grace, and mercy, will shut their hearts and ears) therefore
my body, and soul, and all my powers and facultyes, be thankful unto thee, and
praise thy Holy Name, for all eternity, for thy love and mercy unto me. O Lord
most gracious, thou have caused me, thy prodigal child, to return, and come
to thy Fatherly, and most loving embrasements; and with the Publican, Luc. 16.
v. 13. Luc. 7. v. 36.
humbly to confess my faults; and as Magdalen, to adheare to thee, the true
physician, of my languishing, and wounded soul, and as the good thief, to cry
Luc. 13. v. 42.
unto thee, my Savior, and redeemer, that thou will remember me, and bring me,
to thy kingdom; heaven and earth, and all thy perfections, therefore praise,
and exalt thee; let o Lord, thy magnificent power, and goodness, be known to
all the world, that none may despair, but hope and confide in thy great, and
endless mercyes; that at the hour of our death, we may hear those sweet, and
comfortable words, of thine; this day thou shall be with me in Paradise, where,
with all thy Glorious Saints, and Angels, we may praise thee, with the Father,
and Holy Ghost, for all Eternity. Amen.

5. Thus, you shall be indifferently well provided, cleansed, and prepared, for
receiving your heavenly guest. But by reason, all this belongs, to the
sweeping, and making clean your house, it will be requisite, (this done), to
express your affection, love, and desire to receive, and entertain him, by
the following acts, or the like; which may inuit his divine Majesty, not only,
willingly, and joyfully to visit you, in the most blessed Sacrament, but also,
to remain with you, supply your wants, and bestow his grace and blessings,
abundantly upon you.

THE XI. CHAPTER.
Devout aspirations, before communion.
1. O Celestial bread, and food of Angels, my Christ, my Jesus and my God,
who art most glorious, in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar; I do adore thee,
for thy own goodness, and excellency; and love thee, above all that is in
heaven and earth.

2. O life of my soul, dear Jesus, come unto me, and inuest me, with the
nuptial garment, of thy divine charity; that my soul may not appear, in thy
holy presence, but adorned, with that beauty, which is fitting, and thou art
worthy of.

3. O dear Jesus, my heavenly spouse, by the virtue and power, of thy divine
love, exalt my spirit, above all thoughts, of this world, to rest sweetly in
contemplation, of thy unspeakable beauty, and goodness.

4. Come to me, o lord, my God; thou art long expected, heartily desired, and
very much wished for, by all my bowels, and powers; for thy presence, will
rejoice my soul, comfort my spirit, and recreat, yea, strengthen, all my,
inward, and outward senses.

5. O most beautiful lilly, of the heavenly garden, o most fair flower of the
celestial fields, o tree of Paradise, o fruit of life (sprung from the pure
earth, and most sweet and fertile soil, of the womb, of the all glorious, and
immaculat Virgin Mary) my dear and loving Jesus, come, o come into this heart,
of mine, visit this my soul, now truly thine; for I do vehemently desire thy
gracious presence, sweetly to embrace thee, within the arms, of pure love, and
sincere affection.

6. O sweet love, my God, as the wounded Ps. 41. v. 2.
heart, does hasten to, and desire the fountains of water, so my soul, does
thirst after thee.

7. O dear and most amiable Jesus, come, and let the sweet violence, of thy
delightful love transform me wholly into thee.

8. O my loving Jesus, come unto me, and drown me, in the abisse of thy divine
love; compass me with thy penetrating, and indeficient light, in which I may
see thy beauty;

9. Come my God come unto me; my spirit does breath toward thee, who art
desirous to be with me; o come, and possess my heart, enjoy my soul, which
thou have so long sought, and so deerly bought.

10. O Jesus, my spouse, my love, my soul's delight, o come unto me, for thou
art a fire divine, and wilt consume in me, all that is not pleasing to thee;
thou art a light, illuminating from the mountains of eternity; at thy
presence, all darkness, flies away, all heavy clouds, of grief and
sadness, shall be dispersed, my soul, will rejoice, and be brighter, then the
sun, all blessings, and happiness, are where thou art.

After these, or the like acts, feelingly said, mentally or vocally; say if you
please the following prayer.

A Prayer before receiving.
11. O God, most glorius, o King, most powerful, o Lord most gracious, o
supreme goodness, my dear Jesus; I do confess and acknowledge that thou a^t
really, and truly, God, and man flesh, and Blood, full of all Majesty, in the
most blessed Sacrament, of the Altar; and therefore am fearful to appear, in
thy holy presence, least I be confounded by thy glory.

12. O glory of the angels, my Jesus; I know, that thou art desirous to visit
thy unworthy servant, and come into the poor house of my soul; but I am foul
and unclean, a sinnfull creature, and no fit place for thee; who art purity
it self. O Lord I am very wicked, and thou art the Saint of Saints, God
omnipotent, creator of heaven and earth, men and angels; and will thou so
humble, and demean thy self, as to come to me, a vile and base worm of the
earth, worsse then nothing?

13. O my God, and only good; will it not be a digrace, and dishonor to thy
dignity, and highness; to come to such an unworthy: and abject a house as
mine? O divine love, and goodness incomprehensible; I do confess that thou
art delighted to be with the children of men; which makes thee long so, to come
to us; not for any profit or gain to thee; but for our good, and to work in
us, the salvation of our souls. But o Lord, I find my self wholly unworthy,
that thou should enter into my house; say but the word, and my house will be
glorious, my heart purified, my soul sanctified, and replenished with all grace
and happiness.

14. O Lord of mercy, pardon me, for thus expostulating with thee, or
contradicting thee; since it is thy will, to come to me; o life of my soul, thy
holy will, be done in me, and of me for ever. Yet I wish that I had more then
angelical purity, and seraphicall love, that I might in some degree, be
worthy, that thou should come to me. but true it is, my dear Jesus, that
thou do therefore come to me, to make me worthy; and then thou will rejoice
to see me pure, and take delight to be with me for ever.

15. O true lover of mankind, thou did inuit thy self, to the house of
little Zacheus; and he, and all his family, got salvation by it; to his greatest
joy and comfort; since then it is thy pleasure, to come to this poor cottage,
of my soul; come my Jesus, and I will give thee the welcome of a thankful
heart; and as thou have made it for thy self; if thou please to take content
therein, I shall have happiness for ever.

16. O my dear Jesus, come unto me, who am more thine, then mine; leave me not
to my self; possess thy right, enjoy thy choice; and I most humbly beseech
thee, so to joy in me, that I may joy in thee; and so dispose of me, that I may
be soly reserved for thee. O Lord command, the servants, (my senses) to watch
and be careful, that no other lover be admitted in, but thy sweet self alone;
keep this my soul, for thy house of pleasure, and garden of delight: Come my
God, come unto me, I do expect thee; and when thou art come, my dear and
heavenly spouse, so fire my heart, and burn me, with thy love; that I may be
wholly transformed into thee; and after this mortality, enjoy thee in endless
felicity; Amen.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
How to behave your self in, and after receiving the communion.
1. BEing disposed, as is formerly said, place your self reverently on your
knees, at the rail, or altar step; expecting with all humility, to receive
your Lord; the God of highest Majesty; and when the priest is to give you the
sacred host, keep your head upright, and steadfast; then opening your mouth,
(not to much, nor yet to little, but indifferently) put out your tongue decently
to the lip, that the sacred host may be laid on it conveniently; which
received, shut your mouth, keeping the blessed host, on the tongue, until it
be moistened; that with more facility, and decency, it may be swallowed down;
and not rudely bruised with the teeth, as some do;

2. Having received this your blessed guest; follow him, with all your powers,
and senses; recollecting them, within your self, where he is; and there
casting your self, at his sacred feet, with S. Mary Magdalen; adore him with
all humility and submission, acknowledging, that you are a wicked sinner,
having very often, offended his divine Majesty, and therefore unworthy of his
holy presence; crave pardon; and resolve to dye rather then offend so loving,
and sovereign a Lord, who has vouchsafed to visit you of his own goodness,
without any merit or desert in you.

3. Also you may make some acts of faith, confessing that he is there with you,
really and truly, God, and man; who was borne of the B. V. Mary, dyed for you
on the cross, and is sitting gloriously at the right hand of his Father in
heaven; is judge of the living and dead, all omnipotent, equal to his Father,
and worthy of all honor, glory, adoration and praise by all creatures in
heaven and earth; acknowledge your obligation to his divine Majesty, for all his
favors, and benefits; give him many thanks; and resolve, to serve him ever
after with more love and sincerity.

4. At other times, having received, his divine Majesty; offer your self, body
and soul, with all your powers and senses, to him humbly, desiring him, to
accept of you, and take you to his possession, and dispose of you, as of his
own; and that if you had ten thousand lives, all should be his, and at his
disposal; speak inwardly to him with confidence, and reverence as if you had
seen him with, your corporal eyes before your face; for so certain, he is
there present; ask forgiunesse of your sins, and grace, never more to offend,
and that you may overcome the passion, or vice to which you are most inclined:
then humbly beg that, for which in particular you did communicate.

5. This done, make good resolutions, and firm purposes to amend your life,
shun the occasions of sin, and with his holy assistance, to love and serve his
divine Majesty better then ever before; and daily to do some particular
exercise to put you in mind of your resolution and purpose; though it be but to
say one Aue Maria when the clock strikes; then pray for your parents, friends,
the souls in purgatory, the Catholic Church, daily increase of grace, faith,
hope, and charity, and such other things, as you please.

6. But I have observed some, more rude, then pious, who after receiving, or
mass ended, instantly get away, diuerting them selves, to idle conversation,
and worldly affairs, not giving thanks, for that favor, or visit, nor once
considering, the greatness of that benefit; whereas the great God of glory,
King of heaven and earth, came to them in proper person in that blessed
Sacrament, to show his love, and do them some special favor, if they had but
given him the welcome of a joyful heart, with thanks.

7. These ungrateful christians, by that means do deprive themselves of many
graces, and a true feeling of his divine Maiesty's holy presence within them;
for his coming would not be in vain. believe it certainly, he comes to hear
our prayers, supply our wants, and grant what we demand, or what is more
fitting fot us. he is not so bad a guest, as not, to be regarded, for truly he
will pay very well for his lodging, and intertainment, and abundantly reward
the very least act, or curtesy which shall be offered, or done unto him. this
they find, who with humility do respect, and honor him, for they have a
perfect feeling of his holy presence and love; by the effects, which they
perceive, and do observe in them selves, as, a tenderness, of heart, through
love, sweet tears, and devout sighs, for their sins, inward content and
comfort; with true devotion; a delightful satisfaction, in all their powers;
great desires, to serve and please his divine Majesty, more then ever before; a
joyful spirit, with many good resolutions, godly inspirations, and other
effects, (which for breuity I here omit) by which they daily increase in grace
and virtue, and the love of God. O who would loose so great a good, through
their neglect?

8. Therefore let this be well considered; and after receiving reflect on what
you did, and whom you have present, and why, or for what end, you did then
communicate, and receive him; and afterward do as is formerly said, for,
(dear Christian soul,) if in your mind, n. 2. 3. 4. 5.
you can consider this, or that worldly business; and what is best to be done
in it; why not that, which tend to the damnation or salvation of your soul?
also if you can discourse with men, of worldly things, and give them reasons
for what you say, and do; why not with God, your loving Lord and redeemer, who
is desirous of your company and conversation, and is then come of purpose to
hear and know, your petition, and what you pretend, or demand, and is very
willing to supply all your wants?

9. Moreover, for your comfort, you must understand, that his divine Majesty
know's our condition and weakness, and therefore requires no eloquence of us;
speak to him in your own language and manner, be it never so plain and
simple; he will excuse you, and accept of your good desire, being offered with
humility and reverence; and in case you cannot discourse with him inwardly, or
mentally, for want of use; you may say mentally some of those devout prayers,
which are in the 15. or 16. chapters, yet very slowly and feelingly; looking
inwardly on him, to whom you speak; which will procure a reuerentiall respect
in your soul.

10. But some may say; what is the reason, that we so often receiving the very
treasure of heaven, the fountain of all grace, and goodness; our dear
Savior Christ Jesus (who so much desyr's our good and happiness, as his
coming from heaven, his life and death for us, do testify) are not rich in
virtue, fervent in love, forward in devotion, and prompt to serve and please
his divine Majesty in all things? To this I answer; and do conceive the
reason to be; that we do not prepare, nor dispose our selves as we ought;
neither have we a lively faith, of his holy presence within us when we receive;
and thence does follow, that we have not that esteem of him, which he deserves
and requires of us; nor that respect which is due unto him; and consequently we
have not that confidence in him, which is fitting, and he does expect from us.
for if we did verily believe that we receive him who is omnipotent, merciful,
willing to forgive our offenses, and receive us lovingly unto his grace and
favor again, and does but expect, that we give him the occasion to bestow his
blessings and benefits upon us, (by a good preparation, a reuerentiall
receiving, a humble petition with confidence, that he will not frustrat us, of
our desire being more forward to grant and give, then we to ask and take)
without all doubt, we shall obtain not only what we petition for, but also
other graces and favors, which we never thought of, and were far beyond our
capacity, to demand; this we see and know by daily experience, in those who
proceed in his holy service with true sincerity.

11. For if the soul be pure and humble, and desirous to please and honor his
divine Majesty: at his coming, he will dilate her heart, and make her daily
more and more capable of divine Matters, give her a greater inward
recollection, and a deeper impression of his love; and so by degrees eleuat her
beyond herself, with great sweetness to high perfection, she not knowing how.
for as the infant sucking his Mother's Milk, is nourished, and increases
daily not perceauing how; even so, the pure and humble soul, as a newborn
child (as the Apostle says) often receiving and sucking that divine Milk, and
drinking of those celestial fountaynes (the sacred wounds of our Savior) the
water and nourishment of life in the most blessed Sacrament, is sweetly
nourished, strengthened, and daily increases to a great stature and perfection
of grace and virtue; that not knowing how, she finds herself, not to be what
she was, but quite an other, in her life, manners, behavior, recollection
devotion, conversation, heavenly desires, contempt of her self, and the
vanities of this world, for the love of God.

12. I do therefore conclude, aduising, that you prepare your self carefully,
as is laid down in the tenth and 11. Chap. and after a good confession and
receiving, to keep your mind employed, (as I have said above after communion)
and more recollected all that day, then you do, on other days; for you must
often consider whom you have within you, and what a blessed guest he is; to
whom, it is fitting you should give attendance, and the welcome of a glad heart
with many sweet and virtuous acts, which will not be vnre warded and always
be careful to communicate for some particular end, or intent, if you mean to
profit.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
How to prepare your self to dye well.
1. IT is a common saying; that he who lives well, dies well: so that to live a
good life, to wit, in the fear of God, and the observance of his holy
commandments, (in which the love of God, and our neighbor does consist) is
the first, and a good preparation, to dye well.

2. But by reason of our inclination to evil, (which we have from Original
sin, which in baptism is taken away) we are frail, and weak to do good,
and observe the commandments of God, Therefore to strengthen us (in time of
temptation) against all evil, the world, the flesh and the devil; and like wise
if through frailty we should fall, it will be very requisite, that we often
frequent the B. Sacraments, of confession, and the body and Blood of Christ our
Savior; for by them we rise again, receive grace, comfort, and fortitude to
resist the suggestions of our enemies, be constant and perseuerant in virtuous
and Godly exercises. this is a very good and secure preparation.

3. Moreover, to move and incite our selves, to frequent those blessed
Sacraments, it will be very fitting and requisite, that every day, we consider,
that we must dye; and perhaps this will be the very last day of our life: and
if we be in sin, and depart this world, in that case; what shall become of us
for all eternity? we must then resolve, to do now, what at the hour of death,
we should have done to part with a pure conscience in the grace of God; which
is had by those holy Sacraments; this is the best and securest preparation.

4. Likewise, that you may be the better prepared, in sudden occasions, and
time of dangerous fits; you will do well in time of health, to have your will,
or testament written, signed and sealed in your daske, or with some friend; for
in your sickness it will be a comfort to your mind, that it is made; otherwise,
when you ought to think upon god, and the eternal salvation of your soul,
then will your friends be earnest with you to make your will, which perhaps may
so trouble you, that you may forget to dispose your self for God, and suddenly
dye unprepared; as I have seen some do. and every year you may ad, or
diminish what you please, in it, and so prevent those inconveniences.

5. Also, when you find your self sick, without delay send for your Ghostly
Father, and before your sickness grow heavy, make a good General Confession;
that is, of all your life, if you did it not formerly, but if you made it
before; it will suffice, to make it, since the time of that general
confession, till then; unless for your more content of mind, you be desirous to
do it, of all your life. by this, your mind will be at rest, your conscience
quiet, and your hope in God's mercy and goodness settled, with an expectation of
endless glory in heaven. then send for the physician, and follow his advise for
your diet etc.

6. And, if your infirmity increase, and grow dangerous, send for your friends,
take leave of them, asking forgiunesse, of them, and of all your family, (if in
any thing you did offend them, and not give them, that good example, which you
ought) forgive likewise from the bottom of your heart, all those, that in any
way, did ever offend you; desiring all to pray for you, and not trouble you
more with any visits; that you may, the better prepare, your self, to part
this miserable world, and put your whole thoughts, and mind, on God, your
Savior, and the glory, which he has prepared for his servants, and which you
hope to enjoy; in the kingdom of heaven, for ever.

7. Then give order, that none be admitted, to speak with you, but such, as
shall come, to give you spiritual comfort, and put you, in mind, of God; or
give you good advise, to dye, as becomes a good Christian. for which end, it
will do well, that you procure, to have one, to read now, and then, some what,
of the love of God, to man; of his benefits, and the passion of our Savior,
and the joys, of heaven, which with his Precious Blood, and painful death, he
purchased, and prepared for us; hence you may be myndfull, of your sins, and
your ingratitude, for his divine Maiestye's love, and benefits; cry him mercy,
and make the former acts, of contrition, or those, that here follow; for they
will comfort you very much;

8. You must be very patient, in your sickness; for it is highly pleasing unto
God; meritorious, and beneficial to your soul; therefore consider, what pains
your sins deserved in hell; or the pains of Purgatory, which perhaps for your
patience, in suffering the pain, of your sickness, with content, for the love
of God, will be forgiven you totally; and offer your pain, and patience, to
your heavenly Father, in union of the patience, and pains, of Christ our
Savior, in satisfaction, for your sins, and the pains deserved, for them;
and humbly crave this virtue of patience from his divine Majesty, (through the
merits of Chtist) to bear all your pain, with resignation, content, and
thanks; as for example, thus. O Father, of mercy, and goodness; I do resolve
for love of thee, to bear patiently, all the pains of this my sickness; humbly
beseeching thee, through the merits and patience, of my Sweet Savior Jesus, to
grant me this gift, of patience, by imitation of him.

9, O my dear Lord, Father of heaven and earth, I do offer these my pains
and sores, with all patience, and conformity, unto thee; in union of all the
pains, and patience, of thy sweet Son Jesus, in his life, passion, and
death; in full satisfaction, of all my sins, and the pains to them due;
accept of it, my God, through Christ Jesus. Amen.

10. Lastly, when you grow very weak, and are in danger, being thereof advised,
by your physician, who knows your case; desire extreme unction, or the holy
Oil, after confessing, and receiving your viaticum; crave the assistance, of
the blessed Mother, of God, the refuge, and aduocat of sinners, your Angel
Guardian, the Saint, of your name, or which you are devoted to; and of all the
Saints, and Angels of heaven; to pray for you, and help you at your parting;
cause the litanyes of the saints, and for the sick, to be often said, in your
presence; procure, if you can, some masses, to be said in satisfaction, of your
sins; and that you may have a secure, and happy passage, out of rhis miserable
world; for ten before, are more beneficial, then perhaps a hundred after
death; because your meritorious act, and intention concurs, with the merit of
the mass, directed to God, for that end; which is not after death. then place
your thoughts wholly on the life to come; rejoicing that you are shortly to go,
where you are to be, and see the glory of God, his holy Angels, and saints;
and be a saint, with them, praising and enjoying God, for all eternity; and for
your more comfort, say if you can, mentally or vocally, or cause to be read,
devoutly, the following acts; ^o which, you must be attentive. And in case you
be speachlesse, your Ghostly Father, or some other, may pronounce lowdly in
your ears, one or more, of those acts; and often Jesus Maria; for this is very
comfortable, to the soul.

11. And such as have the Holy Scapular of our Blessed lady of Mount Carmell;
are not only, at that hour of parting, particularly protected, and defended by
her against their Ghostly enemies; but they have also, a general pardon, or
Plenary Indulgence, pronouncing with their mouth, or (being speachlesse)
thinking in their heart, or mind, Jesus Maria. therefore, it is of importance,
that they be said in the ears of the sick, with a loud voice, if otherwise
they cannot hear;

12. It is also good often to sprinkle, or cast some Holy Water on the sick,
and round about the bed; chieflly when he is, in extremity; for it is very
preservative, and a great defense, against the infestations, and evil
suggestions of the devil; who at that hour, is wont to be very busy, and
importunat, frighting the soul, with evil representations, and temptations, of
despair; And in all your sickness, show a great willingness, to hear speak
of God; and to see the crucifix, or picture of our Savior, and our lady; and
to kiss them; for it will move, to devotion, and feeling of our obligation. to
his divine Majesty, and his blessest Mother.

THE XIV. CHAPTER.
Virtuous acts, and sweet aspirations, to be said by the sick, or others, to
him.
1. O My omnipotent creator, in the presence of heaven and earth, I though a
great and grievous sinner, do acknowledge, confess, and firmly believe, all
that, which the Holy Catholic Roman Church, believes; as the twelve Articles
of the creed; Seven Sacraments; the true, and real presence, of Christ our
Savior, flesh and Blood, God, and man, in the Holy Consecrated Host; and all
other things, what soever, written and unwritten, proposed by the Holy Church,
to be believed; and do profess and protest, to live, and dye, in the same,
with the grace of God; And if at any time, in all my life, I failed staggered,
or doubted in this faith, or any particular, thereof, I am heartely sorry, for
it, and, do now renounce, detest, and abhor, all such doubts, from the very
bottom of my heart.

2. O my most merciful Savior, though I be a most wicked sinner: and that my
sins were as many as the sands of the sea, and the stars, of the firmament;
yet thy goodness and mercy far surpasses all; and thy love to us, and thy
desire of our Salvation, is so excessive great, that I hope and confide in the
merits of thy most Precious Blood, wounds, and death; that thou will easily
pardon. and forgive all what soever, and not for sake me, in this my extremity;
but through thy infinite mercy, bring me, to that glory, which thou have so
painefully, and lovingly purchased, for all those, who put their whole trust in
thee.

3. O bowels of piety, and love, my Jesus; receive me coming unto thee, with
all willingness, and hear's desire. for thou art goodness it self, in
finitly worthy of all love, for thy self alone; receive me, o my God; for I
do long, to be out of this miserable life, to see, and enjoy thee in glory.

4. O my sweet and loving Savior Jesus receive my soul, which I do commend
unto thee; humbly beseeching thee, to receive it, to thy infinite mercy, with
confidence and love, now coming unto thee.

3. O my dear Jesus, though just, ye merciful judge, of the living, and dead,
judge me not according to the number, and grieuousnesse, of my wicked sins; but
according to the greatness, of thy mercy, and goodness; for thou do not
desire the death, but salvation of a sinner.

6. O most loving Jesus, for that goodness, which thou art, I most humbly beg
of thee, that at the hour of my parting, thou will be graciously pleased, to
place thy Bitter Pains, and Torments, betwixt my poor soul, and thy judgment;
for by them, I hope, to be set free, and brought to the Kingdom, of endless
felicity.

7. O most amiable Jesus, for thy Bitter ^'assion and death, refuse me not, now
coming unto thee; turn not thy sweet, and loving face, from me; for I do
humbly crave the benefit of thy love and mercy, promised to all that do
repent, and call to thee in truth. bring me to ^hy self; send thy good Angel,
to guard, and lead me, to the port of secu^ity; through this dangerous sea of
mise^yes, wherein I am.

8. O my God, and my only good, look, and take compassion, on me, in thy
goodness, forgive me, my offenses; leave me not to the power, of my Ghostly
enemies; o help me, in this my necessity, and bring me, to thy Glory; for I am
tru^y grieved, and most heartely sorry, for having offended thee.

9. O most Glorious Virgin Mary, Mother of God, all grace, and mercy, refuge of
sinners, aduocat, of the distressed, and comforter, of the afflicted: to thee,
I poor sinner, do now fly, and commend my self, at this hour of my death;
receive me, I beseech thee, to thy holy protection; defend me, from my foes;
assist me, in my parting; and present me, to thy sweet Son Jesus, in the
Kingdom of his endless glory.

10. O deceitful world, I do renounce thee; o cursed sin, I do detest, and
abhor thee; O foul and transitory pleasures, I do truly contemn you; and am
right sorry, that I did affect you, with the offense of my God; Come, o my
loving Jesus, come my dear Lord, and Savior; and receive my soul, into the
arms, of thy mercy, and love; o when shall my soul be dissolved? o when shall
I see thee? o when shall I be with thee? o when shall I possess and enjoy
thee? my soul, o Lord, does long to be with thee, in the land of the living;
do not I beseech thee, my God, frustrat me of my desire.

11. O Jesus, my love, my life, my comfort, and my only good; I do offer
consecrat, and sacrifice my self, wholly unto thee, who have carefully sought,
dearly bought, and truly loved me, (for which I give thee infinite thanks)
receive me, therefore, o supreme goodness, now coming unto thee; having no
other comfort, nor content, but in thee; own me, my God, and gracious
redeemer, as thy right, forsake, not thy true inheritance; bring me to thy
sweet self, and place me, after this transitory life, among thy servants, in
thy house of immortality, endless joy, and eternal felicity. Amen.

12. And observe (you, friends, of the departed soul;) immediately to pray
earnestly for her; for in this; you show your selves true friends; for foolish
crying, helps her not; but she is much relieved, and comforted by the
prayers, fasting, and almesdeedes, of the faithful. and perhaps even at that
very hour, by your prayers, she will be freed from the fearful pains of
purgatory, and brought to glory; this is to be much no^ed.

the end of the first treatise.
THE SECOND TREATISE, Containing several devout prayers, and meditations.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
A Prayer to God the Father.
^. O Father omnipotent, and Lord of all things, (whose bowels of mercy, are
always open, ready to rece^ue the poorest creature, as well as the greatest
King) behold, I quite confunded, (not daring to lift mine eyes, unto the
heavens, by reason of the multitude of my sins) do now come to thee my God,
with a submissiue, and repentant heart, detesting in the presence of thy Holy
Saints, and Angels; what soever I did, against thy holy will; and chiesly, for
lauishing the substance, and portion* of thy divine Grace, which thou we^
graciously, and Fatherly, pleased, to give unto me, as thy child; wherefore I
most humbly beseech thee, o dear Father, for that goodness, which thou art,
that thou will not punnish me, in thy wrath; no^ cast me from thy sight, now
lying at the feet, with all humility; but receive m^ to thy mercy; chastise me
as thy child, and then forgive, what I have wilfully and wickedly committed,
against the holy laws; that I may not perish, wit^ the children of darkness,
the lovers ^^ this world; but reconciled unto thee, and received to thy favor,
and grace again, I may with a pure and loving heart, serve thee in this life,
and afterward in the other, enjoy and praise thee for all eternity. Amen.

A Prayer to God the Son.
2. O My dear Jesus, the true, Son, and eternal wisdom of God the Father,
most pious, most merciful, most gracious, and amiable, who for love of me,
did come from heaven, to this vale of tears and mysery; to live in sorrow,
and suffer the most ignominious death of the cross; thereby to free me from
hell; and draw me out of the fearful, and devouring mouth of the infernal
Lion; for which, my God, I give thee most hearty thanks, and my soul, bless
and praise thee for ever: humbly beseeching thee, by that mercy, and piety of
thine; by thy bitter passion, and grievous torments, by thy Holy Cross, and
painful death thereon; that thou will not forsake me, whom thou have so
dearly loved: but grant me a true sorfull, repentant heart, for my impietyes;
forgiunesse and pardon, for my offenses, a perfect hatred, and detestation of
all sin, and an unfeigned and sincere love, to thy sweet self, my Savior,
and dear redeemer; that hereafter, I may not be ungrateful; but with all the
powers, and endeauours of my body and soul, serve thee, with all fidelity, in
this life; and in the other, live, and be with thee, in glory, my only good,
who do live, with the Father, and Holy Ghost, worthy of all love and praise,
world without end. Amen.

A Prayer to God the Holy Ghost.
3. O Most Holy Ghost, true God, and love divine, who art light, in darkness,
comfort, in sadness, the Father of the poor, and the blessed gift of the
living God; sent, from heaven, to earth, to instruct, direct, and teach the
faithful all truth; come unto me, I most humbly beg of thee, and give light,
to my understanding, obscured, with cloudy darkness of ignorance; reduce me,
from my erring steps, and guide me, in the way of truth; comfort my afflicted
mind; give true sorrow, to my heart, and rivers. of tears, unto mine eyes; for
I abused thy holy favors, and gifts (being many) setting thy grace a side, and
thereby offending thee, my good God, whom I ought truly to love above all thou
being love, and goodness; love worthy for thy self. O merciful Father of the
poor, take compassion, and care of me, a poor distressed sinner; receive me,
as thy child, now coming unto thee; and with the fire of thy divine love,
purify my soul; burning and consuming in me, all affections, and inclinations,
which are not to thee; that by this thy Holy gift, inflamed with thy love; I
may faithfully serve thee; always, please thee, fear, to offend thee; live
in thy favor, dye in peace, replenished with thy grace, to love thee my God,
in heaven; for Evermore. Amen.

A Prayer to the most Holy Trinity.
4. O Trinity most blessed, most eminent, most excellent, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God; I, thy creature, do worship, honor,
reverence, adore, love, and praise thee above all that is created; for thou art
omnipotent, immense, infinite, eternal; thou art merciful, just, wise,
provident, seeing, knowing, and comprehending all, that is in heaven and earth,
far surpassing all capacity and understanding; from whom, all creatures,
visible, and invisible, have their being, and dependence; and without whom,
they fall to nothing, whence they are; so that thou art our loving creator,
preserver, beginning, and end; infinitely for thy own goodness, and
perfections, unspeakable glory, Majesty and dignity, amiable, desirable and
laudable; thou have o Lord made us, to and for thy self; Therefore I most
humbly and heartily beseech thy divine Majesty, to bring me and all, to the
true knowledge, of thy greatness, goodness, and mercy; that here we may
sincerely, love and serve thee; and in thy kingdom of endless joy and
felicity, extol thee with everlasting praise for all Eternity. Amen.

A Prayer to the B. V. Mary.
5. O Most Glorious Virgin, and worthy Mother of my God, the hope, and comfort,
of the distressed; I am in mysery; for my sins, are great, and my vices, many,
my purposes, I multiply, but my amendment, is little, and my sorrow small. so
that, through shame and fear; I dare nor appear, before thy sweet Son
Jesus; nor his heavenly Father; having so often offended and deserved, their
wrath and indignation; Therefore, O most blessed above all creatures. I come to
thee, casting my self, at thy sacred feet, and humbly beseeching thee (who
art the true Mother of grace, and mercy) not to reject my petition, being a
poor distressed sinner; for thou art the cause of our joy; by thee, we
received the fruit of life; by thee, they who lay in darkness, and the shadow
of death, received life, and light; thou art, our refuge, in necessityes; by
thee, vice is expelled, grace and virtue, obtained; sinners saved; and the
devil confounded; do not then, turn thy gracious face, from me, though I be
wicked; give ear to my request, deny me not; but pray to thy sweet Son
Jesus, for me, who will not deny, what thou shall demand; though he may justly,
refuse me. I do confide in thy piety and mercy, that thou will not forsake me,
in this my distressed case, and mysery; because none did ever call to thee, who
was not heard; neither did any crave thy assistance, and was denied; for, o
Sacred Virgin, who flying to thee for safty, was rejected? or who was prayed
for, by thee, to thy Sweet Son Jesus, that was not pardoned, and forgiven,
though never so wicked? O gracious and most glorius queen of heaven, refuse me
not, have mercy on me, receive me, poor sinner, to thy Holy protection, defend
me from my enemies, free me from all fear, beg a pardon for thy clyent,
forgiunesse of my sins, amendment of my life, daily increase of grace; and
above all, the true love of thy sweet Son Jesus, and thy self; and that I
may live and dye, in true faith, hope, and charity. Amen.

A Prayer, to our good Angel.
6. O Blessed Angel of God, my guardian dear, who though in glory, beholding
the divine essence, and goodness of our Eternal Father, and there assisting
with thy endless praise, yet art not thou unmindful of me, by the supernall
power and piety, committed, to thy charge, and care; praise and thanks be unto
his divine Majesty, for the same; I do also reverence and thank thee, for thy
love, vigilance, and care of me; and withal, I do acknowledge my in gratitude,
and am truly sorry, that I did not hitherto, bear that due respect to thee, at
all times, and in all places, which I ought; Excuse me therefore, I beseech
thee, through thy goodness, and pardon my neglect heerin; thou know my
case, my fraylty, and weakness; O pray for me, to my Lord God, that he may
forgive this, and all my other grievous offenses; preserve me hereafter, direct
me in the day, protect me, in the night, defend me in temptations, keep me
from impure and foul imaginations, and other evil suggestions, of the devil;
rule my tongue, moderat my Passions, divert mine eyes, and senses, from vain
objects, inspire good thoughts; prevent the evil; employ my mind, in what shall
be, to the honor, and glory, of my God; and the good of my soul; present I
beseech thee, my poor prayers, and necessityes, to his divine Majesty, whiles
I am living, assist me dying, and in the kingdom of glory, deliver me, to my
dear Savior, Christ Jesus, to whom, by all creatures in heaven and earth, be
all honor, glory, and praise, with the Father, and Holy Ghost, world without
end. Amen.

A Prayer to all the Saints.
7. O Glorious Saints, and worthy friends of God, now enjoying, in heaven, the
happy reward, of your labors, and virtuous life on earth; your joy is great,
and never will have end; my mysery is great, and daily does increase; assist me
therefore, I most humbly pray; and whereas your charity is such, and so ardent,
and you desire, that all should love, and serve our common Lord; help me with
your holy prayers, and intercede for me; that my enemies, may not prevail
against me, nor my passions and vices, overcome me; but that I may truly
forsake all worldly love, subdue my flesh, mortify my senses, suppress my evil
inclinations, contemn the devil, live in virtue, dye in grace, and after,
enjoy your happy society, in endless gloy, to praise our Lord God for ever and
ever. Amen.

A Prayer to obtain chastity.
8. O True lover, of purity, integrity, and of all chaste souls, Christ Jesus;
I most humbly pray thy divine Majesty, to grant me the gift of chastity, by thy
Holy grace, and celestial benediction; and to that end, my God, extinguish in
me, all lustful motions, uncivil inclinations and inordinat desires, that in
all sanctity of life, with body and soul, I may serve and please thee, in this
world, and in thy heavenly kingdom, enjoy thee, o King, and true spouse of
Virgins, for all Eternity. Amen.

A Prayer to our B. lady, for obtaining any virtue.
9. O Blessed spouse, of God the Father, o happy seat, of Christ, his Son,
our Lord; o Temple, and throne, of the Holy Ghost; O Virgin pure, o aduocat,
and refuge of sinners; o true enemy of all vice, and lover of virtue, O queen
of Angels, my dear Mother, I humbly beg of thee, for that worth of thine, to
pray for me, to thy Sweet Son Jesus, to grant me, forgiveness of my sins,
and the virtue of (here name it.) A which I stand much in need of; that I may
please him, who is the pattern and master of all virtue and perfection; and so
live a virtuous life, and dye a holy death, to his honor and glory, his praise
and thine, and my comfort and good, for ever more. Amen.

A Prayer, in praise of our B. Lady.
10. O Saint of Saints, and next to God, in heaven and earth, most Holy, most
pure, most blessed, most Glorious, Mary, Virgin, and Mother; at the hearing of
thy Sweet name, the Angels do rejoice, the faithful, are comforted, the
souls in purgatory, are reliued; the afflicted and heavy of heart, recreated;
the deuiles, terrifyed, and through fear, do tremble and shake. All hayle
unto thee, O Mother of grace, mercy, and all goodneesse; all ought to love, and
honor thee; for thou art light, to us, in darkness; strength, in weakness;
security in danger; blessed are they who bless, and love thee. I do salute
thee once again, with all reverence, and respect; O most gracious queen; for
thou art the living, and magnificent court, and most glorious palace, of the
great King and Emperor of the world, the beautiful spouse, of God the Father,
most excellent, most eminent, most perfect, and blessed, above all women; yea,
above all creatures; most pious, most prudent, most comely, most amiable, the
wonder of heaven, the miracle of the world, O Mother of God, containing in thy
self, whom noe place, can contain; all the celestial quires, do sweetly
praise thee, and all those most happy inhabitants of heaven, do admire, at thy
glory, and perfections, saying, what is she, that rare creature, like unto
whom, we never saw any; she rises from the earth, and ascends hither, fairer
then the beautiful morning, she surpasses the brightness and fairness of
the moon, and far transcends the glory, of the sun; and is so magnificent,
that she is placed, next the throne of our Lord God, ordained queen, and
empress of the world. All hayle again, and again, to thee, o Sacred Virgin,
my Mother, my hope, my refuge, and safty; let all creatures, with my soul,
powers, and senses inward and outward, honor, reverence, and praise thee; to
thee, I do particularly commend, and offer my self, as thy perpetual
servant; direct and protect me, by thy power, o blessed Mary, the Glorius
star of the sea, of this tempestuous world, guiding souls, to the port, and
secure haven of Salvation. O my holy and most Gracius Aduocat, pray to thy
dear Son, that I may have a pure conscience, a godly life, a happy death,
and everlasting glory, with him, for ever. Amen.

A Prayer, to our Savior, for obtaining, devotion, and love, toward his B.
Mother.
O Most Sweet and loving Jesus, who on the cross, beholding the tears and the
afflicted soul of thy dear Mother, did through tender affection, and true
compassion, for her comfort, commend her to the charge and care, of thy loving
disciple, S. John, as to her child; and him likewise, to her, as to his dear
Mother; and in him, did recommend us all; grant me therefore, that I may
always love and honor her, as my true and loving Mother; and with all
ardent, and pure affection, serve and praise her; and with due respect, and
reverence, as her child, worship, and acknowledge my great obligation to her,
for her Motherly care, and benefits to me; and principally that by her, I had
thee, my Sweet Savior and redeemer, with whom all goodness came to me; grant
o good Jesus, that as she is my Mother, by thee appointed; I may deserve, to be
her child; and as her child, and charge; she may accept of me, and have a
tender and loving care at all times, of me; but chiefly, at the hour of my
death, to present me, as her own, unto thee, in endless glory. Amen.

A Prayer to any Saint. according to your devotion.
12. O Citizen of heaven, and dear fauorit of God, S. N. I do honor thee,
and am most heartely thankful, to his divine Majesty, for his blessings, and
favors bestowed on thee, I wish also, that all were devoted, unto thee, that
thy praise, might never be forgotten, but remembered, for all eternity; O
blessed Saint. N. (whom I truly worship, and respect) plead my cause, where I
am unworthy, to be heard; and by thy Holy merits, and intercession, obtain for
me, (name what you desire) as also, a myld heart, a humble soul, a charitable
affection, toward all; a happy life, a good death, and life euerlastling
through Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer for remission of sins, through the merits of Christ.
13 O Father of goodness, piety, and mercy, who do not desire the death of
sinners. but that they may be converted, live, and be saved; though I be
wicked, and the sins of the world; many, and great, and that we are
unprofitable servants, not able to give any satisfaction unto thee: yet o Lord;
I present, and ofter unto thee in full satisfaction of all my iniquities,
ingratitudes, negligences, and disrespects toward thee, my God, and for the
sins of the whole world, thy deerly beloved Son, Christ Jesus, our Lord;
most humbly praying, that through his holy incarnation, pure Life, Bitter
passion, and paynfull death; and for all his virtues, labors, miseryes,
afflictions, torments, his most Precius Blood shed for us, and all his blessed
merits, and what soever he did to thy honor and Glory; thou will according to
thy Fatherly goodness, accept of them and forgive us, our grievous offenses;
receive us to thy favor, and love; re^lenish us, with thy holy grace, free us
from the power, of hell and Satan, and bring us securely, to thy Kingdom of
endless felycity, where we may see, and enjoy thee, our merciful Father, with
thy said sweet Son Jesus, and the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever: Amen.

A Devout Prayer to the holy Ghost.
14. O Most Holy Ghost, true God, proceeding divinely from the Father, and
Son; come unto me; visit this heart of mine; and there purge and cleanse what
is impure; wash my soul, from all foulness, watering sweetly, this arid, and
barren soil, with long desired, pleasing showers, of thy divine grace; cure,
and heal in me, o celestial physician, of my soul; what by sin, is wounded;
make my stubburne heart, flexible, and pliable, to thy holy will; cherish my
cold, frosen soul, with the heat, of thy sweet love; O love divine, make me
humble, in spirit, that thou may joyfully rest in me; O blessed light,
illuminat me, with the splendor of thy heavenly brightness. O joy of
Paradise, O Fountain; of most pure water of delight, my God; flow into my
soul, and make me whiter then the snow, and in the inward of my bowels, kindle
the fire, of thy sweet love consuming what, is in me of me, and converting me,
into thee. O true comforter of my soul, fortify my spirit, against my powerful
passins, reduce my whole affection, to thy self, direct me, in the way of
truth, grant me true peace of mind, a lively faith, a constant hope, an ardent
and perfect charity, with endless joy and felicity, Amen.

A Prayer for the souls in Purgatory.
15. O Most blessed Savior, and most loving redeemer of the world, whose
goodness far exceeds our malice, and whose mercy, is beyond all our
iniquityes; I humbly beseech thee; through the merits, of thy Holy life, great
torments, woeful passion, and painful death, to free the souls of Purgatory,
(and chiefly, the soul of, A. B.) from thence, and those cruel pains which
there they justly suffer, for having offended thee; bring them o Lord, from the
darkness, wherein they are; to the light of glory, where they may praise thee,
with the Father, and Holy Ghost for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer to our Savior on the Cross.
16. O Deete Jesus, hanging on the cross for me; grant I humbly pray, that I
may never part, from this Holy Cross; where my life, my joy, and tresure is;
receive me, within the arms, of thy sweet love; hyde me, from the world, the
flesh, and the devil; within that strong fort, of thy wounded side; secure me,
in the secret closet, of thy open, and loving heart; that I may not see, hear,
know, seek, or love, but thee alone, my most amiable, and dear Jesus; for
really, and truly, thou art my health, my wealth, my joy, my comfort, my friend,
my life, my Lord, my God, and only good, infinitely worthy, of all honor,
glory, and praise, both in this, and the other world, with the Father and Holy
Ghost, for ever more. Amen.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
Short meditations, and devout prayers, for obtaining of particular virtues, to
be used according to the days of the week.
1. YOu must first observe, that when you read the meditations, set before the
prayer, of the day; you are to present, before the eyes of your mind, the part,
or point, of our Saviors passion which is therein mentioned, and sweetly
looking upon him, for a while, consider what he did, why; for whom; and what
we ought to do in true gratitude; this done, say the following prayer,
vocally or mentally, but slowly and devoutly; this manner of praying, is
profitable, and meritorious.

On Monday, The meditation.
2: COnsider how Christ our Savior, being to go from this world, to his
heavenly Father; at his last supper with his disciples, (to express the
greatness of his love to mankind through which, he could not endure to be from
us) ordained the most B. Sacrament of Matt. 26. v. 26.
the altar; in which he would be always really and truly present with us, to
be our comfort in afflictions, our help in necessityes, our food and
nourishment in this our bannishment, that we might be confident of his holy
assistance in all occasions, and not forget, nor be unmindful of this his so
great love, but with gratitude return love for love, which is all that he
desires of us.

The Prayer.
3. O My dear and loving Jesus, whose love to mankind, is far bayond all
expression; I do acknowledge thy many great gifts, and benefits; for all which,
I do give thee most hearty thanks, and above all; for this benefit in
particular, wherein thou have expressed thy affection and love, in a very high
degree, leaving unto us; in the most blessed Sacrament, thy Precious self, the
living, and true bread of life, which descended from heaven, of which, he that
truly eats, shall have life everlasting.

4. This bread, my God, does nourish, comfort, and strengthen the weak, and
afflicted; it is wealth to the poor, health, to the rich, a salve, and cure
for all sores, a sovereign medicine, for every sickness, and endless life,
to those that receive it worthily. O true tresure of heaven, o Fountain of the
water of life, o most Blessed Sacrament of the body and Blood of my dear
Savior Jesus; praised may thou be for ever.

5. O most sweet and amiable Lord grant me the benefit of this bread; give me,
this holy bread, wherein thou art, yea, which thou art; for it is far better,
sweeter, more pleasing, and comfortable, then the heavenly manna, which thy
Father, gave to the children of Israel, to nourish, and strengthen them, in
their Deuteronomy. 8. v, 3. and 16.
long, and tedious journey, to the land of promise; give me then, o loving
Lord, this divine bread, and in, and with it, a lively faith, a constant hope,
a sincere and ardent love, to thy sweet self.

6. O dear Jesus, I am very weak, and cannot live without this living bread,
neither shall I come, to the land of promise, heavenly Jerusalem, without this
celestial food, to nourish and strengthen me, in the way of this miserable
peregrination; thou art the way, even to thy self, thou art the truth, which
cannot fail, thou art the life which has noe end. having thee, I cannot err,
in Joan. 14. v. 6.
the way, nor be ignorant of thy truth; but shall have life, and live with thee
for ever; for all goodness, will come to me, together with thee.

7. The heavens o Jesus praise thee; the earth adore thee, all creatures,
magnify, love, and serve thee; and all my senses, facultyes, and powers,
inward, and outward, with body and soul, I offer unto thee, my dearest love,
with all the praises, of heaven and earth; in thanks for this token of thy
love and presence, in the most blessed Sacrament; humbly praying thee, o most
tender hearted, and loving Jesus, to grant me, in some measure to deserve this
thy dear love, in loving, and affecting thee, above all, that is created; that
so being nourished, and strengthened with this divine, and supersubstantiall
bread, I may pass securely through the desert, of this world, to the true land
of promise, heavenly Jerusalem; there to see thee face to face in glory; and
with thy celestial quires, of Saints and Angels, love, enjoy, and praise
thee, with the Father, and Holy Ghost, for all eternity. Amen:

On Twesday, the Meditation.
8. COnsider the profound and admirable humility of Christ our Savior, who
kneeling, his disciples sit^ing, Joan. 13. v. 5.
washed their defiled feet, with those pure and sacred hands, which created
both heaven and earth, thereby to confound the pride of this world; learn
therefore (said he) of me, because I am Math. 11. v. 26.
myld, and humble in heart, and upon whom shall my spirit rest, but on the
Jacob 4. v. 6.
humble, for he does resist the proud, and give his grace to the humble,
consider and imitate this holy example; for if the King of glory, did humble
him self so much, why not you?

The Prayer.
9. O Dear Jesus the true pattern and master of humility, who descending from
the unknown joys of heaven, to this vale of tears, would be esteemed as
one of us; subject to the myseryes of our nature sin excepted; with humility
thou were borne in a stable, in humility thou did live subject to thy
parents, in humility thou did submitt Luc. 2. v. 51.
thy self to the evil usage, and abuses of wicked sinners, and were esteemed
the scorn of men, and the very our cast of the people. O most humble Jesus,
teach me this heavenly doctrine, grant me this admirable virtue, of humility;
for it is the ground and fundation, of a spiritual life, the mistrisse of
virtues, the treasure of the soul, the true path way, leading through the
dangerous solitude, of this world, to the land of the living; a jewel
unknown, yet found, and enjoyed by thy Holy Mother, and therefore, she is Luc.
1. v. 48.
called, blessed, by all genetations.

10. This, thou have taught in word and work, this, thy followers learned,
and embraced; this, thy lovers, highly esteemed, and respected; this by thy
heavenly Father is always honored, and richly rewarded in glory: for he who
humbles himself, (thou say), shall be exalted; Grant me therefore, I most
Matt. 23. v. 12.
humbly beseech thee, my Sweet Jesus, this blessed gift, this most excellent
virtue, of humility; which like the camamill, the more it is pressed down,
trod, and kept under, the better it grows; the fairer, it spreds; the sweeter
its odor is; and the greater its fragrancy, which much delights the
beholders.

11. O most humble Jesus, again and again, I pray thee, to give me this,
powerful, and most grateful virtue, which above all virtues, has that force,
as to draw the love of all, to it self, it causes the highest heavens, to
incline, to the poorest and lowest creature; and the most abject, to be
exalted, to the highest glory; and as pride, does purchase hell; humility
gains heaven; O most humble Jesus, what shall become of me? I see thee, on thy
knees, humbly washing the unclean feet of thy disciples, yea, of Judas, that
wicked one; whom thou did know, was to betray thee.

12. O how far this act of thine o Jesus, in like case, had been from my
proud heart? but it is the rare effect of thy humility; O what a confusion this
is to me? I feign would be esteemed, and honored by all; and that others
should bow to me, who am a foul and wicked sinner, a mere nothing; and thou o
glory, of heaven, and King, of the Angels, do so humble thy self, even to
the wicked? o what a shame and condemnation this is to me? who ought to humbly
my self to all for thee; and esteem my self, that which truly I am; vile,
base, and unworthy to be regarded by any: yea fit to be despised by all; for I
am a wicked sinner, dust and ashes, meat for worms, a mere nothing.

13. O supreme goodness, my most humble Jesus, bannish from my heart all pride
and vain content, grant me, this heavenly treasure, this rich and incomparable
jewel, this virtue of true humility: that in this world, I may submit my self
to all, think well of all, but of my self; and heartely desire to be humbled
set at naught, and contemned by all, to be exalted with, and by thee, in the
other, to the mountain of eternity in endless glory, and felicity. Amen.

On wensday, the Meditation.
14. COnsider how Christ our Savior in his prayer, in the garden of Gethsemany
(his heart being Luc. 22, v. 44. Matt. 16. v. 42.
heavy and sad, even to death) did sweat drops of Blood, through the
apprehension of the grievous torments and pains, which he was to suffer in his
passion and death; they being harsh, and repugnant to nature, yet with all
resignation, he conformed his will, to the will, of his heavenly Father,
saying; Father, not my will, but thine be done; I am content to suffer,
because thou will have it so. by this example, we must, in all occasions,
difficultyes, and crosses, resign our selves, and conform our wills, to the
will, of God, accepting with content, what pleases him to send.

The Prayer.
15 O Most sweet and Myld Jesus, who in thy prayer, and painful sweat, in the
garden of Gethsemany, according to the desire of our weak nature, did pray
thy heavenly Father, that the challice, of thy Bitter Passion, (which thou
did then foresee) should be taken from thee; yet knowing the great honor,
and glory, unto him, and the great good, which thence were to ensue to us,
poor sinners; with all reverence (though the torments were great and many,
which thou were to suffer) thou did resign thy self, thy Holy Spirit being
always prompt, and ready to fulfill, his pleasure and will; and therefore,
with all love and alacrity of spirit, did willingly perform that heavy and
painful work, of my Salvation, by thy great torments, pains, and death, on
the cross; for which o my God, my soul, and all thy creatures, thank and
praise thee, for ever; O most amiable Jesus, o living life, of my life, (without
whom, there is no life) thou have resigned, and guien thy life, for me; o
comfort of my soul, o true content of my mind, how great thy care is of me? o
how great thy love is to me, in this thy suffering for me?

16. Grant me o Jesus, this resignation and conformity (in all occasions) to thy
holy will, that I may accept what ^^ntradictions, abuses, and crosses inward
and outward, shall happen unto me, with all content; because it is thy will, it
should be so; O Sweet Jesus, what can come amiss, to a resigned mind? to a
soul conformable in all things to thy holy will? he that is resigned; walks
securely, he fears no crosses, he is not proud, for wealth, or honor; he is
not grieved, for poverty, or contempt; he is patient, in sickness; he is
joyful, in tribulations, and temptations; because he knows, nothing can
happen, to him, spiritual or corporal; but according to thy will; and it is
fitting, thy holy will, should be always done, of us, thy creatures; and
thou do best know, what occasions, to send, wherein I may, with profit,
resign my self, and be conformable, to thy will, and thereby augment my merit
and glory.

17. Grant me, o my dear Jesus, this ^rue resignation, and conformity, to thy
holy will; that in the tempestuous storms of temptations and afflictions, how
great soever they be, like unto an vnmo^able rock, with tranquillity of mind,
and true hearts content, I may always ^ay, thy will be done my God, not
my^e. Amen.

On Thursday, the Meditation.
18. COnsider how our Savior, being falsely, and unjustly accused, of diverse
crimes by the Jews; did not once Math. 26. v. 63. Math. 27. v. 14.
excuse himself; but in great silence, heard, and endured all; in so much,
that Pilat, (who was Judge) did greatly admire; by which our Savior, commends
this verrue, unto us, as a special good; for this silence, is a virtue of high
merit before God, who knows all truth; and will reward it, abundantly in
glory.

The Prayer.
19. O King of glory, my Jesus, I consisider thee before Annas, Caiphas, Herod,
and Pilat, falfly and unjustly accused, and most injuriously treated, and
abused; by the wicked and malicious, Jews; which thou could easily convince
of falsehood, and untruths; and cast into hell, if thou had so pleased; yet
would not thou so do; nor once excuse thy self; but referring all to thy
heavenly Father, were so silent, that Pilat did admire; that thou did not
answer for thy self, to what was objected, and laid to thy charge; for he was
desirous, by thy answer, to take an occasion, to refute them, and set thee
free; for he knew full well, that through envy thou were falsely accused, and
brought to be judged, by him.

20. O blessed Lord of my soul, thy actions are our instructions; hence it is,
that this virtue, is so much in holy Scripture extolled, and by thy true
servants commended, and practiced; as that, which preserves all piety, and
inward graces; therefore thy Apostle said, he Iac. 5. v. 2. Isai. 30. v. 15.
that offends not in word, is a perfect man: for in silence and hope our
spiritual fortitude does consist: which a servant of thine knew very well,
saying, that it often grieved him, to have spoaken; but never, to have been
silent, by reason whereof, others, for many years (as we read in their lives,)
did not speak a word; woe is me, my Jesus, and my God, how lavish I have been
of my tongue? how forward to excuse my fault? and willing to defend a wrong, by
fair and deceiptfull speeches, rather then be silent, or do as thou have
done?

21. O pardon me my God; and for that goodness which thou art, I most humbly
beg of thee; to grant me this admirable virtue; then without excusing my self;
I shall refrain, and tame this unbridled tongue, of mine; whence so many euiles
proceed; and not offend in words, as daily hitherto, I have done; ye^ being
silent and speechless, to the world in the sweet retirement, and inward o^ my
soul; I shall find place and opportunity, to speak, and confer with thee and
thy Holy Angels, of divine and heavenly things; and such as concern the good
and salvation of my soul; and consequently, detraction, lying, cursing,
swering, and such like, (wherein I often offended,) shall have no place in me;
O silent Jesus, be not silent, unto me; but say. thou art pleased, to grant this
blessed virtue, and most happy gift, unto me; that my tongue may not be
employed, but in thy holy praises, both now, and for ever more. Amen.

On friday, The Meditation.
22. COnsider how Christ our Savior, by the wicked Jews, was stripped naked,
then fast tied to a pillar, and so pitifully whipped (his Sacred flesh torn
Math: 17. v. 26.
on every side) that his blessed ribs, and bones did appear; this he did
endure, only to do penance for thy sins; that thou may know, that without
thy concurring, and doing of penance; thy sins will not be forgiven, nor gods
wrath, appeased, which thou have deserved, by offending his divine Majesty.

The Prayer.
23. O Glory of heaven, o light of the earth, o comfort, and life of my soul,
my dear and loving Jesus, what stony heart will not break, or at least,
extremly grieve, to see thee, in that woeful case abused? o what frosen soul,
would not melt into tears of compassion and love, to see thy Sacred flesh
torn, and thy most Precious Blood, streaming on the ground, for my sake; to
do penance and make satisfaction for my sins?

24. O Lord I am the nocent, and thou the innocent, I am the guilty, and thou
the condemned, I deserved for my sins, that severe punnishment, and thou do
suffer it for me; O dear Jesus, what shall I say? what shall I do, my dearest
Lord? I see thy Blood run to the ground, thy Holy flesh, all torn, thy
wounds open, thy bones naked, none there, to take compassion on thee, but all
d^sirous to torment, and afflict thee; I am therefore o my Sovereign good,
(...) confunded, and it grieves me, to see he in that pain, for such a wretch
as I.

25. Thou art o Lord, my creator, and I, thy creature, thou my King, and I thy
subject, thou my Lord, and I thy vasall; must I then have ease, and thou
trouble? must my body rest, and thine be vexed, and torn with lashes? must I
most wicked offender, escape free, and thou my Sweet and innocent Jesus be
tormented and punnished; in that woeful wise? O supreme goodness, what shall
become of me? O how shall I be thankful unto thee? how shall I requite thy
love and pains? how shall I make some satisfaction, for my cursed sins; which
put thee to those heavy pains and torments? thou, o my dear and loving Jesus,
have showen me the way, of Salvation, and reconciliation; by doing penance
for my sins.

26. Grant me therefore (I most humbly pray) thy holy Grace, to encourrage me,
to do true penance, for my sins, through love of thee, and with a sorrowful
repentant, heart, cry to the heavens, for mercy; for I must confess, that I
have been favorable to my self, and little desirous to suffer any
mortification or pain. But now O Jesus, with the assistance of thy holy grace,
(which again I heartely beg, of thee) I do resolve, to imitat thee, and take
reueng against my self (for having offended thee) by fasting, watching,
disciplines, frequent prayer, with other mortifications, and austerityes inward
and outward; and though all that I shall do; be very little; yet they receiving
worth from thy holy pains and merits; I hope to appease the wrath of thy
heavenly Father, (which I justly deserved by my wicked life, for which I am
heartely sorry) and after the misery of this life, enjoy thy holy sight, and
company in glory, for ever. Amen.

On Saturday, the Meditation.
27 COnsidet how our Lord and Savior, Christ Jesus, with invincible patience,
endured, not only to be contemned, despised, outbrayded by the Jews and wicked
Pharisees, with evil language, and most opprobrious words; but also, to be
crowned, with sharp Thorns piercing to the brain; so that the Blood ran
down his blessed neck, Math. 27. v. 2^.
and face; and then in derision they a dored him; by this we have his example.
to bear patiently, all affronts, iniuryes, and abuses which shall happen, or be
offered, unto us, for love of him, who so patiently suffered them, for love of
us.

The Prayer.
28. O Most myld, and patient Jesus, thou have taught me, with patience, to
endure, and overcome all difficultyes; for though the wicked Jews, did
endeavor, with foul abuses, and cruel torments, to move and distemper thy
holy heart; yet thou did bear and support all, with so great patience, that
heaven and earth might well admire thereat.

29. O my dear Lord, I see, how without respect or regard to thy worth and
dignity, they veil and smit thee over thy face; they in scorn adore thee, as
a King, and crown thee with sharp thorns; thy eyes are obscured with the
blood running down, thy gracious face with spitle and buffits, is all bruised,
swollen, and disfigured; all conspiring to work thy woe.

30. Yet most patient Jesus, for my sake, and example, thou did suffer all
with content; and leave thy self, to their fury, enduring these wrongs and
crueltyes, with unspeakable patience. O my sweet and myld Jesus, this holy
virtue of patience, is the true touchstone, by which, such as love thee, are
perfectly known; it is honored in confessors, praised in Virgins, crowned in
martyrs and admired by all; for it ouercomes, the rage and fury, of an angry
heart, it does moderat, and suppress the disordered passions, it is stronger,
then torments, and tyrants; and it adornes the whole Church of God.

3^. O my loving Jesus, how shall I without shame, and fear, presume, or dare
hereafter complain of an injurious word, a small abuse, or wrong offered, or
done unto me? O most patient Jesus, grant, that I may imitate thee; give me
this blessed virtue, of patience, I humbly beseech thee; and even for thy
self, refuse me not my God.

32. For having patience, I shall be humble, myld, silent, obedient,
charitable, resigned, and conformable in all things to thy holy will; for it is
the tresury of virtues; o grant it me, my God, that in all occasions, affronts,
iniuryes, and wrongs how great soever, I may be patient, with, and for thee;
and then in afflictions, miseryes, and crosses, with thy true and patient
servant Job, I may Job 2. v. 10.
say; as I received from the hands, of my God, what things were good, and
pleasing; why should not I likewise accept what euiles, or crosses, his divine
Majesty shall be pleased to cast upon me? for they may be sent as a
punnishment, for my sins, or for my trial, and exercise, in virtue; or for my
spiritual profit, and greater glory.

33. O blessed patience, thou art the proper virtue of the Servants of Christ,
o Jesus grant it unto me; for then I shall not fear, if the heavens thunder,
hell, rage, the passions, swell, the devil and nature tempt, and the world grow
mad; what, o patient Jesus, can overcome me, joined and united in patience,
with thee? O my God, bestow this holy gift on me; with patience to live, with
patience to dye, and live with thee, o most patient Jesus, for ever and ever.
Amen.

On Sunday, the Meditation.
34. COnsider how Christ our Savior, was not only hanged and nailed on the
Cross, by the wicked Jews, but also scorned, and maliciously derided; with
most injurious blasphemies, which notwithstanding; he took compassion upon
them, and offered his holy prayers, to his heavenly Father, with most ardent
love, for those his blody Luc. 23. v. 34.
enemies, desiring him, to forgive them; sweetly excusing them, because they
knew not what they did; thus instructing us, to love, and pray not only for our
friends, but also for adversaries and enemies.

The Prayer.
35. O Celestial Phoenix, my loving Jesus, who with the fire of divine love,
have consumed thy self, dying on the cross; thereby giving life, to all that
live in thy Holy Church; and have offered thy self, a Sacrifice to thy
heavenly Father for us, wicked sinners, thy enemies; daily crucifying thee
again, with our abominable crimes, and offenses; and still do offer all thy
sacred prayers, and wounds, unto him in satisfaction, and remission of our
sins; that with thy Precious Blood, all malice was head from our souls, and
thy true charity stilled into our hearts, we might affect, truly love, and with
thee, pray for our enemies, and persecutors; saying; Father forgive them,
because they know not, what they do.

36. This holy lesson and divine doctrine, many of thy servants learned, of
thee; this thy blessed Martyr S. Stephen, Act. 7. v. 5. 6.
and others did for those that stoned, and put them to death. Thy love o dear
Jesus, is great to us, and therefore thou do inuit us, to come to thee, to
be unloaded of the heavy burden of our sins, and be forgiven; yea, it is so
vehement and sincere, that with a tender and loving heart, thou do excuse
our weakness, fraylty, and unconstant condition; and easily do forget our
faults, and put them in oblivion; yea if our sins be innumerable, and we, as
foul as may be; from the cross, thy voice is made horse, calling unto us, to
return from our wicked ways, and come to thee; thy bloody fountains will
wash all clean away; thy holy arms, are stretched out, to embrace us; thy
side is open, to receive us, thy wounded heart desires to entertain us, within
the bowels of thy mercy, and thy sweet love and tender affections; and thy
prayer to thy heavenly Father, does never cease, but cries for us (though thy
enemies) Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

37. O what a loving prayer, o what a charitable request, o what a sweet and
true excuse? for if we truly knew, o Lord, the great hurt of sin, we would
endure all the torments of hell, (if they were as many more) rather then
committ one; or offend so good a God, so high and great a Majesty. We have
therefore great cause to love, and come to thee, with heart and soul; and give
thee, my dear Savior, infinite thanks, for loving us so; and suffering
through love for us; and inuiting us, to come to thee, to enjoy all happiness,
and free us, from all misery?

38. Behold O my Jesus, I do now come to thee with all submission and
confidence, humbly beseeching thee, to let fall those blessed streams of thy
living fountains, on me, to wash a way, the foulness of my sins; ease me my
God, of this heavy load, which permitts me, not to lift mine eyes, to behold
thy goodness.

39. O true sun of Justice, cast down the fiery beams of thy burning love on
my frosen soul, that I may whol^ melt, and be dissolved into tears of love;
consume in me, o Lord, what is no thine; burn my heart, with the flames o^ thy
divine love, that the waters of tribulation, with all their violence and force
may never be able to quench, or put i^ out.

40. O then my God, I shall imitate thee; then I shall love, and pray for my
enemies; then shall I desire heartely their good and happiness, as my own;
then shall I take all things what soever, in good part; and judge the best of
others actions; and excuse in them, what to me, may seem amiss.

41. O Loving Jesus grant me this true love toward all that shall in any wise
offend me; that I may heartely pray, they may be forgiven by thy heavenly
Father, as I would be forgiven by him and thee, for all Eternity Amen.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
An Exclamation or confession of a penitent and loving soul, to Christ our
Savior.
O Joy of heaven, o light of earth, o comfort of the world, sweet esu: O Son
of God, o lover of mankind, my Savior dear; thou have dispersed the clowdy
darkness of my soul, and given me light, to see my erring steps, thou have
comforted my afflicted mind, being near the gate of despair and door of
eternal death. thou did care for me, when I did not care for my self, nor
thee; thou did seek after me, ^oing, I knew not whither, but straying from
thee, who art the true, and only way to life everlasting.

2. Thou know o Lord, how I was ^ompassed about, by my enemies, and taken in
their nets; then chayned fast in sin; walked with them, in the path of
^arknesse, leading to the house of Sa^han, and place of perdition; and when I
^eganne to sink into the depth, of the mire, of all abomination; insensible of
my danger and evil; then did thy goodness, and mercy appear, by holy
inspirations, sweetly admonishing me; and i^ seemed unto me, that I heard, thy
Low cry, calling unto me, as to another Lazarus, to a wake, and rise, our of
th^^ Joan. 11. v. 43.
dead sleep, wherein I was, and retur^^ to life again; which I neglecting,
wa^ no small grief, to thy holy, and loving heart;

3. Yet did not thou o my dearest and truest friend, my Jesus, forsake me, but
by a secret way, place in my mind, a thought of that terrible and dredful^ day
of judgment, with a trumpet sounding in mine ears, in a most fearful manner,
saying; arise ye dead, for now is the judgment of the world. who has done
well shall go to endless glory; Joan. 5. v. 29.
who evil; to endless torments;

4. This my God did amase me much, and caused me to reflect somewhat on my
self, and what should become of me for all eternity; and not knowing what to
say, or do, I began to weep, and shake with fear, and would, forsake, but
knew not how, those poisoned bits of sin, which on every occasion, were
offered to me, as sweet and pleasing; this tie kept me so fast, that I could
not get off.

5. O dear Savior, and redeemer of the world, how often then in thy love and
mercy, did thou knock, and knock again, at the secret of my heart,
presenting many thoughts of the joys of heaven, with such sweet and forcible
means, that my heart, though stony, griew tender, and in the affliction of my
mind, (which then was great, as thou do know) I said, I will stay no longer
in this misery; I will cast of, this heavy yoke, of sin; I will forsake the
occasions, and set by the false frendships, and vanities of this world;

6. And then, my God, how heavy was my heart? into what a depth of
perplexityes, was I brought? there the vanities, here the frendships and
familiarityes; then the pleasures of this life, and the false delight of sin;
then fear; then shame, to confess; all like so many bewayling friends
surrounded me, and busied my thoughts, and mind, endeavoring, to put an
obstackle to my good; some seemed to say, will thou forsake us so, and live in
misery, void of pleasure and content; then that damnable sweet of sin, was so
forcibly presented, to my mind, that I was altered, and vehemently troubled,
and my pain was such, that I knew not what side to take, and suspicious fears
so blinded me; that to be rid, and freed from the torment^ which thence I
felt: for a remedy, i^ seemed best, and I was content to remain with them,
thinking by my greate^ evil, to get some rest?

7. But my God, what a hell was this* the heavens o my dear Jesus, bless, and
praise thee for ever, and all thy creatures be thankful unto thee in my
behalf, for the means which thou did use to free, me thence; for being all
alone, on a time in this sorrowful conflict, and my thoughts multiplied; at
last, what heavenly considerations, what good desires, how many pious
resolutions, by thy care and mercy, came into my mind? I considered thy body
scourged and all torn, thy head crowned with sharp thorns, thy bleeding
wounds, and death upon the cross, for love of me; but above all, thy great
desire, to save my soul, thy willingness to receive me, to thy mercy, love,
and glory with very great, sweetness, plainly appeared unto me.

8. And then, o my eternal Lord God, how did thou open mine eyes, to see
the darkness, wherein I was? o how did thou then awake my soul, from that
sleeping lethargy of sin? then did I perceive the light, of thy holy grace,
then, did I observe my danger, and the profound pit of eternal demnation,
into which I was falling then, my dearest Lord, thou did give me courage to
forsake the place, and cause of sin; and resolve never to return thither
again; though I should dye thereby.

9. O heavens what a combat was this? o what perplexity was I then in? for
hell, sin, and Satan, did conspire to work my woe, cross my resolution,
and hinder its execution; but thy love and grace a ssisting me; that could not
be; O my God, how many were my tears? how frequent, the heavy sighs, and sobs
of my afflicted heart? thy care was great, thy love was strong, thou did not
rest, until I was set free: thou did most mercifully break those ties,
and chains, (with which I was kept fast, as the slave of Satan) by a good and
pennitent confession, and a firm resolution to sin no more; all which came
from thy holy grace and gift; which I confess with thanks in all sincerity.

10. Thus o my dear Jesus, thou did seek after me, thy straied sheep; thus
mercifully; thou did receive me thy prodigal child; thus did thou revive
me, thy beloved Lazarus, thus, o Lord thou, did free me from the cruel
beast, and roreing Lion, who thought, and sought to devour me; thus did thou
bring me from hell; save my soul; and of the slave of sin, and Satan, make
me the child of grace, and God.

11. O light of heaven, and glory of the Angels, o true lover, and life of my
soul Sweet Jesus, how is it, that thou do so far forget thy self, and thy
worth and dignity; as to be solicitous for such a one as I? art not thou o my
dear Jesus, creator of heaven and earth, and supreme Lord, of all things? how
comes it then, that thou my omnipotent God, should be myndfull of me, or
daigne to cast a look on so foul a dunghill, and so mere a nothing, as I am?

12. O ye heavens admire at this so great mercy, and goodness, so great care,
so wonderful, and gracious love of the son of God, the King of glory, my
dear Jesus, to so abominable a sinner, the most ungrateful of men; to me, who
most wickedly did forsake my part, of the joys of heaven, for a momentary
pleasure here on earth; to me, who made hoise, to love the filth of sin,
rather ^hen his unspeakable goodness, or his dear and most pure love; to me,
who am the worst of all creatures; to me whose eyes were lascivious, whose
mouth, blasphemous, whose ears, unchaste, whose ^houghts, vnpure, whose heart,
defild; to me, who am the center of euiles, the sink of sin, and the
receptacle of all abomination.

13. O my dear Jesus, o my Lord, and god, o my most true and dearest friend,
what is this love, which put thee so far beside shy self, (if I may so
speak) as to affect me, being sy vile and base? Oh what have thou seen in
me, my God, but sin, or worsse, if worsse may be? O how many thousands, more
deserving, are ^ot thus by thee called? O if they had ^ut half what thou have
done to me ^oore wretch, they would doubtless, love thee more; and serve thee
better, far^e then I; why then o my life, do not ^hou bring them to thy
admirable light, knowledge and love? o true lover of my ^oul, and comfort of my
heart, I am confounded to see thee, so choice of me, being what I am, base and
ungrateful, and pass by them; O my dearest Lord, thy Precious Blood was shed
for them, as well as for me, why then is not thy love to them, as unto me? thou
would be better served, by them; more honored, and loved, then by me? O
supream^ goodness, what is the cause, or reason thereof?

14. I do acknowledge, my God, tha^ thy judgments are profound, and
incomprehensible; and the reasons of thy doings, are not intelligible, nor
known to any but to thy self alone; yet my dearest Lord, this I may conceive,
of thy infinite mercy, and goodness; that I being, what I am, the absolute
worst, fowlest, and greatest of sinners; unworthy of any favor; the greatness
of thy goodness, and infinite mercy, might the more appear, in forgiving me;
by how much my malice, and wickedness, was greater against thee, that all thy
creatures, might therefore honor, glorify, and praise thee, for ever; who art
not tied to any, nor have respect of persons; but the greatest sinners,
(though their offenses were as many as the sands of the sea, and the stars of
the firmament) may confide in thee, and hope for salvation; seeing thy so great
mercy, and favor unto me, being so over wicked.

15. O Fountain of grace, my Jesus, blessed infinitely and for ever may thou
be, for taking such care of me; O my loving Lord, how many are the ways, and
and the inventions, which thou have, to bring souls, unto thy self, and thy
dear love? O how sweetly thou do inuit and allure them, to thy service,
and praise? but this is, to whom thou, wilt, when thou will, and as thou will;
thou art o my God, always beholding and providing for us, as if thou had
no other care; and we most unworthy, seldom think on thee? thy benefits are
innumerable, and we consider them not; thy joy and delight, is to be with us,
and we do not desire Prou. 8. v 31. 1. Pet. 1. v 12.
to be with thee, our only good; the very Angels, do rejoice to stand in thy
holy presence, beholding thy gracious countenance, excelling in all beauty; and
we wretches, (whom it most concerns,) do think to long to to be one hour in
prayer with thee, or in thy sweet presence and conversation.

16. Thou art, o loving Jesus, our true felicity; for in thee alone, all true
content of heart, is had, which in any wise, we can desire; yet we forgetful
of our own good, do not seriously seek after thee, as we are bound; and
ought. At least, my dearest Lord, I do confess my fault, and my most grievous
fault heerin; yea this my ingratitude, (when I reflect on my self) does
afflict my heart, and torment my soul with grief; so that now I wish I had a
fountain of tears, streaming at mine eyes, to weep continually, and bewail
my unworthiness, and great vnthankfullnesse unto thee. O how, my God, shall I
in any kind requite, this thy so great love? o my dear Jesus, how shall I be
thankful, for these thy so many benefits, and mercyes unto me? O my soul, why
do not thou burst with grief, of thy neglect heerin? and why do not thou
melt into tears with love, of thy loving Savior Christ Jesus, who weryed
himself, seeking after thee, and consumed him self to death, with love of
thee*

17. O my sweet spouse, and soul's delight; with what praises shall I extol
thee? with what thanks, shall I return love for this thy love? O my dear
hearts content, how shall I honor thy infinite goodness, make known and
declare thy mercyes, and benefits to me, so great a sinner? which is more then
sufficient, to bring the whole world to admiration, and move all sinners, to
forsake their wicked ways, with love of thee: I wish, o my Eternal God, and
only good, that all the members of my body, and all the hairs of my head, and
all the facultyes of my soul, were eloquent tongues, and burning hearts of
love, to make known to all, and sing forth thy mercyes, and love: and praise
thy infinite goodness, for all eternity.

18. Yet how soever my dear Jesus, with body and soul, and all rhat which I am,
I do honor, adore, and praise thee; and in the presence of heaven and earth,
with all the thanks and praises of thy creatures spiritual and corporal, I
offer my self wholly, and thankfully unto thee, for thy blessed love, and
favors unto me; and hereafter for thy dear sake, I will admit no love, but
thine into my heart, have no comfort not consolation, but in thee, no solace
nor recreation, but with thee; no meat nor drink shall do me good, without
thee; my music, my content, and rest, shall be in thy company, and with thee
alone; yea, for love of thee, my God, I will shut mine eyes, mine ears, my
mouth, and heart, to all things of this world, to think and see, to speak and
be, with thee alone.

19. Come Sweet Jesus, come my dear, come unto me, my heart is open and my soul
longing to receive thee, my only good, come my God, come and visit this
habitation of thine, take possession of thy right, give not thy inheritance to
an other; come o loving Jesus, enjoy what thou have so painfully sought, and so
deerly bought; come my heavenly, and deerly beloved spouse, come, rest and
repose thy self in this soul, which is thy choice, and no more mine, but
thine; o transform me into thy self, that I may be perpetually united in thy
love and praise; augment o Sweet Jesus, thy divine love, in me, that I may
whiles I live, in this mortality, still burn and languish, with an ardent and
heavenly desire, to be dissolved, and live with thee, enjoying thy blessed
company, and most amiable presence, in glory; which I beseech thee; for thy
love, and self, Sweet Jesus, to grant unto me for all Eternity Amen.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
A devout meditation, upon our Savior in the garden of Gethsemany.
1. O My dear soul, thou have been long desirous to speak with thy loving
Lord and Savior, Christ Jesus; he is gone to the garden of Gethsemany all
pensive and sad; follow him thither, perhaps it may be a fit occasion, to
speak unto him; and he may take it well, if it were but to divert his mind
some while; for he said to his disciples, my soul is sad even to death; and
when thou art Matt. 26. v. 38.
there, consider all that passes, and then feelingly, and with compassion,
say; O Jesus, my dear Lord, I have considered thy great sadness, and the
affliction of thy mind, and how the fear, and panges of death, have compassed
thee, through the consideration and apprehension, of those Ps 17. v. 5.
cruel torments, which thou art to endure, and the painful death, which thou
art to suffer on the cross, for love of me; this strikes me, to the heart; and
I am wholly amassed to see thee, my God, in so great anxiety, that thy soul is
sorrowful, to death; o doleful words, o heavy words, o words deserving
compassion, and, which are able, to grieve any, that truly loves thee.

2. Art not thou, o Lord, the joy, of heaven, and the only comsorter, of the
afflicted on earth? art not thou, that good Jesus, of Nazareth, powerful in
words, Luc. 24. v. 19.
and work to whom the troubled, grieved, and afflicted repaired, and they were
eased, and comforted? to thee the weak, the sick, and diseased, flocked, and
were cured, healed, and strengthened; and now my God, I see thee the comforter
o^ all, in sorrow, and comfortless. But my Jesus, art not thou omnipotent; and
well able, to help thy self, and comfort thy afflicted mind, and not desire
to be assisted by thy creatures? why, my God, did thou tutning to thy
beloved disciples, say, thy heart was sad to death; what help could they give
thee? or whence have they any thing but from thee? how can they then comfort
thee? thy Sweet face becomes pale and wanne, which shows thy inward pain;

3. This weakness my God, as man, thou have from us; and what strength we
have, is from thee. yet perhaps, as one afflicted friend, to ease his mind,
relates his grief, unto an other; so thou do to Peter, James, and John, as
to thy dearest, among thy Apostles, saying, thou were sad to death; I must o
Lord confess that it is some content, and ease, to an afflicted soul, to see a
friend take compassion upon him, in his grief, and affliction; which perhaps,
might have moved thee, to acquaint them with the pain, wherein thou were,
(which so heavily wrought on thee) that they taking compassion, of thy woeful
case, might be some ease, to thy afflicted mind; or at least, that they might
watch and attend thee, in that extremity, until they had seen what would
ensue, or become of thee; whereas, thou did desire them, to remain there,
whiles thou did go to pray, unto thy heavenly Father, to take that pain
away from thee; who alone could comfort thee.

4. But my Jesus, whiles thou do pray, thy pain does increase, rather then
diminish, and the panges of death do truly Ps. 17. v. 3.
seem to compass thee; for thou art fallen into an agony, thy sweat is water
and blood, in great dropes, falling down, Luc. 22. v 44.
and at last, thou through weakness do fall flat on the ground; O Pitiful
and woeful sight? how is it, my Lord that my heart does not burst, with a
feeling grief, and mine eyes into a fountain of tears, to see thee, the Lord
of all things, my dear God, in that pitiful case; well knowing that my
sins, are the cause of all thy pain, and woe? but thy tender love to me, doeh
move thee, to endure it, though it be great.

5. O ye Angels of comfort, where are ye? where is your care where your
attendance? have you forgot your duty, to your King, and service to your good,
and Sovereign Lord? or have you forsaken him because you see him in
affliction, in pain, and the agony of death? as if he could not help
himself, or were not, what he is? But you Peter, James, and John, (whom he
loved most, and trusted above the rest) where are ye? he told you of his pain
and grief, you then should be present, to assist, and not leave him, in his
extremity, of pain.

6. O my dear Jesus, art thou forsaken, left comfortless, and destitute of any
friend, to look unto thee, in that agony? are these thy trusty friends, to whom
thou did open thy mind, and make thy moan? I must confess, my God, that
they ought to watch with thee, in thy necessity; chiefly, thou making choice
of them, above the rest of thy Apostles, to go thither with thee, as most
trusty, and dearly beloved; but o Lord, they are sleeping, and thou suffering.

7. This my Sweet Jesus, is the false friendship of the world, they promise
much, and perform little, they are friends, in prosperity, and for their own
commodity; but unknown, in the time of adversity, and necessity. S. Peter
seeing thy Math. 17. v. 4.
glory, would willingly have his tabernacle with thee in the Mount Thabor, and
there remain in joy; but now he sleeps, and forgets thee, in thy necessity;

8. O Peter where art thou; have thou so soon forgot thy dear master, with
whom thou sayd'st, thou would live, and dye? are all thy promises, great
words, protestations, and expressions of love, come to this, that thou art now
careless, and unmindful of him; he acquainting thee, with his sorrow and
grief? thou might, for one hour, put of thy sleep and watch with him, who
loved thee so dearly? surely his loving heart, could not but feel, this thy
neglect; therefore he said, Simon, (so calling thee,) do thou sleep, and I
in this pain and perplexity? could not thou watch one hour with me? As if
he faid; Peter, I made choice, of thee, to come hither with me, to attend, and
watch with me, and art thou sleeping? it is not to sleep, I brought thee hither;
(thou might have done that at home) but to be a comfort unto me, in my
pain, and agony; to assist me, with compassion, in my weakness and to have
some care of me, in my desolation. I did expect, that thou should show more
care, and love, and not for one hour's sleep, forget me so; thy love ought to
move thee, to be myndfull of me, and to attend me in this my painful sweat,
and wipe away those bitter tears, and heavy drops of blod, from my face, and
hold me in thy arms, that in my extremity and weakness, I should not fall, as
I did, on the ground, where I lay without help, all comfortless. Yet thou
did sleep, and could not wasch one hour to do this small work of
humanity, and charity, I trusting so much on thee.

9. O Peter, how could thy heart, endure those loving, though wounding words,
as a sweet and myld reprehension? Math. 27. v. 40.
could not thou watch one hour with me, (who loved thee so deerly,) but
sleep whiles I did suffer, and pray for thee? O my sweet and most loving Jesus,
how many Peter's, or Symons are in this world? we do often prefer self love,
and our bodily commodityes, before the love of thee, our dear Lord and master;
contrary to our promises, and resolutions; and not watch one hour, to serve
thee, or hear divine service, on holy days, (though we be bound thereunto)
but sleep it out with ease.

10. O my Jesus, many, yea, very many, sleeping friends, thou have, and too few,
true and trusty; we promise and protest, to do great matters, when we are
ioyed with thee, in prayer, as Peter in Mount Thabor; yet in time of trial, or
temptation, we forget thy favors, and thy self; we sleep, whiles thou do
watch, and pray; we seek content, and pleasure, whiles thou art, in sorrow and
pain for us; we sleep in many sins, whiles thou art sweating, o dear Jesus,
water and Blood; to wash them all away; thy feeble body, through loss of
Blood, falls to the ground; whiles our bodies are pampered with excess, and
then do sleep and rest; and not watch one hour with thee.

11. It seems, o Lord, that one hour's watching with thee, in prayer or in any
other godly exercise, does ease thy pain, though great it be; and the content,
which thou do take therein, is such, that it seems, that thou art well
satisfied with it, for all thy pain; o unspeakable love o admirable love,
which causes thee, o Jesus, to value our actions (though mean) at so high a
prise, as to give thee content and satisfaction, for all thy troubles, griefs
and pains?

12. O my most loving Jesus, this is no small comfort, to thy faithful:
servants; though very many, neither for thy love, fear, or their own good,
will endeavor to give thee this content, and perhaps, in the four and twenty
hours, they will not spend one hour, to watch it prayer with thee, or once
consider thy pain, or sufferance for them, nor take it to heart; And I, (o
Lord, my God) am one of these; to my confusion, I do acknowledge, and confess
it; always more mynding, my own commodity and ease, then thy love, or what
thou do endure for me. I am o Lord, ready to receive thy gifts, and will not
spend, one hour to watch, and give thee thanks; and though thy grief, thy
bloody sweat, and pain, be great, and for my sins, yet I take it not to
heart, nor take compassion on thee; neither am I thankful; as in justice I am
bound, and ought; by which, o God, my ingratitude does appear; therefore I do
humbly confess my fault, heerin.

13. Moreover my dear Jesus, I am sorry, for my neglect; and now considering thy
grief, thy painful sweat, and thy self, in that agony falling to the ground,
with so great pain and love, and my ingratitude; I find my soul somewhat heavy,
and my heart grow tender, with a compassionate affection; and the more I do
reflect, on all; the more I feel a desire, and willingness, to bewail my
sins, and be with thee, my dear Jesus, and to cast my self most humbly, on
the ground, to help, and bear thee up, and keep thee from the earth; in that
painful sweat and agony.

14. O my loving Lord, if I might be admitted to this happiness, that in some
way I might show my duty, unto thee; or ease thee in any wise, by being
partaker, of thy pain; or at least '^f those sacred dropps of thy painful
sweat, and Precious Blood did but fall on me; that I might not forget, but
remember thy dear love, to me, and my obligation, and duty unto thee: it would
be a comfort, unto me; for thou art o Jesus, the innocent lamb of God, that came
to be sacrificed Joan. 1. v. 29. and 36.
for us, and with, thy Precious Blood to wash away the sins of the world; I
wish therefore my God, it had fallen on me, that I might be washed clean, of
mine;

15. O Sweet and blessed sweat, o water of life, o heavenly balsome, o dew
divine, o most Precious Blood of my dear Jesus, I adore you, with body and
soul, and do humbly beseech you, that I may partake of the benefit of one only
drop, for then I shall be washed clean and made whiter then snow, and not be
unmindful of thee my God.

16. O my dearest Lord, whom I desire to love in truth, I most humbly and
heartely beg of thee, for that goodness which thou art, and for thy painful
agony, to be graciously pleased, with those tears of thine, and that Precious
Bloody Sweet, to wash my sinful soul, from all impurity, and vouchsafe to take
from me, those abominations, and wicked crimes, which were the cause, of that
thy pain and woe.

17. Let that tender love of thine, o dear Jesus, excuse my faults, and thy
sweet mercy, pardon, what hitherto I did amiss; and permit me not, my God,
hereafter, to sleep in sin, whiles thou do suffer, and pray with tears
for me; but cause me wake, and watch with thee; that temptations may not
prevail against me; let me not be, of thy sleeping; but watching friends; let
me not fly, nor forsake thee, in prosperity, nor adversity; permit me not,
Sweet Jesus, for fear; or pain, or death it self, to turn my back to thee;
but by the merits of thy painful sweat, to watch in thy holy service, and,
suffer with thee my Sweet Jesus in this life, and in the other, rejoice with
thee, for all Eternity. Amen.

THE XIX. CHAPTER.
A Pious exclamation, or consideration, of a soul in love, with the love, of
Christ Jesus.
1. O Heavens, give me your help, to know, and find, what I do seek for; it
is called love: a thing my heart desyr's, my soul long's for, and would enjoy.
But o love, what art thou? where art thou? or in what place may thou be
found? the earth knew thee not, hell, admits no such thing, surely then, in
heaven thou must be had.

2. But what speak I of heaven? it is not so great, thou art more larg by
far, for thou art an unlimited power, commanding a light, illuminating, a
fire burning, and consuming; a power, thou art, so strong, that the heavens
could not resist, nor yet contain thee; for thou did burst open their
gates, which by the sin of Adam, were shut up, against mankind; thou did
miraculoussly, by a way far surpassing all understanding, in this vale of
tears, and misery; take on thee human flesh; (a pro^ect, so rare, a wonder, so
great, and admirable; ^ha^ heaven and, earth stand all amassed) and by that
means, the seruan^, was made lord; the subject, King; God, made man, and man
made God.

3. O admirable love, great is thy ^ertue, and thy power is incomprehensible; o
who can conceive thy ways? o who can tell me, what, and where thou art? o
who can understand, thy works and wonders? who can declare this ingenne?
that thou immortal, eternal, immense, infinite, art become man, flesh and
blood, mortal, like us? I must, and do confess, this to be the power of
love, beyond all power, controuling and commanding all.

4. O Blessed love, thou art likewise, a Joan. 1. v. 9.
light illuminating, as thy Apostle says, all, that comes into this world;
yea, thou art that light, which Zacharias affirms, Luc 1. v. 12.
came from heaven, to illuminate those that fate in darkness, and the shadow
of death; thou art that indeficient light which cleereth our understanding,
expelling thence all darkness of infidelity, ignorance, and error; and there
placing the blessed light of true faith; thou art a light illuminating in the
night of sin, to see, and shun the dangerous way of hell, and perdition;
thou art the light, of the eternal sun of justice, which shows the way
leading from vice (being, dark and obscure;) to the fair, plain, and secure
path of virtue, piety and true perfection; thou art the light, guiding souls
from this blind wotld, to the other, of endless light and glory. O love, great
is thy good, where shall I find thee? o when shall I find, and enjoy thee?

5. O dear love, thou art also, a fire burning, and consuming, for thou came
by thy own acknowledgment, to cast fire on the earth, and thy will was it
should burn; but, o divine fire, what would thou have it burn? unless it
be Luc. 12. v. 49.
the hearts, of thy faithful people, and with thy flames consume in them, all
terrene affection, and unmortified inclinations, purifying their intentions in
all things; that nothing should remain in them, but the pure and true love of
thee; thus consuming, those loving souls, and transforming them into thy
self, and so become one and the same of two; for as the fire does convert the
fuel, into its own nature; so thou, do these loving souls, into thy
self, deifying them; thy Apostle confirms the same, saying, God is charity,
and he that is in charity, is i^ 1. Joan. 4. v. 16
God, and God in him; o happy and blessed transformation, o wonderful an^
great effect of divine love; this is that love, which came from heaven for love
of me, this is that, o my loving Jesus, which I desire and seek for. God did so
love the world, that he sent them, his only son, that by love, they might be
one with thee, as thou art one and the same by nature Joan. 17. v. 31.
with thy heavenly Father.

6. O Son of God, O God and man, my Jesus, what had I been, or where, but for
this love of thine? hell claymed a right in me, and according to justice thy
Father had cast me thither, but for thee* my debt to him was great, and having
no means to pay; when he might have quite forsaken me; thy love, out of thy
heavenly treasure, did satisfy and pay for all; O dear Jesus, great is thy love
to me; and I am quite confounded, considering what through love, thou have
done for me; and how little, I do for love of thee; for all thy holy life, and
death; are but tokens, and expressions, in a high degree, of this thy love, to
me;

7. VVat caused thee, dear Jesus, descend from heaven to earth, become man, be
borne in an open stable in such poverty, and mysery; but love? thereby to give
satisfaction to thy Father for my prodigality, vain superfluity, and self
interest? what made thee spend whole nights in prayer, on mountains and desarr
places; Luc. 6. v. 12.
but love? so to obtain pardon for my night offenses? what caused thee, to
fast forty days and nights, and be tempted Matt. 4. v. 1. 2. and 3.
by the devil; but love? so to free me, from danger in temptations; and to
satisfy thy Father, for my excess in gluttenous eating and drinking, and
pampering my body, against his holy laws, and the rule of temperance? what
caused thee, o loving Jesus, to endure with admirable patience, so many
affronts, abuses, and iniuryes, opprobrious words, and taunts; but love of me?
so to please and content thy Father, for the abuses, and grievous iniuryes, and
sins, which I have done, and committed, against him, breaking, and contemning
his holy will and commandments, to do my own most peruersse, and stubburne
will. O dear Jesus, blessed may thou be, for all eternity; for this thy
tender affection and love to me.

8. Moreover my dear Lord, what caused Joan. 6. v. 15.
sed thee to humble thy self in all occasins and on thy knees to wash the
unclean feet of thy Apostles, but love? t^ Joan. 13. v. 5.
make satisfaction, for my pride ambition, proper estimation, and vanity. wha^
also o my Sweet Jesus, moved thee to tha^ Luc. 22. v. 44.
painful and bloody sweat, in the garden of Gethsemany; but love? that thy
Father taking compassion on thee, in that woeful case, might take pity on me,
and forgive mine offenses for whom thou did so suffer;

9. Why o Lord would thou be sold, taken, fast bound, and brought before
unjust judges, falsely accused, esteemed a malefactor, and, leave thy self to
their will, who thirsted after thy blood and death; but through love, to pay
for my too much licentious liberty, irregular living, presumption of my talents
blasphemous speeches, backbiting, cursing, swering, lies, and periuryes: what
caused thee o myld Jesus to suffer thy self to bestript Math. 27. v. 26 and 29.
stark naked, most pitifully scourged, and thy flesh to be all torn, but
love? thereby to make satisfaction for my delicacyes, wantonness, and the
impure delectations of my pampered flesh;

10. O my loving Jesus thou were cruelly crowned with thorns, the blood running
down thy face and neck, on every side; thy eyes were vayled, thy face spit
upon and buffited; what caused thee to endure all this, but love? thus to
satisfy thy Father, for my idle and fantastical imaginations, unclean and
foul cogitations, the wanton looks of my lascivious eyes, and the vain
content I often took in my own beauty, delighting my self with the
transitory image, or sight thereof in a looking glass, as if I were not dust
and ashes, and meat for worms.

11. And more then so, my dear Savior, thou were hanged an a Cross, thy Luc.
23. v. 34
hands, and feet fast nailed, with great cruelty; thy side was opened, and
heart pierced, with a spear, and thou bereued of breath and life. what brought
thee to this pass, my God; but true love of me? for thy hands were so nailed,
to pay for my evil works, unjust striking, uncivil, foul, and unseemly
touchings: and thy feet were so affixed, for my wicked steps, leading to the
places of iniquity; and thy heart was wounded, for the envy, hatred and malice
of my heart; and my dear Jesus, those five fountains yealded streams of thy
most Precious Blood, to wash my sold and body, from all impurity, thy arms
were strecht forth, and thy eyes lifted unto the heavens, praying so unto thy
Father, that he would be pleased to accept thy sufferings and pains, for my
offenses; and to forgive me; because I knew not what I did, being weak, frail
and blind with self love.

12. All this, my God, true love did work in thee, o tried and unfeigned love,
of my dear Jesus, more in works, then words expressed, to show the greatness of
thy love, to so vile a worm as I: for all thy life, and sufferings, even till
death, were but to manifest this excess of thy true love to me; to bring my
love to thee; I cannot o Sweet Jesus, doubt of the sinceryty of thy love to me.
O how can I then but truly love thee, unless my sense, and judgment fail
me? and I become most ungrateful, and wholly unworthy of this thy Gracious and
most blessed love?

13. O my dear Jesus, thou have the sour, and I the sweet, thou have
trouble, and I ease, thou have the pain, and I the joy, thou art wounded
sorely, and I healed, thou have suffered death, to give me life; and thus with
that divine fire of love, thou have consumed thy self, and paid my debt at
full, that I may be set free and live in endless liberty.

14. O love, of my dear love, how strong and powerful, how great and
admirable, how immense and incomprehensible thou art? O how is it, my God, that
after all these expressions of thy true love, and affection, unto me, I am not
powerfully moved, sweetly illuminated, and totally inflamed and burned with
this fire of thy divine love, and transformed into thee? Oh heavy is thy load,
o love, and my heart does feel it; yet know not how, to find thee, or where
thou art.

15. O dear love where art thou? thou art the comfort of my heart, the solace
of my mind, the true content and only joy of my afflicted soul; o where art
thou to be found? let me but know, and thither speedily I will go; fot where
thou art, there, all treasure, true peace, true rest, and all happiness are
had; o how shall I find thee? o when shall I find thee? o dear love how shall
I requite thy labor? how shall I be, able to requite thy woeful pain and
death, for me? O how shall I serve thee? howshall I please thee? o how shall I
do somewhat acceptable and grateful unto thee, who have been so loving and
beneficial unto me.

16. Feign would my soul do some what in requital, but knows not what; yet
I feel my heart solicitous, and restless with care to seek, find and enjoy
he; this breeds a pain, and my forces fail, though with delight; and my
heart ^^ w^ere thou art, not knowing where, but there i^ is, where it does
love; and there it lives far m^re, then where it is, and rest it would in
thee; f^^ all my thoughts are still with thee: which ca^seth me languish, and
long to be with thee; and se^ thy most gracious face, and once enjoy thy mos^
amiable presence, and listen to the sweetness of thy celestial and loving
voice; no riches, wealth, no pearls, nor Precious stones, are like, or to be
compared unto this.

17. O how shall I subsist, without my life, or live without my love? thou art
my life and love, and it is worse then death, to me, here to love and live,
and not in thee; give life, give health, give wealth, and what thou will; but
thee: no joy of these shall content me, no love, shall please my mind, my heart
will take no rest, my soul will live a dying life with love; until thou take
compassion on my pain; and grant me what I seek.

18. O love divine show now thy power, and carry me beyond my self; O endless
light, illuminat my understanding, to know, and see, what, and where thou art;
O burning fire of endless flames, of love; consume me quite, and let me be no
more what yet I am, but transform me into thy sweet self, that I may be, and
live in thee both here, and for all eternity. Amen.

THE END OF THE FIRST PART
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS, Of the first part, the first figure will show the
Chapter, the next the Page where it begins.
CHap. 1. page. 1. What Prayer is, and the abuse thereof. Chap. 2 p. 13. How to
pray with profit. Chap. 3. p. 18. A daily exercise, very profitable. Chap. 4.
p. 32. Prayers for morning, evening, and going to bed; with a profitable advise
concerning Prayer. Chap. 5. p. 40. Brief considerations, of the creation of
man, induceing him to the knowledge of himself, his duty to God, and a love to
heavenly happiness. Chap. 6. p. 48. Of the fall of Adam by sin. Chap. 7. p.
60. Of the hurt of sin more in particular. Chap. 8. p. 66. Of the great love
of God to mankind. Chap. 9. p. 78. How to prepare your self before confession
and communion. Chap. 10. p. 86. Prayers before and after confession, and how to
make your confession. Chap. 11. p. 93. Devout aspiration* with a prayer before
communion. Chap. 12. p. 98. How to behave your self at, and after communion.
Chap. 13. p. 107. How to prepare yo^^ self to dye well. Chap. 14. p. 114.
Virtuous acts, or aspirations to be said by the sick, or others to him; Chap.
15. p. 119. Many devout and godly prayers to God and his saints. Chap. 16. p.
137. Short meditations for the days of the week, with prayers to obtain
virtues. Chap. 17. p. 161. A Penitent sinners confession to Christ. Chap. 18.
p. 172. A Devout Mediration upon our Saviors blody swea^ in the Garden of
Gethsemany. Chap. 19. p. 183. A Pious exclamation of a devout soul in love,
with the love of Christ.
Of the principal things contained in the first Part. The first figure will
show the page or side of the leaf; the next figure, will show the Marginall
number, where you may find, what you look for. and when you find! ibidem! it
will design the precedent citation, or figure.
A.
APplication of the mind to God; and what it is. p. n. 2. p. 3. n. 3. Abuse of
God's mercy will be punnished p. 4. n. 4. Abuse of Prayer. p. 6. n. 5. 6. 7.
Abuse in confessing and receiving, and speaking with God. p. p. 10. n. 9. 10.
Audience given by God in time of prayer. p. 11. n. 10. Angels attend God in
the place of prayer. p. 15. n. 2. A Prayer to our good Angel. p. 126. n. 6.
Almighty God command's that all first fruits shall be offered to him. p. 18. n.
1. Acts of love, are the first fruits of the heart of man. p. 19. n. 1. the
benefit of good acts. p. 23. n. 9. p. 24. n. 10. Affairs of the wotld, do
blind worldlings. p. 21. n. 4. p. 24. n. 10. Assistance of God to be desired,
to perform good purposes. p. 25. n. 5. 6. Attentively to read, to procute
devotion. p. 25. n. 12. Adam's fall from his happiness by sin, and all men in
him. p. 48. n. 1. and p. 50. n. 3. Aspirations very devout. p. 93. n. 1. 2. and
p. 114. n. 1. 2. Adam had the superiority over beas^^ byrds and fishes. and
they did obey his call. before his fall. p. 41. n. 2. Adam placed in Paradise,
the place of all delight on earth. p. 4. n, 2. Adam after his fall saw his own
nakedness. and with shame did hyde himself from God. p. 54. n. 8. Adam
rebelling against God, had all creatures to rebel against him. p. 55. n. 9.
Aduocats for gain, do defend unjust causes to their damnation. p. 57. n. 15.
B.
BEatitude or endless felicity wherein it does consist. in the preface. n. 1. The
beauty of God very great, and to be considered, by the beauty of the creatures
of the world. p. 43. n. 5. Of too great beauty through pride, Lucifer fell. p.
50 n. 2. Benefits of God to be well considered. p. 40. n. 3. and p. 74. n. 11.
12. The Body of man subject to very many diseases and miserys. p. 49. n. 1.
Bargains unlawful often made through covetous desire of wealth. p. 56. n. 10.
C.
CHrist, Lord of all things, and judge of the living and dead. p. 44. n. 12.
Confession with humility, and acknowledgment of the injury committed against
God, is the first step by which a sinner must come to his divine Majesty. p
78. n. 1. How to examine your self for confession. p. 81. n. 5. Confession must
be entire, clear, and the sins confessed in particular. p. 82. n. 6,
Confession must be without stories and impertinent things. p. 83. n. 7.
Circumstances changing the quality, or much aggravating the sin, only to be
confessed, as by examples there laid down ibid. Changing the Ghostly Father, a
temptation of the devil, and why. ibid. and n. 3. Acts of contrition to be made
before confession. p. 85. Prayer before confession. p. 86. Confession how to be
performed. p. 89. Prayer after confession. p. 60. Before communion devout
aspirations. p. 93. Prayer before Communion, or receiving. p. 95. Communion to
be received, with reverence and humility, and how to behave your self in, and
after receiving. p. 98. n. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7 8. Why some Communicating so
often, do not profit, more in virtue. p. 104. n. 10. Great benefits had by
Communicating well. p. 105. n. 10. 11. in particular.
D.
THe Desire of Adam and Eve to be as God, through pride, lost them the Blessed
state of innocence, and original justice. p. 50. n. 3. This unlawful Desire
of Adam for some pretended happiness is crept with original sin into the hearts
of men, so that to compass their desire they care not to offend God or break
his commandments. p. 55. n. 9. to Dye well, what preparation necessary. 107.
n. 1. 2. 3. to the end of the chapter, The sick man that is adijng must make
acts of virtues. p. 114. A fearful story of one that dyed in mortal sin.
related by our Holy Mother S. Teresa. p. 65. n. 5.
E.
THe end for which man was created. p. 41. n. 4. Eua seduced by the serpent. p.
54. n. 7. 8.
F.
FAuorits in Courts of Kings, and Princes etc. do swear and lie to get
wealth. p. 57. n. 11. Felicity of man wherein it does consist. p. 42. n. 1. and
p. 46. n. 7. Friends, to pray, and not lament for the dead, at the hour of their
death. and wherefore. p. 119. n. 2.
G.
GOd only can completely satisfy the appetite, and capacity of man. and the
reason why. p. 46. n. 7. God the Father prayed unto. p. 119. n. 1. and p. 133.
n. 13. God the son prayed unto. p. 121. n. 2. and p. 132. n. 11. and p. 136. n.
16. God the Holy Ghost prayed unto. p. 122. n. 3. p. 135. n. 14.
H.
HVmility highly praised. p. 143. n. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. Heavenly things to be
considered, and often spoaken of. and how. p. 75. n. 13.
I.
INtention in prayer, how much avails. p. 13. n. 1. Intention how to be
applied; of this many exemples. ibidem. Inconsideration, of what men do, the
loss, and ruin of many. p. 52 n. 5. Intention of the heart, God regards
more then the language, in time of prayer. p. 15. n. 2. and p. 16. n. 3. Jesus
Maria to be often said by the sick in extremity, and why? p. 113. n. 10. 11.
K.
to Keep evil thoughts as compagnions, in this life very dishonorable. p. 77.
n. 16. to Keep Godly thoughts as compagnions very fitting for Gods servants.
p. 76. n. 15.
L.
THe Love of the son of God to mankind. p 70. n. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10, 11 12. Love is
wonderful. p. 183 n. 1. 2. The Virtue of Love. p. 184. n. 3. Love is a light
illuminating. ibid. n. 4. Love is a burning and consuming fire. p. 185. n. 5.
Love caused Christ descend from heaven. p. 187. n. 7. Love caused Christ to
humble himself. ibid. n. 8.
M.
MAn created to God's similitude and liknesse. p. 40. n. 2. Man created in
original justice. ibid. Masses to be said for the sick in time of extremity,
rather then after he is dead. aad, why. p. 112. n. 10. Meditation upon the
agony of Christ. p. 172. Man by Christ made to be of the blood royal of the
kingdom of heaven. p. 77. n. 12. Many in office oppress the poor for gain.
p. 56. n. 10. Meditations for every day of the week. p. 138. Mental prayet as
fit for women as for men. preface. n. 3. 4. Mental prayer's excellency
described, preface. n. 5. 6.
P.
PRayer. what it is, described. p. 1. n. 2. Prayers abused. p. 2. n. 1. 2. to
the 10. How to Pray with profit. p. 13. n. 1 How to behave your self in the
place o^ prayer. p. 14, n. 2. What to do, if you find your self distracted in
prayer. p. 16. n. 3. Prayer very profitable. p. 17. n. 4. A Prayer before
confession. p. 86. n. 1. A Prayer after confession. p. 91. n. 4. A Prayer
before communion. p. 95. n. 11. A Prayer to God the Father. p. 119. n. 1. A
Prayer to God the Son. p. 121. n. 2. A Prayer to God the Holy Ghost. p. 122.
n. 3. and p. 135. n. 14. A Prayer to the Holy Trinity. p. 123. n. 4. A Prayer
to the B. V. Mary. p. 124. n. 5. and p. A Prayer to our good Angel. p. 126. n.
6. A Prayer to all Saints. p. 27. n. 7. A Prayer to obtain chastity. p. 128.
n. 8 A Prayer to our Lady for obtaining any virtue. p. 129. n. 9. A Prayer in
praise of our B. Lady. p. 129. n. 10. A Prayer to our Savior, for obtaying
devotion and love toward his B* Mother. p. 152. n. 11. A Prayer to any Saint
according to your devotion. p. 13^. n. 12. A Prayer for remission of sins
through the merits of Christ. ibid. n. 13. A Prayer for the souls in
Purgatory. p. 136. n. 15. A Prayer to our Savior on the Cross. ibid. n. 16. A
Prayer for obtaining love through the benefit of the B. Sacrament. p. 139. A
Prayer to obtain humility. p. 142, n. 9. A Prayer to obtain resignation and
conformity to god's will. p. 145 n. 15. A Prayer to obtain the virtue of
silence. p. 148. n. 19. A Prayer to obtain grace to do true penance for your
sins. p. 152. n. 23. A Prayer to obtain patience. p. 154. n. 28. A Prayer to
obtain the love of God and our Enemies. p. 157. n. 1. Preparation before
confession and communion. p. 78. n. 8. Patience to be used in sickness, p. 111.
n. 8. Preparation to dye well. 107. n. 1. 2. Patience declared, and praised. p.
155. n. 31. 32. 33.
R.
REsignation to the will of God. p. 145. n. 14. 15. 16. 17. Receivers of rents,
unknown to their Lords, do afflict the poor tennants through a covetous
desire of gain. p. 56. 10.
S.
SIn the cause of all our euiles. p. 48. n. 1. Sin brought many great miseryes
to body and soul. ibid. but chiefly. p. 5^. n. 8. and p. 60. n. 1. 2. Sin
described in particular. 67. n. 2. The Sinner does attribuit unto the creature
(when he commits the sin) somewhat more worthy of his love, then the infinite
goodness of God. ibid. n. 3. Sin measured, by the greatness of the person
offended. p. 68. n. 4. A fearful story of one who dyed in mortal sin related
by our Holy Mother S. Teresa. p. 65. n. 5. Sinners ought not differ their
conversion and penance. p. 59. n. 14.
T.
THoughts of men, ought to be where their true treasure is, and where they
intend to dwell and settle for all eternity. p. 77. n. 15. Tradsmen's deceit in
buijng and selling. p. 57. n. 11:
V.
VSerers blinded with covetousness, and desire of gain. p. 56. n. 10.
W.
WEalth, and worldly content steals away the heart of man, does blind him, and
bring him to sin. p. 48. n. 1. This visible world created for the use of man.
p. 41. n. 3. Holy water to be often sprinkled on the sick. p. 113. n. 12. The
virtue and efficacy of Holy water p. 31. n. 18.


THE ERROVRS OF THE FIRST PART. Escaped in the printing.
The fifth page and 7. line. an. for and p. 7. l. 4. woluntary. for voluntary.
p. 14 l. 7. must. for most. p. 16. l. 27. and. for and. p. 14. l. 20. wirh. for
with. p. 8. damicells for damocells. p. 18. l. 8. of. for of ibid. l. 17.
endeuonr. for endeavor. p. 21. l. 22. in the honor. for in honor. p. 27. l.
9. forgine for forgive p. 29. l. 7. whilst for whiles. p. 31. l. 15. figne for
sign. p. 33. l. 14. behalse ^or behalf. p. 34. l. 22. goodnef. for goodness.
p. 35. l. 29. rifing. for rising. p. 38. l. 19. defire for desire. ibid. l. 27.
intertaine for entertain p. 41. l. 15. consider for consider. p. 42. l. 19.
ontward for outward p. 49. l. 11. ofren for often p. 55. l. 9. selse. for
self. p. 62. l. 27. thiues. for thieves. p. 66. l. 10. confider for consider
p. 67. l. 17. auerfion for auersion. p. 71. l. 12. enerlasting. for
everlasting. p. 74. l. 21. sormerly for formerly. ibid. l. 24. slesh. for
flesh. p. 77. l. 3. compagnious. for companions. p. 78. l. 30. shumble for
humble. p. 83. l. 3. geffe. for guess. p. 88. l. 3. stippery for slippery. p.
90. l. 14. tu for to. p. 92. l. 5. persections. for perfections. p. 94. l. 3.
eomfort. for comfort. p. 96. l. 19. digrace for disgrace. p. 110. l. 27. fins
for sins. p. 111. l. 19. Chtist. for Christ. p. 112. l. 19. yonr. for your.
ibid. l. 25. rhis. for this. p. 113. l. 10 to for to. p. 114. l. 15. blessest
for blessed 116. l. 3. hear's for hearts p. 120. l. 7. chiesly. for chiefly.
ibid. l. 10. gracioufly for graciously p. 121. l. 19. sorfull. for sorrowful
p. 128. l. 13. gloy. for glory. p. 131. l. 9. gracius. for gracious. p. 134. l.
7. ofter. for offer. p. 135. l. 18. brightneffe for brightness. p. 139. l. 3.
bayond for beyond. p. 144. l. 16. humbly. for humble. p. 148. l. 7. verrue for
virtue. ibid. l. 14. falfly. for falsely p. 160. l. 7. rhyne for thine p. 167.
l. 15. sy for so. p. 173. l. 9. consider for consider. p. 175. l. 28. doeh for
does. p. 178. l. 12. wash for watch. p. 126. l. 11. fins for sins. p. 188. l.
2. occasious for occasions.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SOVL'S DELIGHT, COMPOSED, BY THE R. F. PAVL OF St.
VBALD, RELIGIOUS OF THE HOLY ORDER OF THE B. V. MARY OF THE MOUNT CARMELL, For
the benefit of those that are desirous to live a retired life, and by the
exercise of virtues, and practice of mental prayer, to acquire spiritual
perfection.

Animalis homo, non percipit ea, quae sunt Spiritus Dei; 1. Cor. 2. v. 14.

The natural man, receives not the things, of the Spirit of God.

Mortificate ergo membr a vestra, quae sunt super terram. Colloss. 3. v. 5.

Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth. Coll. 3 v. 5.

IN ANWARP.

Printed by WILLIAM LESTEENS in Hoochstrat at the sign of the Pelican.

THE SECOND PART Of the soul's delight, in which, is treated, of mental
Prayer; and of the Purgative, illuminatiue, and unitive life.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Of the dignity, and profit of Mental Prayer.
1. IN the first part, you have seen, how, and with what great profit, the
soul may delight her self, with the use, and practice of vocal prayer, and
other pious exercises, and become grateful, and acceptable to God. But in this
part, you walk by a more perfect way, and of a higher merit. for in that
prayer, you speak to God, as a far of; and in this prayer; as to one near
unto you; giving ear, to your discourse, or petition; or, as one familiar
friend, with an other, in great priuacy or secrecy; vocal prayer, is used
often, without any particular attention; but this prayer, requires attention,
and a serious application of the mind inwardly, or it is no prayer. In this,
when the soul gets within her self, she begins to discover the strange works
of God, which are in man unknown; but to those that are by God illuminated; in
this, as in a look inglasse, a man discouers, what he is, and comes to the
true knowledge of himself; for there he see's, how far, he is from true
christian perfection.

2. This knowledge of our selves, is the ground, and fundation of our spiritual
life and edifice. In this, a man finds out, what vices and passions, do most
dominier, and molest him; and the causes, why he does not live, in all things,
according to the law of God, and the right rule of reason; and what remedies,
to apply, to this great evil. Here all the inward sores, diseases, evil
customs, inclinations, and disordered affections are perceived; this is the
school, where we may be daily taught, and instructed, how to cure those sores,
suppress those vices, mortify those passions, regulate those affections and
inclinations; gain virtue, and please our heavenly spouse;

3. Here, we come to know the vanities, inconstancy, and uncertainty, of the
things, of this transitory life, with a cleerer sight, and feeling, then ever
before; which causes the soul, to loath, and contemn the world, hate vice,
love virtue, and seek after God alone. and therefore she resolves to chang her
life, and be no more, what formerly she was; her eyes, are opened; she is
illuminated, and taught, in this prayer, how all things created can give her,
no true content; which makes her seriously desire, and aspire, to those things,
which are eternal;

4. For she begins to taste in this prayer, of the content, and joy of mind,
which the true servants, of God, enjoy in heaven; now she regards not the
wisdom of this world; but that which does consist in subjection, humility, and
sanctity of life.

5. Nay more then so; in this prayer, the wyles, and deceits of the devil, and
the subtle and alluring excuses of nature, are discovered; which are very
hurtful to a soul that desires true perfection; which must be had by the way
of mortification; which the devil, and nature do little affect. here, the
knowledge, and love of God, increases to a great height, in the soul; which his
divine Majesty, does often visit, and replenish with supernatural graces, and
comforts, and by secret influences of his Holy Spirit, does eleuat her far
beyond her self, to see, know, and feel with great content and joy, what,
tongue cannot express.

6. To conclude; in this prayer we come to a true union of our wills, with the
will of God; which is the highest we can attain unto, in this life, by our
labor, and industry, through his holy grace; without which, we can do
nothing; though many has great favors, visions, and revelations, by his
special gift. O what a happy thing this prayer is? o what a sweet invention
this is, of our good God, to bring souls to his knowledge, love, and
familiarity? (as is said in the beginning) that thereby, with more facility, and
security they may gain that glory; for which they are created; this, all ought
to love, desire, and practice; that desires endless felicity, and happiness.

7. Many there be, who think it impossible, or at least, of great difficulty,
to attain to, or gain, this blessed prayer; but I do assure them, that they
are very much mistaken; though true it is, that it cannot be had, without some
industry, and labor of ours; neither can a man learning any art; or science,
be perfect the first day, be it never so easy; for experience teaches all; we
see thousands, of all sorts, and sexes, given daily to this exercise, and
practice of mental prayer; so that, if you intend to go forward in this holy
exercise, and acquire perfection, you must not think it difficult; nor be
dismayed, if presently you gain it not; for every thing, has a beginning; and
nothing is had in this world without labor

8. You know, that a man, is seven years, an apprentise, before he can
profess himself expert in his trade; the farmour, or husbandman, in the depth
of winter, cold, frost, and snow, dry or weat, takes great toil and labor,
and with much patience endures, and passes all; in expectation of a little
fruit, in summer; or corn, in harvest; and perhaps get little or none. and
shall not we labor a little, to gain this benefit, or art of prayer, and
reap thereby the fruit of virtue, and life everlasting? Our labor, is less,
in this, then their's; far more easy, and delightful, then their's, the
fruit, and profit, more certain, then theirs; and of greater value, without
any comparison, then their's.

9. Be not therefore disheartened, but as the Prophet says; come, and taste of
it, that is, practice it, and you shall see, and feel, how sweet and pleasing,
our Lord, is, to those, that through love, do truly seek after him; For, if
you be in Ps 35. v. 9.
darkness, come to him in prayer, and you shall be illuminated; if thirsty,
there you drink abundantly, of divine nectar, springing as a pure water, from
the very Fountain, of life; if hungry, you shall ea^ there, of the celestial
food of Angels; for there your beloved has his table set Prou. 9. v. 4. 5.
with varietyes of daintyes, for all comers, without exception; and his
goblets of wine, of all pleasant, and delightful tastes, placed thereon.

10. If you be cold, come, to prayer, and you shall be made warm, and
comforted, with the fire of divine love; Come, I pray, to this fair garden,
and Paradise of pleasure; and delight your self, with the beauty, varietyes,
and sweet odours, of virtuous flowers, which there are seen, and had; for they
do delight, and ravish the very court of heaven;

11. If you be, in any affliction, or necessity; come hither and delight thy
self, in our Lord; (who is always present) and call to him; for he will
grant thee, the petitions of thy heart; come to him, he does inuit thee, be
not afraid, nor ashamed; for thy face shall not be confounded; but much ioyed,
in his holy presence, and comforted with his sweet conversation; in a word;
they are happy, that give themselves seriously to this most blessed exercise,
of prayer; but what it is, and how to use, and practice it, you shall see in
the next following Chapter.

THE II. CHAPTER.
What Mental prayer is, and of the parts thereof.
1. Mental prayer, as I take it, is a familiar, yet reuerentiall colloquy,
conference, or humble discourse of the soul with God, not by outward words, but
inwardly, in our mind; declaring our necessityes and wants; and craving such
things, as we stand in need of; for to this; all our discourse tends; this
definition of prayer, includes and supposes the other, which is an elevation
or application of the mind to God: for I must first have a man present, befors
I can speak to him; even so, I must first, have God present by the
elevation, or application of my mind, to him; before I can discourse, or
speak with him. But you may inquire how you may have God present; I say; his
presence is framed by your understanding, as you shall think fit, or most
convenient, for your purpose; as our Savior, being a child, in the manget,
shaking with cold: or as a man praying in the garden, and sweating water and
Blood; or in any other form, or manner, that he lived, on earth; is glorious
in heaven, or in the most blessed Sacrament, where he is really, and truly, God
and man; or by faith, supposing him to be within and without you, as truly he
is, according to his divinity; which is every where, in all things, and in the
most inward substance of your soul, and secret, of your heart; also when you
are distracted, or not well able, to keep his presence, in your mind. you may
pray inwardly, looking on some devout picture, or image placed before you to
keep you recollected. see the 11. chap. of the presence of God.

2. To the end therefore, that you may proceed orderly and not confusedly, in
this prayer; observe the method, or manner here set down; by which, you may
dispose your self, with due respect, to appear before, and speak with so
high a Majesty; and spend the whole time of prayer with ease and profit; this
does consist in the use of the parts in order.

3. The parts of prayer are six; to wit, Preparation, Lesson, or reading,
Meditation, thanks giving, oblation, and petition, which is properly prayer.
Every part of these, has its own office, and is of great importance, to be
well understood, and observed.

4. Preparation, has two parts, the fist, remoues all outward impediments; as
to expel, out of your mind, the memory of secular affairs, vain and idle
thoughts, and such as are not of God, or tending to piety and devotion; the
other, procures an introuersion, and recollection, of the powers and senses,
now free by the first, from worldly, and vain objects: that all being at rest;
the soul may more seriously, and attentively, apply her self to her
negotiation with God, with whom she intends to treat, of high matters, as the
business of her salvation, is; which requires a careful, and diligent
application, without distractions.

5. For a man that has many employments, knowing that at a certain hour, he
is appointed to have audience of his Prince, or King, (which he much desired)
about affairs of great consequence, will somewhat before time, rid him self
of all other employments, so to dispose him self, without trouble, for that
hour of audience; this is the first part; but this is not sufficient, for it is
not enough, to rid himself of those occasions, if he did not recollect
himself to consider carefully, what he is to do, and what to say unto the
King. this is very plain, and reasonable. he therefore having set a side all
occasions, as is said, he retyres him self into his chamber, or closset,
giving direction, to his servants, or wayters, not to permit any come at him,
least they disturb him; then he there applies himself seriously, to consider,
the greatness and majesty, of the person, he is to speak with; the manner how
to behave himself, and salute the King; and the mattet, or business, he is to
speak of, with him: in this the mind is totally applied in recollection, and
this is the second part of preparation.

6. In like manner, the hour of prayer; is the hour appointed for you, to get
audience, and speak with your King; the great King of Kings, and Lord of all
things; a quarter of an hour, or more, before that time, you must endeavor, to
put all distractions, and idle cogitations (as is said) of what kind soever,
out of your mind; for with these you are often to much employed, and busyed;
this is the first part; to shun company, retire your self, to your chamber,
and read pious and godly books, helps much to this part.

7. Then enter into the closset of your heart, with all your powers and senses
(as is said) and there consider, the dignity of the person, you are to speak
with; the manner, how, and the matter, you must speak of; As for example;
thus. I am shortly to have audience, and speak, not with a worldly man, but
with the true King, and creator, of heaven and earth; that great God
omnipotent, who gives being, and life, to all creatures; in whose sacred
presence, the Angels, cherubins, and Seraphins, and all the celestial powers,
do tremble, and shake; if then, to worldly Kings, there must be so many
ceremonies, bowings, and kneelings used, before a man, can speak to them, as
we daily see; what must be done, and what ought I to do, going to speak with
my God; the King of so great power, dignity, and majesty, attended most
gloriously, with many quires of Angelical spirits, whose eyes, will be all
together upon me, observing what passes? doubtless then, I must come before
him, with great humility, reverence and respect; and so behave my self, that I
may do nothing, displeasing to his divine Majesty, or offenciue to his
heavenly courteours. and this is the second part of preparation.

8. Then, the matter which you art to treat, or discourse of, being resolved
upon; at the hour appointed, and in the place of audience, to wit, of prayer,
kneeling with great reverence, say slowly and feelingly, the following
Antiphon. and prayer.

9. Come o Holy Ghost and fill the hearts of thy faithful, and kindle in them,
the fire of thy love.

The verse. Send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be created.

The responsory. And thou shall renew, the face of the earth.

Let us pray.
10. O God who by the illustration of the Holy Ghost, have taught the hearts,
of the faithful; grant us, by the same spirit, to understand righteous things,
and of his consolation, always to rejoice. through Christ our Lord. Amen.

11. Then with great submission, before his divine Majesty say mentally. O what
am I, or how dare I presume to come to thy presence, my God, and King, of
infinite Majesty, and glory? for I am nothing, but dust, and ashes, meat for
worms; and which is worse; a wicked sinner; who often offended thee, and
deserved, thy wrath, and indignation, rather then any favor; which makes me,
with fear, and trembling, now appear before thee.

12. But because thou art goodness it self; and as well, the God, and Lord,
of sinners, as of the just, (having all power over both; and art very desirous
of the good, and salvation of all thy subjects, being infinitely merciful; and
can forgive, more in an instant, then I have done, or ever can commit)
with a most humble and submissiue heart, yea, with shame, and confusion, I do
come to thee, o most merciful, and great God of glory; being a grievous
sinner, yet desirous to amend my life, and never more offend thy divine
Majesty; wherefore I humbly beseech thee, not to cast me from thy presence, but
give me audience my dear God, and incline thy ears and heart, my gracious
King unto my words, and hear what I shall say: for I will not despair, but
confide in thy mercy and goodness, and do humbly beg of thee to grant me thy
grace, that I may truly open my heart, and make the cause of my soul known
unto thee.

13. These or the like words of your own, you may use; Then read in some pious
book, or call to mind, the matter which you red before, and did prepare, and
intend to speak of, so possessing your self of the quality of the business
by reading; which is the second part of prayer.

14. Then begin the third, which is Meditation; by which you do consider
that matter or subject, with all its circumstances, and conueniences, as how it
was, is, or may be, for your spiritual good, and profit; what, and how great a
benefit it is, to you; or you may get thereby, and what obligation it does cast
upon you. As for example, suppose that the matter read of, and you are to
consider, or meditat upon, is, how Christ our Savior being stripped naked by
the Jews, is fast bound to a pillar, most pitifully whipped, his sacred flesh
torn with many heavy lashes, and his whole body, blody all oner; this you
frame in your mind; and him in this case placed before the eyes of your soul,
adore, saying quietly and slowly in your heart; who is this so pitifully
tormented and torn? this is my Sweet Jesus, whom the Jews did seek to put to
death.

15. O Jesus art not thou the son of the Eternal Father? art not thou the
glory of the Angels, the joy of heaven, the lover of mankind, and the innocent
lamb, who came to save thy people, and take away the sins of the world? art
not thou o my Jesus, as well God as man? how come's it then, that thou art thus
abused and tormented by cursed sinners, the wicked Jews?

16. Look on him in that pitiful case, with a tender heart and a
compassionat eye, and rest in that sweet aspect, without more words, as long as
you can; for so, you may be easily moved to some devotion, inward feeling, or
pious affection; in which you may remain, repose, and delight your soul, with
that spiritual gust, until your affection begin to decay; and if you may
spend the whol^ time of prayer, in that view, and swee^ affection, do not
discourse, but rest in that repose;

17. For the end, for which we meditar, is, to move the will, to some good
affection; which once had; meditation, or discourse is needelesse, and will
rather hinder, then profit the soul; which remaining in any pious affection
does spend the time very profitably.

18. But if you be not moved, or the affection grows cold; go on with your
meditation or discourse thus; O Lord how spitefully are they striving, who
shall abuse thee most, strike the greatest stroke and put thee to most torment
and pain? and, consider that when they have rested a while they begin again,
as it were in your presence; and what opprobrious and injurious words they
speak unto him, laying, heavy lashes, on every side; and not as much as one,
to favor him, or take compassion upon him; then lookeing at him; rest in that
sight, as is formerly said, (without forceing your head, or heart: for all
violence or force, in this sort of prayer, does hinder the spiritual profit,
and hurreth the bodily health,) and if in this, you get no feeling, or your
devotion, or affection (if any you had) does decay, suppose that our Savior
desolat, all alone, among that wicked crew, is lookeing after an eye upon you,
with tears trickling: down. Then address your speech unto him, saying.

19. O my dear Lord, I see thee forsaken, by thy Apostles; and left to the
cruelty of thy bloody enemies; and none to attend, or comfort thee; In what, my
dear Jesus, can I serve thee? it grieves me, to see thee (who art the beauty
of heaven) in that desolat and woeful case; I will my God, remain here, and
will not part from thee; that, at least, I may be partaker of thy inward
grief, if I cannot be of thy outward pain; I wish my God that I could be some
content or comfort unto thee, who art the only comfort of my soul;

20. These or the like words, may be inwardly said, very feelingly, not rashly,
nor hastily; but slowly and attentively; that the substance, of what is
conceived, or said; like water into a sponge, may soake into the inward depth
of the soul; which will cause her, with great alacrity of spirit, to continue
long in prayer; or it interrupted, to return willingly to it again; which is
of great importance;

21. I must confess, that the content, which in meditation of his Holy
passion, is often had, is very great: but am sorry, that so few, have a feeling
of it, by reason they do not use this sort of prayer; nor try how sweet our
Lord is, to all that through love do come unto him. But if in what is said,
you are not moved, nor find any gust; go forward in your discourse, saying
unto him, as yet lookeing upon you; my dear and loving Lord, I see thy
affliction, to be great; I beseech thee let me know, for what, or for whom
do thou suffer those grievous pains, and torments? for pain and
punnishment, are due deserts of sin; thou neither did, nor could sin;
neither craft nor deceit was found in thee. why then, or for whom, were thou so
cruelly tormented?

22. True it is, that thou art the Savior Joan. 1. v. 47.
of the world, who were long expected; and art come to save thy people from
sin and Satan; thou art the innocent Math. 1. v. 29 Joan. 1. v. 29.
lamb, which takerh away the sins of the world, as holy Baptist said, so that
thou cam^st to save my soul; but o Lord what mean this thy pain and
punnishment? I deserved punnishment; and not thou; but I see, that what I could
endure, were no satisfaction for my sins, being of infinite malice, deserving
infinite punnishment: therefore, to set me free, from all; thou have taken the
punnishment on thy self (through love) which proceeding from thee, and offered
unto thy heavenly Father, is of infinite value and satisfaction; and thus thy
painful suffering is for me.

23. O life of my soul, what am I? or what is there in me, worthy of thy love?
that thou, the Son of God, and Lord of heaven and earth, should so suffer
for me? O purity of the Angels, my sins, have put thee to that pain; my
sins have so tormented thee; by that great punnishment, and thy painful
wounds, I see how hateful to thy heavenly Father, my sins are; who so
severely does punnish them in thee, his only, and deerly beloved son; O
cursed Caitiffe, o wicked wretch, that I am: who have so sinned; woe is me, who
lived to see thee my God, for my foul offenses, in that pitiful plight. O
dear Jesus, what shall I do? what shall become of me, who have so wickedly
tormented thee? o what shall I do for that loving satisfaction of thine, made
for me? if in this, you have any sweet gust, or feeling of sorrow, compassion,
or tender affection; rest, as is said, in it with content.

24. This done, consider that our Savior by his suffering, made satisfaction
to his heavenly Father for your sins, and the great torments, which in hell
you were to suffer for them; which is a great and special benefit, that ought
to move you, to take compassion upon him, to hate sin, do penance, and be
very thankful to his divine Majesty for his love: in suffering for you: and
consider what a great obligation to serve him, ever after with more fidelity
and sincerity, he has cast upon you, procuring your salvation with so great
pain merely of his goodness and love: without any merit or desert of thine.

25. This well considered, and your soul well possessed, of this her
obligation; she may say with a true feeling: blessed may thou be my God, for
all thy favors: I do acknowledge and confess, this to be so great, that it
does oblige me for ever, to thy love and service. O Jesus, how admirable, how
excessive great, is thy love to me, dust and ashes, the worst of creatures, the
greatest of sinners? O unspeakable favor, o inexplicable benefit: o Lord, thy
goodness Psalm. 144. v. 9.
^s incomprehensible, and thy mercy, is truly far beyond all thy works. and
^hus ends meditation: whose office is with reasons, to move the will, to
ackowledg Gods benefits, and to induce it, to love and gtatitude.

26. For if you meditaton sin, and that thereby you offended God, who might
cast you into perpetual torments (as he did Lucifer and thousands more) yet
did not: what a benefit this is? to bear with thee, and expect thy repentance
and conversion? if the pains of hell, be considered; how often did you deserve
them, by breaking the laws of God? yet this punnishment was not inflicted.
then when you were in sin, and thereby the slave of the devil; how many sweet
inspirations, and remorses, of conscience, had you from God? which by the
benefit of his holy Sacraments, brought you to the state of grace, and freed
you, from the power of Satan; which is no small favor, nor done, to many
thousands, that do rott in the filth of sin, and will be eternally damned.

27. If you think of death: how often by it might you have been deprived of
your life, and time of repentance ^ when in sin, you might have perished,
body and soul for ever: which by God goodness, and mercy, was prevented though
daily many others are suddenly dead; and God knows, in what case: if you
consider the joys of heaven: which you lost by sin: and see, that it is
recovered again, and purchased for yo^, with no less prise: then the Precio^s
Blood and death, of Christ our Sauiou^^ what a high obligation, does it cast
upon you, of some requital of love? you see, how all these, and what else,
you can consider in prayer, do plainly appear, to be great benefits, of
Almighty God; to the knowledge and feeling understanding of which; meditation
does bring you; and consequently, to be thankful, to love, and serve his
divine Majesty, with great sincerity and fidelity. I have written these
examples briefly, to help you, the better to meditat, and know what to conclude
upon; out of what you do consider.

28. The next part of prayer in order, is thanks giving; for when you perceive
(by what you have meditated) that you received a benefit, from God; stand it
not with reason that you should not only acknowledge the favor; but also give
him thanks, in the best words, and expressions you are able, or can make your
thankful mind known? which may be thus done; o Lord, my God, the true lover,
and most faithful friend, of my foul; when, or how shall I be thankful unto
thee for all thy gracious favors, and gifts? and for this particular benefit,
bestowed, and done unto me poor sinner, wholly unworthy of thy love? O my
dear Jesus, how shall I requite this thy tender affection? o how shall I serve
thee? or wherein can I please thee? Oh how shall I praise thee being what I
am? o how shall I honor thee, my God, who have so highly expressed thy love,
and desire of my salvation, in this great benefit? O most loving creator, how
near and dear to thy sweet heart, thy creature is* rest in this, (as is said)
if you can; looking on him with a reuerentiall and loving affection.

29. Then to conclude say, o most amiable Jesus, this expression of thy love,
does wound my heart, it is sufficient to draw unto thy love, all the hearts of
the children of Adam* And for my part, I wish my dear and loving Lord, that my
heart were wholly inflamed with the fire of thy divine love; that I might never
rest from praising and loving thee, and being thankful for thy suffering thus
for me, what my wicked sins justly deserved?

30. Therefore I beseech all the creatures of heaven and earth, in my behalf
to be thankful unto thee, and praise thee my God for all eternity. O comfort
of my soul, dear Jesus, I wish I had as many hearts burning with more then
Seraphicall love, as there ever were creatures, are, shall, or can be; all
which, I would most willingly employ, in loving, praising, and giving thanks
unto thee, for this thy loving benefit. O supreme goodness, true life of my
life, thou art the treasure of heaven, and thy merits do infinitely exceed all
love and praise of thy creatures; therefore I humbly pray, that thy own
goodness, and all thy other attributes and perfections, in my behalf, may
praise thee, and be thankful to thy sweetselfe for ever and ever. thus ends
thanksgiving.

31. Oblation (which is the next part) follows consequently, consisting in
this, that the party who received a benefit, would in what he could, not only
in word and affection, as in thanksgiving but likewise, in work and deed,
requite with some gift, the love of their benefactour or friend; for a grateful
mind, is never content, to be thankful in words only, (as many wordlings do)
but it always thinks and considers, in what manner, service, or gift, to
requite the benefit or favor done; which may be thus expressed.

32. O most loving Lord, and Savior dear, who through thy goodness and love,
without any merit or desert of mine, have endured those iniuryes, and
painful lashes, rather then I should eternally perish; though I have not
those desired hearts and tongues, to employ in giving thee endless thanks and
praise; and to be thine for ever; yet I offer unto thee, my good will and
affection, and likewise my heart and soul, with true sincetity, in union of the
love and affection, with which all that are in heaven, and earth do truly
love, serve and praise thee; yea, and my body and soul, and all the powers of
both: I do willingly and heartely consigne unto thee o most loving and
bountiful Jesus. to be only employed in thy love and service ever hereafter
though I should suffer death it self thereby.

33. O dear love the joy of my heart and soul; I do also offer unto thee a
firm purpose, and resolution, for thy love, to abhor, and mortify in my
self, what soever I shall know to be displeasing unto thee; but chiefly this
vice, and passion (name it) which I am inclined to; and with the assistance of
thy holy grace, had rather dye and be torn in pieces, then once give way to
it; or offend thy divine Majesty in that, or any other thing what soever. and
to this end, I do resolve to take on my self, some pennances; and in
particular, this week to fast one day, or more, on bread and beer, and to
discipline my self once, every week, for this month, and exercise my self
in this virtue, (name it) which is contrary to my passion, or vice; by making
daily, some acts thereof; that with some token of gratitude though it be but
very little, I may show my willingness to requite thy love.

34. For I do know my God, that good resolutions and virtuous acts, are
grateful unto thee, and of high esteem in thy sight, much more being well
performed. But observe that no pennances must be used, (notwithstanding your
resolution) without the advice, or leave of your Ghostly Father, or spiritual
directour, by whom you must be guided; for he represents the person of, God, to
allow of, or not, what you resolve upon, to do for his love and sake. and
thus ends oblation.

35. Now follows the last part which is properly called prayer, that is,
Petition, for by this, we beg, and ask, as being poor and needy, of that
great God, rich, and powerful King, (whom we certainly believe can, and will
grant our desire) to help, and relieve us in our necessityes, and bestow what
we are in want of as thus, My omnipotent and most bountiful Lord, most
merciful and gracious King, (whose hands are always open to the needy, and
whose willingness to assist the distressed, is greater, then their desire to
be relieved, and without whom we are, and can do, nothing;) experience has
made me to know my own weakness, frailty, and inconstancy in any good; for I
often failed in performing virtuous and godly resolutions, formerly made, for
the amendment of my life; which causes me humbly, to confess, that of my
self, I am truly nothing, and can do no good; Therefore my God, take
compassion on me, leave me not unto my self, grant me thy Holy Grace, to be
constant in my good purposes; otherwise I shall fall, and slide away, like
water, whose steps are not perceived; my resolution will fall to nothing, and I
shall be as if I were not; having nothing whereby to subsist.

36. I am poor o Lord, and thou art rich, to all that will come unto thee; I
am in great want, and do stand in need of the assistance of thy Holy Grace,
being what I am, which makes me o most bountiful, benign, and Gracious king,
here prostrat to adore thee with body and foul, in the presence of thy holy
Angels, and of all thy creatures, acknowledging that thou art all powerful,
creator of all things, independent of any, and all depending of thee. all
goodness, is from thy goodness; all power, from thy power; all beauty, from
thy beauty; all wealth from thy wealth; all love from thy love; all grace from
thy mercy; and to conclude, without thee my God we are merely nothing.

37. Therefore I most humbly beseech thee, and earnestly beg, for thy
goodness and mercy, that thou will commiserat my case, and as thou have
graciously inspired, those good purposes, and godly resolutions, (for they are
from thee, and not from me) so thou will be mercifully pleased, to grant and
give me, the particular assistance of thy Holy grace, that I may be thereby
enabled, to amend my life, and through thy true love, to execute, and perform,
what I have now purposed to do for thy sake; and principally to overcome my
evil inclinations, and utterly abandon and forsake this vice of (A) by which I
do most offend thy divine Majesty, that hereafter all my thoughts words and
deeds, may be highly, and purely to thy honor, glory, endless praise, and my
soul's salvation. Amen.

38. If in this you find your self moved to any pious affection, rest sweetly
in it as in the other parts; then pray for the souls in Purgatory, the Holy
Catholic Church, conversion of sinners, extirpation of heresy, your parents,
friends, benefactours, and other necessityes commended to your prayers, or what
else you please; then commend your self, and all the rest, to the Blessed
Virgin Mary, and other saints as your devotion serves; heartely desiring their
assistance, intercession, and protection. And so you end the last part, saying
the Antiphon of our lady.

39. O Holy Mother of God, under thy protection we seek our safety, despise
not our petitions in our necessityes; but from all danger, O Glorious and
Blessed Virgin, always deliver us.

*. Pray for us, o Holy Mother of God.

*. That we may be made worthy, of the promises of Christ.

Let us pray.
40. O Lord God omnipotent, through the holy merits of the B. Virgin Mary, I
most humbly pray, that thou will grant unto me, what I have desired of thee,
and give me grace, to perform in deed, those good purposes which I have
offered unto thee, and daily to increase in virtue and sanctity of life. Amen.

41, Observe that you are nor tied to those words in the parts of prayer, laid
down; but you may use what words, God shall inspire, or such as you shall find
come soonest, and with most facility to your mind.

THE III. CHAPTER.
Profitable aduises concerning the use of Prayer.
1. FIrst you must be careful, to observe and keep a certain hour, for
prayer, morning and evening; which you must never omit; but on very great
necessity. our Holy Mother S. Teresa, even in her iorneyes, travailing from one
place, to an other, did keep silence, and caused her compagnions, to do the
same, when the hour of prayer came; commending themselves the best they could
to God; and to that purpose she carried a little bell and an hour-glasse with
her, as she went;

2. Be not dismayed if soon you cannot gain a facility in praying; for
believe it, the time will quickly come, and it will not be long, before you
taste the sweetness thereof; none can be perfect the first day in any trade;
ryme will perfect all; this makes men labor with patience, in winter,
expecting the fruit of summer.

3. Make no great account of distractions, and idle thoughts, which many are
troubled with in prayer, when they are not voluntary, but you do your best
endeavor, to cast them of, when you take notice of them; for your resisting of
them, is very meritorious; though you did nothing else; because, to have these
thoughts, or be without them, is not in our power; but when they come; to
accept of, and intertaine, or resist, and reject them; that is in our power; no
man can have good thoughts, or be with out evil thoughts, when he please: but
the one comes from God, and the other^ from the enemy; who does use to multiply
them, in time of prayer; to vex us, breed a disgust in us, and that thereby,
we may conceive it, a thing very trouble some, and in a manner impossible to be
acquired; that at last we showld omit it, all together. this is his aim, for
he well knows, that by this prayer, we do daily secure our selves, more and
more from him, and his wyles; and draw nearer and nearer, to God; which he
cannot endure, and would hinder, if he could. and believe it, your time is well
spent, though you did, but put of these thoughts, the whole hour of prayer; for
in this, you fight for gods cause.

4. When you find your self, so distracted, that you can hardly think upon
any good thing; suppose in your mind, that you are cause thereof; and
therefore, with profound humility, prostrat before his divine Majesty, examine
your conscience, and likely you may find, that you committed some small sins,
or not prepared your self for prayer; or not performed your good purposes; or
not answered some holy inspirations; and if you find none of these; at least
acknowledge it, to be a just punnishment, for the sins of your life past; and
that you are truly, unworthy of any consolation, or heavenly visitation, being
such, and so ungrateful a sinner; and that you are more then well dealt with
all, to be admitted to his holy presence. for this humility does highly please
his divine Majesty, and does often move him, instantly to give unto the humble
souls, great comforts, benefits, and graces.

5. Commonly you must use all the parts of prayer, in order; until you be
well practiced in them; by reason, in time of aridity, when you can have no
gust in one part, you may pass to an other; and so without trouble or
loathsomeness, you may spend the time of prayer, if not with content and
comfort; yet with profit. For as its said in the beginning, these parts of
prayer, are placed before the soul, as so many diuersityes of meats, that if
in one she get no gust, she may take of an other, and so tasting of each, it is
like, she may get content and satisfaction, in some of them, please her pallat,
and sweetly refresh her self, after her long labor taken, in discoursing;
seeking to find that spiritual food. and be sure to spend more time, in the
affectiue parts (which are the three last) then in the three first, which are
only preparatiue or dispositiue; but as is said, if in any part you be moved to
some pious affection, remain in it, without inward words, lookeing on the
object, and affecting it, as long as you can; though it be in the very first:
for God gives this feeling, perhaps in the beginning, other times, in the
middle; and some times, in the very last: but whenever it is given, esteem
it very much, giving hearty thanks: take sufficiently of it, and be careful,
that your affection through too much fervor, do not drown, or ouersway the
understanding; for when it is vehement, with too great sorrow, or joy of
spirit; do not force or forward it; for that will stifle or choke the spirit,
but either sweetly rest in it; or divert your mind, on some other pious object;
for this, as cold water cast into a boiling pot, will assuage or qualify, that
little pot of your heart, which is ready to run over, with the too great heat,
of the fire of love, which the Holy Ghost, has left burning in your soul; and
experience teaches. (as is formerly said) that all violence, or force, hurts
the body hinders the soul's spiritual profit, and causes her, to fear, and
loath to go to prayer; by reason of the pain she is put to, in that forcing.
For feign she would enjoy totally what she loves; and she forces her self to
this, which cannot in this life be had, by all our endeauours possible; for it
is not in our power, but must come by gods holy gift, when he please.

6. Also, if you be in any great aridity, or dryness of Spirit, do not force
your self; but in your desolation, with humility, acknowledge, your self
unworthy of any favor, by reason it depends of the good pleasure of his divine
Majesty, and its beyond our reach, to have those comforts, and feelings; and
esteem it a special favor, (as truly it is) to be admitted to his holy
presence, on any terms to treat with him concerning, your reconciliation, and
salvation; having so often formerly offended, and wronged him: and give him,
very hearty thanks, for this favor and benefit; this is the true way, and
must be observed.

7. If through, weakness, frailty, or negligence, you fall, or fail in the
performance of your good purposes, or commit some small sins, or
imperfections; be not impatient with your self, for this afflicts many,
troubles the mind, disturbeth, dismayeth, and deiecteth the soul, makes her
forsake prayer, and keeps her from going on heartely in the service of God; a
discontented and unquiet mind cannot pray well; Therefore in such occasions,
let not your passion sway, but with all submission go to his divine Majesty
(who is more a loving Father, then a rigourous judge:) confess your frailty,
and disability, of which he is very sensible; and well knows our weakness,
and will have us to understand and acknowledge it; and that we, of our selves
can do nothing, but must diffide altogether in our forces; and place our
whole trust and confidence in his omnipotent goodness; who will give us the
victory over our selves, if we be perseuerant in our holy exercises, and his
service; and not doubt of his assistance and help: for he is so good, that
seeing your fidelity, and desire to please him, he cannot but reward it
abundantly, though he differ's it for a while: Children learning to go, do
get many falls, by reason of their weakness; yet crying to the nourse, with
her help, they always rise again: even so, you are but a suckling, as yet,
learning to go in the way of virtue, and perhaps, you get many falls; then cry
to God, your good nourse, and with his holy assistance and grace; you may rise
again as often? until at length, you may go with out fear, or any great
danger.

8. It will also comfort you much; in these aridityes, desolations, and
temptations, to remember, and call to mind, how our Savior was sorely tempted,
and had very many crosses, inuiting us, to carry our cross, and follow him;
for he who does not carry his cross and follow Math. 10. v. 38. Luc. 14. v. 27.
me, (said he) is not worthy of me; that is, to be my disciple, or gain my
love, and the favors which I am wont to bestow on my true servants; The way of
the cross is the Kings high way (as they say) to glory, and the cross, is the
livery of Christ our Savior; and by this, his true servants, are known, from
the servants of Satan, and the lovers of the world; who for human policy do
dissemble, and stop their passion, without merit; and others, will not endure
any trouble, or cross, for virtue, or the love of God, or human respect; but
must have their humor, though it be but to fre^ in passion, and chafe them
selves, with regeing words, and revenging thoughts; to their ruin and undoing;
but in the way of the cross, the servants of God ever did, and still do
follow him, to his kingdom of endless felicity?

9. Consider their lives and deaths; which is able to encourage thee, to go
forward with great content, and hope to overcome all difficultyes, and to
accept with patience, all crosses, and afflictions, that shall occur; as
tokens of love, sent unto you, by his divine Majesty, for, whom he loves, he
chastises; moreover he knows best what is convenient Heb. 12. v. 6 Apoc. 3.
v. 19.
and fitting for every one; and therefore he gives to some, sensible devotion,
with many sweet tears in prayer, because they are weak spirits, and must be
fed with those sweet milksops of consolations; otherwise they would not go to
prayer; others like hyrelings, go to prayer, in expectation of a reward, of
some comforts and consolations, which now and then they felt in prayer, and
this does forward them in the practice of virtue; more then the love of virtue;
to others God gives consolations, and crosses, with several temptations, by
turns; this, to try and harden them, and that to comfort and encourage them;
least with the trouble and dislicultyes, of temptations, they should re^urne to
the flesh pots of Egypt; that is, the pleasures of this world, which once they
did forsake, and so loose all.

10. Others for a long time, have nothing to feed upon, but the hard crusts
of temptations, aridityes, and desolations; yet they go on, very heartely; for
they do not value, nor much esteem those sensible devotions and consolations;
neither will they serve, for hyre; but as loving children, serve their heavenly
Father, to please him, by reason it is his business and will; and like
faithful subjects and true champions, serve their King, ready on their own
cost, to undergo any labor, or service whatsoever, to show their loyalty and
since^e affection to his divine Majesty, whose honor and love, they esteem
more, then all the consolations and troubles that they may have in this world;
this is the life of saints, which we mus^ imitat if we desire virtue and true
perfection; these rather kneel in prayer, with aridity, resisting stoutly
distractions, idle, and vain cogitations, then for want of consolations,
depart from prayer, or not go to it, as many do; for they seek not their own
ease, and content but to do the will of God; knowi^g full well, that the scope
of all their exercises, is, to honor and serve God through love; and that true
devotion does consist in a prompt and ready will to please God in all things;
and conform our will, to his, happen what may: and commonly, they that from
the beginning, go on this way; in the end, they have many celestial comforts,
visions, and revelations.

11. Lastly when prayer is ended, do^ not suddenly divert your mind, or apply
it to outward affairs, but sitting, standing, or walking reflect carefully, on
what you did in prayer, call to mind the benefit, thought upon, the good
resolutions, and purposes you made, for ^he amendment of your life, and better
serving of God ever after: and what in particular you intended to do in
requi^all of that benefit, and his love toward you; for general resolutions
do bring little profit; therefore what you purposed in particular to do, be
careful, to put it in execution; and to have somewhat about you, to make you
mindful of it: as a few stones of beads to hang where you most usually put
your hands, that ^ouching them, you may call to mind, what you intended, and
ought to do, for the love of God; and in this, you must be more exact,
sincere, and punctual, because you past your word, to God; then you would have
been with any King, or Prince, if you had promised to do somewhat for them,
with whom, you would not dare, nor presume, to break your word, though it
should cost you your life and estate.

12. This reflecting, on what was done in prayer, is of great importance for
your spiritual profit: because we are very apt to forget those spiritual
things, chiefly beginers, (for this to them do most belong), who are easily
allured, and carried away, by what is more pleasing to our sensuality, which as
yet is not mortifyed, but very powerful in us. It will be very profitable to
you, to read these aduises often.

THE IV. CHAPTER.
Instructions for those that cannot discourse and therefore in prayer have no
content.
1. SOme there are, that cannot discourse nor frame similitudes n^^ reasons, to
help themselves in prayer, and therefore are often in aridity, not knowing
what to do. it will be good for these, to read often, the former aduises; they
may also, encourag themselves by the examples of others, that were gods great
servants, and suffered in their beginings, many difficultyes and great aridity,
in prayer; as our holy Mother S. Teresia, who in her life says that for
eighteen years, she had no spiritual consolation, neither could she
discourse; but did help her self with good books, and pictures, when she
went to prayer; also the venerable Father, John of Jesus Maria, though a most
learned man, and one of the most eminent that ^ere in his time in matters of
Spirit (as ^is writings do testify) yet in all his li^e, he never had one
consolation in pra^er; but his sanctity was not therefore, ^he less, yea,
rather, much more; and this grace he had, that what afflicted person The bodies
of S. Teresa and the V. fi: are uncorrupted.
^ame unto him for advise, he always ^arted much comforted, and ioyed in
spirit; the uncorruption of both their bodies, do well show their purity and
sanctity; this called to mind, will be a comfort to the afflicted, in aridity.

2. When they go to prayer, though ^^ey do nothing else but think that ^od
is within them, and every where ^out them, (without framing any simi^tude) and
to renew this thought of^n, making some act of reverence, ado^tion, and
respect to so high a majesty; ^f contrition, for having offended so ^reat a
God; of humility, as being vn^orthy, to be in his holy presence, ^rough the
foulness of their sins; of ^ankes, for his benefits, or of love, and ^aise,
for his goodness, and mercy; will ^e very acceptable to God; and thus they ^ay
pass the whole time of prayer wit^out tediousness;

3. At other times, they may say these or the like words; My God, I did not
come hither, to please my self, nor to have other consolations, then to please
thee; nor to do my will, but thine; if then, it be thy will, not to comfort me
at present; but leave me in aridity, I will with thanks content my self, and
for thy love, kneel herein thy holy presence, so I may therein do thee, some
small service, which I hope my God, thou will gratfully accept of, seeing that I
am unprofitable for more. Moreover, when they cannot recollect themselves, it
will help to have a devout picture, or image before them, of our Savior, or
some Saint; that looking on it, their thoughts may be employed, in the mystery
there represented; or this, or that thing done by that Saint to please God;
this will not only help recollection, but also move to devotion, sweet tears,
and a desire to follow and and imitat their example.

4. It will also at other times, help recollection, to have some devout book
(as our Holy Mother had going to prayer,) wherein to read, as often, as they s^
them selves carried away with man^ thoughts; by reason they cannot discourse,
and then to shut the book and thin^ upon what they read; that so they may be
inwardly employed until God of his goodness, seeing their diligent care, to
please him, may either visit them, with his holy grace, and give them a feeling
of his inward presence, for their comfort; or leave them, in their aridity, and
troublesome thoughts, for their greater merit whiles they stoutly resist them.
for they fight for him.

5. It may likewise much avail in prayer, when they know not what to do, to
run over the life of our Savior, in a general manner, from his infancy till
his passion and death, only to keep the mind employed in good thoughts; and it
is like that in some one part, they may have a feeling of their, sins, of his
love, or some other good affection.

6. It will be also to good purpose, when they are troubled with many vain
cogitations; to think and consider that God only is so powerful, that with a
word, he created the whole world; that he is also, infinitely wise, in creating
many admirable, rare varietyes of creatures; and that he is unspeakably
provident, ordering and disposing, ruling, and governing all with such great
harmony and conueniency that it surpasses all understanding then to think on
his greatness, goodness, mercy, majesty, and glory; also of his great love,
to mankind, more then to the highest Angels; for he never did for them what he
did for us. thus to spend the time; going from one point to an other, will
keep one from idle thoughts; and delight the mind in good ones, till prayer be
ended. and if you can rest in any of them, offer your self to his divine
Majesty, and show a willingness and readiness to please, and serve him, if
you knew how, o^ wherein.

7. Moreover our Holy Mother S. Terea appoints a very good employment for a
soul in this case; which she thus describes; You must compare your soul to a
young gentlewoman who is to be preferred to a husband; for first, she considers
what his parents are, and what calling, and estate they are of; then she must
know, what her husband is to have out of that estate for their present
maintenance; also what condition and natural disposition the young man is of,
with whom she is to be, during life; and whether she may conform her
disposition to his. that with quietness and content, they may live together.

8. The soul is the gentlewoman, to be espoused to Christ our Savior. she then
may consider who his parents are, what calling, and estate they are of, and
what thereof shall come to there is share; his father is the king of heaven and
earth, he is supreme Emperor of the world. he has a most vast estate; for all
things belongs to him and he loves his son so dearly, and tenderly that at
present he has put him in possession, and made him Lord of his whole estate, to
rule and dispose of all, as he shall think fi^^: and as for his natural
disposition he is so gracious, affable, beautiful, and amiable, that none
can be more. to conclude, there is nothing in him, but goodness; he is void
of passion, but full of virtue, and therefore his heavenly Father, must have
his spouse to be of the like condition or at least not vicious; but humble,
loving and affable.

9. Then consider, whether you may attain to this so great a preferment? what
may hinder it, and by what may you obtain it, being of so great importance for
your advancement? an immortifyed and proud spirit, hinders it; for God cannot
endure them; a humble and loving soul, is his choice; who then should not
strive to be such a one, to purchase so great a good, and a happiness which is
eternal; a sweeter lover cannot be, a better kingdom or greater wealth there
is none; more content and joy may not be, then to be his spouse, and live with
him, in endless felicity; thrice happy are they, who come to this blessed
preferment; in this delightful consideration, the whole time of prayer, may be
sweetly spent. and as near as they can, all the parts of prayer must be
used in their order.

10. It may serve well likewise, to say mentally some devout prayers, chiefly
the Pater noster, Aue, and creed, with great attention; considering, briefly,
what the meaning of this petition, or of what you say, may be; as; what is
understood by (our Father) then you are to consider the condition or property
of a good Father; and how loving and good a Father God is to you, that you as
his child may love and serve him in all obedience; and so of the rest: with
this you may pass the time very profitably. Yet observe, that you must not
commonly give way to your imagination to run upon many things, but for the
most part upon one matter, or point of some mystery; by reason the soul will
gain an evil custom thereby, and be hardly well settled, or recollected in any
wise; which is a great obstacle to contemplation, to which we tend in prayer.

11. For you must understand that all the remedies here written, are only to
be used in necessity, and in time of great aridity, and distractions; or when
one cannot by reason of the want of discourse, settle in any one thing: and
therefore these remedies, are to be applied, to keep the mind so employed in
time of prayer, that distractions may have no place; so that the soul by the
use and custom of godly thoughts and the very powers and senses, will take
such content in that inward recollection; that of them selves, they will fall
into it, in time of prayer; for the inward content and sweetness, proceeding
from the knowledge of truth, and spiritual objects, will allure them far more
forcibly then any outward things; many servants of God, were so inwardly with
their powers and senses employed, that outwardly they made little use of them;
and that only for necessity, or charity; of these were S. Bernard, our Holy
Mother Teresa, and others; but howsoever humility, love and perseverance will
gain all; for where love is, it cannot be idle, and they who love most; will
labor most, for their beloved. the desires of such as cannot help them selves
with discourse in prayer, are often great and many, to serve and please God,
whom they love; but wanting discourse, and vexed with. idle distracted
thoughts, which they are continually resisting, they must suffer much, to pass
the time, in some recollection; and in this they show their love, and
doubtless their merits and reward are great;

13. For he is scarce worthy of thanks, that goes often to prayer, when he
can pass the time with a sweet and pleasing discourse, by which he may be
easily moved to good affections, wherein he may be so contented that the very
content and joy of mind, may keep him recollected: but the other goes to
prayer, with fear, and as to a torture, yea with great repugnance, the poor
soul, loathing in a manner those difficultyes and troubles, which she is wont
to suffer in prayer; yet for his sake, whom she loves, more then her self,
she will not omit her prayer; therefore his divine Majesty seeing her fidelity
and perseverance, at length takes compassion on her, and brings her to
contemplation, and perhaps to quiet prayer, wherein she needs no discourse,
but with a sweet repose of all the powers and senses, do rest with unspeakable
joy in the love of her beloved; whom then she perceaueth feelingly present in
the inward of her very heart and substance; and this joy is so excessive great,
that she esteems all her labors, more then sufficiently rewarded, though,
they were as many again.

14. It is to be noted, that these souls must endeavor to keep great purity
of conscience, and often to frequent the Holy Sacraments of confession, and
communion; and it well be very necessary for them to be practiced in making
acts of all virtues, but chiefly, of humility, contrition, patience, obedience,
conformity to gods will; and charity; by reason, in time of aridity these will
supply the defect of discourse and inflame the soul with love, and godly
desires, and cause her not feel the time passing, and at the end of prayer
leave her with content: if you please you may use at those times such
iaculatory prayers as these:

15. My God thou know my disability and ignorance in all that is good, and
that of my self I cannot have as 2. Cor. 3. v. 4.
much os one good thought, but all must come from thee; direct and teach me o
Lord always to desire to serve and please thee, and in all things, to
fulfill thy holy will.

16. Thy delight my God, is to be Prou. 8. v. 31.
with us, grant I beseech thee that I may take delight to be in company and
conversation with thee.

17. O my life, dear Jesus, when, or where can I be better, then with thee?
or when, or where o my only good, can it be well with me, to be without thee?

18. O most loving and amiable Jesus, thou have no good, by being with me; but
all my wealth and health, my comfort and only good, is to be with thee; by whom
all goodness and blessings comes to me;

19. Thou have o Sweet Jesus, suffered much for love of me; why should not I
suffer somewhat, for love of thee? therefore I will kneel here though
comfortless, to please thee my God.

20. O my Gracious Lord, thou have endured many iniuryes and affronts for my
sake, o why my God should not I, (who deserved all abuses, and punnishments for
having offended thee,) joyfully for thy love, in requital, accept of all
iniuryes and wrongs, so I may but in somewhat pleasure thee*

21. O my dear Jesus, I will hereafter, be no more mine, but wholly thine; in
sickness, and in health; in poverty and in wealth; in temptations and
consolations, do what thou will, and as thou will, with me; my will shall be
always thine, and what shall happen, shall be welcome unto me, for love of
thee. Sweet Jesus grant me this. Amen.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
Of the Purgative life, or way of beginners, and chiefly of the first degree.
1. IN the former chapters, you have seen, what an excellent thing mental
prayer is, and how to meditat, using all the parts thereof: by an orderly
method: now it rests, to know, what they must do, that are desirous of true
perfection; which with God's grace in the following chapters, and this, you
shall understand;

2. A man that intend's to make a garden for his pleasure, of a plot of ground,
over grown with evil weeds; puts on a resolution, (cost what it may) to
finish this work, and bring it to perfection. out of this resolution he
beginns to digg the ground, very deeply, and turn it carefully over and over
and to take away the weeds and roots, least they should grow again; this
done, he breaks the clods, of earth, gathers together the roots, weeds,
stones, and other rubbish, with his rake; and then they being in one heap, he
casts them all out of the garden plot; after this he begins to frame, and
square it, sow good seeds; set sweet heatbs, and odoriferous flowers; and
plant it with fair pleasant trees; watering them all daily until they be well
rooted: and then his greatest care is to keep it clean, and cut of the least
weed, that shall appear; by which diligence and industry, the garden at
le^ngth comes to perfection; and the owner, takes great content and pleasure,
to walk therein, and is much comforted with the beauty and sweet odours of
those flowers and herbs; he makes nosegayes and gathers now and then, of the
friute, and bestows of them, on his neighbors, that they may partake of the
pleasure and benefit of his garden.

3. In like manner the soul of a man (who lived in the world, according to his
own will, and the desires of nature, is like unto this garden plot, over
grown with the evil weeds of vice, bad customs, unmortified passions, and
disordered appetites. If therefore you intend to go on in this holy exercise
of prayer, and bring your soul to virtue, and true perfection; you must make a
firm and solid resolution, (cost what it may) to apply all your desires,
labors, actions, endeauours inward and outward, to that end only; so that the
scope of all your intentions must be, the acquisition of perfection; and what
shall appear contrary to this, to abhor and reject, as an absolute evil, and
impediment to your greatest felicity, and happiness.

4. This being so, the garden plot, to wit your soul, must be purged from all
the evil weeds which she has, as her evil habits, inclinations, and passions,
as is formerly said; and then, the sweet and pleasant flowers of all virtues
there set and sorted, will make the most pleasant and delightful garden that
can be imagined.

5. But how must this plot be purged? I say by being deeply dug, that is, by
a serious consideration, a diligent and exact examination of your life past, in
thought word and deed, commissions, omissions, evil advise and example.

6. It will help your memory much to examen first from year to year since you
had the use of reason. for example, where you were, or dwelled, being very
young, what company and conversation you used. what schools, exercises, o^
employment, you were kept unto; th^^ examining from the first time you think
you had the use of reason, till the present year, wherein you live; for this
may bring you to remember things, which perhaps would never come into your
mind, or you thought were no sins, though truly they were, and not confessed,
either through, ignorance, negligence, fear, or bashfullnesse being young,
(and therefore it imports much that every Christian being of ripe years, once
in his life, should make a general confession with a good and learned Ghostly
Father, for it will rid them of, and prevent, many dangerous scruples, which
may happen, and the devil is apt to suggest, at the hour of death; then run
over the ten commandments, the seven deadly sins, the preceps of the Church,
and your other obligations, according to your state of life, as is said in the
first part; afterward, examen to what sins you were most inclined, in times
past; and by what means, and motives, you did commonly fall into them; and
whether of frailty, set purpose or malice, (that is, wittingly and willingly)
you did commit them; and what propension, to them, or amendment you now find in
your self; also what sorrow you have for so offending God, and what hatred you
have, to all sin; and whether that sorrow and hatred, be for the love of God,
(if any you have) whom you ought to love with all your heart and soul; or for
fear of his rigorous judgment, and the pains of hell which are allotted for
sinners.

7. Likewise examen what venial sins, you do daily most offend God in, and
whether your conscience, does reprehend you, when you commit them; or you
carelessly pass them over, making no account of them; as in discourse, to tell
some light lies for pastime, or ornament of the story; for it is an evil token,
if you have no remorse of your venial sins, being they displease so high a
God, and do dispose a man to fall into deadly sins; and therefore carefully
to be shunned.

8. Then consider how unmortified your passions and senses, your inclinations
and affections, your proper will and judgment, and all other your sinful
ways; were and are; for this examination must be more exactly done, then that
which they do, who are in the world, (that intend only to save their souls,
confessing the greatest, or mortal sins, not making any account of the rest,)
by reason these, aspire to higher glory in heaven, and consequently to greater
purity, and perfection, here on earth; and therefore they must examen the
least imperfections, as being impediments to so great a good, which they
pretend, and intend to gain.

9. So that every corner of this soul being so carefully dug, and turned
over and over, and all the roots, weeds, and euiles committed, gathered
together, in your memory, by a good general confession, to an understanding
prudent Ghostly Father, must be cast out of this garden plot, which then may be
framed and squared into a fair and pleasant garden, for the comportment and
delight, of your heavenly spouse and your self.

10. But it must be ordered by the good instruction of your Ghostly Father,
Superior, or spiritual directour; to whom you must be exactly obedient, not
trusting little or much to your own sufficiency, or wit in those exercises, or
documents which he shall appoint; but with all humility leave your self to be
disposed of, as God shall inspire him, to direct you in all, that tend to your
spiritual good; and the acquiring of that perfection, to which by Gods grace,
you resolve and intend to attain; and with great submission prostrat before
that great god of all goodness, humbly desire that he will be pleased to give
you, his poor and unworthy servant, a feeling knowledge of all such things, as
may hinder, and forward you, in this way of perfection;

11. For the understanding being illuminated, the will is easily affected;
therefore King David desired this gift of knowledge from God; give me o Lord
said he, understanding, and I shall learn thy 118. Ps. v. 73.
commandments, that is, I shall observe thy commandments; which we must
always desire; this is the path of beginners, and the purgative way, in which
their souls are cleansed from the filth of sin; This way Ezechias walked,
Esa. 38. v. 15.
who said, I will call to mind before thee all my years in the bitterness of
my soul; as if he said, with a sorrowful repentant heart, I will examen all my
life, and call to mind my sins, (by which o Lord, I offended thee, and
deserved thy wrath and indignation) and confess them unto thee, that thou
may forgive them all, according to thy mercy: thus he dug his garden.

12. The Blessed Prophet King Daui^ walked the same way, saying, I will
confess vnro thee o Lord all my vniustices, against me, as if he said, O Lord,
I Ps. 31. v. 5.
know, I have sinned, I will examen my whole life, and then, considering my
many offenses, (by which I deserved thy displeasure) will confess them all,
unto thee; and when he had humbly confessed his sins; he was forgiven them;
therefore he said, and thou have forgiven the impiety of my sins, because with
a sorrowful heart I did acknowledge and confess them; and, said he, according
to the measure, Ps. 33. v. 19.
and multitude of the sorrows of my heart, for having offended thee; thy
consolations have comforted and ioyed my soul;

13. For David did not only cast out of the garden of his soul, his great
sins; but also he got up commonly at midnight, to confess unto God; and did
sweep clean his spirit, from the smalest weeds and faults, that he found in
it, as he himself confesses in the 76. psalm.

14. In this manner (by a due examination 76. Ps. v. 7.
of our life; with sorrow, in the bitterness of our heart, by a penitent
confession, casting all the rubbish, and filthred of sin, out of our soul;
and then with vigilance, and care not only in day, but also at midnight to
sweep away the least imperfections, by confessing, and sorrowing for the
smalest faults the plot of our soul, is purged from all evil roots, weeds,
and other rubbish; and then she is ioyed much in her purity; and consequently,
gods consolations will there abound. this is the first stepp or degree of the
purgative life, ascending to perfection.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
How this garden of the soul, must be squared, and made fit, to be sown and
set with seeds and flowers.
1. THis is the second degree, to wit; that the soul be so squared and
ordered, that she may be preserved from evil weeds; and made fit, to receive
good seeds, herbs, and flowers; The blessed Prophet King David, who gave us,
a pattern, or example of the first degree, in himself; now gives us, the
method of the second; for nothing can move the heart of man, to forsake evil,
and embrase good more then the consideration of the benefit of the one, and the
hurt of the other. Therefore he said, 76. Ps v. 6.
Eternal years I kept in mind. as if he said, least I should fall back to
sin again, I have considered, what eternity is; and that Eternal joys, are
prepared for the just; and eternal torments in hell, for the wicked, and which
of these shall fall to my lot, at the hour of my death, I know not; for the
panges and pains of death are great, and what they will move me to, is
uncertain, and the rigor and severity of god's judgment, is such; that he
will have us to account for the least idle word, thought, and deed; this
causes me to carry in mind, and keep before my eyes, the eternal days,
which are allotted for all; whether in hell or heaven, is to us unknown;
Therefore I have cause to fear, and sweep my soul clean, even from the least
faults, as near as I can, with the assistance of his holy grace; for I
deserved to loose the one, and be condemned to the other.

2. But I know that god's sweet mercy, far exceeds the greatest rigor of
his justice, and can set me free; but least I should forget my self, and fall
again; I will always bear in mind those eternal days; this very thing, as
a prime preservative against sin, the holy scripture commends, to us;
Remember thy Eccl. 17. v. 46.
end, to wit, heaven or hell, death, judgment and thou shall never offend;
this is the promise of the holy Ghost; who is all powerful, can, and will,
perform it. which is a great comfort unto us; thou shall never offend; heaven
and earth may fail, but Gods word, will never sail;

3. Yet he requires of us, as a necessary condition (without which, he is not
tied) that we keep in mind those things, which must happen to all, at their
end. David then, had good cause, to keep in mind those eternal days, to
preserve him, self, from sin; and keep the garden of his soul, clean;

4. An other motive he had, to be so myndfull of eternity; because he had well
considered, the vanities, pleasure^, and delight, of this life; and found all
to be mutable, uncertain, and transito^^; therefore he said, I shall be then
satisfied, when thy glory, o Lord shall appear, Ps. 16. v. 15.
that is, in heaven.

5. An other reason, he had; to wit, that he considered, how odious a thing,
sin is, to God; and how seuerly he punnished sin, from the very beginning of
Man, to his very time and person.

6 I do not mean the pains of hell, (to which Lucifer, and all his
confederat Angels were cast, with thousands more; for one only sin) but
temporal punnishments mentioned in the Holy Scripture for our instruction; As
the bannishment of Adam, and Eua, out of Genesis 3. v. ^3. and 24.
Paradise, the drowning of the whole world, and all creatures, in the flood of
Noe, except the few which were in the Genesis 7. v. 21. 22. 23*
arck; for god repented that he created man, their iniquityes were so odious
unto him; and therefore in his wrath he destroyed them all.

7. Also the fearful punnishment of the Cittyes of Sodom and Gomorra Genesis 19.
v. 24.
which by fire from heaven were burnt, and man wife, child, and all things what
soever, yea and the very walls consumed to dust, that there remained not the
shadow of a city, or any dwelling; likewise the most dreadful plagues of
Egypt, the Exodus 7. 8. 9, 10.
very reading of which, in holy writ, is sufficient to terrify, the strongest,
and stoutest heart.

8. Moreover, the fiery serpents sent by God, upon the children of Israel,
which Number. 21. v. 6
devoured a great multitude of the people. And in the sedition of Core, Dathan,
and Abiron, how in the presence of all the children of Israel, with their
tents goods, wives, children, and adherents Nu. 16 v 22.
which were many thousands, the earth suddenly opening, were all; devoured and
fire proceeding from God, consumed two hundred and fifty more, that were
offering incense for them; and as the scripture says, the cry of them
descending to hell alive, was so great and lamentable, that the people that
were appointed by God, to be present, and to take example by their punnishment,
fled and ran away, with fear to be inuolued in the same pit.

9. These and many more David considered, which caused him so to fear sin;
for if God does thus severely punnish sin in this world, what will not he do
in the other? the way then to preserve us from it, is, to be myndfull of our
end; so that the meditations fit for beginners must be of the vanity,
uncertainty and transitorinesse of this world, and all the pleasures thereof;
also of the hurt of sin; of the dreadful hour of death; of the severity of
God's judgment; the eternity of the great joys of heaven; and fearful pains
of hell; and with this blessed King to keep those eternal days, always in
mind;

10. But your principal and most common meditations, must be of the life,
Passion, and death of our Lord and Savior, Christ Jesus: for the former
matter, moves more to fear, but this, more to love; and in this, you shall
not only, in a more perfect manner, observe and understand the evil, and hurt
of sin, and how odious, it is, to God the Father, (whereas he punnished our
sins, so severely, and with that cruelty, if it might be so said, in the
tender and most delicat body, of his own only, and most deerly beloved son;
as the like was never seen) but also as in a looking-glass, you shall see
your life past, and present; and how little they agree, with the life of Christ,
or a good Christian; whose life ought to be, the imitation of Christ.

11, His life was humble; thine, proud; his, pure; thine, foul; his, poor and
needy; thine, prodigal and wanton; his, myld and patient, thine, rash and
passionat; his, resigned and conformable to Gods will, and laws; thine,
stubborn, and disobedient in all; his, modest and grave; thine, light and
idle, his, spent in long fasting, and praying; thine in gluttonous eating,
drinking, and pampering thy flesh, and in vain and foolish prattling and
talking: his, in contempt of himself, and the vanities of this world; thine,
in selfloue, proper interest. and a greedy affection, to the pleasures, and
transitory shadows of this life.

12. To conclude in a word; ponder well his great love to God, and his
neighbors, (as his coming from heaven, and suffering what, and as he did for
us, does well declare) and thy little love to him, (whom thou oughtst to love
above all,) and less to thy neighbors, whom thou should love as thy self,
as God commands. Consider also the austere lives, of the Holy Saints, and
their great pennances, for their sins; that thou may not only ever after
fly sin, and bear a hatred to it, being to thee so hurtful, and to God so
odious; but also do some pennances for thy offenses; that thy life may be
reformed, thy oblations and prayers, more acceptable to his divine: Majesty, and
his wrath sooner appeased; Ps. 101. v. 10.
holy David said, I have eaten ashe^ licte bread, and mingled my drink with
tears, and humbled my soul, with fasting. so that after a good confession,
this is the next step forward to perfection.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
How to sow and plant this garden, and bring it, to the third degree.
1. THe soul, which is this garden plot, being by that good confession, so
purged, and made pure and clean; and by those good and pious meditations, and
other holy exercises, appointed by the directour or Ghostly Father, squared
settled and ordered must now be; sown with good seeds, and set with good
plants;

2. But perhaps you may demand, what are the seeds and plants, and where may
they be had? to this I answer, that godly desires, and pious affections, are
the seeds, and all sort of virtues, are the plants; and both are had in the
fair garden of prayer, where you may walk freely, pass the time sweetly, and
with great content parting, bring thence as many as you please, without fear
of any; as for example, when you are in prayer, and with your understanding
have perused and considered how many and great the pains of hell are, and that
they are appointed for the eternal punnishment of sinners, by the great and
powerful Lord and King of heaven and earth, whose judgment and sentence none
can shun; and that you often sinned against this your King, and deserved that
punnishment, and to be tormented in those pains for ever, and consequently
deprived of the most glorious sight of God, and the joyful company of his holy
Saints and Angels; if you do not repent whiles you have time in this life;
for after death, there is nothing but salvation or damnation in hell; whence
there is no redemption;

3. Out of this consideration, you conclude thus; I am in danger, and in need:
of Gods infinite mercy; o what shall become of me for all eternity? hence you
conceive a wholesome fear, a hatred to sin, (which bring so great evil) a
sorrowful heart, a desire of amendment, a resolution to make a good
confession, do penance, and never commit the like again; also a purpose to
acquire virtue, to serve, please, and praise God, who did expect your
conversion with patience, giving you time to repent, and grace to amend, and
many other pious affections and G^dly desires, which there are had; with a
thankful mind for this mercy and benefit, which was not given to the Angels
of heaven, nor to many others, who dyed suddenly in their wickedness:

4. Are not these good seeds, which, do produce a godly life, and glory
everlasting? these must be sown and weel watered with sweet and penitent
tears, until they be perfected, or take good root in the soul; and at
length, you shall receive the joyful fruit and benefit of all.

5. You must here observe, that in prayer, some, has good desires, but they
do not put them in execution; that is, do not sow them, which makes them
void of profit; as a desire to go to confession, and not to commit this or
that sin again; which presently after prayer, they forget, neglect, or put
of, from time, to time, and perhaps they are cut short by a sudden and
unprovided death; for it is not sufficient, nor enough, not to do evil, but
you must do good; nor to forsake vice, unless you labor, and endeavor to
gain virtue; so that he who desires to be penitent, do penance, become
virtuous, (as to be humble, modest, silent, and so of other virtues) and will
not endeavor to put them in practice; will do himself but little good, yea
much hurt, for not using those seeds, but neglecting to answer those good
desires, and holy inspirations, which God gave him to use and make profit of;
and therefore as an unprofitable servant he deserves punnishment.

6. But what are the plants? and how are they set? to which I say; virtues, are
the plants; and must be set in this garden of the soul, by the daily use, and
practice of their acts; so that in time; by this holy exercise, they will be
brought to perfection; for experience teaches, that by the often drawing of
letters, and the use of writing, at last, a man writes well; and by the use of
spelling, and reading, a man reads well; and so of all arts; for by this
practice, we gain the habits of arts; which do facilitat us, in their acts;
so that by often producing virtuous acts; a, man gains the habit of virtues,
and becomes virtuous* as by vicious acts, he becomes, and is called vicious;
so that by the good, or, evil usage, of your inward are outward senses, you
shall acquire good, or bad habits;

7. I beseech you, call your five senses to an account; which are the doors,
by which all vice for the most part, entered into your soul; and be vigilant
over them hereafter; that they admit no evil objects; least they disorder your
garden, being now purged and made clean, and is sown with good seeds, as I
suppose.

8, For Eua only looking on the forbidden unmortified eyes.
apple, which was fair to the eye, did fancy, took, and eat it: and Adam by
her persuasion, did the same, contrary to Gods command; which was the cause of
all our evil. Likewise Jeremy the Prophet Lam. Iere. ^. v. 51. 2. kings 11. v. 2
says, that his eyes did betray and rob his soul, by the evil objects that
entered by them; Also King David only looking on Bethsabe, bathing her self,
did fancy her, committed adultery, with her, and murdered her husband; yet he
did repent, and confessed his offense before God, to Nathan the Prophet; and
therefore he was forgiven; you see what hurt comes to the soul by unmortified
eyes; and immodesty.

9. Mark also, how David did cleanse his garden, of this evil weed; and set
therein the plant of modesty: he did repent, confessed his sins, and then said
he, my God my, eyes did yield floods of Ps 118. v. 136. Ibid. v. 27.
tears, because they did not keep thy law; therefore o Lord, turn away, mine
eyes, that they may not behold vanities. as if he said, o Lord, by giving too
much liberty to mine eyes, I offended thy divine Majesty, for which I am sorry,
and do resolve never to do the like again; but my God, give me thy
assistance and turn away mine eyes from beholding or looking on any vanitye
hereafter.

10. All that, which conduces not to devotion, piety, the service and love of
God, is vanity; which, all intending to attain to perfection, must shun
carefully. Job who knew fullwell the hurt of Job 31. v. 1.
vnmortifyed eyes, made an agreement or bargain with his own eyes, that they
should, not as much; as behold a virgin, so to prevent all danger.

11. If you then did offend, by the way of your eyes, or do intend to prevent
the future danger, imitat those blessed saints, and set this fair plant of
modesty, in your garden; thus, in every occasion, of vain shows, (as foolish
masking, idle dancing, women's sporting and familiarity) saying, o Lord turn
away mine eyes, that they may not behold this vanity; part the place; and shun
the occasion; or if you cannot; say inwardly; these objects my God, are but
vanities, which distract my mind, they are snares of the devil, to entrap my
soul, I will not open mine eyes, I will not look upon them, least I should
offend thee my God, or fall from my good resolution.

12. Far be it from me o Lord, to place these eyes of mine which thou have
created to behold thy infinite beauty, for ever in glory, upon these fooleryes
and vanities, which are but transitory, and do pass away as if they were not;
to see thee o Lord, in thy glory, and Majesty, is life everlasting; o Jesus, I
will shut mine eyes to this world, that thou may grant me this felicity; give
me o most modest Jesus, this true virtue of modesty.

13. By these and the like acts with care taken, not to cast your eyes here or
there, the mastery and dominion over your eyes is acquired and this sweet plant
of modesty, is set in your garden, and brought at length to perfection.

14. I have seen in Collon, a certain religious woman, of whose virtuous life
I heard somewhat related; which caused in me a desire to see her, upon some
occasions I did observe her very well, and consider her actions, and behavior,
which truly were very grave; (though she was young) but above all, I did admire
her modesty, and the composition of her eyes, which were so steadfast and
settled, that I could never see the apple or ball of either of her eyes; which
did edify, and comfort me much; true it is that whosoever has supernatural
prayer, or a continual inward presence of God, can hardly move their eyes, by
reason of the inward attention, and settlement; this plant of modesty, was well
set, came to perfection, and was an ornament to her, and is a comfort to
others, who by her example may be animated and encouraged to imitat so rare a
pattern; nothing is difficult to a willing and loving mind; for the use and
practice of any thing, be it never so difficult, makes it easy at last; as we
see in all trades.

15. As concerning your tongue proceed in the same manner; that the virtue of
silence, may be set, as modesty is. For when you have considered that you often
offended God, by evil words, and idle speeches, (as lying cursing, swering,
detraction, wanton discourses, to your Unmortified tongues.
own hurt, and the evil example and scandal of others) you must resolve not
to speak, but when mere necessity, or urgent charity shall force you to it.
for as the Scripture says, he that uses many words; hurts his own soul;
and he that is in considerat in his speeches, shall find evil thereby; because
as in an other place it is said, in many words and Eccl. 20. v. 8.
much talk sin cannot be wanting; which is the greatest of evils,

16. To shun therefore this evil, and to Prou. 13. v. 3. Prou. 10. v. 19 Ps
148. v. 3.
gain, the virtue of silence, say with holy David, put o Lord a guard unto my
mouth, and a door of circunstance, unto my lips, to wit, that nothing, may
come thence, offensive to thee; or my neighbor; but all my words may be first
maturely considered, before they be pronounced; you may say likewise; o my
dear Jesus, the true master, and pattern of all virtue, thou being falsely
accused, and extremely wronged, and abused; were silent not opening thy mouth;
or excusing thy self, (which thou might well have done) though by the Judge
much pressed to make answer for thy self, yet did not, for our instruction
and example; therefore my God, I will be silent hereafter, to those of this
world, though I be abused, and falsely accused; far be it from me, my God, to
employ my tongue, which thou have ordained to sing forth thy endless praises;
in speaking of vain and idle things, O my dear Jesus, when I shall have the
grearest occasions, and find my self most forward to speak, then will I be
most silent, for love of thee, and the gaining of this blessed virtue.

17. O loving Jesus, I will fly company, and shun all occasions, and retire my
self into the solitude, to be silent to the world, and not speak to any, but
for obedience, or my spiritual profit; o Lord grant me, that my whole
conversation may be in heaven, and of heavenly things; open thou o Lord my
lips in Ps ^0. v ^^.
thy Holy Praise; and shut them fast, to all others; Grant me o dear Jesus,
this Holy Virtue of silence; o Jesus if at any time I shall fail in silence, I
will punnish my self, by some mortification, as one time to fast, an other
time to take a discipline, that I may through thy grace the sooner gain this
blessed virtue of silence; these or the like you may daily practice, that this
plant may be set and well rooted in your soul.

18. Also when you have considered, that you offended God, by eating and
drinking, on fasting days; or took prohibited meats; or used excess in any
of both, and how Adam eating the forbidden Gluttony. Genesis 3. v. 23. Luck 16.
v. 22. Judith. 13. v. 10.
fruit offended God, and was banished from Paradise; the rich glutton went to
hell, but staruing Lazarus, to heaven. Holofernus in his drunknes, lost his
life, and head, but Judith fasting freed her people from ruin, and put their
enemies to flight. and that Christ our Savior fasted forty days, and several
other times, and in his greatest extremity hanging on the cross, and thirsting
Math. 27. v. 48.
vehemently, had no other liquour, or refreshment given him, but most bitter
gall and vinegar; you must resolve absolutely, not to affect meat, nor drink,
but for mere necessity; neither must you exceed in quantity nor quality; nor
desire daynty or toothsome meats, sawces, or gust in eating and drinking; but
a moderat satisfaction, of indifferent meat and drinck, for nature's
sustentation, rejecting super fluityes, and daintyes, which cause delectation.

19. You may daily to this purpose of gaining the virtue of temperance, say
these or the like acts; O my sweet and loving Jesus, thou have fasted long and
often, for love of me; and I by excess in eating and drinking, have often
offended thee; I will hereafter rather dye, then do the like again, for love
of thee: far be it from me o Lord, to feed daintily, thou being fed with
vinegar and gall; I will seek no gust in meat; seeing thy sauce to be no other;
O most temperat Jesus, Math. 4. v. 2.
thou did fast forty days for, my sins, and the love of me; and I would
not endure one day's fasting, nor pass over one drouth, for my sins, or the
love of thee; I will therefore hereafter chastise my body, by fasting, and
temperat eating and drinking, for love of thee; o most amiable Jesus, hereafter
I will mortify my taste, and seek no sawces with my meat; I will not give my
self content in taking as much as one grain of salt, to please my gust, for
thy sake: o my loving Jesus, if in eating, I shall fancy one morsel, or bit,
more then an other; that, I will leave, and take the worst, for love of thee; o
my dear Lord, I will seek no meat, nor drink to please my taste, until, I
eat with thee, of that heavenly banquet, which thou have prepared for thy true
friends, in thy kingdom of endless glory; thus your plant of temperance is
set, and brought to groth in due time.

20. Now go forward, and consider Unmortified ears.
how you offended God, in hearing; as giving ear to detraction, idle talk,
and conversation, wanton songs, books treating of uncivil and dishonest
things; then cry God heartely mercy, and say, o Lord, shut mine ears, that I
may not hear hereafter, but what shall be to thy honor and praise, and the
good of my soul; far, be it from me, my God, to apply my ears (which thou
have given me to hear thy holy words, and those celestial praises, which are
song to thee in heaven, to the vain and idle talk of this transitory world; O
loving Jesus, I will never give ear, to hear my neighbor ill spoaken of
hereafter. I will hedge up mine ears, o Lord, Eccli. 28. v. 28.
from hearing the talk and lies of this world, that I may hear thy canticles
in Syon, and celestial Jerusalem; Give me grace o Lord, to withdraw my self
from all occasions, of hearing what may be offensive unto thee, hurtful unto
me, and scandalous to others; so that when you are in occasions of hearing what
is not good; you may say, (if it be among your familiars) we shall answer
before God, for these things, let us speak of God; it is not fitting I should
hear my neighbor ill spoaken of; for I would not be glad, my neighbor should
give ear to hear me ill spoaken of, if you cannot conveniently hinder their
speeches, then in your mind, turn to God, who is within you, and make the
former acts, or the like, withdrawing your attention, from what they say; to
God, to whom inwardly you speak.

21. Proceed in the same manner with Vnmortifyed desires.
your smelling, and touching, and with your passions, and desires of nature;
for we are so guien to love our selves and our proper commodityes, that unless
we bridle our appetites, they will undo us; therefore when you find, that
nature is not content, to want her commodityes, say.

22. O my Jesus, why should I seek my ease and content so much; where as thou
Math. 3. v. 20
had not a place to put thy sacred head into? O my soul, thy Lord and
Savior, was borne in a stable, without any commodity, he lived in poverty, and
want; he fasted; lay on the earth; and his best bed, at his end, was the hard
wod of the cross, whereon he lay naked, in the cold of winter, I must have all
plenty, and no want: all commodity, and no sufferance? Far be this from me:
for I am not better then my master who suffered for me.

23. In like manner you must proceed The passion of anger*
in mortifying your passions, some time, one, then, an other; as thus, I am
choleric and hasty; o my Jesus what will it avayle me, to give way to my
passion? why should I be angry? whom do I hurt thereby, but my self? I alter
my body, hurt my health, trouble my mind, displease and discontent my
neighbor, and offend thee my God. therefore I will never be angry more; I will
never give way to may passion: I will be meek and patient; I will take abuses
and iniuryes in good part, rather then offend thee by anger: for I shall
thereby procure thy wrath and anger, against me; who can punnish me, and
cast me into hell. O most patient Jesus, with invincible patience thou did
endure not only iniuryes, and reproaches; but also cruel torments, and death it
self on the cross, I will imitat thee hereafter in this holy virtue; Sweet
Jesus grant me so to do, for love of thee, rather then for fear of punnishment,

24. Consider also that you offended in pride, vain glory, and proper
estimation, Pride.
and that God does resist, and will humble the proud, and exalt the humble;
therefore Lucifer was cast to hell, for his pride; but the Blessed Virgin Esa.
14 v. 13. and 14. Luc. 1. v. 3. Math. 11. v. 29.
Mother of God, for her humility was regarded and exalted above all creatures,
in heaven, to the highest glory; and is, and will be called therefore blessed,
by all generations; learn of me, our Savior said; because I am myld, and
humble in heart; follow then so good a master, and say; most humble Jesus, thou
did humble and submit thy self to all, yea to the ignominious death of the
cross; I will therefore humble my self to all and esteem my self worsse
then all; o most humble reedemer of the world, I will never give way to pride,
or vain glory hereafter; I am nothing, my God, of my self; for, thence I
came, and thither I shall return again, if thou shall be so pleased; of what
then can I boast, or be proud? o my dear Lord, I am so base, and made my self
so vile, and unworthy, that I am not fit for any other, then to be the
compagnions of the ugly devils, being a wicked sinner, and to be tormented by,
and with them in hell fire for ever, if thy mercy does not free me thence; how
then shall I be proud, or of what vain glorious; or what can I esteem my
self to be; but miserable and wretched? O most humble Jesus, my good conceit,
or well esteeming of my self, makes me noe more, nor better, then I am in thy
sight, who see the secrets of all hearts; if my soul be foul, in thy sight,
my vain thought, makes me not clean; and dear soul, remember that your
taking pride of your beauty, or other talents, or thinking your self, to be
worthy of esteem, or to be devout, or good, adds no virtue nor perfection to
your soul, but rather robs God, of his honor and praise, from whom, if any
good you have, you did receive it; and to whom therefore, the honor, esteem,
thanks, and praise, is only due, and not to you; for you are but dust and
ashes, meat for worms, a mere nothing;

25. In like manner, consider how wilful Disobedience, or Wilfulnes.
you have been, and how repugnant to the commands and will of God, and the
good admonitions and advise of friends, and Ghostly Fathers; and that such are
truly libertines, that walk the broad and large way, which our Savior in the
gospel says, leads to perdition Math. 7. v. 13. and 14.
and hell; for narrow is the path to heaven, that is, the way of penance and
mortification, in which few do walk; and therefore so few are saved, and so
many damned, as there are. Therefore say; o my Jesus, I will submit hereafter
my, proper judgment, and will, to all, for love of thee; I will esteem the
judgment, and advise of others, in matters of virtue, and the good of my soul;
better then my own, and will be ruled by them. O my dear Jesus, thou were
always resigned to the will of thy heavenly Father; I will therefore
hereafter, be in all things, resigned unto thee; thy will be done of me, my
God, not mine; send whar crosses, temptations, or siknesses, thou will, upon
me; I will accept of them willingly, as from thee, for my good; o Jesus, grant
me to be for ever conformable unto thee, and to my Superiors, and Ghostly
Fathers, for love of thee, for thou have appointed them in thy place, over me;

26. To conclude; if any foul motion, Note.
or suggestion shall trouble or molest you; be not grieved in mind, and do not
afflict your soul, but suddenly, and sweetly (when you perceive it,) divert
your imagination, and cast the eyes of your soul, on the bleeding wounds of
your dear Lord, and Savior, Christ Jesus; and say, o my Sweet Jesus, thy holy
body and flesh, is so tormented, and torn for the pleasures and delectations
of my wicked flesh, and shall I offend in this, and put thee to the same
torment again? For thy Apostle says, that he Heb. 6. v. 6.
who sins, does Crucify the again; far be this from me, my God; I do
choose rather to endure all torments yea, death it self, then once consent to
this. Short is the pleasure, but eternal the pain and punnishment; O Jesus I
will prefer thy love, before all the pleasures of this world, and the foul
delights, of my corrupt flesh. I do abhor thee, o Satan, and all thy vnpure
suggestions.

27. And if you see, that so beholding our Saviors wounds, you are not freed;
you may cast your thoughts on the fiery flames of hell, which many do suffer
there, for that sin; and say, O Who would endure willingly those cruel
flames for ever, for a momentall pleasure? o Lord, my God, send me all the
torments of this life, rather then come thither.

28. At other times, you may lift your eyes to heaven, and think on the
endless joy, delight, and glory, which many do there possess, for abhorring
sin, and the pleasures of this life: and keep the eyes of your soul fixed on
these objects, as long as you can possibly; for that will cause you forget the
foul representation, by reason our natural powers, are moved by the
representation of things, which are in our imagination, so that if the
imagination be employed about any object seriously; it makes her forget other
objects which troubled the soul;

29. And observe this well; that if you find a natural pronesse in your self
to that sin, or did in your days formerly offend, in it; when you are in
prayer, and do consider your sins past; never enter into any particular
consideration of the circumstances of this vice; as how, or in what manner you
offended? or how wickedly, on small occasions, you offended God, in that sin?
thinking by aggravating the sin, and circumstances, to move your self, to
more contrition, and greater hatred, to that vice. do it not, for the devil is
cunning, and when you think to move your self (by representing the horror of
those foul acts past,) to hatred of them, and more piety, he will move you to
carnality, having that occasion, and well knowing your natural disposition,
and inclination to it; therefore though you had sinned ever so much, in that
Kind; call no particulars to mind; but in a round and general way humble your
self before God, and acknowledge that you offended in that sin; make acts of
contrition, desire pardon, and pass it over so. and if by that very general
memory of it, you find your self never so little inclined, as is said;
instantly divert your imagination, on some other object.

30. So, to conclude if any passion or sense, move you to the least
imperfection, forthwith, you must suppress it, and make some virtuous acts, to
encourag you the better to overcome it; and thus, this garden is sowed and
planted by continual godly thoughts, and practice of virtuous acts.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
Wherein the whole substance of the purgative life does consist.
1. A Man that in any faculty, art, or trade, knows not where with, or in
what particular, to being; will never know well, how to go forward. Therefore I
place here the degrees by which you may proceed in order, according to what
hitherto is said in this part;

2. The first is, Renunciation, the second, Renunciation. Math. 19. v. 11.
abstraction, the third, Introuersion, the fourth and last Abnegation. You know
that our Savior gave this document of renuntiation unto us, in the gospel,
when the wealthy youngman came unto him, and demanded how he should gain the
kingdom of heaven, our Savior answered, keep and observe the commandments;
the young man replied, that he always did so: to which our Savior said; if
thou will then be perfect; go and sell all that thou have, and follow me; as
if he said, if thou intend to live a good secular life, and gain heaven
afterward, it is sufficient to observe the commandments; But if thou do
intend to gain perfection, and attain to very high and great glory after this
life; thou must first and before all things, forsake all that thou have, in
this world; and then follow me; how? by abstraction, that is, not only
betakeing Abstraction.
himself from the pleasures, wealth, honors, familiarityes and frendships of
the world, and all that are in it; but also from the affection, which he had,
or has to any of those, as not to permit his mind run upon any of them,
though never so near or dear unto him; nor to be solicitous, for his parents,
and what concern them, but to pray for them, and no more;

3. For now he is like to a man, that is taken in the high way, robbed of his
pursse, and left tied, with several cords, by the robbers, and at length, by
degrees having by struggling and great labor untied himself, got loose and
free from all, and so did save himself. this soul in the high way to her
country. which is heaven, is taken by the world, the flesh, and the devil, they
ty hit fast, by so many affections to this and that, thing; this ^or that vice,
and perhaps robbed of all grace; but now, by much struggling with herself, and
great labor, she ouercometh all, and by renunciation, and abstraction, fre'eth
herself, and is laid at ^iberty, and got home to her own house; which is
done by the third degree, Introuersion: for by this, she (all other
Introuersion.
cares set in oblivion,) getts within her self in prayer, where she begins, to
consider and examine all things of her life, and finding so many evils, and the
danger she does stand in, of eternal damnation (if God whom she offended, be
not in some King satisfied, and his wrath, which she by sin deserved,
appeased) she becomes sorrowful, repents, does penance hate's sin,
frequent's the Sacraments, implore's Gods favor, and mercy, makes strong
resolutions, to dye, rather then offend God again; and to abhor in her
self, all that were the occasion, or cause of her offending God; this is done
by the last degree, Abnegation, Abnegation
by which she does for go and renounce every thing, that may give content to
her nature; hence she is in war^e with her self, now mortifying her outward
senses, then one passion, then in other, now breaking her will, in one thing;
submitting her proper judgment, in an other; then taking away one e^il custom,
then an other; one time fasting long, an other, watching long in prayer: when
you desire much to sit, then to stand, when you desire to sleep, except your
time appointed, stand with your hands stretched for thin a cross, when in
prayer you desire to lean, for ease; the^ kneel upright, when you sit, incline
no^ forward; nor for commodity put you back against any thing; when you a^ dry
or thirsty, and desirous to drinke^ abstain till your due hour; ad to, these*
disciplines, haircloth, and such other mortifications; as your Ghostly Father
o^ directour shall appoint. Thus the soul begins to put her inward house or
common wealth in good order; which does consist in a peace and subjection of
all senses, powers, appetites, and passions.

4. In fine a beginner must be an open enemy to himself, neither sparing nor
fauourning him self in any thing what soever, until he acquire the upper
hand, and mastery over himself, and make his body, senses, powers, and
passions, subject to the spirit, and he must fight faithfully, never yealding
for favor or friendship, any rest, or conniuance to his body, senses, or
desires of nature, for content, gust, delectation, tenderness, proper
estimation, or honor; but like to the true servant of God, and champion of
Christ, hold the sword of mortification, in his hand always naked, ready to
cut of the least motion, of any appetire, passion, or sense, inward or outward,
that shall appear to move or stir disorderly, or against his good
resolution, and the law of God.

5. Yet I do not say, that they who are weak of body, shall use these bodily
mortifications; but those only, which they may do without prejudice of their
health; as to keep their eyes, senses, and passions, in continual
mortification, and subjection; which with great ease may be done with out any
hurt to their health: as to be silent, to be retired, to be patient, humble,
and so forth: by this example, you may also well conceive, the duty, and office
of the purgative life.

6. You know, that a young colt, newly brought from his dame, and the company
of other colts; is wild, unruly, and intractable; yet by beating, and
laboring, him every day, for a certain time, i^ the round, until he be
weryed, cause^^ him to fear, and leave of flinging, casting behind, and
leaping; and at length ^^ takes the bridle, though with difficulty; and a while
after, he permits the saddle to be put on; then, to be shod; at last, his
ridder to sit upon him; and when he is thus mortified, and pliable; the rider
begins gently to go with him, to stroke, and make much of him, and then to
teach him, either to amble, trot fairly, or what else he please.

7. In like manner, the man who i^ newly brought from the world, is as yet
wild, and very untoward, and can be brought to nothing, but by mortification,
austerityes, and pennances, to fear God, and eternal damnation; by which, he
begins, to submit him self, frequent the Sacraments, endure correction, is
guided by the bridle of his Ghostly Father, or his directours instruction, how
harsh soever it be to nature, or his will; he thus mortified in his body,
passions, and senses; his soul by inward sorrow for his sins, and a good
confession, is purified, Gods wrath appeased, his friendship acquired, grace and
mercy obtained; and all inward, and outward, well composed, and disposed, to be
taught, to go on fairly, and sweetly, in the way of virtue; which is the part
of the illuminatiue way, being its proper office, as you shall see in the
following chapters.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
Of the Proficient or Illuminatiue way;
1. NOw that you have seen in the purgative way, how the soul must be
mortifyed, and purified; in this, she is to be made understand, what virtue,
is, that must be set in that garden, and how to bring it to growth, and
preserve it, until it come to perfection; which is done by the last degree;
for in the first, the soul is but animal, as is said, but in this second, she
is made rational, and in the third, spiritual; also, in the first, she is a
beginner, in this second, a proficient, in the third perfect; likewise, in the
first, she is purged, in the second, she is illuminated; and in the third, by
love, to God united;

2. You must observe, that some, do not consider, what it is to go forward in
due order, in the way of virtue and perfection; but before they well know
themselves, or what mortification is; they go on in the exercises, of this
second degree, by reason whereof, their passions are unmortified, their senses,
not heeded, or well governed; and consequently, though they use prayer. for
many years, they remain with small profit, and little virtue;

3. Wherefore you must not presume to ascend to this second degree, until you
be well examined; whether you are sufficiently purged, from all affections
toward the things of this world, well mottified in your senses and passions,
and come to the true knowledge of your own insufficiency, ignorance, vileness,
baseness, and nothing; for this is the scope and end of all the exercises of
the purgative life; and then if your directour think it fir, you may go
forward to the second degree;

4. But if you have not your directour at hand, you may examine your self
thus: first, whether you find in your self a true feeling, and knowledge, of
your own baseness, and nothing; and of Gods omnipotency, who alone can do
all things; and of whom, you depend, in your being, life, and whatsoever else
you have; then; whether out of this feeling knowledge; you esteem your self
nothing, and believe that you are to be so esteemed, by all others; and whether
you find, out of this knowledge of your baseness and nothing, a holy hatred
against your self, for offending so great and good a God; on whom you do so
depend: and whether thence, you would rather dye, and endure any torments then
with deliberation venially offend, his divine Majesty; also whether you
perceive, that servile fear, of hell, death, and judgment to be much decayed;
and that the meditating upon them, is loathsome, by reason they make the soul
too heavy, and pensive; likewise whether you find your soul (in prayer) incline
rather, to love, then fear; and to consider Gods benefits, then his
punnishments; and whether you find a desire, to gain virtue, by the imitation
of Christ our Savior, and a promptness and forwardness in all that belong to
the service of God; and a serenity, and freedom of spirit, in your exercises.
by these tokens, you may understand, and know that your soul is indifferently
well purged, and made clean; and so may pass, to the second degree, or
Illuminatiue way;

5. It may be well called the illuminatiue way, by reason the dark clouds of
sin, are dispersed, and the tempestuous winds of the vnmortifyed passions,
which obscured, blinded, and troubled the understanding, are now appeased,
ceased, and decayed, by the exercise of the first degree. every one knows by
experience, that passion troubles and blinds the understanding; so that a
man cannot see, or know well, what he says or does; neither does he proceed
then, according to reason; consider a man or woman much in love, or in a
vehement passion of anger; and you shall find, that they are so overcome by the
passion, that often, it seems, that they are rather beasts, then reasonable
creatures;

6. But now that the soul has got over the hedge, from the foul miry way,
wherein she was, into a dainty plain, and from that winters night, to a summers
day; and that the tempestuous operations of the passions, are gone; the
understanding even in his native light, does now begin more seriously to work
according to reason, and chiefly, the sun of justice, casting his rays and
beams, in this summers day upon him, by which he is enlightened, so, that he
plainly see's and perfectly obserue's the great misery the poor soul was in;
and that, only, by the practice, and exercise of virtue, she can be preserved,
and kept, from returning thither again; then by degrees, this soul increasing
in purity, by the exercise of this way or state, gains a facility, content,
and sweetness in prayer, and many illuminations, and divine illustrations, by
which she is well instructed, how all that is in this world, is but vanity, and
has an end; and that only virtue and a godly life, has endless glory; for a
rewatd; this causes her to affect virtue, and really to set upon it to gain it;

7. But here you must note, that though in the first degree, or purgative
state, acts of virtues are practiced, as well as in this state, yet there is
very great difference betwixt the manner and motive of both; for in the first;
virtues are practiced, not for themselves, or their worth; but in as much as
they serve for the ouercoming, mortification, or extirpation of some vice or
passion; but in this; they are practiced, desired, and loved, for their own
worth, and excellency; which was unknown in the first degree, for want of that
supernall light, which is had, in thi^ state; and therefore it is well called
the illuminatiue state, and the proficient; for the soul now taking an
affection to virtue, understanding its worth, with courage and alacrity of
spirit, resolves to gain it, (happen what may,) by the frequent consideration
and imitation of the life and vertue^ of Christ our Savior. and so by the
daily practice, and exercise of the acts, of those holy virtues, she profits,
and goes from virtue, to virtue, until she has gained a great profit, and
treasure in the degrees of virtues, and of merit.

8. Therefore it may be well called the state of the proficient, or those that
are profiting in virtue, and the spiritual life; many other better reasons you
may find in diverse authors, or books, written of this subject; but these at
present, may suffice;

9. The first exercise of this state, is, to keep as near as can be, a
continual presence of God, as the fundation of all the rest; the next, is
solitude, or frequent retirement from all occasions of distractions; the third,
the reading of good books, and use of much prayer; the last; the practice of
virtues, by the imitation of our Savior, who said', go and sell Math. 19. v.
22.
what thou have and give it to the poor and follow me; that is: imitat me in
my life and virtues:

10. The benefit of the presence of God, is unspeakable, it preserves from
distractions, and causes recollection, it disposes a man well, and helps to
pray with ease, and content; it gives courrag in difficultyes, and light to
know truths; it edgeth on to virtue; it moves forcibly, to the imitation of
good; it gains familiarity with God, and inflameth the soul with his divine
love.

11. Foe the soul that is in love, thou^ never so little, will desire time and
pla^ convenient, to confer with her bel^ued; therefore she endeavors to
g^^ from company, and other occasions, and retire her self to some solitary or
private place; there to read of her beloued's virtues, and perfections, or the
lives of those that loved him; which is the ne^^ degree, and then she does
begin to consider what she read; and in this, she spends not a little time;
that is in prayer. for the more she considers those things, the more she is
desirous to gain them; which is by the imitation of her beloved, an^ the
exercise and practice of those mo^^ excellent virtues, which she has
considered and seen in him.

12. Thus, by degrees, this garden is daily bettered, the sweet herbs and
fair flowers brought to increase; for it is the office of this state of life,
to bring the soul forward in virtue and all piety; and with more heed and
care, to preserve those plants, from the iniuryes of the wynd, and weather, as
good gardeners do; covering with earthen pots, glasses, straw, and other
things, the herbs, flowers, and fruit, which are precious, until the weather
grow warm, or be so temperat, that they need noe longer ^^helter; for the
wynds of temptations of either the world, the flesh, or the devil, who is never
at rest, (some times God so permitting) do blow so strong and sharply, that
they penetrat to the very heart, and are able to destroy all;

13. Therefore you must place as a wall of defense, before them, the exemplar
life of our Savior and cover them over with his love, least they should be
nipt by the frost of pusillanimity, and withered with the sharpness of the
wind; for when a temptation comes, and nature, with the austerity of these
exercises, grow's cold in Gods service; then casting your eyes upon the
exemplar life of Christ, and that great love of his to us, covering all his
actions, (as his humility, he being set at naught, and despised; his patience,
being with many iniuryes and reproaches abused, whipped, and scurged; and his
perseverance in suffering; and the exercise of all virtues even till death on
the cross; and all for example and love of you) instantly you are eneouraged
to endure all, follow his example, reject all temptations, go forward in your
holy exercise, and never yeald to the excuses of nature, nor desires of flesh
and blood, for love of him, who so dearly loved you; and thus love covers
your actions, and does lead you on, in the way of perfection, and solid
vettue; preserving you from danger in all occasions, and causing all your
labors, not only, not to be troublesome, (though with some contradiction of
nature) but also, to be done with facility and delight.

14. For the Passions and inclinations of nature, are indifferently well
mortified, and subdued; and therefore they do not rise in rebellion, with any
vehemence; and if they do, the devil so moving them, suddenly by acts of the
contrary virtue, as with a scourge they are forced, as slaves, to be subject,
quiet, and at rest: so that the devil perceauing such great care, and
vigilance, fears to tempt, or move any passion; because he see's those stout
champions of Christ, gain the victory, more and more, over them selves, and
him, to his great confusion: and thereby their virtue and merit to increase,
which to him is no small affliction. and on the other side: Christ our Savior,
considering this so great diligence, and fidelity, of his servant, he being the
true sun of justice does shine over all the garden of this soul so
graciously, that she is wholly illuminated, comforted, and with the rays of his
divine love, so warmed, and heat, that the flowers begin to sprout and show
themselves; and then one may be discearned from the other; as one, to be
patience, another humility, and so of the rest; so that the gardener finds in
his soul virtues showing themselves, and without any pride, does acknowledge it
to be so; and that it is the special gift of God, to whom he does attribute
all good, praise, and thanks; for he well knows, himself to be a mere
nothing, and all together unprofitable.

15. But now that this gardener perceaueth those fair flowers sprouting, and
showing their beauty and goodness, his whole mind, runns upon this; and he
takes no content, nor pleasure but in walking in this garden, and delighting
himself with the fairness, and sweet odours of those flowers. at one time he
does walk in the alley of humility; then, in that of charity; afterward, in
that of patience; so visiting all; every week making choice of one virtue, in
which he does intend to exercise himself, that week; that so, he may bring
them daily to more perfection;

16. O How often does he long to se^ them come to their perfect growth? o how
many are his consolations and heavenly visitations, by the sweet inspirations
of the Holy Ghost? now the fame of this fair garden is come to the ears and
knowledge of the Lord of the soil, Christ Jesus; whose delight is to be with
Prou. 8 v. 31.
the sonns of men; and therefore rejoices to find this place, and commodity,
to be familiar and conversant with them; he often goes thither, and takes
great content to see, and participate of the fairness and sweet odours of
those virtuous flowers; he admireth the great care and vigilance, of the
gardener, in keepeing this garden clean from the least sins, and bringing it,
to so great purity, by frequent mortifications, and sincere confessions; and
you may be sure that his coming thither, is not in vain, nor without profit to
the gardener; for at every visit, the gardener receives some token of his
affection; and some particular gift, from his divine Majesty; and, by his so
often coming, he causes the gardener to be so familiar with him, that he tells
him, the value and worth of those flowers, and how much he does esteem them;
and that he is fitting even for their worth, to dwell in his heavenly palace.

17. The soul perceauing this great affection of her Lord, and considering the
unspeakable happiness, she may come unto, by these means; desires more and
more to please him; and now to loath the things, of this world, which are but
transitory shadows; and to forsake utterly all pastime, secular company, and
conversation; her talk is wholly of spiritual things, and such as tend to her
spiritual profit, and the honor and glory of God; all that has not this
sauce with it, is more troublesome to her; then a most bitter potion to a
stomach, that taking it, cannot be at rest, until it be cast up again; and
therefore to shun all these occasions, she betaketh her selse to more solitude
and retyrement; and when there she call's to mind her life past, and the time
formerly spent in pleasure, and vain fooleryes, (which brought no profit, but
much hurt and loss, unto her, by them having offended this her dear and
loving Lord, who is so gracious and good, as to make such esteem of her, being
so miserable;) her sorrow is great, her tears many, not so much flowing from
her eyes, as from the Fountain of love, which springs within her, and her
heart through grief and love, is ready to burst, and annihilat it self.

18. Now the light is greater and she more plainly understands those things of
God, which may induce her to love him in a high degree, and it makes her heart
tender, and inflames it with reciprocal love, and a great desire to imitat the
life and perfections, of our Savior; and to print them deeply, in the most
intimat of her soul; for he is the true pattern o^ all perfection. it is not
in the understanding of any, to conceive, nor in the eloquence of the tongue,
to express, the comfort, and joy of mind, and the admirable feeling, this
sweet soul, that is come so far, has often in prayer.

19. True it is, that she is not as yet truly and perfectly mortifyed, for it
is not sufficient, to have renounced the world, and all things else, with more
perfection, and stronger resolutions, and to use more retyrement outward and
inward, and greater austerity toward your body then in the first degree; but
here you must go a little higher to examine, and mortify your affections, even
in spiritual, things; and withdraw your self from their sensual delights,
for as David said; Ps. 61. v. 13.
if riches (of delight) flow upon you, put not your heart or affection on
them; that is, go not to prayer for the tenderness of heart, and sweet
delight, which you find in it; neither must you the longer therefore continue
in it, nor practice those virtues, by multiplying their acts daily, for the
comfort and great content you have thereby; but purely, for that you know,
these exercises to be pleasing unto his divine Majesty; and that you desire
only to do his pleasure, and holy will in all things; come life, come death,
come pain, come joy, come temptation, come consolation, come aridity, and
desolation, or what else may happen.

20. Go on then with alacrity of spirit to gain sollid virtue, that will not
be cast, by any tempest to the ground, consisting in a perfect conformity,
through love, (and not for those comforts and consolations) to Gods Holy will;
for though the inward illuminations, comforts, and divine visitations, be
great, and many; yet his divine Majesty, for our trial and good, does some
times, withdraw himself, that the sun shines not, and the poor soul
remains in darkness, not knowing what to do, and the more she endeavors
to have that wonted sweetness (which did allure her to frequent prayer, and
other exercises,) the less she feels and finds them; so that unless from the
beginning you labor to carry your cross, and follow our Savior, as well in
the painful sweat, as in the joyful glory of Mount Thabor (by not seeking
these comforts, but solidly with resignation in all occurrents, to go on
stoutly in your intended way, until you attain to that true perfection, which
you aim at; that is to please, and honor God, in your exercises, rather then
use them for any commodity, content or intrest of your own) you may be
deceived, and void of true virtue.

21. For such comforts, under the shape and pretense of hidden sanctity, are so
mingled with our spiritual proceedings, that though they may be a good mean
to help us forward, in the service and love of God; yet by reason of our self
love, and particular interest, which are concomitant it will be better to
neglect them; or at least not affect them; As for example; in prayer you find a
tenderness of heatt, sweet tears, fervor, and delight in your works, and a
great facility to overcome any difficulty, which then might happen, by reason
of the sensual gust and joy, which you inwardly feel; all this not proceeding
from any acquired, or infused habit or gift, or the true love of God; but
really from that sensual sweetness, which is agreeable to our nature, self
love, and proper interest; which is augmented by those pleasures and delights;
and therefore we willingly do these exercises that our sensual content may be
the more; and thus the love of our selves, and proper content, does increase,
and not the love of God, or true virtue; and yet this runns on, very hiddenly,
under the pretense and color of virtue, and the love of God; which is a great
hurt and impediment to our spiritual profit, and may bring many vain Glorious
conceits, illusions, and deceits of the devil to the soul.

22. Therefore to distinguish these two loves in your self, and know by which
of them, you are moved to your exercises; is that, which you must examine, and
watch after; and in all; purify your intention, directing it, to please God in
solid virtue, rather then for any content you find in those gusts, which do
move, us often to force our selves, to things we cannot reach unto; chiefly
when they are from the devil: as to make great resolutions and purposes in that
present content, to do some great pennances, as it were for Gods sake, which
afterward we are not able to do, or our nature cannot bear; which is but a
trick of Satan, to hinder our true spiritual profit; and by some difficulty
occurring, or sickness, to put us back from what we began, and intended; which
was; with the grace of God to gain true perfection. to prevent this danger, we
must with great humility, and submision, resign our selves wholly to God, and
strip our selves naked from all affection to such spiritual gusts; desyring
(without any proper interest) solid virtue for it self, and Gods glory: and to
take more content in crosses and spiritual afflictions, then in those delights
which do hinder true virtue, and nourish self love and proper esteem, being
affected.

THE X. CHAPTER.
Of a more spiritual and perfect mortification.
1. NOw let us go on in this matter of mortification to the Superior part of
the soul, for the former is in the sensitive or inferior part; God is wont to
give many illuminations, a feeling knowledge of truths, and great desires of
true and solid virtues, to a soul, that does use to mortify her self, and
prefer his glory, and conformity of her will, to his, before that sensual
gust or delight; and even in this, the soul may glut her self; for the
spiritual delight, which comes with them, is without comparison far beyond
that former, and therefore requires more vigilance, and a mortification, and
renunciation, of a higher quality and order, then all that has been spoaken
of; for, though those illuminations, and the content which proceed from them,
be from God, and really are a very good mean, to gain solid virtue, and union
of our will, with the will of God, by conformity and love; yet if we be not
careful; but give way to our natural disposition, which is inclined to
embrace such illuminations, and spiritual comforts, with a great deal of
inward satisfaction and content; we shall find as in the former, our own will,
and a self complacence (though hiddenly) in them. and then the soul does
endeavor to dispose all her powers and affections to dilate themselves for
augmenting those illuminations, and persuades her self, that they do
increase, as her desire increases, and that they are great gifts proceeding
from God, more the^ were at first; whereas there is no suc^ thing, neither do
they increase, but he^ greedy desire to enjoy more and more gusts, proceeding
from that light and those illuminations, does increase, which does discover her
self love and proper unmortified affection, which she did not observe,
thinking it to be a gift from God, which is not; and that she had some infused
virtue, or gift, which did move her so much forward, in those desires; whereas
really, it was selfeloue, and her own proper interest; by which it appeeres
how many deceits and errors she may easily full into.

2. And commonly when his divine Majesty sees the soul to esteem this her own
complacence, more, then his love, or conformity, with all indifferency, to his
holy will; he does withdraw this light, and his concourse; so that she is left
in aridity, and knowe's not what to do for want of firm and solid virtue,
which attend's to nothing, but the pure will, and glory of God; and thus self
love shuts these sweet flowers, and hinders them from sprouting fairly,
and consequently, she cannot discern the one, from the other, nor the true,
from the false. But what remedy for this malady? what cure for this sore? what
evasion, from this danger? partly that which is formerly said, that when the
soul perceives these feelings in her self, and that great light, she must not
desire, to augment them; but with submission prostrat her self, and with true
humility even annihilat her self, acknowledging her unworthiness and nothing,
before that great Majesty of God, and that she is wholly resolved not to
pleasure her self in any thing, but in doing his holy will, with all
indifferency; and that by reason of her great vileness, and baseness, she is
unworthy of any heavenly visitation or consolation, be it never so little; much
more of those so great illuminations and comforts, of which she is very well
contented to be deprived, if his majesty shall be so pleased.

25. Thus she does purify, her intention, reject all self love, proper
complacence, and deprive her self willingly of Gods gifts and comforts, for
God; and not only acquire firm and solid virtue; but also she thereby does
dispose her self so well, that God often by special influences, and purer
light, does lead her forward in the true way of perfection; and then this
error appears so plainly, that the soul, admireth at Gods great goodness
and bounty, to whom she refers all praise and thanks, with great feeling,
and acknowledgment, of his mercy, and favor; who does daigne to incline
himself to visit so vile and abject a thing as she is; and then does offer her
self totally to his divine Majesty, ready to be deprived of all comforts and
gifts, what soever, so that she may but never so little please him, and augment
his glory; and thus she is truly transformed into God more perfectly then ever
before.

3. Let all spiritual souls note this well, for it will be a comfort to them
in time of need, and these like occasions, to know this rule, Observe
likewise, this general rule to know self love, and your proper intrest, even
in the highest contemplation, and greatest visitation of God: that, when you
perceive any of them in prayer, and that your joy is* excessive great, and your
love to God, and desire to serve him, and be wholly united to his divine
majesty, does increase; and suddenly you are called from that high
contemplation, and sweet content with God, by obedience or charity, to do some
secular business, which, may be the occasion of many distractions, and a
hinderance to your sweet repose; though beneficial to your neighbor; if you
then find a repugnance, disquietnesse, or any anxiety, to be brought from the
content you were in; or fear to loose it, by those occasions; you may be sure,
your spirit i^ not mortified; and that you have not acquired the true
abnegation of your self; for here you see, how much you are tied to self
content, and your spirit is not free, at liberty, nor resigned perfectly, to
the will of God; for you must leave God, for God; that you may more perfectly
please God, in all things; and be more deeply united, and by love transformed
into him, which regards no commodity, or discommodity, but only to please and
content her beloved. all we aim at, and wherein true virtue and perfection
does consist, is, to please God, and do his holy will in all things; what then
should I care, whether I be in the active life employed, or in the
contemplative, when* I know that, to be the, will of God? wherein can I honor
God more, then in doing his will? is it not more reasonable and perfect; then
to do my own will, though it be to praise God in a high degree, by reason of
the content I take i^ it? the best, is always to be preferred; and so must
Gods will, be in all things; the spirit of God brings a continual tranquillity,
and peace with it, to the soul; but that anxiety is from self love, and the
enemy; and therefore to be rejected; for this self love, and proper interest,
are found hidden often in the most heroic acts of virtue, that may be; even in
a desire of martyrdom, when this desire is accompanied with solicitude and
anxiety, which in every thing is to be observed.

27. Moreover, you must be careful not to trust to your self, nor your own
judgment in any thing, nor think that you have your passions truly mortified,
nor that you acquired any solidity in virtue, though your desires be great; and
your inward acts of virtues, be many, and that you have a great facility in the
exercise, and doing of all things, that are to Gods honor and glory; until in
several occasions, not so pleasing to your humor, you be well tried, and
proved; for in the try all, the truth will appear; and according as you find,
you may praise God for his benefits, or humbly acknowledge your frailty, and
inconstancy in good, if you failed, and found not in your self, that
mortification, which you thought you had, and ought to have; and above all,
endeavor to subdue your own will, and proper judgment: for they like so many
worms, will never leave of grating on the roots of those virtuous flowers, be
they never so fair; (if they be not very, well mortified;) and will never
permit them come to perfection: be therefore humble, and vigilant over your
self, and implore gods grace, and assistance, in every thing; without whom, as
you were nothing, and are nothing, so you can do nothing that is good, nor
overcome any vice, or passion, nor acquire any degree of virtue; the manner how
to practice the acts of virtues, and acquire them; you have seen in the
seventh chap. of this part; and shall see more perfectly, in the following
chapters.

6. You must also understand that it much avails, to place before our eyes,
the admirable lives, austerityes, mortifications, and rare virtues, of the
great servants, and Saints of God; to encourrag us, to go forward, in these
holy exercises; for many of them, men and women, though noble, tender, and
delicat, did not therefore favor themselves, nor yeald to the desires of flesh
and blood; but did mortify, and subdue themselves, in al^ things, and
occasions, for the love o^ God; but your chief meditations, must be, of the
passion, and virtues, of Christ our Savior, not as in the Purgative way; for
there, you consider the passion of our Savior, and his pains, as procured by
your sins, and that you are the cause of all his woe; and therefore you ought
to grieve for it, and do penance: for that you were so wicked, injurious, and
cruel against the Son of God; but in this, you consider it, as a benefit, and
a special favor, and token of his love toward us; for of mere love, without
any compulsion, obligation, or merit of ours, he did offer himself, to his
heavenly Father, to suffer those torments, and make satisfaction to him for our
sins, and the eternal torments which we deserved for ever in hell fire.

7. Then we must consider the manner of his life, passion, and death; to wit,
with so great humility, patience, obedience, and other virtues; which do shine
in him (above all others) who is the true pattern, of all virtue, and
perfection: and whom we ought to imitat in these virtues, and love him
tenderly, who so deerly loved us;

8. Then to meditat upon his benefits, as that of our creation of nothing, to
his own similitude, and likeness; and not a stone or beast; to be borne of
Catholic parents, nourished, bred, and brought up, in the Church of God, and
faith of Christ, and not a heathen, turk, Jew or heretic, which are out of
the Church, and in the state of damnation; (for, as they who were out of the
arck of Noe, were drowned, and none saved, but those that were within the Arck.
So none can be saved, that is out of the arck of Christ, which is the Holy
Catholic Roman Church, for it only is Catholic; that is, universal, or
universally throughout the world agreeing in unity of faith, and doctrine; and
it only, from the Apostles, to this very time* can show 1. Cor. 11. v. 28.
Ephesians. 4. v. 11.
its succession, in Bishops, Praelats, Pastors etc. as S. Paul writes to the
Corinthians, and to the Ephesians. By it only, Churches, monasteryes, and
Altars were erected, and true sacrifice offered unto God. by it only, in all
ages heresies, and heretics were sentenced, and condemned, and whom they
condemned, the whole world held, and still do hold for heretics; this church
therefore so continued, Matt. 28. v. 20.
and assisted by the Holy Ghost, is the firm pillar of infallible truth, as
the Apostle does affirm, which will continue 1. Timot'y 3. v. 13
to the world's end, and out of which there is no salvation; behold I am with
you all days till the consummation of the world, these are the words of God,
which cannot be falsified; this is that very Church, which our Savior, Christ
Jesus built upon a rock, which will never fail; Math. 16. v. 17.
and therefore he said, the gates of hell, shall not prevail against it; that
is, all the power of hell, shall not be able to deceive, or bring it into
error. this is the true Church, wherein these Bishops, Prela^s, Pastors etc.
were and are employed in preaching the gospel to all nations; in the
converting of infidells; in the governing, and instructing, of the faithful;
in the administration of Sacraments; in this Church, and in none other, there
were from the beginning, sacred professed Virgins, holy confessors, and blessed
Martyrs; in this Church only, God did, and still does manifest himself,
appeering to many of his servants, and by them working strange Miracles, to the
open view of the world, and prophesijng things to come; in this the most
learned doctors, and writers of the world were, and are, this only, is the
Church universally accepted of, and believed to be holy, according to that
article of the apostolical creed, I believe the Holy Catholic Church; all
the articles of faith are infallible truths, and always true, then it is
infallibly true, and all must believe, that there was always, is, and shall
be to the world's end, a holy Catholic, that is, universal Church, to wit, a
Society, or congregation of people through out the world, as a body under one
head, in one and the same belief, or faith, giving due adoration, and worship
unto God; this is that Church, which was, and is visible, which in the acts is
called, the Act. 19 v. 39.
legitimat or lawful* Church wherein controversies of religion must be
decided; this is the Church, to which our Savior bids us complain in like
occasions, Math. 18. v. 17.
and if he complained upon, will not hear the Church, that is, obey the
sentence of the Church, let him be (said Christ) to thee as a Publican, and
Ethnic; Out of which words I argue thus against the denyers of the visibility
and infallibility of the church. If there were not always a continued,
visible, and known church, how in difficultyes could any complain to the
church; for expect, a determination or decision of the controversy? also, if
the church in its decisions, and sentences in controversies, were not
infallible; why should any be bound to obey it, under so great a penalty?
likewise if none be bound to obey the decree of the church, why should the
disobedient, be sentenced by Christ him self, for a publican, and Ethnic, who
commands, that every child of the church, shall esteem him such. So that every
one, must shun them, as excommunicated persons, with whom, we may not eat,
drink, or converse; by which you see how falsely, these new sectaries, and
reformed gospellers, do tax the holy Catholic Church, with fallibility, and
error. for, since Luther (who was a member of the true Church) as a rotten and
putrified member, fell from this holy Church, the mystical body of Christ, and
way of life, by his errors and disobedience, to this his mother (for which he
was sentenced, and condemned for an heretic) and therefore according to the
command of Christ is to be esteemed as a Publican and Ethnic; his followers to
color their ill proceedings, and to defend their carnal liberty, and
disobedience to the true church, they allege, and say that the church can, and
did err; contrary to the very word, and promise of God; by which they deprive
themselves of all certainty of faith, church, and hope of Salvation. for if the
church that was holy, and acknowledged by the whole world for true; could, and
did err in faith according to them, their church can err in faith, and they
know not, but at this present they do err; and consequently, they are not
certain of faith, church, nor Salvation. neither is this to be admired that
they should err, 1. Cor. 1. v. 10 Romans 16. v. 17.
having so many sects distinct, and disagreeing betwixt themselves in the very
principles, and fundamental points of faith, which the whole world takes
notice of* whereas there is but one God, and Ephesians. 4. v. ^
one says, without which, it is impossible to please God, as the Scripture
does declare; (note this well) and without Heb. 11. v. 6.
pleasing God, there is no Salvation; so that they that are not certain of
their faith, are uncertain of their Salvation, but we Catholics do confess,
and truly believe, that our church is true, holy, and infallible, and that in
this, there is true faith, and Sacraments, by which all may be saved. this
being occasionally said, for your better instruction; I will return to the
matter I spoke of before, as all this were within a parenthesis, then consider
your conservation with such great providence and care, your redemption as is
said, with so great pain and love, also your vocation, by baptism, and after
actual sin, by holy inspirations, and the blessed Sacraments of penance,
and the body of our Lord, from your wicked ways, and sin, to the state of
grace. then the evil prevented, and good granted, with all other particular
benefits, which every one best knows in him self;

9. Also they may often meditat, and consider the attributes and perfections of
God, as that he is omnipotent, to do what he list, and whom none can resist:
immense, filling, and in himself including all creatures what soever,
Eternal, without beginning or end; wise in making so many varietyes of
creatures of distink natures, and the whole frame of this world, in so great
beauty, and order, comprehending and understanding all things, even the very
least, and most secret of our thoughts, Just without partiality; good, without
any imperfection; merciful, and bountiful to all; for, from him, we enjoy
what we are, and have, and so of the rest:

10. I do not therefore, say, that they may not, now and then, consider those
things, which belong to the purgative life; as sin, hell, judgment, death,
heaven, and their own baseness, and nothing; and do such pennances, as they
are able, or their state of life does require, with the allowance of their
directour, or Ghostly Father; for they, as a spur do awake, and quicken a
tepid, or dull spirit, to run forward in the way, and service of God; for we
are so miserable, by reason of the load, we carry; and our natural
inclination, ^o sensuality and proper commodity; that we always stand in
need of some helps, to encourrage and spur us on, to those things, which
are spiritual; and not so agreeable to our natural disposition; for we cannot
keep the bow always bent, least it burst; nor our spirit, in continual
contemplation, but must yeald to the necessityes of nature, whiles we live in
this mortality; as to eat, drink, and sleep: neither does the Eagle always
soar on high, and remain recreating her self in the purest and sweetest
air, but must some time descend to the earth, nature so requiring, which is a
heavy load; and therefore, we need many helps; for, what fear, cannot do;
some times, love may; and other times, what love, cannot; fear may; and for
this reason, it is often necessary that in all states, we use the meditations
which we find by experience do best help us in our occasions.

THE XI. CHAPTER.
Of the Presence of God, and what it is.
1. THis presence of God, as I take it, is a memory of God, or an application
of the mind, to God, apprehended, or conceived by the understanding to be
present intellectually, or imaginarily; the intellectual is, according to his
divinity; but this, according to his humanity. According to his divinity, by a
liuly faith, you conceive him, omnipotent, eternal, immense every where, in
all creatures, and comprehending in himself all things created, but cannot be
comprehended by any; of whom all do depend, and he of none; and that he is our
creator, beginning, and final end; Apoc. 1 v 8. Genesis 15. v. 1. Ephesians 11. v. 6.
the rewarder, and reward of all good works; as the holy Scripture affirms;
so that truly and really he is within you, and every where, about you, where
ever you sit, stand, or go; which you calling to mind, and considering, is an
intellectual presence, of God, recollecting, and moving the soul to great
reverence, adoration, thanks, praise, and love.

2. But when you conceive him according to his humanity, that is framing in
your mind some image representing him, as he was a child, lying in the stable
shaking with cold, or in his Mothers lap, sucking, or embracing her about the
neck, sitting among the doctors in the temple at twelve years of age, or
fasting in the desert forty days, or preaching and teaching, curinge and
helping the sick, and sore; or some particular point, or passage of his life,
passion and death; representing him thus, either within you, before you, or at
your side, is an imaginary presence of God. which you may easily understand by
this example; when you call to mind any friend, that is absent; you frame his
image, in your imagination, and you see him, in a manner present; and so
looking on him, with with your inward eyes, you may be moved to love him; and
some times, to grieve and lament for his absence; Christ our Savior thus
conceived; is an imaginary presence of God, and it is of great efficacy, to
move us, to bewail our sins, and to preserve us, from any, ever after; and to
seek after true virtue by his example.

3. The application of the mind, to the presence of God, may be diversely
practiced; first as one friend, with an other, taking content, that they are
together; or as two in love, much ioyed beholding each other, (their look
speaking its own language) so far, that without other words, or actions,
their hearts, are moved, their affection, inflamed; their joy, increased; and
being after this, separated, and one absent from the other, they feel a
sadness, a discontent, and unquietness within themselves; much more the soul
beholding her beloved, present in mind, (who is the most beautiful, amiable,
and loving spouse, that may be, and well understands the least inward motion,)
ought to take content, and joy in his presence, and be inwardly moved, and
inflamed with his love; this cause, being more noble, as being betwixt the
creat our, and his creature; God, and man; the soul, and her heavenly spouse;
and as this love, is far more excellent, (as being pure, and spiritual)
consequently, the absence of this her beloved, ought truly to make her sad, and
procure in her, a greater feeling of grief, then that other betwixt worldlings
does.

4. Also you may not only take content, in that presence, and mutual aspect;
which is the first degree, but likewise, you may come so near as to be
familiar, and converse with him, expressing by inward acts, your love, and
willingness, to serve and please him, in what you can; this is more forcible
to increase the affection; and if this presence of God be of the humanity, and
you beholding his wounds; how is it possible but you (knowing, that for love of
you, he was so wounded) will be moved to compassion, tenderness of heart, and
grief, to set him so pitifully abused?

5. But to be brief; you may consider God as your creator, and you his
creature, and so converse with him, as the Holy Ghost shall inspire; or as your
King, and you his subject; as your Lord, and you his servant; or as your
Father, and you his child; or as your beloved, and you his spouse; or as a
friend, and you his familiar; or as a physician: and you his patient; this is a
brief of the ways to observe the presence of God, Now what the duty of a
creature to his creator, of a subject to his King, or of a servant, to his
Lord, of a child, to his Father, of a spouse, to her beloved, or of a friend to
his familiar; and of a patient, toward his physician; needs no great
explication, for very few are ignorant of it; and daily experience, does teach
it. Observe, that what way soever, you conceive, or consider him, his goodness
and love to us, is such; that he will conform himself to our condition,
simplicity, or sagacity; that his high majesty, may not confound us; nor his
friendly familiarity, breed in us any disrespect, or irreuerence toward him;
until at length he bring us, to be of his; and by a true transformation of
love, become one and the same with his divine Majesty, if the fault be not ours.

6. Note that according to the dispositions of every one, they may observe what
sort of the presence of God they find most profitable; for some may profit more
by the intellectual, others by the imaginary; yet, though that be more noble,
this, notwithstanding is commonly to be more used, and is more profitable, by
reason it is more agreeable to our nature, and more forcible to move us, in
difficultyes, to overcome our selves; for we beholding his torments and pains,
and knowing that he endured, and suffered them, for love of us, and to make
satisfaction for our sins; and that we, and not he, deserved them; will cause
us to lament, and grieve for our offenses; crave with humble submission,
pardon, for them; do penance, subdue the passions, mortify the body, correct
our senses, and live a virtuous life; and be more thankful, and desirous to
serve and please his divine Majesty, then if we considered him only omnipotent,
immense, just and so of the rest, which is not so deep in our interest, as the
other; but whether you profit by one, or the other; what you make choice of,
keep it all day long, in your mind, as near as you can, according to one of
the ways formerly mentioned; so that wheresoever you be, he may be a witness
present, of all your thoughts, words and deeds: it is unspeakable, what profit
may hence arise to a careful soul.

7. There is an other presence of God supernatural, which his divine Majesty,
is wont to afford to pure souls, without any labor or indrustry of their
part; this brings a certain Majesty with it, yet nothing seen, but by an
inward light, and feeling, with one simple look, the soul is moved very
forcibly, and sweetly, to acknowledge him then present; and this leaves in the
soul an admirable respect, and reverence toward him: of this I shall speak
more in the third part God willing.

8. To conclude; by reason of our natural disposition, and inclination, to
think of the things, of the world and our own interest; being not as yet so
well mortified, practiced, and able to keep a continual and constant presence
of God: we must acknowledge heerin our frailty and weakness, and endeavor
carefully, to acquire it, by all means, possible; it will therefore avail,
and help very much, first, to practice it daily, then to have some motives to
bring it to our memory; as when the clock strick, instantly call to mind, your
presence of God, and by some inward act, address your self to him; do the
same, when the cock does crow, or any bell does ring. In the house likewise
wherein you dwell, it will be good, for the same purpose, to give a denomination
to the rooms of the house, of the passages of our Saviors life, and death:
(as to one, the place of his nativity; calling it the stable where he was borne
and laid betwixt an ox and an ass to an other, where he made his last supper
with his disciples, washed their feet, and ordained the most Blessed Sacrament
of the Altar, as a token of his love to us; to an other, the garden of
Gethsemany, where he prayed, and sweat water and blood; to an other, where he
was whipped: and so of all the rest,) that when you go into any of these rooms
you may call to mind, the mystery of that place, and inwardly do your duty to
his divine Majesty; there, with respect and reverence making an act of
humility, patience, silence, contrition, adoration, thanks, praise, love, and
o^ other virtues, which is nothing troubl^some, yet of great merit, and profit;
trul^ if you pass through the room where you see your Lord, or lady, master,
or mistrise, your hat, you instantly put of, and passing by do bow unto them;
why not then unto your God, whom you consider, and is there truly, according to
his divinity.

9, Also it will help, to have some few stones of beads (which we do use,
and call the presence of God of it) to hang where you, most usually put your
hands, that when you touch them, you may remember your presence of God; you may
likewise were a ring on your finger, with some notable mark, to that same
purpose; or a string upon the wrest of your hand, and such other ways, of
this kind, which may keep you myndfull in all occasions, and times, of your
presence of God; for they are most admirable and excellent ways. inspired by
the holy Ghost, and practiced by his holy servants, to keep them myndfull of
God alone; and forgetful of all whatsoever else: for in this degree, they
aspire to those things which are celestial and eternal; therefore it is
requisite to procure thus, the familiarity and friendship of this great God of
glory, who alone can grant what we pretend: for hence we put great confidence
in him; for a true and loving friend, as he is, being able, will never deny,
what according to reason is asked by him, whom he does love; this presence of
God (as is said) is worthily the fundation, of all virtuous buildings, it is a
treasure beyond treasures, a good beyond our understanding, and without which,
there is no union with God, nor any felicity in this, or the life to come. O
most sweet and amiable Jesus grant us, to have thee always present, and mind
nothing but thy sweet self alone, and that we may be truly transformed, and
absorpt in thee. who art our endless good and felicity. Amen.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
How the Presence of God, is to be daily applied to the practice of virtue.
1. FIrst, I suppose that your morning meditation is commonly of some point of
the life, or passion of our Savior, in whom all virtues are complete, and
truly perfect; and in imitation of whom, according to those virtues, the
exercise of this state does consist.

2. To the end therefore, that at all times, and in all occasions, your mind
may be employed, in this imitation, (as an art or trade, which you must not
forget to practice daily, if you intend to gain virtue and perfection) you
must have him, who is your pattern, present before the eyes of your soul, and
in him so present, consider what is to be imitated, and followed; so that you
see how the exercise of virtue must walk daily, as we may said, hand in hand
with the presence of God, as two loving compagnions, that may not be easily
sundred or separated. By this example it will more plainly appear;

3. When in your morning prayer, you have made choice of the presence of God,
which you intend to observe that day; and resolve upon what to meditat, and
pass the time wi^h him so present; (for it is not like that two loving friends
being present in one place, would be silent, and not speak to gether, or pass
the time in conversation about some particular matter; though some times they
do but behold one an other, as in contemplation) as if you made choice of our
Savior tied to the pillar, pitifully whipped, and extremely abused by those
wicked Jews; which is the presence of God, you intend to observe in mind, that
day; then you see, and consider with what great humility, he submits and
leaves himself, to the barbarous usage of those cruel, and base soldiers as
if he were not what he is; but a malefactor, deserving that usage and
punnishment; hence you resolve to imitat him, in this blessed virtue of
humility, that day, by the practice of inward and outward acts; and to humble
your self to every one without exception, as he did; and not to omit it, in
any occasion, that shall occur; though it be, but in small, or trifling
things, as to give the precedence to every one; to be familiar, and serve the
poor; if you be sitting; to rise up, at the intrance of any, to the room; to
offer unto them, your chair, or stool, or present to them, an other, if they
will not accept of yours; to give them way to sit first; and many other such
things, which seem of no moment, but truly are of great importance, being done
for the former end, and intent.

4. Also not to speak of your parentage, or your own qualityes in way o^
praise; nor contradict any in discourse, unless necessity or charity requires
it; and even, in the very manner of speaking show humility, and no pride, or
arrogance; as to speak mildly, and slowly, without bitter words, though it
concerned you, never so much; this for the outward, may suffice; beside doing
mean offices in the house, wherein you dwell; for a soul desirous of virtue,
will find out many occasions; as our holy Mother S. Teresa did, who, when she
had no other occasion, she remained in the quire after the rest of the Nuns,
and folded up hand somly all their mantles, and put them in their own places;
also the Holy Ghost will never be wanting, to assist a willing mind, and
inspire what to do, and how to find occasions, to exercise any virtue:

5. Now let us go to the principal, which is the inward practice of this
virtue, which must be done unfeignedly, by inward acts, and a familiar and
reuerentiall colloquy, with our Savior present, as is said; for, and
concerning this virtue, which in him you have observed, and thought worthy of
imitation; as thus.

6. O most humble Jesus, the true pattern of humility, whereas thou have so
humbled thy self, and little regarded thy worth and dignity, being what thou
art, Lord of all; I will (as in all reason I ought) humble my self, in all
occasions, and have no esteem of my self, though I had all the dignityes,
honors, qualityes, and wealth of this world.

7, O king of glory, most humble Jesus, thou do advise me to learn of thee,
that is, to imitat thee, because thou art humble in heart; therefore whereas
thou have now so humbled thy self to be abused, by those mean and wicked
soldiers, I will ever hereafter, submit and humble my self to all persons
whatsoever for love of thee; that by so doing, I may learn this sweet virtue
of humility, after thee;

8. O my dear and most humble Jesus, since thou have so vilifyed thy self, as
on thy knees to wash the feet of thy Apostles, I will always vilify my
self, and acknowledge before the whole world my baseness, and humbly serve the
meanest and poorest beggars, though it be to wash their loathsome feet and
ulcers;

9. O my sweet and loving Jesus, I do^ verily and truly believe, that the
poorest beggar, is richer in grace, and more deserving in thy Sight, then I,
who am a most perverse and wicked sinner.

10. O most amiable Jesus, thou did humble thy self, not only to base and
abject men, but also to the most co^temptible death of the cross; this thy
humility, does confound my proud heart and the pride of this deceitful world;
I will therefore hereafter think humbly of my self, and bannish from my
heart and soul, all pride and vain glory, to learn of thee, and gain this
blessed virtue of humility.

11. O myld and humble Jesus, I have just cause and reason to be humble, and
think meanly of my self, having nothing of my own, but sin and iniquity;
and if in me, there be any thing, that is good; it is thine, not mine, and to
thee the glory, and praise thereof, is due, and not to me.

12. O Lord, my God, thou did fly away, when the people would have made
thee King, (seeing thy wonderful works and miracles,) to make thy contempt of
worldly honors, and humble heart known, and manifest to those that loved,
hated, and feared thee; how then o Lord, can I without confusion, and shame,
desire any honor, dignity, esteem or praise in this world, being a mere
nothing?

13. O glory of the Angels, and joy of heaven, my Jesus, though thou were the
Lord of all; yet thou were contented, not to be esteemed, as a man, but a
worm, Ps. ^1. v. 6.
the scorn of men, and the out cast of the people, as thy Prophet does
affirm, much more I should desire, and be contented, to be set at naught, and
despised by all, being the scandal of men, and the worst of sinners.

14. O my God, thy Blessed Mother, Luck. 1.
for her humility, was exalted above all in heaven and earth; and shall be
called blessed for her humility, by all generations, as she does testify; grant
me o lesu this holy virtue by her sweet intercession.

15. O Lord, what esteem can I have of my self, being dust and ashes, and
meat for worms? yea, come from nothing, and shall return to nothing, if not
preserved by thee? far be it from me, my Jesus, to think, or esteem of my
self, but what I am, which is a mere nothing, and this esteem, I wish al^
would have of me, and no other.

16. O Lord, if the uncleanness of m^ soul, were known to all, as it is to
thee, then speedily they would despice, depart, and abandone me from their
sight and company, as of right they ought, which I do humbly and willingly
acknowledge and confess before the whole world;

17. O dear Jesus, if thy goodness and mercy were not to me, more then my
desert, the dung hill on earth, had been a place, to good for me, and hell
afterward for all eternity.

18. O most humble Jesus, by thy holy humility, and the admirable humility of
Blessed Mother, and the humility of all thy sants and servants, I humbly, and
with all submission, do pray, and beseech thee, to grant me this virtue of
true humility, that I may truly esteem my self, a mere nothing, the worst of
all men, and heartely desire to be so esteemed, and used by all;

19. Here dear Christian soul, you see, how sweetly the presence of God, and
the use, or practice of virtue, do walk, and go together; and how one
helps the other, to be continued; for his presence gives cause of speech;
and, familiarity, moves, and sweetly induces the soul, to those acts, by
which, she does express her mind, and desire, to imitat and gain what
virtues, she does perceive, are grateful to him, and in him do appear most
perfectly; and this continual, and familiar practice, of these virtuous acts,
keeps him present in her mind, to whom she does address her words.

20. But what understanding is able to conceive, or tongue to express, the
inward feelings, the heart's content, and comforts; which in this conference,
the soul does receive from his divine Majesty? truly none, but that really
humble soul, which esteems her self unworthy of any such; to these he gives
grace; upon these, his Holy Spirit does rest; in these, he dwells; with
these, he is familiar, and takes great content; and thus he is delighted to be
with the sonns of men, and not with the proud; for as the Scripture says, God
does resist the proud, and give grace to the humble; consider, Jacob 4. v. 6.
the lives of God's servants, and you shall find that by this path and way,
they went to heaven.

21. But some may say; it is a tediou thing, to be always keeping God's
presence, and making, and producing acts o^ virtues. I beseech those souls to
consider seriously, that the people of this world, do spend many years, to
gain ^ trade, or art, whereby to live, and keep their familyes, in
necessaryes; and with great care and diligence, by night and day, do practice
the acts of that trade, or art; there is none ignorant of this; for they see it
daily before their eyes, in all parts of the world. Why may not we then spend
some years using all care, and diligence, to use and practice the acts of this
celestial trade, by which we may gain such store of riches, and spiritual
treasure, that without difficulty, we may purchase an inheritance in the
kingdom of glory, where we may live plentifully, deliciously and joyfully for
ever?

22. Also, they may consider, that we can spend whole days and nights in the
company, and conversation of those whom we affect, and love, or do expect
benefit and profit by; why not then, with our good Jesus, our dear and loving
Lord, and redeemer, who desires nothing more, then to be with us? we should
desire his company and conversation, if we do love him, or desire our own
spiritual profit, and heavenly riches; for he stands not in need of us, or
our company, or conversation; but we greatly stand in need every moment of
him; for of him we depend in all that we are, do, and have; and therefore, if
not for love of him, at least for our own good, and profit; we should heartely
affect his company, and desire and procure his familiarity and love.

23. Moreover is it not an admirable thing, to see, how servants for little
wages do labor night and day, in cold, frost, and snow, and in the greatest
rain; to do the will, or command of their Lord, master, or mistrisse: and to
give them content, they often fast and watch long, yet they do all things
willingly; and many times, they do suffer very much to their own prejudice,
and yet esteem it nothing, so they know, that it will please their Lord, or
Master, the better to get their good will, and be continued in service, for so
small a reward. Yet our good God, our dear Lord and master, requires no such
great toil and labor of us, but easy and small things; as to do, what he
commands in the precepts of the decalogy; to keep a pure conscience and say a
few prayers, which is generally for all; but from others of* higher calling, he
requires likewise, mortified senses, passions, and appetites; and a care to
wait upon him, and keep him company; for which service, he does promise us,
(and will certainly perform it,) indeficent riches, glory, and life
everlasting, in his own Palace, among his dearest friends, and to be fed from
his own table for ever. and truly in this very life he does reward those
servants abundantly, with unspeakable consolations, and comforts, as is
formerly said.

24. Are not we then to be thought senseless, if we do not accept of this
service, being so much to our comfort, and profit? are not we to be blamed, if
we do not spend time daily in the practice of those virtuous acts, by which we
may gain the virtues, and purchase endless riches in glory? are not we to be
esteemed unworthy of his favor, familiarity, and gifts, whose company and
conversation we value not, nor desire, though he, even for our good, and
profit, desires ours. I do leave this, to the consideration, and censure of
any rational man;

25. It is no small happiness, that we can have access, when we please, to
our Lord God, and to make our wants and necessityes, and troubles of mind,
known unto him; which no prince on earth allows to his subjects, nor
greatest uassalls; let us then heartely desire, and love his holy company, and
spend our time with him; to give him that content, who so much desires it, for
our good. Let us also, to give him more content, keep great purity of
conscience which does highly please him, and will comfort us. and observe well,
whether you labor to amend, what once in your self, you did reprehend; and
whether you go forward, or backward, daily in your exercise, and practice of
virtue; for by it, you gain true humility;

26. And note for your better help, that which follows. to wit; if you
perceive any good in your self either of nature, or grace; instantly say to
your self the words of S. Paul, what have thou, 1. Cor. 4. v. 7.
which thou have not received, to wit, from God? if then thou have received
it from him, wherein will thou glory? as if he said; whereof can thou boast
having nothing of thy own; but what thou have is from God; thou art then to
give him the praise and honor of it, with thanks; and acknowledge all to be
due to him alone, and nothing to you. thus you humble your self, and keep
your self from pride, and vain glory.

27. Also if you perceive any thing, that is laudable, or good in an other; you
must not envy his happiness; but humbly praise God, whose gift it is; and
confess truly, that you are unworthy of any such;

28. Moreover, if you observe any vice, or imperfection in an other; you must
not therefore think amiss, or condemn him, in your mind; but endeavor to
excuse it, and with compassion and fear, say; his intention is good; but if it
be such, that it cannot be excused; suddenly look into your heart, and call to
mind, the great sins, which in your life past, you committed, fearing least
you also should be tempted; and say to your self; you can take notice of that
in him, which is but small, and perhaps before God is nothing, yea good; and
cannot remember these many great sins, which you committed against God, and
grievously offended his divine Majesty, and therefore justly deserved hell
fire; and even, now, at this present, if his holy grace, had not contained and
prevented thee, thou had done worsse then he; sweet Jesus preserve all from
offending thee.

29. Thus humility works, and by this practice, you shall think every one,
better then your self, and come to be familiar, and inward with your Lord, and
Savior Christ Jesus; whose company if you forsake not, he will never forsake
yours; for the garden of your soul is now beautified with this, and other
flowers, sprouting, and showing themselves, and beginning to breath forth their
sweet odours, that he being Lord of it, can hardly absent himself from thence,
he is so taken, and delighted with the pleasantness, fairness, and
Odoriferous smells thereof. and surely he will according to that saying of the
gospel, say unto thee, o good and trusty servant, since thou have been
careful, and faithful about a little, I will exalt thee, to a higher dignity,
and trust thee, with far Math. 25. v. 21. Euc. 19. v. 17.
more and greater talents, and bestow upon thee, supernatural gifts; as
infused virtues, and prayer, having formerly but what was acquired, by thy
labor and industry. according to this manner, the presence of God, is daily to
be used, and practiced with some one virtue, or other, by all that desire true
perfection.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
Of resignation and conformity to the will of God, and how to practice it with
the presence of God.
1. IN the former chapter, you had an example of the practice of humility, with
the presence of God, (it being the first stone, to be set in this spiritual
building, after the presence of God; which two, as lime and stone, makes a
solid fundation, for the edifice of virtuous perfection; and without which,
your spiritual building cannot subsist:) Now I will do the same with
resignation and conformity to the will of God in all things, for this with
facility brings the building to a great height of perfection.

2. For self love, and the disordered affection, and esteem which we have of
our selves, for want of the true knowledge of our miserable condition; is the
cause of all our mischief: therefore this old house of self love, and proper
esteem, must be pulled down and destroyed, before we can begin to build the
new, of the love of God, and virtuous perfection;

3. There is nothing, more efficacious to cast it down, and bring it to ruin,
then humility, for as S. Bernard says, speaking of humility; it is a virtue by
which with true knowledge of our selves, to wit, of our own misery and nothing,
we seem truly vile and base even to our selves; and do verily believe it to
be so; and that all others ought in truth to conceive the same of us, being a
mere truth indeed; which knowledge of so great baseness in our selves, takes a
way the occasion of pride, and loving, or esteeming any thing indiscreetly of
our selves; whereas we plainly see, nothing in us, love worthy, or to be
esteemed, by any; but rather what deserves an hatred, and auersion from our
selves, and others; and which is worsse, that we are so before God, and his
holy Angels, being as we are, wicked and contemptible sinners; which in their
sight, makes us more abominable, then the most stinking carrion, in the sight
of any prince, who passing by, cannot but turn his face a side, and shut his
nostrills, to prevent the feeling of the foul air, which thence does proceed.
for as is said in the first part, we are really, but a sink full of foul and
noisome stuff, and he who looks inwardly on him self, will experience this
truth. so that by this virtue and knowledge, self love falls to the grownd,
proper esteem, is quite extinct, and the fundation of true perfection settled
in the soul.

4. This fundation being so laid; it rests, that you know, how to bring this
building forward, and to your intended end; the most compendious, and brief
way that I can find, is; by conformity, or resignation of our will; in all
things, to the will of God; our Holy Mother S. Teresa says, that by this
virtue, we give unto God, the tree, and the fruit; the tree, of our own will,
which is the seat of love; the fruit; this love, and all our other affections;
so that we strip our selves, wholly of all proper interest, and are no more
our's, but his; and by him to be disposed of, as his own; for he that gives
all, reserues nothing; he that guieth tree and fruit, gives all, for nothing
more remains; and consequently, self love, and proper interest, with all
their edifices, falls to ruin, and then, the house of the love of God, may be
there set up, and fairly built; self love; does build Babylon, the city of
Satan, the place of confusion, and destroys heavenly Jerusalem, which is the
city of God, the place of peace; this is the soul in state of grace;

5. For what can destroy a virtuous soul, more then pride, vain glory,
boasting, envy, which proceed from self love; if I had not loved my self too
much, and my own proper interest, I should not be proud, set others at naught,
boast of my own talents, and doings, or envy an others prosperity, or care for
his preferment before my self, to any dignity, honor, office, wealth or other
benefit; and consequently, not build an habitation in my soul for Satan, who
is always where pride and envy is; for which, he was cast from heaven, to
hell. But by resignation and conformity, being truly observed, we give our
will, and all that proceed from it, to God, to be disposed of as his own, and
as please him; so that we must do nothing, but according to his will, to whom
we have willingly guien all power over us* by resignation;

6. But you may say; how shall I always know his will, that I may perform,
and do it? he has declared it sufficiently by these words; love God, above
Math. 22. v. 37.
all things, and thy neighbor as thy self; and how to love God, above all
things; he has showed in the first of the ten commandments. For said he, thou
shall love thy Lord thy God, with all thy Deuteronomy. 6. v. 5.
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy power and strength. By this you see how
to do his will; to wit, that your whole heart, soul, powers, and senses, be
only employed in his service, and those things, which are to his honor, and
glory, through true love: and to prevent all emulation, and envy; he said, and
thy neighbor, as thy self; which if you do; Babylon is utterly brought to
ruin, self love destroyed, the city of God, by love of him, and our
neighbor, fairly built; and the soul settled with so great indifferency, that
nothing can disturb her inward peace; for she care's not what may happen to
her, by reason she is resigned to be disposed of in sickness and health,
prosperity and adversity, desolation and consolation, all a like as his divine
Majesty shall be pleased; for her will is prompt and ready, to be conformable
to his in all things; and to desire nothing, but what he is pleased to dispose
of her.

7. But to come to, and acquire this holy virtue of resignation, and
conformity, you must do, as is formerly declared of humility: As when in your
morning prayer, you have considered our Savior sweating in the garden of
Gethsemany (which is your presence of God, that day) nature apprehending and
loathing the cruel torments, which he was to suffer, being then represented to
him; yet not withstanding, he said, to his heavenly Father; Father not my will
be done, but thine; as if he said; Father, though the torments, be very cruel,
and great, which in my passion, and death, I am to suffer, and that my nature
does abhor the pain, yet because it is thy will, I should suffer, I will
willingly endure all, rather then give way, to the desire of my nature; thy
will shall be done o Father, Luc 22 v. 42.
not mine; in which you have observed, his resignation and conformity, to the
holy will of his Father; and you do resolve to follow his example, and imitat
him, in this virtue of resignation, and to keep your will conformable to his
will, and to spend your time that day, in his holy company, using many acts of
that virtue, as thus.

8. O my dear Lord, and Savior Jesus. who in all things, and in all occasions,
were resigned, and conformable to the Holy will, of thy heavenly Father, I do
intend to follow, and imitat thee in this; and ever hereafter, to be resigned,
and conformable to thy holy will in all things, and upon all occasions, though
never so contrary to my nature and will.

9. O most amiable Jesus, the end, for which I am created, is, to serve thee in
this world, and to enjoy thee in glory, in the other; how can I serve thee,
unless I do thy will? or how shall I have the reward of glory, if I do not
truly serve, and do the will of thee my Lord and Master, who wilt reward every
one according to their desert, and merit? and what do I deserve if I do my
own Ps. 61. v. 13. Apoc. 22. v. 12.
will, and not the will of my blessed Master? truly nothing, but to be turned
off, as an unprofitable servant. therefore, I will be always resigned, unto
thee my God, and do thy will, and not mines happen what may.

10. O my sweet Jesus, by thy holy law, which is thy will, I will regulat all my
thoughts, words, and deeds, hereafter; least I should do any thing contrary
to thy expectation, or displease thy divine Majesty in the smallest matter.

11. O my good God, even according to natural reason, and for my own good,
and benefit; I ought to prefer thy holy will, before mine, for I know
certainly, that thou have created me, for thy self, and to be with thee in
glory, and do desire my salvation, more then I do my self, and do love
me more then I my self; if thy love were not more to me, then my own, I had
long since, been in hell; for I knew I should be punnished in hell, and
deprived of endless glory, by sin; yet not loving my own good and to do my
own will, contrary to thy command; I freely and often sinned, forsaking all
right, to grace, and glory, and gave my self, under the power of the devil,
who night and day does desire, and seek my destruction, and utter ruin; but
thou desiring my salvation, through love; (which I did not) did, with thy
own discommodity, and great pain, by thy Bitter Passion, and lamentable
death, free me from all my miseryes, and the power, and slavery of Satan,
making satisfaction, to thy heavenly Father, for my sins, and all those
griueous torments, and punnishments which I deserved, and had for ever
suffered, if thy love had not thus prevented all; so that what I was destroying
in my self, thou were repairing; and what I was condemning, thou were saving;
all which, in reason, o true lover of my soul, gives me plainly to understand,
that thy love to me, and care of my salvation, is far more, and greater, then
my own; wherefore I will ever hereafter, resign my self to thee; and leave
my self wholly to be disposed of, according to thy holy will;

12. Moreover, my dear and loving Jesus, since thy desire (as thy Apostle does
affirm) is, that all may be saved, 1. Tim. 2. v. 4.
and none to perish, or be damned; thou will according to thy mercy, wisdom,
and providence, give unto every one, such necessary means, and helps, with
which, they cooperating may be saved; powerfully and sweetly disposing all
things, to that end; therefore my God, what shall please thee to send, shall be
welcome unto me, as most convenient for my salvation.

13. O my Gracious Lord, my hearts content, and joy, since thy care is such,
and thy love, so great to me, and that really and truly I find my self, to be
more thine, then mine, by creation redemption, conservation, and many other
titles; It is fitting, thou should dispose of thy own according to thy will
and pleasure: I do therefore resign my self, and will have no other will,
but thine, to be done of me.

14. Also my only good, dear Jesus, since thou know best what is sitting,
and necessary for every one, to come to glory; and wilt send the occasions to
each one, by, which, they may deserve it; hereafter in all occasions, and
occurrents, I will suppose, and say; by this, my God will have me save my soul,
and come to glory, his holy will be done; nay my God, though it be a thing very
harsh and contrary to my nature; I will with content, and conformity,
thankfully accept of it.

15. O most powerful and merciful Lord, who do all things for the best,
(and therefore some have health, and wealth; others, none of both; some,
honors, and dignityes; others, calamityes, and miseryes; some, comforts, and
consolations; others, crosses, and temptations; some, many children, and
nothing to leave unto them; others, great riches, and no child, to enjoy them;
now famine, then plague, here wars, there peace, and so of other things, which
we daily see, proceeding from thy holy ordinance, and not as some will seem to
say, that these things do but casually, or accidentally happen; no, no, it is
not so, but all, are ordered by Gods divine providence, (who knows the
disposition of all, disposing and dividing to every one, what is most
convenient, and may conduce to that glory, for which they are created,) if thou
shall send me prosperity spiritual or temporal, thence I have an occasion,
and motive, to be thankful, love, and serve thee; and not offend thee, being
so gracious, and bountiful unto me; likewise, if thou shall send me adversity
spiritual or temporal, with thanks I will content my self, because it is thy
will, it should be so, who know best what is for my good; and withal, I
will accept of it, as a true token of thy love, well knowing, that they who are
2. Cor. 1. v. 7.
partakers of thy aduersityes, and tribulations in this life, in glory shall be
partakers of thy joy, and consolations.

16. I am thine, not mine, dispose of me, my God, as shall be most to thy
glory, and my good; it is fitting, my dear Lord, thou should do with thy
own, what, and as best pleases thee.

17. I cannot o Lord, dispose of my self, contrary to thy will, being truly
thine, without doing thee a palpable injury; far be this from me, my God.

18. O my dear Savior, in all occurrents, I will say, with thy Holy Prophet,
my heart o Lord is prepared, my heart is prepared, I will sing and say a
psalm; Ps. 56. v. 8.
that is, my heart o God is prepared to live and die according to thy will; and
to suffer what aduersityes shall fall on me, with resignation to thy will; I
will sing with joy, and not repine, I will say unto thee, a psalm of praise,
and thanks, for all.

19. O my God, what can be ill to me, that comes through love from thee; come
then what may; thy will be done of me.

20. If thy servant Job accepted with thanks, the bad, as well as the good, to
conform his will, to thine; much more o Jesus I ought to be indifferent, and to
accept as well of crosses, and losses, as of comforts, and prosperity; and will
hereafter.

21. O Lord, I do often desire, what may be my destruction, not knowing what
is most convenient for my good, I will therefore hereafter, leave my self to
thy disposing, and content my self, with what shall happen; as coming from
thee because thou know that, to be best for me.

22. O dear Jesus, what iniuryes, reproaches, and abuses did thou not endure,
with content; to conform thy will, to the will of thy heavenly Father? why
then, should not I, my God, in this imitat thee?

23. O Sweet Jesus, the Scripture says, that to do the will of thy Father,
stood Joan. 4. v. 3*
thee in stead of meat; as if thou said, to do my Fathers will, does
comfort me, far more then meat; I will therefore my God, do thy will, in all
things, and not mine, and take content and comfort in so doing.

24. O Lord, in all tribulations, and crosses, I will conform my will, to
thine, for I do know, that thou do give the greatest glory, to those, that
with resignation, and conformity do endure the greatest troubles.

25. O Sweet Jesus, all crosses, shall be to me most grateful: for I esteem
them true tokens, of thy love; for thou do most chastise, whom thou do
most love, for their greater merit and glory;

26. O most loving Jesus, I do confess, that to do thy will, in this life,
and conform our's, to thine, in all things is the highest, greatest, and most
acceptable service, that can be done to thee on earth, grant me this o Lord.

27. O Jesus, true comfort of my soul, by resignation to thee, in tribulations,
and aduersityes, the fidelity, and love, of thy true servants, is most known;
I will never therefore esteem my self to love thee, without this holy virtue;

28. O true lover of all virtuous souls, my Jesus; who in all thy life and
death, were resigned to the will of thy heavenly Father for my instruction; now
in the presence of thy holy Angels, I do renounce my will, my proper
judgment, and my self, resigning all that I am, unto thee, to be wholly, and
soly, thine; and disposed of, as thou will; for being resigned, and conformable
to thy will, in all things; nothing can disturb me; I shall in all occasions,
be quiet in mind, patient, in adversity, thankful, in prospetity, contented,
in distress, and poverty, joyful, in temptations; faithful, in all
probations, and constant without fear, esteeming all as gain, for love of
thee Grant me o dear Jesus, this blessing, this gift, this blessed and (to
thee) most acceptable virtue; that in all what soever, I may be resigned, and
conformable, to thy holy will.

29. I have here, dear soul, laid before thee, an example, in these two
virtues; the one belonging properly to beginners, the other, to the proficient,
that you may know, how to use the practice of other virtues, with the daily
presence of God, according to this form; for thus the knowledge, and habits, of
virtues, are acquired; souls become familiar, and in favor with God;
mortified, in their passions, and senses; stayed, in their actions, modest and
composed, in their behavior, moderat, in their speeches; sweet and affable, in
their conversation; and circomspect, in all their proceedings. and thus the
garden of the soul, is well ordered, the flowers brought to sprout, and show
themselves; and when the heat of the sun of justice, or the love of God
shining upon them, does penetrat the earth, they open, and give forth some
breathings, of their sweet odours, even before they come to perfection.

THE XIV. CHAPTER.
How, in several ways, to use the presence of God in Prayer.
1. IT is formerly declared what the presence of God is; and how to keep it in
mind daily, intellectually, or imaginatily, and apply it to the practice of
virtue. But in this, you shall know, how after diverse manners, to use, and
practice it, in mental or vocal prayer, and chiefly in mental prayer, which
in this state, is most used;

2. First then, you must understand, that God is in his creatures many ways,
by his power, presence, and essence; by his power, preserving them in that
being, which he gave them; by his presence, as Lord of all, and witness of
what they do inwardly, or outwardly; whose knowledge even of their most secret
thoughts none can shun; by his essence, concurring, and cooperating with them
in all their actions; so that without his concurring they cannot have the least
motion; after these manners, he is, as well in sinners, as in the just; but he
is in the just, by an other special way, to wit, by grace, sanctisijng and
adopting them, to be the children of God;

3. Moreover, in some just, he is in a more eminent manner, then in others; as
in those who follow a retired, and spiritual life, by some special favor, as
inward illuminations and consolations, in others, by certain influences of his
divinity, clearing the understanding, in the knowledge of truths, and inflaming
the will, with the love of God, and those things, which are eternal; also, he
is in us, in the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar, when we communicate; for
said he, behold I am with you to the world's end, to him here, we may have an
easy access in all our distresses, and necessityes; Matthew. 28. v. 20.
for he is delighted, to be with the sons of men, and therefore, he ordained
this Sacrament, that he might never be absent from them; all these ways, and
manners (though others, there are) your faith does teach, and you may practice.
consider God in all thy ways and he Prou. 3. v. 6. Act 17. v. 28. Joan. 14. v.
23.
will direct thy stepps. in him we are, we live, and move, the Apostle says;
and he, yea, and the most blessed Trinity, is in us; we will come unto him, and
remain with him, these are the words of God.

4. O what a comfort, this is to all Christians? to know certainly, that they
have within them, so happy a guest and lodger, (if the fault be not in them)
God omnipotent, their creator, Lord, and Savior, for as the soul gives life,
and operations to the body, God gives being, life and operations to the soul;
and there makes his kingdom, seat, and throne, if sin does not hinder it,
ought not we then have in our hearts, in all places, and at all times, a great
respect and reverence, to this our Sovereign Lord, and King, whom we certainly
know to be present? o how dare we do in his presence, what we would blush to
do, before a mean man? o what can be more forcible, to cause us to forsake,
and abstain from sin, then to consider his divine Majesty present* and what
can move us more to a virtuous life, and all perfection?

5. God said to Abraham, walk before Genesis 17. v. 1.
me, and be perfect, as if he said, in all thy ways, keep me present before
thine eyes, and that will cause thee become perfect, and acceptable unto me;
Old Tob 4. v. 6.
Tobias gave to his Son, this advise, saying: all days of thy life, have God
in thy mind; for he knew right well, that this would be a bridle to all his
passions, and inclinations; it would keep him from sin, and forward him in
the service, fear, and love of God; so that you see; that it is of very great
importance, and benefit, to keep daily the presence of God, in mind; but now
let us go to the practice of it, in prayer.

6. Some there are, that in prayer do begin to think upon God in a general
manner, and in a confused way, not descending to any particular, and they
consider many good things, not fixing steadfastly upon any one; but going from
one to an other calling to mind the sentences of Scripture of the Holy Fathers,
and adorning all, with many learned reasons; but all this remaynes only, in the
understanding, and they take content; and pleasure them selves, in those fine
discourses, and conceits, more then in any pious affection; so that in this,
there is some want of humility, though not of vain glory; for the
understanding, fed, with these sentences, and reasons, takes a complacence in
them, and conceaueth well of that discourse, that it is learnedly done, and
attends to the curiosity of it, and not to move the will, to any pious work,
to please and love God; and this is the greatest cause why many do not profit
in prayer, and virtue, after the use of prayer, for twently years, more then
in the first year; by reason all is in the understanding, and they content
them selves with discourse, and seldom fall to imitation, mortification, good
purposes, and resolutions, to gain this, or that virtue; or over come this or
that vice;

7. But howsoever, to spend time in thinking upon good things, and keeping the
mind from vain, and idle thoughts, is meritorious, and beneficial; for their
intention going to prayer, was good, and for God, Our Holy Mother S. Teresa
says, that though learning be very good, and helps, and comfort much,
before, and after prayer, yet being there, before the eternal and infinite
wisdom of God, it must be for that present, set a side; for humility, and
simplicity, there, is of more force, and value, then many speculatiue, and
learned discourses; Therefore she advises that going to prayer, and placeing
your self in God's divine presence, without wearijng the understanding, with
long discourses, searching here, and there; this, and that, or using any
framed, or composed speeches, or reasons, simply, and humbly, propose your
necessityes, to his divine Majesty, acknowledging his goodness, mercy, and
benefits done to you, and that even then, he does so graciously admit you, to
his presence, notwithstanding his high majesty, and greatness; and your vile
condition, and baseness; and calling to mind, that, what he suffered, was for
you, (if your meditation was of the passion) and merely of love, without any
merit, or desert, on your behalf; and then, with all submission, desire him
for that love, and what he suffered, to grant your request, and give you grace,
not to offend him more, but to return love, for love, doing what service you
think, to be grateful to him, this is a compendious, and good way of prayer.

8. Note, that as I said before, the more in prayer you humble your self,
(acknowledging your own unworthiness, ignorance, and insufficiency, and all
good, and the honor, glory, and praise of all, to be due to God alone, and
confessing, even those good thoughts, which then you have, to be from him, as
truly they are) the more is your gain, and spiritual profit; and the better,
and more efficacious your prayer.

9. For this good himility has, that it makes one grateful to all, but much
more to God, who gives his grace, and other favors plentifully to the humble
souls, which he does deny, to those that do presume of their own wit, and
sufficiency, by reason of their learning, and ability, in discoursing well, in
prayer. But whether this meditation be of the humanity, or divinity, as of Gods
attributes and perfections, to wit, his power, greatness, wisdom, goodness,
etc. (which in deed well considered do delight, and feed the understanding
very much) always, descend to some one point, and thence consider, what it
avails you; and infer, that you ought to be thankful, love, serve, and
praise God, who is so good, and bountiful unto you; and then make good
purposes to do somewhat acceptable to his divine Majesty; as some penance, to
serve him, with more diligence, and care, then formerly; to keep a purer
conscience from any sin, that may displease him; to amend some vice, or
imperfection, or exercise your self, more exactly, in some virtue; for want of
so doing most that use prayer do come to little mortification, of their
passions; less profit in virtue, and no great feeling of the love of God, and
true perfection.

10. Many do use, in prayer to consider themselves compassed, with the
divinity, and that they are in God, which is a very truth, and it is a good way
of prayer, and nothing troublesome though more subject to distractions, then
that of the humanity, by reason we beholding the humanity, or any point of it
we have somewhat within the reach, and capacity of our senses, that we may
apply our understanding to, and employ it, with rest: but in the other, being
beyond our reach, the understanding is like to one swiming in the middle of a
great sea, not seeing land, nor knowing well whither to go, or to what side to
turn, but swimeth here and there in hope of some resting place; or as our
Holy Mother says, the understanding considering the divinity, is like unto a
bird flijng here and there, and can find no resting place; so that the
understanding is (as we may say) a stray, and its thoughts, many, and unsettled;

11. Also in this manner some do endeavor to ascend so high with the
understanding, that they labor to suspend it, from working, so to remain in
contemplation, keeping themselves passiuly, that God may work in them; which
our Holy Mother does not approve, by reason, it has some want of humility, for
they presume to reach higher, then God is pleased to carry them; and the
understanding being forced beyond his capacity, leaves the will in aridity,
without any benefit; for the will follows with its affection, the knowledge of
the understanding;

12. Therefore in the name of God, let the understanding work with humility;
until his divine Majesty vouchsafes to eleuat it, and set it, at rest, in
true contemplation; for, when he is pleased so to do, he presents the
object, and that, which without force, or violence, sweetly suspendeth the
understanding, and keeps it employed; as long as he sees it good; and noe
longer, it can remain so;

13. As for the imaginary presence of God, you may conceive him present,
without you; before you, or at your side, you looking on him, and he on you;
and in that manner make your prayer, by a humble discourse or consideration of
some part of his life, or passion, for as is said, your beholding him,
suffering for love of you, to make satisfaction, for your sins, will be a
motive, to stir you to a tenderness of heart, to take compassion upon him,
in that case; to grieve for your sins, which were the cause of his suffering;
and to do some penance, in satisfaction of them; with many other good
effects, and resolutions.

14. But observe, that some do in a repide manner, consider the passion of our
Savior, not as a thing present, but past long since; neither do they consider
his dignity, that suffers, but in a general manner that he suffered for
them, and for all men; they ask him forgiunesse for their sins; and so end*
but they ought to consider carefully his dignity, the greatness of his pain,
with what love, and for whom, he suffered all; for in this manner, it will be
more moving, and profitable;

15. Others are of a more liuly apprehension, and do conceive our Savior, as
then sufferring, and the Jews then acting their cruelty against him; they
seem to see his flesh there torn, the blood running freshly down over all his
sacred body, they consider his love, and the greatness of his pain; and that
their sins were cause of all; they are vehemently moved, their heart with
grief is ready to burst, they sigh, and sob heavily, the tears run in great
abundance from their eyes, love does melt them, inwardly; they do not
apprehend, nor fear any austerity; their resolutions to do somewhat to please
God, are many, and great; they are never satisfied with mortifications,
pennances, and punnishments, against them selves; and if they be not hindered,
and moderated, by their directour, with vndiscreat zeal, they over load the
poor body, and soon bring them selves to sickness; this is much to be
esteemed; though it may proceed from the devil; for these feelings are for the
most part in the sensitive or inferior part, of man; and discretion, must be
used, in all their proceedings; they must not force them selves in prayer, to
more tears, or to more sorrow, but follow the instructions, laid down in the
third chapter of this part, let them not make too much have, they must do
things, by degrees, their outward austerityes, must not be great, and chiefly,
such as may hinder their health; but the mortification, of their senses, and
passions, rigourous;

16. Others can do none of all these, and they ouerlabour and tire the
understanding, endeavoring to frame some representation of our Saviors
divinity, or humanyty, yet can do but little, or nothing; at least to continue,
for any time; but howsoever, they discourse, and speak to him, (the light of
faith only guiding, and instructing them, that he is there, and does hear and
understand them, as truly he does,) and though they grieve to see their own
little sufficiency, and capacity, yet they do not desist, but go on, and by
the inward motion, and devotion, they feel him present; this their labor is
of great merit, and to God very acceprable; for it is the work of a loving,
and resolute soul, it being done with so great difficulty, and aridity; and our
Savior does often recompense it, with perfect contemplation; I think, that I
spoake of this in some other chapter, yet it is of so great importance that it
cannot be to often repeated;

17. Others do frame the presence of God, their desires are great, and they
would feign do somewhat, but they know not what to do, what to say, or what
to ask; this commonly is the case of beginners; let them read the sixth and
seventh chapters, of this part, and follow the aduises had there, and they may
make good resolutions, and purposes, to serve, and please God, and do some
small pennances; for these may be done without great discourse, or art, and
they will give some satisfaction, to those swelling desires, and bring them, to
a calm, and settlement. these are said of the outward presence of God; and
note, that to help them selves in prayer, it is necessary, that they be prompt
and ready in making acts of all virtues, which are gained by the practice, and
use, of them. for with them, they may pass the time of prayer, either in their
greatest comforts, or greatest aridity, and they will inflame the soul, with
the fire of the love of God, and penetrat the heart like so many darts.

18. Now let us consider how inwardly we may keep the presence of God, in
prayer; for though the other; be good; yet this without any comparison, is
far better, more moving, and beneficial; and they who use it, do soonest
come to contemplation, natural, and supernatural; we call the other presence
of God, outward, by reason the thing represented, is conceived to be outward,
as before you, or at your side in the place, where you pray; but this, is
called inward, by reason the object, or thing represented, is conceived to be
with in your body, in your heart, or the center of the soul; as for example,
suppose the eyes of the soul, to be resident in the head, and from thence, to
look upwards when you consider God or his saints to be in heaven; and to look
downward, when you consider hell, or Purgatory; and to look inward, when you
consider God, to be in your heart, or in a more private room further in, as in
the center, or most intimat part of the soul, it is not easy to make this to be
understood: but howeuer, I will do my best endeavor with Gods assistance, to
declare it, that it may be conceived;

19. The understanding as is said using his operations, is perceived to work
in the head, as in his own seat, and looks, as from a height and a far of,
into the heart, or inward of the soul, where he does, see God to be, either
imaginarily, or intellectually, as our Sauiour's humanity, or some great light,
for the divinity; and though, betwixt both, there be a great distance, yet he
does address his speech unto him; and few go farther in, though they practice
prayer for many years, by reason of too many visitations and frequentations of
worldly, and vain thoughts and objects which keep them there employed; the
cause of this, is; little mortification of the senses, and passions;

20. But purged souls, may go forward in, and get down the stayres to the
antecamera, or drawing chamber; for they are not busied nor detayned with
worldly imaginations, they bade them adieu, and now all their endeavor is, to
please this their Lord, and to come into the room, where he is resident that
face to face they may speak, and make their cause known unto him, now having
good leisure, and opportunity;

21. Here the soul begins to work understandingly, feelingly, and sincerly,
though as yet she be not come where he is to be seen face to face, but he is,
as, within a curtine, or at least they may observe that they speak as being in
a good distance from him; here you may perceive plainly that the understanding
is parted from his own house, that is, the head, and is speaking in the heart*
the head not being more minded, or thought of, and the other senses, do
follow, and all doors are commonly so shut, that no stranger or worldly
thought, can get in thither; here the soul is nearer to the presence of God;
is more recollected then formerly, the understanding, better settled; the
knowledge, cleerer, and more perfect; and the will, better, and more seriously
affected; and all the senses, well employed, and contented; in so much, that
they easily forget their outward functions, and operations; for the joy, which
they here enjoy, is greater, then what they could have, from their outward
objects; and this does cause them, with the other powers, to give their inward
attendance, though they often return to their own; they that are gone so
far in prayer, may know this to be so; for if they be applied, and looking on
Here the eyes of the soul are somewhat fixed in a King of contemplation.
the presence of God, as is said, though the outward eyes, be open, and a book
placed before them, they know not a word, but they see the letters without
taking notice or reflecting upon them, by reason of the inward attention.

22. All this is said, to give some way, to understand, how the soul, does by
degrees, bring the powers, and senses, within her self, to help her more
fully, and quietly to apply her self to her negotiation with God;

23. At last, and not without labor, and long practice, the soul gets into
the secret room, far within her self, attended with her powers, and senses,
where her beloved spouse is; here, the attention is so great, that they easily
forget, not only their own functions; but also, all things of the world, here
the soul, is in contemplation, the understanding in great admiration, the will
sweetly, yet strongly affected, and united, by love; the memory, is at rest,
mynding nothing, but that only, which is present, in which she is settled, the
other senses, gives their attendance, so carefully, and with such content, that
they are a frayd to move, or stir; but all do expect there like so many
wayters, or pages, to se wha^ the conclusion will be, betwixt their lady, and
her beloved, whom they attend, and see in great priuacy, and content to gather.
the inward illuminations, are many, the consolations great, the content and
satisfaction, which all enjoy, cannot be expressed, and thus deeply
recollected, sweetly affected, and joyfully by love united, the soul does
remain his captive, until he be pleased to set her at liberty; this is the
highest we can come unto by our labor, and industry with the grace of God, for
without his grace our labor is in vain.

24. This perfection of prayer is not suddenly gained, but after long exercise,
and practice, of mortification, of our palsions, our outward and inward senses
with great purity of conscience; true it is, that by great diligence some do
acquire it sooner, then others, being fervent and courragious; and when God is
pleased, he gives this gist, to beginners; for I have known those, that in
less time, then a year, did attain to it; but commonly, it is acquired by
degrees, experience of the inward joy, inuiting and sweetly, inducing the
powers, and senses, to run inward, at the least call of the ^oul, when she is
desirous to be in private with her beloved; for as pleasure, and de^ight, do
allure all creatures, to their operations, so the sweetness, and great
content, which are had in Gods presence, Commonly they that go so far, have
some degree of supernatural prayer
and conversation, causes all the powers, and senses, willingly when the
occasion is offered to loath outward objects (whence, they get no such
satisfaction) and go inward, to be partakers, of the joy, which is there had;

25. These are the most common ways, to keep the presence of God, in prayer,
(though there be other ways, by which God does lead souls) out of which,
beginners may make choice, of that, which is most agreeable, to their
disposition; that in prayer, they may not run at random, as we say, and tire
the understanding, to search what in the very beginning, they may fix upon; and
so go forward, until God, with his grace and assistance, bring them to this
perfection of prayer.

26. It is observed, that what custom a young colt, or horse does get in the
beginning, when he is broaken, he commonly does hold during life, whether it be
good, or bad, and hardly afterward, by any industry, can he be brought from
it; even so, what custom you give your self unto from the beginning, in
observing, and keeping, the presence of God in prayer; the same the soul will
always desire, be it good, or bad; therefore it will be requisite, to begin
with a settled way, that beginners may not easily err; and to this end, so
many manners, and ways, of the presence of God, and so many parts of mental
prayer, are laid before their eyes, that a certain and constant method may be,
by every one observed.

27. Note, that though Moses in King Pharao's house had the favor of the
King, and worldly content; yet he had noe blessings of importance from God;
until he forsook the Palace, and went into the desert, or wilderness; where
by the practice of prayer, he became familiar, and inward with God; and at
length, his divine Majesty, desirous to free his own people, from the slavish
bondage of Pharao in Egypt. appointed Moses, to be their captain, to lead
them from Egypt, and the thraldom, of Exodus 3.
that tyrannical King, to offer sacrifice, unto thim self, where he
appointed: which in Egypt they were not, permitted to do; this Moses did
undertake, and perform; God working by him, many strange wonders, to the
confusion, and ^errour, of all those of Egypt.

28. In like sort, though thou have the world at will; if thou art desirous to
have Gods familiarity, and conversation, and the blessings, favors, and sweet
content which he is wont to give to his servants; go with Moses into the
desert or solitude, (for in Kings Palaces, the noise of cittyes, or multitude
of people, this happiness is not had) forsaking King Pharao's Palace, to wit,
the world, the trouble some Noise, of people, the multitude of vain thoughts,
imaginations, disordered affections, and inclinations, by a sweet retyrement,
of all thy powers, facultyes, and senses, within thy self, as is said'; for in
that solitude, thou may have, and enjoy the presence, and familiarity of thy
heavenly spouse, that great God of glory, who can make, thee captain, to free
his people, to wit, thy powers, facultyes and senses, from the thraldom of
Egypt, this vain world, and the slavish bondage, of Satan; that on the Altar
of thy heart, with joy, and true content, thou may offerre due sacrifice of
love, thanks, and praise, to his divine Majesty, the God of gods, and Lord of
hoastes.

29. It is admirable, to consider how many hundred thousands, yea millions of
all sorts, and sexes, that forsook the world, and betook themselves, into
solitudes, and deserts, to enjoy this content; whose exemplary lives, rare, and
heroijck virtues, and ever to be admired perfection, do remain to all
posterity; for though for Gods love, they lived austerely, and dyed, in holy
poverty; their memory, far more, then that, of the great Emperors, Kings,
and Princes of this world, is by all people, honored; and their festival
days, with joy, and glory, in the whole Church of God, celebrated, according
to that of the Prophet; the just shall be remembered for all Ps. 111. v. 7.
eternity; and those great ones left in oblivion.

30. This is a strange secret, and enough to convince all heretics, to see so
many kings, Princes, Nobles, Queens, and ladies forsake their kingdoms, and
Scepters; their callings, honors, and estates, though never so great, and
vast; being so tenderly bred, and brought up; and become abject in the house of
God, among poor friars, and nuns, contemning all, for the love of God; and
themselves most, rather then live in the tabernacles of sinners; that is, in
the pleasures of this world. and others though they lived in the world, they
were retired from it, as in a solitude, but the more they humbled themselves,
God did exalt them, the higher, in glory: and many of them, became even in this
world, great, and miraculous saints, as you may read in the volume of the lives
of saints. He that touches the pich, shall be defiled Eccli. 13. v. 1.
by it; therefore they forsook the world.

THE XV. CHAPTER.
How to examine your profit, or progress, made in Prayer.
1. AS it is of importance, to know how we proceed, and what we do, in
prayer; so it is, to know, what profit, and progress, we make in prayer; the
first you have seen, by what is said of prayer; this other, you shall see, in
this chapter, for thence you shall be able, to give an account to your
directour, of your spirit, and prayer; and he may know wherein, and how, to
examine and direct you; which will be a comfort, and satisfaction to both;

2. First, examine, whether you go to prayer, for any consolations, or other
proper interest, or no; then, what does most bring you to it; then, whether you
go to prayer, with more willingness, and alacrity of Spirit, then you were
wont; then what facility or difficulty, you find in the use, or practice of it,
whether you do commonly make all the parts; and whether you be troubled with,
distractions, and idle thoughts, and of what kind are the thoughts; then,
whether you have these distractions, through negligence, willingly, or
unwillingly; whether instantly, when you take notice of them, you do reject
them, and have a remorse of conscience, for them; or not make any great matter
of it. Then, whether you do use to have recollection, and in what part
commonly of prayer do you feel it, what does most cause it; whether it be of
continuance, or for any long time, or no; to all this the former chapter will
give you not a little help.

3. Secondly examine, whether your prayer be with discourse, or no; if with
discourse; whether you are easily or hardly moved; and what does most move you;
and to what are you most moved; whether to compassion, compunction, penance,
fear, love, this or that virtue, or hatred of some vice; and whether you be
vehemently moved, or no; if it be without discourse; how do you employ your
self all the time of prayer; whether in resisting idle thoughts, making of
acts of virtues, or giving God thanks, and making good resolutions, and
purposes; to this the 4. chapter of this part will help very much.

4. Thirdly, whether the understanding, at any time, omitting the noise of
inward words, can rest, sweetly beholding the object, and for how long? whether
this, be with content, or no; whether you find a desire to continue in prayer,
(though you have little comfort in it) only to please God* whether it be
displeasing to you, to be kept, or hindered from prayer, at the due time;
unless it be, for obedience, or charity? for then we must leave God, as is
said, for God, and some are glad, to get an occasion, to be kept from prayer,
when they are to go to it; which is no good sign; then whether the manner of
your prayer, be with the presence of God inward, or outward? whether most of
the divinity, or humanity; whether you spend more time in the affectiue parts,
then in the others; whether after prayer, you find your soul continue in the
presence of God; or have a memory of him? and how long does it continue? and
whether (without procuring it) your soul in doing outward things, be myndfull
of God, have some pious affections, or is producing acts of virtues, or is
speaking with God; and observe above all other things, whether in prayer, but
chiefly after it, you find a humble disposition, and a loathsomeness in your
self to be esteemed, or well spoaken of? for the prayer which is not
accompanied, with this virtue of humility, is to be always suspected, though
never so high; and not to be esteemed of any great importance; whether you find
your self with a hauinesse or dullness; or lightness, and serenity of
spirit; whether you find your soul in love with God, and whether this love, be
free, and with sincerity, and not a coacted, or forced love; and whether the
soul does incline to amorous acts, and delight rather in them, then in
discourse? then, what time you do use to spend in mental prayer, morning and
euning?

5. Fourthly what sort of prayer, you do use; whether natural, or
supernatural; that is, acquired by your labor, and practice; or infused by
God; then, whether it be habitual, or transitory; that is to say, whether that
infused prayer, is guien you only for that one, or more times, which I call
transitory; but that which is habitual; without any industry or labor on your
part, does as soon as you place yourselfe to pray, put you in a sweet
recollection, you have him present, with whom you may speak, and matter to
speak of administered, you not knowing how; and this is usual whenever you
go to prayer, if it be infused, and habitual; and mark, that the presence of
God, which is there, and then given unto you, brings with it, so great a
certainty of his being present; that it procures with one look on it, an
admirable and reuerentiall respect, with great humility in the soul; toward
God.

6. Fifthly, (if you have any visions or revelations,) examine whether they be
inward, or outward, imaginary, or intellectual, with words, or no; also
whether you have sweet smells, or noisome; a delightful alteration in your
body, hear music not knowing how, or whence; whether you have extasis, or
rapts, and what you feel in them; and whether you have the degrees of prayer,
with their effects, which are mentioned in the third third part of this book,
or, any of them. In all this, and what soever else; be careful, to acquaint
your directour, with what passes; be very silent, and do nothing without his
advise, and approbation; for so doing, you shall hardly be deceived by the
devil, or err much, in your proceedings; this our Savior told to our holy
mother S. Teresa, as she affirms. Moreover by conference of those things,
with your directour, you shall learn to understand, what you do, well, or ill
in prayer; and be the better able to express your self, in declaring your
mind, and those spiritual thing, unto him, which are obscure of themselves,
and not easily under stood, or explicated by the very learned, that have not
experience in themselves of them; much less by others not learned,

7. Lastly examine, how liuly is your faith, and what confidence you have in
God, that he will grant, what you desire; this is of great importance; and
whether your love to God, do make you careful to shun the least
imperfections, and to be imagining, and inuenting ways to please him, more and
more, daily;

8. I have known some (though in the world, and many occasions) given to
prayer, and mortification; and I beliue, there be many, that have made a good
progress, in prayer; and have somewhat of that, which is supernatural, not
knowing of it; nor what they do: by reason, they want a directour, to
understand them; and they want knowledge, to examine their manner of prayer, or
spiritual profit; or what they feel; and therefore they think that they do
nothing, in prayer, that is good; because they do not discourse; though they
find a great quietness, inward content, and satisfaction, not knowing how, or
what it is; and often they omit their prayer, thinking their time lost; and so
they go backward, and not forward; and the devil is not wanting, in like
occasions, to trouble, and tempt them, and persuade them, to omit their prayer;
as being nothing beneficial to them, and there, they loose; where, they ought
to gain.

9. For, not to go forward in God's service, is to go backward; and our soul
in this world, is like unto aboate, which must come to its port, forced against
a strong current, or a swift river, by great art, and industry, of the boatmen,
always one beginning to put on, before the other does end, his action; so that
there is no intermission, or desisting, but a continual forceing on, until
they arrive at the intended place; for if all desist from work, never so
little; the boat is carried away, with the violence of the water; in so much,
that what in a long time, with great labor, they gained, of the way; they, as
it were, in an instant, do loose. it is the same with those that desire to be
virtuous, and acquire perfection; for they are forceing the boat, of their
soul, on, forward, to it, with great art, and labor, against the swift, and
strong current, of their natural appetites, inclinations, disordered and
unmortified passions: but if they desist, never so little, or omit their
exercise, at any time, and their vigilance over themselves; they are forcibly
carried away backward, to what nature does desire; and what they gained in a
long time, is suddenly lost, and hardly recovered; Therefore we have need of
helpers; and helps, of necessaryes, to forward us, against so strong a current;
to which, there is none like; the helpers, are God, your directour, and
spiritual persons; the helps, God's grace, devout books, daily practice of
virtue, with the presence of God, mortification, and prayer; with one of these,
you must be in continual action, and then doubtless, the sweet breathing
wynd, of the Holy Ghost, with this your labor* and diligent care, will bring
you at length, to the happy, and desired port of perfection.

10. And by reason your enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil, are
witty, strong, and vigilant, and do give you many daily battayles, you must
also examine, how you do overcome them, in occasions; and what arms, and
weapons, they most fear; for of this, and your diligent care; your safty, and
security, does depend; so that you must often consider, what may be offensive,
and what defensive, how to annoy, and how to prevent; because your life on
earth is a continual warfare. for if at any time, you grow tepid, and Job 7.
v. 1.
negligent, you stand in danger to be surprised, and lost, by those cruel
traitors, who continually, do watch, meditate, and intend your utter ruin.

11. I do therefore advise, that commonly in prayer, you examine what you do;
whether you go forward, or backward in God's service, according to your
thoughts, words, and deeds; and every day, make new purposes, to amend this,
or that imperfection, though it be never so little, or small; and do some
particular thing to the honor, and glory of God; in thanks, and token of
gratitude, for his blessings, and benefits; as to kise the earth three times,
in honor of the Holy Trinity; or five times, in honor of the five wounds, of
Christ our Savior, who for love of you, was so wounded; or to stand, or kneel
with you hands streched forth, in a cross, while you say the litanyes of our
blessed lady of Loretto, or the Psalm of Miserere mei Deus, or five Paters and
Aues, or a creed. and such like small things; for believe me, these will make
you myndfull of God, and your self; and augment his grace, and love in your
soul; and encourrage you, to higher matters; and it is a sacrifice, to his
divine Majesty, very acceptable; and you must be in continual war, with the
vice, or passion, which does most molest you, giving it, no rest, nor quatter,
as is said before; until you overcome, and subdue it, that you may have the
full dominion, over it, and keep your inward house in peace, and all
subjection, to God* and his Holy laws; thus you shall know, how pure, and
clean your garden is; and to what degree of perfection, your flowers are come;
and you shall be the better able, to give an account of all to your directour,
of which, and his good direction, your good, and spiritual profit does much
depend.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
Of the unitive Way, or state of the perfect.
1. Dear Christian soul, you have seen, in the two former states, how the
garden is dug, purged, squared, and how the seeds are sown, and the
plants, set, and brought to growth; so that, every flower, may be discerned,
one from the other; and that the garden is grown pleasant and delightful; but
in this state, you shall see the flowers, with the heat, of the sun of
justice, open; their beauty perfectly appear; their variety, rare, and
wonderful fair; all breathing forth their sweet odor, and fragrancy, without
measure; which in deed, is so delightful, that it brings the world, to
admiration; for here the light is so pure, and the knowledge, so great, and
perfect; that humility, is most profound, contempt of our selves, and all that
is not God, in a very high degree; honors, and proper esteem, quite trod
underfoot; poverty of spirit, in very great request; and charity, as lady,
ruling, and directing all, with true resignation, absolute abnegation, in
sincere love, and conformity to God's divine will, in all things, without
exception; in all which, true perfection does consist.

2. An example, and a perfect pattern, of these three states, you shall see,
in one, and the same body; to wit, Blessed Mary Magdalen; she few days
before, walked the streets, with such pride, glory, and beauty; that as a
beneficial servant, to Satan, she allured to sin, the hearts, and
affection, of those, that with pure eyes, did not behold her; she was a foul
garden plot, wherein all vice was got; but by the preaching of our Savior, she
understanding her woeful state, and lamentable case; to purge and make this
garden plot, clean; first, she does cast of her rich and vain attire, them
barefooted, meanly clothed, her hair about her eyes, along the street she
goes, and enters among strangers, where our Savior was invited to a feast: and
in the view of all, casting her self upon her knees, knocking her breast, with
sighs, from the bottom of her heart, did embrace kiss, wash with her tears,
and wipe clean, with the golden hair (wherein she formerly took pride) those
sacred feet, of Christ our Savior; hereby manifesting her repentance, and
inward grief, for her sins; her contempt of her self, the world and all
vanity, the desire, she had, to be disesteemed, ill thought of, and despised by
all, as then she was by Simon, who invited our Savior, Luke 17. v. 39.
as in the gospel does appear; in this also, she expressed her liuly faith,
firm hope, and sincere love, with most admirable humility, to Christ our
Savior, the true physician of her sick, and languishing soul, her only good;
then she grieved heartely, that she so foully offended him in all her life: no
tongue is able to express her inward sorrow, but her heavy sighs, and many
tears, with that outward action, gives to understand, what feeling she had,
in the secret of her heart.

3. She came thither in sin; but where sin, did abound, grace did
superabound; she came wicked, she returned justified; she came sick, but
returned healthy, well, and sound; she came altogether troubled, she returned,
quiet, and contented; she came unclean, and unmortified; she returned
purified, and composed; she came a beginner, but became soon a proficient, and
by this one resolute action, by which she overcame her self totally; she
became truly perfect, united with true love and all conformity, to the Holy
will of God; and though she made no noise of words, yet her silent speech, was
heard by him, who knew the secrets of all hearts; and therefore he said, thy
many sins are forgiven; I have heard thy prayer, and granted thy request, go
in peace, and sin no more.

4. At these words of life, sweet was her content, and great her joy,
darkness fled, the light of grace appeering in her happy soul; O how
powerful, and operative are the words of God? (go live in peace) o divine
benediction, o heavenly gift, o admirable treasure? go live in peace; this
peace, did quiet her afflicted, and troubled mind; ordered, and settled her
passions, and appetites, in due subjection; composed her senses, and left no
place in her, for further war. or strife; her joyful heart, did then melt,
with the heat, of the fire of divine, love;

5. O how fervent, o how ardent she returned home, where, in private, with those
chains of gold, (which formerly were a help to sin) she bruised those
delicat shoulders, and tore her tender flesh, with many heavy lashes;
retyrement, and solitude, in continual contemplation, of divine misteryes, and
her great obligation, to God; were her only comfort; she had no other care, in
mind; so that she sat with sweet content, at our Sauiour's feet; while Martha
labored in preparing meat for him, and his Apostles; Mary being at rest in
contemplation, and for getting all, that was on earth, Martha taking it ill,
complained to Christ, that she did not help her; but he that was more fed with
her inward occupation, then with Martha's preparation, did plead Mary's cause,
and said, Martha, thou art busied about many Luke 10. v. 41.
things but Mary about one (which was God alone) and therefore she did choose
the best part.

6. Blessed Mary Magdalen, lived thus, increasing daily, in the love of God,
and contempt of all the world, until she heard of the apprehending ar^ainment,
and condemnation of our Savior: at which she could not contain her self, nor
stop the current of her love, but away she went, where she might behold him;
she pressed through the multitude, without, care, of credit; or fear, of
death; and though with many chekes, and abuses, of the soldiers, and others;
at last she came where her beloved was, with that heavy cross whereon they
were to nail him fast, naked, to the injury of the wind, cold weather, and
shame of the whole world, as a malefactor, whom none would acknowledge for any
other, nor countenance in any wise; there, in presence of all, she does expose
her self, she does acknowledge him, draw near to the cross, embrace it, with
many sighs, and tears; receive the drops of his sacred blood, falling down
upon her; lament his death, helps to sheet him; assisteth his burial, and
often does visit his Holy Sepulcher, love affording her, no resting place,
until she had seen; and found, whom her soul affected, according to his
promise; for he said, he would rise the third day, and she was not defrauded,
Matthew. 16. v. 21. Math. 17. v. 22.
nor frustrated of her desire and expectation; for before he had visited his
apostles after his resurrection, he appeared unto her, whose love seemed more,
and care greater, to seek after him; and after his ascension, her brother
Lazarus, she, and her sister Martha, with others, bannished from their native
place, came to Marsilia in france, where, in a little cave, under ground, she
lived a while; but it was in the city, and it is like, that she had some
visitations of friends, and others, which was a hinderance to her desire; which
was to be busied with God alone; and therefore she parted thence and went to a
vast, and high mountain, near the town, where, in a solitary cave, or hole;
she lived in contemplation of the passion of our Savior, and divine misteryes,
for the space of thirty three years, not tasting any earthly food, but daily,
by the Angels of heaven, seven times, was elevated, and carried in the air
toward the kingdom of glory (which she expected) and was recreated with the
sweet music, and joyful harmony, of celestial Jerusalem, quite forgetting
all that was on earth;

7. What more perfect pattern of all degrees of spiritual perfection, can be
seen? she put the axe to the root, in the very beginning, and brought down
the tree of all vice, and imperfections, to the ground, on a sudden; she had in
deed, a strong resolution, to forsake and overcome all; her attempt, (to her
own confusion) was great and stout; she came to a speedy conversion, a true
resignation, a perfect abnegation, and a total, of what was inward, and
outward, mortification. She was a rare beginner, an admirable proficient, and
soon solid in true perfection, transformed, yea deified, and wholly united to
her beloved, Christ She had supernatural prayer before she came to tbis height
of perfection.
Jesus, in the same spirit, love, will, and desire with him; the sweet odours,
of her virtuous flowers, even to this day, do wonderfully delight the whole
Church of God;

8. Thrice happy are the souls, that come to this degree, as to transcend all
worldly things, and burn with the fire of the love of God alone, the thing is
great, but nothing is difficult to a willing mind, that is in love; nor
impossible, to so great, powerful, and good a God; these souls cannot hyde
their treasure, though they would, the inward grace appeering in all their
works. their actions, and words, are attractiues to piety, and devotion; and
like so many firebrands, do inflame all with the love of God, and desire of
perfection; the flowers are open to the view of the world, and their odours,
and fragrancy so strong; and their beauty, so admirable, and rare, that all
they, that come near them, are comforted, and delighted extremely; they
thirst after the salvation of souls, they use all diligence and industry for
the conversion of sinners, their prayers to god for them, are many; their
pennances, rigourous, and their tears, in great abundance; that his divine
Majesty may be pleased, to reclaim them, and bring them from their wicked
ways; their whole, and only desire, is, to bring all to serve, love, and
praise God; their very conversation is of that sweetness, and emphacy, that
such as hear them, are never weary; they think whole days, not hours,
through the content they find, and the rauishment of mind, they have, from the
sweet odours, and feelings, that proceed from those fair virtuous flowers,
which in their garden are seen, love, does shine in them so gloriously, that
what soever does happen to them, it seems to shine with the same, and be as
it were of the same color; therefore in murmurations against them, they are
joyful, in persecutions, patient, in suffering, perseuerant; when they are
esteemed, honored, or praised, they are humble, and confounded; all esteem,
honor, and praise, being only due to their beloved Lord; their poverty of
spirit, is so great, that, not only of the things, and content, of this world;
but also of the very gifts of God, and spiritual comforts, and consolations,
for his love, they are contented, to be deprived; their resigna^ion, and
conformity, is so perfect, that ^hey have no will, but his, they do no more
live, but Christ does live, in them, ^cting and directing all, that they do;
^e is so enamoured of this garden, that ^e as Lord of the land, takes it to his
own possession.

9. O how inward, how familiar, and ^ouing they are to gether? he says to
Cant. 4. v. 1.
^his his spouse, those words of the can^cle; o how fair thou art my dear,
the^e is no spot in thee: he is so taken with ^er beauty, and her admirable
charity, that he is even made captive through love, to her: and she likewise,
to him; and ^his is so strong, and forcible: that none ^^ them can endure the
absence of the ^ther, for a moment: for nothing in heaven, nor earth, can give
her any content, out his presence alone, and he likewise so careful, and
choice of her, as if ^here were no other in his favor but she ^one: o what a
heavenly happiness this ^ on earth? this soul is so in love, that ^he myndeth,
nothing but his honor, ^lory, and endless praise; she wishes that she were
all creatures, and that all creatures, were hearts, of love, and tongues of
praise, that she might do no other, for all eternity, but love, and praise
Christ Jesus, her deerly, and only beloved, in the highest manner, and greatest
extension, that possibly might be; she does languish, and long to be out of the
prison of the body, that so dissolved, she might be with Christ in the kingdom
of his glory, for ever: for in this world, ^he can have no true rest, nor
content.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
How some are deceived, thinking themselves spiritual,
1. IT is said in Holy Scripture, that not every one who says, Lord, Math. 7.
v. 21.
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of
out Lord; In like manner, not every one that uses prayer and other spiritual
exercises for some years, is mortified, virtuous, spiritual, or perfect, but
he only, whose inward and outward senses a^^ truly mortified, with a perfect
abnegation of himself, and all things of this world, and a real conformity,
of his will, at all times, and in all occasions, to the Holy will of God, is
virtuous, and spiritual.

2. But our nature is such, that in all events, we are apt to think the best
of our selves, and conceive our selves to be that, which really we are not;
therefore, to discover this hidden diseasse of self-loue, and to know truly,
what we are, we must be first as is formerly said, in several occasions well
tried; and as, and what, in that trial, we shall be found; so, that, and no
other, we are; though we think never so well of our selves; and if ^n those
occurrents, you find your self, to be always conformable, to Gods will, and
desire to please him rather then your self, and do his will, and not your
own, and not believe, any thing of your self, that you have not well
experienced, you may be said virtuous, and spiritual.

3. For he that preferrs the will of God, before his own, cannot do but well.
his was that, which our Savior did, in is life and death; for when his Mother
^ound him, at the age of twelve years in the temple, after long searching for
him, and said, my sone, what have thou done ^o us so? thy Father and I
grieuing, have Luke 1. v. 49
sought after thee; he said, what is it, that you sought me for? did not you
know, that it does behooue me to be employed, in the things, that belong to my
Father as if he said, I came to this world, to do the will of my heavenly
Father, and it his occasions I am employed; you needed not to have sought me
with such care; for I must do that, for, which I came; to wit my Fathers will;
in this present occasion.

4. Also when he converted the Samaritan woman at the well, and his disciples
would have him to eat some what, knowing that he was hungry; he said, my Joan.
4. v. 34 Luke 22. v. 42.
meat is, to do the will of my Father: and in the garden of Gethsemany, he
said Father thy will be done, not mine; though it was, to suffer most cruel
torments, and the ignominious death of the cross, and even for the good of
those wicked Jews who sought his death; this was a trial in deed; for as the
gold it the fire, so the just man, in the furnace o^ tribulation, is proved and
tried, and ^^s virtue truly known; so that a man m^st not trust unto himself,
nor think that he has any degree of virtue, until the occasions has tried
him, and found him so.

5. Some that spent many years in the use and practice of prayer, and other
good exercises, finding content, and sweet tears, with a little sensible
deuo^ion, not well instructed, and knowing ^o more; think themselves
spiritual; for ^hey feel no great affection to the things of this world; they
take no pleasure in pastimes, they willingly read good books, frequent the
Sacraments, ^peake of God, and spiritual matters; all which are very good; yet
their passions ^re liuly; their appetites, and senses unmortified; but they
know it not, by reason, they had no occasions of trial; and ^hey are no
sooner in the occasion, then ^t is observed; so that the content they ^ad in
prayer, and other exercises, caused those good effects in them; rather ^hen the
love of God, or desire of true ^erfection; which is not had but by the ^way of
mortification.

6. It happened, that one of these sou^es, came acquainted with me, and by
^hance, we speaking of prayer, she vn^olded unto me a great secret, which she
^euer told to any: thinking that it was ^ great matter, and that she had
received ^ great benefit of God, which (for humility) she was loath any should
know, and it was, that she found such content in prayer, that she could
continue for a long time in it, and did very little care for the world, and
desired me to instruct her, and tell her, how to go forward in the love, and
service of God, I saw her good desire, did proceed from that content, and that
she used no mortifications outward, nor inward, and therefore persuaded her to
meditat upon the passion of our Savior, and his mortified life, and virtues,
as his patience in suffering, his poverty, in wanting even a place to put his
head into, and so forth, of other virtues. this seemed very good to her, at
that present, but when she went to prayer, and did not use her own manner, nor
find those comforts, she would not use my instructions any more, and said it
was not a good way, to come to the love of God, so that in stid of the love of
God, she was found, with the love of herself, and her own content, and when
she thought that she had loathed the world, she found it within her self.

7. For who can say, he hates the world, and all things, else; and yet, is so
in love, with himself, and his own content, that so long, he will be
obedient, to his directour, or Ghostly Father, as he shall direct, or command,
things agreeable to his humor, and desire: and no longer; so that, such do
seek their own will, in what they do, and not the will of God; and whereas
they think themselves spiritual, they are found otherwise. For as a certain
true mortified servant of God, said'; among the things of the world, which thou
shall forsake, remember, and do not forget, in the first place, to forsake thy
self.

8. For the world, is not the insensible things, only; as the vanities,
honors, wealth, pleasures, and such like; but also the people, corrupt
manners, self love, proper judgment, our own will, our Passions, and senses;
all these do help, and induce to sin. this then is the world, to be
principally, and most forsaken, and so acquire the love of God, and true
perfection; when S. Peter said to our Savior, behold we have forsaken Math.
29. v. 27.
all, and followed thee; what gain shall we have, what shall be our reward? he
answered saying, Amen I say unto you; that you, that followed me, shall receive
a hundred fold, and life everlasting, he did not say, you that did forsake all,
(as many philosophers did, shall be rewarded thus; but ye that followed me;
did imitat my life, and virtues, in poverty of spirit, abnegation, humility,
patience, resignation, charity, shall have life everlasting. so that to forsake
the world, without following Christ, is not sufficient; therefore we must carry
our cross, and follow our Savior, mortifijng our selves, in all things,
casting of, old Adam, Collos. 3. v. 9.
with his acts, our unbridled appetites, affections and inclinations, and
inuesting our selves, with the new, which is according to Christ, forsakeing,
vice, and embracing virtue, and so we shall forsake our selves, for God; and
our own will, to do the will of God, and be truly spiritual.

9. Others there are, of greater retirement, who have forsaken all medlings
with the world; their times and hours are distributed, they read, and pray
much; they often frequent the Holy Sacraments, and other godly exercises, they
would not offend God, for any thing; they take compassion, upon those that
live according to the world; they find a desire to be with Christ, and they
have no small conceit of themselves, of their progress in virtue, and
spiritual perfection; yet they have reserved for them selves, their
possessions, that they may not be in any want, or need, least to trouble
themselves, to seek for any thing, that might be necessary for their
accommodation; thinking this, not to be an obstacle to virtue, but rather a
help to all perfection; and the devil does so cunningly suggest, that it would
hinder their devotion extremely, to be in want of a house, meat, drink,
clothing; or to be careing for these things; also that they must have a care
of their health, and keep themselves well clod, and shod, in the winter, must
eat moderatly; yet good and wholesome meats, well dressed; must sleep well,
and such like; so that, they having all accommodation may without trouble serve
God, use their spiritual exercises, and attain to the love of God, and true
perfection; and withal our nature desirous of proper commodity, and thinking
that this may stand, with true virtue, and perfection, is easily persuaded, to
give belief to it, because all is carried under the color of pretended
helps, to acquire virtue; and perfection.

10. But dear Christian soul, though this be good, without all doubt; yet it
cannot agree with the mortification and poverty of our Savior Christ Jesus,
Luke ^ v. 7.
who came naked to the world, without commodity of house, bed, fire, or friends,
about him; for he was borne in an open stable, in the cold of winter, and had
no better bed, then the manger to rest in, nor other fire, to comfort him, then
the breathing of an ox, and an ass; he lived in great poverty, without
commodity; and dyed naked on the cross, forsaken by his disciples; if his
actions, are our instructions, surely this is the way, and not that of proper
commodity, to acquire true perfection? our Savior said to the young man, in
the gospel, if thou will Math. 19 v. 21.
be perfect, or art desirous to attain to true perfection; go, and sell all
that thou have and give it to the poor, and, then take thy cross, and follow
me; where, you must observe, that our Savior said, if thou art desirous to be
perfect, (for of such we speak, and not of others) sell all; he said not,
keep all necessaryes, and sell what is superfluous; but sell all; and what
then? take thy cross of mortification, and follow me, in want, poverty,
nakedness, abnegation, resignation, and conformity, to the will of God in all
things;

11. In an other place, he advises, that we be not solicitous what to eat, or
drink, the next day; but to serve God Math. 6. v. 25 and 32.
truly, and seek for the kingdom of heaven, and he will provide all
necessaryes for us; for our heavenly Father knows what is fitting for us; and
surely he that prouides for the birds, and beasts, they not sowing, nor
reaping, will not forget, to provide for us, his own similitude and likeness;
he loving us so deerly as he does; chiefly, if we have for saken all
commodityes, for his sake, and love. But these delicates, would feign be
partakers with our Savior of his consolations, but not of his wantes, and
tribulations; certainly they have not that liuly faith, and confidence, in God,
which they ought to have, otherwise they would quite for sake all, and trust to
his promise; knowing that he is omnipotent, and will not for sake those who
do truly confide in him.

12. He fed our Holy Father S. Elias, and S. Paul the first Hermit, and diverse
3. kings 17. v. 6
others in the deserts, and wildernesses, by the ministry of Angels: what was
wanting to his Apostles when they went from place, to place, without shoes, or
hose, without a wallet, or a penny in their Luke 22. v. 25.
pursse? nothing: for our Savior to confirm them, in this truth, did ask
them, if at any time when he sent them a broad there was any thing wanting to
them; and they answered; no. what was wanting to glorious S. Francis, when he
forsook not only the things of the world, but also the very clothes that were
on his back, casting them away? truly, nothing. therefore these commodious
lovers of themselves, are deceived, by this fine slight, of Satan; under the
pretense of virtue, to keep them always imperfect, and far from true
virtue and perfection; for corporal commodityes, are preseruers of self love,
and both, a great help to sin, and enemies to all virtue, and perfection.

13. There are many that live this manner of life, and they do well; but they
are not of those, that carry the mortification of Christ, in their body, as S.
Paul: 2. Cor. 4. v. 10.
nor of those who are not satisfied with going barefooted, but would also go
naked altogether, but for modesty's sake through love of poverty. as S.
Francis; nor of those, who lived in the wilderness, in nakedness, hunger,
thirst, and cold: as many, of great quality, and tender virgins did, having for
their best bed, and resting place, the bare earth, and sack, or hair cloth,
for their couerlets; Luke 6. v. 12
our Lord and master Christ Jesus, watched long, spent whole nights, in
solitary places, in prayer, suffered much hunger, thirst, and cold; and in his
greatest extremity, hanging on the cross, and greatly thirsting, had no other
comfort, nor refocillation given him, then the bitter taste, of vinegar, and
gall; in imitation whereof, the Holy Fathers (and I have seen it often done)
did use to put some wormot, or other bitter thing, yea, and the wax of one's
ears, into their meat, to mortify their taste, that they might have no gust,
in any thing, but in God alone; and to mortify their body, and offer themselves
unto his divine Majesty, a living, immaculat Romans 12. v.
and acceptable host; these sought nothing in this world but to please God,
and imitat the life and virtues of Jesus Christ, in true mortification,
nakedness, want, and conformity, to the will of God; therefore the Holy
Prophet said, cast thy care upon our Lord, be not solicitous for any thing, he
will nourish thee, he will have care of thee; fear neither want, or sickness,
do not think, Ps. 54. v. 23.
that he cannot preserve your health, unless you have good meats, and sawces;
and other bodily commodityes? for truly I see none more unwieldy, then they that
take most care of the preserving of themselves with those accommodations; and I
see none more healthy, then they who put themselves wholly into the hands, and
care of God, not regarding how they are clod, or how, they eat, or drink, as
the poor hermits, and religious mendicants.

13. For I have observed in our own order, where they eat no flesh, their
dithes, not many, costly, nor toothsome, they fast one meal near eight
months in the year, their disciplines are many, their, austerityes,
mortifications, chains, ciliciums and other bodily macerations, (beside their
inward war subduing the passions, which is of great trouble) not few, nor of
small account; yet they are as seldom sick, as any others, with all their
commodityes, and do live longer; many, upwards of fourscore, others, of nynty,
but commonly to near seauenty, and betwixt that, and eighty; which is esteemed
among seculars, a great age.

14. But whosoever, do think, that they must not be sick, they are mistaken?
and what if they fall sick? cannot they therefore serve God in sickness?
without all doubt, they may, and please God highly, in their greatest
infirmity, and pain; I know not what better occasion they can have, to
exercise themselves, in patience, resignation, and conformity to the will of
God; and perhaps enduring their sickness, and pain, with content, it may be
more acceptable, of more value, and merit, before, God; then what they did in
all their life formerly, when they had their best health; for in this they are
tried; and the fruit of their prayers, and other exercises, will appear; and
their virtue, and love to God beknowen, not only by what, but also in the
manner that they do suffer for his sake, and love;

15. And what then if they dye? do not they the sooner go to heaven, to enjoy
him whom they say, they love, and for whose love, they took that form of
living upon them, to be free from the miseryes of this life, and be in glory
for ever? who do think, they would endure wrongs, iniuryes, persecutions,
torments, and martyrdom, for God; according to the desires which often they
feel in prayer, if they fear infirmityes, and would be free from any
sickness, and not indifferent in all things, and to accept of them, with all
patience, and conformity, as God were pleased to send them?

16. Some also of this sort of people do add to their retirement, prayer, and
other spiritual exercises; many bodily mortifications, and pennances, but they
feel not their inward enemies; perhaps, by reason they have no occasion to
try, or know, what inwardly they are; or by reason they are of a soft, quiet,
and mild disposition of nature, and not easily moved, or are insensible of
troubles; these are soonest deceived, and secular^ in them; who seeing them of
that simple, and myld condition, do honor, and esteem them very much, as if
in deed they were saints; and this is one of the greatest deceits of the
world; and these do think themselves of no little spiritual perfection, and
virtue; I have seen, and known some of them, but when they were affornted in
occasions with injurious words, and abused, contrary to that esteem which they
themselves, and others had of them, their passions were found very liuly, and
their inward mortification and virtue little.

17. Of these likewise, there be many Noblemen, and women, and others of great
estates, that having used a retired life, much prayer, and mortification of
their bodies, are desirous to forsake all, and embrace a religious state of
life, in some holy order; but the devil is not here wanting to hinder so great
a good; and first he places as a reasonable thing, before their face; that
they must do nothing rashly, but be advised by their friends, and Ghostly
Father; and when they have so done; the friends, (chiefly if they have a benefit
by their remaining in their own estate,) do allege unto them, their
tenderness, the great rigor and austerity of a religious life, and what a
hard thing it is to be at the will, and command of an other, who may want
discretion, and other qualityes befitting a superior; and have no regard of
them, more then of a poor man's son, who was brought up to labor, and may
cause them to do servile works, which they were not bred to, and hinder them
from prayer, and other good works, which in the world they could have done,
with great perfection; as to build Churches, bridges, high ways, maintain
orphans, prefer poor decayed gentlemen's daughters, relieve the poor, and
many other good and charitable deeds; which in religion they cannot do; and
then they present to them, the example of many Emperors, Kings, and queens,
that by their good deeds, and virtuous life, remaining in the world, were
great saints, as Henry the first Emperor, and his wife; Lewis, of France,
Edward of England, Helena, Empress, two Elizabethes, of Portugal, and
Hungary, and diverse others, saints; and then the Ghostly Father perhaps out of
some human respects, and loath to offend these friends, does consent and
concur with their remaining in the same state, under this holy pretense, that
they may be virtuous, and saints as well, as others, that lived so.

18. But this was a special and extraordinary favor of God, done to them, not
commonly granted; and therefore the poor souls are deceived, being thus
persuaded, not to follow gods holy inspirations, but are hindered to be free
from these ties, with which they are kept fast, and cannot go forward, with
true freedom, and liberty, to perfection, and the love of God; for often it
falls out, that these good souls having the occasion present, in time of
temptation, and aridity, not finding those inward comforts, and consolations,
which they were wont to have, may fall from their godly exercises, to worldly
recreations, rather then suffer that trouble, and aridity; and perhaps fall
into sin, as David, and Solomon did, after receiving many great graces, and
favors from God; but David did penance; and whether Solomon be saved, or
damned, it is doubtful, and most say; that he is not saved; I was acquainted
with one of quality, who was thus deceived, and fell after acquiring a great
progress in prayer: whereas, if he had forsaken all, and become religious, the
occasion of falling, had not been; for in religion in time of aridity, they
have an encourragment (by seeing the example of others) to go forward; and they
would be unmindful of any other thing, and resolutly, and constantly go on,
and do the will of God, in all occasions; in hope to gain the comforts, and
other feelings, they had formerly of God; also they have not any motive
present, to withdraw them from their spiritual exercises, wherewith to divert
their mynds; for being religious, necessity may compel them to virtuous
exercises, and to put their confidence in God only, having no other refuge,
since their estate and wealth is once forsaken, to which they cannot return.

19. Yet, I do not say, but some may be saints, being rich, and wealthy; but
it is rare, for though S. Bernard says, that not the substance or the wealth,
but the affection, to it, is that which hurts, and hinders us, from
perfection; yet it is hard for a rich man to enter into the Matthew. 19. v. 23.
v. 24.
kingdom of heaven; or for a man to possess riches, and not affect them; and
consequently, to acquire perfection, and become a saint; though true it is,
that the grace of God is beyond all; these sorts of people, are very pious, and
devout, whiles they have no cross, but comforts; and they think themselves
virtuous, being not tried, by the contrary; and in time of temptation, or
probation, they fail.

20. Our Holy Mother S. Teresa relates a story of one whom she knew, that
lived a retired life, but had all commodityes; he was much given to prayer, to
speak of God, frequent the Sacraments, and he would not willingly offend God,
in any thing; and was as he and others. conceived, of great perfection, by
reason he was a single man never married, then aged, kept private in his own
house, was affable of condition, not seen angry, endured many troubles, and
contradictions, he did not use to speak ill of any, had comforts and
consolations; so that many held him for a Saint;

21. But she whom God had Blessed with the discretion and knowledge of spirits,
being in conference with him, soon found out his disease, and his error; for
she observed that in all things, he followed his own judgment, and will;
affected his commodityes, and in occasions of self interest, or worldly
profit, he was somewhat earnest, and gave himself more scope, then he ought,
or was fitting, for so good, and upright a conscience; she also perceived, that
he took content in his own speaking of spiritual things, and in relating
what he did, and suffered; and he so gilded, all his proceedings, that he was
esteemed very pure; and perfect; as is said.

22. But why did he behave himself so well, in suffering those troubles*
without note of impatience? and so well demean himself in other occasions?
not out of any true or solid virtue; but only for his honor, and the
preservation of his credit, and the good opinion he knew, was held of him; all
which she easily discovered in that conversation, and she much admired how the
party himself, and so many others, were so easily mistaken, and deceived in
him. and she concludes saijng, that she feared the loss of this man's soul, and
the like, more then of many known sinners. for he had his commodityes, his
own will, and proper judgment, in all things; he trusted to himself, his
mortification, was little; and his manner of life, with those comforts, and
consolations, and the esteem held of him, caused him simply to have a good
conceit, and opinion of himself, and relate what he did, and for his credits
sake, to suffer those contradictions, and troubles with a cheerful
countenance, not observing perhaps any vice in all this, yet pride and vain
glory had no small share in him. to this purpose you may call to mind the
lamentable story of the Doctor of Paris who as some conceive for the good
conceit he held of himself, was damned; though esteemed a saint by many; good
God how apt we are to think well of our selves, and what we do? and how
easily we are blinded in our own cause? for self love makes things appear,
otherwise to us, then they in themselves are; and truly, where wealth and good
accommodation is, commonly, pride and vain glory are not wanting; which cannot
consist with true perfection.

23. Now let us speak of religious persons, that forsook the world, with a
desire to serve, and please God, with great perfection; they begin well, using
many austerytyes, pennances, and much prayer; they become learned, they speak
of God willingly, in all their conuersations; and are of an exemplary life;
which, if they should prosequu^e, certainly they would, by God's Grace, at^aine
to high perfection; to which, perhaps they conceive they have attained:
howsoever, they are well esteemed of others; but that which is much to be
lamented, is this, that they who forsook he world, and all things thereof,
(under he color in the beginning, to help others,) do put themselves in
occasions; and by degrees, they decline from their wonted exercises; they seek
to be acquainted with this, and that Noble, or^ich man, or woman, and get their
fa^our; and that for which they forsook the the world, is now the cause why
they are more in the world, then ever before, and he that came to religion,
vowed poverty, and to live retiredly from the world, myndeth nothing more then
to please, and embrace the world? and so he perhaps of that Blessed Paradise,
of religion, makes a hell and place of damnation for himself; what seek they
by their diligences? to acquire the favor, or esteem of worldlings, and to
go from the pure water, in which they appeered white, and clean, into the
filthy puddle of worldly mire, and then they are so changed that they are no
sooner touched in a word, about their honor, or reputation, but their
immortification appeeres; they are offended; inwardly troubled, and disquieted;
which shows, that their building, was not solid; their virtue true, and
themselves, after all their labors, and exercises for many years of little, or
no perfection;

24. These come so far, that they will not have any, to think otherwise,
then well, of them; which is no small defect, and want of humility. and more
then so, they think it, fit, to justify themselves, and that they are bound so
to do, in discretion, for preserving their reputa^ation, in case they be ill
spoaken of; which truly, is a great deceit; unless, it does concern the
public good of their order, and that they are commanded so ^o do, by
obedience; this is the opinion of all spiritual writers.

25. For who could better defend his credit, and justify himself, then Christ
our Savior, the true pattern of virtue, and master of all perfection, being
fal^ly accused, very much wronged, and ^bused, both in his reputation and
person? Yet he in silence, humbling himself; with patience endured all, for
our example, but the devil is cunning and crafty, and does well know, how to
paint, and color things, in all occasions, with false shadows, according to
the humor, and disposition, of every one, to deceive, and keep them in
ignorance of the truth; vnmortifyed, and imperfect.

26. Others, also there are, who live with more mortification, and
recollection, not esteeming any friendship of worldlings, but do endeavor to
observe their institute exactly, and think that they are dead to all things,
and perhaps they are; but not to themselves; for often, if they be corrected,
or admonished for some small defects, they do find an auersion, and an inward
murmuration in themselves; and they think so well of themselves, that they
conceive, that they live an irreprehensible life, and therefore are disquieted
if they be corrected; this shows that they have not gained true humility, nor
gained perfection, neither have they put the axe of mortification, as yet, to
the root of the tree of self love, and proper interest.

27. Others are of a higher degree, yet are found tied in trifling things, as
to affect a good cell, a fair breuery, handsome beads, spiritual books,
curious pictures, so that if they should be deprived of these, they find an
inward alteration, and contradiction, though it be done by their Superior; by
which, they show, that as yet they have not the true liberty, and freedom, of
spirit, which they ought to have, but are tied with these small threeds, which
keep them down, that their spirit cannot fly to the height of perfection;
others are of more perfection, and are free from all worldly ties, and the
former affections, and are in a great height with God; they have great
feelings, and comforts, even in the Superior part, and this they affect; so
that, if for any time, these illuminations, and feelings, were kept from them;
they would find a kind of sadness in themselves; which shows, that they are
not totally mortifyed, and that they have not acquired true poverty of spirit;
which is; willingly, for the love of God, to be conformable: to Christ naked,
and comfortless on the cross, and the will of God in all things, and to be
deprived of those very favors, and comforts, which his divine Majesty, does
bestow upon them, for they must strip themselves naked of all affection
whatsoever, and be indifferent, to be disposed of, as shall please God; though
it should be, to be in affliction, and void of all comfort, during their life,
in this world;

28. So that all these, are soberly de^eiued thinking them selves truly
spiri^uall, but the contrary, is found in these occasions, wherein they are
tried; yet all ^s laudable.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
The chief reasons, why they attain not to perfection of spirit.
1. MAny causes and reasons there may be alleged, why so few come to true
perfection, but here I do intend to show two which may suffice for all, The
first is, that from the very beginning they did not place a sollid fundation for
their building, that is, they did not seriously practice themselves, in the
meditation, and imitation of the life, passion, death and virtues of our dear
Lord and Master Christ Jesus, the looking glass and true pattern of all
perfection; but lightly passing over his life, bitter passion, and death, they
remain in the consideration of his benefits, and other high matters, of Gods
perfections, wherein they find comfort, and content; with which they are
satisfied; they give God thanks, and praise, and go no further, to know
themselves; whereas they should meditat upon his life, and passion; to be
moved to compassion, compunction, and mortifycation of themselves, and to do
some penance for their sins. and thus proceeding with humility, carry their
cross, and lay a so^id fundation, to build upon.

2. For what will it avail me, to have content, and consolations, in prayer,
if I ^e not the more penitent, and by pennan^e, my soul the more purged, and
pure; ^or my senses, nor passions, the more mortified, and subdued? they that
go so high, are like to those, that going, do always look upward, not
considering that stones, or other obstacles, may meet with their feet; and if
they hit on some one, down they fall, so these consi^er high matters of the
divinity, and ^oe not look down upon the suffe^^ngs of our Savior, which
might pres^rue them from falling, in case, they hit on the stones of
temptation; for tempta^^ons meeting with their inclinations, and unmortified
affections, which are the feet of the soul, and they not practis^d, to look
upon, and immitat our Saiours mortification, but thinking of his greatness,
or other his perfections, may easily fall to sin.

3. But who considering that our Savior suffered those cruel torments, for
our sins; would not be moved to hate sin, and rather, dye then commit one?
we read that a man in spain desirous to sin with a woman, it happened to be
near a cross, which was on the high way; and when he was to commit that evil
act, lookeing on the crucifix which hanged an the cross, it came to his mind,
that our Savior, was so nailed, and put to death for his sins; where upon
instantly he stoppt; and would not commit the act, but repented; and it is
said, that the crucifix did bow down to him, and does so remain to this day;
to show how gratfull that act of his, was to our Savior. by this you see how
powerful the memory of the passion of our Savior is to prevent sin. also,
^^ that intends to go upward, must beg^^ from the lowest step, next the
ground, and so ascend by degrees, and not (...) before time, which brings
danger of ^ great fall. the lowest step ascending t^ perfection is the knowledge
of our selves, our unmortified senses and passions, which we shall see, and
know, considering the life, and passion of our Savior, comparing ours, with
his;

4, As to say thus, what will it a^ay^^ me, that our Savior suffered many
iniuryes, and cruel torments, if I do not imitat his suffering by doing
penance and abstaining from sin. if he suffered for love of me; why should
not I suffer somewhat for love of him? Also what the better am I, that our
Savior was poor, humble, patient, myld, obedient, resigned, affable,
mortifyed, and conformable to the will of his heavenly Father in all things? if
I do not consider them, and endeavor to imitat him, in these virtues, and
settle them, in my soul, as fundamental stones, and a solid fundation, of this
spiritual building, least the fundation not being strong, and solid, the
tempestuous wind of some temptation coming, it should be cast to the ground,
by sin, and perhaps after the use of many years of prayer, and other good
exercises, when they think themselves virtuous, and spiritual, in the
occasions, and trial, they find themselves, unmortified, passion at, and void
of true virtue?

5. Observe this well, for a certainty, that the prayer, in beginners; which
induces not to the mortification of the vices, passions and senses, is of
little worth; And in the proficient; that pra^er, which does not bring them to
the imitation of the virtues of our Savior, is not to be esteemed, let their
speculation and desires be never so high or great and in the unitive, or state
of the perfect, that prayer, which moves not to a perfect abnegation, of them
selves, and an alienation, or subtraction from all creatures, and to the pure
love of God, and desire of his honor, glory, and praise above all things; and
a great feeling of the least imperfection; with which the high majesty of God,
is displeased: and a sincere affection to suffer for his love; is not to be
valued, or thought of any great profit; so that from the beginning to the end of
our lives, we must by this way, from one step, to an other, go forward;
always, tending to perfection, until at last, we offer our selves wholly
without any interest whatsoever, as a pure sacrifice, and holocaust, to our
heavenly Father, as our Savior did upon the cross; dead to our selves, and
all the world, living only to God alone; and then our prayers may be forcible
and effectuallin deed with God.

6. Observe also, that though consolatious are good, to draw us forward, yet we
must not make any great account of them, or much desire them, by reason, it
shows selfeloue, and proper interest, as is said; and withal, though many
times, they be from God, they may be also from the devil, and not without the
smoke of vain glory; and he induces us, with it. to think well of our
selves; and that God does give them, because we do serve him well; and that
our life, and exercises, are grateful to him; and thence we take compassion of
others, that do, not serve God, to our likeing, and we desire to bring them,
to do, as we do; as if we were somewhat; and in truth are nothing; and thus we
are often deceived, thinking all to be from God; and our selves to be what we
are not; therefore they are not to be desired; but when his divine Majesty is
pleased to give them, they are to be accepted, with great humility, and
thanks; not thinking any thing the better of our selves; and thus, if they be
from the devil himself, you may profit by them; but whether your prayer, be
natural or supernatural, meditation, or contemplation, with gusts, or without
them, you must not of set purpose neglect the humanity of our Savior (though
you put of other corporeal shapes) to remain as it were always absorpt, or
suspended in that content, or expecting till god do send it unto you, as In
her life chap. 22. and in the castle of the soul. man's. 7.
some books do advise; for they teach, that if one come to true
contemplation, not to fall on corporeal things, nor on the very humanity of
our Savior, by reason it is an obstacle to their progress in prayer, and
spiritual profit; which our Holy Mother does not approve, but teaches
absolutely the contrary, for several reasons.

7. First it is not always granted by God, that the soul and powers are in a
deep recollection, and high contemplation, of the divinity, gods attributes,
and perfections, with those sweet gusts, which some times are had in prayer.
for every day as the proverb says, is not a Holy day, but some time must be to
toil and labor; neither is any so happy, as to be in a continual inward
peace, and not have some trouble; for the life of man on earth is a war; so
that, when that great Job 7. v. 1.
recollection and contemplation is not had, nor those gustes; and temptations
(without which, none can be) at hand; what an encourragment, to suffer, can be
greater? what help better, then the example of our Savior, who came to this
world, to teach us, by his virtuous life, the true way of perfection? neither
are we Angels to be continually suspended in contemplation, and to burn
always with the love of God; but we must remember, that we are men, flesh and
blood, must eat, drink, and sleep, be among others, and converse with them;
which brings distractions, and temptations; in which, what can be a better stay
for our thoughts, then the humanity of our loving Lord, and Savior, in whom we
shall see, what instantly to rest upon, and how to employ our thoughts, both
to defend, and recollect our selves;

8. For if, we breed our spirit to be separated from the humanity of Christ;
in abuses* wrongs, iniuryes, persecutions, which forcibly do bring the spirit,
from that height of contemplation) what refuge have we, for our preservation,
and safety? what shall the poor soul do in that case, not haing the help of
the one, nor the other? whereas if she had our Savior present, there she might
see how patiently he suffered, how charitable, and favorable he was to his
adversaries, and enemies; how humble, mortified, and conformable to the will of
his heavenly Father he was in all his persecutions, and torments; and how
sweetly Math. 10. v. 28.
he advises us, not to fear those, who can only kill the body, but come to
him, and he in our greatest afflictions will comfort, and assist us, that with
the temptation, 1. Cor. 10 v. 13.
we may have profit, and the victory over all our adversaries, and our selves.

9. O what can move a man more, to suffer with patience, and all conformity,
the crosses of this world, for the love of God; then to see his bleeding
wounds, with so great patience, and humility, endured and suffered for love of
him? for casting his eyes on our Savior, in that case, he may conceive, that
he says to him; have I done so much for thee, and thou do forget both it,
and me? is it possible, that thou will not do somewhat, and endure this little,
for love of me? these are liuly motives, to encourrag the poor soul, in her
assaults, and temptations, to suffer all with content; which she should not
have had, nor could it be expected, without the presence of his holy humanity.

10. It is also certain, that God the Father, is much more pleased with us,
and delighted, when with love we offer unto him, his sweet and dearly beloved
son, Christ Jesus and his Holy Merits, and sufferings, in satisfaction of our
sins, then with any other thing whatsoever; for how do we think to obtain
forgiunesse, or any grace, or favor, but by him, who is our aduocat with the
Father, and by whom we had salvation, all grace and goodness?

11. The Holy Catholic Church never demands or desires of God the Father
any thing, but through Christ Jesus, whom our heavenly Fathet does always
hear for us; where then at any time can it be better, then with him? or how is
it possible, that his sweet presence, can be a hinderance to our contemplation,
or spiritual profit, by whom, and in whom all blessings are had? And though
that abstraction, or alienation of the mind from all corporeal things, be
often with great delight, yet it is not so profitable nor secure as that
contemplation of the humanity of Christ; neither will they ever come to the
true mortification, poverty of spirit, and perfection, which they may come
unto, by the humanity; and withal, these souls, seem to seek their own
content, and those gustes, rather then true abnegation, and conformity to the
will of God, and the life of Christ, who is the treasure of heaven, and
fountain of all grace, and happiness; in knowing of whom as S. John I^an. 17.
v. 3
says, is all felicity, and life everlasting.

12. To think then that the memory of him, may hinder our spiritual profit, is
an error and deceit as our Holy Mother affirms; the devil also by that
means, would have us forget, what our Savior mercifully vouchsafed to be, and
do for us; least we should be moved always to be thankful, but rather fall
into the crime of ingratitude, which to God is odious, and to cause us to have
a very little respect to the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar, where our
Savior Math. ^6. v. 26.
is really and Gloriously, true God and man, and consequently, have in a manner
no love to the sacred humanity of Christ, which was borne, punnished and
tormented, dead and buried for love of us, and rose, and ascended into heaven
for our justification and salvation.

13. The most eminent and devout saints that lived, were always truly
affected to the sacred humanity of Christ, S. Paul had him so printed in his
soul, 1. Cor. 2 v. 2.
that all his speeches were of Christ, he minded nothing but Christ Crucified,
and who had higher contemplation, greater visions, more revelations, then he?
who had greater persecuations, and boar them with more courrage then he? who
could (as he says) do all things Philip. 4. v. 1^
in Christ; that is, nothing seemed impossible or difficult unto him, having
Christ before his eyes, who could assist and strengthen him in all occurrents
whatsoever? who also was more affected to the humanity of our dear Savior,
then B. S. Francis, whose wounds were not only fixed in his mind, but also
printed in his very flesh to be seen, in his hands, feet, and side; and yet
none thought more contemplative, in his time; Blessed S. Bernard was so
addicted to the sacred humanity, that all his endeauours were to imitat the
mortification, and virtues of our Savior, and is therefore commonly painted
with all the instruments of our Saviors passion, in his arms; and yet he was
so given to contemplation, that hardly he used his outward senses, and that
with difficulty, and only for charity, or necessity: the same you may read of
S. Martin Bishop of Toures, of S. Anthony of Padua, who is painted commonly
with little Jesus, S. Brigitta that was for the most part absorpt in the
contemplation of the Passion and wounds of Christ, S. Catherin of Syena who had
his wounds printed in her flesh, as S. Francis; that great Ignatius Martyr and
innumerable more; who always did place their best thoughts upon the humanity
of Christ, and by that came to true contemplation and perfection.

14. Moreover you may consider, that in that elevation of spirit from the
humanity of our Savior, there is some want of humility, by reason they do
eleuat their Spirit, before God does eleuat it and would feign be partakers
with Christ in his consolations, but not in his tribulations, and become Mary,
before they learn, or know to do, the office of Martha; Mary sat with sweet
content at our Saviors feet, in deep contemplation of his humanity, and
Martha did labor to serve him, by her holy action; and both did please our
Savior; the active life, is the way to the contemplatine, and he that would
feign enjoy the comfort of the one, without enduring the labor and trouble of
the other is not so humble as he ought, and certainly will never come to the
height of mottification, nor perfection. for the least defect of humility in
this way of prayer, is of very great importance, and hinders all progress in
virtue.

15. Therefore, in all prayers, whether it be natural or supernatural, she
advises In her life chap. 21.
that we begin with the sacred humanity, and she does entreat her Ghostly
Father in his prayer not to do otherwise; for it is the true and secure way to
all perfection; but if it shall please his divine Majesty, to eleuat your
spirit, and bring you from the humanity, to be delighted with the joyful
contemplation of his divinity, go freely with him, always placing humility
before you, as a lantarne; for we must not be too forward, nor too desirous of
spiritual gusts; but modest and civil, remaining willingly with his sacred
humanity, and think it a great favor; and that we are wholly unworthy of any of
those high favors, great comforts, and gustes.

16. But for us to eleuat our spirit of our selves, from all corporeal things,
and the sacred humanity of Christ! is to fly before our wings are grown,
willing to penetrat high misteryes, of the divinity, (which far exceed our
capacity) before we understand the mystery, and great good we have, by Christ's
holy humanity, which is the ladder to ascend by, to the divinity; for as he
says, none Joan. 14. v. 6
can come to his Father, but by him, who is the way where in none can err, and
without which, they must go astray: O who would willingly deprive himself, of
so great a certainty, and security to come to our heavenly Father? O who would
be so ungrateful, as of purpose deprive himself of the memory of those most
blessed tokens of the love, of the son of God, our dear Savior to us wretched
sinners, expressed with so great pain, and the effusion of his most Precious
Blood, by which the sins of the world are washed, and taken away? surely I
think none, but such as came not to the true knowledge, and feeling of the
treasure of the true love of God; what, for Gods sake, do they aim at? I
should think; at true perfection; and not at gusts, and knowledge of high
things; but perfection of true and solid virtue, does consist in the perfect
imitation, of the life, and virtues of Christ our Savior, as is often said,
and the conformity of our will, to the will of God; how then can they imitat
whom they will not call to mind, but of set purpose forget? how will they come
to perfection, who willingly do leave, and forsake the rrue way to it?

17. Likewise it is to be noted, that even for the bodily health, it is good,
often to fall from that high contemplation of the divinity, to that of the
sacred humanity, for the bow which is always bent, is in danger to burst,
and break; and the soul which is kept in that height continually, not having
always those comforts, nor wherewith to settle and employ her self; which
often does happen; is sorely tired, the head hurt, the brain weakened, and the
body perhaps brought to sickness, which I have seen, and known, in some; but
then falling to the sacred humanity, she has where with to rest, with ease,
and employ her self profitably, considering with what love, our Savior
suffered, those torments, for us; which is more suitable, and agreeable to our
natural disposition?

18. And believe it, that if we humble our selves, our Savior will exalt us,
and give us a more perfect contemplation, and those comforts, and gustes, in a
more plentiful manner; for when he does eleuat our spirit, to that
contemplation, he presents instantly sufficient matter, to keep the soul
sweetly employed, without any great labor, yea with great facility and
delight; but when we do it of our selves, though he does concur, yet not
near so much, as in the other. by reason it is his own work, and I may say,
a reward of that humility, which is not given to the other, in which there is a
defect of humility, which puts an obstacle to the effects, which in prayer
are given to the truly humble; and our Holy Mother at length does conclude
thus, that if any book, or Ghostly Father shall direct you otherwise, then by
the sacred humanity of our Savior, do it not, for their persuasion; but with
humility, allege the former reasons; for this doctrine, she received from the
mouth of our Savior, and by long experience; she had the trial of both, and
found this to be true; and confidently she does affi^me, that they who go by
the other way, shall never come to the true poverty of spirit, and perfection,
which by this other is acquired; neither shall they ever enter into the two
last Mansions of which she write in the book of Man's. 7.
the castle of the soul; This is the first reason why so few come to
perfection, though for many years they use prayer, and other holy exercises.

19. But some may say, that they cannot always meditat upon the passion of
our Savior, by reason, it is painful. and the soul over much danted, will
have no courrage without somewhat to recreat, and comfort her; true it is, that
it is a heavy thing, always to consider the passion, and wounds of Christ,
but you need not do so always; for you may consider many other things in
his life; as his nativity, with the joyful melody of the Angels, singing in
the air praise to God, and peace to men on earth; also the visitation of the
poor Pastors with great joy, the Glorious star, and adoration of the three
kings, acknowledging him with their gifts, to be the supreme Lord, and King of
heaven and earth; his being among the Doctors, at the age of twelve years,
putting questions, and answering to their interrogations, with so great wit,
and wisdom, Luke 2. v. 46
that all did admire; his calling disciples after him; his preaching, his
miracles, his great charity to all; which is a thing extremely to be observed;
for none ever came to him, but got their desire, except they who came to tempt
him, of mere malice; as the pharisees; also they may consider his glorious
resurrection, his appeering to his Appostles, and disciples, his bringing of
the Blessed souls from Lymbus, and his ascension with them, into heaven, where
he is sitting Gloriously at the right hand of his heavenly Father, and in the
most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar; all which and many other considerations
are not painful, and heavy, but rather comfortable and joyful;

20. Also, some do allege, that such as are arrived to supernatural prayer,
cannot meditat upon the passion, nor the life of Christ, or his saints; by
reason they cannot discourse; and so they should labor in vain; to which our
Holy Mother does make answer saijng; that true it is, that in supernatural
prayer they cannot meditat or discourse, yet not withstanding, the memory may
present some one point of his life, or passion, to the understanding, which
with one simple look, may behold, and sweetly contemplat it; for example, our
Savior suffering with great pain, and love. himself to be crowned so cruelly
with thorns, or nailed fast, to the cross, for us; in which view, the
understanding, may rest sweetly, with great content; and seeing how ill, his
love and grievous pains, were required by us; the will, instantly, though not
with sensible tenderness, yet with a most prompt willingness does offer her
self to suffer in occasions, for his love and sake, in token of gratitude;
which memory of our Savior, in time of temptations, will encourrag the soul,
with alacrity of spirit, to endure all with patience, and conformity to the
will of God.

21. The second reason or cause of their error, is, the not subiecting, or
submitting themselves, to be governed, and directed by the will of an other;
but do trust to much to themselves. for as S. Paul says our sufficiency is
from God, and no man is sufficient to rule or govern 2. Cor. 3. v. 5.
himself, be he never so learned or spiritual; chiefly in these things;
wherein true humility, is more requisite, and necessary, then all the learning
of the world; and he that is truly humble, does not think well of himself, nor
of his own proceeding, but is always fearful; and does prefer the
judgment and advise of an other, before his own; neither does he esteem
himself the more virtuous, or perfect, for that contemplation, gust, or
consolation, which he feels in prayer; but with all submission, does
acknowledge himself, wholly unworthy of any favor; and plainly confesses his
obligation, to love and serve his divine Majesty, to be the more and greater;
and that he does not perform his duty in this behalf; which causes him to
think himself ungrateful, and that nothing that he does is secure without the
censure, or approbation of some learned and discreet Ghostly Father, or
directour, for being obedient in these things, he cannot do amiss; his very
humble obedience, will supply before God, all other defects, and it gives his
divine Majesty more satisfaction then whatsoever he out of his own will and
judgment should do.

22. Obedience is better then sacrifice, kings 15. v. 22.
for by it you sacrifice, your greatest interest to God; to wit your judgment
and will; by reason, for his love, and sake you do renounce your will, to do
the will of an other, who in his place is over you; this is a secure path; in
this, our Holy Mother Teresa of Jesus did excel, and therefore was praised by
Christ himself, as she does confess in her life; for she understanding of the
great austerity and rigorous pennances which an other great servant of God did
make, called Catherin de Cardona (who was after, of our order,) she grieved, by
reason she did no such pennances, being hindered by her Ghostly Father, and
complained on her self, to our Savior, who said, that her obedience, was more
grateful to him, ^hen all that great austerity of the other; for she in all
that she did, followed her own will, but our Holy Mother, followed the will of
God, and forsook her own will, which is the greatest and most we can offer to
God upon earth; and therefore, it is well said in Holy Scripture that the
obedient shall speak victoryes; that is, shall be Victorious over the world,
the flesh, and the devil, having Pro 21 v. 28.
subded themselves, to be in all things conformable, and obedient unto Gods
will, and the direction of their Ghostly Father, who in those things,
represents the person of God; but he must be learned, and of a good life, and
discreet, (if such a one may be had) but if with this, he be spiritual, and
given to prayer, it is a great blessing;

23. Yet how soever, if he be learned and humble though not practiced in
prayer, and does confide in God; he will assist, inspire, and direct him, what
to say, and do, for the good of those humble, and obedient souls, that do
not desire their own will, but the will, honor, and glory, of God, in, and
above all things; and observe, that you must not conceal any thing good or
bed, from him; but acquaint him with all that you do, and what either God or
the devil does unto you; in temptations, or otherwise. for, by this, your
inward and outward actions, senses, and passions, are often examined, the wyles
of the devil, discovered, the deceitful pretenses, and excuses of our nature,
known; virtues, always exercised, mortification, practiced remedies against
all euiles, had; self love, proper judgment, and our own will, altogether
destroyed; our spiritual profit, in the way of perfection, perceived, and
understood* which is a great settlement to the mind, having with it, the
testymony of a good conscience.

24. By these two documents our building shall have a sollid fundation, and be
secure; which truly is a heavenly happiness, on earth; and the want of these
fundations, practiced from the beginning, is the cause of the ruin and fall of
the buildings, of those supposed spiritual people, who trust so much to them
selves; for none can ever attain, to true perfection, without these. This
doctrine; to wit, to be humble, keeping in all degrees of prayer, the company
of our Saviors Blessed, humanity, and obedience to your spiritual directour,
or Ghostly In her life chap. 22.
Father; in that which is for the good of your soul, and glory of God,
concealing nothing from him; she had from the mouth of our Blessed Savior, as
she does declare; and it is the true, and infallible way, to true perfection,
and therefore to be highly esteemed, followed, and practiced by all, that are
desirous of spiritual perfection.

25. Some reading the lives, and books of some great saints, and finding
there, how much they were favored by God, enriched with special graces,
replenished with unspeakable joys, and inward comforts, endued with the gifts
of the Holy Ghost, and the degrees of supernatural prayer, (as quietness, or
silence, suspension of the powers, and divine union in prayer; whence follows
ecstasies, rapts, visions, revelations, Miracles, and such like that tongue,
cannot express) do aspire to come to those things, which are supernatural,
and desire that God would grant them the same, as to be suddenly mortified in
their senses, and passions, infused virtues, divine contemplation, and union
with the divine essence, and be perfect, as those saints were; I cannot say,
but that all this is very good; yet on the other side I must confess, that to
desire these to be suddenly infused, shows a weak spirit, little courage,
great want of humility, no mortification, small knowledge of themselves, much
selfeloue, and huge presumption. and perhaps, those supposed spiritual souls,
formerly mentioned, are of these, and therefore they never come to true
perfection. for commonly these are given to pure, and mortified souls, as a
reward of their long labors, and austerityes which they would have without any
such, yet I do not say, but that his divine Majesty, may give it, when, and to
whom he please, but it must no^ be desired by us, as if we were not sinners,
and needed not, to do penance for our sins, cry God mercy, crave pardon,
fear hell, and his rigourous judgment; for with trembling, and fear w^ must
work our Salvation, and by degrees, walk the path, of mortificatio^, as those
saints did, in the form, an manner, that you have seen here set, before you,
until at length, by your lon^ practice of virtuous acts, much prayer and other
holy exercises with the grace of God, you do overcome, and subdue (...)
outward, and inward senses, and ^^^^ons, and then in true humility love, ^^d
conformity of your will, to Gods In the castle of the soul. 5. mansion chap. 3.
will, in all things, you may acquire perfect union; which brings no danger.
with ^t, but great security. this is that union, which is to be desired, and
which our Holy Mother does highly commend, and did ever yet affect and desire
as she does ^ffirme, which is gained, as we may say, by the sweat of our
brows, our courrage, and the work of our hands; and not that supernatural
and delicat union, which is given without any desert, or merit on our part, and
which may bring danger with it; by reason, those gusts and great consolations,
may be procured by ^he devil, and are subject to deceit, but ^ot the other; the
soldiour, that by his own labor acquires any dignity, is mo^e to be esteemed,
then if he had that dig^ity gratis given him, or without any merit, or desert,
and so it is in this case, for what is spoken of in the first, and this second
part of this book, we work and procure with Gods Grace, until we at^aine to
that union of perfect conformity of our wills to God's will, in all things. but
that which is in the third, or next part God does work in us, the one is with
great labor, acquired, the other this hout any. that, without deprinationust
any sense or power, this, with a susp^^sion of all, that secure, quiet, and
immouable in all occasions; this full of suspicions, and fear to be deceived,
it so far surpassing our capacity, and understanding, and therefore not so
much to be desired as that other, which God grant we may come unto, cost what
it may. Amen.

The end of this second Part.
THE TABE Of the Chapters of the second Part of the Soul's Delight.
CHap. 1. p. 3. Of the dignity, and profit of Mental prayer. Chap. 2. p. 9.
What Mental prayer is, and of the parts thereof. Chap. 3. p. 33. Profitable
aduises concerning the use of prayer. Chap. 4. p. 44. Instructions for those
that cannot discourse in prayer. Chap. 5. p. 55. Of the purgative life, or way,
of beginners. compared to a garden. Chap. 6. p. 64. How the garden, of the
soul, must be made fit to be sown with good seeds, and set with sweet herbs
and flowers. Chap. 7. p. 71. How to sow and plant this garden, and bring it to
the 3. degree. Chap. 8. p. 91. Wherein the whole substance of the purgative
life does consist. Chap. 9. p. 97. Of the proficient, or illuminatiue way.
Chap. 10. p. 115. Of a more spiritual, and perfect mortification. Chap. 11. p.
131. Of the presence of God, and what it is. Chap. 12. p. 140. How the presence
of God is to be daily applied to the practice of virtue. Chap. 13. p. 154. Of
Resignation, and conformity to the will of God, and how to practice it with the
presence of God. Chap. 14. p. 169. How in Several ways, to use the presence
of God in prayer. Chap. 15. p. 191. How to examine your profit, or progress
made in prayer. Chap. 16. p. 202. Of the unitive way, or state of the perfect.
Chap. 17. p. 212. How some are deceived thinking themselves spiritual; Chap.
18. p. 238. The chief reasons why they attain not to perfection of Spirit.
Of the most marckable things contained in this second part of the Soul's
Delight; the first figure, shows the page, the second, the Marginall Number,
where that is had, which is sought for. and. ibid. designs the place lastly
cited.
A.
ARidity to be accepted of with resignation in prayer. p. 46. n. 3. exemplyfied
in our Holy Mother S. Teresa, and the V. Fr. John of Jesus Maria. n. 1. ibid.
Anger, how to mortify. p. 85. n. 23. Abstraction described. p. 92. n. 2.
Abnegation described. p. 94. n. 3. Attributes and perfections of God to be
often considered. p. 129. n. 9. Application of the mind may be diversely used
with the presence of God. p. 133. n. 3. 4. 5. 6.
B.
BEginners must be as open enemies in war with themselves. p. 95. n. 4.
Benefits of God to be often considered, as the proper exercise of the
illuminatiue state. p. 123. n. 8. He goes backward in God's service, that
daily goes not forward. p. 198, n. 9.
C.
CHurch of Rome the true arcke and Church of God, without which there is no
salvation. p. 119. n. 8. Comforts in prayer not to be desired. p. 116. n. 1.
see gusts. In Contemplation of the passion of our Savior and other divine
Misteryas S. Mary Magdalen spent her days after her conversion. p. 206. n. 5.
6. 7. Carnality suggested by the devil, or otherwise how to be overcome. p. 88.
n. 26. 27. 28. 29. The way of the Cross, the Kings high way to heaven. p. 40.
n. 8. Confession of our sins with humility, very acceptable to God, by the
example of King Ezechias and King David. p. 62. n. 11. 12.
D.
DIsobedient people to the will of God, and his ministers, are true libertynes
that go the large way leading to hell. p. 87. n. 25. Desire of ease to be
mortified, and how. p. 94. n. 3. Many deceived thinking themselves spiritual
which are not. p. 215. n. 5. 6. 7. to the end of the chap. Drunknes punnished
in Holofernes. p. 81. n. 18.
E.
EYes unmortified, the cause of great hurt to the soul; and how to mortify
them. p. 75. n. 8. 9. Eua eating the forbidden apple which was fair to the
eye, was the beginning of all our Euiles. p. ibid. Eating and drinking in
excess, or against the laws of God, must be punished. and how remedied
hereafter. p. 80. n. 18. 19. Examine carefully what profit you made in prayer
as is laid down. p. 191. to the end of the chapter. Eternity considered often,
of great profit. p. 64. n, 1. The end of man to be kept in mind. ibid. n. 2.
F.
Failing in your good purposes, you must not fall to anger or impatience. with
your self, but with submission to God, acknowledge your frailty in a sweet
manner, that you may not dismay your soul. p. 38. n. 7. Fidelity in gods
service will be always rewarded. p. 39. n. 7. Flowers of virtues, may be
discerned one from an other in the illuminatiue way. but in the unitive, they
appear very fair giving forth their sweet odours. p. 202. n. 1. to the end
of the chap.
G.
GVsts not to be affected, or fought after, in prayer. p. 116. n. 1. God does
withdraw his comforts from those that affect them, more then the doing of his
will, with all indifferency. p. 117. n. 2. God gives greater light and comfort
to indifferent souls. p. 118. n. 3. God must be sometimes left, for God. p.
119. n. 4. Helps to gain true humility. p. 152. n. 26 27. 28. 29. God present
in men diverse ways, to the great comfort of those that do consider it, p.
169. n. 2. 3. 4. Glu^tony punnished, and how to overcome it. p. 81. n. 18 19.
H.
HVmility how practiced inwardly and outwardly. p. 142. n. 3. 4. 5. etc. but
especially. p. 152. n. 26. 27. 28. 29. etc. Humility described very clearly. it
is the ruin of pride, proper esteem, and, is the fundation of true
perfection. p. 155. n. 3. Humility, the more, in prayer, the more the profit.
p. 175. n. 7. 8. 9. Humility with the presence of God, like lyme and stone does
make a solid fundation for the edifice of virtuous perfection. p. 154. n. 1.
The Humanity of our Savior not to be neglected of set purpose in prayer.
though never so high. p. 243. n. 6. see. p. 248. n. 12. and p. 249. n. 13.
Reasons, why the humanity is not to be neglected in prayer. p. 244. n. 7. to
the end of the Chapter.
I.
INtrouersion, described. p. 93. n. 3. Illuminatiue way. what. p. 97. n. 1. the
signs of it n. 4. why it is so called. n. 5. 7. its difference from the
purgative. ibid. its exercise. n. 9. its delight. n. 15. Instructions for those
that cannot discourse in prayer. p. 44. n. 1. 2. 3. etc.
K.
Knowledge of, our selves, the groundworke and fundation of a spiritual life.
p. 4. n. 1. 2. Knowledge of our selves, the cause of true humility. p. 155. n.
3. The gift of knowledge to be desired of God. p. 61. n. 11.
L.
Love desires convenient place and time to be with the person beloved. p. 104.
n 11. Love causes difficult things to become easy. p. 105. n. 13. self Love
is discovered by certain signs and tokens from the love of God. p. 119. n. 4.
Lives of Saints to be considered, to encourage the soul, in difficultyes to go
forward in virtue. p. 122. n. 6. and. p. 40. n 9. Self Love builds Babylon
the city of Satan, and destroys Jerusalem the city of God, which is the
soul in grace. p. 157. n. 4. What the life of saints is. p. 42. n. 10. The
life of Christ how far different from thine. p. 69. n. 11.
M.
M Mental prayer described. p. 9. n. 1. what great benefits are had by it. see
the first Chap. The parts of Mental prayer explicated. p. 11. n. 3. 4. 5.
etc. A certain hour to be observed for prayer, which never must be omitted,
but on very great occasions. p. 33. n. 1. good aduises concerning the use of
prayer. ibid, n. 2. 3. 4. to the end of the Chapt. Mortification of the senses,
and passions requisite to go on in the illuminatiue way. p. 98. n. 2. 3.
Mortification of the Superior part also very requisite. p. 115. n. 1.
Meditation of the passion of our Savior, in the manner, far different, in
the illuminatiue way, from that of the purgative, p. 122. n. 6. Meditation not
only of what, but also how our Savior in his life passion and death suffered,
most of all requisite in this state. ibid. n. 7. Meditations of the Purgative
way to be used somtymes in the illuminatiue, very requisite, and wherefore. p.
129. n. 10. Motives to bring us to be myndfull of the presence of God. p. 137.
n. 8. 9. and. p. 148. n. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. Who is he, that is to be said
truly mortified. p. 212. n. 1.
N.
NO man is sufficient to rule and govern himself be he never so learned, or
spiritual. p. 257. n. 21.
O.
THe soul to be ordered by the Ghostly Father, as a garden plot. by the
gardener. p. 61. n. 10. and p. 64. n. 1.
P.
PResence of God framed by the understanding how. p. 10. n. 1. Presence of God
described. also divided into Imaginary, and intellectual and what these are.
p. 131. n. 1. 2. to the end of the chapter. Presence of God in us several
ways, not framed by our imagination as the others, p 169. n. 2. 3. 4. Presence
of God and the practice of virtue, in prayer, and out of it, must like two
loving companions walk to gether hand in hand, which is the true way of
perfection. p. 140 n. 2. several examples of this practice. p. 141. n. 3.
Motives induceing us to be myndfull of God, in all places and times, and to
pass the time with him. p. 147. n. 20. 21. 22. etc. Presence of God have great
benefits. p. 103. n. 10. Passions, not esteemed to be mortified, until in
several occasions they be well tried. p. 121 n 5. Prayer to be used with the
presence of God in several other ways. p. 147. n. 6. to 17. and p. 182. n.
18. to the end of the Chap. Pride most of any thing, destroys a virtuous
soul. p. 157. n. 5. in Prayer always you must descend to some one particular
point. p. 175. n. 9.
R.
REsignation brings the spiritual building to a great height of perfection.
p. 155. n. 1. 4. Satan is always where pride is. p. 158. n. 5. Resignation
practiced with the presence of God. p. 159. n. 7. to the end of the chapter.
Reasons why they that think themselves spiritual, attain not to that
perfection. p. 238. n. 1. to the end of the chapter. Reflecting after prayer on
what, you did in it, of great profit. p. 42. n. 11. 12.
S.
THe Soul compared to a garden plot, which must be framed into a fair garden.
p. 57. n. 3. 4. 5. Servants do toil extremely in this world for small wages.
and do labor to please their Lords or masters though with their own great
discommodity, only. to continue in service; yet God requires no such toil of
us in his service, and does promise us for wages, endless glory, and life
everlasting, and this not withstanding we do not endeavor to please him. p.
149. n. 23. 24. Self will and proper judgment like worms do eat and consume
the roots of all virtues, if they be not well mortified. p. 121. n. 5. Sin
severely punnished from the beginning. p. 66. n. 5. 6. 7. 8.
T.
TOngues vnmortifyed have many euiles that follow, and how it may be remedyed.
p. 78. n. 15. 16. 17.
V.
Union with God, gained by prayer. p. 6. n. 6. Vanity, vncostancy, and
uncertainty of the things of this word, clearly known in prayer. p. 5. n. 3.
Venial sins daily committed, to be examined. p. 59. n. 7. Unmortified
passions, senses, and inclinations to be examined and considered. p. 60. n. 8.
W.
THe will of God, how known. p. 158. n. 6. VViles and deceits of the devil are
in prayer discovered. p. 5. n. 5.


THE ERROVRS OF THE SECOND PART. Escaped in the printing.
The tenth page, and first line. befors, for. before. p. 17. l. 19. the for.
the. p. 25. l. 12. foul. for soul. ibidem. l. 15. benesit. for benefit p. 39 l.
25. croffes for crosses. p. 44. l. 1. sensnality. for. sensuality p. 48. l. 14.
Terea. for. Teresa. p. 49. l. 4. there is. for. their. p. 53. l. 16. well for
will. p. 63. l. 13. filthred. for. filth. p. 66. l. 18. reasou. for. reason p.
67. l. 23. how. for. who. p. 70. l. 19. licte. for. like p. 73. l. 7. weel.
for. well. p. 84. l. 9. yonr. for. your. ibid. l. 26. I must. for. and l. p.
86. l. 26. os. for. of. p. 88. l. 12. whar. for. what. p. 90. l. 3. onr. for.
our. p. 93. l. 9. got. for he got. ibid. l. 13. his for her. p. 96. l. 20.
ridder. for ryder. p. 98. l. 4. sirst. for first. p. 99. l. 5. fir. for fit.
ibid. l. 22. on. for. of. p. 103. l. 8. ffate. for state. p. 126. l. 15. for.
for. or. p. 129. l. 7. distink. for distinct. and l. 13. sor. for. for. ibid.
l. 19. sin. for. sin. p. 131. l. 20. fit. for. sit. p. 147. l. 2. sants.
for. saints. p. 152. l. 5. fay. for say ibid. l. 18. is. for. if. p. 157. l.
11. guieth. for gives p. 194. l. 24. hauinesse. for heaviness. p. 207. l. 1.
chekes. for. checks. p. 211. l. 11. os. for. of. p. 238. l. 2. way for why. p.
240. l. 8. an. for. on. p. 146. l. 11. fo. for so. p. 259. l. 16. subded for
subdued. p. 260. l. 4. bed. for. bad.


