A PARADOX, IN THE PRAISE OF A DUNCE, TO Smectymnuus.

By H. P.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Paybody, in Queens Head Court in Pater Noster Row.
1642.

A Paradox In the praise of a DVNCE.
WHen I undertook this subject and seriously bethought me of the Title, (as
Plinies advice to every Author) The praise of a Dunce, I considered whether I
were my self a Dunce or no, then it had been true, proprio laus sordet in
ore. Again, Qui alterum incusare vol^^ scips^^ intueri opertet. But when I saw
that I had spent no small a time in the University, published some useful
Books (as well in Latin as English) to the Commonwealth, which have taken in
the world, and I could never get any thereby, but (...) as Plutarch calls them,
silken words, I concluded I was no Dunce; But the greatest reason of all that
persuaded me was, that for all my pains I could never get any preferment, had
I bin Dunce, without question, I had long ere this, perhaps bin double or
treble beneficed, bin a lasie Prebend, or Deane of some Cathedral my self, or
kept a fellowship with a good Living to boot in some College or other, as
long as I had lived. But to our purpose. There is no question, but a Dunce
deriveth his name from Duns Scotus, who was a tolerable writer in his time; and
no doubt but they deserve to be commended, for that they are pretenders to his
knowledge and learning, and though they cannot attain to the same, yet in
rebus magnis est vol^isse satis.

They commonly keep good houses, and give entertainment to Learned men, and
so they do (as Erasmus says) sarcire officium Hospitalitate. Yea while they
are in the University; they are very beneficial by bestowing Suppers and
Break-Fasts, (besides their liberality in Money) upon such learned Scholars as
make their Declamations and other exercises for them.

They love and make much of their Wives above other (whom they choose commonly
the handsomest in the whole Country) keeping them in their Coaches, their
Taffata, or Plush Gowns, themselves clad in Damask, with their broad Beavers,
Hats turned up, or crushd close before like a Court dripping-pan. They make good
sport in their exercises, by speaking of false Latin, making absurd arguments,
to the exceeding recreation of others. And since Taciturnitie, or silence is a
virtue, they are to be commended for their silence, for in learned company
where matter of knowledge or Learned discourse is offered, he always holds
his peace. I remember in a Christmasse time as I was at Dinner in the company
of one who was a Doctor, and had some 800l. by the year in spiritual living,
when a learned friend of mine a Doctor of the Civil Law, told him that I was a
stranger lately come from beyond the Seas, and could speak little or no
Latin, and desired to speak to him in Latin, which I did, the Doctor by an
interpreter, answered me, it was not the Custom of England to speak Latin in
a Christmasse time, and so drinking to me we had no more discourse.

He can in his preaching please both Country and City, and give them content.
In the Country he will never stand above three quarters of an hour, whereby
young men of the parish have leisure enough in the afternoon to recreate
themselves at any exercise they please: in the City he will not stick to
preach (such as they are) three or four Sermons in a day. Learned B. Andrews
when he was Vicar of St. Giles without Criple-gate would often say, that if he
preached twice in one day, his second Sermon was rather a prating than a
preaching, for indeed every Sermon he made was thoroughly studied, and fraught
with abundance of reading and learning.

The best Scholars commonly are slovens in respect of one of them, they go
spruce and so neat, and whatsoever their Doctrine or divisions be, if they be
handsome men and wear pontifical Beards, they are much commended by the
Faeminine Auditory, for says Erasmus merrily, In Far. Ep. Foemina laudant
concionem a vultu Concionatoris, Women commend a Sermon from the Preachers
countenance.

They never make any quarrel between our Church and the Church of Rome,
neither meddle they with controversy, or ever write against Bellarmine,
Bucanu^, Suarez, and the rest. He will hardly suffer any Living to fall into
the lapse, which rather than it should he will engrosse three or four into his
own hands. He seldom falls out or quarrelleth with any man, now and then he
will break Priscians head till the blood runs about his ears.

Again though he be no Scholar himself, he will provide of some more able
than himself to preach, which as a foil sets him off the better.

Sometimes if he be ambitious of popular applause, he will turn Schismaticke
in some kind or other sowing his Tares and Cockle, in woods and corners, to the
hazard of his ears; This proceeds both from want of learning, and want of
wit, wherein he is to be pitied veritas non quaerit angulos.

A Dunce also makes us good sport with any of his works that he publishes
himself, or that is published by another, witness, Epistolae obscurorum
virorum, where you shall see Duncery to the life, that if a man be extremely
Melancholique, let him read that book, and I will warrant it to cure him.

If a Dunce falls into a Scholars company in travel upon the way, or meet at
an Inn at night, he is the most boon companion of the world, he will call for
Wine, and the best meat in the house (for observe it, they are commonly the
sons of wealthy men and left exceeding rich, which indeed makes them Dunces)
and in the end pay for all, which, who can deny but to be a most honest and a
generous part. He commonly plays well at Bowls, and is so valiant that he
scorns to give ground to any man. He has an especial care of the burning of
Pigges upon the spit, and the overbaking of Pies in the Oven, therefore by his
good will, he will make short work upon a Sunday, and he thinks an Homily well
read to be sufficient.

If he be a Separatist (as many of them affecting singularity above the^^
fellows prove,) he puts his Auditors to little or no charge at al for his
Pulpit, a Velvet Cushion for his Deske, or so rich a Pulpit Cloth as they have
at St. Martins in the Fields, nor ever troubles he his officious Clerk to
wait at his opened Pulpit door for his coming in, for in plain truth his
preaching place or Pulpit, is either a two-eard Bucking-tub, or at the best the
one half of a Vinteners Caske, without any door at all. The Bishop of his
Diocese commonly bears with him and much delights in his company at public
entertainements and meetings. For many of them though they want learning, yet
have they often times good Natural wits, and ripe conceits upon any occasion.
As one came before Bishop B. to be examined and posed of the Bishop for a
Living (which was bestowed upon him) when he came for his institution, and it
fell out to be late at night, and at such a time the B. was writing of a
letter, Mr. B. quoth the Bishop, you have picked out an ill time, for me to
examine you in, neither am I at leisure to ask you many questions, come one
quoth the Bishop; what is latin for this Candlestick, and if it please your
Lordship quoth the other, the Candlestick is latin of it self, so it was,
indeed a latin Candlestick, the B. not knowing whether he spoke it out of
simplicity, or in way of jest, gave him his institution, without further
questioning.

A Dunce commonly will tell the people of their faults truly and roundly, or if
they hear of any misbehaviour or abuse in a Parish they will not stick (though
he leaves his Text altogether) to correct and ^ea^e it down, and many times
will tell such as are guilty to their faces of such and such faults they have
committed. One preached at Barkeway, and after he had read his Text told the
people their Town consisted of many Lordships, and how he was informed of one
notable abuse amongst them in that Parish, which was, if a Cow or Ox of
another man's were strayed away and happened into any of their grounds, they would
with a Rye loaf hot out of the Oven bend his horns which way they listed, so
that when the owner came to challenge his own Cow he knew not whether that
were she or no, for quoth he my Cowes horns stood backward, these stand
before and hang down her forehead, surely this is not she; and thus men were
cozened of their Cattle, but the truth was, none in the Town knew this trick
before, but after he had preached it amongst them, presently after they began
to practice it.

Another came by chance as a stranger unto a shire Town that shall be
namelesse, some day or two before a Visitation in the same Town he sent to the
Archdeacon residing then in the Town, that he might have leave to preach,
which (to gratify him being a stranger and very formal in his habit) was
granted: upon the day, before the whole Clergy, the Archdeacon, Chancellor,
and most of the officers of the spiritual Court, he went into the Pulpit,
after he had made his prayer, he read his Text, Come and See. My Text divides
it self (quoth he) most naturally into two parts, the one is Come, the other
See, Come I apply to our selves of the Clergy, and See to the Laity: for the
first, Come I divide it into three parts, whither we Come, then who they be
that Come, then how they Come: we Come hither to a Visitation, which is derived
from an old Latin Verb of the first Conjugation Visit^, visit-as, Visitavi,
withal he makes an obeisance to the Archdeacon, and to visit is a Metaphor
borrowed from the visiting of Patients by the Physician, for they visit them to
see whether they be sick or sound in the Body, and these Visitations to see
whether the Country men be sick or sound in the purse or no, etc. who they be
that Come, (for (quoth he) I comprehend under the name of Visitation all manner
of your Ecclesiastical Courts) here come to your Courts and visitations,
Swine, men presented for drunkenness, Goats and Town Bulls, for lying with
their own maids, or their neighbors Wives, and what become of them after
they have dearly paid for their poundage in your spiritual (or rather
fleshly), Courts, they run again into other men's Corn, and do as much
mischief as they did before, etc. How they come, your rich and double
benefit'd Parsons come a day or too before, and feast the Archdeacon
Chancellors, Proctors, sparing neither for Sack nor Claret, the poor Curate
except his Churchwardens be the more merciful unto him to pay for his dinner,
he must fast and go home as he came: to be short, some Come with money, and
some Come with none, if you do not believe me Come and See. So he fell into his
Text again, etc. Now See for the Lai^ie, I see a (...) sit and stand at the
nether end of this Church, who if they had been thriftie and good husbands
when they were young, they might have had their places above and had heard me
better: and I see a great fault in you Inne-keepers of this ancient City or
Town, who lodge a footman who has travailed hard all day upon a Mattris or a
flock-bed at the best, if an horse man comes to your houses, riding upon an
ambling Nagge, or an easy trotting Gelding you lay him upon the best feather
bed you have, and sometimes (...) with this fault amended, the poor footeman
has more need of a feather bed than the other, after this manner he proceeded,
till the glass was run out, when he had made an end, and was come down, the
Proctors, Apparators, and other officers of the Court, had like to have torn
him in pieces, but the Archdeacon and Chancellor would not suffer them, but
cited him next morning to come before them, but after dinner he had taken his
horse and was never heard of after. Notable are the absurdities of Dunsticall
Schoolmasters, as one at Dunstable was so precise, that he would not teach
his Scholars to say Amo I love, but Amo I am in Charity, quoth a Boy wiser
than him, then Master I must construe, Cum amarem eram miser, when I was in
Charity, I was a wretch.

I had my self a Schoolmasters who is yet living, who I well remember
construed unto me Maecenas atavis edite regibus, edite, set you forth Maecenas
the sports, atavis regibus, of ancient Kings.

One Sir Hugh a Welchman who was a Brownist or the l^ke, taught a School in
Gloustershire, who when he was accused before the Major of the Town for
teaching his boys to speak false Latin, and that they profited little or
nothing, he told their fathers, they should play at Cat, or spanne Counter
with all the boys in the Country.

Your very Dunce is commonly like Ignoramus, an excellent Solicitor in Law
business, and many Country Parsons are fitter for pettifogging than for
p^eaching.

One, a Dunce in Grain after he had read his Text, fell a railing against
Church Government, for which his Sermon he was cited before Bish. Barlow, whom
upon his horse back he met coming out of Gate at Buckden house, he riding
upon a white Gelding with a red Saddle and a yellow Saddle Cloth, how now Mr.
G. quoth the Bishop, is this Canonical, a Red Saddle, and a yellow Saddle
Cloth for a Minister? My L. quoth the Parson, though you have Canons for me,
you have none for my horse.

And the common reason why most of our Dunces care not for Learning, is because
say they, Scientia inflat, knowledge puffs up: and in very truth as our Times
are, the matter is not great whither a man be learned or a Dunce, for he may
come to preferment as soon by the one as the other, though he were but a
Tradesman, or a Mechanike.

Let not my Reader be offended at what I have written, for like a suite in
Birchen Lane, if any thing here fit him let him wear it.

FINIS.

