LOVE In it is ECSTASY: OR, The large Prerogative.

A kind of Royal Pastoral written long since, by a Gentleman, Student at
Aeton, and now published.

Multitudine Amicarum est salus.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Mercy Meighen, Gabriell Bedell, and Thomas
Collins, and are to be sold at their shop at Middle Temple gate. 1649.

To the Reader.
READER,
THe torrent of the Press that now sweepes All, amongst other Pamphlets has
laid this before you. Did the Stage enjoy 'its former luster, this would have
lien still neglected and forgotten: but since those pastimes are denied us
wherein we saw the soul and genius of all the world lie contracted in the
little compass of an English Theater, I have thought fit amidst a number of
more serious pieces to venture this in public. You may be confident there lies
no Treason in it nor State invective, (The common issues of this pregnant age)
It is inoffensive all, soft as the milkie days in was written in, for although
it appears now so late before you like a winter blossom in the middle of a
boisterous and illboding season, yet this Interlude was long since the early
recreation of a Gentleman not fully Seventeene, and those times admitted but of
small distempers, or those years but little judgment to discern them. Were
all men's Religion come up to the height once of a Drammatick Poem, We should
not fear that Stage where Virtue ever finds Reward, and Vice, Repentance or a
punishment.

Farewell
The Scene Lelybaeus.
The Persons.
Charastus, King of Lelybaeus Brabantas, King of Pachynus Sperazus, King of
Pelorus Virtusus, Son to Brabantas enamoured of Thesbia Fidelio, Son to
Sperazus betrothed to Constantina Bermudo, A noble man of Lelybaeus Halisdus,
An old commander Arontas, The Captain of the Citadell Spadatus, A Courtier.
Iayler Messenger Attendants Guard.
Constantina, Sister to Virtusus Thesbia, Sister to Fidelio Desdonella, Sister
to Charastus Flavanda, Sister to Bermudo. Echo.
Love in it is Ecstasy.
Actus Primus. Scena Prima.
Enter Arontas and Spadatus. Spa. YOur fears are vain Arontas.

Aron. I wish to heavens they would not prove
True Omens to the Kingdom.

Spa. Can you suppose the King, whose powerful nod
Can force a thousand Virgins, to become their own bawdes,
And prostitue themselves unto his loose embraces,
Will for one coy girl resign that g^ft
Only in which the Gods can truly boast their liberty?
Fie Arontas, think not so poorly of your Sovereign;
He is a Man, and therefore has Ambition.

Aron. So has he Love.

Sapd. But can that Love,
That weaker fancy of an idle brain,
Make Charastus yield, unto a composition, so absurd?
As for to grant a Kingdom for a conquest.

Aron It Is to be feared; The obdurate Girl
Persists still in her enterprise: nor will she yee'd
The fortress of her Love without the resignation
Of his Diadem unto her Brother, a man
Ambitious as the Devil.

Spa. Hear reason.

Aron. It Is not her will alone,
The woman's chiefest argument, that denies him,
But her weighty reasons, with which she still convinces
All that dare venture opposition.

Spa. Is not the Kings prerogative an argument
Beyond weak woman's will? The wise men say,
Kings ought to force when subjects will not obey.

Aron. Love cannot sir be for^'d;
It is a spirit thinner than Air, which when
With boisterous hands we strive to captivate
Does vanish into nothing.

Spa. But should the King, in this his height of dotage,
Offer up his crown, the Trophee of her cruelty,
Think you his Subjects will e're give consent
That one should wear it, so generally hated as Bermudo?
One filled with such variety of wickedness,
^s if the end of his creation was
Only to shame his Maker.

Aron. Did he deserve a Worser character,
Yet when the Crown, when that imperial Gem
Once triumphs on his brow, his Vices Sir
Will turn to virtues: such is the fate of Princes.
Nor may we sir oppose his reign
Since it is our King that wills it.
Kings are the Gods immediate Substitutes,
And their Wills are most divine, and holy statutes,
Which our Religion in so strict a manner
Binds us to observe, that should Bermudo,
In that very instant, on which the Crown
Is placed upon his head, command our lives,
'Twere more impiety to contradict,
Than cruelty to obey.

Spa. Strange superstition!

Aron. It may seem so to you, a stranger: for
Foreign Nations laugh at us, and call our zeal
A blind obedience, their prouder hearts
Can brook no Kings, but like unruly steeds
Contemn their Riders, and blow Rebellion, Witchcrafts Ape,
Even in the faces of their Sovereigns; good Gods!
Is this piety? is this Religion? shall He
The principal of all subordinates, one by that Royal wreath
Distinguished from the common Chaos, and created Head?
Shall He be subject to the Wills of an
Irregular Multitude that Knows nothing of a States necessity?
The Sun-^and slave that labors at the Oar
Knows not a life so servile then. But let 'um on,
And glory in their disobedience: we whose souls
Has still been subject to those higher powers,
Must always think that man is chiefly blessed,
That suffers.

Spa. Be Happy then, I dare pronounce you Happy
If Bermudo reigns; Felicity with a vengeance
Will flow unto you, till 'its hideous torrent
Has consumed the Kingdom.

Aron. If it is our fate 't^s welcome, 'twill only prove
The greater Argument of our Allegiance.
The Citadell, of which I am the unworthy Master
Must be kept strongly for him, till his Will,
Not Tyranny disclaimes it.

Spa. No more: The Kings on entrance.

Act. 1. Sce. 2.
Loud Music. Enter Charastus, Flavanda, Bermudo, Halisdus, Spadatus, Arontas,
and Attendants. Cha. Was It not a direful Tempest that last night
Affrighted our Horizon? was ever yet your age
Acquainted with the like Halisdus?

Hal. Never my gracious Lord: yet I have seen
Many, that would have terrified the boldest:
When our Aetnean Hill, spitted his fiery venom
Against the Heavens; when the affrighted Sun
For three days has withdrawn himself; yet these
Compared with this for horror,
Deserve not to be mentioned.

Cha. It was a dreadful night indeed; yet see
How gloriously the Sun appears: the Heavens
In labor were all night, and from their pregnant womb
This morn a Sun springs forth, whose glorious beams
Frights back their pristine terror.

Hal. Were not a sin too great and irreligious
To mistrust the heavens diviner Mercy,
I should conceive this ill-aboding night
Portendeth some ensuing misery.

Cha. Do not Halisdus with thy misconstruing fear
Strive to disturb our joys: Thy sight Flavanda,
Like to Auroras Beams, darted from out the Eastern Hills,
Expells those drossie exhalations, which this too sad night
Infused to my sadder soul.

Fla. Your highness has a privilege for flattery.

Char. Still harping on that string Flavanda?
If for to speak what my inclining soul
Prompts me to utter, and to conceive what I have said
Is but a derogation from thy worth, be Flattery,
I must confess I am guilty of that fault,
Which never King did act, unless upon himself.

Fla. Pardon my incredulity great Sir.
When I consider that the lofty Pines
Stoop not to brambles, that your S^aring Hawks
Bend not to lesser Birds, except for prey: I must confess
My virgin fear holds back those wandering thoughts
Which your Al-potent Majesty extracted
Lest I should perish like a hasty Blossom
Cropped by the setting winter.

Cha. Is yet my Loyalty in question?
How often have I with sacrilegious lips
Dissected all the Gods for Oaths, and must I still
Remain suspected of disloyalty? surely I have a conscience.

Fla. Yes, pure and more spotless than the wandering snow
Which the least breath of any calmer wind
Blows up and down: such a conscience,
That had it not a burden of Felicity
I should court its Master.

Cha. Was ever yet Felicity a Burden?

Fla. Yes, that which you vainly style one:
You do suppose a Crown a brave and glorious
Trophee of felicity, which had you been without,
One poor commanding word had done that deed,
Which now your vain entreaties sue for.
You are my King Sir.

Cha. But tell me Dearest, how has my former life
Deservd that title of your King: has my taxations
Ever yet filld my oreflowing coffers?
Have I replenished once my appetite
With the direful noise of any subjects curses?
Our gentler reign abhorred those vices
Which most Kings do Boast in: And can thou think
When I do subjugate my self to thee,
I shall become more ravenous than when I was
Sole Monarch?

Fla. I dare not question Sir that virtue which in you
All Princes cannot admire enough, much more not imitate.
It Is not the Tyrannick usage of a Scepter
That confirm's a King; He that is truly Royal,
Rules not his kingdom with the severe
And cruel Rigor of an austerer judgment,
But with a mild severity, a virtue which you
Have practiced long; I must confess, you are adorned
With all the Ornaments that make a King
A second Deity; But can those glorious trappings,
Your Crown, your scepter, armed with that virtue too,
Can they all resist those blasts, which envious fame
Will hurl upon my honor?

Cha. What can the giddy multitude report
Against thy virtues? Thou art beyond their malice.

Fla. I were beyond then all that is good,
Beyond the heavens themselves, and the celestial powers.
That Love that tends to a superior,
Be it never so pure, is amongst them
But an ambitious Lust, sold for preferment.
Should Hymen join our hands in a lawful union
With our hearts, yet they would say,
Flavanda does not give, but prostitutes her love
To satisfy her vain Ambition: Thus I should ever
Rather be thought your Strumpet, than your Wife.

Cha. Can thou suspect me yet Flavanda?

Fla. I should suspect my self rather, for I know
Our sex are all like watery clouds
Made various still by the reflecting Sun.
Whilst that the Crown, Great Sir,
Impalls your Royal Brow, I cannot be your Wife
And to be your Whore, I dare not.

Cha. Unfortunate condition of a King! when that
Hi^ chiefest Ornament becomes his greatest punishment.
A Crown, and Scepter are but transitory toys,
That wait on bigg and pompous Misery.
Oh thou ambitious Man, whose soaring thoughts
Aim only at a crown! knewst thou
The inconver^ence now of mine, thou then
Would wish, thou had rested in security,
And nere had sought so vain a happiness,

Fla. If that your boasted constancy be firm
As 'twere a sin to suspect the contrary,
That our loves may not diminish from each others luster,
Invest my Brother in your dignity: So I a Princess
May equal you a some^times King.

Cha. Must I resign, or perish in felicity?
Is this thy doom then still irrevocable?

Fla. As Fate.

Cha. A sad and dismal sentence! yet stay,
And ere I part with this same glorious gemme,
Let me recall the long lost man within me,
And with him, Man's better part, my Reason,
Reason! alas I have none
This trifle woman has unmand my soul,
And made me like her self irrational.
Reason would tell me that I am a King,
And in that name, something there is
That whispers to my thoughts I may command.
It Is true, I may, over things
Gross as my self; This arm of mine can level
Cedars with the humblest shrubbs, and this my voice
Can with one accent, breath more certain Fate
Than plague, or Fire. But can its loudest note
Silence one murmuring thought? or can this potent grasp
Enclose heavens lighting, or the smallest beam
Which from the sun is darted? Love is more pure
And less substantial, it is no created body, Form,
And Matter, but an etheriall essence, Fancyes creatures.
And to be Master of an immateriall Soul,
Who would refuse to sacrifice that dross,
That clogges Mortality? He is a beast
That would not fall, to rise a Constellation.

Hal. Yet, Sir, consider what you give,
A Crown, a Scepter, and a Kingdom.

Cha. These are but titular Emblemes of ^elicity,
Visions of Bliss, Symptoms of Happiness.
What is there in a crown, worthy our estimation?
(He puts it on Flavandus head. Place it here in its most proper spha^re,
It Is but a glorious trifle; look now Halisdus
With impartial eyes, and tell me which casts
The greater luster; thy silence does condemn thee.
See, I kiss it, embrace it, and no virtuous heat
Pays a gratuity: One Kiss of hers
Makes me contemplate of a future happiness
That rapes me to an Ecstasy of pleasure.
Dull, senseless, and base stupid E^rth,
Go to the Center; My aerie thoughts climbes Heaven,
And graspeth now a Deity.

Ber. Beware a cloud Ixion* if my plo^^s hitt right,
It shall be twice as fatal.

Char. Yet 'ere Bermudo
I do fully cease, 'ere that my soul
Be quite dismantled of that glorious robe
Which Fate so freely did allot (...),
Oh let these dewy drops, the truest Harbingers
of a set^ing Sun, entreat thee
Not to bring my frailty to a custom:
Do not, oh do not! do^te like me Bermudo,
Let not posterity in succeeding times
Account this folly lawful, and traduce Me,
Me the Original; 'Twill vex me in my urn.

Ber. It shall not sir. I Will break the custom,
And to show how much my soul's
Obedient to your will, and that the world may see
That it is not pomp nor majesty affects me,
I make a vow before just heavens, and you,
That if ere my heart be conquered with a woman's love,
Your Crown shall be restored.

Cha. Thou know not what thou vow'st Bermudo.

Ber. I do my Lord, and know withal
How strictly Religion binds me to performance;
For should I dare to violate what I have vowed,
It would call a curse upon me, high
As the punishment Damnation pays to sinners:
I must then royal sir, and so must ye, my Lords,
And Peers of Lelybaeus, acknowledge him again
Your Sovereign, unless a do a deed
Which humane frailty names impossible,

Cha. Can thou be so good Bermudo?

Ber. It Is not a Crown great sir,
With that same large Prerogative annexed,
Can make Bermudo be ungrateful;
You nourished my declining fortunes,
And brought them to that height which now
They stand in, and should I like ungatefull plant
Consume the stem that nourished me,
In^amy would surely blast me.

Cha. Thus then I do indulge thee
All the prerogatives of Majesty.
Go and ascend my throne, and let all with one applause
Say after me, Long live Bermudo King of Lelybaeus.

Trumpets and shouts within. Omnes. Long live Bermudo King of Lelybaeus.

Omnes. Long live Bermudo King of Lelybaeus.

Omnes. Long live Bermudo King of Lelybaeus.

Ber. I have it now, seated firm, beyond the power
Of Revocation: Thanks to the Heavens,
And our diviner Policy. Long has this Kingdom
Under the easy yoke of an esteminate King
Surfetted with luxury, and been a Proverb
For our neighboring Princes to express lasciviousness:
The thought whereof did grate my heart,
And stirred a noble Anger in my blood.
Shame of all Kings, dishonor of thy race,
It was I that forced my credulous ^ister
To make this trial of thy constancy.
I made Flavanda to demand thy Crown, only
With a promise to restore it: But can you think
A Gemme so lost, will e're be found
Before the extirpation of that seed
Which thy effeminate government has sown
In this too much abused Kingdom?

Cha. If that the thought of what I was
Can not procure some reverence,
Yet slight me not ^or what I may be,
When the conditions which you hold
Your Kingdom by are broken.

Ber. Conditions? It Is true, I promised when e're
My heart was conquered with a woman's love
Your Crown should be restored.

Fla. That was not all* A vow
Was past to me, sealed with an Oath,
That when our Nuptials should be solemnized
You would restore the Kingdom.

Ber. It is confessed: nor dare I disobey it.
Vows of this nature may not be broken
Without the violation of Religion.

Cha. Come dearest then, let Hymenae all Rites
Restore a double happiness.

Ber. Stay rash man, hear our Decree first*
Read Arontas, and let thy voiyce
Strike terror to the Nation.
Arontas reads. Whereas this ^ertile Kingdom, under the easy reign of our
esteminate predecessor, has long su^setred with a degenerate passion, which the
weaker ones style Love, the wiser Folly, to the high dishonor of the Nation,
and great displeasure of that Virgin Goddess whose rites we ought to celebrate.
That we may now therefore repair our lost honor, appease the wrath of that
incensed Deity, and avert those judgments which are now so imminent; We have
thought fit to decree, and be it decreed by the most high, and excellent
Bermudo, the Supreme Lord, and Ruler of this Nation, that for the space of
seven years next ensuing, none shall presume to entertain that passion: If any
one shall presumpt^ously, contrary to this our pleasure, be ^ound so weak as to
express it in the least of Circumstance, their lives to Heavens shall forfeit,


Bermudo. Ber. You have heard our will Charastus,
Presume not then to disobey it: It Is not the remembrance
Of your former greatness, or the Peoples love,
Can exempt you from the justice of our anger.
Could thou suppose, fond man, Bermudo
Would restore a Crown for bare gratuity; No,
I did but pull away the bait, to make
The hasty fish receive it with more eagerness,
Which now is caught, thanks to our Industry:
And that the captive may not flatter his imagination
With a hopes of a Recovery, Let our Decrees be published.

Exit Arontas. Cha. That sir you have a power to punish my credulity,
This knee, nere bent before to humane greatness, testifies.
Oh Royal sir! Let the severity of your Law stop here,
Here on my head let your anger fall:
Punish not my folly in your loyal Subjects,
Guilty in nothing but obedience. If not for my sake,
For my sisters sake, for Desdonellas sake,
She though a Princess loved you sir a Subject:
I saw it, and was silent, and surely,
Had not I thought, you had supposed
I^gratitude the worst of evils,
I near had left my self so bare,
Clothed only with my shame and ruin.

Ber. If Desdonella harbors such a thought,
She feeds the flame that will consume her:
Nor she, nor any sir shall dare to do,
What is denied their Sovereign.

Cha. Then thus proud man I rise,
And boldly tell you, that though Religion
Ties our hands, yet there is a power above you,
Which neither custom nor Religion can control,
He sir will punish to the height the deadly sin
Of an abused Authority: Remember it, and tremble.

Fla. Alas, fond maid, to what a deluge of misfortune
Has this thy incredulity now brought thee?
What indigested heaps of misery has it thrown
On thy ore-charged soul? Ye sacred Powers
That guard distressed Innocence!
If that my brothers tyranny has not as yet
Exiled ye this Nation, pity my tears,
And since I needs must hate where I am forced to love
Learn me a loving hate: But can I hope
The heavens will pity me in such a vale of wickedness?
No surely, I Will therefore to the woods,
There harmeless Innocence wrapped in securi^y,
Entombs faint envy, there vain Ambition
Covets no other Crown but Roses, No Scepter
But a Sheephook, these will I covet too.
Farewell Bermudo; and because once thou were my brother,
In Heavens I wish thee.

Ber. And I thee in hell for wishing it.

Fla. Since that the Constellations yet do want
A fierce and cruel Tiger, I Will pray the Heavens
To place thee there, that when a Tyrant's born,
The world may say Bermudo gave the influence.
My ill-spent tears bids thee adue: Farewell all cruelty,
A Wolf and Lamb compared to us, for symp^thy,
May well be styled the Zodiacks Gemini.
Exit.
Cha. Farewell thou perfect Model of all goodness,
Haste to the shadie woods, there I will live,
In contemplation of thy excellence:
Loves Theory shall be my study; a Science
Far beyond thy reach Bermudo; thy grosser ^ence
Is ignorant of all loves, except of that
Whose baser flame knows no commerce with purity,
That which insatiate lust perhaps has prompt thee too;
Mine is a love superplatonick, a flame,
Whose bright continued Pyramide of splendor
Shall soar above thy dulle^ reach Bermudo,
And make thy faint ambition become more blind
Than are thy thoughts that guide it.

Ber. What curses mutterst to thy self?
Are they against me, or against the destinies?

Cha. Thou art not worthy of my curses,
And to curse my stars were irreligious,
For 'twas Love, not Fate
That made Charastus thus unfortunate.
Exit.
Ber. Farewell, a pair of Fondlins.
Is Arontas gone to publish our Decree?

Hall. He is my Lord. Shall I recall him?

Ber. Stir not a foot to h^nder our designs.

Hall. Oh good my Lord! This is not the way
To keep you in your Kingdom long Sir.

Ber. Why? Lives there a man so bold
As to violate the Majesty of a King?

Hal. It is a crime I must confess, that we Scicilians
Most abhor; nor do I think there lives a man
So irreligious: But by your leave,
He is no King that has no Subjects,
And if you take this course, what Subjects will remain?
Consider sir, Love is the principal cause
That begets you Subjects, And if you take away
The Cause, the effect will follow.

Ber. Let not that trouble you sir.
Let it be your care joined with Arontas
To send a Guard unto the utmost limits of our Kingdom
That bound upon the other Promontories
With a Commission to let none pass:
If any of another Nation come within their reach,
Bring straight to our subjection; which don
Haste ye unto our Ports, burn there our ships;
If that a man escapes, your heads shall pay his ransom.
We long have surfeted with extremes, and now
Extremes shall cure this deadly malady,
Which Justice is Halisdus, and not Tyranny.

Exeunt. Act. 1. Sce. 3.
Enter Virtusus. Vir. Once more in spite of fortune, and the raging waves
Of a tumultuous Sea, does my unhappy foot
Salute the Earth again. Did ever man
From all eternity behold a night so dismal
Leave behind no sad remembrance of its former horror?
Here Is not a stemm that is widdowed of his leaf,
No, nor one branch become
The hopeless issue of the Husbandman, but all
In a sweet tranquillity enjoy that happiness
Which Nature has allotted them: I am
The only object of Heavens Tyranny,
Else had these senseless Plants
Perished this fatal night, when both the Artick,
And Antartick Poles, striving to kiss each other,
Confounded Heaven, Earth, Sea, Hell, and All
Into an indigested Chaos: yet in this dire
Confusion of the Elements, these stand untoucht
Outbraving Fortunes Malice, whilst wretched I,
The heavens least part of care,
Was banded too and fro by the immerciless winds
Uncertain of a rest, and had not the thought
Of thee my Thesbia, ballanc't my rottering soul,
The insatiate bosom of the Ocean
Had been my wish't^for grave.
Enter Fidelio like a Shepherd. Sir, the fortune of the Sea having cast me,
A sad and desolate man, upon the Confines
Of an unknown Land, I must desire
Your charitable disposition to declare
Your Countries name unto me.

Fid. Most willingly. Know sir you are cast
Upon a most unfortunate shore, Lelybaeus
Is the Countries Name, one of the three
Promontorian Kingdoms of famous Scicily.

Vir. Heavens, now I see ye are not altogether cruel:
This is the happy Country that my voyage aimed at.

Fid. Call it not happy sir, for it is the most
Infortunat'st habitation that ever man enjoyed.

Vir. It seems not so by the outward Appearance.

Fid. Oh no! Nature has bedeck't it with the best
Of all her ornaments, nor could she, if she would
Create another world, frame any part
To parallel with this.

Vir. What diastrous chance then
Has made it thus unfortunate?

Fid. Pardon me if I refuse to tell you that,
The relation whereof would draw tears
From my ore-charged eyes. Let this Decree
Inform you sir.
He gives him a paper, and he reads. Heavens I thank ye: This courtesy
Will make me dye ungrateful to your bounty.
Oh how my soul now gluts it self, to see his enemy
Thus offered as a sacrifice to his incensed Ire!
Just anger seize me then, and Constantina,
Let the thoughts of thy sad sufferings
Inspire my soul with vengeance, arm my strength
With a Revenge as ample as the cause:
Yet Prince Virtusus I Will not kill thee basely;
That were to mistrust my cause, which is as just
As heavens are innocent, Thou shall not dye
For to be damned in ignorance: No, I Will summon
All thy faults, and thunder '^m to thy ears;
If then thy treachery has not exiled thy valor,
Let thy sword plead thy innocence:
By which most noble pleading thou shall dye
Honored, by my Revenges charity.

Vir. Oh my unjuster stars! Why did ye stop
The Oceans mouth, denying me an entrance,
Yet bring me here to be entombed
Alive upon the shore? was it because I feared
Your threatening waves, or that the louder winds
Struck terror to my affrighted Conscience? This cannot be:
For how often in scorn has my undaunted sighs
Ecchoed the blustering winds, and my full tide eyes
For fear of scarcity, how often have they
Replenished the waves, and nourished
The decaying Billows? Yet must all this be
The Prologue only to my ensuing Tragedy?
Oh cruel Pity! Oh inhumane charity!

Enter Charastus. Fid. Peace sir: The King.

They Kneel. Cha. Why kneel ye unto me sirs?
If I have not deserved your pity,
I have not deserved your scorn I am sure.

Fid. The Heavens forbid, when ere I see
Such Beams of Majesty, that I should presume
To approach without that awful adoration
Which my Allegiance pays unto my Sovereign.

Cha. It Is true, good Subjects ought to do so:
But when a Lyon's dead, the baser Ass
Will come, and trample on him,
And spurn that face, which when alive
Was death to look on.

Fid. Such incivility becomes the Beasts;
But man whose purer soul
Claims something of divinity, can easily discern
That sacred Majesty which on Kings
Hang like the Gods re^in'd Idaeas: He cannot be
So foolishly impious, to think the Sun,
Because oft-times he does obscure himself
Under the gloomy shade of some gross exhalation,
That he never will again come to his p^istine splendour.
How often do we see those blazing Members
Of the Air, decline? those fiery Comets,
Which though composed of exhalations
Covet the highest Region, where hurried
With their vain imaginations for a while they reign,
Contracting their own ruin that at length will come
As suddenly as fearful? Such will Bermudo's fall be,
And the higher he lifts his towering thought^
The deadlier will his precipice become.

Cha. Can thou perceive that Majesty which to Kings
Is still essential, and speak these words against
Thy lawful Sovereign? Surely thou art no Scicilian.

Fid. I am great sir, and yet dare say
It Is virtue makes a King: Majesty without that
Is a disjoynted structure that must fall,
And come to ruin. It Is not a Crown alone
That I adore, for should I do^e on that,
And slight the goodness which you are Master of,
I were worse than he, that fears the Idol,
Yet contemnes the Godhead: since then Bermudo
Wants the better part of King, a Royal soul,
I Will look on him, as on polluted incense,
Sacred, though not holy; And on you, as on
An unfurnished Temple, pious, though not glorious.
Then pardon sir, if I prefer an undecent sanctity
Before a comely wickedness.

Cha. Could thou distinguish, I confess 'twere just:
But since wise Nature has ordained
Goodness essential to Supremacy, it is fit
You serve and honor him.

Fid. And so I will: but it must be
As Infidels do Devils, for fear, not love.
Far be it from me sir to confine
Goodness to Greatness only, or suppose that man
Is solely Rovall that is ambitious;
That were to think the Heavens an easy sponge,
From which the daring soul
Squeases his ends out: He rather sir is great
That dares be good.

Cha. Then thou art great I swear; exceeding great:
Thou can distinguish between good and good.
Had I had such an intellectual soul
To put a difference 'twixt those attributes
That make a King complete, the gilded flashes of his tongue
Would then have rendered him, as far contemptible,
As now he is fatal. Come nearer to us Shepherd:
Nay! flatter not a falling greatness;
To kneel unto an Altar that is defaced
Smells more of Superstition than Devotion*
Arise, worthy our Arms,
And if thou needs will serve thy King
In me his small Epitome, chide not his folly
With this strickt observance; to make him Master
Of those joys, which ^e han'^ power to command,
Is exprobation not affection.

Vir. Noble Charastus!
Thy miseries cannot outvie thy virtues,
Nor can they suffer an ignoble act
To derogate from fortunes Conquest,
Though she has made thy sufferings
Ample as her power. Wonder not, great Prince,
Who it is dares Comment on thy miseries,
Since none can truly know a Kingdoms loss,
But he that feels it.

Cha. If thou have lost one then,
And that experience stimulates this boldness,
I shall rejoice in thy society: I often have seen
A feathered Captive sadly in a cage
Mourning in silence his determined freedom,
But having got a partner of his sufferings, the silly Bird,
As if revived by another mischief,
Has from his drousie taciturnity awak't,
Chirping sweet Io Paeans to our ravished ears,
Until his eyes became the sad oblation
Of his fainting voice.

Vir. Behold a partner then, O^e
That fortunes malice has in sundry shap^^
Horrid as Cowards fears, or midnight apprehensions,
Strove to appall his courage, yet to him
Those P^nick horror^ seemed but painted fires
Quenched with the smallest drop of's resolution.
Behold a Prince equally distressed:
But if our sympathetic^ll disasters
Has not created an instinct to know me,
Sum up your patience sir, and that will tell you
That none can parallel its fortitude,
Except Pachynas Prince, Unfortunate Virtusut.

Cha. Stay, and ere thou further speak
Let me survey thee sully, for in thee is drawn
The just resemblance of my misery.
By all our former happiness! It Is rarely limm'd;
Fortune, thou had eyes, thou nere could
Copy me so truly else.
Oh Royal Prince, my woes sad character!
Let us incorporate, and be one,
One Monumentall Trophee of misfortune.
Bear witness oh thou sacred Register of united hearts,
How Virtusus here joys to behold Charastus there.

Vir. Allied thus by misfortune, our united wills
Shall hate a separation. One act we will still pursue;
One thought we will think; One soul we will have;
One heart, and one Ambition.

Cha. Ambition! In that we will imitate our mother Earth,
To fall is her Ambition, should she aspire,
'Twere not Ambition, because not natural.

Vir. This Union sown in tears
Shall rise in glory; my prophetic soul divines it:
Mean while we will live here in these woods disguised,
Sometimes we will visit Court, and see if Fate
Will put a period to our sufferings, till then
From you renowned Shepherd we must crave concealment.

Fid. Your graces may command your humblest vassal.
I have a story of my own to tell you; But for a while
I must crave leave to lie concealed.

Cha. Then we will not urge it.
Hence, hence Ambition now, and all those pleasing thoughts,
Which Crowns and Scepters whistled to our ears.
The silent Groves, and murmuring streams,
The shadie woods, and whistling winds, will be
A recreation beyond Court vanities. There we three
Will fancy to our selves a Triarchy.

Exeunt. Act. 1. Scen. 4.
Enter Bermudo. Ber. Of what aerie substance is Man's soul
That still it is so ambitious to aspire?
The higher still I am lifted, the more I covet.
Is there no end Heavens of our vain desires?
Cannot a Crown and Scepter stay our towering thoughts?
But must we aim at things impossible?
Are we All composed of that same disputable element
Whose questioned flames outstrips the highest Region?
Is there no Earth commixt within us,
Or did we drop it at our first creation?
Enter Halisdus. Thou envious Man, why come thou with a face
So wretched, thus to check our joys?
What sorrow 'ist thy tears does thus prognosticate?

Hal. I now lament the woeful fruits
Of your dire cruelty: Oh too much wronged Princess!
Wretched Desdonella!

Ber. What of her? Perhaps her passion
Has caused her to lay violent hands upon her self.
Is It not so?

Hal. Your Highness is too true a Prophet,
For the woeful Princess when as the fatal news
Of her dear brothers Misery, resounding in her ears
Was seconded by the late published edict, Knowing
That she could not live without your anger,
Which to her was worst of miseries,
Threw her dejected body into the hideous stream,
Where the en^^oured wa^es proud of their rich prey
Even killed he^ with embracings*

Ber. She was a fond and foolish woman.
We will not spend one tear would it recover her.

Hal. She loved you sir to^ too well.

Ber. For that we will not* Those looser thoughts
Shall never ceise Bermudo* The world shall know,
To offend in those absurdities is not the Nature
But the Vice of Power, from which I Will fly
As from a singing Siren, or a weeping Crocadile.
Enter Arontas. What news portends your haste?

Aron. Two ships my gracious Lord, this morn
Arrived within your harbor, which we,
Bound by our duty, and your express Command,
Took, ransaked, and burnt: But seizing of the men,
Two cried out, Lay not your hands on sacred Majesty;
For we are Kings: yet nevertheless
We have brought 'um here to be examined by your highness.

Ber. Spies on my life! Let 'um be brought before us;
They shall dye. It Is I, their fate, have said it.
Exeunt. Kings are not safe in their own territories;
But still are subject unto Treachery.
He that ascends a Throne by such severe,
And unjust dealing, goes but on a slippery path,
Where but to a stumble is a precipice.
Beware Bermudo then, Traps are laid to take thee,
Envie's big, and will be delivered of her brat Ambition,
Which we must strangle in the Infancy,
Or all will perish.
He that begins in mischief must go on, and in it reign,
If he but leanes to virtue once, he falls amain.
Exit.
Actus secundus. Scena Prima.
Enter Virtusus hastily, and Fidelio following, in each hand a naked Rapier.
Fid. OH save thee Great Prince, from yo^der Hill
A fierce and cruel Beast comes raging.

Vir. Where is this hideous Monster?

Fid. Alas! it follows thee* Here, take this sword,
And stand upon thy Guard: See, how ^e yawnes,
As if he meant to swallow thee alive:
His eyes are numberless from which proceeds
Such a sulphurous flame, that alas, I fear,
The very smell will kill thee: Oh what a black
And noisome mist his gaping mouth sends forth?
His tongues spit floods of venom, and his reaching tail
Sweeps down whole mountains, on his
Cristed back does rise, so many and such massy spears,
That you would swear whole Armies
Came to thy destruction.

Vir. I see nothing, sir, so horrid.

Fid. Alas, it comes invisible.

Vir. Would have me fight with shadows?
I fear you are distracted sir.

Fid. So, now you are safe from company,
I Will be more plain.
This fierce inhumane Beast, which I so mentioned,
Lodges here, here in my Breast his den is,
Long on my inmost Bowels he has gnawed
Lacking his worthy prey; But now on thee
He means to seize. Revenge his Name is;
You may guess the Monster.

Vir. My innocence is ignorant of his Nature.

Fid. I Will prompt it in few words. You must dye.

Vir. It is acknowledged: So must we All.

Fid. Nay, by this Hand I mean, Revenges Instrument.

Vir. I am so innocent,
I cannot persuade my self to credit you.

Fid. Cowards still plead Innocence.
Dare thou not fight?

Vir. My cause too good is, yours too bad.
Think what a stain my honor would receive,
Should I but fight when such an inequality
Parts our causes.

Fid. Oh Coward!

Vir. Are you more valiant, Because
In a distempered rage you dare draw a sword,
Which not provoked you durst not?
It Is he is truly valiant that will fight,
Not when his furious Blood boyles
In his veins thus, not when a fervent inundation
Swells his distempered channels, but when it coldly flows
With a mild, soft, and quiet motion:
Those streams that run with such a hideous violence
Are still the shallowest; The silent waters
Are most dangerous.
If I have wronged you sir in such a manner,
That naught but death will expiate my crime,
Let me understand my fault before I dye.
Beasts do not fight without their natural parlye:

Fid. I scarce have so much patience
As to tell thee: Thou had a sister.

Vir. And, hope I have one yet. What of her?

Fid. Can thou remember her, and no crimson Blush
S^^in thy immodest cheeks? oh impudence!

Vir. When I remember her,
I have less guilt than I expected:
For if my wronging her my only fault is,
Heaven knows I am virtuous.

Fid. Hell is divine then: Less Tyranny is harbored there.
If for to cloister up a sister be a virtue,
Let me be vicious Heavens: For to have killed her
Had been charity; But to bury her alive
Where she must still consume in Loves hot torturing flames
And never perish, is an act that Saints
All humane Malice. Know not me yet?
Know not Fidelio?

Vir. Fidelio! Let me embrace thee: I must.

Fid. Keep off dissembling Crocadile: Too long
Has the thought of thee already rioted in my bosom,
Which now I Will banish quite: Prepare to dye.

Vir. Hold yet your hand:
She is not in a Nunnery as you think.

Fid. Ha! Is she dead then? oh my misconstruing soul!
It Is too true: Can I know it,
And let thee live a minute after?

Vir. Do not abuse your patience: She is not dead.

Fid. What happy place contains her then?

Vir. I know not that sir.
When that my Father did with bad success
Send unto Delphos, to demand what fortune
Should betide my sister, after that solemn Contract
That was made between you, He received from thence
This short but fatal Oracle.
Brabantas take this answer, and no other,
Thy daughter's born to disinthrone her Brother.
These words did so inrage my Father,
To think his own bowels should root out
His own posterity, that naught but
The immurement of my sister could assuage his Passion,
Which shortly he determined to perform;
But she, the night before that dismal day,
The silent darkness helping her escape,
Departed from the Court; But whither
I am uncertain, for my raging Father
Supposing me the plotter of her flight, next day
Did banish me his Kingdom, on pain of death
No^ to return without her.
First to Pelorus I begun my voyage,
Which then I found all drowned in tears,
Lamenting your departure, which as I heard
Her late supposed immurement had caused.
Long there I staid not, but sailing onwards,
The tempestuous Sea cast me unawares
On this unfortunate Kingdom; Where I shall never find her.

Fid. And would thou carry her back again
To her imprisonment? Oh! the unconscionable
Cruelty of a Brother!

Vir. Do not deceive your self. Heaven Knows
My thoughts are innocent.

Fid. Talk not of innocence false man,
It is a virtue which thy childhood nere could boast off,
Thy tainted blood runs thick within thy veins,
And I must vent it, lest it prove dangerous.

Vir. 'Twill prove as clear as crystal
In token of my Innocence: No silver wandering stream
Shall with a purer current flow, than this
My unpolluted blood shall, to invite
Thy guilty hands, to wash them of their stain.

Fid. There I could bathe eternally, and never faint.
Prepare. Have at you sir. So cunning?

They fight, and a Letter drops. Vir. Hold: What had I forgot?
For this same crime Fidelio I will not dye
Innocence is wronged in it: I Will give thee
A juster cause for thy Revenge, thy sisters Will:
Here in this letter it is enclosed.

He gives him the Letter. Fid. Letters to me from Thesbia? art sure
The enclosed injunctions are to kill thee?

Vir. Her threatening brow at my departure told me so.
When I received them, me thoughts her face appeared
Like to a quiet stream crispt on the sudden
By some gentle wind, which soon, too soon
Arose to Billows; Then her tongue
Proclaimed me vagabond, commanding me to find
My sister and her Brother, or near to see her more.

Fid. Thou will grow odious to all the world.
She loved thee once Virtusus, and ever would
Had not thy virtue failed, for which
If now she has sent thy doom,
Millions of Armies shall not hold my hand
From acting a Revenge, that shall puzzle
All the Furies for to second.

He reads. Vir. Never did guilty Prisoner at the Bar
Await the sentence of the Magistrate, with such
A Holy and Religious fear as I do mine.
See how his clouded brow
Already doomes me guilty: Such another look
Would save the Executioner his labor.

Fid. Oh cruel sister! Would have me pardon him?
Think thou he is innocent? the cruel Leopard
Is less spotted.
Enter a Messenger. The News?

Mess. The Prince Charastus is returned from Court,
And does desire a speedy conference.

Fid. We Will wait him instantly.

Mess. But good sir, stay not; The affair,
He says, is very weighty.
Exit.
Fid. My sisters pleasure, and the Kings affairs
Defers our combat till some other time, mean while
Read this enclosed Letter, my sister sends it thee,
She Will not the Proverb break,
Love bids us write what we are shamed to speak.

Exeunt. Act. 2. Sce. 2.
Enter Arontas and Spadatus. Spa. Why so sad Arontas?
Can the Honors lately conferred upon you
Make you forget your wonted liberty?

Aron. I am already weary with their burden;
Fate has converted my felicity to a wickedness
So horrid, that the Ghosts of injured Kings
Will for ever haunt me.

Spa. What desert in thee can procure
So Royal Attendance?

Aron. Have thou not heard then of that cruelty
Which will for ever record my name
Amongst the Tyrants?

Spa. I yet am ignorant; Prithee inform me.

Aron. I tremble but to think on it.
The Kings of Pachynus and Pelorus, going to Delphos
To consult, about the finding of their late lost Children,
Were by the last unfortunate Tempest Cast on this Shore.

Spa. What of that?

Aron, I* bound by my new got office, and the hopes
Of future honor, presented them to the King,
Who, contrary to my expectation, has,
As Spies, condemned them, le^t by their flight
The world should know the Tyrany of his cruel Laws.

Spa. And must they dye then?

Aron. Most certain.

Spa. Surely they must not.

Aron. Why? what should hinder?

Spa. The people.

Aron. Heavens keep such thoughts from Scicily.
The People? they resist Authority?

Spa. May they not oppose a Tyrant?

Aron Take heed whilst they oppose one
They introduce not thousands. Be confident
The ruin, spoil and rape of Innocence that attends
But one such single act, will be far greater than
The malice of ten Tyrants can ever perpetra^e.

Spa. Though Innocence may suffer for a while in it,
And much too, Yet we shall at length be free.

Aron. Never, Oh never. Open but that gap once,
And ten thousand unseen miseries will enter.
Those whom the People dote on so, admire,
And saint for seeming virtues, if they once get power
(Heavens having stamped that curse still on such changes)
Will turn the greatest and the worst Tor^entors.
Oppression in a lawful King, is but a kind of wantonness;
But in all others, a Necessity. No power, I must confess,
There is without its whip; but the usurper
Lashes with Scorpions.

Spa. Then we can change again.

Aron. Most likely sir you will.
Change will beget a change, till All are nonothing.
Rebellion is a Circle that will find no end
Till men want Ambition, or the People, Madness.

Spa. What must we do then?

Aron. Keep close unto that sacred rule of strict obedience.
Though Tyrants reign, one grave, or age may end it;
But Government let loose to change, and popular disorders,
Contracts that ruin which nothing but eternity can bury.

Spa. I find it a sad truth; yet would these Kings
Were saved though. I am strangely troubled.

Aron. No King can fall, but good men
^inde an Earthquake.

Spa. Shall we to Court, and see the event?

Aron. Lead on, I Will follow. Oh Allegiance,
Thou elder child of Virtue, Lend us thy passive fortitude,
With that high Saint-like goodness arm this Nation.
Resistance ever brings a swift damnation.

Exeunt. Act. 2. Sce. 3.
Enter Brabantas, Sperazus, and Iaylor. Iay. My Lords, the King commends him to
ye
In this Message. He bad me tell ye,
Ye must prepare your selves for a Noble,
Sudden, and a fatal entertainment.

Bra. What does his cruelty entend to do now?

Iay. No more than Tarquin did to the Poppeys
When he lopt their stately heads off.

Bra. Must then our Heads go off?

Iay. No sir; They must be cut off: My worship
Is appointed to execute that honorable function.

Bra. Base peasant, has thy Master sent thee thus
To jeer our Misery?

Iay. Good words sir, I shall be a cruel Destiny,
And have three cuts at your thread of life else.

Bra. Thus dares the baser Ass revile the dying Lion.
Hence thou unnecessary Parenthesis of Nature,
Or by my just anger, thou shall be our Harbinger.

Iay. I am gone, but shall return in Thunder.
Exit.
Bra. Oh ye powers!
Where Is that Majestic^^ glory, which to Kings
Is still e^^entiall? where is that awful power
Which our least Nod may justly challenge?
Surely you have but flattered us, else Peasants tongues
Could never thus triumph over our Misery.

Spe. Be patient Great Brabantas.

Bra. Oh it is above my patience, that we two
Whom the All-potent Gods have framed their Image,
And have given as equal power to rule in Earth
As they in heaven, should thus be mocked by one
Whom Natures overcharged breast has vomited,
And made a drossy lump worth naught
But scorn and foul reproach of purity.
Kings are Earths Gods, how dares the baser sort
Profane their Deities?

Enter Fidelio and Virtusus like Priests. Vir. Most Royal firs, no sooner did
your sad estate
Arrive ou^ Knowledge, but it raised
Pity within us, so far, that being bound
By the Religion of our office, and the commiseration
Of your Miseries, we thought it fit to visit ye,
And p^escribe some necessary comfort.

Bra. There is no comfort left beyond my miseries.
That name is banished quite; my cr^me so horrid is,
That all the infernal torments will be
But my deserved penance, and no punishment,
And the enduring them but my devotion, and no sufferance.
Oh reverend Fathers! there is such a crime
Lies burthening my sad conscience, that to relate it
Would affright your ears, and puzzle
Your Inventions for a penance.

Fid. Let not the defect of a sufficient penance
Make you irreligious; Heavens mercy
Is above your crime.

Bra. Had there been ever sin of such an exorbitant nature
For their mercies president, I might be confident;
But now to hope it, were flat impudence.
The crying voices of my injured children
Are too clamorous for any prayers of mine
To arive there.

Vir. No question sir your Childrens cries
Are Mediators for you. They will but prove the steps
Whereby your prayers may easily ascend:
It is their filial duty.

Bra. Ought there to be a filial duty
Where no paternall care was? Such goodness
Would but aggravate my crime; should they
But plead for me, how wicked then were I
In wronging them? oh sirs!
Is It not a crime most horrid, when a father
Shall immure his daughter in a Nunnery,
Because a foolish Oracle did say, she was born
To disinthrone her Brother?

Fid. Will not a careful Husbandman oft-times
Cut off a branch, because he sees it may offend
Some other? Necessity compels often to cruelty.
And he is mad that will not part
With a corrupted limb, when it may prove
Injurious to the whole body.

Bra. But he is worse that kills himself,
Because he wou^d not dye. Shall I
For fear of drowning from a well rig'd ship
Leap down into the waves? This is
Wilfully to court, that which I fain would sh^^.

Vir. Your Son sir I perceive in this
Was chiefest Author; 'Twas his accursed fear
That made your tenderness to use
Such rigor on your daughter. Though him you father,
Father not his crimes.

Bra. Would have me still heap sin on sin?
Is not the ruin of a daughter an offense sufficient,
But must I rob a Son too of his Honor,
And make a rape of Innocence my Relaxation?
My soul already is replenish't, I need not bring
Vice in a newer fashion: Had he been guilty
He might have rested safely in Pachynu^.

Fid. No more: It is enough Virtusus.

They discover. Bra. I would my eyes were fountains
Fraught with tears, that I might ever
Weep for joy at this thy safety.

Spe. My Son Fidelio, welcome to my Arms;
Now let me dye Bermudo, for thus supported
Dare I stand out braving Fate, and make
Death cremble at my boldness.

Bra. Arise my son; Let all the blessings
That the Earth can give to mortals, light on thee:
That thou may safely flourish and spring up,
When this same withered trunck's blown down
By ag^s Tyranny.

Fid. Tri^le not time* Great Sirs.
Take these our ill beseeming robes, in these
You may escape the Keepers curious eye,
And pass all undiscovered.

Bra. But how will ye escape then?

Vir. Leave that to Heavens and us.
D^spure it not: I pray make haste.

Spe. Heavens be your guard then.

Vir. And yours.

Exeunt Bra. and Spe. Fid. Oh Virtusus, Pardon my infidelity,
No thought of mine was the first that caused
That ^oul suspicion of thy Loyalty,
Only the ill-sounding Trump of same*
Blew some such speeches to my ears, which they
Too suddenly entertained, and would as suddenly
Have banished, had not some envious tongues
Then seconded it. That friendship which before
I vowed, shall now be' established;
I have called a Parliament within me,
It Is now confirmed by Act. Fool that I was
Ever to mistrust thee.
A continued cry within of Fire. Hark, it is done; Charastus now I see
Thou are truly faithful.

Enter Charastus hastily. Cha. The Lodge is fired, the Keeper's gone,
And I am pursude.

Both. How? pursude?

Cha. Time will not give us leave to talk on it;
Make haste, and save your selves.

Exeunt. A confused company pass over the stage, crying stop the Shepherd. Act.
2. Sce. 4.
Enter Bermudo and Arontas. Ber. What tumult's grown in our disturbed Court?
Will not the heavens permit me for to take
One peaceful hour, But must they still
Molest my wearied senses with these dismal sounds?
But heavens I thank ye: ye have now awak't
And summoned up an almost forgot Revenge:
The slow pac't time is now fulfilled in which
The two proud insolent Kings are doomed to suffer.
A cry within of fire. Hark: Surely the Gods already have prepared a fire,
And do expect the Kings for sacrifice.
A cry again of fire. Still more and more; Look out Arontas.
Exit Arontas. What should these flames portend? what secret mystery
Is in Fate, that passes thus a Kings capacity?
Be it good or bad, speak it ye powers;
Speak it in thunder Heavens: or if
The affrighted world must still be ignorant of its ruin,
Let some gentle wind whisper it to me alone:
Why should Bermudo be denied to be Fates Councellor?
If it be treachery against me you would conceal thus,
Be speedy in your plo^s, I will unfold 'um else,
Unlock fates Cabinet, rip open the all-containing breasts
Of the inscrutable destinies, where thus
I Will dissipate them all. Ha!
A shout within. Why tremblest so my breast? wilt never be refined
from that terrestrial passion? Are not my thoughts
Too crowned? Must they still live
In base subjection unto fear?
Enter Arontan. The cause Arontas, quickly?

Aron. The Porters lodge, most gracious sir,
Fired by a malicious Shepherd, caused
These sudden accl^mations of your Subjects.

Ber. And was that a fit subject for their ridiculous shouts?
Now I perceive they are weary of my government,
Else my danger could nere beget their mirth.

Aron. The mirth proceeded at the Shepherds Apprehending:
See where he is.

Enter Spadatus Iayler and Guard bringing in Virtusus and Fidelio. Iay. Justice
most gracious Sovereign. Justice I desire.

Ber. It Is Treason to suspect the contrary.
Which was the Author of the flames?

Iay. Of that your great Authority must inform you,
For both were taken flying, yet but one
Was seen about the Lodge; which that one was
By examination you may easily find sir.

Ber. Be assured we will do our best: it concerns us nearly.
In the mean while fetch you forth the Prisoners.

Iay. Your Highness will shall be obeyed.
Exit.
Ber. When the severer hand of Justice menaceth destruction
The innocent often trembles, when the guilty smiles:
How often has my doom beat terror
To affrighted Innocence, yet these two
Conscious persons, which must upon necessity expect
'Its fatal fall on them dare arm themselves
With impudence, and suffer their audacity
To outface my justice, appearing rather
My Judges than my Prisoners.
Are all good manners blotted from your memory?
If that the horror of my Justice cannot
Beat down those stubborn floodgates, yet let
Your guilty consciences make room for showers
Of penitential tears to wipe away
My hovering severity, or it will fall as unavoidable
As deadly. When heavens thunder speaks
The senseless Ash will bow his head in a true
Submissive reverence, but the stubborn Oak
Unmoved refists their threatenings, and with soaring pride
Advances still his branches; But often times we see
He pays a fatal forfeit for his impudence. So shall ye.

Vir. He stands to be suspected sir that basely fears.
Who would commit pure and undefiled Innocence
Unto so cowardly a protection?

Ber. Who dares be vicious, dares be impudent in denial.
That is an essential part of Villainy;
He is but a poor proficient in the Mercurian Art,
That frames not an excuse before the Plot.

Fid. Excuses sir we have none: There is
Too great a contrariety 'twixt innocence and them,
One breast cannot harbor both.

Ber. That Innocence which you so falsely to you
Attribute, is but an excuse it self, or otherwise
It would have dared the utmost of suspicion,
And not have caused such timorous flight.

Fid. Does not the Lamb the sacred Emblem
Of happy Innocence, make haste away, if he once spy
A ravenou^ wolf pursue him? and yet his flight
Ought not to raise the least suspicion of his virtue.
The dismal noise of Fire worse than a ravenous wolf
Followed our ears, which made us I confess to fly;
But whither? only to your Court sir.
Had we been guilty, we never could suppose
Your Court to be our Sanctuary;
For he is mad, that having slain the husband*
Will seek protection in the widows house:
We had been far worse, that having fired a Member,
Would dare to take refuge in the body.
Will e're the timorous Heart fly unto the Hu^ter?
Or the harmless Dove meet the pursuing Falcon?

Enter Iayler. Iay. Mercy most gracious Sovereign, Mercy I desire.

Ber. Where are the prisoners sirrah?

Iay. They have escaped, my Liege. Mercy, oh mercy.

Ber. Escaped? Speak it again villain.

Iay. They have escaped. Oh mercy.

Ber. Escapt? what treachery is hatching in the infernal Pit?
What damned Magitians has the Furies sent
To stupifie a Kings divinity? ye heavenly Powers,
And you diviner Providence, yield,
Yield your precedence to Hell,
From thence proceeds the Masterpiece of plots
That justly robs you of Supremacy. Escapt!
It was as easy for a Lamb to escape
From out the paws of a half starved Lion,
Or for a damned body to return from out
The jaws of Acheron, had they not been
More than mortal. They were Devils, damned Devils,
Sent from Hell to jeer me;
Had they no other shapes to personate but Kings?
Must Divinity become a cloak to Treachery?
Oh ye Gods restore 'um back again,
Or take your Bounties.

Aron. Good my Lord, this passion ill becomes your Highness.

Ber. I am mad Arontas, stark mad:
Fury like lightning feeds upon my soul.
Good Heavens send down some ministering Spirit
To divert this flame, or I shall fall
Armed with an universal ruin. Hear me
Ye just powers, It Is I, Fates Fate, entreat ye.
Enter Halisdus, and Thesbia in boys Apparel. And art thou come blessed Spirit?
why now I see
The Heavens are but our wishes Instruments.
Hail glorious Saint, thy charity has robbed thee
Of thy excellence: Thou that sats't enthroned
Amongst the Deities, filling the heavenly Quires
With thy Harmony, whilst with thy notes
The em^lous Spears jar'd in confusion,
Why have thou vouchsaf't to lay aside Divinity,
And visit poor and undeserving Mortals?

Hal. Mistake him not my Lord: He is a Mortal,
Sent as a Present from your Subjects
That guard the confines.

Ber. Thou art blind, old man, I can perceive
Divinity within him, the least part whereof
Will make a monster of Perfection. Nor shall I
Think him less than he does seem to be,
Unless his courteous voice proclaim it.

These. Let no supposed excellence in me
Make you an Idolater, but if you see ought
In this poor fabric, worthy this Admiration,
Admire the Deity that did infuse it:
Give not the cr^ature the Creators due.

Ber. If beauteous sweet thou art mortal, as yet
I am not fully satisfied, Tell me thy name and Country.

These. Anthrogonus men call me sir.
Pelorus is my native Country.

Ber. Oh happy Country that can boast of such a rarity!
Look here effeminate men, ye that with impartial eyes
Adore a thing called woman, here, here
You may find a difference; but I have too much lost my self.
Revenge bids me retire. Iayler, were not thy head
Too base to answer for two Kings,
I Would make thee an example to succeeding times
For such neglectfull villains.

Iay. Oh! good my Lord! my Lodge wa^ fired only,
That I being bufie in the quenching it
They might escape.

Ber. Thou promptst me well, Shepherds confess or dye.

Fid. He that confesses sir an undone crime,
Deserves the punishment of the sacrilegious,
Honor, that Holy and Religious Mystery, is defiled in it,
And if they be punished in the highest nature
That rob a Church of some divine and holy ornament,
What punishment deserve they that take away
Divinity it self, and make a rape of their Devotion.
Honor a household God is, which removed
Destruction surely enters.

Ber. Not confess then?
Oh Allegiance, where is now thy former glory?
Me thinks I see thee buried in the earth,
Crying aloud for vengeance on these Traitors.
Rest quiet soul, I will assert thy cause,
And wreck thy vengeance in a full effusion
Of blood and horror.
Once more bold Shepherds we will vouchsafe to ask ye,
Will ye confess the Author? we may be merciful.

Fid. I Will not belly our Innocence to gain your mercy.
Let me be tortured with all the torments
That timpanized cruelty swelled to the height
Could ever yet invent first.

Ber. Let him have his will in it.
Away with him to Tortures.

Vir. Oh spare his life great King; Spill not one drop
Of his pure innocent blood. It Is worth thy Nation.

Ber. Let him confess then.

Vir. I will confess what ever you will have me.

Ber. Did thou not fire the Lodge then?

Vir. Alas I did not.

Ber. Iayler away with him.

Vir. I did, upon my knees I did.

Fid. Believe him not great King: it is this accursed Policy
To rob me of the glory of my sufferings.

Vir. Shall I no^ be believed then? Stay, you need
No witness, when you have one really conselling.

These. It is confessed you see great sir, what would you more?
Be now a King and pardon him:
Rigor becomes your petty Magistrates that know
Nothing of their Authority, but oppression.
A Throne's a Mercy-seat, and he that sits thereon
Ought to distribute it, where ere he sees
True penitence, that is promised by confession.

Ber. Peace Anthrogonus,
He is not worth thy pleading for.

These. Those better spirits that ascend
Will often look down, and wheresoere they see
Virtue oppressed, will vouchsafe to help with pity.
I do no more, I pity him, and spend
Some tears, and prayers, a poor boys benevolence.

Ber. Thy tears Anthrogonus have prevailed*
My adamantin heart melts at those showers.
He shall live. And be thy prisoner only* No more.
Come, we will be for Martial sports: The Boar
We Will hunt to morrow. Prepare our javelin^.
A King like a Colossus stands, over striding fate
Whilst envies sails swelled with ambitious winds
Floateth between his legs, and cracks her Mast
With Admiration only at his height: No Fate
The true Nativity of Kings can calculate.

Exeunt. Actus tertius. Scena Prima.
Enter Charastus. Cha. NOt one tear more I Will spend for thee my sister;
It is a grief too light to solemnize thy exequies.
My heart in silence shall weep blood, when I remember
Desdonellus fate. Hence then eff^minate tears:
Ye are too soft an expresser of my misery,
The senceless Trees but struck in favor by the Sun
Will do as much, and shall I when fortune darts
Her real beams of malice, express no greater sorrow?
Yes, an inward bleeding is most dangerous,
That, that I will learn to practice.

Enter Fidelio. Cha. Fidelio! Let me embrace thee.
I do contain more worth within these arms
Than Atlas bears upon his shoulders. Speak dearest friend.
Where is Virtusus? living or amongst the dead?

Fid. Alive too, but in prison.

Cha. I Will free him instantly; I Will have my Crown again,
Too long Bermudo has usurpt it. I Will break upon him,
Like some di^efull Contet sparkling my vengeance
'Bout his Throne, or like a swelling channel lon^ damned up
Will I discharge my streams on all sides of him,
Rushing forth with a strong and hideous torrent
As mischievous as irresistible.

Fid. Forbid it Providence. Be not too rash fond man,
R^l^gion, and your sacred Laws oppose it.
You have indulged him all the Prerogatives of Majesty,
Crowned him your self, and should you now
Lay violent hands upon him before his Crown is forfeited,
How would you violate your Laws, and scandal
Your Religion? Think what an easy president
'Twill be hereafter to your Subjects.

Cha. Far be it from me to violate Religion:
I would not for the worlds vast Monarchy
Receive the morgag'd Crown before its forfeiture.
I Will wed Flavanda first, so doing
Religion seconds my attempts, and restores
The Diadem again unto me.

Fid. Still you grow rasher: will you for a Crown
Receive a Serpent to your bosom? His Sister?
Will all your glory, and your high swollen titles
Make constant her that loves thee not.
Take heed, there is danger in it, great danger.

Cha. Her Love's more constant than the Rocks,
Less blasted with the puffs of vain Ambition:
Nature has lost the mold where she was framed,
And cannot second what she did:
'Twas my Flavanda whom her curious hand
From all eternity strove to make perfect.

Fid. Were she the e^actest piece of Curiosity that ever
Admiration doated on, yet if she want a soul
Able for to govern all those excellencies,
We cannot style her perfect (Perfection being
The unity of both most excellent) our Loves
Like to our selves are still terrestrial,
Reflecting only on the outward object,
Without regard of that divine and most celestial
Fabric of the soul We think
Those seeming spots within the Moon, mere motes
And blemishes, when indeed they are most pure,
And most pellucide; so on the contrary,
We deem all virtuous that is fair, and yet
The Moon is fair we must confess, yet she
Is only constant in Inconstancy.

Cha. Can thou look virtuously on any thing that is fair?
Cans't thou behold dame Natures Masterpiece.
And no new Admiration swell thy enamourd fancy?
Can thou but seem to court Divinity,
Or behold the Sun in all his glory, without a true
And real Adoration? if so: Go court my best Flavanda.
Carry a thousand Ovids in thy tongue,
Let thy words melt to the winning'st eloquence
That e're enchanted Lady; Speak in thy highest phrase,
Thou can not flatter her; she is as far beyond it,
As I come short of admiration,
And if all this does produce a tear,
Or sigh, more than in pity of thy folly,
I will as much abhor inconstancy,
As now I doat upon her excellence.

Fid. I were injurious unto you, and to that Diety
That lies inshrin'd within those rays, should I
Presume to approach but with a virtuous adoration.
No immodest thought shall once extract
An amorous glance, no rude word shall preach
Uncivil doctrine to her, nor any melting touch
Cast a delicious silence over her body, whilst
Her pleased eye retorts a second invitation:
All shall be truly harmless, all divine.
I Will lay a seeming ^iege against her constancy,
And if she bravely can maintain that fort,
I Will style thee happy in thy humble choice, happier
Than those that wed 'bove their aspiring fortunes,
Where every nod of the displeased wife
Clames an obedience in the Husband.

Cha. On to thy wars then, but take heed,
Fly not too long about those flames, lest that
Thy melted wings like to a second Icarus
Throws thee down into a deadly Ocean of destruction,
Where thou must sink eternally: So Farewell.

Exeunt. Act. 3. Scen. 2.
Enter Virtusus reading a Letter. Vir. Thine for ever Thesbia. If this be true
I am above thee Fate. Why should I doubt it? Her hand
Is the truest Character of her faith, her Seal
The firm and furest obligation of her Love
Which like the Gordian Knot binds most inseparably.
It Is that divinest Thesbia that has tide
Our absent souls together, reuniting too
Our hands though distant in as firm a Kno^
As Hymen and his sacred Rites could do, though present.
Be frolic then my soul; To day
Thou art wedded to thy happiness. Swell high my blood;
I Will entertain my Thesbia in a dream:
There my delighted fancy may in spite
Of cursed distance, kiss its fill,
There in a second slumber I may lie
Melting my soul with hers, whilst cach embrace
Invites another, and each amorous look
Calls to a second Parley; There my ravished senses
Rapt to the highest ecstasy may find out
New sorts of pleasures, and sweet fresh delights.
Rest here then melting soul, to All good night.

He sleeps Enter Thesbia. These. Did our chief bliss consist in worldly pleasures
As Epicurus did define, I might suppose my self
Most happy; But alas, take heed,
Trust not a Lion though he ^awns.
Oh ye powers! why did ye not!
When this same fabric lay like melted wax
Void of all form or feature, why did ye not
Frame it most miserable? why was I made
Beyond the reach of happiness?
I would Bermudo thou had ha^ed me,
I could have been ambitious then, and Crowns
Are like Love, nere pleasant but in getting,
Once got, they are troublesome: Happiness consists
In expectation only; Fond Gamsters when they play
Desire to win, but having won, their play is ended.
Sick men will please their thoughts with that,
Which to enjoy were deadly: Ambition
Were a virtue could (...) shun the end.
What sleeping prisoner? Thou art happy in thy thraldom;
Kings cannot sleep so soundly;
Where is my father Shepherd? where is he?
For whom thou endur'st this thraldom?
Cannot thy sleeps inform me? This Paper may.
She takes the Letter. Ha? Amaze me not ye Heavens!
Do not abuse my too inclining senses with the fight
Of this same flattering object. Oh desire
Thou art a false Optic misleading of our fancies
To that sight which most we covet.
Why thus transformed Virtusus? Are these a Princes Robes?
Is sleep a Lovers fellow? at noon tide too?
Then Thesbia is forgotten.
Sleep on sweet soul, she has deserved thy scorns;
Let Quires of heavenly Spirits guard thy slumbers,
And when thou walk'st let thy enamourd soul
Turn to those pleasing sounds: Thesbia would have
No mortal Rival. Alas he wakes.

Vir. Stay Morpbeus stay, force not thy leaden wings
So quickly from mine eyes: oh let me ere behold
This Pleasing object. How has my fancy
Traveled all this while? what Seas, what Gul^s,
What unknown Lands has my imagination compast?
If dreams those weaker fancies of our brain
Can work so really upon our souls,
Oh let me dream eternally, let all my life
Be one continued slumber: Ha? a Vision!

These. No, a real piece of Misery, one that begs
Upon his knees a Courtesy.

Vir. Thou art my Jayler boy,
Thou may command it.

These. I not command, but my obedient soul
Poures out it self in supplication: Because I am your Jayler,
Let not that keep back your clemency,
I will become your fellow-prisoner rather,
Weep when you weep, sigh when you sigh,
And be the true and perfect flatterer of your misery.
Tell me, oh tell me! where is that unhappy King Sperazus,
Whose life thy loss of liberty has purchased?
Long have I sought him up and down,
Yet still was so unhappy as to miss him.

Vir. Would thou betray him then false Boy?

These. Far be it from me, I would but chide him only;
Tell him he was cruel, inhumanely cruel,
Cruel to his own dear daughter,
Robbing her of that affection by his strict command
Which she had placed on Prince Virtusus:
Nor was this enough to satisfy his ire,
But he must force her to revile him too,
(Heaven knows too much against her will.)
How often poor maid has she with showers of tears,
Distilled from those never empty fountains,
Prayed that the heavens would set an everlasting seal
Upon those lips that uttered such a profanation?
But they reserved them for to sing in heaven,
As now they do.

Vir. Is she dead then?

These. No, she lives in heaven a sacrifice
Unto Virtusus ire.

Vir. I have heard too much: Hence Night-Raven
Hencethou black interpreter of death,
Haste to the Stygian shades, be never more
Here heard on earth: Thy voyee will blast us all.

These. I am sorry sir --.

Vir. Hold, stop thy accursed Mouth;
Let it not breath such dismal vapors:
Haste unto Pluto's Quire, there let the Mandrakes voice
Yell forth his Mattens; Howl there the Dirges
Of tormented souls; Learn Harmony from Toads.

These. Yet hear me.

Vir. Never, oh never.
Exit.
These. Thus often Politicians with their too much care
Turn what was perfect to a just despair.
Exit.
Act. 3. Sce. 3.
Enter Flavanda and Constantin^ as Shepherdesses. Fla. Call you this place a
Cottage, it is a beauteous
Palace rather, adorned to entertain some Deity;
Art sure? and Nature too has met to make it
A per^ect Paradise: I have lived in ignorance too long;
Courts are false Optics blinding our weaker fancies
With a false and basely forged felicity.
This is the truest happiness.

Con. Now I perceive things are most sweet
Known by their contraries; Courtiers amongst us
Are had in admiration; we whose simplicity
Can be but honest only think flattery virtue.

one knocks. Fla. Some one knocks, pritheee admit him.

Enter Fidelio. Con. One from Charastus Madam desires
To speak with you.

Fla. From Charastus? come you from him sir?
Pardon me if I express a greater pleasure
Than modesty will allow me: How does that Prince?
Alas, I fear all is not well you look so strangely.
Is he alive or dead? speak quickly, quickly gentle ^ir.
Release me of this fear. Why are yo^
So cruelly silent?

Fid. Admiration Lady stopped my speech: He lives,
Lives happily in contemplation of your excellence*

Fla. Does this same visit sir proceed from him?

Fid. No Lady: my devotion bound me hither
With as great a zeal, as Pilgrims to their Pilgrimage*
For since Charastus tongue that poor interpreter
Of your worth blazed your perfections to me,
My heart would never be at quiet
Till my ambitious eyes were witnesses of that excellence,
Which now alas I find of such a full authority,
That I am forced to adoration: Thus low
I offer up my self unto your mercy.
Oh be as gentle then as fair,
And let some showers of pity quench those flames,
Or cruel love worse than a flash of lightnin^
Will consume the Sacrificer, Altar, and the Sacrifice.

Fla. If showers of tears could quench the flame
I would be full of pity, but Loves fire
Is of that nature that the more we strive
To quench it, the more it still does burn.
Pity 'its fuel is, and should I spend some Tears,
It would raise a strange presumption in you
Of an ea^ie Conquest; I Will not deceive
Your hopes so much: Charastus sir has conquered,
And is of force to keep. I am only his.

Fid. Only his? Good ought to be common still:
Do not, oh do not, sweet, confine a happiness
To only one: Make not a stealth of Natures bounty,
But like some gentle stream running betwixt two fields
Be a delicious ornament to both.
The twining Ivy that ascends
Embracing the loved Elm will often vouchsafe
The encircling of some neighboring bough, and yet
The Elm cannot accuse it of inconstancy.

Fla. To suffer our affections so to wander
Were but to prostitute* and make common that
Which nature has reserved within for a prize
Due to the most deserving.

Fid. The Sun himself nere stands upon curiosity,
But lends his beams to all: He nere rega^ds desert.
Be wise Flavanda, know he that woes thee
Is a Prince, the Prince of great Pelorus
Whither he shall car^y thee in as full a Triumph
As he would his Penates.
There thou may shine in all thy glory
Whilist thy Beholders melt to see those rays,
And never seek a shade to shelter them,
Whilst here you stay, the Tyrants Law
Wor^e than a grossly exhalation duls your beams,
Not suffering them to shine at all, no not so much
As on my friend Charastus.

Fla. With what face dare you call him friend
Whom thus you strive to ruin? Can you suppose
He will forget this injury? Surely
He Will ever hate you for it.

Fid. He Will rather love me for it:
Atheists themselves love Atheists, and shall we,
We of so pure a faith maintain a hate
Against one another for being of the same Religion?
How injurious should we prove unto that Dei^y
To whom we pay this reverence,
Should we but think her mercy lay confined
Within the circumscribed bounds of constancy,
Or suppose that that love can ere be limited
By a promise which Nature has made free;
Love rests not in a point, it is large,
Diffusive as the Air, not like a stream that still
Tends to the Ocean, but like some wandering flood
Which at the will and pleasure of the Spring
Returns unto her bosom: Draw part, Sweet,
Of that wandering stood to this side of the fountain,
Here let it come in a full effusion,
I Will meet its pleasing Billows with a virgin Love
That yet remains unstained, unproffer'd, unpolluted.
(...) Thou lie, false man,'it is staind,'it is proffered,
And polluted too.

Fid. Nay, blush not, Sweet:
Thou Wilt make Aurora blush to see her self out-gon
In her peculiar excellence.

Fla. Let not this crimson have a colorable mistake,
It Is a red flag of just defiance against thy Treachery.
Recant fond man, thou will grow odious else,
More odious to me than my evil Genius:
I shall abhor thy sight till penitence
Has washed away this profanation. Dearest of Friends,
If e're thou will do a favor to Flavanda,
Haste to Charastus, Tell him this man's disloyalty.
He surely will severely punish it.

Con. I obey most willingly.
Exit.
Fid. Now She Is gone, I am not what I seemed
The base abuser of thy constancy: No saucy flame
Burns now within my veins, It Is a religious fire,
I cannot style it love, but zeal.
Why did thou sweet suspect me? I was
Too confident to be a Lover: Loves flames burn high
Still trembling with their height;
Mine were too base, and too audacious*
Be happy now Flavanda, ere that too morrows Sun
Shall deck these meadows with his beams
Hymen shall join you to Charastus. I was sent
Not as his Rival, but his Instrument.

Exeunt. Act. 3. Sce. 4.
Horns within. Enter Bermudo. Ber. This Boar has mist us strangely: I Will see
Whither I can trace him in the woods.
He goes out and enters again. No sign at all? It Is strange: Where lies the
wind?
North or North-East? He must needs be this way.

Stay: what foot is that? It Is fresh and newly printed.
Music below ground. Ha! Guard me Diana: A Rape, a Rape;
Where flies my ravished senses? oh
From what earthly cave proceeds this heavenly harmony?
Dissolve, dissolve my soul, turn Air*
And Echo forth those blessed harmonious accents;
A voice too? Orphens, Orphens, begst thou again Euricide?
Let amorous Lovers take delight
And glory in variety,
Love still to gaze, though every sight
Ads still unto their misery.
Song.
I in a Cave
More pleasure have
Loving but one,
Than they that love,
Still to remove
Can in a Throne.
Surely the ground is holy where I tread;
The heavenly Choristers are met to day
To consecrate this wood, Eternal Ministers of heaven
If my rash foot has offended in the disturbance
Of your holy Ceremonies, blame my rude fo^rune.
Oh let me not wander here in admiration thus,
But send some gentle Air to be my guide
Out of this pleasing Labytinth: Oh Diana
Take pity on your servant.

Echo. Servant. Ber. What voice calls? Art thou a ta^ling Echo?

Echo. No.

Ber. No? what art thou then? Art thou some gentle Nymph
Inhabiting these woods? or art Dianas self?

Echo. Dianas self?

Ber. Most gracious Goddess of these silent groves,
Long has thy servant lived the poor admirer
Of thy excellence* long has he lived in ignorance
Of that glory whose true worth to know
Would surfeit Admiration* Tell me, of tell me,
May thou be seen by mortal eye?

Echo. I.

Ber. I will no longer live in ignorance.
I Will seek thee in the deepest caves,
Search the remorest corners of the wood
To view thy splendour. Oh stay then Gentle Goddess,
Fly not hence, oh stay I come.

Echo. Stay, I come.

Ber. Come not to me sweet Goddess,
I am not worth such favor: it is happiness enough
For me to seek thee, though I nere should find thee.
Oh come not then, I am thy servant,
I am Bermudo stay.

Echo. Bermudo stay.

Ber. Yes, with a zeal as fervent as the
Melting Bride expects the wished arrival
Of the Bridegroom.

Enter Desdonella from the Cave attired like a Sylvan Goddess. Des. Lie there
thou sweet and sole companion
Of my mise^y, whilst I from out this solitary Cave
Behold the so admired fabric of the Heavens,
And then contemplate on their excellence.

Ber. Eternal piece of chastity, at whose shrine
Pure Virgins offer up unspotted incence,
Lo thus prostrate at thy feet Bermudo lies
Offering himself a most unworthy sacrifice.

Des. Alas I am betrayed: it is Bermudo.
I must dissemble.

Ber. Beauteous Diana, Goddess of the woods
May I behold thy splendour? As yet I durst not
Lest thy refulgent eyes should blind me for presumption.
Oh draw a veil ore that majestic countenance
I shall be blinded else with too much seeing.

Des. Men's weaker eyes must not behold
Divinity in all its luster: That were a sight
Too glorious, else Bermudo I would appear to thee
D^ckt with divine, and holy ornaments,
B^t envious Fates sorbid that happiness to man,
I must assume some other shape
Before thou can behold me.

Ber. Take any gracious Goddess so I may see thee,
Could thou assume the Devils 'twould be lovely.

Des. I have thought of one Bermudo not so terrible
Though bad enough, what think thou of Desdonella's
The late dead Princess? thou hatedst her alive,
Her shape then surely cannot ravish thee.
Shall I assume hers?

Ber. Oh any gracious Goddess, any*

Des. Arise Bermudo then, Look up,
Behold in Desdonella's shape Diana; Speak,
Am I not very like her? Ca^'st not perceive
Her tear swollen eyes, her trembling hands,
And love-fick countenance? Look I not
Like a true and perfect Lover?

Ber. Oh Desdonella were thou now alive,
I should admire thee;
Thy shape was never lovely until now.
Thou art transparent grown, I can perceive
Divinity within thee, the reflection whereof
Dissolves my frozen bosom, and makes me stand
Like to a burning Statue, all on fire,

Des. Why tremblest so Bermudo? can Desdonella's shape
Of late so odious, make thee tremble?
Fond man, where is thy Allegiance to Diana?
Where Is now that chastity which so often
Upon mine Altars thou have boasted?

Ber. Pardon Divinest Goddess; no loose desire
Causes this sudden alteration, no upstart slame
Makes me forgetful of my loyalty;
It Is not the outward shape that I admire,
(Though I must needs confess it is excellent)
There Is that within clameth an Adoration,
And I were worse than sacrilegious should I rob
Divinity of its due.

Des. Look no more thorough that false optic, fear;
^^e not so timorous; Divinity is laid aside,
And I am perfect mortal, come, (...) consident,
And kiss our hand; why so fearful?
He kisses her hand. Now for this favor you will report Diana is unchaste.

Ber. Let me be blasted then; I were more impious
Than superstition, should I think a kiss or an embrace
Could be a breach of chastity; Those are rewards
Given to afflicted goodness; but what merit lies in me
Whose just worth from out the center of your
Chaster mercies may extract so great a favor
I must confess I know not, unless I take
Your liberality for the cause.

Des. I am so far from being ungrateful unto him
That harbors but a spark of chastity, that I suppose
The favor of our hand, a poor
And trifling recompense for so much virtue;
But should I offer up a lip to you Bermudo,
You* would be civilly fearful, thinking me
Unchaste to offer it, and your self
More impious to receive it.

Ber. I were erroneous should I think so;
Will not the Sun oft-times vouchsafe
An humble salutation to the earth, and yet not lose
One of his chaster glories; far,
Far be it from me to think, when ere I see
Approaching beams of Chastity, that I may refuse
To meet them with an equal ardour:
When I consider that the unity of two chaste bodies
Makes chastity entirely perfect, I dare put on
A confidence to salute a Deity,
Provided always our intents be chaste.
It Is not an outward ceremonious action
That can spot the soul, for could we sin
And think but chastely, 'twere no fault.
Armed with which opinion I am confident,
And dare taste the sweetness of that lip,
And think it lawful too.

He kisses her. Des. Ou^ impudence; That kiss has pulled a ruin on thee.
Hence from my sight, make haste,
Lest my pursuing vengeance overtake thee.
Exit. How near my Virgin-modesty was forfeited?
Who can look virtuously with affections eyes?
Beware ye vesfall Virgins, ye that do make
Your chastity your Religion, beware of too much gazing;
Eyes oftentimes dart forth a luster
That will dull devotion were it armed
With all its sacred glories.

Enter Halisdus. Hal. How fares it Royal Princess with you
After this wished conference?

Des. As with a ^eary Mariner shipwreck in the Haven.
Many a tedious voyage has this wandering bark
Past in the gulf of desperation, yet still was ever
Lost in the port of happiness; oh Halisdus!
I am grown weary with this sailing;
Is there no other way for to be happy,
But by this most unfortunate adventure?

Hal. Yes Madam, if you will be advised. You know
On what condition Bermudo holds his Crown
Just now with you broke it; If you please then
I Will tell your brother of the forfeiture, and so
To save his life he will condescend unto your will.

Des. Accursed policy to shun a rock
And fall among Pirates; Far,
Far be it from D^sdonella to enjoy that love
That comes by composition; that were an act
Becoming those that set a common price on Chastity,
And sell Repentance unto Prodigals.
True love admits no hire, it is Lust not Love
We bargain for. Grant he has sinned,
Ought I to punish him: Will ere the Leopard
Chide the Ermine for being spotted? That were
To blame their own deformity in another
Without excusing of themselves.

Hal. Thou art too virtuous Desdonella:
None I can blame for the misfortune but thy virtue.
Oh ye powers! Is this that just reward which virtue pays?
All will hereafter strive for to be vicious
If excellence must merit misery. Come Desdonella
I Will to thy Cave, and furnish all thy wants:
Thy virtues glories had they their perfect light
Would puzzle all eternity to write.

Exeunt to the Cave. Act. 3. Sce. 3.
Enter Constantina. Con. Where am I now? what make thou Constantina here?
Alas I am come to do a Message,
And have forgot my errand; oh nere remember it.
Could thou forget ever, thou mighst be happy.
Thou must accuse Fidelio; Thou must dye first:
Though he has sinned, thy tongue shall never punish him.
Oh Fidelio thou art false, false as inconstancy it self,
False unto me, and to the worlds vast expectation too.
Is this the melancholy life thou vow'dst so often
To lead in Lelybaeus? why did my soul
Leave her religious Sanctuary, Country, friends, and all
To see thee court my ruin in an unknown Land?
Should I now chide, and seek Revenge,
I did but Justice, 'Twere equity
No Rigor should I kill thee.
I cannot be so much a woman; oh ye powers
Why made ye me so soft, and him so cruel.
Enter Charastus. Hail gracious sir, these so dejected looks
Speak you Charastus: I have a message to you,
Would but your eye suffer your ear to hear it.
Why do you g^^e so? has your divining soul
Foretold the happy tidings that I bring you?
If some instinct has forestal'd my errand,
I shall not need for to relate. I Will only tell you sir.
You have a friend, by name Fidelio, a Man,
(A ^ine rather where scattered virtues gathered up
Lie hoarded in a commixt unity)
If ere perfection was, it is in him. He Sir
Has spoke your cause so ^eelingly to Flavanda;
Pleaded with such divine and holy Oratory,
That her love now blazes with such violence
As I could wish you presently would see her.

Cha. Divinest closu^e of a soul more pure,
No general pardon sent from Heaven
Could strike attention in me with so great a zeal
As thy commanding voice as don; dearest,
Dearest Flavanda can thou suppose a poor,
And silly garment can keep me from
The discerning of thy excellence, that knew it,
When I lay a misshapen Embrio in the Chaos?
It Is not a silken cloud, Divinest, that can hide the Sun.

Con. You do mistake it sure.
This is a Meteor only, reflected from the true one.

Cha. Those rays are too too glorious for reflections,
They cast a luster would make
An Angel of Ae^hiop, would not their heat
Convert him to his wonted color.
Nor can I think such beams can meet
But in my dear Flavanda: Art thou not she?
I prithee say thou art, 'twill ease me somewhat.

Con. Your reason sir will tell you that I am not.

Cha. Make me not m^d I prithee: can there be
Two most excellent, two most rare,
Two chiefest above all, it is a mystery
Beyond two worlds: The Sun admits
No partner of his glory, the Phaenix no partaker,
Why should not she the chiefest of all women
Assume the like Prerogative? Must there be
A divided essence of an united excellence?
Oh Nature! why did thou give to man, two hands,
Two eyes, two Affections, and but one heart?
Pardon divinest Lady if my too much care
Has made me negligent, there is
A direful conflict fought within me by two friends,
Either must have victory by my ruin:
What will that victory yield.

Con. I see you are disturbed sir;
I Will crave leave to return.
Exit.
Cha. Thus does the Sun fly our Horizon,
This Night clad in a misty veil,
Spreads darkness over the world,
Whilst mortals wander in obscurity.
Oh Love, thou are too much a wanton;
Thy sport's too serious. Who fires a Church
Or kills his parents may be happy,
Repentance often will wash away that stain,
But he that loves, loves doubtfully as I,
No tears, no sorrows, nor repentant sighs
Can wipe away his misery, but he must dye
Starved in the midst of plenty.

Enter Fidelio. Fid. Why so sad Charastus? prepare your ears
To entertain news that will startle all your
Melancholy thoughts, and make you pamperd appetite
Swell high with contemplation of a happiness,
Flavanda's constant, more constant
Than a miser to his gold; The vestal Virgins
At their Altar may be tempted, but not she.

Cha. Oh Fidelio thou have abused my trust, I
Sent thee not to praise my constancy, but to try hers;
Did thou not promise me to court her,
Nay court her in thy chiefest Rhetoric,
To use all the persuasions that thy tongue
Could in civility pronounce?

Fid. And so I did, by all that is good, I did.

Cha. Thou swearst not by thy self now:
He is not good that is false unto his friend.
Why stird'st thou a suspicion in me of her constancy,
Yet never would seek to prove it?

Fid. What Dev^^ has inspired thee with this falsehood?

Cha. It was my better Angel rather
Sent from Heaven to warn me.
Did thou not flatter me? extol my loyalty
Beyond its merit? Tell her each figh I spent?
What tears her love had caused?
But that I know she is constant,
I should suspect her for thy praises.

Fid. If thou believ'st Charastus there is faith
Or loyalty in Fidelio, (which surely thou oughtst not to suspect)
I tempted her as far as piety and friendship
Would permit me, yet like a steadfast rock she stood
Throwing the insulting billows on the movers face.
Oh Charastus thou art happy;
She is a gem incomparable, and did I know
What envious tongue had blasted thus our reputation,
I Would make it eat its venom.

Cha. If thou but heardst, it thou would start,
And stand amazed to hear such sweetness.

Fid. Do not delay your joys with her E^comium.
A Priest and your Flavanda does expect you
For to tie that Knot which you before
Too rashly would have don, had my unlucky hand
Not hindered it.

Cha. Alas Fidelio the tide is turned;
If now you wed me it is unto my grave.
From my divided heart springs a biforked flame,
Hymen will stand amazed to see it, and will not tell
At which to light his torch at.
Farewell Fidelio, death he needs not fear
That does desire to meet it every where.
Exit
Fid. Oh Love thou art too cruel! How can thou tyrannize
Ore his too soft nature? Had thou but eyes
Thou then would pity him, but as thou art,
Blind and obdurate, thou shootst at random still;
So fortune guides thy shafts, and always she
Upon desert spends all her cruelty.
Exit.
Actus quartus. Scena Prima.
Enter Flavanda. Fla. THe lying Painters picture aged time
With wings at's heels, as if he always flew,
But that their license warranteth their acts
I justly might accuse them of their falsehood;
The time that Love obeys is slow, exceeding dull,
Hel'd back with leaden fe^^ers.
Each tedious minute makes a week,
Each month an age, and each delaying year
Seems fully a Platonnick.

Enter Charastus. Cha. Whither despair do hurry me?
What new found death can thou invent
For an inconstant Lover? If there be one
Which never yet imagination compast, let me enjoy
Its wished virginity, I have deserved it fully.

Fla. T^lk not of death Charastus now; my arms shall be
Thy living sepulcher, my Bed thy winding sheet;
Hymen shall write thy joyful Epitaph,
And Virgins pure shall (...) an Epithalamium for an Elegy;
We two like to two meeting channels will turn one,
One individed and united Body.

Cha. Oh Flavanda I blush to see thee;
I am a villain grown, yet I still dearly love thee*
I am inconstant, Dearest, c^n'st thou think it?
The ficklest fortune is more steadfast:
The wind oft-times is stable, but my heart
Wavers at every object.

Fla. Have I a Rival then Charastus?
Is the stream of your Affection then divided,
And your Love grown less?

Cha. Not less Flavan^a; Streams parted with a stop
(...) with a greater violence (...) her side,
Than when they k^pt united in one channel.

Fla I (...) ^on^^ss my unwo^thiness; I will resign
Unto thy ^^ether love, could I but think her worthy.

Cha. Never, oh never, never shal't thou do it.
For sooner sure the Gods can separate the orbs
Th^n our so long united Hearts.
Enter Constantina. Were the separation but in Natures power, here comes
Those rays that easily would make the dissolution.

Fla. Thou have made a worthy choice Charastus.
I glory in my Rival more than Lovers in their Nuptials:
This Act confirms your love to me, and should I dye
I make no question but my liveless trunck
Would pleasure in your happiness; no ^o^iembrace
Could ye exchange, but I should be partaker
No kiss without a joyful blush from my wan cheeks
Should join your tender lips together.
Delay not then your joys for me.
My Love is old and stale; He^'s fresher
Than the maiden Rose whose pure^ess ye^
No boisterous hand has touched profanely.
I Will imitate those friends that take more pleasure
For to see some feed, than if they fed themselves.

Con. I Will starve before I Will taste such cares,
They will infect me with inconstancy*
They Are like devouring flames, they still turn
All they meet with to their own nature:
But I will fly them worse than stings of Scorpions,
Or that deadly root, that pallateth the eye
But poisons still the palate.

Fla. Shun not approaching happiness for my sake;
I am grown old in his affection, and Age
You know must dye, yet when I am dead
Be not I (...) jealous of my Ghost.

Con. If death can end this controversy, it is fittest
I should yield, when I am dead
I happily may love him, but never living.

Cha. Contend not so my hearts two parallels
For what is another due; Death my desert is,
Here I live, like to a needle 'twixt two Loadstones,
Paying a trembling reverence to both,
No full Allegiance unto either.
Oh ye individed moities of my soul,
Tear not my heart with your attractive virtues
Thus by piece-meals, divide it gently,
Ye both are victors of my better part already,
My body is not worth your quarrel.

Con. Nor your heart; we night as well
Quarrel for fortune, she is as constant.

Fla. But not so lovely.

Con. Constancy the only beauty is in eyes
That true affection governs, which till Charastus
Gets again, I shall abhor to see him.
Exit.
Fla. Would I could do so too; But envious Fate
^wharts my desires, and condemns my hate.
Exit.
Cha. Do I yet live? remain my senses perfect?
Oh I could rave, tear out my traitorous eyes,
Dissect my heart, and rend affection from affection.
Surely I am mad, because I am not mad:
Mad men enjoy their happiness, but we
In having reason know our misery.
Exit.
Act. 4. Sce. 2.
Enter Constantina. Con. Where is that boasted constancy which so often
Men use to glory in? where is that Faith,
And that eternal Loyalty, which once exalted men
'Bove Demigods? Is there not one left virtuous?
We might have been inconstant by Authority,
Custom would have allowed, it but men,
Whose purer souls should harbor most divinity*
Are now become less constant far than we
That clame no being but from them.
Why should we suffer then for what is another fault?
My act shall work a reformation in the world,
And man, not woman, shall hereafter be
The Proverb to express Iuconstancy.

Enter Fidelio. Fid. Kneel you to me Lady?

Con. Wonder not Fidelio why thus low
An unknown Virgin offers her obedience;
It is a reverence that we ought to pay
When we behold such virtue, and should I
Be so uncivilly modest to deny an adoration
When duty and affection bind me,
The world might justly style me irreligious.

Fid. That modesty I must confess is incivilitie
That smothers an affection; But what worth in me
Can stir affection in your chaster breast I know not,
And I must needs Lady either be a fool
In extolling of my self, or uncivil in condemning your Judgment.

Con. I look not on you sir with superstitious eyes,
I cannot make an Idol of perfection,
It is your souls Idaea I admire
Whose excellence I have studied long
Taught by your Constantina's praises.

Fid. You have chose a most unprofitable Subject
For your study Lady, it is so sparing of reward
That it forgets it self, and must for ever, you.

Con. It is a study like the Chimick,
The end I must confess is hard to gain, but yet
It shows most sweet conclusions to the industrious.
Many there are that study it with delight,
But none with such a fearful fervency as I;
Yet though I tremble, I despair not, since she,
That only had the power to obtain it,
Has resigned it to me for a Legacy, which I may
Justly challenge, and you may not without imp^ety deny.

Fid. A Legacy? if she be dead that was
Sole Mistress of the Art, the Art m^st dye too.

Con. Mistake me not, she is not dead sir,
She has usurpt another study only, called
Obedience to a Husband, for Constantin^ your once betrothed
Is now married to the Duke of Florence my only Brother.

Fid. She is worse then, her constancy is dead,
And with it dies my love eternally.

Con. Oh say not so; that was my Legacy given to me
By her departing Constancy, and if the Laws fulfill
The wills of wicked men, it is fit that sacred Constancie's
Should be obei'd* She told me here you lived
In Lelybaeus a disguised Shepherd for her sake,
Which made me take this journey and this habit,
And surely had you not a fresher Love,
You nere could disobey your Constantina's will,
Especially to one so like her.

Fid. I must confess thou art so like her,
That I should believe what thou have said is true,
Were I not so confident of her Loyalty.

Con. Shall I not be believed then?
Let her hand persuade you, since my tongue cannot.

She gives him a Letter. Fid. This is her seal and Character, I know'um well;
The direction, ^o her wronged Fidelio.
I begin to tremble, my gelid blood
Flies fast unto n^y heart, and ca'ls for vengeance.

He reads. Con. Read and repent false man.

Fid. Oh heavens! Why of those numerous torments
That attend our sinful actions, chose you a woman
Yo torment me? If that my crime so heinous was,
That all your malice joined with fortunes
Could not invent a punishment to equal it,
Hell surely might have furnished you,
You needed not have called a woman to your council,
Their malice is above H^ls hate,
But I Will be revenged on, all their Sex,
For none I am sure is constant since she is false.

Con. Be not so confident of our weakness:
The loving Turtle shall not serve her mate
With half that faithfulness as I will you.

Fid. Hence Ethiopean Devil; Thou art too like her
To be good: I Would rather meet a Succubus,
Embrace a sooty Moore, or dally with a Negro's horrid curles.
They may by chance prove constant, but thou Will presently deny thou love me.

Con. Let me dye eternally, if ever I deny
I love you.

Fid. Then follow me to Bermudo, thou shall be the first
I Will sacrifice to my just anger. Oh men accursed!

Exeunt. Act. 4. Sce. 3.
Enter Virtusus. Vir. Oh thou restrainer of our wilder actions,
Thou that keepst in awe all raging superflui^ies,
Teaching sobriety to the grossest Epicures,
Could thou restrain our wandering imaginations too
Thou were a Paradise, but they in the obscurest places
Wander most, and in the darkest Caves, where light
Nere yet vouchsa^t an entrance, often will see
A perfect splendour and a full effusion of immateriall Beams
Descending down from an impenitrable postern.
Thoughts are the Devils chiefest Instruments.
The holiest Friar in his seclusest Cell
Often sins in imagination; The purest Vestall
At the Altar will oft-times fancy a thing unlawful;
And should that be the utter ruin of Virginity,
Where should we seek it Heavens?

Enter Bermudo and Thesbia. These. See yonder he is, Great Sir.

Ber. Thou art a courteous Jayler; He sares
More like a Prince than Prisoner.

These. I love not Sir to triumph over Misery.
Exit.
Ber. Shepherd, thou have thy liberty.
The importunate entreaties of Anthrogenus have commanded it.
See now thou go, and with submissive knees
Be thankful to his bounty; It is
But a poor gratuity for freedom.

Vir. I scorn that freedom that is given
Not for desert, but out of courtesy.
Flattery a thraldom is beyond a Prison,
And I abhor it worse; I Will not thank him
Nor Heavens for what is my due sir.

Ber. Why stubborn fool? What merit lies in thee
Whose just power may challenge but a favor from him?
It was not thy desert that raised this pity,
But his Charity.

Vir. His duty rather: true goodness
Whensoere he se^s oppressed Innocence
Is bound in duty to relieve it.

Ber. Is Innocence the ground of your presumption?
Shepherd beware lest thy contempt
Kindle a flame that will consume thee.
Thou have stirred the embers, without prevention
'Twill be dangerous.

Enter Thesbia. These. Oh smother it a while, Great Sir;
Let it not spend
As yet its violence: He will accept your courtesy,
I know he will* It was not He, it was
His modesty that refused it; See how he blushes Sir.
Gentle Shepherd, dye not ungrateful to our bounty;
That crime will blot your former innocence,
And make it seem as loathsome as impiety.
If against me you do conceive this Hate,
Go but with me, and I Will tell you sir
She is not dead, Thesbia is not dead,
And reconcile us two in a perpetual league of friendship.

Vir. For once I Will try your cunning.

Ber. Shepherd choose which you will have,
A perfect freedom, or a sudden grave.

Vir. I shall have both in either.

Exeunt Virtusus and Thesbia. Ber. Have thou Bermudo with ambitious wings
Soared 'bove the reach of common thoughts?
Have I obtained that happiness which proudest envy
Scarce can prye into? And must I stoop
Unto a boys soft Lure? Surely some holy power
Conceals it self within that pleasant habitation,
Whose awful noise freezes my raging appetite,
And tu^ns my fury into Charity.

Enter Fidelio. Fid. The hardened Earth made stiff with winters frost
Views not the Sun with such a full alacrity,
As I your Highness.

Ber. A lustful couple joined in loose embraces
Hate not the approaching Morn with such an enmity,
As I your flattery.

Pid. Believe me Sir I cannot flatter you.
My simple honesty leaves that study unto them
That seek preferment by it: I never hoped
To raise my fortunes by my handsome lying.
The zeal I bear your laws has armed my confidence,
And I do wish I had a thousand unchaste Damzels
To present you for a sacrifice.

Ber. And I do wish if this be true,
I had ten thousand favors to requite thee with.

Fid. My duty Sir, and not those hopes of recompense
Has bred this hate, which death shall not extinguish,
But my angry Ghost shall hate 'um in Elysium.
The very name of woman is grown odious,
And I abhor a Lovers sighs worse than the air
Breathed from infection.

Ber. Let me contain thee in my arms thou faithful Champion;
We two will grow together, and be one,
One terror to that foolish passion.

Fid. I have not earned such favor yet.
I would not willingly receive my hire
Before I have deserved it: Let your Revenge
Eat of my labors first; I can present you
With a taste, a woman, that dares outface
Impudence it self, who in despite of all your Laws,
And that, which lately I did count
An ornament of woman, blessed modstie,
Is turned a shameless wooer.

Ber. If this be true, I Will wear thee here
My better Genius; Long have I sought out such a one.
To make their sex more odious to my eyes,
But nere till now could find one.
Conscience that food of fools and bane of Greatness
Has abused me still, making my subjects
To conceal those crimes, which had they but revealed,
My exercised severity ere this
Had bred a Hate, more deadly to their Sex,
Than raging Dog-dayes, and Platonnick men.
Thou art an honest subject, Shepherd, thou preferst
Thy Kings content before that Bug bear Conscience,
For which, ask any thing, it is thine,
Ask Monopolies, I Will seal 'um all, yet do not,
They are the rewards of flattery, and cannot
Equal thy desert.

Fid. Your favor Sir will far exceed my merit.

Enter Constantina. Ber. Have any witness, Shepherd, of the fact?

Con Yes sir, I am his witness;
I know she loves him, Loves him as her soul,
And were there but a thing more dear unto her,
She would love him better.

Fid. Oh Audacity: This is she.

Ber. She? Unto what height of impudence are women grown?
Dare thou defend thy crime, that thou art grown
So confident?

Con. I come not Sir for to defend my crime,
Or to expostulate with your Highness, for if I did,
I then would tell you, she that loves most truly
Ought to be thought most modest,
And that affection if but constant does as far
Exceed your chastity, as Chastity, Incontinence.

Ber. Bold woman! Have thou forgot thy Sex?

Con. I think I have, for I cannot dissemble now,
But what I say, proceeds from Truth
Great as thy Tyranny. I flatter not your Highness,
Such common Courtship let them use that are
Afraid to dye; My resolution shall out brave thy rigor,
Use then thy full Authority.

Ber. Who waits without?
Enter Guard. Convey that Strumpet hence, ere that the Night
Sheds Poppeys on the Earth, she dies.

Con. Now I shall dye in charity with all
Since thou art merciful: For this same courtesy Bermudo
Whilst I live, I Will pray thou may repent,
And when I am dead my obsequient Ghost
Shall wait upon thee still to put thee in remembrance.

Ex. Guard with Constantina. Ber. Shepherd, this courtesy has fatred my revenge,
My raging fu^y feeds upon this fuel with a devouring appetite,
And if thou add^st not still unto the flame
Vengeance will lack his prey, and f^ast on me.
Proceed then in thy holy work, and sooner shall each sense
Forget this Organ, than I my pious instrument.
Exit.
Enter Virtusus. Vir. Whither so fast Fidelio? How fares it friend?

Fid. Well.

Vir. That well sounds ill me thinks.
Is this the joy you give my liberty?
Had thou received thy freedom so,
The calmer Seas when Halcyons breed
Should have appeared more boisterous than I:
I Would not have frowned to see thee free,
But if some billows did by chance arise,
I would have turned 'um into dancing waves
For joy of thy secuity.

Fid. Alas Virtusus, I am glad to find thee safe, but
My afflicted soul cannot express the joy.
Oh see not my heart sweld with revenge
Extend my stretched out sides, and can thou hope
For any thing but frowns?

Vir. Thy looks I mu^t confess declare a Passion,
But of what nature I am ignorant.

Fid. If thou ha^t lost thy penetrating eye,
Look upon my face, and there my eyes
Sparkling forth fire for anger, will give light to read it by.
Can not conceive it yet? See thou not woman there
Imprinted in the wrinckles of my frowing forehead?
Oh woman, woman, woman!

Vir. Come, forget this passion for a while,
Forget all women, and their virtues too.

Fid. Alas there is not one left virtuous, but are all
As false and as disloyal as thy sister.

Vir. I hope you don't suspect her sir.

Fid. Yes, and your Mother too.
One man could not beget two contraries:
Thou art too good to be her Brother, and she
Too bad to be Brabanta's daughter.

Vir. My ears have sucked in poison, which works
Like Stybium in my brains. If this be true
(Which yet I cannot credit) nor piety nor sisters cries
Shall hold my hand, but I will sacrifice her blood
For an atonement to thy anger.

Fid. Oh Virtusus it is too true: would thou rip open my heart,
There, there thou nightst behold
Disloyal Constantina writ in bloody notes;
There too as in a perspective thou should see
The Duke of Florences lustful eyes
Fixed fast on Constantina, whilst the amorous Girl
Plays with his wanton hair, and in
A thousand other ways invites embraces.

Vir. Should Heavens in thunder speak it,
I durst to contradict 'um.

Fid. 'Twill be a less impiety to contradict this paper.

He gives him a Letter. Vir. It is her seal and Character:
I Will read no more; would 'twere her body,
Thus I Would rend it; Thus would I tear her unchaste limbs,
And blow 'um like to Atoms in the air;
Thus in contempt I Would spurn her lustful face,
Bowl with her rouling eyes, and twist her hayr
In ^opes for executions. Did I but know
What vein her blood inhabits,
I Would make a sluice and draw that channel dry
Though I lay drowned in its gore.
But I am too passionate; who fury can allay,
Vengeance may sooner, and securelier pay.

Enter Charastus. Fid. Oh Charastus, never till now unwelcome to Fidelio.
Thou art too happy now for my companion.
I have dissolved thy Loves ambiguous Riddle,
And given thy soul a free election,
By making a necessity of thy choice.

Cha. False and disloyal man, da^'st thou yet live
And glory in thy wickedness? Have thou a Conscience
Not to kill thy self when such a stain commands thee?
Oh thou prophaner of all Justice
Ought he to live that cannot look upon perfection
But with envious eyes?

Fid. My care has not deserved these words Charastus.

Cha. Call not that care Fidelio which thy spleen
Too long has nourished, it is an inveterate Hate
Sent from the fouler mansion of thy soul
To blast perfection: Is that Physician careful
That instead of Physic gives deadly poison
To his patient?

Fid. No dire mistake was author of my charity,
But a Revenge which all their Sex must tremble under,
And 'twas my fortune to practice first on her,
And her honor to precede whole thousands.

Cha. Thou art the worst of Mountebanks, they kill
Their poorest Patients for experiments,
But thou destroyst Patience it self, the richest Gen
That ever Art envied dame Nature for.

Fid. It is the nature of Revenge to punish first
Those things from whence they took their poison.

Cha. Poison from her?
Herein thou show thy venomous disposition:
Spiders suck poison from the sweetest flowers
When Bees draw Honey. Her words
Though armed to my destruction seemed to me
Adorned with more variety of sweetness
Than ere enricht our Hybla, more pleasant
Than the jucie grape stole from the Vine
Just at the entrance of maturity;
And can they then, can these delicious words
D^still'd to the invitation of a happiness be a poison?
^Tis thy bad Nature only that converts to vaught
What ere the Gods thought good.

Vir. Dote not Charastus so on one, whose scorn
Makes her condition poorer than her birth,
Which surely is ignoble. The Kingly Eagle
Stoops not unto flies.

Cha. But yet a Fly mounted on Eagles wings
Deserves more commendations than your pairted Peacocks
That boast but in the gross absurdity of Nature.

Vir. If for to reach a glove dropped from
A neighboring Queen, be to degenerate
From Majesty?
What will the world report when they shall hear
Charastus stoopt to the meaness of a Shepherdess?

Cha. Art thou disloyal too Virtusus? two such more
Would learn the Heavens impiety. Adue false friends,
Know my revenge shall be
Fully as ample as your Tyranny.
Exit.
Fid. I dare, vie vengeance with thee at the highest;
My heart's as great with rage, and less confined
Within the bounds of charity, it is free,
Freer than Air, it soars aloft, hovering
Like some prodigious Meteor ore all women.
All shall groan under its heavy weight, all must sink
Or all my ends will perish,

Vir. Not all Fidelio, be not so severe: Out of
Those numberless thousands that do clog the Earth
One may be found unspotted: thy Sisters Virtue
(...) of sufficient value to redeem a destined Heca^ombe
Of unchaste women, though doomed by Tyranny it self.

Fid. I do suspect her too; she is too much
A woman to be good: Women are all
The fruits of drunkenness, begot when men
Like senseless beasts wallow in strange desires;
Then coveting to frame a Monster like themselves
Nature complying with their avarice, sends them
A daughter: How can that Sex then be divine
That Is thus engendered betwixt Lust and Wine.

Vir. Be more charitable Fidelio in your opinion:
Blame not all for one.

Fid. Charity is cold:
'Twill breed a contrariety in my raging breast.
Give me hot fuel: I would be all on flame.
Feed me with Bridegrooms thoughts, and let me drink
The fervent sighs breathed from the truest penitence;
Bathe me in Lovers tears, dry me with
The fiery palm of some notorious Red-haird Scrumpet:
I would be a living element of fire
To cross the new Philosophers opinion.
Yet from this flame I would send one spark
But to the ruin of a woman,
For now I find the Proverb's verified
He that begets a daughter surely went drunk to bed.

Exeunt. Act. 4. Sce. 4.
Enter Sperazus and Constantina. Spe. Daughter this forwardness of yo^rs to dye,
Makes me believe you are innocent, and now I am
Grown confident that what you said is true,
Although at first I must confess it startled incredulity.

Con. As grave Sir I am not bound with an untruth
To wrong myself; so I do scorn
To mitigate my crime with coined excuses.
I must confess I am guilty of that sin
Which now they tax me with: If it be a sin
Chastely to love, I am most wicked, if not,
I call the Gods to witness I am innocent,
For no loose desire has ever yet profaned me.

Spe. Thou art the purest Virgin living then,
Purer than those that think all Love
An argument of looseness: Who nere knew Wine
Cannot be thought abstemius, it is the forbearing taster
That is temperate. She that is chaste and never loved
Does only good compelled by ignorance;
But she that loves and can be chaste
Enjoys that virtue in its full perfection.
Such an one, divinest Maid, art thou,
Whom but to ransom from the Tyrants Law,
I Would stretch my feeble limbs with vigor on the Altar,
And with a zeal undaunted meet the flames:
So with them should my soul aspire
Beyond the reach of gross mortality.

Con. And do you envy me that happiness?
Is not my soul as free as yours to expiate
Its own transgressions; The Gods I am sure
Desire a Sacrifice though spotted, if offered
By the repentant sinner, more than whole Hecatombs
Bestowed by Innocence.

Spe. Thou pleadst divinely against thy self; thy only fault
Is too much goodness, which lest the Heavens
Should not know how to pardon, by wanting of a president,
I Will furnish thee with showers of tears
To make a flood wherein thy soul may float
In peace unto security.

Con. Reserve them for some other subject;
I make no question but to dye for him
Will be both penance and a pardon. Could my heart
Be but so kindly stubborn to resist my thoughts oppressions,
And no^ break till I endure this martyrdom,
I should receive the joyful Crown of immortality.

Spe. Let not the thought of that, divinest, trouble thee;
Here is a juice distilled from Nepenthe, Drink it,
And the remembrance of thy former miseries
Will fly thy imagination.

He gives her a Vial. Con. Alas I dare not take it: my life
Is of so short a moment, that I shall nere requite you,
And I would not willingly dy^ ungrateful.

Spe. I owe both this and far more to thy virtue.
Farewell thou mirror of all goodness;
Take these my tears, my prayers, my sighs,
Companions of thy journey, and when thou art amidst
Those sacred flames, thy'l help to wast thee to eternity.
Exit.
Con. Right heavenly Sir adue.

Spe. Where were thy eyes Fidelio?
This will be news
Will make thy affrighted blood start from thy veins,
And turn thee more pale than she consumed to Ashes.
Exit.
Act. 4. Sce. 5.
Enter Bermudo. Ber. Now sails our wishes with a steady course,
The tottering bark poised by a seconds help
Floats safely on the Maine. But yet be not
Too credulous fond man, the balance is uncertain,
And should that fail the shipwreck would be deadly.
Trust not too much unto a friend; Opportunity
Base mischiefs Bawd to them is too obsequious.
Brutus could pierce great Caesar's side
When Pompey could not; Mistrust then all Bermudo,
Be intimate with none; It Is State policy.
A Snak^ though fostered in a Kings own bosom
Will grow at length as mischievous as uncontrollable,
And pierce that breast that nourished it.

Enter Charastas. Cha. Ye silent Ministers of Night
S^nd your Cimme^ian darkness ore the world,
Choke up the Sun with fogs and misty vapors,
Let it b^ night eternal, or let my eyes
Drop from their hollow caverns, that I may never see again
So gross impiety.

Ber. What fury does transport thee?

Cha. In what foul part lies my accursed memory?
I Will tear it out, and be a lump of dead forfogetfulness.
Entomb: ye just Heavens within oblivious Cave,
I would forget my self, my all, so with them
I might forget that wickedness
Which these my eyes were witness off.

Ber. What art thou frantic fellow?

Cha. Pardon dread Sovereign if my rage
His slack't my due obedience. Fury so blinded me
I could not see those rays which from your Majesty
Shoot in a continued luster.
Oh Modesty where is now thy ruddy wings?
Where is that bashful trembling which so (...)
I have seen adorning Country Mansions?
Why liv'st thou now an exile in the woods
^anisht from Court and City?

Ber. The man is mad.

Cha. I would I were great King so this were ^alse:
Oh Sir, your Court is spotted with such Lust
As can command a blush for ever in my cheek to think on.

Ber. Ha! my Court?

Cha. Yes, your Court, that Holy Temple
Where Justice and Religion hand in hand
Walks in a happy unity, is now become
The sink of soul impiety.

Ber. My Court become a bro^hell house of Lust?

Cha. These two unhappy eyes saw two
Melting in close embraces, Kissing each other with such fervencie
As if their lips desired to be united and become
An individual happiness; Alas my chaster tongue
Cannot express those amo^ous tricks
Which their hot appetites belcht out
To teach old Lust a new lasciviousness.

Ber. Swell higher yet my rage;
Thou art at too low an ^bb to punish such impiety,
Swell till your channels crack*
Let a general inundation break the banks
And turn to ruin all it meets with.
Their two deaths cannot alone dissolve
This mass of wickedness: Thousands must dye
To expiate this crime, if it be true.

Cha. It Is too true great Sir; your eyes
Shall be witness of it, if you will be pleased to follow.

Ber. Lead on.

Exeunt* Act. 4. Sce. 6.
Enter Constantina and Thesbia. Con. The holy absolution of the Priest
Sings not so glad a Requiem to my departing soul
As this thy comfortable presence; Do not,
Oh do not then obscure thy self with ill beseeming tears,
I shall suspect thou think me still unchaste,
And spend'st these tears to puri^^e my spotted Conscience.

These. When friends do part but for a week or so,
Their weeping eyes the emblems of their troubled hearts
Will let fall tears, and shall we
That now must part eternally
Deny our souls that charitable sacrifice?
Thou a long journey Constantina now must take,
Who knows whither I shall see thee more;

Con. Alas poor soul, weep not for my felicity.
It is a glorious place that I shall go too.
There in a golden firmament enameld with bright stars,
Amidst a thousand Virgins I shall hear
Eternal harmony, still sounding, and still pleasant,
There fragrant smells shall never cloy
My fainting appetite though still presented odoriferous.
And can thou weep because thy f^iend
Must go to such a Paradise?

These. I weep not dearest because thou go,
But that I stay behind; Could I accompany thee,
No Vestall Virgins at the Altar should appear
With such a joyful countenance: But since I here must live
A walking Ghost pent in an earthly sepulcher,
It would be impudence to refrain from tears;
Weep on then Thesbia, let thy eyes
Flow with a continued moisture, to drain these fens
Will puzzle all projecting undertakers.

Con. My weakness can resist no longer.
These tears proclaim thy triumph;
We two like two Niobes will shed tears
Till we become one Fountain.

Enter above Charastus and Bermudo. Cha. See great Sir how close they are?
Oh do you start Sir?

Ber. Ha! Anthregonus, I would my eyes were lightning
For to blast thy spotted soul, yet leave thee still as fair.

Cha. With what affection they embrace?
See how their wanton heads wearied with kissing
Hang like two drooping Lillies on each others shoulder,
Their very eyes to sympathize with them
Melt into tears.

Ber. My rage involves a thunderbolt, this poor thin cloud
Cannot contain it long; 'twill out to all our times.
Oh Anthregonus little can thou think
What raging sorrows boil within my breast
At this sad spectacle; The sight of such impi^ty
Feeds on my heart worse than Cantharides*
Or the deadly sting of a foul Conscience.
My eyes shall be no more your Pander.
Take heed fond fools, Bermudo comes
Armed to destruction:
Exit.
Cha. Thus climbs Revenge: thus her aspiring head
One step has mounted, ere to the top it comes
Your hearts false men shall feel its rigor.
Sleep on fond Boy, thou have a soft but fatal pillow,
Had not Bermudo loved thee, nor thou saved their lives,
Thou might have lived, but now
To punish three thou die.
Thus by degrees Revenge must rise
Who straight brings death knows not to tyrannize.
Exit.
Bermudo within breaks open the doors upon them. Con. Alas we are betrayed.

These. I care not I since Innocence is my guard.

Enter Bermudo and Guard. Ber. Seize on that lustful couple.

These. Why this violence? ye needed not have come
Thus armed to betray our innocence:
That weak resistance we could make
One word might have subdude, but if you think
To f^ight us with your strength, know we have
A guard about us shall con^ro^t your hopes.

Ber. Guilt's a s^fficient terror to it self,
It needs no addition; but Justice as it strikes
So must it speak, like thunder.

Con. Should it strike here, it would be truly so;
The holiest Temples often are struck with thunder.
Should you but ta^e his Nature and destroy
So pure an edifice as his, it were no Justice
But profane severity.

Thef. Plead not for me: I dare his utmost rigor,
In that he will be constant, and constancy I love
Be it in cruelty.

Ber. My cruelty will but water when it flows on thee.
Oh thee such tender years can be so old in wickedness.
Had thou a soul A^throgonus as pure
As its enclosure thou mighest have been
E^^h^on'd a Deity for mortals to have wondered at.
Would thou yet live? There is a strange
Conflict fought within me, by Piety and Affection.

These. Let not Affection pull a curse upon you.
It is not in the power of your Majesty
To spare my life and take he^s, unless you will be
More impious in breaking of your Laws,
Than you were pious in the making them.

Ber. It Is true Anthrogonus, thou can not live
Without I violate Religion; Thy body must
Within an odoriferous cloud ascend the Skies
To crave a pardon for thy soul.

Con. The Gods require no humane sacrifice.
Mercy if offered in a free oblation, is the only incence
They delight in. I am enough to satisfy the Law,
Make not Religion sir too great a Butchery,
Your pity and his repentant tears
Will be a sacrifice more sweet,
Than all the Cookery of humane entrails.

Ber. Witness ye Gods with what unwilling hands
I offer up this sacrifice; But Laws must be obeyed
When piety commands, though to the makers ruin.
Kings that make Laws to encrap others, may
With their own plots by chance themselves betray.

Exeunt. Actus quintus. Scena Prima.
Enter Constantina and Flavanda. Con. IF thou will know a reason why I sent for
thee,
Ask of my heart, for that would never be
At quiet till I had seen thee,
But rolling still in my disturbed breast
Prompted my soul to dye not stained with such forgetfulness.

Fla. Thy immaculate mind tells me thy soul is pure,
I should suspect the heavens before its whiteness:
The alabaster Mines helped by the Sums reflection
Cannot show a piece so candid.

Con. I cannot boast its color, it is a foul one,
And ere I dye, it will be one continued spot
More ugly than deformity it self: There is
A crime that I must perpetrate, or else my Ghost
Cannot rest quiet in its utne.

Fla. There is no crime so horrid, but thy former goodness
Has made a virtue: One drop of poison
Poured into the Ocean, polluteth not the water,
But clears it self and adds unto the stream.

Con. Ingratitude is a sea of venom,
Which my malicious soul has entertained,
And most discharge her poison upon thee;
Thou that have been the partner of my sorrows
Must now become the subject of my malice.

Fla. Thou can not find a fitter subject, I dare
Encounter with the deadliest poison thou can give
And think it a preservative.

Con. Mine is the worst of venomes;
If thou but take it, it is not thy body only
That must perish, but thy soul too.
To what sure destruction do I run on either side?
If I refuse to sue unto thee, I am ungrateful,
And if do, the same stain brands me still.
Can thou be inconstant? wonder not Flavanda
Why I ask so rude a question,
For by thy inconstancy, I must be proved constant,
Thy weakness must be my triumph,
And thy disloyalty my eternal glory.
To ask thee now whether thou could leave Charastus
Were a Tautology as absurd as to name, Flavanda
And most excellent, I know thou do
Already understand me.

Fla. Yet I am ignorant for whom thou pleadst.

Con. I plead for one that loves thee with an ardour
More fervent than Charastus, one that will not waver
When he sees whole Chataracks of beauty, much less
At the small suspicion of a feature. Fidelio
Is the man; which ought you to respect then most
Him that left me for you, or you for me?

Fla. Be not mistaken Constantina,
That love that he professed to me was only feigned:
Charastus sent him but to try me.

Con. I prithee say not so; thou will undo
A Virgin with a truth; if he be constant,
How impious then was my suspicion.

Fla. When you were gone, he told his treachery,
And with what plots he sought for to betray me.

Con. No more.
Thou have returned my poison to the full;
The false suspicion of his Loyalty heaps sin on sin.
My soul's one leprosy so foul,
That surely the flames in which I must be sacrificed
Will against their Nature downwards tend,
And hurry me to Hell. Oh Fidelio, never before
I wished thee false: thy constancy will be my ruin.

Enter Fidelio. Fid. Oh Constantina here shall my knee take root,
Until thy voice denounce my sentence:
This penitence
Entreats no pardon, it is Justice rather Rigor
I desire.

Con. Let this suffice
To show my duty and my penitence: could
I fall lower
My ambition to out-go thee in humility
Should force me down.

Fid. Kneel'st thou to me? the earth shall not resist me,
But my obedient soul shall pr^ss me down,
Till nature bids me stay, lest I should
Violate her Laws by falling upwards.

Con. Thou can not kneel Fidelio and I stand,
When the Sun is down, the exhalations fall:
Arise, and I will personate those vapors.

Fid. Thy sentence must dissolve my frozen joints
Or I shall fall again: Can thou forgive me?

Con. Can thou forgive me?

Fid. No, I cannot; it lies not in heavens power
To forgive where none is guilty; A pardon
Does belong unto a Conscience stained with wickedness,
But thou art innocent, so innocent
That the purest Crystal will confess some spots
To see thy whiteness.

Con. To make me clear, prove not your self disloyal.
Or you inconstant are, or I more stained
Than misbelieving Atheists with my incredulity.

Fid. Thou art become more glorious by thy incredulity:
Thou could suspect, and yet be virtuous.
Thou thoughtst me false, yet loved me still,
When I upon a supposition sought Revenge,
And most unluckily obtained it.

Con. Yet I was Author of thy crime:
My foul suspicion was thy sin^ sad pr^sident.

Fid. Thou make my sin appear more horrid:
Thy suspicion was but the confirmation of thy constancy,
And were that a President to me
How wicked then were I for to be vicious
Because thou were virtuous.

Con. I cannot conquer you with arguments, yet
In civility you must yield: contend not with a woman;
That victory will be no glory surely;
You must not sir deny me that: See,
My soul pours out it self in a petition.

Fid. Weep'st thou Constantina: I Will plough the earth,
And sow those precious seeds, ^ee'l have
A crop of Pea^l, more glorious than the Oriental:
Venus shall have a neck-lace of these Gems,
Dianas Virgin Zoac these beads shall beautify,
The other Deities shall labor in our Harvest,
And think one seed a pay too prodigal.
Weep Sweet no more, thou have shed enough
To purchase immortality, I prithee weep no more
Lest I be forced to sow my Tares
Among that heavenly ^rain.

Fla. How well those drops become them? the pleasing dew
Adds not a greater luster to the Rose.
With what a sweet variety they slow?
How prettily they spo^t in method?
One Knocks. Alas! one knocks Fidelio.

Fid. I will not wake to hear him. Tell him
I say I will not: in this sweet slumber
I Would not disturb the Heavens with a petition,
Or should they call, I would refuse to hear them.

Enter Arontas. Aron. Most noble Shepherd, the King expects you in the Temple,
For to s^e the sacrifice, and you fair Shepherdess
(I am (...) I must become so sad a messenger)
Must presently prepare to suffer.
Exit.
Fid. Never did voice jar ho^^ser in my ears,
Oh what a hellish sound it leaves!
Hells three mouthed Porter joined to Scylla's quite
Cannot howl out so sad a Message.
Prepare to suffer? What is that?
Comment on those sad words sweet Heavens,
Unsold that hideous mystery: I dare not think
Upon the exposition ^s so horrid.
Know thou what it is to suffer?

C^n. Yes, it is to dye, and be immortal.

Fid. Death is the common ^ode to immortality; men
Whose lives abhorred all virtue but Repentance,
In abundant troops, flock by that common Highway,
And shall she whose Virgin soul no thought has blemished
Find no unknown path peculiar to such excellence?

Con. To dye a spotless sacrifice is a glorious path
Nere trod ^n but by them whose Saint-like presence
Still adds to its curiosity: The Altar is no funeral Pile,
That melts its fuel into Ashes, but a re^ining fire,
As gentle as those flames from which
The purified Gold receives it luster.

Fid. Oh do not deceive thy self: How often do we see
The Sacrifices perish, and nere return
More glorious by their sufferings.

Con. It Is true, that fire that cleanses but the Gold
Consumes the drosser Mettalls: Had bea's,
Our common sacrifices, but souls confirmed divine
By Innocence and Reason, we might adore 'um
On our Altars without the blot of superstition.

Fid. If death must purchase immortality,
Thou must not, shall not be immortal:
There is a debt due unto Nature for thy goodness.
Live here an everlasting mortal then and pay it.
The glory freely given unto dese^t
Is greater than if purchased.

Con. But who can give it? It Is not in Natures power.
She frames our goodness for the Heavens;
There I must live, hemmed in with happiness:
There no felicity will be wanting, but when
These tears makes me remember thee.

Fid. Let not the thought of me thy murderer
Disturb thy happiness: I will revenge thy quarrel to the full.
Something must be done: Farewell thou heavenly Candidate*
Thou have a place selected among the Deities
Where thou must sit and teach the ignorant world
That constancy, which none but thou could ever boast of.
I shall betray a womanish passion in me
Should I stay longer. Farewell thou new elected Deity.
Exit.
Con. My Tears so stop my speech, I cannot Bid Farewell.

Enter Thesbia. These. What weeping Constantina? Can the fear of death
From out the circle of thy purest innocence
Draw such a saintness.

Con. The senseless trees, Herbs, plants, and flowers
In dewy tears lament the Suns sad absence, and shall I
Deny that duty to Fideli^ when a sad Ecclips
Must hide him from me to eternity.
Tears are not Emble^es of a saint belief,
The hottest days melt often into showers.
Oh Thesbia! my heart will break,
And cheat the Altar of its sacrifice.

These. Here, drink this Nepenthe's juice then,
'Twill ease thy heart, do not refuse it, the Priest
Ju^t now bequeathed it to me as an heavenly Cordial.

Con. What had I forgot? See here is the same.
Oh 'twas a Holy man; He would sain have died
To save my life.

These. So would he to have saved mine: Trust me
He made me weep to see his silver tears
Distill in such abundance from his eyes;
My dear, dear father could have don no more.

Con. Lets then on bended knees in adoration of his charity
Wish that the Heavens will never be ungrateful,
But ^ill shower down on his deserts a due felicity.

These. Upon our knees we wish it;
And as this juice from our orecharged souls
Expels our miseries, so may his sorrows vanish.
They drink. It Is down. My congeled blood late frozen to my heart
Dissolves, and with a quick agility
Leaps in my new-fill'd veins. My thoughts have pleasant ^uell,
And every sense is ravished with an unknown happiness.

Con. I am strangely altered; I have forgot
The principal end of my creation, to be miserable.
Come sit down, I have a great mind
To imitate the dying Swans upon Caiisters Banks,
And sing my funeral Elegy.
She sings. Swell swell my thoughts, and let my Breast
Receive with joy eternal Rest,
Swell higher yet, faint not to see
The end of all thy misery.
Death's but a sleep,
Then do not weep,
But with desire
Embrace the fire,
So shall thy soul, so shall thy soul, aspire
Unto a place where it shall see
Etern^ll Crowns of Majesty
Attending on its pompous train
Uncompel'd, without disdain:
Then let not fire
Make thee retire,
Nor yet deny
This obsequie.
Lest in despair, lest in despair thou die.
Then let not fire
Make thee retire,
Nor yet deny
This obsequie.
Lest in despair, lest in dis -- pair --

she sleeps. Fla. Thus ceast the dying Nightingale, enamored sleep
Delighted with thy Harmony stole the last accent
From our ears. Thesbia! what has her voice
Hushed thee into a slumber too, and left me here
The sole resister of its power? Sleep on sweet souls,
And when ye wake, think it no pain
If ye be forced too soon to sleep again.

Exeunt. Act. 5. Sce. 2.
An Altar discovered: Loud Music. Enter Bermudo, Arentas, Spadatus, Halis dus,
Virtusas and Fidelio. Ber. What means this silence Shepherd? me thinks you look
As if you were at some most solemn ^unerall,
Where the c^rps of an endeared friend is to be interred:
These visages become that place; but when you go
To ^alu^e the heavenly Deities with your f^ee oblations,
You must put on a far more pleasing countenance
That the Gods may pleasure in your offerings,
And delight in your burnt sacrifice.

Fid. My divining soul great King, foretells
An universal ruin in this sacrifice,
A general numness prompts my heart unto a sad,
And deadly melancholy: Surely I have offended.

Ber. Yes in thy drooping zeal. Come, let not ^ear
Hinder that devotion, which thou beganst
With such a noble resolution, to thy immortal glory.

Fid. I do conjure you Sir by that hate which you
Conceive against women; By your Crown, by your Scepter,
By all the Gods I do conjure you
To spare this humane sacrifice.
If you needs must offer to their Deities,
Surfe^ their Altars with the richest gums,
Fetch forth the Phaenix nest for an oblation,
Or^er the world lament the loss of all their cattle,
Profane not thus their Altars with a woman's blood.

Ber. Thou have won so much on me by thy former service,
That to deny thee now were a most vild ingratitude
Did not the Gods require it: my vow to Heavens is past
And cannot be recalled, to promise them
The malefactors for an offering, and then
Cheat 'um with a sheep or some such tri^le,
Is not to sacrifice but defraud.

Fid. The Gods nere feast on humane entrails,
Their Nectar is not mortals blood:
Think you their stomachs have so base an appetite
To hunger after that which men do loath?
Repentance is their banquet, the steam of fervent sighs
Their food, and tears not blood's the potion they delight in:

Ber. Be not ungrateful Shepherd;
Strive not, for my love, to make me impious:
Justice and fidelity commands them for a sacrifice.

Fid. Sacrifices must be pure, not spotted;
The fairest bea^^s are destined to the Altar.

Ber. The sinner gets his pardon sooner
By his own sufferings, than if h'ad suffered by a Proxee.

Fid. I did belie her Innocence, believe me Sir
She is innocent, as innocent as the new-begotten child.

Ber. To purge a sin, oft-times a Lamb must dye*
And so shall she, our zeal will be the greater.

Fid. Rather your impiety:
Who offers up one Godhead to another honor?
Be not so irreligious to destroy that gem,
Which I adore, as a resplendant Deity
Sent from Heaven, to beautify the earth.

Ber. Take heed; Be not so fondly superstitious.
Thus to contract a Deity to a Beast.

Fid. A Beast! can Heavens hear this,
And no thunderbolt tell the proud King he lies?
A beast! were thou armed with thunder,
Or were it but to see thee ten thousand deaths,
Nor piety, nor Religion should withhold me,
But I would tear tha^ venomous tongue out,
And hang it like a lying Meteor in the Air.

Ber. He grows frantic: Alas poor man,
He deserves my pity more than anger.

Fid. Where sleeps your Justice now?
Rouse up your drousie headed Laws
To take revenge on him that dares their utmost.

Solemn Music. Ber. Whence this sad Music?

Enter Sperazus, Flavanda, and others bringing in Constantina and Thesbia,
veild All in a solemn manner. Fla. Cease your petitions: it lies not in the
power
Of your prayers, nor his mercy to recall 'um:
Fate has deceived the Altar Sir; The Lambs
That should have been the sacrifice, are dead.

Ber. Dead!

Fla. Yes; Your threats great King has proved
Their executioner: Imagination that unnatural flame
Has not consumed, but broke their tender Hearts.
Here you may see the ruins of those well built Temples.

She unvails them. Fid. Ha! Heavens vanished unto Heaven;
Why did thou steal thy death divinest?
Why did thy flitting soul poast so away,
And give no warning to thy friends?
Hands off ye dogs, do not deny the Gods their sacrifice.
He snatches at a Sword, and the Guard hold him. Me thinks the Genius of the
world does stagger;
The affrighted Earth turns round, and sends forth
Foggy trees, in a continued lamentation for its loss:
The Heavens stand still to entertain her ex excellence,
And all the Planets turn to Constellations
With amazement: Copernicus, thy opinion Now is verified.

Ber. Most reverend father, though cruel destiny
Has abrig'd part of our triumph by their deaths
Yet to manifest our duty, in all ceremonious order
Let their corpse be sacrificed.

Spe. I dare not Sir pollute the Altars
With a dead oblation: High Heavens will be displeased
With our offerings; The very beasts abhor the dead.
Let but their bodies be interred, and then come
And offer a few prayers, and without doubt
The Deities will be appeased.

Ber. Your will shall rule us

Exeunt. Manent Fidelio and Virtusus with Constantina and Thesbia. Fid. Oh
death, thou grand Commissioner of Fate,
Seize these my vital spirits, since she is gone
Whose warmer breath so often has nourished them.
What! can thou not hear now Death?
Art thou grown astonished at thy late got prize?
Assume he quickly heavens; Death will forget
His office else and let the populous world
Surfeit with multiplicity.

Vir. Did ever traveller so faint to see
The end of all his travells? Has all my wearied steps
Tended to this Home, and tremble I to be^hold it?
Where be those pleasing smiles, those wheeling eyes,
And that harmonious voice, which once did call me, Brother?
Are all gone? Has death ravished thy Virgin blushes too,
To adorn thy soul translated to some Deity?

Fid. That new star which the Astronomers of late
Observed in Cassiopeia, was but thy Harbinger,
Sent to prepare that room to entertain thy excellence:
There thou must set, Queen Regent of the Constellation;
Oh be my Zenith ever!
Lend me thy influence to direct my actions,
And sooner shall the Adamant forget the North,
Than I thy sacrifice.

Vir. What Justice would not stagger
To condemn such excellence? what Tiger almost famished
Would not stand amazed, and rather starve,
Than make a prey of such perfections?

Fid. Why made her Nature of such goodness,
And tookst no care for to preserve her?
Me thinks those lips, soft and as ruddy
As the purest wax, invites impression.
He kisses her. Heavens, be not jealous If I kiss her.
They Are warm: a crimson blush begins
To beautify her cheeks, and says I was immode^^:
Oh Heavens! She stirs too; Now for some glorious apparition.

Con. What new fire burns my polluted breast?
Whence come these unknown flames?
Guard me some chaster power; good providence
Redeem this Temple from a profanation.

Fid. Thou have mistook thy way divinest; Heaven
Lies not here; That h^s a narrow pa^h
N^re trod on but by virtue; Go, Knock
At Repentance gate, one rear of thine
Will easily compel an entrance: Thy goodness surely
Is not ignorant, it is thy charity only
To enrich the earth again with thy diviner presence
That has caused this wilful error.

Con. If thou be here, I Will seek no other path,
This is the only way my wishes aim at.

F^d. Keep off; The beams of thy divinity
Will consume me; I begin to melt;
My knees more stubborn than the Elephants
Bows down in adoration with thy luster.

Con. I cannot tell what strange effects
Sleep has procured upon my outward shape;
My thoughts are su^e the same, they have Fidelio
Still their subject, which makes me confident
That I am not changed, but still am Constantina.

Fid. Thou art some Goddess rather, which
To appear more glorious has assumed her shape;
Alas, the Heavens has stole her soul
For an immortal Pyramide, and it would be
Too great a prejudice to it, should it return
From such celestial happiness.

Con. I am transformed in nothing but my tongue,
That once was powerful to charm belief;
VVher's now its vain Authority? Thesbia
I prithee sweet awake, and tell thy incredulous Brother
That I live, yet straight must dye
Killed with his most misjudging charity.

Vir. It Is she; oh Thesbia my dearest sweet, Awake
Awake, Virtusus calls thee; Depart not in a dream;
Let not thy soul he ravished with those joys
Which heaven presents thee with; good sle^p
Be not so cruel to be eternal.

Enter Sperazus. Spe. Tri^le not time Fidelio with these Ceremonies;
Arise, 'twas only sleep caused by a potion
That deceived the King.

Fid. May I believe you?

Spe. Belive your senses, why so fearful?
She Is no Ghost.

Fid. Liv'st thou Constantina? thou art so pure
I do suspect it.

These. What pleasing waves rocks my delighted soul?
How is it tossed within a gulf of happiness? Ha!

Vir. Let it float still, divinest, the enamored waves
Will be made happy by its presence.
Nay, fly not Thesbia from the Haven:
Here are no traiterous sands, no sudden storms,
Nor unseen Rocks to ruin thee. All
Is as free from danger as thy wishes.
Why casts thou Anchor? Hop'st thou to be securer
In that miserable Ocean? Oh Thesbia
Thou will raise storms in that securer Port
If thou deniest an entrance.

These. Surely you do mistake me Sir.
Thesbia was a woman, and can you love her,
And think her so immodest to turn man.

Con. Thou can no longer Thesbia lie concealed,
He knows All.

These. Have thou betrayed me Constantina?
Oh let me sink under my shames sad burden.

Vir. We Will sink together then; thou and I
Will be each others monument.

Spe. No more!
I hear Bermudo coming: true Lovers care
Will in possession o^t-times breed despair.

Exeunt. Act. 5. Sce. 3.
Enter Bermudo. Ber. My Plots still fail, and all my shafts
Shot against resisting walls
Bring back a ruin to the sender that sacrifice
Wherewith I thought to expiate my crime
Fate has converted to a murder so horrid,
That I must sink, or get a pardon for devotion.
Oh how my grovelling soul pressed down with wickedness
Rowles like the imprisoned wind
Pent in the hollow caverns of the Earth,
Finding no vent to aspire, but still must lie
Under the heavy weight of soul impiety.
Repentance must redeem it from its thraldom, a Ransom
Which I dare not think on lest envious Fates
Should turn that too into a wickedness.
The greatest are not still the best I see,
Kings are but crowned to fall decked with a pompous infamy.
A groan within. Ha! what dismal noise beats that alarm
To my guilty conscience? my affrighted blood retires,
And leaves my trembling arms
Shaking like sapless branches at the Northern wind,
My feet the Basis of this tottering Pyramide
Cleaves close unto the earth, whilst my erected hair
Stiffer then bristles of a Porcupise
Stares in the face of Heaven: Oh I am thunderstruck.
Enter Constantins and Thesbia severally. Ha! the easy stomack't earth vomits
they dead,
To tortors me; Am I environed round with Ghosts?
Conceal me ye good Heavens;
Spread an eternal darkness ore the world,
That very sprights may wander still in ignorance:
VVrap my affrighted soul in a defense
Not to be pierced with apprehensions eye;
Make me invisible or blind.

Con. Heavens cannot hide you from my just revenge
Without the forfeiture of goodness: Murder.
That crying sin has like a power Spell
Summoned my scarce cold corpse, not fully settled
In my latest urn, to appear again on earth,
And force as accusation of thy conscience.

Ber. Mount mount my soul, and with the swiftest winds
Fly to some unkwown Land, where the affrighted Su^
Nere yet durst enter, nor the amazed Heavens
Think on a place so horrid: where the corrupted air
Darts forth infection, and the ulciferous winds
VVhiffs plagues to the inhabitants more loathsome
Than the stench breath from polluted charnell houses;
Where death surfets his fatal arrow,
And each funeral Knell yield by a dying Mandrake
Proves still the dirge of an ensuing frailty.
Is there no Sanctuary for a guilty conscience?
Let me then sink, sink to the Center.
Release those captive Giants Heavens, that now groan
Under the heavy weight of mighty Mountains
Hurl Pelion upon Ossa, and Olimpus upon Pelion,
And all their fetters upon me, to press me down
Beyond the reach of Register: Let me not suffer
In their Annalls too, but let a sad mortality
Of Remembrance ceaz all succeeding times,
That I may fall forgotten.

These. Is this the way to expiate thy crime Bermudo?
Are prophaner wishes thy repentance? take Heed
Do not precipitate thy inclining ruin; Pull not
That hovering Justice on thy head, lest it fall
No less than fatal.

Ber. Thou blessed Idaea of a form divine, forgive
My rash devotion; ent^mbe Revenge amongst those
Sacred Relics, and let thy incensed ghost
Sleep in its peaceful urne: oh be as mild as excellent:
Draw hence those looks, filled with such pleasing horror,
And each succeeding day shall add
New Trophies to thy mercy.

These. Think thou my patient Ghost can rest in quiet,
Whilst thy majestic cruelty tramples ore the ruins
Of my lost honor? Can I behold thy ambitious mind
Sweld higher with my suffering, and no pious envy
Seek to abate thy triumph? shall wronged innocence
Unrevenged lie, whilst charity proclames it lawful?
A crime unpunished is a virtue in the opinion
Of the giddy multitude.

Ber. Let not misconstruing fools contract those beams
Which in a bountious manner use to slow
Even to the period of their luster.
No Mortals force procured my hate:
I still preserved thee like a blooming Rose,
VVater'd thee with my choicest streams, and sand thee
With my pleasingst gales, till envious fate
Stole that delicious Bud, not fully ripened.

These. Thou had fore^^all'd his office else; and like
A treacherous wretch to make my ruin seem more horrid,
When that my pampered Appetite lay bathing in felicity
Thou would have thrown me headlong to destruction,
There to die like to some harmeless Beast
Fatted for slaughter.

Ber. It was devotion sought thy ruin, I was compelld
To play the Tyrant by Religion: and like
A careful Mariner in a storm, to throw away
A Gem, p^iz'd far beyond my Diadem,
VVitness ye Heavens how often my Zeal
Suffered affections checks; how often my Love
Held back my hand from ruining that comely Temple
Which I so admired, and ever must, though now
Imagination makes it horrid.

These. Play not still the Hypocrite;
Why mention'st Love? Did ever Love
Pronounce so sad a sentence.

Ber. VVitness ye powers before whom I kneel
How dearly, dearly I did love thee; And surely
Had not fate been so hasty, I had rug'd hard
With my Religion to have saved thee.

Enter Charastus, Brabantas, Sperazus, Flavanda, Fidelio, Virtusus, Arontas,
Spadatus, Attendants and Guard. Gha. His own words condemn him*

Omnes. They do most mighty Prince, and we obey.

Cha. Love that so long has barred me from my throne
Once more reseats me in my former dignity.
Seiz on the Usurper Guard.

Ber. Hands off, Rebellious Miscreants, that unjust authority
Prophanes our sacred person? Can Scicilians
Grow so impious, to violate their Kings?

Cha. The date of your supremacis is expired; your approaching end
Must put a fatal period to your Tyranny:
A Crown
Is off too pure a mettle to endure long
Within so gross a Mine.

Ber. Unheard of wickedness! Heavens can you hear this,
And dart no quick consuming plague into his treacherous bosom:
Where be those Laws which we Scicilians still
Held as Religious orders? where is Piety
And Allegiance, out adored Penates.

Cha. Here in this breast: Long has Religion
And my former vow maintained thy Tyrany:
Long have I seen thy pompous height
Grown riotous with my ruin, yet still have flattered it
Without ambitious interruptions: No
High fwell'd thought has once desired a repossession
Nor ever should, had not thy love of him
Declared a forfeture.

Ber. Take not so poor a Covert for thy irreligion:
A Boys chaste Love forfeits no Diadem.

These. Thus, that false title I renounce: thus
I appear my self, decked with my virgins innocence;
She discovers her self. These blushes speaks me woman Sir.

Ber. Am I outreacht in policy? good Fate
Send some invisible dart, and kill me quickly,
Shame will deceive thee of thy triumph else.

Spe. Be not ashamed Bermudo: It is an honor for to fall
Thrust by a Royal hand: A practiced Politician
No ignoble brain did work thy ruin.

Bra. Our revenge must thank thee Thesbia;
Thou have dissolved this mass of Tyranny,
And brought our long-lost honors to their former luster:
We owe duty to thee for our second birth,
And ignorance must pay ingratitude, if you refuse
The reacceptance of that Crown bestowd so freely
By your Liberality. I will not say Vintusus has desert
Whose just heat may challenge your affection,
That were to extol him beyond humane merit,
But I dare say though poor in worth
He Is rich in his endeavors.

Spe. Her blushes do bewray her Love, which long ete this
Had met its wished for happiness, Had not revenge
For my second Fidelio been too obstinate.
The love of him made her forgo her Country,
And on unknown Lands hazard these many dangers
In his search: She told it to me, when her Confessor.
Here take her Virtusus as a Virgin Sacrifice,
Pure as the timely blossom whose forward Zeal
Decks the arising Spring.

Bra. I Will make the harmony complete:
Thus from that cloister which my timorous age
Before designed thee too, a parents care releases thee;
And with the same devotion confines thee to Fidelio;
Turn thy Repentance to obedience, thy zeal to Love,
And all thy care into a settled constancy,
That from the ruins of that chaster Temple
A sacred Structure may erect it self, no less perspicuous.

Spe. May our Kingdoms joined by this double concord
Like two flames of incence shoot up still
In one continued luster, whilst our souls
Peitcht on their sparing glories
Reach an immortality.

Cha. Can I yet live and see my life divided?
Shall Hymeneall flames consume her Virgin Zone
And I stand by a vain Spectator: Patience
Thou art a virtue.

Fla. What sad thought great King can in the midst
Of this solemnity draw such a veil ore that majestic splendour?
Which in his perfect brightness ought to shine
To the refreshing of your nummed Subjects.

Cha. The remembrance of my lost Sister, hangs like a dog
Upon my soul, yet prompts me forward to revenge.
Can Charastus triumph whilst Desdonella lies
In her eternal sleep, rockt with the pleasing Lullaby
Of falling waters? Can I maintain a thought
Tending to happiness, before Revenge
Has quietly entombed her? first shall my rage
Swell higher than the streams that buried her,
That all may perish with its inundation.

Fla. Rob not the Heavens Charastus of the honor
Due for your happiness: can you be so ungrateful
To their mercy, to let revenge
Cheat them of their alacrity clam'd justly by their ^avors.

Ber. Stop not the current of his anger: Let it flow.
Here are no trembling barks that fear its vigor.
Could he invent a torment which never yet
His predecessors boasted of, my patience
Should convert it into charity.
Enter Desdonella and Halisdus. Diana! amaze me not ye Heavens:
Can she vouchsafe such favor unto him
Who late abused her with immodesty? my incredultty
Sins too much against her virtue: It Is she,
The Ayr's perfumed, the odoriferous clouds
Filled with delicious spices distills to odors:
The fragrant flowers as she walks
Offers their sweetest incence, and where she treads
The adoring grass bows in a pious gratitude.
Are ye all amazed? why kneel ye not,
And with a general adoration entertain that Deity
That freely comes to visit you? Thus greatest Goddess
My obedient soul submits with truest penitence,
I must confess I did abuse your presence
With most profane and unchaste ceremonies,
Yet I must say it was my Zeal,
And the assurance of your clemency, that made me.

Des. Arise Bermudo: it is I must kneel;
Thus as a Subject to your power I bow,
But as a powerful Subject thus I stand.
If my supposed death has in your noble breast
Kindled religious sparks, if Desdonellas fare
Has moved your patience to Revenge,
Calm your disturbed thoughts; See I live
This shape is truly real.

Cha. My Sister Desdonella, more welcome than my immortality:
Unto what power shall I ascribe this happiness?

Des. I owe my life unto his courtesy;
He mocked Bermud'os Statutes with my feigned death,
Whilst in a Cave my melancholy Lu^e and I
Flattered each others misery.

Cha. Surely Halisdus thou were born
To make thy King ungrateful; my joys abound
To an unmeasured height, I fear they are
Too vehement to last.

Ber. I am amazed; my converted appetite
Courts an unknown desire; my fervent zeal
Turns to a looser flame, and worships now
The Temple for the Deity.

Des. Why now so strange Bermudo? did thou admire
The structure only for the builders sake?
Is it become less glorious in another right?
Can virtue vanish with a name.

Ber. No Desdonella thy supposed divinity
Made me perceive something that still is excellent;
All is not vanished with those beams,
The departed Sun leaves still a heat behind him.

Des. But can that heat, cast from those weaker rays
Extract so full an adoration? Can thou bu^ pay
A liking to its fervor, and not contemn it
For the absent Sun?

Ber. How impious were I should I hate that shape
Which I durst think Diana would inhabit?
When I contemn it, may my blood forget its motion,
My soul her faculties, and the Heavens my soul.

Cha. On that condition take thy throne again.
Learn now to be a King, and rule with such pleasing majesty
That thy Subjects may sooner doubt thy favor,
Than fear thy anger.

Ber. This Council might be welcome unto them
That do desire a Diadem; But unto him
That is already wearied with his weight,
It is as vain as expent fencing unto Cowards,
They may have skill, but dare not use it.
Yet, if you will needs instruct my unwilling soul
In that virtue which you only Sir are Master of,
Reign longer than, and let me learn by your example.

Cha. He must not reign that cannot rule Affection;
If you refuse this favor, I shall suspect you
Still to be a Tyrant, and nor worthy of my Sister.

Des. Alas what means my Brother?

Cha. To make thee Queen, and ^eat thee
In the highest dignity, whilst ^ in Shepherds weeds
Learn to assuage desires. Nay weep not sweet Flavanda,
Perhaps thou do suspect thou art a stranger to my heart,
But witness, oh ye Heavens, that what I do
Proceeds from Love to thee; Thee I will meditate,
And when I sleep my dreams shall fancy thee.
Still I Will discouse of thee, and when the happy end
Has crowned my studies that I truly know thee,
I shall have searched the deepest point of all Philosophy.
But you fair Princess whose conquering eye
Has took a prisoner captive, and now boasts
In the bare spoil of another victory,
You I must nere remember, but must
As ill taught children learn to forget again
What my greedy eye too soon conceived.

Con. Good Sir.
Make not me an accessory to your inconstancy.
Your hopes of me you see are vain,
Hymen has joined our hearts already in a knot
Which naught can separate but death.

Cha. It Is true, fair Creature, you are His:
Meet him with an ardent Love.
And from the Ashes of thy nicer cha^^ty
Let a tall Phoenix issue, whilst I
In silent groves desire of Fate to dye.

Fid. Stay Charastus; Let not thy destruction
Crown our wedding.

Cha. Let fortune then decide the co^^roversie: Here
Take this sword, and plead thy title, a cause so just
Would make a Coward valiant:

Fid. But me a Coward.

Cha. Thy goodness has incen'st me;
Do thou refuse the combat? take ^eed
Pull not a ruin on thee with thy virtue; I am enraged.
My envious heart is tympaniz'd with anger.
Had thou but offered to have fought at first,
I then had left the combat, and with as much scorn
Had hated thy disloyalty, as now I emulate thy goodness.
Guard thy self.

Hal. Hold, Princes hold, Make not a Theater of the Temple:
Do not profane this sacred place
With an incestuous quarrel.

Cha. Incestuous? Is love incestuous?

Hal. Yes, of your sister.

Cha. I have no sister except Desdonella.

Hal. Pardon me great King if I unfold a secret.
Which never should have been revealed
Had not the fear of your destruction forced me.

Cha. If it be good, do not delay my joys so long
As I shall be in pardning thee.

Hal. You greatest Princess, I have injured most,
But yet I know your virtues to be such
That I despair not of a Pardon.

Des. Assure thy self there is no crime so horrid
But the remembrance of thy former goodness
Will command a Pardon for.

Hal. Then thus Braba^tas I restore thy Son
Took from thee in the late intestine wars
When Scicilies three Monarchs like three meeting streams
Strove to convert each others Kingdom
To their own Dominions.

Bra. I must confess in those inhumane broyls
When Scicily groaned with her civil wars, I lost a Son
Who in his tender years was taken from his Nurse
By the rough violence of a barbarous soldier.

Hal. I was that soldier that in hope of great reward
Took from the nurse that unresisting Babe
And brought him here to Lelybaevs to present
The King with: But fortune, that seldom
Crosses wicked men, then ^rown'd on me:
For our tender Prince committed for the more security
To my loving wife, did with a fall
From her too careless arms receive his death.

Bra. Oh most unhappy fate.

Hal. I then was forced to turn my captive to a Prince again,
For in the room of dead Charastus
I then placed your Son, who hitherto
Has lived our Sovereign, and ever should, Had not
The fear of their approaching ruins told it.

Bra. This happiness may be wished for, not obtained.

Hal. I could produce your Kingdoms Arms
Wove on his Mantle, but this would be
A shallow testimony to that I Will show you.
Look on his left wrist, there you may see
The half Moon, from which Lunaster he was named
If Fames Report be true.

Bra. It is most true; He had his name from then^e.

Hal. See Royal Sir, it is still preserved.

Bra. Do I yet live, and see my Son Lunaster?
Fate thou art too bounteous: I cannot live
To pay a due gratuity, an age will be too little
To express my joys in.

Cha. Am I deceast that now my transmigrated soul
Seeks out a new inolosure?
Tell me my name good Heavens, my Country too,
Who are my Kin, or rather who are not.
All here I think do clame alliance.
Fairest Constantina my divining soul
Prompts me to call thee Sister: Be not I prithee
Angry with my Love, I will no more
Harbor ince^^uous flames, yet I will see thee still,
And keep a Brothers distance: you will not be jealous Sir?

Fid. I were injurious to her virtue then.

Cha. Nor you Flavanda?

Fla. Let me dye hated first of all,
And have no tomb but malice.

Cha. I am not mortal sure, such joys as these
Belong to immortality.

Spe. When three Kingdoms join, it is a Royal unity,
Scicily shall be no more Trinacria now
But one promontory whose soaring top
Stretched hove the insulting billows
Shall strike a terror to our foes, whilst we
Armed with their fear sleep in security*

Vir. Let not the loss dear Brother
Of this Kingdom trouble you; we will haste unto Pachynus
And when that envious ^ate bereaves us of our father,
Thou and I, will like the Zodiacks Gemini,
Reign our alternate courses in that happy Kingdom.

Con. Yet I must ruinate that happiness:
It is I Virtusus that must disinthrone thee.
So Apollo said.

Cha. No dearest Sister, I am
That Brother that Apollo meant; my crown
Already thou have lost, my Love to thee has lost it.
Ha^st thou been less fair, less constant to Filio,
And more kind to me, I still had reigned;
This nere had been divulged; Had it Halisdus?

Hal. Never Sir. Tortures should nere have forced it
From me.

Cha. The Oracle is fulfilled then. Let all fears vanish.
Heavens knew a Crown was not my due,
That made me sure so willing for to part with it.
I am glad it is gone so fairly, and I am confident
There Is none, knew he the cares, the troubles,
The perplexed thoughts and dangers that attends
A good Kings throne, but he would resign
As willingly as I do, did not his calling,
And his shame forbid it. That Kingdom
Which my ignorance so long usurpt, returns to thee Bermudo,
It Is Desdonella's right, she is the richer Jewel.
Be once a man again, and from the ruins
Of thy pristine Tyranny, build a most glorious Structure
To reach Heaven; Let not thy former cruelty
Make thee despair; who would aspire
Ought first to fall, that he may rise the higher.

Ber. Come dearest Desdonella, too long I have practiced Tyranny;
Mercy hereafter shall become my study. For now I see
Our lives are but a Scene, a Scene that changes
At the will and pleasure of the Author;
We are all but Actors and do take
Each several day a several part; This day
We personate a King, the next a Beggar.
This is our course of life which varies still, till Death
The closer up of all comes in and clean
Puts out the Tapers, and withdraws the Scene.

Exeunt. FINIS.

