SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Russia Seed, SHOWING Its Admirable Virtues in
Curing the Rickets in Children.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in the Country to Esquire Boil at London, 1674.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Russia Seed; SHOWING Its Admirable Virtues in
Curing the Rickets in Children.
In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
YOU may remember that when I was last at London, we had a close Discourse
concerning that deplorable Distemper called The Rickets, which Cripples so many
poor Children, and you told me of a Doctor of Physic, and one of the Famousest
in Europe, had not been able to Cure it in several of his own Children; indeed
it may be called a new Disease, for it is wonderfully increased amongst us of
late, as we find by the Bills of Mortality. I am very much of your Mind, that
the Knowledge of Physicians would be much increased, and their Success would be
much greater, were they more Curious in making Experiments and Observations of
the Success of simple Medicines, for they cannot so easily do it upon
Compositions. I Will now tell you what great Cures I have done in my Country
Practice, amongst Children who have been overgrown with the Rickets: The
Specific that I make use of, is a small white Seed that comes from Russia, by
some called Seed Manna, I draw a Tincture, a Spirit and an Extract out of it,
and give twenty Drops at a time in all the Childrens Meat and Drink, they take
it with Pleasure, because it is not ungrateful to the Pallat; Morning, Noon and
Night, is often enough.

It opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, strengthens the Brain and
Spinal Marrow, and causes a free Distribution of the Nourishments into all the
Nervous Parts of the Body, whereby Nature becomes strong and vigorous, and the
Spirits cheerful and lively.

You are pleased to tell the World, in your Excellent Discourse of the use of
simple Medicines, that you hope to enlarge the Minds of Physicians, and invite
them to make use of several Remedies which they never thought on, or against
which they were prejudiced. You also tell us, that Specificks, where they may
be had, are wont to be free from any immoderate manifest Quality, and for the
most part work more benignly as well as more effectually than other Medicines;
and therefore you endeavor to bring them into Request, that so thereby Cures
may be performed more speedily, safely and pleasantly.

Your Tenderness and Caution is highly to be commended, in desiring your Reader
not to be too credulous, or rely too much upon any Medicines that you commend,
until they have been frequently tried upon Persons of different Sexes,
Complections and Ages.

I am sure that this Seed, and other Specificks which I have written on, have
been tried sufficiently, in a multitude of Examples, and with great Success,
which gives great Encouragement to depend upon it in difficult Cases, with God
Almighty's Blessing.

I am much of your Mind, that one Reason why so many Distempers prove
incurable, is, because Physicians do all they can to discourage the use of
Specific Medicines; so that if they do not always work Wonders, they presently
tell People that they do nothing at all.

In Compliance with your Request, I have found out a Specific Remedy in almost
every Distemper, which in time may prove as efficacious as the Cortex in an
Ague, for ought I know.

I must say, if at any time I have found Specific Remedies prove ineffectual,
it was when they were compounded with some insignificant Remedies, or given too
late, or administered in too small a Dose, or left off too soon.

This small Seed may be given boiled in all the Childrens Broth or Spoon-meat,
or in a Liquid Form, as the other Specificks use to be.

I have cured several Children in one Gentleman's Family, after gentle
Evacuations, when the Ribbs have been knotted, the Head very large, the Legs
crooked, the Joints much extended, only with this Remedy.

This Distemper has spoiled as many Children as ever Herod did, its high time
if we would prevent the destruction of our Innocents, to find out some more
effectual Remedies. The Method that Dr. Glisson and etc. found out, was very
good, but this simple Specific added to it may make it more effectual.

You are pleased in your Discourse of specific Medicines, to mention the
Prickly Indian Pear that I told you of, that communicates its Tincture so
speedily to the Bladder, that it makes the Eaters think they piss Blood, which
gives a clear Example of the Penetrating Qualities of some simple Specificks,
which have no sensible Operation by Vomiting, Purging or Sweating.

One of our Judges in his Reports, tells us of a Learned Doctor who traveled a
hundred Miles, to learn a Specific of an old Woman to Cure an Ague. I am sure
I have traveled many thousand Miles to learn all these Remedies, and my design
is Public Good: For although I am particularly known to you, I desire to be
known to the World by no other Name, but

MEDICUS INDICUS.

FINIS.

