SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Calumba Wood, Otherwise called CALUMBACK:
Imported from The INDIES: SHOWING Its Admirable VIRTUES in Curing the GOUT, and
Easing all sorts of Rhumatical Pains.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in the Country, to the President of the
College of Physicians in London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Calumba Wood, IMPORTED FROM The INDIES: In a
LETTER, etc.
SIR,
WE are told by good Historians, that before Physic was reduced into Art and
Method, the Custom was to carry Sick Persons into Streets and Markets, and such
places of public Concourse, that they might have Opportunity to inform those
that passed by what their Complaints were: And also to hear what experienced
Remedies they could communicate to them. And this Method with Gods Blessing
has proved Advantageous to the Relief of Multitudes.

I Will now tell you an excellent Specific that I have found admirably useful
against the Gout, easing all sorts of Pains both external and internal, it is
that excellent Drug called the Calumback Wood: It corrects those flatulent
Acrimonious Humors which afflict not only the Joints, but also the Periostia
of the Bones, the Muscles of the Body, and the Membranes of the Stomach and
Bowels, and by its Alcalizate Quality it destroys those Acidities which put
Nature upon the Rack; and this it does by cleansing and strengthening, without
creating any disturbance to Nature, but leaving the parts more firm and strong,
and less subject to receive new Defluxions, whereby the returns of the
Distemper are much prevented.

Sir William Temple observes, that amongst all the Diseases into which the
intemperance of this Age disposes it, he had taken Notice of none to increase
so much within the Compass of his Memory and Conversation, as the Gout, nor of
any of worse Consequence to Mankind, because it falls generally upon Persons
engaged in Public Affairs, upon whose Thought and Care the Service of their
Country very much depends; and therefore he tells the World, that whoever
proposes a way of Curing and Preventing it, would do great Service to States
and Kingdoms, as well as to private Persons.

I knew a young Merchant who had been at the Bath for Pains and Weakness in his
Limbs, and found no Relief, he took the Tincture drawn out of this Wood with
Spring Water, and in two Months time was strangely recovered, and can walk ten
Miles in a day.

A young Gentlewoman extremely afflicted with Rheumatick Distempers, and by
going often into Hot-houses to sweat, had brought her self into Hectic
Fevers, and yet could find no Ease of her Pains, until she used the Spirits
and Extract drawn out of this Arthritick Wood.

An old Gouty Gentleman, about Seventy five Years of Age, who was Confined to
his Bed many Months, with great Extremity of Pains, yet found Ease by the use
of this Medicine, which he took sometimes in Milk, and sometimes in Wine and
Water, but continued it a Month.

A Gentlewoman about Fifty, who was Let Blood seven times in a Year for her
acute and violent Pains, her Blood very foul, yet found no relief, but grew
every Day weaker and fainter. I also directed her a Vitriolick Balsam, which is
a kind of Potential Cautery, for it causes Tingling, and a little Pain in the
Part for the present, and draws out a moist Humor, and sometimes fetches off
the Skin; this gave her great Ease, but did not totally help her, until she
took the Medicines drawn out of this Specific Wood, which she did in
Water Gruel, and sometimes in Tea and Coffee, and now she has had Health and
Ease many Months.

A Humorsome Gentleman, much afflicted with the Gout, unto whom I had
recommended the Use of this Wood, objected against it that 'twas an Outlandish
Plant, and we had Herbs enough in our own Gardens to Cure our Distempers. I
told him that Plea would never become him nor my self, who took so much
Tobacco, and drank so much Coffee: Upon that he fell to the use of it, and
finds much Relief by it, more than by the two former Drugs.

A Virtuoso of my Acquaintance told me, he had read such an excellent Account
given of this Wood in Mr. Ray and other Authors, that he resolved to try it,
and has found it answer his Expectation, and give him help in such a Disease
which is worse than Death, for that Eases us of all Pain, and this keeps us in
continual Torment.

FINIS.

