THE ART Of living in LONDON, OR, A Caution how Gentlemen, Countrymen and
Strangers, drawn by occasion of business, should dispose of themselves in the
thriftiest way, not only in the City, but in all other populous places.

AS ALSO, A direction to the poorer sort that come thither to seek their
Fortunes.

By H. P.

Printed for John Gyles, and are to be sold by Samuel Rand, at his shop at
Barnards Inn in Holborne. 1642.

THE ART OF LIVING IN LONDON.
IT is a greater piece of skill to live in a populous place, where multitudes
of people reside then in a so^itary and private place among a few; yet some
natures are so carried and led away with variety of acquaintance and company,
that it is a death unto them to live by and to themselves, which indeed is the
happiest life of all and has ever bin most contenting, and pleasing to the
best and wisest men.

Now our most populous places are Cities, and among us London, or (...). The
City, whether all sorts reside. Noble and simple rich and poor young and old,
from all places and Countries either for pleasure (and let me add beside, to
save the charge of Housekeeping in the Country) or for profit, as Lawyers to
the Terms, Countrymen and women to Smithsield and the Markets or for
necessity, as poor young men and maids to seek services and places,
serving-men Masters, and some others all manner of imploiment.

Now the City being like a vast Sea (full of gusts) fearful dangerous shelves
and rocks, ready at every storm to sink and cast away, the weak and
unexperienced Bark (with her fresh water soldiers) as wanting her compass
and her skillful Pilot; my self, like another Columbus or Drake, acquainted
with her rough entertainment and storms, have drawn you this chart or map for
your guide, as well out of mine own, as my many friends experience.

Who therefore soever shall have occasion to come to the City for the occasions
before mentioned; the first thing he is to do, is to arm himself with
patience, and to think that he is entered into a wood, where there is as many
briars as people, every one as ready to catch hold of your sleece, as your
self; for we see that sheep when they pass through a thorny or a bushie
place they leave locks or wool behind them; so imagine a populous City could
not live nor subsist (like the stomach) except it have help and nourishment
from the other parts and members. Therefore the first rule I give you, next to
the due service of God on the Saboth, and at other times is the choice of your
company and acquaintance, for according to that every man finds his own
valuation high or lo; that is, we are esteemed to be such as we keep company
withal, as well in estate as condition; if you cannot find such fitting for
you, apply your self to your friends, if you have any, or the friends of your
friend; if you have not them neither, (I speak to the meaner and more
inferior) be sure that you take your lodging at lest in some honest house of
credit; whether it be Inn, Alehouse, or other private house, which I could
rather wish because in the other, the multiplicity of resort and company of all
sorts will draw you to much need esse and vain expense; as in pots of Beer or
Ale, Tobacco, perhaps cards, dice, the Shovelboord-Table etc.

But first of all have an eye to, and a care of your maine business, or the
end of your coming to town, as it were at what mark you wou^d (...) your
arrow; which being thoroughly considered, for your purse sake, pursue it with
all expedition: for the City is like a quick-sand the longer you stand upon it
the deeper you sink; if here money or means to get it be wanting.

But imagine you have money of your own and come hither only for your
pleasure, as being tired and weary of your Country, if you husband it not
thriftily, you may quickly take a nap upon penilesse bench: so many are the
occasions here offered that are ready every hour to pick your purse; as
perpetual visits of vain and vselesse acquaintance; necssitous persons ever
upon borrowing hand with you; clothes in the fashion, this or that new Play,
play at Ordinaries, Tavern feasts and meetings, Horse and Coach hire; beside
those britle commodities they carry; Boat-hire to Kingston, Winsor, and other
places, with the like. For an Antidote to these several poisons, let me
prescribe to my City Country Gentleman these receipts or remedies.

First, being come to the City, avoid idleness, which commonly draws after a
train of many vices: I call idleness keeping your chamber, consuming the day
lying in bed, or risen in walking up and down from street to street, to this
or that Gentleman's chamber, having no business at all, and cannot meet with
useful company, let the Bible, and other books of piety, such as treat of
Philosophy, Natural or Moral History, the Mathematickes, as Arithmeticke,
Geometry, Music; sometime Heraldry, and the like, be your chief company: for
you shall find books no flatterers, nor expensive in your converse with them.
Beside, you shall meet with those who can instruct you in all those Arts which
Tully calls Venales, which are taught for money as the Mathematickes
themselves, Dancing, Fencing, Riding, Painting, and the like.

Next, have a care of saving and improving your money to the best: As who would
bespeake a supper or a dinner at all adventure at a Tavern, and not know the
price of every dish, as the Italians and other Nations do, while they laugh at
our English for their vain profuseness and simplicity, who when the dinner is
ended, must stand to the courtesy of a nimble-tonged Drawer; or a manyringed
whistling Mistress whether they or you should be Masters of your money.
Beside one dish well dressed gives a good stomach more and better content then a
variety of twenty.

And above all things beware of beastly drunkenness, which (as Horace truly
says, does Affigere humo divinae particulam aurae. And well he may Affigere
humo, or nail to the ground: for some are found sometimes so drunk, who being
fallen upon the ground; or (which is worse) in the kennell, are not able to
stir or move again. Drinking begets chalenges and quarrels and occasioneth
the death of many, as is known by almost daily experience. Hence are Newgate,
the Counters, and other prisons filled with our young heirs and swaggering
gallants, to the sorrow of their friends, and joy of their Iaylors.

Again, men when they are in drink, are apt to say or do any thing as become
sureties for decayed companions, or lending them ready money out of their
purses which when they have slept upon it, they curse and are ready to hang
themselves beside the terror of conscience, and extreme melancholy which
sticks by them a long time after. Drunken men again are apt to lose their
Hats, Clokes or Rapiers not to know what they have spent, how much money they
have; and full often they have their pockets picked by Whores and Knaves. There is
less danger in out-doores recreations then, as shooting, Boules, riding,
Tennis, etc.

Next, let every man beware of play and gaming, as Cards, especially Dice, at
Ordinaries and other places: for in the City there are many, who when they
live only by cheating, are so cunning, that they will so strip a young Heir,
or Novice, but lately come to town, and Wood-cocke like so pull his wings,
that he shall in a short time never be able to fly over ten Acres of his own
Land.

These and the like errors are the cause why so many fair estates being near
or not very far from the City, have been so often bought and sold, and the
truth is, very few have held out in a name to the third generation.

Let a monyed man or Gentleman especially beware in the City, ab istis calidis
and calidis solis filiabus, as Lipsius: these over-hot and crafty daughters of
the Sun, your silken and gold-laced harlots every where (especially in the
Suburbs) to be found: these have been and are daily the ruin of thousands;
and if they happen to alure and entice him, which is only to cheat him, and
pick his pocket to boot, with the bargain she makes; but let him resolutely
say as Diogenes did to Lais of Corinth, Non tanti emam poenitentiam, I will not
buy repentance at such a rate.

Let him also in the City have a special care whom he entertaines into his
service, let him or they have friends of his acquaintance, who may undertake
for them but not at all adventure every stragler. What says old Tusser in his
book of good Husbandry?

Take Runagate Robin to pity his need,
And look to be filcht as sure as thy Creed.
And if you bring one with you out of the Country (except you have a great eye
over him) he will quickly be corrupted in the City with much acquaintance:
then shall you help your self to bed, see your horse starved in the stable,
and never rubd; your linen lost at the Landresses; in a word your self every
where neglected. Think it therefore no disgrace in a City Inn, to see your
horse every day your self and to see him well meated rubd and watered he shall
make you amends in your journey. Occhio di patrono ingrassa lo Cavallo, the
Masters eye makes the horse fat: besides, remember what Solomon says, The
righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the ungodly have cruel
hearts. I saw, I remember, a Carrier flea his horse alive, being able on the
way to go no farther, his too heavy burden having broke his back, insomuch as
he tumbled raw in his own skin.

Next; let a Gentleman living in the City have a care to keep himself out of
debt, let him owe as little as he can to his Tailor for following the fashion,
then which there can be no greater misery; for then if he walks abroad he is
ready to be snapt up at every lanes end, by Sergeants Marshals men, or Baylies;
or keeping his chamber, let him stir never so little be betrayed by some false
knave or other; in the mean time his creditors, if they be of the inferior
sort (nay their scolding and clamorous wives, and every saucy prentice) will
be ready to disgrace him; and if arested, he shall be hald to prison many times
like a dog, if he returns but the lest ill word; if he be a landed man, let
him take heed of Usurers and their factors, of whom he shall find as much
mercy in cities, as an Ox cheek from a Butchers Curre: but I will turn my
discourse now to such as but accidentally make their abode here, either through
business to see friends, or sent for by Authority.

Next after the setting up of their horses, and seeing them well used (which
should be your chiefest care at your first alighting in the city, with all
diligence follow your business, let not vain and byoccasions take you off
from it, as going to Tavernes, seeing Plays, and now and then to worse places,
so lose your time, spend your money, and sometime leave your business
uneffected. To avoid these take a private chamber, wherein you may pass your
spare time in doing something or other and what you call for, pay for, without
going upon the score; especially in Citie-Alehouses, where in many places you
shall be torn out of your skin (if it were possible) even for a debt of two
pence: and though you have spent twenty or forty pounds in one of their
houses, your Host, especially your Hostess, will hardly bid you drink in a
twelve-moneth; but if they be at dinner or supper, never to eat a bit with
them: for that were an undoing to them in their opinion.

Again, walking abroad, take heed with what company you sort your self
withal: if you are a Country man, and but newly come to town you will be
smelt out by some cheaters or other, who will salute, call you by your name
(which perhaps one of their company meeting you in another street, has learned
by way of mistaking you for another man, which is an old trick) carry you to
the Tavern, saying they are a kin to some one dwelling near you, etc. But all
tricks of late years have been so plainly discovered, and are so generally
known almost to every child, that their practice is out of date and now no
great fear of them; yet an Item can do you no hurt.

You shall not do amiss if you send for your diet to your own chamber an hot
joint of meat of Mutton, Veale or the like, what you leave covered with a fair
napkin, will serve you to breakfast the next morning, or when you please.
Keep out of throngs and public places, where multitudes of people are, for
saving your purse; the fingers of a number go beyond your sense of feeling. A
Tradesmans wife of the Exchange, one day when her husband was following some
business in the City, desired him he would give her leave to go see a Play,
which she had not done in seven years. He bade her take his Prentise along
with her, and go; but especially to have a care of her purse: which she
warranted him she would. Sitting in a Box among some Gallants and gallant
Wenches, and returning when the Play was done, returned to her husband, and
told him she had lost her purse. Wife, quoth he, did I not give you warning of
it? How much money was there in it? quoth she, truly four pieces six
shillings, and a silver Tooth-picker: quoth her husband, where did you put it?
Under my Peticote between that and my smock. What quoth he, did you feel no
bodies hand there? Yes, quoth she, I felt ones hand there; but I did not
think he had come for that. So much for the guard of your purse.

Now for such as are of the poorest condition, and come to the City, compelled
by necessity to try their fortunes, to seek services, or other means to
live, let them presently provide themselves if they can (for here is employment
for all hands that will work) or return home again before they find or
feel the extremity of want; otherwise they shall find it far worse then the
Country; because if they want, here are more occasions to draw them into ill
courses then there, as being constrained to steal, and to shorten their days,
to seek death in the error of their lives, as Solomon says. Young maids, who
never knew ill in their lives, to be enticed by impudent Bawds, to turn
common Whores, and the like; but if they can provide themselves, and take
honest courses, by the blessing of God, they may come to as great preferment as
Aldermen and Aldermens wives: For poverty of it self is no vice but by
accident. Whom has the City more advanced then poor men's children? The City
it self being the most charitablest place of the whole, and having done more
good deeds then half the Land beside. In a word, for a conclusion, let me
give all comers, not only to London, but all other like populous places this
one and only rule never to be forgotten, which is, To serve God, avoid
Idleness, to keep your money, and to beware of ill company.

FINIS.

