A CONGRATULATORY Pindaric Poem, For His Majesty's Safe Deliverance from this
Hellish and True PLOT.
Humbly Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lord Dunblaine, by C. P. Gent.
Vicimus, o magnis tandem exaudita piorum
Voca Deis, nunc alma salus, nunc saecula curat
Jupiter.
Barcl. Arg. TEll me, ye Great Divinities;
Who dwell beyond the distant, and the arched Skies,
Since you their Reign with Peace, and Love,
Tell me why our Earthly Jove
Should so unhappy in his Subjects prove?
Can it be a Punishment
Which you from Heaven have sent
T'inflict on him that is Innocent?
No, no, it cannot be
It lessens your Divinity,
To send down Ills, upon the best of Men,
And give the best of Princes so severe a Reign.
II.
But hark! methinks I hear
In the ambent Air,
A sound, that grating strikes my Listening ear,
Which says the King must die,
Nay instantly,
Oh horrid and unheard of Blaspemy!
Look down, look down, thou mighty Thunderer,
Who'st still took care,
To save, and to protect, thy great Ambassador;
See where he lies
Designed the Peoples Sacrifice,
Whose cruel minds so Disobedient prove,
The Government they all detest, as much as Treason love,
And if they had the Power, the Rebels would
Once more imbrew their hands in their own Sovereigns Blood.
III.
Quit, quit, ye great Controulers of the Skies,
Your happy Palaces,
And suddenly detect their damned Conspiracies;
Let not this Nation, which ye once thought dear,
Neglected lie, but hear her prayer,
And now once more descend, and pity her,
Unite her every part,
And to that Union add a Loyal heart,
That the great Mass may jointly move,
Abroad commanding Fear, at Home creating Love.
Then; then; we'll drain the Land from putrid Blood,
And admit none, but what are Just and Good,
Here Innocence alone shall Reign,
And Loyalty and Peace admittance have again.
IV.
But now, and only now unhappy Isle;
On whom in former times the Gods would often Smile,
And pour their Blessings down,
Upon the obedient People, and the gentle Crown,
Then; then; how Love and Peace,
With Luxury and Ease
Were joined, as if they would never part, or ever cease,
But now Sedition does overflow
This once blessed Land, though sinking now,
Sedition, with so black a dye,
It aims at nothing less than Majesty.
V.
Thus the bold Sons of Earth
Made their Attempts at Heaven, that gave 'em Birth.
The Gods themselves they did defy,
Aspiring to command even destiny.
Mountains on Mountains still were upward thrown,
Whose towering height did almost reach the Sun.
Thus did they think to shake Jove's great and glorious Crown,
Boldly they did their first Attempts pursue,
For mounting, at the Gates of Heaven they flew,
But to late found
Their Bodies, with their Work, lade level with the Ground.
This fate to the bold Rebels then was given,
This Fate had Lucifer who fell from Heaven,
Thus may all sink from Earth to Hell,
Like the damned false Achitophel,
Who dare against the Almighty, or their Prince Rebel.
VI.
How often have the Fatal Sisters had
Orders to cut the thread,
On which did hang the Fate
Of Charles the Just, the Good, the Great.
How often in his Childhood did they run
To force the high born Youth from's Throne;
All this and more than this was done,
For that great Crime of his, of being his Father's Son.
Then Angels were from Heaven sent,
Who did those threatening Ills prevent,
Who still maintain him in his Royal Seat,
And guard his Person, and secure his State.
Oh may these heavenly Guards for ever be
Sufficient to protect him to Eternity.
VII.
But where is the Atlas of our sinking State,
Kelyn the Just, the Fortunate?
Kelyn the First, that ever could
Singly preserve the Land from Blood,
And at one time, serve Country, King, and God.
What e're he did still Conscience was his Theme,
All his Confession still from Conscience came.
Now, in the highest Sphere he sure may move,
Famed for Religion, Loyalty, and Love,
Let him Just Heaven, for sure from Heaven he came,
In Life be Happy, and when Dead, in Fame,
Let him, whilst here below, from us receive
All that a Land so much oblieg'd can give.
VIII.
Now; now; to Heaven let us offer up our Prayer,
And thank the Almighty, our Deliverer;
Let Us never cease
Our Sacrifice,
'Till with our Incense we have filled the Skies;
Through every Mouth let thanks be given,
To that great Power above, that rules both Earth and Heaven;
For by his Providence alone
Cur King and Land's preserved, and Crown:
Oh! may Great Charles for ever be
Secured against their Treachery!
May he Live long, and happy Reign,
And Peace be once brought back again.
May Treason and the Traitor have an End,
And to Hell, as to their proper Center, tend.
Thus may each Subject happy prove,
And Charles be happy in each Subjects love.
London, Printed for Walter Davis in Amen Corner. 1683.


