THE Morning Ramble, OR, THE TOWN-HUMOURS: A COMEDY.

Acted at the Duke's Theater.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the White Lion, next Chancery Lane end in
Fleetstreet. 1673.

PROLOGUE.
Critics, now boast your power, for you have made
A Tragic muse run mad in masquerade.
All Poets before him the Laws did slight
Of such as only railed, but could not Write.
But he submits so far, that you will swear
His first was writ in blood, but this in the Air.
'Twas nine day's work: but truly there might be
As good a Play just spoke Ex tempore.
For Whip and Spur, it is A-la-mode de France;
A thing made up of Fiddle, Song, and Dance.
All three your dear Delights, no matter then
Whether of sense there be one line in ten:
This Age is not for that, it is much too wise,
What Poets teach, you dull moralities;
That was their business in that humble Age,
When Hedges were their Scenes, and Fields their Stage,
When the poor simple World strove to be good;
Thank time, things now are better understood.
But yet he could not leave, you will see him now
Have a slight pass or two at some of you;
He thinks there is Bullys dare not fight, in the Pit
As well as Critics, that he is sure want wit.
One may be both -- They that make most ado,
Do oftnest want both wit and courage too.
But fear no common place, nor sober saws,
By some late Plays he partly knows your Laws.
At a quaint Dance, or a Grimace that takes,
The Theater with loud applauses shakes.
But if true thought be with good Language dressed,
You slightly cry, 'twas well enough expressed.
Then as you have used some Plays, so do by this,
Clap but that part which wild and senseless is,
And for what is wise we give you leave to hiss.
The Actors Names.
Townlove. Merry. Ruffle. Muchland. Rash. Fullam. Breef. Constable. Drawer.
Officers. Soldiers and Watchmen. Mr. Betterton. Mr. Harris. Mr. Smith. Mr.
Medbourn. Mr. Crosby. Mr. Underhill. Mr. Norris.
Honor Muchland. Betty Rash. Rose. Lady Turnup. Two Maidservants. Three
Vizard-Masks. Mrs. Johnson. Mrs. Long. Mrs. Shadwell. Mrs. Osborn.
THE Morning Ramble.
The First Act.
Enter Townlove and Merry, with Fiddles and Torches. Mer. NO drawing back,
Townlove, I Am engaged, and am resolved to make a Night on it.


Townl. Prithee, Will Merry, let us part; thou know I never use that word to
thee but when I have extraordinary business.


Mer. Business! what business can thou have? I Will warrant you you're to be up
betimes in the Morning to sell a parcel of fat Sheep or Oxen, new come from your
Estate in the Country, or else to instruct Counsel in a Cause of yours
depending I know not where. Business, quoth a, that ever a well-bred Gentleman
should suffer the word to come into his Mouth.


Townl. I tell thee, Will, I have business, serious business, and business fit
for a Gentleman; let that satisfy you: and so farewell.


Mer. Stay, Stay, this shan'not do, Townlove, I smell you out; You fear I Will
carry you to some lewd House now that abounds in Burgundy, and there top up
with 'tother half dozen Bottles; then the dreadful Head-ake comes and keeps you
in two days to be the disappointment of Lord knows how many she-friends.


Townl. And do you think such fears are not very reasonable? A Man indeed has
so much time allowed him in this World, that he should neglect the Living two
days for the delight of two hours: Prithee think, would any Man of sense part
with his time at that rate?


Mer. Faith, Townlove, thou art mad, distracted, gone, and I Am afraid, beyond
recovery; thou can not consider things I see.


Townl. If want of consideration be a sign of madness, Will, thou have been a
little crazed ever since I knew thee. But prithee, what have NOT I considered in
this matter?


Mer. Living, Townlove, Living: thou have not so much as considered what
business thou was sent into the World about -- It Is Living, Man.


Town. Why, I know it is Living, and therefore I strive to Live as much of the
time I have allowed me as I can.


Mer. Thou Live, and yet speak against Drinking, the very thing that
distinguishes the Life of Man from that of a Beast! Why, it is the only Spur of
Wit and Reason; I have heard more new thoughts in Drinking three hours, then
the best Modern Play can furnish you with; Therefore if thou would Live,
that is, truly enjoy thy self, Drink, I say, Drink.


Town. Well, I can neither stay to do it, nor talk of it now; and therefore
good bu'y.


Mer. Nay, faith, thou shall stay till I give a serenade to my Mistress now, I
am under the Window; strike up, Boys.


Town. Hold; sure Will, you are mad -- Do not know her Brother is a serious
Gentleman, and not used to City frolicks; it is the only way to lose her for
ever.


Mer. Why, this it is, not to understand Drinking, it makes one as dull and
thoughtless as a Country Curate, that lives upon six pounds, and a cast
Cassock two and fifty Sundays; do thou think I would Marry her, if I did not
intend to reclaim both her and her Brother from dull sobriety.


Town. Why, thou would not have thy Wife Drink, would thou?


Mer. No, but I would have her be as mad, and love those that do, Women are
fine thin things, the breath of a Man that is merry is sufficient to inspire
them with wit enough for a Woman, and therefore here I declare that I will
serenade her, and if she shows the least dislike to the frolic, I will, in
spite of Love and all his little tricks, disclaim her for ever. And therefore,
Boys, to our business; come, the Song I made.


Town. Well, I Will stay to see thee a poor discarded, melancholy, disconsolate
Lover, and then I Will leave thee, and go to my Mistress.

Song.
FRom Friends just inspired with brisk Burgundy Wine,
Speaking raptures of Reason, and sayings Divine.
I come -- I come -- from this Heaven I come,
And through dirt and darkness I willingly roam,
To follow a Boy that confesses he is blind,
He tells me of hope, but leads me through fear,
Nay, sometimes I Am just on the brink of despair;
Yet on I follow, I follow still, leaving behind
The two mighty Blessings, my Bottle and Friend.
He tells me of Bliss,
Beyond this,
Yet will not declare where my Journey shall end.
Chorus. Ah, what Charms have those Eyes!
That a Love so strong can inspire,
It Mirth, Wit, and Friendship defies,
And Wine cannot slacken its fire.
Then spite of my self I must follow him still,
A Devil, or a God, let him be which he will,
I cannot, nay, would not retire,
No, though I were sure to be burnt in the fire.
Rose appears in a Nightgown above.
Rose. For Heavens sake, Mr. Merry, be gone; my Mistress knows who you are, but
should her Brother do so, we should be sent into the Country immediately.


Mer. Rose, Rose, I tell thee, Rose, I would follow with this noise of Fiddles
at my heels, and drive him back to Town, or never let him sleep but in shelter
of as many Night-Caps as Morose in the Silent Woman has.


Rose. I am very serious, Sir, my Lady begs you to be gone before you wake her
Brother.


Mer. Come, Rose, confess, confess; I know thou art acquainted with a touch of
thy Mistresses secrets: Tell me, is there no other seat but of being sent into
the Country?


Honor, Muchland appears. Hon. Oh, yes, no doubt on it, the Mistress is highly
concerned for fear of losing the hopes of so sober a Husband.


Mer. Marry, and I thought so. --


Hon. One, that if a Body has occasion for at night may be heard of either in a
Tavern, French-house, Constables hands, or the Counter.


Mer. Well; and is not that better then to be troubled with a formal fopp of
business, who lodges his wife in the Country, to prescribe for the Agne, then
scratches his empty Noddle, cries, I protest I must post to London, I shall be
undone else; there stays a whole Term a doing nothing, or what is as bad, that
which comes at last to nothing.


Townl. And thinks he performs his Duty very well to his Wife, if he gives her
a bout every post with a long formal Letter of Excuses for not coming.


Mer. Which must beget another on her full of Complaints, for his absence.


Town. Then when he returns in the Spirit of Beef and Ale, Will, it may beget a
Male Child.


Mer. Which proves like the Ingredients it is Compounded of, a fit Companion for
Clowns, and of no use but to have his Name inserted in long Indentures,
Tripartite for Intaling, specially that Earth that is near as sensible as it is
Clod-pate owner.


Town. The drawing of this deed too is a new excuse for coming to London, and
seeing, as the learned have it, his Uncle.


Mer. So, that in fine your man of business loves to be thought to love
business, Courts business, lies with business, and begets nothing but business,
or things as dull as business; and, Lady, will you slight a Man that loves Wit,
Mirth, and Burgundy, for this Animal, nonrationale.


Hon. I pray, Sir, where is the necessity for marrying either, do you think
there is none but such as cannot stay at home for their business, or will not,
for their Wine and Wenches?


Town. Lady, have a care; that is my Province: Wenches! if you speak
irreverently of Wenches I am bound to stand up for them, and shall soon be
provoked to say, that if my friend here, and some few others like him, could
but relish the pleasure of Wenching, you, and all the ill-bred honest Women in
the Town might sleep quietly, or waking, gnaw your Sheets without the help of a
Song and Fiddle at your windows. VVenching, quoth a.


Hon. Well, Mr. Merry, I see you, for your Wine, and your Friend for Wenches,
are so well met, 'twould be pity to part you, and I am resolved not to be so
cruel; therefore assuring you I am not in have for a Husband, but can stay till
a soberer grow; if there be none yet ripe, I leave you to your further
Adventures.

Exiturus Honor and Rose.
Mer. Faith, no parting so. Strike up, and sing the Chorus, Chor. Ah, what
Charms have those Eyes, etc.


Hon. Pray hold, my Brothers coming.


Mer. I am glad of it, since I cannot reclaim the Sister from doting on
Sobriety. I Will see what can be done on the Brother; go on.

Sings.

Then spite of my self, etc.


Enter Mr. Muchland above. Much. Ah, Mr. Merry, you're upon the Ramble, I see;
what time of Night is it?


Mer. About two, and fair Weather; who would lie spending this pleasant time in
a lazy Bed, and then rise to fry all day in the Sun?


Much. Why, did not Nature intend the Night for Rest, seeming to draw Curtains
about us, and the Day for Action, displaying the great producer of it, Light.


Mer. This Philosophy may serve well enough for one not in Love, but 'faith my
Body is too combustible to endure two fires at once; Love, and the Sun: and
therefore I drink at Night to slacken than within, and sleep in the Day to
avoid that without.


Much. I see you would seem a Philosopher too, to justify the drinking as
caused by your Love, but my Sister will scarce believe you in that.


Hon. Yes, Brother, but I will; for I do believe it is Love; Love of drinking, I
mean, that causes the fire within he complains of, and so he drinks on to
quench it.


Much. Well, Gentlemen, the street may prove scandalous: Rose, go, let 'em in.

Exit Rose.
Hon. Scandalous! if you mean to them, it is impossible; for they are as well
known in the street as the Bell-man, and as duly expected by the Neighborhood
to their Lodgings punctually to come home at break of day.


Mer. You say right, Madam; the Smiths, Shoo-makers, Pewterers, and Sadlers in
our street have no measure to call up their Prentices by, but the noise of my
Fiddles playing me to my Lodging.


Town. He tells you true, Madam; for they heard once he was going to remove,
and in great fright called a Vestry the next Lord's Day, where it was proposed
to make a Collection amongst them to pay for his Lodging, on Condition he would
stay.


Mer. Yes, faith, and a solemn present of saffron Cakes and Sack given to
Townlove, to move me to it.


Enter Rose below. Rose. Come, Gallants, you may enter; but Mr. Muchland is not
of my mind, to suffer it.


Mer. Prithee why, Rose; I know thou art not so cruel, but thou could find
in thy heart sometimes to let in a Friend later than this.


Rose. Sir, it must be with greater expectation of a sober demeanor when they
come in, then I could hope from you now.


Mer. Townlove, Rose is a Person I much rely on, therefore prithee manage the
controversy begun with her, whilst I go and excuse my self to her Mistress.

Ex. all but Rose and Townlove.
Rose. No, Sir, Arguments are in vain to me, I Am so possessed that Love and Wine
are inconsistent together, that I think I could die rather then recant my
Opinion.


Town. And, Rose, it may be in doing so, would be as solid a Martyr as many
of thy Sex, who have, as they say, witnessed with their Death, truths they no
ways understood, nor indeed lay half so obvious to their Reason.


Rose. Well, Sir, will you please to come in; the noise that these Fiddles keep
will allure more of you wandering Knights to enter, except the Door be shut.


Town. No, Rose, thou and I will stand and guard the passage to this Enchanted
Castle, where vil'd Matrimonical Love is pursued in these days of clearer
light.


Rose. Why then, Sir, you dare not enter into any House, it seems, that is
defiled with Honesty; if those be your principles, you and I are not proper
Sentinels for one place, being Soldiers of two opposite parties.


Town. Why, Rose, are you for no Love that is not bound by the spell of, To
have and to hold, and the little Magic Circle of Gold, that Fools say, makes
one of two Persons as inconsistent, and different in their Natures, as the
Stars that govern 'em; and as far asunder in their inclinations, as they are
from one another in place.


Rose. Truly, Sir, I am altogether for being particular in Love, or for not
being in Love at all, though I confess it is no great matter, I think, for any
other tie than mutual consent.


Town. Divine Rose! if thou art not now, or have not been particular, as thou
call'st it, already, then this free humor I Am afraid will make me thine in
spite of all resistance, and therefore dear Rose, admit of a Treaty, in order
to a stricter League.


Rose. Which will begin on your part with a breach of Articles concerning some
former commerce; that Amity is like to continue long, whose first Foundation is
broken Faith.


Town. No doubts, Rose, but must be explained on both sides, to prevent future
mistakes, I must know whether I am the first discoverer of your Territories,
that I may the better rate the curiosity, you shall know the true cause of my
leaving my former Traffic, and seeking out new Countries.


Rose. Well, Sir, I am not so fond of the Alliance, as to spend time in the
Treaty; and so farewell, if you will not come in.


Town. Come in, say thou! I am so taken with thy humor, that I would follow
thee, though it was to Church.

Exit. The Scene changes into the House, where is Merry, Muchland, his Sister
Honor, and the Fiddles.
Much. Well, I Will go and dress my self, and then Ramble with you.

Exit.
Mer. Do so; this Brother of yours, Madam, is a very honest Gentleman, and I
have greater hopes of him then I have of you.


Hon. Indeed, Sir, you have a great deal of Reason.


Mer. Why, good Madam, can you show a just exception against my manner of
Living?


Hon. Yes, indeed, Sir, a thousand, if it concerned me, but I shall not need to
take pains in particulars about a thing so remote.


Mer. Madam, I must tell you, there is more thanks due to me for this Visit,
then you seem to bestow by your cold indifferency.


Hon. Thanks for breaking my sleep!


Mer. For breaking your sleep, say you; marry, I hope to have your thanks for
doing it before I dye, notwithstanding your seeming sober dislikes of it now.


Enter Townlove. Hon. For hope, it is an Estate entailed upon Lovers and Fools.
There is no dispossessing them of it, and though I cannot certainly define by
which of the Titles you hold, yet this for your comfort I can tell you,
Fiddles, and crying Fire are much the same to me about two in the morning, and
were I married, I cannot certainly tell which I should sooner wish my Husband
should waken me with.


Town. Faith, Madam, let your Servant wake you with Fiddles, and your Husband
with Fire; the first provokes Dancing, the Emblem of Love, that never lets a
man rest, and the other is hot, and therefore requires a -- Cooler.


Mer. Townlove, I thank thee for that -- it is the first time I e're heard thee
speak for sitting up late; sure thou have been drinking since I left thee
without, thou art so thoughtful, nothing but Wine would have made thee arrived
to the tenth part of this good Nature.


Town. No, truly, Sir, I have been loving, and loving a great deal for so
little time.


Mer. The fire of thy Love is like that of Gunpowder, flash, noise, smoke, and
Exit. Mine is kindled in heart of Oak, where it is lasting and useful.


Hon. And which to preserve the Block the longer, you quench every Night by
drenching it in Liquor, and then with a great deal of pussing and blowing you
kindle it again by Noon.


Mer. And is not that well, when you can have half the day to warm your self by
it? an't would but hold out at that rate I should prove the best Husband in
Town; but faith, Madam, take me before I waste too much, for this keeping the
fire-light all Night will consume fuel monstrously.


Hon. And it is two to one we shall sit blowing our fingers half the long Winter
of Marriage, for that is a cold time, I have heard many of you Gallants say.


Mer. Ay, such as Townlove here, that know no other way to heat themselves but
at the main fire. But we that practice the warm Exercise of Drinking, never go
cold to Bed, and a warm Bed-fellows Arms is a pleasant place I can tell you.


Enter Muchland dressed. Much. Come, Gentlemen, I am ready for your commands
now, let us whither you please.


Mer. Why then, let us to your Mistress, and serenade her, and call Ned Rosh her
Brother up, and go to the Rose Tavern for a Bottle of Burgundy.


Much. With all my heart.


Town. I Will bring you on your way, till you go embarque for drinking, and then
I Will take leave, being not willing to grow Sea-sick to Night.


Mer. Brother Muchland, that must be, for so I know the Destinies have decreed;
this Townlove is a very honest fellow, did he not delight in lewd Company.


Town. One good turn is, the faults of my Company are not so visible, nor do
not make such a noise as yours do.


Mer. If thou understoodst noise, thou would not say so, for is it not the
whole noise of the Town; who is such a ones Mistress, what he allows her, and
whether she has any certainty settled on her, or must upon dislike be cast off,
and according to the answers of these Queries she is more or less respected,
and makes the greater noise at her Lodgings in the Park, and at the Play House.


Town. And good reason too; it is not the drinking of Wine, but your ability to
pay for it makes you welcome to the drowsy Vintner at two in the Morning; and
let the precise say what they will, it is plain they never complain of the sins
they themselves get by, or delight in.


Much. Faith, Sir, you are in the right, I never heard of a Vintner or Bawd
that complained of Drinkers or Wenchers, except they broke Windows, or built
Sconces, and I Will assure you I have known very devout People of both those
Employments.


Mer. No doubt on it, People that would not have failed being at Church before
the Psalm was sung for their Sundays Dinner.


Much. Truly it is the same in more warrantable Employments, for you shall
never hear the Parson speak against the sin his Patron is notoriously guilty
of, or if he is forced to Name it, it is in such a whisper, that few, except
the Reader, can hear him.


Town. Your Lawyer never speaks against the forgery he is retained for; your
Doctor, never against the cause of the Pox, nor will a Soldier be persuaded
there is any hurt in plundering.


Much. Nor will all the Rhetoric a man has be enough to Convince a Tradesman
that he does ill when he over-reaches them most that trust him most.


Town. Then since no Action, be it good or bad, but has it is vouchers, I am
for letting every one have his humor, and only beg that I may have mine, which
terminates always in the consent of the parties I deal with, and the Devils
in it if there can be harm in that, to which all Persons concerned give their
approbation.


Mer. Why, you are in the right, Townlove, and therefore let us by mutual
consent pursue our intentions.


Town. What, call up a Lady with a noise of Fiddles at two in the morning, for
no other purpose but to break her sleep; it shall never be said Townlove was
partaker in such a Crime; therefore you that can Dance, shall; and you that
cannot, shall try; for I will have my frolic.


Hon. And good reason you have for it, Sir, for it is a shame that those who are
so used to Dance about the streets all Night should be able to do nothing
tending to the same stirring faculty within Doors.


Town. Then to your business; first, the Catch in commendation of the Liberal
Art of Wenching, and then a Dance, to show the methodical motion of Reeling.

Catch.
1. Boy, call the Coach; come, Jack, let us away:
It Is tedious to sit out this Tragical Play.
A Plague o'their pletting and dying in Rhyme,
Let Us drive to the Park
Before it be dark,
There we will better dispose of our Time.
2. Stay, who is that so dressed like a Queen?
1. It Is the fine Lady Lofty, but let us not be seen:
For her Husband is surely gone out.
Chor. -- She searches to find
If a Friend will be kind,
And treat her abroad with a Supper and 'bout.
2. Why should she want that? Her Lords a brave Man.
1. Ay, Jack, but they are married.
2. Then what two are you?
1. It Is Will Lovewell and his pretty Miss,
He has kept her this seven year, yet prithee, Jack, see
How jocund and merry they be,
How Crowned, and incircl'd with Bliss.
Chor. Love Revels, and Feasts in hearts that are free,
But languishing starves if restrained he be.
1. See, yonder sits Well-born with his pretty Wife.
2. They look as they would never seen each other before.
1. She seeks for her Gallant, and he of my Lise
Has a mind to be feaguing you Vizor-Mask-Whore.
But stay, let me see; by Heavens it is so,
That Mask hides a Lady I know,
Who seems for to dote on Husband and Honor,
But look there, Ned Ranter has just fixed upon her.
2. She has yielded, and see they do go.
1. If Wives will do this,
Give me the true Miss,
She Would be hanged e're she would serve a Man so.
Chor. They Are Fools then that Marry, and strive to consine
In politic Chains what still will be free;
No Fetters can hold a power that is Divine,
Nor Shackles restrain great Loves Deity.
A Dance; and Exeunt Dancing. Manet Hon. and Rose.
Hon. What would I give, Rose, to be a man but one Night, to see what pleasure
there is in the inside of a Tavern; for sure, it must be something
extraordinary maks Mre. Merry so continually delight in being there.


Rose. Faith, Madam, it is not hard to compass your wish.


Hon. What, to be a man for a Night?


Rose. Ay, to be a man as far as amounts to carry on the design of going to a
Tavern; for I believe these honest good fellows never examine the inside of
every man's Breeches that keep 'em Company.


Hon. Rose, you are a little too wanton.


Rose. Madam, you are a little too precise; why, it is the business of a
Chambermaid to give hints of delight to her Lady when they are alone, and
there is not one in ten, let them say what they will, but are pleased to hear
something to the purpose sometimes.


Hon. Now out upon thee; I am afraid Mr. Townlove and you have had a conference
lately, you are so apt to change my innocent discourse of a Tavern to matters
nearer his purpose, in which I Will assure you I am not at all curious.


Rose. Well then, Madam, let that alone, and as to your observing the delights
of a Tavern, I can put you in a way immediately to do it.


Hon. What, without being known!


Rose. Yes, Madam; for the Suits, Perriwiggs, Hats, and Swotds that are to go
to your younger Brothers into the Country, came home last Night, and your
Brother has not seen them I am confident, if you and I put them on, we shall
never be suspected for any other then a couple of tight Bully Bocks.


Hon. But should we in this Habit intrude into their Company, I am afraid
they will make us drink, and I am not able to do that.


Rose. But I am, Madam, I Will warrant you as far as a Bottle or two, and you may
put on Mr. Townlove's humor, at which I Will Quarrel, and that shall be our
Excuse for leaving them before they agree to part.


Hon. Well, faith, I Will venture, for I long to satisfy my Curiosity.


Rose. Come, let us make haste to dress our selves.

Exeunt. The end of the first Act.
The Second Act.
Enter Muchland, Townlove, Merry, Fiddles, and Torches. Mer. STrike up, Boys,
sound Alarm to the sleepy Sentinels of this Fortification.

Ah, what Charms have those Eyes, etc.

They follow and make a noise.
Enter Rash above. Rash. What, sober Mr. Muchland! I little suspected to have
seen you at the head of a Troop of Fiddles and Torches, scowring of the
Streets, and beating up of Quarters at such a time of Night.


Much. You see how powerful Example is, yet considering these honest Gentlemen,
my Companions, I think this may be as becoming an Exercise, as the following a
pack of Dogs all day so hard, to kill my Horses, and the Quarry only a rank
Fox, for the noise of those we Hunt, which now is much more Musical.


Mer. Come, come, dress, dress, we are in great haste, and have much business
to do before that great makebate, the Sun, who lights your Lawyers, Usurers,
Scriveners, Merchants, and other formal fopps to go together by the Ears, do
rise.


Much. I am afraid we have disturbed your Sister with our noise.


Mer. Prithee, dear Muchland no fears, for let her be disturbed as much as she
will, she will take it for a sign of Love, to see that when her Servant is
Rambling, he cannot choose but take her in his way, and let them never so much
dislike the man that does it, there was never one of them yet that was
displeased at being beloved.


Rash. I am of your mind, Mr. Merry, they are the same in Lovers as they are in
Footmen, so they have but enough to wear the Livery, they desire but one to do
the business, and glory more in the Manies constant attendance, then they do in
the ones ability for performing their How de's.


Town. Faith, Rash, thou art in the right; for till this way came up of keeping
Misses, a Woman counted it a scandal to have but one Servant; it is true, they
admitted them under the Name of Platonicks, Friends, or Admirers, but would
oblige them at the charge of their Lovers or Husbands, rather then lose their
Visits; but since this impropriating of Women's Flesh without Matrimony came in
request, it is counted a greater disgrace amongst themselves to admit of two
Gallants, then e're it was for a married Woman to Cuckold her Husband. And
Opinion being the sole Governor of men's Actions; I believe this to be the only
way to introduce Chastity into the Female Sex again, and to secure men in the
knowledge of their own Children.


Rash. I never knew you want an Argument to justify Wenching in my Life. But
come in, and I Will Dress me.

Door opens.
Mer. Sound a Charge, and Enter.

Ex. Singing and Playing.
Scena Secunda. Scene a Tavern. Enter Ruffle, Tullam, and Breef, ^s from Play^^
with a Drawer; Ruffle with some Dice in his hand. Ruff. Sir, never tell me
o'that, Sir, you're (...) of Cheats, and I Will have my money again, or I Will so
swinge you.


Full. Good Mr. Ruffle consider this Gentleman as a mere Stranger to me, and
that money I have won of you, I have it fairly, and will keep it too in spite
of your coun^^rf^it Courage.

Aside.
Ruff. Conspiracy; a mere Conspiracy, what t^^ Devil, is not here a Dye has
nothing but fives upon it: here another with two sixes, and there a third with
two Quaters, and two ^^e's? I tell you it is a plain Conspiracy, and I will have
my money again.


Breef. Sir, you know I am a mere Stranger to him, and met you at the
Coffee-House by chance, and truly, considering I have lost all my money I might
ju^^ suspect.


Ruff. Suspect, ha, what would you suspect? ha!


(...). Suspect, Sir, look you, if you go to that, Sir, I might suspect, (...)
that you drew me hither, and conspired together to get my (...), Sir, (...)
^^^eting those Dice I see there, that I might suspect, Sir.


Ruff. Sirrah, thou Varlet, dare thou talk thus to a Gentleman of my Quality,
that can spend a thousand pounds per annum, and be never the worse, that ever I
should light into the Company of a Slave that spunges at Ordinaries upon the
winning hands for his Bread: begs to go six pence upon 7, to 5, and being broke
by paying Laundress, or Lodging, sets up again with a new borrowed half-Crown.


Breef. Good Mr. Ruffle, be more civil; you know I brought you into the House a
Guinney, sixteen shillings in silver, and a studdle Watch-Case, and Chain, and
have lost them all; then methinks you might give me leave to speak for my
money.


Ruff. Oh, Impudence! Drawer, what is to pay?


Draw. Three pounds, Sir.


Ruff. Lok you there, Rascal! is it likely you should be set by us to get the
value you speak of; when the Reckoning comes to more. Thou Dog, I have lost
fifty Guinneys, besides three pounds in silver; and you come in with your
studdle Watch-Case and Chain, and we should design upon you in the Devil's
name; very likely.


Breef. Sir, I have more money somewhere, and I believe all this heat is
because I had no more about me to lose.


Ruff. Damned Rascal, do provoke me? I Will kick thee up the Chimney.

Kicks him.
Breef. Lord, Sir, pray, Sir, (...), what de'e mean, Sir? we shall talk about
this anon.

Aside.
Full. Hold, Mr. Ruffle, this is not fair, nor must be here; we will have no
Quatrelling, if I can help it.


Ruff. I vow to Gad, Mr. Fullam, you are a civil Gentleman, but there is no
enduring of this Rogue; therefore, prithee give me leave to kick him out of the
Company.


Breef. No, Sir, that need not, Sir; on Condition you will threw those Dice out of
the Window, I Will borrow five Guinneys of the Drawer, and lose them too, if it
be my ill Fortune; but I Will assure you I Will look to the Dice we play with.


Ruff. Well then; Drawer, go to your master, and bid him send me twenty
Guinneys.

Throws away the Dice.
Draw. I shall, Sir.


Breef. And do you hear? bring me five.


Draw. It shall be done, Sir.

Ex. Drawer and Fullam.
Breef. I protest, Mr. Ruffle, I am sorry I have offended you; for you know
it is not my custom to Quarrel at the Ordinary, or any where else, but lose my
money as quietly as men of better Estates do.


Ruff. Then this Fullam is a Rogue; but 'sore Heaven, if I take him at his
tricks, I Will cut's Ears off, or have my money again.


Breef. You have reason; but Gad, I have some Tools here about me, as good Lows
and Highs as e're ran on smooth Table; Gad, you might, and you would serve him
a trick for his trick.


Ruff. And will, by Heaven; lend me them then.


Breef. There, Sir, these are Lows, and these are High runners; you will never
find more than threes run on these, nor less than fours on these.


Ruff. Then we will to passage.


Breef. Come, Sir, let us into our Room, and seem angry still.

Exit.
Ruff. What advantage have men of Courage over Cowards; how tame this Rogue is
with his beating? I have got some Reputation for my money in huffing this Rogue.

Exit.
Scene changes to a Hall. Enter Merry, Muchland, Betty, Rash, and Maid in Night
Dress. Much. Madam, you see the Excellencies of these Fellows: Was not the
Sport you have had worth waking for?


Betty. Yes, truly, Sir.


Mer. Faith, Madam, I never do worse than this; my Bottle, Fiddle, and Friend,
are the Delights of my Life, and had not Cupid watch't a time when I was sober,
and shot me as I stood musing on this Gentleman's Sister, I think I should
never have thought of other pleasures; but now spend at least two hours in the
twenty four, in musing, sighing, hoping, wishing, and fearing.


Bet. A grievous affliction I Will assure you, Sir; and if I were able to
persuade the Lady that has this interest in your heart two hours of the day,
she should even release her part for altogether; for I think the twelfth part
of a Man's heart is no more worth keeping then the twelfth part of a shilling,
a sum too little to be bestowed on the meanest Beggar.


Mer. Ay, Madam, you speak of a heart that can be divided; but alas, it is not
so in mine; she has right of common in the whole, every part is as much hers as
any part, and she can enclose it when she pleases, being Lady of the Manor.


Much. But I am afraid you would soon break down the Fences, and plead a
prescription of Liberty, especially to that part that lies nearest the
Watercourse.


Mer. What, a Lover! and in the presence of his Mistress, yet plead for the
Adverse party! O, Monstrum Horrendum!


Much. Ay, Sir, a whole Lover may have Liberty to speak against the twelfth
part of one, there is no proportion between them.


Bet. Sir, it is possible the twelfth part of one heart may be more then the
whole of another.


Mer. Faith, Brother Mushland, I think there you are met with.


Much. I should be loath to think the Lady meant a comparison between your
heart and mine; but if she did, I would be glad she would take the trouble of
surveying both before she gave final Judgment in so difficult a cause.


Bet. Since I pretend a Title to neither, nor know any body that does, you
shall pardon me if I concern not my self about the Buts, Bounds, Quantity, or
Quality of the premises.


Much. Madam, you that command so many hearts, you think to descend to the
observation of particulars is below you; but since you will at last find it
convenient to Build, you ought to survey well the place you intend to sit down
upon.


Bet. Sir, you say well; and when I begin to think of that, I shall not fail to
be very circumspect in my Choice.


Much. But do it quickly, Madam, Life's short, and if you intend to enjoy the
fruit your self, you must plant betimes.


Enter Rash and Townlove. Town. Madam, this Brother of yours is more
circumspect in dressing himself for the Tavern, then Mr. Muchland was to come
to his Mistress.


Bet. It is a sign he has a greater respect for the one, then Mr. Muchland has
for the other.


Much. Nay rather, Madam, impute it to the excess of my desires, which prompted
me to such haste, as I regarded nothing but the hopes of seeing you.


Rash. Come, let us away to the Rose, for it is almost Day; and it is more
scandalous to enter a Tavern, then come out of one in a Morning.


Mer. It Is true, had not we the laudable excuse of Fiddles and Link-Boys, which
are infallible signs of no early Risers.


Rash. Well, all the Good Fellows we meet in the Street, and all that are in
the Tavern are part of our Company, know them, or know them not.


Mer. Provided, they carry good Testimony that they rise not thus early about
business, for if we meet any such, they or we must change sides of the way.


Bet. Never fear it, Gentlemen, such, if they meet you, will give you the way
without Quarrelling; for if you look on them as Fools, they think as sure that
you are Madmen.


Town. And with very good reason; and therefore, desiring I may be suspected
for one of these foolish Men of business, I beg Liberty to give way to you Men
of the Moonlight.


Mer. Be but a Madman to the Tavern, Townlove, and then go away like a Fool if
thou will.


Town. Well, come on then; I will endure worse denominations then these, so I
may but have my humor.


Mer. Come, Rogues, Rascals; come away, and sound a retreat to Mr. Muchland,
who scarce marches off with flying Colors as I did from my Mistress.


Bet. Sir, I dare say he is no more without nopes then you are without
Confidence.

Enter Fiddles and Torches.
Much. No, Madam, in spite of Mr. Merry, I will not believe my self so
miserable, as to be past all hopes.


Rash. Faith, Mr. Muchland, nor need not, if it be'nt your own fault.


Bet. Fie, Brother.


Rash. Fie, Sister; I Will tell thee, Muchland, she is more afraid of being
forsaken, then you are of being slighted.


Much. I dare not think my self so happy.


Rash. You are a Fool then, let her deny what I said, if she can.


Bet. Brother, this is unsufferable.


Rash. Come, come, prithee come away, there is such fooling and dissembling
with these Women.

Exeunt all but Betty and Maid, with Fiddles playing before them.
Bet, This Brother of mine has so thoroughly vexed me, by discovering my
inclination, that I shall not be able to sleep for thoughts of it.


Maid. Why should you be troubled, Madam, since methinks it is well he knows
it, 'twill put an end to the business quickly.


Bet. But if he should slight me, I believe I should dye.


Maid. Never fear that, Madam, you have him too fast.


Bet. Come, I will to bed; no more this Morning.

Exeunt.
The Street Scene. Entes at one Door, Muchland, Townlove, Merry, and Rash: At
the other, Honor and Rose in Men's Clothes. Mer. Stand, who goes there?


Hon. Ah, Rose, it is they!


Rose. No matter; what are you that question who we are in such high Terms?


Mer. Are you men of business? For if you be, you must leave this side of the
Street clear to us.


Hon. Gentlemen, do you think we look like persons that are sent to fetch
Doctors, Apothecaries, or Midwives thus early; or, that we rise this Morning
not to fail meeting at some zealous brothers, for the Spiritual comforts of a
morning Lecture; no faith, we are men of no more business then your selves.


Town. Are you Good Fellows, or Wenchers, that you are upon the Ramble so late?


Hon. Partly the one, partly to'ther, like most of Mankind; but by what Authority
do you examine us thus?


Rash. We have a Commission to take up all stragglers we meet, and carry them
to the Rose Tavern.


Hon. Where, after Drinking all Night, you intend to take your Mornings
Draughts; is it not so?


Much. It Is true, that is the scope of our Commission.


Rose. We are for you then, though my friend here never Drinks; he is for
pleasures of another Nature.


Town. I have Commission to Dispense him as well as my self, he being I find of
our Brigade.


Mer. Fall into your places then.


Rose. But not so easily I believe, you will think we did not design to play
the Philosophers: No, we are for mirth and madness, frolicks of some noise must
tempt us to engage in your Company, else we are going to those that know truly
how to be merry; men of mettle, that though they will not break Laws, have an
Art of stretching of them as far as the best pleading Case Lawyer that wears a
Coif --


Much. And that is further by half then any Shoo-maker can his Leather; for
they can fit Law to every Last.


Rose. Therefore in plain terms, Gentlemen, we must see some frolic performed
that will convince we are not like to lose precious time in your Company, or we
shall take you for some Constables, Churchwardens, Sides-men, and Overseers
in Disguise, a going to Ferret, and set Toils for the tame Game of Whetstone's
Park.


Town. Your scruples of Conscience are so weighty, there ought to be much care
taken to solve the doubts.


Mer. Your Company seems so good, that let the Conditions be but possible on
which we are to gain your acquaintance they shall be performed: What say we,
shall we break Windows, pull down Signs, beat Constables, or fire the Church --


Town. Hold! Fire Coven-Garden Church; Heaven forbid! If that should once be
done, then should I be condemned never to hear Common Prayer again.


Rash. And what a loss would that be to the Church, to have such a Pillar
removed?


Town. Coven-Garden Church! It is the Theater of Beauty, and Rendevouz of
Misses and Gallants. I dare avow it is a greater Advantage to Love's Empire then
both the Play Houses are. No, I Will have no firing of Coven-Garden Church in my
Company; any other Church in the Kingdom I think may be spared.


Hon. No, Gentlemen, these sort of frolicks we are not for; there is no
venturing upon such without the security of as many Lives as a Cat; besides, we
hate to be giving the lie to Reverend Men of the long Robe, in crying not
guilty, my Lord.


Mer. Invent, invent then! What is it we must do?


Hon. Can you Dance all of you? The place is convenient here within the Piazza.


Much. We can do something like it, most of us.


Rose. I wish we had but a Bell then; we would wake all the People of the
Piazza, and show them by our mirth, the difference between Living as we do, and
dying; that is, Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, and Melancholy moving to no
purpose, as they do.


Mer. We shall but lose time in looking for a Bell-man, and I have a Trumpet
here will make a greater noise; I carry it always with me, to sound at some
particular Healths.


Hon. That will do much better, the rarity of it will beget more attention.


Mer. Come then, a Levite; my Man here has a Speech to go round with: I use it
at my Friends Windows as I Ramble to my Lodgings a Mornings.

A Levite sounded. Come, I Will speak it first at this Corner my self, and then
he shall about with it, whilst we fall to our Dance.

GRave sober Sots rise from your Beds,
And just thrust out your Logger-heads,
With Eyes half shut, and senses dulled
You Will see a little how you're gulled,
And kept from pleasures of the Dark,
By precepts wise of Lamb and Lark.
But learn by us your Lives to mend,
For Life is short, and time will end:
And when you're dead, for what you do,
Your merry Heirs will laugh at you.
Morrow Mr. Scrape, Morrow Mrs. Scrape, Morrow Mr. Save-all, Morrow my Lord
Sober, Morrow my Lady Pensive, Morrow Mr. Catch-good: Morrow, you Sleepers all,
good Morrow.


Enter Servant. Serve. Stand upon your Guard, Gentlemen, the Constable and Watch
are coming.


Mer. Let them come, I have a sure way to keep such Dogs from Barking, as can
be; if our party be two strong, they fly off course; but if not, I take him by
the hand, and cry good Mr. Constable don't you know me? Strait with the help of
their horns they peep in my face, whilst he has time to consider that he is
richer by half a Crown then he was; then, as in an ecstasy of Joy, he cries, ha,
Sir, is it you? Will you have any of my Watch wait on you? Which I denying, we
part with as many farewells, and good wishes to one another, as if we had
tumbled together in one Belly, though it may be we never saw one another faces
before.


Enter Constable and Watch. Constable. Stand, who goes there?


Mer. No body.


Constable. What, are all you no body?


Mer. I say, no body goes here, for we are all standing.


Constable. You are merry Gentlemen, but I shall alter your humor presently; come
before the Constable one of you, keep the Peace in the Kings Name, keep the
Peace, I am his Majesty's Constable. Oh, I shall be killed, I am a dead Man:
Oh, my Wife and Children: I Will have you all hanged if I be killed: I say, keep
the Peace; in the King's Name, keep the Peace.

They all advance with their swords drawn, and away run the Watch.
Mer. What, Mr. Last, is it you?


Constable. Ay, an't please your Worship, your Worships own Shoemaker; good Sir,
don't use me ill, your Worships shoes are ready for you.


Town. Use thee ill! What, my man of midnight! Do think we will use thee ill?
How does thy Wife and Daughter Joan? they are pretty Rogues both.


Constable. Ay, Mr. Townlove, you are pleased to say so, but it is your goodness
more then their desert truly; though indeed they always talk of your Worship,
and are near falling out sometimes about you, in arguing which loves you best,
but I to keep the Peace part them, and take my Daughters part, because poor
thing! My Wife is her Mother in Law, I hope your Worship will not be angry at
it --


Town. No, no, Mr. Constable, by any means keep the Kings Peace within doors,
it will keep it self without.


Mer. Come, Mr. Last, how many Prisoners have you that are not able to pay
Ransom? I am resolved to Act the Justice, and set all at Liberty after due
Examination.


Constable. Why truly, Sir, we have only took four Gentlewomen, which we were
carrying to the Round-house; I Will make the Watch bring them before your Worship
-- Bring the Prisoners.


Enter Watch with four Prisoners. Mer. Come, Madam, turn up your head, and
let us see your face very well! What is your employment?


Town. Prithee Merry, be not impertiennt, what should a pretty Woman's
employment be? Let me speak to her; Come, Madam! fear nothing if you tell
Truth: Are you a Park, Playhouse, or Street-plyer? Do you Live upon Industry,
or are you kept?


1. Wom. I am kept, Sir.


Town. What makes you out at this time of Night?

This may be my own case.

Aside.
1. Wom. I am kept by one that allows me but forty shillings a week, and makes
at least ten Guinneys of me; for he bargained I should admit any Friend of his,
and he brings almost every day a new one, and sometimes two or three, with whom
he keeps so good Intelligence, that whatsoever they give me, I can never sink a
single shilling for Coach-hire; he sometimes lets me out too, as it happened
this Night, to a Country Parson, whose Land-lady suspecting the matter, and
Jealous of losing any thing her self, turned me out of doors without a penny of
Money, so I fell into the Watches hands, and I hope, since you seem a civil
Gentleman, you will redeem me, for it will be very injurious to my Honor to go
to the Round-house.


Town. Thy Honor shall be as safe as a Thief in a Mill, never fear it; Come,
Madam! Your Quality.


2. Whore. My business lies altogether in the City, Sir; for I find them the
best Customers.


Mer. But how struck you into that Trade?


2. Who. Truly, by mere chance, Sir; for sitting one day in Masque at the
Playhouse, in the middle Gallery, some Clerks began to talk wildly to me, till
an Ancient, Grave Man, who proved since to be a Packer to Merchants, rebuked
them, and said, their Discourse was sinful; then giving me a tread on the Toe,
and a pinch on my Arm, went out; I followed him, hoping he would prove lucky, and
so he did, for besides his own bounty, he has brought me acquainted with so
many Rich Citizens, that I have more work then I can turn to, though I confess
they being most Old, I have dispatched half a score sometimes in a day.


Mer. But after your abundance of Trading at that, how came you to this end of
the Town?


2. Who. Truly, Sir, I Love a Young Gentleman that I keep, whom I came to see,
and having given him all the money I had, I was going back to turn the penny.


Town. A very honest, industrious Woman this, she shall have no harm: Come,
let us see, what is your business?


3. Who. You shall not see my Face, I Will go to Prison sooner:


Constable. Ay, ay, she is a stubborn Jade, and called me Cuckold.


3. Who. And so you are one, to use poor Women thus: Mr. Town-love, let me
speak with you -- It Is I --


Town. Truly, Mr. Last, I think she speaks to the purpose in calling of you
Cuckold, for this usage she shall not show her Face. Will Merry, it is his Wife.


Mer. The Devil it is; 'twas lucky then we met, or how would she have got off.


Town. She Would have said it was to watch his haunts she came abroad, or some such
thing -- she would have tamed him quickly, for it is a very Devil of her Tongue,
and Cuckolds him almost before his Face.


Mer. Well, who are you?


4. Wom. A very good Gentlewoman both born and bred; I am a Presbyterian
Ministers Daughter.


Mer. A substantial Title to Gentility, who will say after this the Crown is
the Fountain of Honor, when they that pulled it down can make Gentlewomen.


Town. It Is possible her own Employment does mote entitle her to it, therefore
let us know that.


4. Wom. Sir, I have had a great mind to be a Player, and have offered my self
to both Houses, and truly most of the sharers have had me severally at their
Chambers to try me, and they all say, I do very well; but it is the Envy of the
Women already there, that fearing I should outdo them, keep me out, as I was
told by two or three of the hired men of the Duke's House, with whom I have
been to Night, and spent all my money, but I do not doubt to find Friends to
bring it about, for there are two or three Persons of Quality have undertaken
it.


Mer. Nay, then there is no fear of succeeding.


4. Wom. No, I hope not; alas, I desire little or nothing for my pains, I would
only show my self on the Stage, and then, perhaps, I may get a good Husband, or
at least, some Fool that will keep me.


Mer. Honest good Women all; and are not you hard-hearted to disturb the Lawful
endeavors of such well-minded People, Mr. Constable -- Well, there are
Resolutions taken by some Gentlemen of my Acquaintance to make you keep closer
to your Lawful business -- which is indeed to cry Fire, prevent House-breaking,
and snore on Stalls according to your primitive institution, and not to set to
Ransom, or Imprison People industriously improving the two great works of
Whoring and Drinking. War is declared, and shall be carried on against all the
Obstructions of Trade, as you shall hear in a Song lately published, in which
all must bear their parts.

Song.
1. THe Trade of wine is much decayed of late;
The Vintners complain, and the Customs abate,
For Pickaroon Bill-man in every Street,
Like Capers make prize of all Traders they meet.
2. Come then, it is time to scowr along the Coast;
To re-take good Fellows, who else may be lost:
'I is Lawful those Foes to invade,
Who rob us of Honor, and hinder our Trade;
And a damned Zealous Constable 'midst of his Watchmen
Does Trading more harm, then a Squadron of Dutchmen;
1. Weigh Anchor then, and hoist up Sail;
Nore and by West it blows a merry Gale.
2. The Glass is run, ho, star-board, Watch, turn out;
Hark, did you hear, that Gun was from a Scout.
Run to the top,
3. Hey Boys, I see a Fleet,
They bear hard up to us; we quickly shall meet.
1. All hands to prayers, and make ready to fight,
2. You need not, their Flags are all white;
That Color denotes them for Wine or a Wench;
All Half-shirts are for us, as sure as the French.
They hale our Scouts, methinks I hear them call,
1. Whence your Fleet?
3. From White Hall.
1. Whence your Fleet?
3. From White Hall.
1. We are Friends to them, then cry, Huzza.
2. Once again, Huzza.
1. And again, Huzza.
3. They are Friends to us, then cry, Huzza.
3. Once again, Huzza.
3. Once again, Huzza.
4. And again, Huzza, huzza, huzza.
Now we are all met, let us draw into a Line;
Charge every man his Glass of Wine,
It Is our Royal high Admirals Health,
Whilst we drink all Night,
He does Hero-like Fight,
To rescue the Kingdoms Honor and Wealth.
Let Trumpets sound, and all at once give Fire,
If the Enemy comes, we will soon make them Retire.
1. Let Us Charge them again, for a Health to the King.
2. They come, they come, their Bell-man does Ring.
3. Their Caps, Staves, and Lanthorns I spy,
They Have horns in their Flags, and they bear them on high.
4. Fall on then, fall on, tan tara rara, etc.
1. They fly, they fly.
2. Then give a Broadside, and cry, Vive le Roy, Vive le Roy.
2. Give the Broadside, etc.

Town. Now these four Gentlewomen will make our Dance the better.

Dance.
Mer. Come, to every Lady a Link and a Watchman for safeguard to their
Lodgings.


3. VVom. Except me, Sir, mine is not far off.


Mer. It Is true, you shall only have one of my Links; Mr. Constable, no more
Prisoners to Night, as you tender my good Grace; and there is a Crown to Drink.


Constable. We Will know no other Justice hereafter but your, Sir.


Mer. Now every one to their several abidings, and we for the Rose, sound a
Charge, and let us assault the place.

Exeunt omues.
The Third Act.
The Scene a Tavern. Enter Ruffle, Breef, Fullam, and Drawer. Ruff. COme, come,
Sir, these are no Jesting matters, I Will not be cheated of all my Money thus.


Full. How do you mean cheated, Mr. Ruffle?


Ruff. How do I mean? Did I not find a Dye with all Sinks, and others of the
like Nature?


Full. I love you for that, In Faith, Mr. Ruffle, I hope you don't take me for a
Cully.


Ruff. Nor shall you make me one, if I can help it, and therefore, say, was
there not such Dice here? we will find afterward who brought them in.


Full. I saw no such Dice, not I.


Breef. Nor I, I Will assure you.


Ruff. Hey day, here is fine Rogues; Drawer, did not you see the Dice I speak of?


Draw. No, Sir, not I; it is true, I heard you say some such thing, but I could
not believe Gentlemen would put false Dice upon one another.


Ruff. No, but Cheats will.


Full. How do you mean, Sir, I say? Cheat again! war the third time, Mr. Ruffle.


Ruff. I say, this Gentleman and I are Cheated, and by you, that is plain, and
if he will be ruled by me, you shan'not carry it off so.


d Full. I can endure no longer: Come, come, come, draw, raw, Sir, for I will
have satisfaction for this abuse.


Draw. I Will bear no witness.

Exit Draw.
Ruff. Are you for that sport?
We Will swinge you:
Do you think to carry it off so?
This is brave in faith.
First, Cheated, and then Hectored;
Suffer this, and suffer all.
All this while be bast'es about, throws his Hat away, pulls off his Perriwig,
and seems to be preparing to fight. Come, Sir, why don't you prepare? Do you
see how he braves us?

To Breef.
Breef. What do you mean, Sir?


Ruff. We Will beat him, take out money again, and then have him tossed in a
Blanket.


Breef. I shall not stain my Honor in being two against one.


Ruff. I am cross bit I see.

Aside. Nay, I can as well spare what I lost, as you can yours, and it shall
never be said, I fought to recover another money, that would do nothing for it
himself; give me your hand, Mr. Fullam, I am very glad 'twas your Fortune to
get it, since it is mine to lose it.


Full. This is but trivial satisfaction, Sir, for the abuses you have put upon
me.


Ruff. Hanged, Man, Passion, mere Passion; give losers leave to speak, I would
take twice as much for half the money, and I think I value my Honor as much as
another (if I can but get off with Credit now.)

Aside.
Full. Well, Sir, I think you speak Reason, therefore, pay the Reckoning, and we
are Friends.


Ruff. How do you mean, Mr. Fullam? Have not you got all the money?


Full. And will keep it, Sir; therefore resolve to pay the Reckoning, or --


Ruff. Plague on it, I never value three or four pounds; and it may be thou have
particular occasion for this sum of money at present, then we will never stand
upon small matters, I Will do it. But for you, Sir, I Will talk with you for your
Highs and Lows.

Aside.
Breef. Very pretty, in faith, a well framed Dialogue: Good Mr. Ruffle, it is too
plain; do you think your counterfeit Quatrels shall carry it off so? I shall
stand by, and see my self cheated of my meney, and take it kindly I have lost
it, because you can Rally one another.


Full. What do you mean by this, Sir?


Breef. Sir, you are a stranger to me, and I cannot blame you for what you have
done; but to be set and bubled by Mr. Ruffle, on pretense of Friendship, is
unsufferable.


Ruff. What the Devil, is not one kicking enough for you in one Night? Must I
be bound to wear out my shoes upon you?


Breef. Come, come, Sir, I know when to take a kicking, and when not. I bore
with it then, in hopes you would have so managed the Dice I lent you, as to
have won money for me, but on the contrary, you placed them upon our selves:
therefore, Sir, refund, refund, I Will not lose a groat of the money I lost.


Ruff. But sure you don't hope to carry it off so: Have I any of your money?


Breef. But your Friend has for your use, and I Will look no further then your
self for it; therefore, my money, or Draw.


Full. Before Heaven this is pretty; then it seems you both designed upon me.


Breef. Come, Sir, will you repay me?


Enter Drawer. Draw. Mr. Ruffle, here is a great many Gentlemen with Fiddles,
hearing you were here, are resov'd to come up to you.


Ruff. What shall I do? Gentlemen, step into another Room, I Will come and give
you full satisfaction presently.


Breef. Well, Sir, I am content to wait a little.

Ex. all but Ruff.
Ruff. The Devils in my luck, I never get a little Reputation by beating a Man,
but presently some body or other huffs me out of it again, and then all my
Honor flies in Fumo. It Is true, I am a Coward, but no body need e're a known
it but my self, if I had not a foolish desire to be thought valiant, and so
must still be picking Quarrels with all I think like my self. And I gad, it is
not once in twenty times, but I miss my Man and get a beating.


Enter Merry, Townlove, Rash, Muchland, Honor, Rose, and Fiddles. Mer. What,
Ruffle alone in a Tavern at four in a Morning, that is a thing I never was
guilty of.


Rash. Come, come, Table and Chairs.


Ruff. Faith, Will Merry, to tell thee the truth, I have been bubling a couple
of Culleys to Night, and the poor things having lost all their money are
staying for more in another Room.


Mer. Faith, that does not use to be thy way, for I have known thee ostner a
Bublee then a Bubler.


Ruff. That Is true, but when I grant out my Letters of Mart to my Highs and
Lows, there is no Man sooner takes in reprisal then I; and In Faith, they have
been all at work to Night.


Mer. What have you won?


Ruff. Let me see; fifty Guinneys, three pounds in silver, and twenty Guinneys
more they borrowed of the Master of the House.


Mer. And did they not smoke you, as their term is?


Ruff. Yes, a little; but one of them beginning to prate, I kicked him soundly.


Mer. Thou Boy; now I believe nothing of the whole matter: Thou venture to kick
a Man, it is impossible.


Ruff. Why, this it is, because I am a little complisant sometimes, and put up
injuries from Gentlemen, therefore, you, it seems, have mean thoughts of me,
but you shall hear; come hither, Stephen.


Draw. Your pleasure, Sir.


Ruff. Did not you see me kick a Gentleman soundly to Night for talking to me
of Cheating?


Draw. Yes, Sir, I Will assure you, I was afraid you would hurt him.


Ruff. And was not there twenty Guinneys borrowed of your Master?


Draw. Yes, Sir; and five of me.


Ruff. That Is true (go thy ways) law you now, I had forgot that five Guinneys.


Mer. Miracles, Miracles, Miracles, give us Wine there; Miracles are not ceast:
Here Is a Health to Ruffle's Conversion, Townlove; thou shall pledge this, if
thou never drink'st more.

All this while Ruffle struts about.
Town. Faith, Sir, you must pardon me, if I don't know some great cause for it.


Mer. Thy Ear.


Ruff. Come, Gentlemen, you know he is a merry Man every way, let him have his
frolic: La, la, la, la, la, Sir, my Service to you, Will Merry's Health.


Hon. Sir, I drink no Wine.


Ruff. Damme, not pledge me, Sir, before Heaven but you must, or I shall throw
it in your face.


Much. Good Sir, be not rude, the Gentleman has our word to excuse him.


Ruff. If he has your word, let him pass it. la, la, la, la.


Hon. Sir, I commend it to you.


Rash. I never drink by Commendations, Sir.


Ruff. Well done, Boy; here is another milk-sop: What, cannot he drink neither?


Rose. Yes, Sir, or any thing else with you that you dare.


Ruff. Before Heaven a Lad of mettle; give me thy hand: Here Is a health to all
that dare, and a fig for men that dare not do any thing.


Rose. Sir, I Will pledge it.


Mer. Some Wine, there; give every one of the Music a glass in his hand


Town. Mr. Ruffle, I congratulate the change, and if I have any interest in my
Lady Turnup, she shall be yours, since the only obstacle is removed.


Ruff. Faith, Mr. Townlove, you see men will show themselves such one time or
other. Alas, the stoutest Bully Rock of them all never went to single Rapier in
swaddling Clothes, they had all a time to begin: La, la, la, la.


Mer. You are in the right, Mr. Ruffle; come, the Catch.

Song.
1. BOy, bring a Glass without marks, to confine
The Ebbs and the Floods of our Drinking;
Our Cups shall be heaped with a full-tide of Wine,
Till our Tongues do speak wit without thinking.
2. We will with Wines, Aetherial fire,
Like subtle Chemists, Bodies change;
That without words each man's desire
Shall through the others fancy range.
1. Wine shall wash off our Earthly parts,
And to new Creatures mold us;
2. We Will take off our Bouls,
Till we mingle our Souls,
And the World grows too little to hold us.
Chor. We Will, etc.
1. All hands to work then, time slides away,
Night chides our sloth, and hastens on the day;
2. Then the Sun will bring heat
For our Limbeck so high,
And make our Elixar in fumo to fly.
1. Hark, do you hear, the Men cry Chimney sweep;
Fanatic Wives will now no longer sleep;
Strange Dreams of Religion have waked them by this:
In heat of their zeal
They Will presently rail
At every thing is, and is not amiss.
2. Be sure if they see us, of Custom they will say,
We turn Day into Night, and Night into Day;
1. In this they are right;
We'd turn Day into Night;
But they lie, if they say,
That we would e're wish to turn Night into Day.
Chor. In this, etc.

Mer. Bravely done, Boys; now to a little silent drinking: Townlove, you keep a
good man from us.

During the Catch Townlove and Rose talk together.
Town. I Will release him presently.

Faith, Sir, you see I have opened my heart to you, in hopes to make you my
Friend, for there is something in your face pleases me extremely.


Rose. I am obliged to you by it, and shall as much seek to deserve it; but
methinks three hundred pounds a year is considerable to allow you Mistress, if
you pay it constantly.


Town. I never fail you may be sure, whosoever stays, she must not. A dun
between a pair of Sheets makes a man more impotent then a Witches tying of a
Country Fellows Cod-piece-point.


Rose. Well, Sir, for my own part, I never understood the pleasure of keeping
Misses, I Am for othermens, if for any.


Town. I believe your Friend is not of your mind; he, I perceive by his
refusing to drink, is for his Miss; can you let me know who she is?


Rese. Truly, Sir, I know of none he has, he is Young, and rather talks of
Marriage then Misses.


Town. Why, there is the mischief on 't; he is new come from the University, or
I Will be hanged; there is more of our hopeful Youth spoiled by Schools and
Universities then is imaginable; they learn nothing but to tread the dull paths
of our Forefathers, to bury themselves alive in Marriage-Beds, to arise
Monsters with huge Horns on their heads; if you have any kindness for him
reclaim him from such a design.


Rose. I have used my endeavors, and find him a little inclining to be kind to
one Rose, that waits on Mr. Muchland's Sister.


Town. Gad, Sir, I had rather he had a mind to be kind, as you call it, to my
Sister, and sooner should forgive him for it


Rose. Why, Sir, what is she to you?


Town. She Is one I have a mind to, and am resolved if three hundred pounds a
Year will tempt her, she shall be mine; provided, he, nor no other smock-fac'd
Fellow has been Quartered upon her before hand.


Rose. How'l you know that, if it is so?


Town. P'shaw, never ask questions of an Old Gamester; and I Am resolved, since
my present Miss is to be married, I Will pursue my design upon Rose, to prevent
yon smock-fac'd Fellow, of whom I have dreadful apprehensions.


Rose. Well, Sir, trouble not your self, I Will take care he shall remove his
Siege.


Mer. Townlove, thou think we have nothing else to do but to talk; release
our man there, that you have taken Prisoner by the Ears.


Town. Well, take him, but it is a thousand pities he should be spoiled by you.


Rose. I Will warrant you, Sir, I am past their spoiling.


Town. Gentlemen, I have performed my word with you; and so farewell.

Exit Town.
Mer. Farewell; you have returned us a better man for our present purpose.


Rash. Sir, you're in a rear, and since you allow drinking to be your
profession, you must balance Accounts, and pay down what you owe.


Rose. I Will assure you, Sir, I am but just begun to be a professor in the
Mystery, therefore, if you call for Debs too soon, you will break me, and I shall
never be able to follow the Trade, then let us now go on, I Will run in a rear no
further, and the next time I meet you I Will balance Accounts.


Much. Come, the Gentleman says well, it is not our business to be drunk, but
to be merry; therefore, let us not break Methods at the present for any thing
past.


Rash. But, Mr. Muchland, by your leave I desire no man to be a sober observer
of my drunken behavior, therefore, if he and his Friend will not drink
equally, I should be glad of their rooms.


Hon. Sir, as I take it, it was your own fault you had our Companies, and the
terms we met on were agreed to before.


Rash. Not by me, I Am sure.


Ruff. Nor by me, therefore if you will not drink, turn out of the Company.


Much. Sir, I must tell you this is rude, and no ways becoming a Gentleman.


Ruff. How, Sir, what is that, Rude? La, la, la.


Rash. It Is strange to see how men can see others faults, and be blind to their
own; you tell Mr. Ruffle he is Rude for speaking in his own Room, into which you
intrude to control him.


Ruff. Alas, alas, the Gentleman's lately come out of the Country, he does not
understand good breeding; la, la, la, poor thing.


Much. Mr. Rash, I can take more from you; but --


Rash. But what; out with it, I Am your man, never look at him, and I must again
tell you, that I believe you want good manners so to control; here I say,
these Gentlemen shall drink, or quit the Room.


Hon. And will, Sir, no fear; we do not at all hold our selves obliged by
Quarrelsom Company: Drawer, what is to pay?


Mer. Gentlemen, nothing for you; I am sorry to have engaged you thus
inconveniently, I Will assure you it is rare for me to see these things,
especially amongst Friends.


Hon. We thank you, Sir, and all others from whom we have received Civility.

[ Exeunt Hon. and Rose.
Ruff. Damme, what is that, Civility? They deserve to be kicked.


Much. What, by you?


Rash. I, by him; and it is not you can hinder it.


Ruff. No, by Heavens is it not, nor two such, dear heart.


Much. Sir, if I should tell you you lie, I Am afraid Mr. Rash would call me
rude, but I cannot forbear thinking so.


Rash. Sir, you provoke me to tell you, you're fit Company for Dogs and Horses,
and not for men, except it is your own Grooms, over whom you had best go and
domineer in the Country.


Much. Sir, you know my Obligations, or else --


Rash. Or else what?


Ruff. Or else what? Poor thing: Or else what prithee? La, la, la.


Much. Or else that.

Throws a Pipe at him.
Ruff. Damme, Blood, that; death and wounds, let me alone, nothing shall save
him.

Would draw, but is held.
Mer. Gad, Sir, be as Valiant as you will, I Will swinge you if you be not quiet.


Rash. Mr. Ruffle, the affront was meant to me; be quiet, Sir, we desire no
Quarrels here, and therefore you or I will quit the Room.

Walks to and again in a great Rage.
Much. You pretend a right to it by the interest of your huffing Friend,
therefore I Will quit it, And the World too, rather then take this.

Aside. Exit.
Mer. -- Sir, I Will see you at Home presently. Mr. Ruffle, have you no body to
Exercise your setting out toward Valor upon but my Friends?


Ruff. Friend me no Friends, I know no Friends in point of Honor, that is it
I Will stick to.


Mer. Then I must tell you, Sir, you and I must not part before I carry my
Friend satisfaction in your Blood, or lose my own.


Ruff. Will Merry, thou pretend'st to be a man of Honor, and place these
things upon me, it is very well, In Faith, thou think now that I am not
Valiant, and therefore pick'st a Quarrel, but it shannot pass, no, it shannot,
for do what thou will, I will not fight with thee.


Mer. Then thou art a Coward still, as rank a one as ever, and I lose time to
talk to thee.


Ruff. Ay, think so, do; I a Coward, it is likely, dear heart.


Mer. Mr. Rash, I hope to see you and Mr. Muchland Friends soon.


Rash. I shall take little thought about it, so let us part; Good Morrow, Mr.
Ruffle.


Ruff. I, good Morrow; Huff me -- Good Morrow, Mr. Merry, la, la, la, huff me.

Exeunt.
The Scene a Chamber. Enter Rose in Man's Clothes, Honor in a Nightgown. Hon.
Never tell me on it, I Am confident some unlucky thing will happen, for I never
perceived my Brother more angry in my Life; I wish we had not gone.


Rose. I am rather glad we were there; for, knowing of the Quarrel, we can take
care to prevent the effects of it.


Hon. But we were the occasions of it, you know.


Rose. Faith, Madam, I think not, for Mr. Rash was in such'a Quarrelsom humor,
and that vapouring Gentleman did so push it on, that I am confident had not we
been there the same thing would have happened.


One Knocks. Hon. Who Is there?


Much. within. Sister, I would speak with you.


Hon. Immediately. It Is my Brother, what shall we do?


Rose. I Will stepped into the Closet, and hearken, and then go down the
back-stairs.

Exit Rose. Honor opens the Door.
Enter Muchland. Much. Sister, since I left you, I have had more cause to
consider the consequence of your marrying Mr. Merry then ever I had before,
therefore I desire to know what thoughts you have of him.


Hon. Truly, Brother, I cannot pretend an aversion to a Gentleman you commanded
me to favor as your Friend, and one you designed I should marry, though
further I am no ways engaged.


Much. I am glad to see your indifferency, for by this morning's work I find
you can no ways hope for that happiness I once thought you might expect in
being his; the Company he keeps is bad, and the consequences will attend it
must be worse, therefore admit of no further addresses from him, which the
better to prevent, you shall toward Yorkshire to morrow.


Hon. To morrow, Sir?


Rose. If so, it is time for me to bestir my self.

Aside. Exit.
Much. I, Sister, 'twill save you some blushes for so abrupt a breaking with
him, and I have hopes to live to give you full satisfaction for this change,
and to bestow you on one may more deserve you.


Hon. The manner of your Discourse does much surprise me, and seems very
mysterious; I hope there is no cause those hopes you speak of should prove
doubtful ones.


Much. Sister, I cannot tell, but I desire, let things go how they will, that
you would prepare your self for all may happen.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, a Gentleman without desires to speak with you.


Much. Admit him in.

Enter Rose.
Rose. Sir, your Noble proceedings in so Generously defending strangers has
bound me for ever to your Service. And fearing lest your Generosity has too
far engaged you in our behalfs, I am come to offer you the assistance of my
Sword, thinking I should but ill become the wearing it, if any other should be
drawn, and not it in my own Quarrel.


Much. Sir, you are truly Noble, and I have just occasion to give thanks to
that unlucky Accident, since it produced me the Acquaintance of so worthy a
Person.


Rose. Sir, your own demeanor is enough to inspire worth into a Person that
Naturally wants it, and if I have any, I shall impute it to the Example I
received this day from you; but to avoid Complements, of which I am a bad
returner, I beg you would employ me.


Much. Sir, if I do, it shall be in an Office in which there shall on your
part, be no hazard: Sister, I desire you would entertain this Gentleman,
whilst I step into your Closet to write a Letter.


Rose. Madam, you can no ways believe the great Obligations I have received
this day from your Noble Brother.

In a high voice. But, Madam, not to lose time, I will so mix my self amongst
them, it shall be impossible, but I Will prevent all mischief.

Low.
Hon. I, but the Country, and to leave Mr. Merry, Rose, I am grown desperate
with the thoughts of it.


Rose. Prepare your self to go abroad, and leave the rest to me.

In a small voice. Madam, I dare assure your Lady-ship it is no such matter; and
upon my Honor, there is no man in the World shall be more careful of Mr.
Muchland's safety, then my self.

In a high tone.
Hon. You seem a Gentleman to be relied on.

Aloud. But, Rose, if Mr. Merry should be concerned in the Quarrel after our
leaving them, what then?


Rose. I Will warrant you, Madam, as I Will contrive the matter, he shall be better
Friends with Mr. Merry, then ever.

Low. For truly, Madam, I observed nothing but a little heat about mine, and my
Friends Intrution, that was all; and --

Aloud.
Enter Muchland with a Letter. Much. Sir, I desire you to deliver this Paper
for me where it is directed; I beg your pardon for it is being Sealed, since it
is rather to rectify some mistakes between that Gentleman and I, then to
pursue them further, though, I confess, if he continues his resentments, I had
rather you were witness of them then any other Person wholly a stranger to
their first beginnings.


Rose. Sir, I am proud that you are pleased to employ me any way: Your
Lady-ships Servant.

Exit Rose.
Hon. But dear Brother, let me beg you, if any thing has happened between Mr.
Merry and you, that causes this sudden avertion, let me know it, that I may
with Justice root out of my mind that little esteem your Friendship to him, and
his merit has planted there.


Much. There is nothing, upon my word, Sister, but my consideration of this
happiness has begot the change I have expressed.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, here is a Letter, a Porter brought, he says, from
the Rose Tavern.

Muchland Reads.
SIR,
THE Injuries I received from you are unsupportable, nor can a man of Honor,
as I profess, and shall ever testify my self to be, put them up; therefore, I
desire you would meet me singly with your Sword in your hand, at the lower side
of Hide-Park, at six this morning, where I doubt not to make you know what it
is to Injure the Valiant, and place abuses upon the Worthy, in the first Rank
of which I shall always be ambitious, to have the Name subscribed of

Ruffle.


It Is damned unlucky this, I wish I had not sent my Letter to be Challenged to
the same place whither I desired Mr. Sharp to come; but stay, six of the Clock,
this is an hour sooner then I appointed, that is well; for if I be killed by
this first, I shall dye the more contentedly, in not having fought my
Mistresses Brother, and if I survive, I shall be in a condition to make good my
word to him. Sister, prepare for your Journey, and if you have any kindness for
your self, think not on Mr. Merry.

Exit.
Hon. Not think of him, that is impossible; should my Father's Soul rise from
the Grave, and bid me to forget him, I could not do it. No, Brother, his worth
has placed him here too fast to be by small dislikes of yours removed.

Exit.
The Scene a Tavern. Enter Ruffle, Fullam, and Breef. Ruff. Gentlemen, you have
had your design upon me, what would you more? We all know one another too. I
believe that is not to place approbrious Names upon our own Qualities. I take
you two to be men that will live, if Dice and Cards will do it; and I am
confident you take me to be one that have no mind to leave a thousand pounds a
Year before. I must needs, and therefore am something backwards in fighting
matters.


Full. To speak the truth, Mr. Ruffle, I believe you.


Breef. And I.


Ruff. Now I dare swear, if you would confess, there is neither of you love
fighting any more then I do.


Full. I Will assure you, Sir, my Reputation was never questioned.


Ruff. That I believe, for like the subtle Squirrel, you foresee where the
Wind will be, and change your Nest accordingly; but I have a plaguey damned
humor of desiring to be thought Valiant, which makes me provoke the beatings,
I else might go without.


Breef. Then you deserve them, Mr. Ruffle; but I am so wise, never to regard a
beating I get by.


Ruff. Well, Gentlemen, to continue the good correspondence our mutual knowing
one another has begun, I have a business to employ you in, which you effecting
dexterously, will deserve I should make the sum you have got from me already, a
complete hundred pounds.


Full. Name it, Mr. Ruffle.


Breef. And doubt us not.


Ruff. I have sent a Challenge to Mr. Muchland, who, I fear, will meet me: Now,
if you two will watch him into the Field.


Full. And kill him for you, you will give us twenty pounds.


Breef. A very modest request to begin Friendship with.


Full. Troth, Sir, I have no mind to sing doleful Ditties through a slip knot,
not I.


Breef. Nor have I any ambition to attain the Title of a proper Gentleman, as I
Ride in Triumph on a two wheeled Chariot.


Full. No, Sir, as long as the Town is full of Gallants like you, that dare
venture their thousands against our nothings, we shall not be so distressed, as
to turn Bravoes.


Ruff. Gentlemen, you run on apace, but it is all upon a false scent; why, I
never desired the Death of any Man in my Life, and wonder at those they call
Men of true Honor, that make no more of killing a Man for refusing a Health,
then I do to eat my Breakfast: Yet, since the Town praises these hare-brains
as Men of worth, I have a huge ambition to be thought one of them, so I could
but obtain it without the danger of my self or Antagonist.


Full. Nay, if your design be bounded within the compass of human safety, I Am
for you.


Breef. And ten pounds shall never be slighted by me, coming with the hazard
only of a walk into the Fields.


Ruff. Then Gentlemen, as I said, dog him thither, and when we are both drawn,
appear as taking his part against me, place it upon him, as if he had hired
you; thus our Quarrel will end, and you shall have your money.


Breef. If this be all, come away, we are agreed, I warrant you.


Ruff. But carry it discreetly.


Full. Never, never fear us; alone, alone, alone, come.

Exeunt.
The Fourth Act. Enter Rash and Betty. Rash. SIster, I protest his behavior
was unsupportable, he took upon him, as if he had had a right to domineer over
the whole Company.


Betty. It Is strange, I never observed his tempet much to incline to Pride.


Rash. Not before you, but these Country Gentlemen are so used to control by
the virtue of being Justices, that what with their positiveness on one side,
and their want of Breeding on the other, a Man had as good keep Company with a
Constable in midst of his Bill-men, as with one of them.


Enter Rose. Rose. Sir, I am come to wait on you, a thing I should not have
omitted on my own account, though I now am here but as a Messenger.

Delivers him a Letter, which he reads. Madam, I beg your Ladyship's pardon for
my interruption. Take that.

Rose gives her a Note privately.
Betty. What should this be? But I perceive it requires secrecy.


Rash. Sir, I Will assure you for some reasons, I had rather you had been the
sender then the bringer of this Letter, but however I shall perform it is
Contents at the hour appointed.


Rose. Sir, I hope I am concerned more then barely as a Letter Carrier, and
since I know the most material business of it, I desire you would satisfy my
further Curiosity, I yet believing it is intended I should make one at the
meeting.


Rash. Not at all, I Will assure you, Sir.


Rose. It Is strange, but I shall inquire the cause of it elsewhere. Your
Ladyships most humble Servant.

Exeunt Rose and Rash.
Betty. What Paper's this? (Reads) For Mrs. Elizabeth Rash.

Opens it, and finds.
MAdam, the Letter I delivered your Brother contains a Challenge to meet a
Gentleman in Hide Park this Morning at eight of the Clock, I confess I must
needs appear Treacherous, as well for opening the Letter, as for betraying the
business, but when you shall know the true motives that made me do both, I am
confident you will not only absolve me, but allow a place in your esteem for
one who does all he can to preserve to you two friends; the loss of either of
which would be a perpetual trouble to you, and real grief to your unknown

Servant.


This requires care and Expedition to prevent, for the other Friend he means
can be none but Mr. Muchland, I Will make a Visit to his Sister, and enquire out
the matter.

Exit.
Scene the Street. Enter Merry at one Door, and Rose at the other. Rose. Sir,
you are well met; I was going to your Lodging to look for you.


Mer. Troth, Sir, I am sorry I am prevented the happiness of meeting you there,
we would have cracked a Bottle e're we had parted.


Rose. It troubles me a little that I must tell you my business would scarce
have provoked Drinking.


Mer. But, Sir, let your business have been what it would, we would have drunk
upon it: For if it had been good, 'twould have deserved a Bottle; and if bad,
needed one; and I tell you, Sir, I never saw any thing yet in my Life could put
me past consideration of a Bottle.


Rose. Sir, the pleasantness of your temper, with your Civilities to me and my
Friend, makes me sorry to tell you I am a Messenger from a Gentleman, to invite
you with your Friend into the (...) at Nine this Morning, to meet him that sent
me, and my self; I need not name on what score.


Mer. No, no, it is to Fence for a Breakfast of Honor, I guess the business
well; let him be whom he will, he shall not fail of my Company, though I
confess it seems very odd to be invited to a Banquet of Man's flesh, without
knowing a cause for the Treat. Pray Sir, the Name of this obliging Friend of
mine.


Rose. Muchland, Sir.


Mer. How! Marry now I find a kind of a Qualm coming over my stomach, which
makes me wish I could be excused on any terms, less then loss of Reputation;
yet faith I cannot believe but you mistake your Man, for I was just going to his
Lodging to take up a Quarrel I feared might proceed too far between him and
another.


Rose. No, Sir, if your Name be Merry, you are the Man. He imputes the
misunderstanding between his Mistresses Brother and him, to the Ill Company
you drew him into, and therefore is resolved his Sister shall into the Country
from you to Morrow; and and he will have satisfaction for the injuries he
received in the Tavern from none but your self.


Mer. A Compendious cause for a Quarrel, and much as significant as most Duels
now a days are fought upon: He receives the abuses from others, and requires
satisfaction from me, God's Death, he might as well have placed it on the Vintner
for keeping the House, the Link-Boys for lighting him to it; or indeed on his
Horse that brought him his last Journey to Town, this Capriciousness of his
Temper with his design to take from me my Mistress makes me wish he was here to
begin presently. Where Is the place he designs for this dilicate Trial of Skill?


Rose. In Hide-Park, Sir.


Mer. Well, Sir, I shall bring a Friend that has as much cause of malice to
you as this Man of Punctillioes has to me, and therefore if you have no more
wit, you may fight too.


Rose. Sir, I am not afraid to say I shall scarce be idle when I see you once
engaged.

Exeunt.
The Scene a Chamber. Enter Townlove and the Lady Turnup in Morning-Gowns.
Turn. My dear Townlove, thou art the goodest Rogue for not Drinking, I could
even bite thee to pieces for it. But faith I Will tell Mr. Merry on it soundly
when I see him for keeping thee up all Night; come, prithee, shall we to Bed?


Town. I presently; but first you shall sing me the new Scotch Song.


Turn. No, prithee don't; I am so hoarse with sitting up for thee, that I shall
never make any Music of it now, and I do so long to be in Bed, dear Townlove
come, let us go.


Town. I must have my Song first, time enough for Bed, we will not Rise till
Dinner time, and that shall not be ready till three, that we may have time to go
to the Play.


Turn. And will you stay with me after the Play, and engage with no Body?


Town. Come, my Song, and I will not.

Song. 1.
WIllie was so blithe a Lad,
Nene like was in the Town;
At Wake and Wassel Willie had
For Dancing chief Renown.
2.
He picked the Bar, and hurled a stean,
Nea Man would him out-gang;
And if he strave with any ean,
He guard them lig alang.
3
But Willie needs would Wedded be,
He liked so we will a Lass
That bonny was, and full of glee,
And mickle all did pass.
4.
Yet Willie was no sooner Wed,
But he full sear did pine;
He crossed his Arms, hanged down his Head,
And still had watery Eyne.
5.
Ah, wea is me, would Willie say,
That I am thus forlorn;
I now can neither Dance nor Play,
Nor ought but wind a Horn.
6.
The Lads and Lasses all do laugh,
And scorn me as I gang;
They do me all a Cuckold knowgh,
And gibe me with this Sang.
7.
Willie soon must gang to work,
Or Noone scodes him sear;
Mass Johnne e're he wends to Kirk
Mun con a point we her.
8.
Then Jocky, Sawny, Hugh, and Kit,
Ralph, Wat, and many mere,
Gang when they please, and take a bit,
Whilst Willie keeps the Whore.

Enter Maid. Maid. Madam, here is Mr. Ruffle will not be satisfied without he
can speak with you; I told him you were asleep, he said, I must wake you, for
it may be it is the last time he shall trouble you.


Turn. What does the Coxcomb mean, to trouble me thus early? Tell him I value
my Honor more, then to admit of a Man's Visit at this time of Day; and say, I
wonder at his Insolence: Tell him any thing, rather then let him come up to
disturb my dear Townlove and I now.

Exit Maid.
Town. I Will hanged if the Fool has not run himself into some Quarrel last
Night, and now comes to boast of his Valor; Will Merry was talking something
of it to me, but I scarce regarded what I did not believe.


Turn. What a pox is his Valor to me?


Town. But his thousand pounds a year is; don't slight that.


Turn. I, Townlove, you are weary of me, or else you would never put me upon
Marrying that Fool.


Town. Don't you prove your self a worse, in refusing such a Fortune; you know
my Estate is entailed upon my Younger Brother, then should I dye, what would
you do for a maintenance? Besides, cannot I Visit you then as I do now?


Turn. But will you, dear Townlove?

Enter Maid.
Maid. Madam, he will not be satisfied without seeing you; he says, he had
rather be so unhappy to dye in your displeasure, then without taking his leave;
I think he is mad, for he talks of nothing but Honor, Death, Victory, and the
like.

Exit Maid.
Turn. Go, bring him up; Townlove, step into the Closet, we will see what his
mighty concerns are.

Exit Townlove.
Enter Ruffle and Maid; when he comes in, walks up and down, stamps, starts,
and bustles. Turn. Mr. Rufflle, I Will assure you your proceedings, in forcing
your self thus into my Chamber, has given me high dissatisfaction; you use me
like one of the common things of the Town, that admit of Visits in their Beds;
but I Will assure you I am none of those: My Honor is dearer to me then my Life,
and I Will not hazard the loss of my Reputation for the satisfaction of any
Person Living.


Ruff. It cannot be helped, Madam, the Case is altered -- I am not the Man you
think me -- no -- The World's changed -- Tempore Mutantur --


Turn. The World's changed indeed; you have not dared to use me in this slight
manner formerly, therefore, good Sir, your business quickly, that you may be
gone, and never see my face more.


Ruff. There Is it, you will prove a true Prophetess I fear; but hanged, it is no
matter, a Man must dye, and as good at first as at last. Honor; I, there is it,
to dye, and lie in the Bed of Honor; who would desire more?


Turn. Good Sir, be careful of my Honor, and if your business be only to
disturb me, I command your speedy absence.


Ruff. Command your Maids absence, I shall tell you all.


Turn. My Maid! Heavens forbid! A Man in the Room, and my Maid go out, not for
the World! I believe you have some design upon me, and have set your Companions
to watch their opportunity to enter when no body's here but us, so to force me
to Marry you for safety of my Reputation; but I Will assure you I shall be more
cautious.


Ruff. Madam, your fears are vain -- I adore you -- And I dare tell you, I
merit you now -- since I am Valiant. You said, you found my want of Valor the
greatest bar to my happiness. Alas, alas, Madam, Cowardice was A humor I only
put on for a time; but you shall hear suddenly such things -- la, la, la, --
will you let your Maid withdraw? Upon my Honor, and by my budding Glory, I
have no design, but to let you know I merit you -- I merit you, that is a bold
word, I gad, but I dare say it, la, la, la.


Turn. Peg, go down, but be sure to be within hearing, should I call.

Exit Peg. Sir, you see what hazzards I run to give you satisfaction; I Am
afraid you will Interpret this to too much inclination in me, and I would not that
for the World.


Ruff. Madam, you need not fear censure for your favoring me, I tell you I
deserve it, for I am Valiant. You know Townlove, don't you?


Turn. Yes, Sir, what then?


Ruff. A very brave Fellow that -- And Will Merry too; I have seen them both
Visit you -- And brave Fellows both; by Heavens, Madam, they are, as any walks
the streets.


Turn. I never heard otherways: But what then?


Ruff. What then? I say, damme, blood, should any Bully Rock of them all but
say, or think Townlove or Merry are not as brave Men as Live, I would send the
lie down their Throats with my double fists, that I would; Townlove or Merry
not brave! I laugh at that, la, la, la.


Turn. But good Sir, to the business.


Ruff. Why, that is to the business, Madam, I tell you they are Gallant, Brave
Fellows, and they know one shall be nameless, that is my self, as brave as
either of them, ask them when you see them, how I swing'd a couple of Bullys last
Night; la, la, la. Ask them, I say, they will tell you how I dusted them about when
they were both drawn upon me at once; I feag'd them in faith, they both saw it;
two on them at a time, Madam, won their Money, made mere bubles of them, and when
I had done, kicked them, and turned them down stairs; la, la, la, at the Rose
Tavern: How like you that, Madam?


Turn. Truly, Sir, I am glad you got no hurt, for I Love a Valiant Man and
should be sorry he should get hurt by his Courage. But, Sir, if this be all the
business, you might have staid telling it till after Dinner.


Ruff. All, Madam, it is not half; this is only what Townlove and Merry saw:
All, all, say you? Alas, alas, I am to Fight a Duel this Morning in Hide-Park,
at six of the Clock, with a Man as Valiant as twenty such as they, that is it: I
tell you, Madam, this is truth, and therefore, not knowing how Fate will
dispose of this Body, I come to assure you my Soul is yours, go where it will.


Turn. I find I Am overcome by your worth, it must not be, do not Fight; you
say your Soul is mine, then do not take it from me, I will not let you Fight.


Ruff. Alas, Madam, it cannot be helped -- My Honor, my Honor, think of the
that; la, la, la, I tell you my Honor is dearer to me than my Life.


Turn. Or mine either I see; O cruel Man, was it with design to kill me you
came this Morning? Alas, it is five a Clock already, and six, you says, the
hour. Oh, do not go, stay here with me, I Will say I locked you up.


Ruff. Madam, it is all in vain, your tears are all in vain; my Honor calls me
forth, if I be slain, as chance of War is doubtful, think sometimes of poor
Ruffle.


Turn. Ah, do not think of dying yet, do not go.


Ruff. Honor, Madam, Honor; think of that: Farewell.

Exit.
Enter Townlove. Town. What the Devil does the Rogue mean? Not one word of all
his beating of two Men in our Company is true; he lay vapouring of his having
kicked a Man, to Will Merry, and he believed it, but could not persuade me to be
of his Faith, though I believe there may be something in the latter part of the
Story.


Turn. Let him be hanged, he is not worth concerning our selves about him,
prithee Dear, let us to Bed.


Town. Nay, I am confident he will secure himself from any danger but dry beating,
or kicking, and therefore he shall be no part of my care.


Enter Peg. Peg. Sir, Mr. Merry must speak with you.


Town. Bid him come up; what is his business, I wonder?

Exit.
Enter Merry. Mer. Good Morrow, Madam. What, have not you been in Bed yet, Tow
nlove? I see you mighty mannagers of Misses, that seem so industrious and eager
to be at them are as long a getting into the Saddle when you have the Bridle in
your hand, as Men less professed in the vaulting Trade.


Turn. Troth, Mr. Merry, I could chide you heartily for keeping Mr. Townlove
out all Night, when he had promised me he would come.


Mer. Faith, you will have greater Reason to chide, when I must take him from you
presently: Come, prithee Townlove, dress, I have business with you, your Ear --


Turn. I wish, Mr. Merry, you were Married once, then I hope you will be tamed,
and let Mr. Townlove sleep in his Bed quietly.


Town. I Am sorry for it, I Will slip on my Coat; (help me, Peg,) and go with you.


Mer. Faith, Madam, I don't believe you wish his business should be to sleep
quietly in Bed.


Turn. Troth, Sir, one good turn is, you scarce know what Women wish.


Town. But, Will Merry, here has been Ruffle, and told such damned lies to
Turnup of his Valor, that you never heard the like; and quotes you and I for
Vouchers.


Mer. Dam him, for an unreclaimable Coward, he did nothing but huff when you
were gone, because Ned Rash seemed to take his part; and when I believing him
Valiant, would have took him to task, he proved the same sneaking thing he
always was.


Turn. He tells me he is to fight this Morning at six.


Mer. Faith, may be he might mistake a Man, and give a Challenge, but I Will
secure him from fighting.


Town. There Is something comes in my Head; where are your Fiddles, Merry?


Mer. At the Rose I left them, and bid them stay for me.


Town. Turnup, we will send them to you, and give them such Instructions, that it is
ten to one they shall play up your Wedding Dinner to Day.


Turn. Faith, dear Townlove, I had rather Live as I do.


Mer. Gad, Girl, I like thee for this; refuse a thousand pounds a year for
Love of a Rascal, that will never Marry thee.


Turn. I Love Mr. Townlove too well, to desire to Marry him, if he was such a
Fool to have me; now all our pleasures come freely, but when they once are our
Duties, 'twou'd go so against the hair; no, I Will never marry a Man I Love.


Mer. This is the prettiest sort of new Philosophy in Love; right Descartes, it
depends all upon motion. Why, what would Lucrece, Cornelie, and the rest of the
Ancient Husband Lovers say; did they see these days?


Town. Why, Merry, no doubt but they would be converted to Love for delight,
and Marry for convenience, as Turnup here shall do, therefore I charge you
manage your business so, as I may salute you the next time I see you, by the
Name of Ruffle.


Turn. Well, Townlove, I did not think you would have left me so soon; but I
will do what you bid me, to show you that I can Love better than you in
disposing of my self, that you may get a new Mistress, for I know there is your
aim.


Mer. A gallant Trade, let me be hanged else.


Town. Come, let us away.

Exeunt.
The Scene a Chamber. Enter Betty and Honor. Hon. Was e're so cross a mischief
known? I Am confident Mr. Merry meant nothing but mirth.


Betty. 'Twas that untimely mirth, to which we owe all this distraction; Curse
on his Revels, and may he be condemned never to take Rest that has by this
Nights waking, robbed me, I fear, of quiet during Life.


Hon. Madam, methinks you are too passionate, and something like your Brother,
to whom in Justice you should impute all mischief that shall happen; for I Am
sure it was his only fault these Quarrels ris.


Betty. It Is you are passionate, and blinded too by your concerns for Merry;
he, I say, who, could he keep his Bed, and leave his Fooling, would not be
Author of so many broyls his drunkenness must daily now occasion.


Hon. This Language, Madam, better would beseem your Land-Lady, when in a high
concern for the other farthing Candle, she would rate your Footman for the evil
hours he keeps. To tax a Gentleman with Drunkenness, is proper for no mouth but
such a one as makes the loudest noise in crying Oysters.


Betty. Oh, that we both were Men but for an hour, and all the Quarrel ours,
though bound to end it with our Lives.


Hon. I cannot wish to leave the World so soon, since there is something in it
I must like, in spite of all detraction. But truly, Madam, I could hazard
much against the Sister of that Man I know attempts my Brother's Life.


Betty. Your Brother (Oh, that I live to say it) caused that Quarrel, as you do
this; it was he that sent the Challenge.


Hon. It Is likely then, he had occasion for it.


Betty. Oh, yes, occasion; he could not sure want that, since I Am his Mistress;
one he fain would break with, and wants a fit pretense; but sure he need not
have gone so far about, for I believe he never had mighty cause to think I
doted.


Hon. No, Madam, to deal freely, I Have observed your Pride still strugled with
your Inclination; yet had he not been blinded by his Passion, he might have
seen through all your scorns a likeing.


Bet. Ill-temper'd Maid, thus to abuse my Patience: Oh, for two Swords, that
Women, though we are, we yet might try whether our feeble Arms were wholly
wanting to our Active spleens.


Hon. Your wish so hearty seems, it would be pity you should not have it
granted; and I find your braves have so dispersed all fear in me, that I as much
do long to try this fighting, as you can seem to do; stay but a little, I soon
can find two Swords.

Exit Hon.
Betty. Do It then, and if I don't soon make you feel the effects of Anger,
though by weakness backed, then let me be despised by all that Love me.

Enter Honor with Swords.
Hon. Here are the Swords.


Betty. Come, give me one, I long to see it drawn.


Hon. Nay, stay, you shannot have the longest; there, take that.


Betty. Let me feel the point -- it is sharp, I warrant you I Will make it enter.


Hon. Enter where? I hope you do not mean to kill me.


Betty. Come, come, lets fight; what, Weapons in our hands, and spend our time
in talking.


Enter Rose, and draws. Rose. Hey day, what is here, two Women-Duellers? Some
fighting Planet Reigns to day sure: Ladies, it is very pretty, you that should
be Active in making Peace between your Brothers, are practicing the Art to be
their Seconds. Methinks a naked Weapon, with so sharp a point, is not very
proper for your Ladyships hand, pray let me take it from you.


Betty. I beg your pardon, Sir, it is not so easy to take a Sword from me, as
you imagine.


Rose. But I Will assure you, Lady, I must prevent all fighting, it is my
business; therefore relate the Quarrel, that I may make you Friends.


Betty. No Relations, Sir; our Quarrels Love and Honor, that is enough.


Rose. Enough, say you? I, to set the whole World together by the Ears, or to
make them Friends again either: Love and Honor are the two great Wheels, on
which all business moves. The Tradesman Cheats you upon his Honor, and like a
Lord swears by that, but that he particularly loves you, you should not have it
so. No Tragedy, Comedy, Farse, Demi-Farse, or Song now adays, but is full of
Love and Honor: Your Coffe-drinking-Crop-ear'd-Little Banded-Secretary, that
pretends not to know more of Honor than it is Name, will out of abundance of
Love be still sighing and groaning for the Honor of the Nation. Nay, the Lady,
that for Impudence sake hides her Face behind a Vizzard, will protest in taking
the mollifying Guinney, that it is not that, but the confidence she has that
the Gallant will be careful of her Honor, and because she loves him, that
makes her bestow so considerable a Pox upon him: And therefore, Ladies, if Love
and Honor be the motive of your unusual Valor, it is ten to one you may do
wonders with your Weapons without going to Fencing Schools.


Hon. Come, prithee, Rose, leave Fooling, and tell us in what posture our
unlucky affairs are, for I am more for that, then for fighting.


Betty. Rose, said you?


Rose. Yes, the very same, at your Ladyships Service, though very unable, you will
say, to do much.


Betty. Prithee, how comes this Disguise?


Rose. To play the part of a right Town Gallant, raise Quarrels, and then
prevent them by Discovery, this is the way most Men find to Honor now adays;
the Quarrel is begun with Son of a Whore, you Lie, or a box on the Ear, slight
matters, not able to provoke heat of Blood enough to fight presently, but the
formal Challenge must follow, the Seconds must confer, and the Swords be
measured in order to a meeting the next Morning in the Field; which none of the
four but thinks himself bound by the Religious Rules of self-preservation to
prevent, and therefore each whispers the matter to one of his best Friends at
least, and the Devil's in it, if none of them will find one that loves him so
well to rise a little earlier, to fetch a Guard to prevent all. And you must
think they are soon made Friends, their meek Dove-like Honor being safe.


Hon. I never discovered talking to be the Crime of our Sex before: I thought
it had been a scandal placed upon us, but I see now it is true; for I never
heard so many words to so little purpose from one that wore a pair of Breeches
in my Life. Prithee, Rose, leave this talkative humor, and tell me how matters
stand.


Rose. Why, Ladies both, they stand as you would have them stand; therefore do
but prepare your selves to go whither I will conduct you, if you are not
thoroughly pleased with their standing before to Morrow Morning, let Rose be
condemned never to have to do with any thing within a pair of Breeches again.


Hon. Well, Rose, I will believe it is thy Morning's draught makes thy Tongue
run thus wildly, pray heaven it be'nt before thy wit.


Rose. No fears, Madam, though I must tell you Mr. Merry has received a
Challenge this morning as well as the rest.


Hon. He Challenged! By whom, dear Rose, tell me.


Rose. No, I should talk too much, should I tell you; I will have a care of
running into that error again.


Hon. Cruel Wench, to put me in a fright thus.


Betty. I am glad to see you punished with your fears for Merry's safety,
methinks through all your scorns, was he but hear, he might discern a liking.


Hon. It Is true, I did deserve your Anger, Madam, for urging that of which my
self was guilty; but pardon me, I hope this falling out will but confirm our
Friendships.


Betty. I doubt it not, if Rose makes good her word.

Throw away their Swords.
Rose. Why brave, in faith, you're Bully Rocks exactly, and know to the splinter
of a hair when to draw, and when to put up with Honor; Masquerading must needs
go on, when Women practice the substantial'st part of Man, that is drawing Naked
Weapons. But come, a Coach waits at the Door to convey you where you may have
opportunity to try your Courages a safer way, though I will not affirm without
Bloodshed.


Hon. Thou art run stark mad, Rose.


Betty. And we, I fear, are as mad, to believe any thing she says.


Rose. But if you believe not me, go where you may trust your senses, I hope
hearing and seeing, or at least, the most excellent sense feeling will be
trusted by you.

Exeunt.
The Scene Hide-Park. Enter Ruffle alone. Ruff. He is not come, I see; faith
two to one he dares not: For I have seen many man with as fighting a Face, and
as apt to throw a Tobacco-pipe too, that has been as backwards when matters
have come to the push as men of easier fleam; I, gad, I hope this will prove a
lucky Adventure, but then I might have saved the money I am to give Breef and
Fullam for prevention; a plague on it, that we heartless men cannot know one
another by sympathy, it is true, by experience on my self, I can give a pretty
near guess, and therefore I never hear a man that is apt to speak ill of others
behind their backs under the Seal of secrecy, or that enquires for men's Names
that are Cowards, to report them so in all Companies they come in, or that is
always drawing a Sword, to talk of fancying a pass, or that never sees a pale,
young, or sickly Face, but he makes it red with blushing at the abuses he puts
upon it, or indeed one that seems always so big with Valor, that by
Hectoring, huffing, talking of Duels, and breaking Drawers pates, does, as it
were, cry out to be delivered of this Tympany of Courage -- S'blood, what is
that comes yonder? By heavens my man -- And no sight of my hirelings -- No
where to get out of sight till they appear -- No, it is impossible but he sees
me: What the Devil shall I do -- I think I had best fall to Queries about the
Quarrel -- a way many a Young Gallant has prevented the pinking his Doublet by
-- Never stir, methinks the danger makes me think I dare fight; I, gad, I Will
do it; hang it, it is but dying, and that I must do at last in spite of my
teeth.


Enter Muchland. Much. Sir, I see your Anger has made you get the start, both
of the hour and me; it is hardly six.


Ruff. Your provocation made it seem so to me an hour agone -- and I do wonder
--


Much. Let Us not lose more time in talking then, the dispatch I intend with my
Sword shall make amends for the time you lost by staying.


Ruff. Sir, I Am ignorant who is your Tailor, and therefore might enquire with
what he lines your Clothes.


Much. You have reason, Sir, I think our Shirts an't proof.


Ruff. I think we had best to strip then, not that I doubt your Honor, Sir.

Both stripping.
Much. That Is as you please, Sir, it must rely on proof.


Ruff. Sure I dare fight -- the Spirit comes upon me: And this Gentleman seems
so careless of it, that I believe there is not that danger in sighting I once
thought -- but would the Rogues would come thought.


Much. Sir, are you ready?


Ruff. Almost, Sir, a cursed Band-string hampers my Button so, I cannot undo't.


Much. Shall I help you?


Ruff. No, Sir -- Gad, they are coming --

Aside. I Have done it, come, Sir; but what two men are yonder?


Much. Some to prevent us, I dare lay my Life, they run so fast; but let us make
haste, we may outdo their diligence.


Ruff. I hope we may.

They fight, Ruffle parries and traverses. Enter Fullam and Breef.
Within. Hold, Mr. Ruffle, you are a dead Man else.


Full. Sir, we beg your pardon, we came no sooner to your Rescue.

To Muchland.
Breef. But we are glad our Swords were not wholly prevented from serving you.


Much. Gentlemen, what mean you to excuse your absence so long, since I could
wish the courtesy had still continued.


Full. We cannot blame you to be a little Angry, since we were not so diligent
in performing our words as we promised.


Much. What words? What promise? Gentlemen, I never saw you before in my Life,
as I know of.


Breef. What, Sir, not at the Rose Tavern this morning, when we engaged our
words to do you Service against this Gentleman, as we are ready, then let us
use no time, for yonder is Company.


Much. Sir, give me leave to tell you, you are both Villains, that would contrive
the murder of my Honor, a thing much dearer to me than my Life; therefore,
Sir, as you are a Gentleman, join, but and drive these Rascals from our sight,
or from the World, and then we will fight in quiet.

To Ruffle.
Ruff. Your Dialogue is too mysterious, Sir, for me to mix with; therefore
stand off, if I Am ordained to dye now, none shall say I did not sell my Life at
Honors utmost rate, then do your worst, this Tree shall guard my Back, and
this my Face.


Full. Come, Sir, fall on, and let us dispatch him quickly.


Much. I Am here against you both: If you be Thieves, come, kill me first, then
do the like by him, and take our plunder; but I am resolved no fear shall let
you take my Honor from me.


Breef. Sir, what do you mean? You carry things too far.


Ruff. Come, do your worst; why so long a joining?


Much. Oh heavens, what Fate is this?

Enter Soldiers.
Officer. Put up your Swords, and come along with us; must we be always
plagued with your rash Quarrels?


Much. Sir, as you're a Gentleman.


Officer. No talking, Sir, to us; our Captain, perhaps, will hear you speak.

Exeunt.
The Fifth Act.
Scene the Park. Enter Sharp, Merry, and Townlove. Sharp. SInce we are met, I
see there is a necessity of opening our minds one to another before we can
part: Faith, say, is not your business fighting?


Mer. I Am afraid it will prove so e're we go home, though considering every
thing, I had much rather have walked abroad so early a Simpling, to gather
herbs for a Dyet-drink, and took it when I had done, though it be the Liquor of
all others I most abhor.


Sharp. I must confess I am here on the like Errand, and should be loath to be
prevented, though how we shall save our Reputations to our several Adversaries
when they find us together, I am to seek; nor is it reason for either to desire
the Field, should be cleared by the other.


Town. I Will make a proposition; you shall declare to each other the men you are
to meet, then I will be upon the Scout, and give notice who approaches first,
on which the other shall withdraw.


Rash. I like the proposition well; what say you, Merry?


Mer. The Gentleman I am to deal with, is one I would rather compose then fight
with, and having little or no occasion for the Quarrel, I hope to give Reasons
may end the business without noise, and therefore would be glad to spare Names.


Sharp. There can be little occasion for that caution, since, I suppose, we are
all too much Gentlemen, to be thought bablers; and to show I have reserves,
notwithstanding I know your pretenses; Mr. Merry, I dare tell you, it is Mr.
Muchland I stay for.


Mer. Mr. Muchland! By what motives do you stay for him?


Sharp. Moved by a formal Challenge, sent in writing, to meet him singly here:
But who is your Man?


Mer. I beg your pardon, I have reasons force me to conceal his Name. But you
surprise me much, and though I know that words went high between you, I never
thought they could have moved a Challenge: Pray, Sir, who brought it?


Sharp. Your cautious dealing teaches me the same, though, I confess, too late.


Town. I Have no such Obligations; and since I see there is something foul in
this, I will not spare to say, it is by Mr. Muchland's appointment we are
likewise here now; and I am sorry to see, that Challenging two Men together to
one place, his Courage dare meet neither.


Mer. Townlove, don't wrong a Man you never tried.


Town. He that seeks further trial let him find it, I Am satisfied, if words
will fright a Man, he shall not want them from him; but prithee tell, what Man did
bring thy Challenge?


Sharp. One of those Gentlemen we met in the street; he that durst drink.


Mer. The same that came to me; it is plain, they do but Jest, and sent us
hither only to laugh at us.


Rash. My Temper's not so pleasant to find out Jests in formal Challenges.


Mer. Nor mine so sour, but I can take for Jest all that is meant so.


Town. All that occurs to me on the whole matter, is this, that we may all go
back again, and wait his Explanation of the Riddle.


Enter a Guard. Officer. Come, Gentlemen, deliver up your Swords, you will have no
use of them, it seems, to day.


Rash. I pray Sir, what is the matter?


Officer. We are sent to prevent the Duel you are come about.


Town. It seem we came about no Duel, Sir, and you may spare your pains.


Officer. You are merry, Sir, but we must do our Duty; then give us up your
Swords.


Mer. Where is it we must go?


Officer. The back way to the Mulberry-Garden; they who employed us wait our
coming thither: But we want another, they said we should find four.


Town. It was a needless caution in them, be who they will; for that fourth man
you speak of is as good as forty Guards at preventing Duels.


Mer. Come, go on, we will be your Peaceful Prisoners, though you permit our
Swords.


Officer. Sir, it is enough; march on.

Exeunt.
The Scene Mulberry-Garden. Enter Honor, Betty, and Rose. Rose. I am surpised
extremely, here is a Guard has brought in four Gentlemen already they took
Actively fighting, as they say, and Mr. Muchland's one, I saw him through the
Door.


Betty. This is your diligence, good Mrs. Rose, you have undone us, for if
they have fought, they then will never be Friends.


Hon. What a Fool was I to trust so weighty a concern to the conduct of a
wanton, hare-brain'd Wench.


Betty. Never stir, Rose, compose all matters, as you promised, or you shall
find what it is to raise my expectation high, and then to fool me.


Hon. It Is not your wanton Jests shall bring you off, I Will swear you shall not
Live with me a day longer, if you fail your promise.


Rose. Hey day, will you but give me leave to speak; you're as pettish both of
you as two Puritan Sisters, condemned to dye Maids, the greatest Curse
accounted by the Saints of our Reformation that can be.


Hon. What can you say? Flam us off with some untoward Jest; no, forsooth, that
shall not serve your turn.


Rose. I don't intend it shall, have but patience, that I may go and mix in
Company with these same Duellers, if I don't set all things right again, let me
be discarded by your Ladyship, and bound to fight a Duel with yours.


Betty. Let Us see the effects of your promises quickly, or the Duel you speak
of may prove a sharper then you believe.


Rose. If the Guard I have sent out catch any Quarry, let them keep them close
in some Room till I return.


Hon. It shall be done, but let us have no more failings on your part.

Exeunt.
Enter Muchland, first Officer, Fullam, and Breef. Much. By a Woman's
directions, it seems, you surpised us, and she is a Friend of Ruffle's.


1. Officer. Yes, Sir, and they are together; I believe they will Marry, for a
Parson is sent for.


Much. You seem a Man of Reason; your Ear.


Full. This Ruffle will cheat us of what he promised, for he told me just now we
came too late, and that the danger was past, he being forced to fight e're we
Relieved him.


Breef. He cursed and swore when I but spoke to him, and told me he would have
me tossed in a Blanket if I but mentioned money to him. Nay, he swore damn him,
if in the humor he was in, he could not have beat us all three. And I believe
he is Valiant, for we, you know, found him stripped and fighting.


Full. But he parryed and traverst damnably fast, and I Am convinced by
Experience, that all Men who draw Swords are not Valiant; and that the Disease
of Cowardice, when once proof against the Physic of beating, as his often has
been, is incurable.


Breef. I cannot tell, but if we were once well off with what we got to Night,
I would forgive him my Mornings hire.


Full. I Am of your mind for that, I could admit of an easy excuse to be going.


1. Officer. Sir, you have satisfied me, and it is but reason; I Will take care
you shannot be disturbed.

Exit Officer.
Much. Gentlemen, my Old Acquaintance, and very good Friends that I never saw
before, what motives had you to use me as you did in the Field just now?


Full. Use you, how did we use you? Were not we civil in taking of your part?
Damme, what would you be at?


Much. No hussing, Rascals, that will not do with me, I Am none of those --
Come, tell me presently what made

Draws. you interest your selves in my concerns with such a lie to back it, as
if I had employed you? Come, Sir, speak.


Full. Very pretty: Breef, did ever see the like? The Gallant knows us both
for men of Honor, he durst not else provoke two of us thus.


Much. Men of Honor in the Devils Name: A pair of Curs in couples are not more
tame, nor readier for a beating; you huffing Rascal, answer, what made you do it?


Full. This is unsufferable, I am a Gentleman, and therefore do require
satisfaction for this abuse; meet me singly with your Sword then to morrow
morning at the place where I saved your Life and Honor both to day.


Much. Town tricks right; I Will try you first how far a Cudgel will provoke your
passion.

Exit Muchland, and bolts the Door.
Breef. What shall we do, he has locked the Door, or else we might have got
Ruffle to take our parts.


Full. Gad, let us both draw, and try to keep him off till the Guard hears.


Breef. Hanged, that will not do; I see he is one of those that count their Honor
dearer then their Lives; and Hell, Damnation, the Devil and all are not able to
fright them from fighting when they are set on it. And though by my manner of
Living I should fear Hell as little as any Man, yet I could never persuade my
self to be ready to dye, neither by Sword nor Hanging, one of which usually
follows the fighting of Men that Live in public fame as I do.


Full. Why then let us resolve to suffer bravely, it is but a beating he will give
us, and he will soon give over the Cudgel, if he be a Man of Honor as thou
think he is.


Breef. I, but he is a Man of Country Honor, and they go a great way farther
in beating a Man then your City Man of Honor does. Alas, I know them both, the
one is contented to give the single Battoon of disgrace, but the the other never
thinks it enough till he makes your skin of the color of your hair. I am for
downright confessing all.


Full. That Is worse by half, for then we fall under the Revenge of Ruffle, and
nothing like being in the power of an enraged Coward.

Enter Muchland with two Cudgels.
Breef. He comes, oh, heart, heart, hold breaking.


Much. Come, Gallants, I should be loath to make use of these edgeless Weapons,
therefore confess, and save me and your selves the trouble.


Full. God's Death, Sir, I hope you do not intend to be rude to Gentlemen in
Custody; you know we are Prisoners, or else --


Much. Or else you would run away, therefore I Will begin with you.

Beats Fullam.
Full. What do you mean, Sir -- Damme, this must not pass -- Revenge must follow
-- assure your self it must --


Much. I do consider that, and will give you a little thinking time, whilst I
exercise your Comerade.


Breef. Good Sir, be civil, you know I have not gave you a word to displease you.

Beats him.
Much. Confess, Sir, then; confess.


Breef. Hold, good Sir, and I will.


Full Cowardly Rascal; what, do fear a beating?


Much. Pray valiant Sir, stand by: Come, Sir, your story.


Breef. Sir, we were hired by Mr. Ruffle to come into the Field, and seem to
take your part, to get him Honor.


Much. What say you, Sir? Is this story true?


Full. Yes, it is a truth, but I Would have sooner died then told it you. Out, you
hen-hearted Coward.


Much. Go, Sirrah, and kick him for calling you Coward.


Full. Gad, I would he durst.


Much. Do It, or I Will Bastinado you again.

Breef takes up a stick, and goes to beat Fullam, who takes up another, and
worsts him.
Full. Gad, I Will teach you to strike me, you Cowardly Rogue.


Much. So, well done; now we shall soon be Friends.


Full. Friends, Sir; no, Gad, I Will no Friendship with you.


Enter first Officer and Rose. 1. Officer. This Gentleman's importunity has
forced me to introduce him to you.


Much. He Is truly welcome.


Rose. Sir, I am much surprised to find you here.


Much. You have reason for your wonder, but will not have so long, when I shall
tell you the cause of my surprisal, but now I have not time, I must desire you
to haste into the Park to find out Mr. Sharp, and bring him hither, my Honor
else may suffer.


Rose. I shall obey you, and return presently.

Exit Rose.
Much. Come, my most excellent brace of Spanniels, you must go and witness what
you have said.


Full. I Will witness nothing, not I.


1. Officer. Come, Sir, no muttering, march.

Exeunt.
Enter Honor, Betty, and second Officer. 2. Officer. The Gentlemen we have
taken, call themselves Rash, Merry, and Townlove.


Betty. You have done well; keep them upon your Lives.


2. Officer. Never fear it, Madam, they are safe enough.

Exit second Officer.
Betty. We Are sure by this it is none of them that fought with Mr. Muchland.

Enter Rose.
Hon. No, that matter's plain, and I begin to guess the Man; but here comes
Rose will tell all. Oh, excellent Rose, thy Guard of new made Red-Coats have
done their business bravely; they have brought in Merry, Rash, and Townlove.


Rose. I, now it is excellent Rose; but by and by you will call me longtong'd,
shallow-pate again: I am so elevated with the success of my business, that like
a new-made Bishop, I could appear extremely grave and moody.


Betty. Nay, Rose, no stop of thy Industry for this favor of Fortune, for
should she frown again, thy condition, like a disgraced Favorites, would be
more subject to oppression, then if never she had smiled upon thee.


Rose. In Faith, I believe you, for it is not the well-contriv'd project, but the
successful one is commended; and therefore I Will go on to projection. Step into
that Closet there.

Exeunt Betty and Hon. Officer, bring in your Prisoners.


Enter second Officer, with Rash, Merry, and Townlove. Gentlemen, you are
welcome to the Mulberry-Garden.

Rash. You Will have our thanks, Sir, as we find our usage.


Rose. It cannot well be worse then what I suffered at our first meeting, Sir.


Rash. Come, to the business, Sir; what would you with us?


Rose. By your demand you almost make me think I am your Prisoner, but I must
have other Language from you e're we part.


Mer. Sir, you need use little ceremony in what you mean to do; your Soldiers,
if you command them, took us in the Field, you know as well as we why we were
there.


Town. And there may come a time you may account for it.


Rose. No threatening, Sir, for you are least concerned, and since I am resolved
to examine you apart, you shall be the first I Will talk with. Officer, put that
Gentleman into that Room,

Puts Merry in to Honor and Betty. take that along with you, and leave this
angry Man for me to talk with.

Exeunt all but Rose and Townlove.
Town. Well, Sir, and what is all this for?


Rose. You told me once to day, you wished my Friendship.


Town. I did so, when I took you for a Man of Honor, but now I see you're
none, I slight your Friendship.


Rose. In what don't I appear the same Man still?


Town. You carry Challenges basely intermixed, and yet prevent all sighting by
making us Prisoners, and use us too as't 'twere for Crimes of State we were
Committed.


Rose. High accusations, and with much Anger urged; but suppose Rose should
like the proposition you made her to day, and that I had been the main
Instrument to bring it about, would you not be pleased with me then?


Town. No, says, should I not; for I believe if so, she is but your leavings,
and I d be loath to keep her on those terms.


Rose. I will not say, but I know whether Rose be a M^n or a Woman: But what
then? I dare be sworn for her ^o Man else does; then why so coy? I do believe
you have kept (...) Commendations.


Town. That Is no matter, I took them from better Friends then; but to the
business, Sir, and then dismiss me.


Rose. You're at the business now; I Am Rose her self.


Town. The Devil thou art; but now I look on thee better, it is thee; but what
Gallant was he with you, Rose? I Am afraid you are pre-ingaged.


Rose. It was a Woman too; no mote of that, I Will tell you all anon: Why an't
you suricus, appoint the place to meet in for our Duel? I know you will Challenge
me.


Town. I, to a Bed, dear Rose; that, that is the place we will meet in.


Rose. Soft and fair, two words more to that bargain; your present business is
to take up Quarrels, for Mr. Merry's is ended I do believe by this; don't seem
to know me, not nothing of the frolic to my Lady, as you love me; she is here,
and Rashes Sister with her.

Exeunt.
Enter Muchland, Ruffle, Breef, and Fullam. Ruff. Upon my Honor all they say
is false, and you may think so by what they have done: Take beaten Rascals words,
they speak for fear.


Much. I would be glad to think so.


Ruff. And I Will convince you presently; lend me your Cudgel.

He goes to beat Fullam.
Full. What do you mean, Mr. Ruffle? As I Am a Gentleman, do what he could, I
never would confess.


Ruff. Then was it you that said it, Villain?


Breef. I must confess my frailty; it was I.


Ruff. Oh, was it so?

Beats him.
Breef. But he confirmed it too.


Ruff. Then he shall have it too.

Beats the other.
Full. Hold, hold, good Sir, hold.


Ruff. Did I then hire you to it?


Full. No, Sir, I say, and swore it too before.


Ruff. What say you, Rascal?


Breef. Truly I cannot tell; I think you did not.


Ruff. You see what Rogues are here.


Much. I Am satisfied, and therefore let them go.

Exeunt Fullam and Breef.
Ruff. What do you mean, Sir?

Muchland locks the Door.
Much. To end this matter now, and since these Rogues have placed a scandal on
you, wipe it off; come, to your Sword.


Ruff. Sir, I Am new Married, and will not fight to day.


Much. Oh, the multitude of several sorts of Cowards there are in the World!
Come, without more ado, confess your self one.


Ruff. Confess my self a Coward, that is pretty, in faith; have not you seen me
meet you in the Field, Fight you, beat these Rascals for traducing me, and yet
confess my selt a Coward, because I don't think it proper to fight on my
Wedding Day? A very modest proposition. No, Sir, I Would have you know, this is a
day of Joy, I have Married a Lady worth thousands, besides, for Beauty, Virtue,
and good Breeding, I Will defy you to match her between the Tower and
Westminster Hall. She it was, that hearing of our Quarrel, sent the Guard to
surprise us; and shall I wrong the Love of so Excellent a Lady for your humor?
Damme, Blood, you make me mad that you do.


Much. I wish I could see the effects of it, but not to spend time in words,
the case is this; either confess you hired those Fellows to come into the
Field, that you likewise told your Wife that now is, of the Quarrel on purpose
to be surpised, and that you are a Coward, and dare not fight. And all this to
be openly done before as many as I shall appoint to hear it, or prepare your
self to dye, for that must be your Fate or mine before we part this Room.


Ruff. Tell me, Sir, do you think you Act now like a Man of Honor -- Heavens,
how Men mistake themselves; would you place this upon a Man that you thought
durst fight? Tell me that, would you?


Much. No, Sir, I should not.


Ruff. there is it, and yet you hope to be counted a brave Man for this --
Damme, Blood, if I could not find in my heart to break my Resolution of not
Fighting to day, rather then suffer you to go away with it thus. But since my
word was past before for not fighting (and it is the greatest part of Honor to
keep that) I will humor you in the other: But, Sir, let it be done so, that it
may not grieve my Wife; and write down the words that I must say, that there
may be no new occasion for breach of Friendship between you and I.


Much. Well, Sir, I shall do it. Who waits there?

Opens the Door. Bring a Pen and Ink to the next Room.


Enter Rose. Rose. Sir, I have performed your Commands; the Gentleman is in
another Room.


Much. He shall soon see the occasion of my failing him.

Exit Muchland.
Ruff. Sir, your most obedient Servant, you are a Friend of Mr. Muchland's
here; upon my Life a worthy Man he is: He and I have been merry together this
Morning.


Rose. By the Guard that waits, I thought it had been otherways.


Ruff. You mean, you thought us fighting; but that hinders no mirth, Men of
Honor never fall out about that -- though I could tell you, as a Friend of
his, I was once desperately afraid I had killed him.


Rose. Why, did you Wound him, Sir?


Ruff. No, but I Will tell you, he stood upon his Guard, as't might be thus; and
to speak truth, would not budge one foot, I Will say that for him; I made a pass
or two, as't might be thus; he parryed, but I resolved to make an end on it
quickly, seeing some People coming, therefore I made a through pass, and run my
Sword to'th' hilts.


Rose. In what?


Ruff. In's shirt, it proved to be in's shirt; but I, Gad, I was upon flying,
if the Guard had not come and took us.


Rose. It seems there was no cause, having done him no hurt.


Ruff. I knew not that; but I Gad, he is your Friend, preserve him so, for there
breaths not a braver fellow, take that from me. But, Sir, upon your Honor
speak not a word of this, I know he will have you Spectator of a frolic we have
agreed on; it is that I will not have confidence to speak some words openly that
he shall write, but I Gad, let them be as bad as they will, I Will speak them, let
who will be by.


Enter Muchland. Much. There are the words, look them over, I Will tell you when
to speak them.


Ruff. Then if I do it not, take me and hang me.

Exeunt.
Enter Merry, Townlove, Honor, Betty, and Rash. Betty. Yes truly, Sir, the
Gentleman that brought you the Challenge gave me notice of it, and had I not
Reason to take the best care I could to prevent it?


Rash. They took care enough themselves, it seems.


Town. Faith, Rash, I had once as ill an Opinion of their proceedings as you,
but now I am fully satisfied in every particular.


Mer. I am glad I out-went you both in true considering, for you know it would
never out of my head, but that Muchland was all worth. Oh, the Excellent
Advantages Men have by Wine! it leaves a certain Spirit in ones head, like that
of Prophecy.


Rash. Like it indeed; Prophecy being a sort of madness, that fills the head,
and intoxicates the Understanding, making Men speak abundance of things they
neither believe themselves, nor any Body else, till something comes to pass by
chance that they seemed to foretell. And then oh, the wonder, as if they that
foretold what could not be prevented, were not altogether as useless Members
to a Commonwealth, as a sick Passenger at Sea is to a sinking Ship, when he
bellows out between Praying and Swearing; God, we are all lost.


Mer. Prithee leave, I Am for no Morals, or long-winded simelies. Here comes the
Lad I am for.

Enter Rose. One that understands his Glass, and makes himself and his Company
merry without detracting from his absent, or satirising on his present Friend.


Town. Well, our little Projecter, how go matters? I could for thy sake turn
Woodcock in the Play, and always be kissing.

Kisses Rose.
Rose. If you stop my mouth thus, how shall I tell what you would know: But are
you all agreed upon the matter?


Mer. Only Ned Rash has a little grumbling discontent toward you still.


Rose. I shall soon Cure that; come, you must go all of you to the Balcony, and
there you shall see what Heroes Mr. Muchland has been engaged withal this
Morning. And, Mr. Rash, if your Sister do not make Mr. Muchland and you, and I
too Friends, before we part, I Will be condemned to sing Fortune my Foe in a
Nunnery all days of my Life.


Town. In a Nunnery! What have you to do with a Nunnery?


Rose. You say right indeed, for if the bargain go on you wot on, I should have
little to do with a Nunnery, though I were condemned to wear Petticoats; but no
more of those mistakes, but away.

Exeunt.
Enter Muchland, Ruffle, Fullam, Breef, first Officer, and Guard. Ruff. Gad,
Mr. Muchland, the words are too severe, there is no enduring of them -- let me
leave out this Sentence: And like a Cowardly Son of a Whore as I am: Look you,
Sir, this is abusing of my Mother, and she had not the least hand in the
Quarrel. What say you, Sir, is not this Reason?


Full. Gad, Sir, I would sooner dye then say it.


Much. You Will sooner be hanged then dye, like a Cowardly Rascal as you are.


Full. You may say what you will, but there are them in Town know me for another
sort of Man I dare assure you.


Ruff. Then the Song, Mr. Muchland, you know that goes beyond the bargain.

Enter on one side all the Company, and Turnup. What, all them, and my own dear
Wife too. By Heavens I Will dye ten thousand Deaths before I Will do it. Your
Servant, Gentlemen; your Servant, Ladies. A merry Crash has happened between Mr.
Muchland and I; we are here Drolling one upon another: Gad, Mr. Muchland, if
you had not the ill Nature of all the Justices in your whole Country, you
would never urge me to it, I never will consent to read the Paper, and sing the
Song too, that is flat.


Much. Well, on condition, you will all of you sing, and Act the Song to the Life,
I am contented you shall only deliver the Paper to Mr. Rash, and confess it to
be all a truth.


Ruff. I Will do it, here is my hand on it; Mr. Rash is a worthy Gentleman, and
knows me well enough: Come down, come down, I and these Gentlemen are to sing
a mad Song to you.

Exeunt above.
Much. He that spares, either in kicking or cuffing, shall find me upon his
back with this.


Ruff. Damme, if either of you kick, or strike me hard, I Will swinge you when we
have done.

Aside To Full. and Breef.
Breef. I Will warrant you, Sir.


Full. I Will do as I see cause: Breef, have you a care of my Boil you had best,
or look to it.


Enter all below. Much. Sir, I hope this Gentleman has informed you with what
resentments I intended to repair my Reputation, which I looked upon as too
deeply wounded for your self to excuse my silence in it, and likewise by what
unlucky Accident I was prevented performing my appointment.


Rash. Sir, I Have no cause left to doubt in the least your Honor, and do confess
I was to blame in pressing you too far; for which I beg your pardon.


Much. Could I but hope this Ladies, you have mine.


Hon. Never fear it, Brother, we are both come thus far to be Married, if we
had your consent, for I confess I am loath to go into the Country, and leave
Mr. Merry unreclaim'd, for fear he should be occasion of some further Quarrel
between you two.


Much. What say you, Madam, will you make good her word?


Betty. I to my Brother, Sir, refer the matter.


Rash. Then you are his; take, Sir, this Bond of Friendship.


Much. A Chain so strong, I hope can never break. Sister, I wish you happy in
your Choice.


Ruff. Friends all, Friends all; why, this is fine in faith: Now, Muchland, hang
the Catch; come, pass it by.


Much. Not for the World: Come, the Wine there, and begin.


A Catch Sung by Ruffle, Breef, and Fullam: They in their turns, Drinking,
Kicking, and Cuffing one the other at the words to that purpose. Ruffle. WE are
Gallants of the Town;
Men of sprightly Breeding:
If Oaths will do it, we run them down,
But never come to Bleeding.

Chor. We measure Swords, appoint the place, and thither do repair too;
But Drink, Huff, Kick, Cuff; this is all we dare do.

Fullam. At Playhouse we do count it brave
To have the Masks Acquaintance;
Against Wit and Sense we always rave,
And called inspid Nonsense.

Chor. We measure Swords, appoint the place, and thither do repair too;
But Drink, Huff, Kick, Cuff; this is all we dare do.

Breef. In Coffee-House we Battles fight,
And censure men of Honor;
We swear that such a Ladies right,
And has a Clap upon her.

Chor. We measure Swords, appoint the place, and thither do repair too;
But Drink, Huff, Kick, Cuff; this is all we dare do.

Much. That Is done like Men of Valor.


Ruff. Nay, Gad, I defy him that can say I fear.


Turn. Now you are all Friends, know, the Guard I made use of to secure you,
are all Mr. Merry's Fiddles.


Much. I Am glad I did not know so much before, I should have broke their
Prison, or their pates.


Rose. My Guard are something a Kin to yours, Men very expert in handling their
Feet, if a Man may say so.


Mer. All this I see is a mere contrivance for a Dance; let us, without any more
ado, have it then.

Dance.
Town. Come, Gallants, you think your business is done, but where is Rose's
thanks?


Mer. Rose, I, Gad, I never dreamed o'that; faith, Rose, thou and I Will empty a
Bottle sometimes when thy Mistress is in Bed, since you are so good at Drinking.


Town. No, good Sir, Rose is to set up in a better Employment; for now Ruffle
has got my Old Mistress, Rose shall succeed in her place.


Ruff. I got his Mistress, don't believe him, Dear, I never kept Miss in my
Life.


Town. Sir, it is even so, but I give her to you freely; she was true to me, and
may prove so to you.


Ruff. How, Married to a Wench.


Full. Joy be with you, Valiant Sir; ha, ha.


Breef. Send you comfort of your Virtuous Lady; ha, ha.


Ruff. Shall these Rogues laugh they cheated me of above threescore pounds to
Night already? Make them repay me that sum, I Will forgive all.


Much. We Will Dine together, and they shall pay the Reckoning.


Breef. Good Sir, las, it is all we have to trust to.


Ruff. No grumbling, Rascals, if you do, I Will swinge you: But, Gentlemen, be
tender of my Honor, and I Will take all; say nothing, I Will to my Estate in the
Country, where I shall pass for as Valiant a Squire, and my Wife for as
Virtuous a Lady as the best there.


Town. Well resolved on, and I assure you I Will not Visit your Lady when you are
from Home, Rose and I will keep close together.


Hon. But, Rose, I hope you don't mean to take such courses.


Rose. No, Madam, you may be sure on it, Mr. Townlove's merry, and talks wildly,
that is all; if he and I keep Company, it shall be merely in Friendship; I would
not for the World lose my Reputation with him, I hope you have all better
thoughts of me.


Town. No, Rose, I Will warrant them thee and I will secure one another
Reputations.

For want of Custom wonder does produce,

And ills do lose that Name by frequent use.


EPILOGUE.
POets we justly may Wit's Babbles call;
For they to almost nothing venture all.
They with each Play their Reputations stake,
And ten to one, if good, it does not take.
In those that do, that part you only praise,
Which Comedians mimickry does raise;
So he, and not the Poet, gets the Bays.
But if by Chance some Writer does Extort
From the World's Vogue a pretty good Report,
It Is so allayed by but why that or this,
That he might justly wish 'twas none of his.
Hard Fate! Have they alone! All men beside
Some Curtain still, their faults to hide.
Statesmen their Errors on their Agents lay;
It Is Chance of War makes Soldiers lose a Day:
And your Physicians shame Death wipes away;
But every Fool finds faults in every Play.
Things being so, it cannot be denied,
But to be Poet is a man's blind side.
This is the cause why Active times produce
The fewest Writers for the Stages Use.
The World is busy now; and some dare say
We have not seen of late one good New Play.
And such believe Shakespeare, long since in's Grave,
In Choicest Lybraries a place will have.
When not a modern Play will escape the fire:
I beg their pardons who themselves admire.
Not but this Age has many men as Wise,
But wisely they this begging Art despise.
And two to one, was he alive this Day,
He Would have more wit, then e're to write a Play.
His Fruitful Brain would find Employment now,
Which Times of drowsy Peace did not allow;
Then that you write not too, pray think your Eat,
Good lucky Poets, of your Sword and State:
And be not too severe on those that do,
For all you Play has it is Spectators too.
Amongst which there is some are Fools enough to blame
Our present War, the greatest Scene of Fame.
The best contrived, best lead, and bravest fought
Of all, in which England has Glory sought.
Yet if Cross Winds, or Storms do make you miss
One Action, strait Fanatic Critics hiss.
An Envious sort of Sots, like ours in the Pit;
Who having none, still rail at all have Wit.
Our Author, though, is safe, and fears them not,
His Play pretends neither to Wit nor Plot;
But should you Damn it with your utmost spite,
When next he is idle, he again will Write.
FINIS.

