SQVARE-CAPS TURNED INTO ROVND-HEADS OR THE BISHOPS VINDICATION, AND THE
BROWNISTS CONVICTION.

Being a Dialogue between Time, and Opinion: Showing the folly of the one, and
the worthiness of the other.

By H. P.

Time. Opinion.


Time does Opinion call unto account,
Who turns the Bishops down and Roundheads mount:
Upon Her lofty Wheel their Noddels are;
But Her Camelian feeds on His air.
LONDON, Printed for I. Gyles, and G. Lindsey, 1642.

MVTANT QVADRATA ROTVNDIS. Square Caps are turned into Roundheads
Time. Now tell me Opinion, how long is it since you were at Amsterdam, and how
long have you been in England?


Opinion. Ick hebbe niet cot Amsterdam ghew Desen three yaren.


Time. But you can speak English if you list.,


Op. Ya vader ick habbeghewont int huys van even English predicant even hyhet
Meester But-rush.


Ti. Come leave your Dutch and speak plain Egnglish, that Time may well
understand you, you were borne at Amsterdam were you not?


Op. No verily and indeed I was born at Swine drecht a Dorpa near to Dordrecht
in Holland bordering upon Zealand, but my Father was an Englishman borne in
London, about Cateatenstreete, but my Mother was a Dutchwoman, borne in
Amsterdam: of the family of the Fukers.


Ti. But what occasion had you to come over into England, and what employment
have you had since your coming?


Op. I came (to tell you true) to see what entertainment I could find among my
friends, when walking up and down I was taken for a Vagrant and clap't into
Brid-well; for some outlandish Doctrine I taught and maintained.


Ti. There I believe you first learned to turn the Wheel.


Op. I did indeed, for among other work I was forced to spin Pack-thred.


Ti. I heard as much, for that reason (it may be) you are content to follow Your
old employment, by turning about this Wheel, an Emblem of the Revolution and
Change of these Present times to see, if they may be brought to a better pass
and State then they are: I am He, who is every where complaind off, as if it
were long of me, they are in so bad a case as they are: Alas! I am old, and
ending with the world, and desire no Innovation either in Church or
Commonwealth.


Op. It may be (Father) one of your years may dote, you may want your sight to
see how the world goes round, I am sure you are either blind or willingly wink
at a number of abuses.


Ti. I want my sight to see how the world goes? had not I my being with the
first Moover? am not I Primi Mobilis per successionem numerus. Neither do I
wink at any thing, for I would amend all were it in my power.


Op. Truly Father it is generally imagined, that it is long of you, that the
world is at this stay as it is at, but if it please you to be ruled by me, all
abuses shall be reformd and amended.


Ti. Opinion, I am compelled so to do against my will, since all the world is
led and ruled by Opinion.


Op. Indeed since my coming over from beyond the Seas into England, I have
gotten so strong a Party on my side, that I shall not nay I will not be crushed
or kept down by the contrary Party.


Ti. So it seems: because you uphold your Roundheads, and keep them aloft:
but the Square Caps of the Reverend Bishops You cast under to the bottom.


Op. Reverend Bishops? marry come up, Bishops Sir Reverence; you should say.


Ti. Fie Opinion now you speak like your self; distractedly and out of an
ignorant malice, as the rest of your Faction do: who knowing themselves guilty
of neither wit or learning, fiting so High and Sacred a Calling, Bark at them
as Dogs do at the Moon, who envy her luster and because she being so far
above them they cannot come at her


Op. I have heard that every five hundred years, there is a manifest change and
alteration as well in Church, as Commonwealth: so that this change of these
present Times is not long of me, but foreseen and determined by the Divine
Providence.

Opinion you are (as you were ever) out of the way and beside your Byas,
because God has foreseen the wickedness and Factions of these Times, has he
therefore determined them, is this your Amsterdam Teaching?


Op. Yes indeed is it, and true Doctrine.


Ti. God foresees the most horrible Sins that are or shall be committed to the
end of the world, does He therefore determine and make Himself the Author of
them.


Op Why not?


T. Come about with your Wheel cast your Roundheads below, and give the
square-caps leave to take place aloft your Wheel; else as sure as my name is
Time, I will shortly have them above do what Opinion and her partners can.


Op. Yes ^ I am weary of my task you may and I believe you will in the mean
while I must say, as K. James wrote upon his sumpture Clothes coming after he
was proclaimed King out of Scotland into England Ie a pris mon temps I have
taken my Time; I was not thought on but despised both in City and Country
till of late, now who but I both in the City and Country, there is hardly a
shop in the Ci^ie but I can there take upon trust, whatsoever I or my friends
want and they take upon trust, whatsoever they are taught by us in the Pulpit
be it trve or false.


Ti Why Opinion do you make no conscience amongst you of what you teach (as you
call it?)


Op. Yes, as much as they do in the slae of their commodities to the
unfaithful. So I believe, hence it is that so many the better to color or
cover their cheating, follow you to your Coventickles, to woods, Barns,
Moore-feild al lies and the like places, and having once gott^n the name of
Separatists they can command belief, Reverence, Money, Meat Drink, new suits
of apparel, the solace of a Sister and what

Come I pray you leave this vain and Idle discourse which is ordinarily laid
to our charge among the profane sort your followers (I mean) whom the world
calls Time-servers Windmilles and weather-cocks who with every puff of a
great man's Breath, or finger of alteration, will incline them, selves to what
quarter you will; but I pray you Father Time why are Roundheads become more
odious now in the world then Square caps, all heads are round by nature, Square
Caps with their Cockscombes on the top, came from Beastly Base and Roguish
Rome; and become the head as well as Horns do some of my followers: I was
once taught these verses, when I lived with a Zealous Teacher. Cum Caput
humanum fecit natura rotundum
Cur quadrata iuben^ pilea pontifices.
Since Nature has made man's head round to stand,
Why then do Bishops these square caps command?



Ti. Square caps upon my knowledge were long before Opinion was borne, and tell
your round-headed sectaries their corners are an Emleme of the four parts or
quarters of the world, into which Christian Bishops and ministers are commanded
to breach the Gospel, Ite praedicate ad omnes gentes etc. you know who said,
then good Opinion, have a good Opinion of square Caps; I believe they never did
you hurt except in the high Commission, or in the spiritual Court, you know
about what.


Op. I am not fo much offended with the Caps as with them that wear them, your
Lordly Bishops who never did good in Church or commonwealth.


Ti. Never did good, Opinion? it is trve if you mean some of your own Clergy,
who have cast of their leather doublets and aprons and put themselves into long
Cassocks with grave Silk girdles hanging to the knees. Opinion you are but a
novice, and are new come from your sliding upon the Ice among Mariners boys,
and upon Soldiers your frozen Crafts, and Rivers about Amsterdam and Harlem,
but since the Parliament began: but let that pass, our Bishops have done more
good then you, and your abbettors will ever do so long as the world stands.


Op. It may be some of them long ago have been good and done good but very few
in England.


Ti. No? Who have built more Colleges in our Famous Universities more
Churches, Hospitalls etc. in any part of Europe, then our Bishops have done in
England?


Op. I have heard some of your Bishops have pulled down Colleges, and
Religious Houses, as you call them: but I never heard of any that built them.


Ti. I pray you what Bishop pulled down any? yet I think I know more Opinion
then you do, neither is Time ignorant of any thing that has bine done, I do
but only try you to see what you can say.


O. Did not your great Gor-bellied Cardinal Wolsey pull down forty houses of
Religion, to found His College in Oxford? which He left unfinished.


Ti. He had finished it, if he had lived, and made it one of ^he fairest
Colleges of the world.

But since you speak of Oxford and him, let me tell you what Bishops have done
in Oxferd and Cambridge.

William Durham was a Bish^p who endowed University College with large
Possessions, having none before. Anno. Dom. 1217:

Walter de Merton was B. of Rochester, Lord Chancelour of England, and
Counselor to K. H^n. 3. and Ed. 1. when He founded Merton College.

Exeter Coll. was founded by 2 succeeding B. of the same See (viz) Walter
Stapleton, and Edmond Stafford, brother to Ralph Earl Stafford in the year
1035.

W. Wikham B. of Winchester, Principal Secretary to Ed. 3. L. high Treasurer
and Chancellor of England, builded that complete House New Coll.

Rich. Fleming, who died B. of Lincoln, also founded Lincoln Coll. in Oxford.

Henry Chichley B. of Cant. and Cardinal of St. Eusebius fonuded All-Soles
Coll. Anno Heny 6. 15.

And it is worthy to be noted how this Henry Chichleys Father being a very
poor man dwelling at Higham Ferrers in NORTHAMTON Shire (where this Chichley
was borne) had two sons whom being not able to keep at home, sent them into
the wide world to seek their fortune; one of which proved Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the other Lord Mayor of London both at one time. William
Patten, alias de Wainflet in Lincolnshire, B. of Winch^ster and Lord
Chancelour, and England, founded that absolute Coll: dedicated to Saint Marie
Magdalen which like Euxine Sea never ebbes nor flows with more fellows or
Scholars then the founder gave and left at the first.

Brasen-Nose Col. was also founded by a Bishop one W. Smith B of Ely.

Corpus Christi by R Fox B of Exeter Bath, and Wells, Durham, and Winchester
(who was Godfather to King Henry the eight Anno 1516.

And Cardinnll Wolsey, whom you so vilify and disdain, had he lived, he had
perfected one of the most magnificent Colleges in the World, which he called
Cardinals College but King Henry taking the foundation upon himself, called
it Christ's Church.

Princes I must confess had a greater hand in the foundation of Colleges in
Cambridge, then Bishops yet these were not wanting there.

Peter House was Grounded by Hugh Balsham Bishop of Elie iTrnity-Hall by
William Bateman Bishop of Norwich.

Jesus College by Alcock B of Elie, and all these, Opinion wore square Caps,
what say you have they been so bad members of the common wealth as you and
your fellows would make them?

Nay I can nor must not smother in silence many pious and charitable acts of
Bishops of our own times; did not that good B. Witgi ft B of Canturburie found
a famous School and hosp^tall in Croidon

Did not B Abbot the like at Gilford in Surrey, where he was born, and was not
Saint John's in Oxford so repaird and beautified by this now Lord Bishop of
Canturburie, that it seems to have been new built by him, and beyond all the
rest what magnificent things has the now Archbishop of York done late Bishop
of Lincoln.


Op. I never heard of any thing he did.


Ti. No you were beyond Sea, or Opinion unborn, if you have not heard what a
bountiful benefactor he has been to the Church. Let me tell you he much
repaired and beautified the Church of Westminster where he is Deane, he
repaired with a great charge the Bishop, P^llace of Lincolns where he intended
a goodly Library, having laid out a great sum of money to buy books, besides
provided timber, which but for his troubles he had finished, as also a school
and hospital in Wales where he was bor^ he builded and gave a goodly library
to Saint John's in Cambridge, and another in Westminster; he beautified
Lincoln Coll. Chapel in Oxford, paveing it with Marble, making the D^skes
and Seats of Cedar whersoever he was Parson in the Country, he gave
annuities to the poor, he gave Schollerships to W^stminster, and I believe
Schollerships and Fellowships to Saint John's in Cambridge, but the Masterpiece
of his bounty I must conceal, let it suffize that you are utterly deceived in
the name of a Bishop, and ignorant of the good deeds they have done.


Opin. If it be as you say, I shall have a better conceit of them then I had;
but in the mean time I am carried, with violence in the throng I can do no
other then I do.


Time. Well Opinion, Omnia tempus habent; and my comfort is this, Nullum
violentum diuturnum: Nothing violent lasts long. So fare you well, but be sure
to keep a good tongue in your head.


Op. I warrant you Father.


FINIS

