Nevil Payn's LETTER, And some Other LETTERS That concern the Subject of his
LETTER. With SHORT NOTES on them; For the Clearer Information of the Members of
PARLIAMENT: In Order to Nevil Payn's Trial.

LICENSED, July 1. 1693. Edw. Cook.

Printed at Edinburgh, by Order of Parliament: And Reprinted at London for
Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1693.

Nevil Payn's LETTER, etc.
THE following Letters are marked by the Alphabet for Distinctions sake. The
Letter A had enclosed in it the Letters B and C. The Secretary produced in
Parliament the Original Letter C, but not the Originals of A and B, having left
them at London, but now he has got them. The Letter A with the other two in it
were taken at, or going from London to France, by the way of Holland; it was
directed to Monsieur Vincent Nerieux Merchant in Roterdam, with these words
under, Mrs. van den Anchore. It is known that this is an ordinary Direction for
such sort of Letters from London to Paris, which seem to be the usual
Conveyance for Scots Letters too. As appears by the Duke of Gordon and Dr.
Cockburn's Papers now in the Advocate's hands.

A.
It Is plain enough, that this Letter was written from London.
I Have had none from you since the 5 th. of this Instant, your style; so that
my Pain.
Friend grows very impatient; but I have sent your last with that of Melfort's
Letter to Pain was delivered by Mr. James Smith, Son to Mrs. Smith.
David's, and by this time I suppose he is satisfied; for I am informed all
mine came safe to him. But I have sent you his to let you see what he says in
his Phanatick Humor, for I know he is troubled he has no Answers for his
Friends here, that write to him constantly by me; and I am assured they take it
very ill, and think him or me in fault that sent them. Therefore I earnestly
beg of you to solicit David to say something, for they are good Friends of
your The late King.
Brothers, and not to be slighted. My old Who she is, is no Mystery.
Countess also writ you her self, but I never heard whether you received it,
and every week I have her duty to your Brother and Queen.
Sister, and Service to you; and always says, she lives no longer than she
hears your good Family is in Health; and I am indeed very much concerned lest I
hear you are ill since your last, in which you assure of the pain in your head,
which grieves me to the heart: For I prefer it before my own. Therefore for
God's sake let me have the satisfaction of hearing from you as often as you
can: I have not failed a Post since my Friend went, and all double. I have very
little News, but This Paragraph, and the enclosed Letters, show the time in
which this Letter was written, tho it be not dated.
one thing I cannot omit to tell you, that one Pain a mad Jacobite, is removed
to the Castle of Stirling, and that the Lord Seaforth is to be tried for his
life, and many more such as these are likely to have their due reward. As to
our Parliament, Seymore made a Speech, and told them of the House, That the
French was making great Preparation, which must be provided against, both with
a Fleet and Money; but this is thought was only to press for raising Money; so
that I think, to comfort you, we have no Because the Fleet only, and not Money
alone, could hinder a Descent in Scotland.
fears of that. Dear Aunt I have sent you That is the Letter C, which is from
the Nephew Mr. Pain, whose Letter is to his Aunt too.
one of Nephews, and beg you to do what you can for one in his Circumstances;
for I cannot choose but love him. I am told that Mrs. It appears elsewhere who
Mrs. Mowet is, and that it is a man, and no mean man.
Mowet cannot be long out of the That is, in Prison; see the beginning of the
Letter C.
Doctor's hands, so very ill she is. But more of this from my That is one under
the Name of Gray the Writer of the Letter B, and of the Letter D and E,
apparently an Englishman.
Friend that I hope will be here ere this come to your hands, if his health
will permit; so that if you write, yours will meet him in Town, if it please
God, to whom I resign all my Friends and Affairs: I was to see for Answer of
Mr. Iske for whom I left the Letter of Money Business, to get Answer, but could
not light of him, but he had your Letter, but I will by the next Post; Pardon
this long Scroll, and give me leave to continue my humble Thanks, and be
honored with the Title of, Madam, your most Grateful, Humble Servant, That is
Mary Brown, as will appear by the Cover to to the Letters D and E.
Mary B.

There is found among Mrs. Smith's Papers, a Letter dated the 4th-of February,
the Direction of it is torn, but so much remains -- Son to the -- Robert
Jameson in Edinburgh. It is written by the same Hand with the Letter A, and
Signed M. B. instead of Mary B. It is plain, that this M. B. is at London, and
manages the Correspondence betwixt Aunt at Paris, and Nephew Pain here, with
the assistance of Mrs. Smith. The Letter is thus; the Blanks are Words that
cannot be read.

Loving Mother, Feb. 4.
I Have this day by a Honest fast Friend sent you 50 Drams of the best Balm of
Gilead that I could get, you will certainly have it, do not you trouble your
self for a day, I have taken care you should have no trouble, for God's sake
say what you can to my Sick Friend for me, for I am so oppressed that I cannot
write to her, but pray let her send me a Note under her hand at the Receipt of
her Present, and then I shall have as much more when (...) is satisfied, but
the Note must be made to me, for I had Orders; this is desired, and pray let
her thank Mr. Friend which said little of it to me, but my Aunt assured me he
did so much in it to my Aunt's Brother and David, that they could refuse no
longer, for he was very plain with them, and I find is so in all their Affairs,
which I think is Just. I saw one that came from my Aunt's Brother this Week,
but I hear nothing of my poor Brother, which distracts me, but they are all
well and in good heart, but no more; but to his Business, I hear sad News of
Sick No doubt the late Archbishop of Glasgow, who being then Prisoner in the
Castle of Edinburg, had leave from the King to retire to Holland.
Friend, that the Doctors say she must change the Air, I wonder you say nothing
of it, since Lady L. tells all: Pray let me know the (...) let not Mr. L. know
I tell you (...) Pray let me hear from you, by which you will oblige

your Grateful Daughter and Obliged Friend for ever whilst M. B.
The back of this Letter being torn, there appears only -- Son to the -- --
Robert Jameson in Edinburgh.




The Secretary was obliged at London to restore the Originals of the Letters D
and E, of which he produced the Copies in Parliament; but when he had them,
they appeared to him to be written by the same Hand with the Letter B, (of which
he has the Original); And therefore by one under the Name of Gray, for so the
Letter D is signed, it is evident by the Letters themselves that this Gray is
an Englishman, and the Concerter and Manager of the whole Business; it seems he
was lurking in the North of England when he wrote the Letters B, D, E, for they
are dated the 4th and 25th of December, that is on Sundays, which is the day
after the Post-day at Edinburgh, which is Saturday. It is evident by the Letter
B that he was going into Scotland; and by the Letters D and E that he actually
went to Scotland. It is otherwise known that an Englishman of such a Character
came to Edinburgh about the time here spoke of, and that he kept no mean
Company there.

B.
December 4.
I Had yours this morning, with That is, it seems one to himself.
one to Mr. Gray, I am strangely amazed I have none from your It is plain the
Letter has been written to Mary Brown.
Aunt, I cannot find the meaning on it, and never man had more need of Comfort
than my self at this time; I have Letters from your That is, Mrs. Smith, Mary
Brown's loving Mother.
Mother and Macgill my Lord Melfort's Page confesses that he brought Letters
from his Master to two Noblemen under the Name of Balfour: Mrs. Ford owns that
she received the Letters from him, and delivered them to Mrs. Smith who
absconds. It seems too otherwise clear enough who Balfour is, and that he and
Mrs. Mowet are one.
Balfour which would strike That is the News mentioned in the Letter A. and the
putting in of the new Agents mentioned in the Letter C. to wit, the Advocate
and Justice Clerk, which was done in the end of Mr. Jonstoun's Month, a Week or
two before the date of this Letter.
Terror into any man, but I Am resolved what will be fate, to enter into that
Cursed That is Scotland, which shows he was then in the North of England.
Country, and put my luck to the last trial. I do not know what can be the
meaning of those I wish so well to teaze me at such a distance, it shall not
break the Respect I have for those I Am obliged to. Your Friends favoring me at
this distance, and so little Merit of mine, all Obligations being on that side,
makes me the unhappiest man in the World, I only wish it were in my power, my
Life should not be too dear a Sacrifice. You may assure your self I am ever
your Servant, and you tell me you have not seen my Wife, nor heard from her
Brother, it is no matter, I care not how few you see of my Acquaintance, and
pray tell all I am still in That is in London.
Town. Be sure you write to your and my That is their common Aunt at Paris.
Complaint that she may be sensible how I resent not hearing from her, and that
I do not altogether deserve ill usage after the Charges I have undergone, and
the Hazards I have risqu'd for their sakes; once more I am for ever yours.

C.
December 3. 1692.
I Am forced in ill for want of better Paper Pain writes to the same Aunt.
dearest Aunt to let you know that I am obliged to Change That is, change his
open Prison of Blackness for close Prison in Stirling Castle. The King had
ordered this on the 14th of November. The Councils Order is on the 29th, and
was given out on the 1st of December, two days before the date of this Letter,
he was actually sent to Stirling on the 6th.
my bad Lodging for worse, being relapsed into my old He had been close
Prisoner before in Edinburg Castle.
Distemper again, my Physicians being resolved not to let any Breathing visit
me till it please God to restore me to my perfect Health, they alleging that
my keeping too much Company does great mischief. All my Consolation in this
miserable Condition is, that Mrs. This Name is in several other Letters.
Friend is just come into the Neighborhood; and though I fear I shall not be
so happy to see her, yet my Dearest Cousin, I doubt not, will do it speedily:
For so it is contrived to be by my dear and diligent Friend's Negotiation, who
is the very Life and Vigor of all your The late King.
Brother's Affairs here, and the prop of his Family, running, going, and
spending her self to the last penny in his Service. And but for here is in the
first place, and Mrs. Mowat's in the second, your poor He himself, for he
writes to his Aunt.
Nephew might have perished long ere this for mere It Is known they neglected to
send him money.
want, to no great Credit no more than Advantage of your Brother; for tho he
may have many more able, he has not a faithfuller Servant in the World. Oh His
Phanatick Humor, in Letter A.
God! how can he be so despised amongst his Relations, when their Enemies
consider him so much, and all their honest Acquaintance that knew him, have
some esteem at least for him. This is all I will, and less I cannot say, for
all the strange regardless usage he has met withal from It Is known that in the
late Reign Melfort was his Enemy.
David; and let it stand as it does, since Mrs. Mowat This word is thus spelled
in other Papers of Payn's Handwriting, lately seized in his Chamber.
Wrights me word she and Mrs. Mowet and Melfort begin to be reconciled, and so
Pain hopes to be reconciled with Melfort too. It Is plain Mowet is a man, and a
man of Note.
him begin to understand one another better, and are like to be perfect
Friends, which for your Brother's sake I hope will continue real on that side,
as I am sure it is on this. She and Mowet and Little-John here, are Balfour and
Little-John in Letters D. E. and their reconciliation there as here, is the
foundation of all. Its known who among the disaffected Party were reconciled
this last Winter.
Littlejohn has had a meeting too, where all things have been so explained
between them, that I hope will produce a lasting Concurrence in diligence for
your Brother's Service, to which sole end all my Endeavors therein have
tended; and now I assure you See in Letter E. I thank God, etc.
all things here are in perfect order for bringing on the That is the Invasion,
see trade Letter E.
Trial, as speedily as your Brother pleases, and the sooner the better I am
sure, for his The King. The Commissions for the new Advocate and Justice Clerk
were signed on the 28 th. of November, that is six days before the date of this
Letter.
Adversary is very diligent in searching out new Agents, that are like to be
more able and faithful to him, than those he has hitherto employed; and I
assure you succeeds extremely in his design, and has in a manner united all the
Presbyterians. It Is known that by the Changes made in the Spring before, they
were somewhat cooled in their zeal, which this new change revived again.
Mechanics, by this means to be entirely his, so the Cause may grow worse, but
cannot mend by delay of the Trial. And as It seems he is answering Letters.
for Compositions and Bargains with particulars, it is of little or no
importance, since men's several Interests and Designs are so different, that
they are impossible to be reconciled before the Restoration.
Cause be ended, and he walk the Exchange again. In the mean time care must be
had that his The known Cant for a Declaration.
Letters of Attorney be fairly and fully drawn, as methinks is easy to be done;
and I would have sent a Draught as I told you in my last, but that I cannot
with all my Diligence procure a Copy of the last to make a true Judgment why it
is so universally cried out upon by those of the Creditors have seen it. But
now I must to To close Prison, and so have no more an opportunity to tamper.
Bed, and mind no more Business perhaps while I live, but yet cannot die an
honest man, if I do not with all the Earnestness of my The Word Sole for Soul
is written so too in the Papers that were seized in his Chamber.
Sole recommend to your The late King, Queen, and Melfort.
Brother, The late King, Queen, and Melfort.
Sister, The late King, Queen, and Melfort.
and David, the diligent No doubt Mrs. Smith, who has all along taken care of
him, and is an active stirring Woman.
Gentlewoman I mentioned before, as the most useful Person beyond all
Comparison of any Body they have here. The four Persons mentioned may well be
supposed to be two Noblemen with the late Archbishop of Glasgow, and a Lord the
known Friend and Correspondent of the Nurse, that is, of the Countess of Errol,
now Governess to to the pretended Prince of Wales at Paris.
This Mrs. Mowat Littlejohn the sick Minister, and Nurses Friend, nay, all our
Relations here, not only continually allow, but by daily Proofs will testify.
This makes me beg, that since there is the That is, Sir James Rochied,
Town Clerk of Edinburgh, who died about a week before the Date of this Letter.
Clerk of the Town she Mrs. Smith lives in Edinburgh.
lives in is newly dead, the Place may be procured for her Mr. Patrick Smith
Advocate, who absconded.
Husband or Mr. James Smith her Son.
Son, It appears not to whom the late K. James was to write, but the Magistracy
only can put in the Clerk. The standing Magistracy was then under Process, and
in a few days after thrown out: The Letter then was to come to those who could
influence the new intended Magistracy.
a Line from your Brother does it, and I am very sure it is impossible for him
to employ his Pen more The Town-Clerk's Place is one of the most beneficial
Places in the Kingdom, and is during Life.
deservedly; the Motion I assure you comes not in the least from her, she being
the most disinterest Creature breathing, but was of her own accord proposed by
Mrs. Mowat, who also said she would write to secure the Favor for fear of
somebodies It is evident the late King's Friends here were in Factions amongst
themselves about the disposing of the Clerk's Place, and that Pain finding his
Party not strong enough to carry it for his Friend, would have Assistance from
France, and would have it early, lest some other Pretenders should worst him
there also.
interposing between your Brother and David, to prevent so just a Request in
her behalf as this is. For God's sake propose it earnestly in Mrs. Mowet's and
my Name, to your Brother and David, and interest too therein your That is, the
late Queen, see incomparable Lady, in Letter E.
excellent Sister, and if ever I was so happy to do or endeavor any thing was
It Is known that in the late Reign the Queen reckoned her self obliged to Pain,
and protected him.
acceptable to her, may her Memory thereof plead for me in this Request. Dear
Aunt, lay all nice or timorous Reserves by, and press it home as an honest
Matter, Melfort and the Countess of Errol.
and the most earnest Desire of your dutiful Nephew. Adieu. My Service to L.
David, and L. Nurse, join her in the matter I beseech you for her Friends sake
and mine.

It Is plain that the Letter C. is written by Mr. Pain, by the Declarations of
those that know his Handwriting, of which some have seen him write, and by
comparing it with other Letters and Papers written and signed by his own Hand,
nor does he deny it in private to his Friends.

To show that Pain is capable of the Folly of writing such a Letter, it can be
proved by the Persons Oaths to whom he spoke, and who told it at the time, that
on the 5 th of December, which was two days after the Date of his Letter, he
said to one whose Office as well as his Allegiance, obliged him to a Discovery
that an Invasion was designed. That the late King James had his Officers ready
both in England and Scotland, and that the Invasion would be certainly some
time in the Spring, and possibly sooner than was apprehended.

To show too that Pain was in use to borrow such Names as Aunt Mowet, Cosen,
or Brother, etc. There follows the beginning of a Letter of his written by his
own Hand, and in all Appearance to Madam Smith, for the Letter was found amonst
her Papers, it is dated the 26 th of February last.

Dear Madam,
I Had nothing to add, so only writ one Letter per Carrier last Week, and in
the enclosed to my Neice, you will perceive my Thoughts of Mrs. Mowets Father
should they not be your or hers, however send them forward, for they are easily
amended by her Letters to my Aunt then the Omission would be to my The late
King.
Cosen, whom it imports to know Matter of Fact truly, in so considerable a
Suit as his is. And for my own part, I hardly believe that generous L. L. makes
so right a guess at the Designs of that Man as his Daughter does; I wish I may
be deceived, etc. What is more is private Business.

The Letters D. and E. that follow were taken and came to the Secretaries hand
in the same manner with the former Letter A. B. C. They were under a Cover,
dated the 30 th of December, and written at London, directed to Monsieur
Vincent Nerieux as the other Cover, but under to Mr. Robert's. The Covert is
signed Mary Brown, and written by the same Hand with the former Cover; There is
nothing more material in the Cover, I have not heard from you, say she, these
two Mails, but this came to my Hand to Night, etc. -- to Night, the 30 th of
December, that is, on a Friday, the day on which the Post arrives from Scotland
and goes for Holland.

The enclosed Letter D. is directed for Mrs. Little, and dated the 25 th of
December, the day after the Post day at Edinburgh, as has been observed, and
written by the same Hand with that of Letter B.

D.
December 25th.
I Had a It seems Mrs. Little is my Lady Melfort, and that she writ the whole
Letter, to which this is an Answer, but that David her Husband dictated the
half of it.
Letter half from you and half David as I take it, tho written with your own
Hand. I sent Douglas seems to be Pain, see the beginning of the Letter A.
Douglas his from David, and am much obliged for my own. I have perfectly cured
the Disease between Balfour and little John, and shall work on till I find the
bottom of my The late King, the same with Brother in Payne's Letter, to Aunt,
and with Cousin in his other Letter to Madam Smith.
Cousens Affairs. I fancy I shall meet with things as I would wish, but I
wonder I hear not offer from you, Mr. A Earl well known.
Courtney writ to Mr. Tate, so did my Patient and her Son. I Am surprised there
should be no Return, 'twill discourage the like Practice, and I can assure you
Courtney is troubled at it, and with Reason, for he is both considerable and
has He has been sometime in Prison.
suffered much; so pray consider this, for the Example is of importance: as for
my self I am overwhelmed with Grief for the loss of poor Mrs. Probably an Earl
who died much about the time of this Letter.
Gypps, to whose Family I owe so much. I have writ several to David, and one to
Mr. Tate since I came here. I The reason of the Complaints here and elsewhere,
that Answers came not, seems to be Mogal, Melfort's Page his slowness, who was
long on his way from Paris with a great number of Letters.
beg where I make any Demand in mine, I may have either a condescending or a
refusing Answer. Pray let me know how my Undertakings are relished, and how I
stand with my Cousen; my Service to Balby. I am yours, Gray.

I wish you a merry Christmas.

The Leter E. enclosed in the Letter D. was directed for Mr. Ford, and of the
same Date and Handwriting. The Secretary declared that he had seen Letters
signed David Ford, written by my Lord Melfort's own Hand.

E.
December 25th.
I Had yours for James Balfour and Gray the Writer, as has been said, seems to
be in the North of England, and therefore upon the Receipt of Melfort's Letter
for Balfour, was obliged to send an Express to Balfour, who lives in Scotland.
sent it express to him, when the Return is made you shall have it with all
imaginable Care. I have, I thank God, perfectly cemented the Difference between
Balfour Pain, Mowet and little John.
and little John, having both their Engagements solemnly made mutually and with
a joint Pain lasting Concurrence.
Concurrance to Pain your Brothers Service.
serve my Cosen, to the last Last drop of their Blood.
Penny of their Stock, and their Opinions and Demands under their Hands, which
I thought the surest way of dealing: I Pain, all things here are in perfect
order.
thank God your Estate in these Parts is in very good condition, and the Of Men
of Interest or Courage.
Generality of all that have Stock, or dare any way venture, are resolved to
join you, so that An Invasion. Pain Trial.
Trade is in a fair way of succeeding here. I have now at this time a Messenger
with James Balfour, after whose return I shall make little stay in these Parts,
you shall know by me what you may rely on, where the The Cant is Trade Money,
and Pay-masters is Men and Officers.
Money shall be raised, and who the chief Pay-masters, which is all I can do.

I wonder you do not make Returns to Courtney, my Patient and her Son, since
they are considerable enough to deserve it, for God's sake give no cause of
Disgust, but let the Laborers be encouraged, since a bare acknowledgment of
their Service will do it.

A Correspondence betwixt London and the North.
Correspondence is desired from hence with Bristol, and it is left to my
management to settle, it is of too great Importance for me to take upon me;
therefore I humbly desire your Advice and my Cousen's Orders, whom I shall
trust with it at that place, and to whose Hands it shall be committed.

I was It Is plain he had been in Scotland.
received by James Balfour and little John with all the Demonstrations of
Friendship possible, placing an entire Trust in me as to the Managements of my
Cousens Affairs, and by all their Adherents, they express a very great sense of
your past Services, and Ability to serve my Cosen in the future: But you This
as well as his Style shows he is no Scotchman.
know the Humors of that Country People better than I.

Let me hear from you if you please, how I shall proceed at my return to
Bristol, I dare not appear here for their Creditors; for those that arrested my
Father, lie still in wait for me. My humble Duty to my Cosen and his
incomparable Lady, and let them know I shall never fail to serve them with my
Life and Fortune. Sir, I am very much your Servant, and sensible of the Favors
you have done me. Adieu.

The Secretary declared in Parliament, that he was obliged at London to restore
the Originals of the Letters D. and E. but that he was ready to attest upon
Oath, that the Copies produced were true Copies of the Letters shown to him as
Originals, and which he indeed believed to be Originals. And for a Confirmation
of the Truth both of the Originals and Copies of the Letters D. E. he offered
to have the following Matter of Fact verified upon Oath by the Persons
concerned who had indeed been examined by the Committee.

The Matter of Fact is this; Upon Information given at Edinburgh in December
last, that one Captain Maire, who has lived for the most part in England, was
going thither upon some unaccountable Design, four Officers were privately
ordered to catch him, and search him for Letters; which they accordingly did,
on the 26 th of December, seizing on him not far from the Borders: They found
on him only one Letter, which they read, and finding nothing in it but as they
imagined about Trade, they neither kept him, nor it. But it is plain that this
was the Answer which Gray's Express was to bring from Balfour, and consequently
the Answer to my Lord Melfort's Letter which Gray had received and sent to
Balfour, and which Answer Gray says should be sent to Melfort with all
imaginable Care: For the Letter which the Officers read was signed Balfour, and
directed to Gray, as they owned at their Return to Edinburgh before they or any
other could know the Import of their Error, and which they now owned again to
the Committee. The Time too quadrats. Gray says on the 25 th of December that
he had sent an Express to Balfour, which possibly he had sent the day before,
or sooner, or only the same day; but at which time soever he sent the Express
it is no matter, he says expressly in his Letter of the 25 th, I have now at this
time a Messenger with James Balfour; so the Answer might well be found with a
Bearer on the 26 th, which is confirmed too by the Character of Maire, who has
now fled for it.

To all this it is added, that it can be made appear by other Proofs than those
here mentioned, that there was a Design in the North this Winter. That one was
sent from the late King to manage and carry on that Design. That his
Instructions were consulted and concerted by those about the late King and the
French Ministry: That my Lord Melfort was the Original Procurer of these
Instructions. That the Nature of the Design, and the Character of the Person
employed, were of a piece, that is, equally bad; that the Person employed did
actually come to the North. That he is an English Man, that he returned to
London in the Spring, and in all probability will be found where ever the
Reconciler Gray is to be found.

Additions for clearing some Particulars in the preceding Letters.
AN Original Letter from Mr. Pain to Mrs. Smith, directed thus. May 19, 1692.
For the ever, by me Honored, Dear Mrs. Elizabeth Smith. And sealed with his
own Seal, and carrying a Token of Pains own Hair enclosed.

F.
Dear Madam, 19 May, 1692.
I Write this my last Letter perhaps with a Paper with my own flying Seal to
it; keep them together as a Memorandum from,

Your humble Servant, Hen. Pain.

Dear Madam, 29 May, 1692.
AFflict not your self for me, I am in the Providence of GOD be where I will.
Keep the last and this Note of mine, tho I die before I see you, for I must
confess I never knew so fast and true a Friend as your self to my Master, and
to me, for his sake: And should L. L. Mrs. Mowet, and all the rest of our
Friends forget it, which I am almost persuaded they can never do; yet my dear
Master and Mrs. will upon sight of you by my Aunt, who will be easily found
out, and this Note, esteem and reward you and yours for your Charity; I know
they will in spite of Envy: And should my Nephew forget all the Charity and
Good you have showed to me, and not take more Pains for you than himself, I
shall wish all Friendship from GOD and Man may fail him in his greatest
Distress. My Service to Bailie Chancellor. I am sure on extreme occasions he
will supply me with some Guinies; for he said in a Note of his, he had told
Doctor Mc Gie so. My Love, Duty and Service too to you, your good Sister,
Brother, my little Wife, James, Archibald, Mrs. Ann and Mrs. Lilias; as also to
your good Man, unknown, or any other I have forgot, is all I have time to say,
perhaps in these my last Lines: Tho I do not despair neither to prove my self
as true a Friend as ever was born before I die, being obliged to be so, if
living; and if dead, GOD witness against their Falsehood, that pretend to be my
Friends now that are not, so when I am no more Henry Pain to you and yours. My
Service to Lady Lockhart, whom I so esteem that it troubles me have not
answered her last Letter, with a thousand Thanks for the Favors of it, beg her
to believe one of my greatest Afflictions is to lose the opportunity of her
Favors, but my Prayers and good Wishes shall for ever attend her and hers. Oh
GOD! Thoughts oppress me, and I could with a great deal of Joy and Good Will
remember many more, but have not time; yet the honest Captain Mair, Patton,
Mrs. Hamiltoun and Family; Matthew of the same Name, must not be but saluted as
great Obligers of me: As to C. Mairs, tell him I hope he will revenge my
Quarrel upon some of the Blades, and be as great a Man by that and other his
Virtues, as he desires and truly merits. Tell Lord Balcaskie I wonder he forgot
where he had placed so many Obligations, but I wish both him and his well. To
Mr. Robert Blackwood my Service, and a thousand Thanks, tho that is not the
Payment he shall have if I live, but he, as all others, must trust me at this
time. The Alarm comes stronger and stronger; so, good Madam, forgive my haste,
and present my faithful Service to the Governor's Lady and Daughter, thanking
them for all Charities; I beg they would take into their Custody all my things
that are not theirs, or other Peoples, and to keep the Table, Stands, Glass and
Cabbinet, as a Memorandum of Gratitude for all their Charities, more I need not
say there: Spare no Money or Charges to let me hear from you as often as may
be, for that will be my only Comfort. My Service to Madam Mowet, and to the
excellent L. L. tell them I am no more troubled at this, than another would be
at losing a Bodle, except it be because I cannot frequently know how they and
other Friends do. To all the Sufferers for me I beg my Service and true
Friendship may be presented: For had they not been my Friends, they had never
been suspected for the Trick has been put upon me; and being so, no Mishap
shall ever make me be ungrateful for the Kindness designed to theirs and

Your humble Servant.

Follows the Beginning of another Original Letter from Mr. Pain to Mrs. Smith,
dated the 29 th of December, 1692.
G.
Dear Madam,
I Wish with all my Heart there were proper Words in the World, or that I had
them at least to express the Gratitude I owe to your Ladyship, for the
boundless Friendship you so constantly express to me a poor miserable Stranger,
so persecuted, that if God had not raised me such a charitable Friend as your
self, must have languish'd in this unprecedented Restraint, without knowing how
to cry for Help, and have been heard, except by that God himself, who has
inspired you with so much Charity as thus to be concerned for me. May it be His
blessed Will that I may live to show, I would be sufficiently Grateful if I
could: And in the mean time accept my worthless, tho hearty Thanks for all
their Favors, and most particularly, for giving Mr. James Smith these too
frequent Troubles; he can inform you fully of my present Condition: And by him
I have sent an Order for paying the next or any other Money may be sent for me
to your Ladyship, having also received by him from you Twenty Dollers.

Follows another Original Letter of Mr. Pains, wherein three several times the
word Write is spelled Wright.
H.
Honored Madam,
I Have had two Biles broke out upon me, on each Wrest one; and either they
occasioned a Fever, or a Fever occasioned them; so that it was impossible for
me to put Pen to Paper the last Week: But now, I thank God, I much better, tho
it is very painful to me to Wright: I had your good Cheece, and all you sent
per Carrier safe; and must desire you to send me five Pounds in by him this
time: I wish too you would be so kind to see the Governor from me, and thank
him for all his Favors which indeed are many: He promised to speak to Mr.
Johnstone from me; and as he finds him, I shall Wright, or not Wright to him.
For I have all my Lifetime avoided making Court to no purpose: Therefore beg
you would by any means get the Secretary inquired into, how he is instructed
concerning me: As also take Advice, whether I should apply to Parliament or no.
I protest I can hardly hold my Pen to thank you for all Favors; and to present
my Service to all Friends, therefore pardon me that I abruptly am forced to say,

Dear Madam, adieu.

Letter from the Lady Largo, 4 May, 1693.
PAyn's Letters is like to bring Trouble to severals, the poor Woman that took
care of him is like to suffer severely, she is forced to flee. I fear Coats
Trouble will be unavoidable, tho it is braved out as yet --

Another of hers, 9 May 1693.
NOw to come to your own private Concerns, I believe your Man Coats will be
imprisoned for his Bills, there is uncustomed Goods that will break him, and he
cannot go out of the way since all the Partners would suffer: so he must appear
every day on the Change, but God knows the Disquiet he suffers; for tho they do
not yet know the Goods to be his, yet being in their Hands, it is certain they
will know: And be the worse, he will not write to his Factor, for all Letters
are opened, and that may hazard the breaking of his Credit: But he begged that
I might tell Mr. Best his Condition, that so he might inform and advise --

Letter from London, taken upon the Lady Largo's Women, dated 9 May, 1693. --
I Am informed the Duke of Gordon is an Enemy to David, and speaks meanly of
our Relation, which I am unwilling to believe --

The Differences betwixt the Duke of Gordon and my Lord Melfort, and how ill
satisfied he is with the Usage he met with from the late King, is well known.

Pain in his Treatise in Answer to King's Book, written with his own Hand, and
seized in his Chamber, speaking of Sir Philem-O-Neal, says, a blacker and more
hellish Sole never animated a Human Body --

FINIS.

