THE THIRD PART OF THE SOVL'S DELIGHT, Collected and composed out of the works
of the GLORIOUS VIRGIN, St. TERESA OF JESUS (Author of the reformation of the
Holy Order of the B. V. MARY of the MOUNT CARMELL,) BY THE R. F. PAVL OF St.
VBALD, RELIGIOUS OF THE SAME ORDER, For the comfort of those that are more
spiritual, and have supernatural Prayer.

Sine intermissione. Orate Pray without intermission. 1. Thesal. 5. v. 16.
Meditatio cordis mei, in conspectu tuo semper.

The meditation of my heart, is always in thy sight;

psalm. 18. v. 15. IN ANTWARP By WILLIAM LESTEENS in Hoochstrat at the sign of
the Pelican. 1654.

THE THIRD PART Of the soul's delight, wherein is treated of supernatural
prayer, and several degrees thereof.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. A brief relation of supernatural Prayer.
1. Our Holy Mother S. Teresa in her life, and her other works, does declare,
and explicat this matter so well, that I need not speak much of it. But by
reason her works, or books cannot be had by every one, I will briefly say
somewhat of it, out of her, for the comfort, of pious souls, and to encourrage
many to go forward, in this Blessed exercise of mental prayer, seeing, to what
great happiness they may attain, by it.

2. For the better understanding of what is to be said, you must observe, that
as there are virtues, which we call, acquired; by reason they are gained by our
labor, industry, and practice; there be also virtues which we call infused,
that is; not gained by our industry, or labor, but are given us, by the mere
gift of God, which are certain habits, of virtues, that does cause us
promptly, and with facility to use and produce virtuous acts. these are infused
into the soul, she not knowing how, but that she finds by the effects, that it
is a special gift of God, which is suddenly, perceived, and to which, she
could not attain, with the labor of many years.

3. In like manner, there is prayer, acquired, or natural; and infused, or
supernatural; that natural, is gained by the long practice of it, as we get
other arts, or trades, by the daily use of them; but this infused, is in an
instant given unto us, by God, and it does cause us, to work in a more perfect
manner, and more knowingly, and more feelingly, we not knowing whence, or how
it came; and therefore it is called supernatural, being beyond our reach; but
sometime this prayer is given only for that present and perhaps, at other
times; yet it is not habitual, because it is not permanent, though
supernatural, and this does produce great, and good effects in the soul; but
the other, comes with a presence of God, so perfect, that going to prayer
(though you were in diverse occasions of business, instantly before; which
were sufficient to distract a man a whole day) suddenly set on your knees in
prayer, with a look on that presence of God, you are recollected and have
sufficient matter, to employ the powers in, so that the soul, is in a great
content, with the inward satisfaction, which she does feel; and this is not
without contemplation; and though the natural contemplation, delights the
mind, and adorneth the soul much; yet this other, gives more content and
satisfaction in an instant, then that is ever able to reach unto, with all
industry possible;

4. This is commonly given only to souls that are pure, and after long labor
(in the practice of the other prayer, mortification, of their senses, and
passions; and penance for their sins;) are weary of the world; and do loath
the vanities, and pleasures thereof; and do aspire to the love of God, and
true, perfection. these souls do now desire solitude, and do betake
themselves from all occasions, into the most secret places, they can find, fit
for their purpose; to give themselves to holy reading, prayer, and other
spiritual exercises, as the ancient saints, did, into the wilderness,
solitary and desert places, to be employed, and familiar with God alone.

5. For these places are most fit for recollection, and contemplation; and the
spirit of God, has this property, that it desires to be in private, employed
only in heavenly things, and such as are eternal. and this doubtless, was the
cause, that in former times when there were more saints, in the Church, then
now; the Abbayes, and monasteryes, were built in remote and solitary places,
far from the noise, of people; where all things, and even the very solitude
most, did move, and inuit them to recollection, and contemplation of divine
matters;

6. For every creature there, does teach us to know our selves, our creator,
and his perfections. for there, we shall see nothing but the heavens over us,
the earth under, the water ebbing, and flowing, going and coming, the trees,
herbs, and flowers, now springing, then fair, soon after, withering,
decaying, and fading away; the beasts feeding, and bellowing, the byrds flying,
and singing; all of them, in their kind manifesting and praising their common
Lord the creator of all things,

7. The earth when we look down, tells us, that we are dust, from it; and
must return to it again, be we never so powerful, or great; this, daily
experience does confirm. the water and its courses, shows the uncertainty,
mutability and inconstancy of the life, of man, and his vain desires. the
trees, flowers, and the rest, does show, how long a man is coming to
perfection, and on a sudden is gone by death; the beasts tell us, with all
others, that we are not, of our selves, but have a God, (who gave us our being)
infinite wise, and provident, preserving, and providing for all, in their own
kind; when we look upwards, we see the heavens, and they tell us, that there,
is the place and seat, of all felicity, and happiness, where God and his
Angels, in glory are resident, and that we are created, to enjoy God there;
and therefore ought to tend thither, and labor to compass it, by serving and
praising him, who has so created us, and provided for us, as to be with
himself in all joy, and glory, for all eternity; this good, and much more,
solitude affords, in those desert places, the soul then that is desirous of
perfection; and therefore does retire her self from occasions, and in that
solitude does give her self to more reading, and praying, to come to the more
perfect knowledge and feeling of God, that she may love and serve him, in a
better, and more eminent way, then ever before, must resolve to seek after God
alone, all other things whatsoever neglected, and forsaken; which the great God
of mercy, and goodness observing; and seeing how that poor soul, does labor
in prayer with her understanding, and will, to find him by love; and is often
tired, using great diligence herein; at length takes compassion upon her,
and eleuating her, spirit, does set her at rest, with great sweetness, in a
deep recollection, far, within her self, in a solitude, of an other kind;
where she enjoys so perfect a feeling of his presence within her self; that
she could never have imagined, it; which setleth all the powers in an instant,
and gives her admirable content, and inward satisfaction, far surpassing
what she Felt before. This solitude within Apo. cap. 5. v. 10. 1. Cor. 3. v.
16. and chap 6. v 19. 2. Cor. 6. v. 16.
her self, is the kingdom, and living temple, of God, and the seat of his
eternal wisdom; the manner of going thither, as is said', is by an inward
recollection, introuersion, or rather attraction of the powers, and senses, so
strongly, and suddenly, that the soul is in admiration, to see so sudden an
alteration, but how, or what it is, she knows not, but she does plainly
perceive, that she is so well employed, and her happiness so great, that she
would not be thence though she could, for all this world.

8. This recollection, is far different from that other, which we procure; of
which I spoake formerly; for that does consist in this, that we do seriously
by some pious consideration apply the powers to the presence of God, which we
do conceive, or frame inwardly, which gives great content, and causes them
easily forget outward things; yet the soul cannot but feel the powers working,
with the noise of words, and know that they are, in their own proper home, and
that by their industry, that recollection is procured; but this othet is not
procured, but suddenly given them, and they are more deeply recollected, and in
a greater solitude, so far within the soul, that they admire, how they came
thither; and they work so slowly and attentively that they do near forget,
both house, and home, with the present content. so that the one, is had, with
labor, and difficulty; the other is given them, with ease, and sweetness. the
one is acquired, or natural, this other infused, and supernatural, far
surpassing our capacity, and reach; more inward, with greater light,
sweetness, and satisfaction, and a deeper impression of truths, in the soul;
for it proceeds from a more noble of spring and beginning, which is God
himself; also it leaves, and disposes the soul richly, and well, for higher
matters; so that, in the first, we work, in our selves, that recollection: in
this other, we are the patient, and God works it in us; therefore he said by
his Holy Prophet, I will O see. 2. v. 14.
lead her into the solitude or wilderness, and there I will speak unto her
heart, he does not say, that she will go, but I will bring her thither; to
show, that the work, is his, and a gift, that the soul with all her labor,
and industry, could never reach unto, or compass; that she might be the more
grateful;

9. But you must understand, that as by degrees, we acquire morrall virtues, or
the perfection of natural prayer, so by degrees, or certain steps, (as we may
say,) God leads his beloved spouse, into this solitude, and Paradise of
delight, and first he gives her a continual presence of him self, which is
supernatural, with so efficatious and feeling a knowledge, that she cannot but
certainly believe that he is there within her, yet she perhaps takes no notice
of it, to know what it is, but the light is great, and the effects of his
presence, are very evident, this is not an imaginary presence, but a light that
brings a Majesty with it, which (with one look on it) procures in the soul,
most profound humility, and an admirable reuerentiall respect toward his
divine Majesty, out of which aspect, and respect; there follows a sweet
content, and many delightful tears; so that when the soul please, she may
look in, and presently find with whom to converse, without any labor; and
sufficient matter to keep her employed; and this is the first step, or degree;

10. The second step wherein he leads her forward, is, that recollection, of
which I spoake last; for the joy and content which proceeds from that
continual aspect, instantly recollecteth all the powers, though they were
never so much distracted before, and gives them so serious employment, that
they easily forget all outward objects, attending only, to what is there; which
brings the soul to have great freedom, having nothing to divert her
intention, nor attention; out of that recollection, and serious attention, the
light, and affection do increase, at which the powers, are in admiration, and
silence. (and this is the third degree) expecting to see what will be the
conclusion; for Here the soul seems truly to have found whom she loved,
Cant. 3. v. 4.
and sought for; and now does hold himfast, and will not let him go, as is
said in the canticle; they are here present to gether, very evidently, and
feelingly, there is no noise of words inwardly, but by affection, and love they
are united forcibly, resting sweetly in the bed of delight; and the very powers
have so great content and satisfaction, that they would not have the very body,
to move or breath, least (as our Holy Mother says) In her life chap. 15.
so great a good should be lost, or escape out of her hands; as if by that
means she could keep it, being the gift of God, depending only of his divine
will, and pleasure; who gives it when, to whom, and for as long time as he
thinks fitting, and it can be no longer; here the soul truly feels how great
the power of God is, and how sweet he is to those that love him

11. Hence his divine Majesty leads her forward into the depth of the inward
solitude, that is, to a higher and more eminent degree of prayer, where she may
more perfectly, and fully enjoy his presence, and receive greater blessings,
then in the former; this is called the sleep of the powers, for in the former,
they all were in great silence; and therefore it is called quiet prayer, or the
prayer of rest, by reason all the powers there do rest from their operations
or discoursing, are quiet, and in silence; out of which, the soul falling more
deeply in love, the delight and inward joy increases, so, as the powers are
in a manner overcome, and are beginning to loose them selves by degrees; as one
slumbering, and falling a sleep, that know's not what he does, or where he is;
this soul is like to one that lies a dijng, his forces failing by degrees,
until he grow so weak, and feeble, that he has scarce any sense, or feeling
of any thing, knows, no body, nor where he is, nor what he does, or is done
to him; yet is not dead, but betwixt both, as we may say; our Holy Mother
compares the soul in this degree, to one who is gone so far into a In her
life chap. 16.
deep water, that it reaches to the chin; go forward, he cannot; neither
does he know, how to turn back; neither would he, though he could, and thus
she betwixt both, begins in a manner to sink and fall a dijng; for the waters
of delight are now in such a height, that the powers are overcome, and the soul
loosing her forces and the use of her powers, and senses, is like to yeald the
Ghost; and thus with love and excess of joy, both she, and all the powers, are
not themselves, but sopited, and like to one (as is said) wholly senseless; and
the joy, and content, which is here had, by far exceeds that of the former
degree; yet his divine majesty, (with this not contented) to manifest his love
the more to this his beloved spouse, he brings her into a solitude, beyond
all that is created, (and this is the fourth step, or degree, called union)
where all are absorpt and drowned, over head, and ears; for she and all the
powers, are wholly united to God, and ingulfed in the depth of his divinity, and
she is become one and the same with God, quite forgetting all that is in
heaven, and earth, and the very body, which during the time of union, is void
of sense, and in a manner dead, neither does she know whether she be in the
body or no. in this union, she does not continue long, (perhaps half an hour,
or there about) before some of the powers do return to them selves, and
often, not finding the like content, (as one should say) in their own house,
they go willingly back again, and are drowned in the same depth, and burned
with the same fire; and in this coming, and going, some hours, may be spent;
but not in the total, or perfect union of all; for as our Holy Mother says,
it is so strong and forcible that our weak nature is not able to endure it
long; but by degrees his divine Majesty does enable the soul, and make her
capable for receiving those supernatural favors, and divine communications;

12. In this total union, the soul knows nothing as is said, but enjoys a
content and happiness, surpassing sense; yet, what she does enjoy; or how; she
understands not; but does remain absorpt, and united to the divine essence;
and thus she is become God's captive, tied and chayned fast, by love; and has
no power, to free her self, until his Majesty, be pleased to set her at
liberty; neither would she, though she could, esteeming it a greater captivity,
to be left to her own liberty, and far more liberty, to be in that sweet and
happy captivity; this is a greater and more eminent gift, and favor, then all
the former, it is a most blessed union, or conjunction; a most divine
transformation; a most happy death; a true deification; and most happy life in
God.

13. Note, that in that quiet prayer, the will only is united, and not the
other powers; in that other of the sleep of the powers, the will and the
powers are united, but so, that they are not perfectly united, or wholly lost;
but in this union, they are all wholly and perfectly lost united, and in gulfed
in the divine essence, and they are wholly dead, to all the world, drowned in
unspeakable delight; and the profit of the soul in this degree, is
inexplicable; her love is come to so great a height, that nothing, but the
enjoying of God wholly and perfectly, can give her content; Therefore his divine
Majesty does lead her to an other step, or degree, far beyond her self, and
all that has been said; eleuating her spirit, and opening her eyes, to set
and know, somewhat of his greatness, and the treasure of his celestial glory,
with visions and revelations of high matters, hidden and most profund
misteryes; and this is called and exstasy, or rapt, where she understands
clearly, and plainly, how all things created, are a mere shadow, and nothing,
compared with what she then does enjoy, and see in God; and this rapt, some
times, is so forcible, and vehement, that it does eleuat the very body with the
soul from the earth, and remains hanging in the air, and it does so
participat of the inward joy, and glory of the soul, that it does loath, to be
longer on earth, and feign would be invested with immortality, for all
eternity; and after these great raptes, commonly when the soul returns to her
self, the body as yet, and perhaps for some days, will not be able to use its
own functions; nor the powers, and senses, are themselves, but all are out of
order, for they are as yet drunk, with the memory of the glory, and delight,
which they enjoyed; and the introuersion, and application of the powers and
senses, is so great, that they cannot but with difficulty, attend as yet to any
outward things; and though they see and hear at those times, yet they neither
well see, nor know what they see, or hear; this soul now is no more her own,
but wholly belongs to God; for she has consigned her self, her will, and the
keys thereof, unto his divine Majesty. so that she lives not now, but Christ
does live in Gal. 2. v. 20.
her; in so much, that she myndeth nothing, but the honor, glory, and praise,
of God: and heartely desires, and labors, that all may love, and praise him
for ever: her virtues, are solid, and of great perfection; her love is so
excessive, that her life on earth, is a continual martyrdom, and death; by
reason of her forcible and languishing desire, to be dissolved, and be with her
beloved, Christ Jesus in glory for all Eternity.

14. Thus dear Christian soul, our Savior does reward, even in this mortal,
and miserable life, the little labor, and endeauours, of a loving soul; O who
would not labor, for so great a good? and willingly serve so good a Lord; O
who would not affect so true a lover, and dear a friend? o who would not freely
forsake all this world, for the love of so bountiful and Gracious a God? O
Blessed Lord, praised and exalted for ever, and ever may thou be, who art so
choice of us, and have prepared so great happiness for such worms of the
earth, as we; all thy creatures, love, and praise thee, for ever more. Amen.

THE II. CHAPTER. Of Recollection, and quiet Prayer, more in particular.
1. WHereas this recollection, is so great, and inward; and the powers not
troubled, with the noise of worldly, and vain thoughts; and that God is there
present, what must the soul do in this recollection? first she must consider
that he is there only attending to give audience, and ready then to hear her
petition, and that she can without any impediment speak to him, being so near
(for as our Holy Mother says, the In her life chap. 27.
soul seems to have other, ears, and tongue inwardly, and needs not, speak
loud, or cry out, with noise of inward words, or consider him in heaven, or a
far of or without her self, to be heard, or understood; but she may rest
there with him (for he is not a friend of many words) and accustom the
understanding, to work very slowly, and as it were in silence, carefully
attending to what is said, and with what reverence, and confidence, she
speaks to him: and if the understanding can be kept quiet, sweetly beholding
that presence, of his divine Majesty, without words, or with Luke 18. v. 13.
the Publican casting his eyes, to the earth, expecting with humility, what
shall be said to him, it will be of great profit; and increase virtuous desires
in the soul; contempt of the world, and strong resolutions, to serve God, and
amend their lives; and this the soul does understand by sweet inspirations, and
secret whispers, by which he speaks unto her; here she does offer her self,
and her will, wholly to God, to be employed ever after, in his service;

2. Though some, (yea religious) after coming so far, and having forsaken the
world, and given themselves to God, do return back to the flesh pots of
Egypt, and as a dog to his vomit, to be more worldly then ever, and to seek
for familiarityes, and frendships; and they take back again, from God (even
against his will,) what formerly they freely gave him (THEIR WILL) which they
did dedicat unto his divine Note.
Majesty; to be employed only, in his service; which again they dispose of, as
of their own, and the world and what is in it, which for his sake they
forsook, they seek after, more earnestly, then before they left it; and thus
they draw their mind, and affection from God, applijng them selves, to base,
vile, and transitory things; notwithstanding the experience, they often had, by
many comforts, and consolations, of Gods goodness, and love, when they did
proceed sincerly.

3. And one thing may be much admired; to wit, that these ungrateful people, do
go to prayer, as boldly, and without all fear, as if they had done no injury,
to God, nor wronged themselves; and they are not ashamed, to ask, or expect
spiritual comforts, and favors of his divine Majesty, after so great an
affront: are these to be regarded, or favored more by God? certainly, they
deserve it not; unless with a humble submission, and acknowledgment, of their
abuse, and wrong committed, they return to his Majesty, forsaking all, and
restoring what was vniusty taken away, without which, this recollection is not
had again, for it does consist in this, that the powers are introuerted, and
not troubled with any vain or worldly thoughts. as is formerly said. But they
who go on, with their endeauours, to please God; do easily find how sweet,
and good, our Lord is, to those that love, and do seek after him.

4. It is a comfortable thing, to speak of the next degree (to which they are
brought after that recollection) and of what passes there; and seriously to
consider it, is most joyful, and pleasing; but to feel it, is in excess
delightful; this is in Quiet Prayer, where the soul is placed to rest without
laboring or discourse; here she is feasted with varietyes of heavenly
comforts, divine consolations, and joyful delights, far surpassing sense;
here she does begin to taste of the food of Angels, and is reposed in the bed
of sweet content; certainly, if all the honors, pastines, and pleasures of
this world, were in one, and to continue, and be enjoyed for ever, yet compared
with one only moment of the joy, content, and satisfaction, which here are
had, all that would appear to be mere nothing; for as far as the heavens,
do exceed the earth, in greatness, and perfection, without any proportion;
so do these spiritual comforts, without any equality, or proportion, exceed
all the others; words cannot express, what it is; but those happy souls can
best tell, and declare it, that by experience has often known and felt the
sweetness of it.

5. This Quiet prayer does consist in this, that the soul and all the powers,
after laboring to find out whom she does dearly love, are brought by his
divine Majesty, from that laborious discoursing, and searching for him; to the
place of rest, that is far within her self, where, in great silence, and
peace of all the powers, she does enjoy his presence, and is united to him
strongly by love, and does remain in his sweet embracements, with great
content, and satisfaction; and this is therefore called quiet prayer, by
reason, there is no discoursing nor noise of inward words used, in it, where
with, the soul, and powers, were often weryed, searching to find him; but all
are silent, and quiet; not that they do omit to work, but it is so sweetly
done, that it is scarcely perceived, by reason they are in contemplation, and
with one simple look, they are in admiration with great joy, and do feelingly
understand, more in an instant, then they could attain to, with all the
discourses possible; let not any think that the soul does see any image, or
shape wherein God does appear when his presence is named here, but only that
she has a fixed memory with a liuly faith that he is there, and that by the
effects, which she does find in her self it appeeres; as a great joy and
inward satasfaction of all the powers. Also a light which procures a most
humble and reuerentiall respect in the soul with a kind of certainty of his
presence, with which, she is so contented and delighted, as if nothing more
rested to be desired in this world: and this content does redowne even to the
body which is never weary whiles that quit content does hold;

6. And observe, that as it is former 's said, the will being only united, the
other powers, which are not so, do keep he often in war, and do molest her
much endeavoring to bring her from her rest, and content, to pass the time,
(as we may say) with themselves, but their labor is in vain, and the contrary
does often happen. for she does cause them to return to their quiet rest with
her, for she does labor to keep in, that little spark of fire, of the love of
God, esteeming it (as of right she ought) of great worth; for thence (if she be
not in the fault,) in time may proceed a great fire, and flames of divine
love; for she does now by experience well know, how great good it is, to
adheare to God, who gi^^th that small beginning, as a liuly token of his
affection, and earnest penny, to bind the bargain, and confirm the agreement,
betwixt them; to wit; that she must not be longer of this world, though living
in it; but of those, whose conversation, is in heaven; and dispose her self,
for greater, and higher matters; and to be disposed of, only by his divine
Majesty; who has now chosen her to be of his private chamber, and to seek
after nothing but what shall be to his honor and glory; O admirable dignity
and happiness?

7. Let not any soul that is come to this state, undervalue her self, nor
think it want of humility, to conceive that she is favored, by God; for one
will be more thankful, that he knows the greatness of the gift, or benefit,
and dignity of the person that gives it, then if they did not mark it, or did
forget it; or would not acknowledge it, but she must with an humble submission,
and holy presumption acknowledge that she is favored, without any merit, on her
part; and that it is the mere goodness, and mercy, of his divine Majesty that
will have it to be so; that she may know how much she is obliged, and return a
sincere affection, answerable to his intention and not frustrat him, of his
expectation; for certainly this will encourage her, to go forward, daily in
Gods service, and to undertake greatter matters, for his love, honor, and
glory; and believe it, that a soul truly humble. cannot have a greater
confusion, then to see her self favored, and honored, without any desert or
merits; and well knowing her own demerits; which causes her, to be more
humble, and thankful; and desirous, to please him more then formerly; for this
truth is imprinted in her, so feelingly, that she cannot but see, and confess
it; so that in the presence of that Majesty, which she knows to be so great,
and powerful, she would even annihilat her self, if that she could; for she
is not ignorant, of her own nothing, and unworthiness;

8. But some souls, do think their time lost in prayer, and without profit,
when they do not discourse, but are in that solitude, silence, and quietness,
not knowing what they do, or ought to do, in that case; but they are
mistaken; it is not so; as they themselves, both then, and after, do perceive,
by the effects, which they find in themselves; for first they find an
alteration, and sweet content in them selves, they perceive a great
satisfaction, in all their powers, with so great suanity, that it does redowne
to the body, and senses; in so much, that at that time, it would grieve them,
to be molested, called upon, or spoaken to; nay they would not move, nor
stir, nor breath, least to hinder their sweet repose, and joyful rest in
God; and after prayer, there remains such a memory, and impression, of his
presence, in the soul, that she cannot in a very long time forget him, and this
quietness is so pleasing, with so great humility, and feeling, that if they
were called to dinner, or supper, their grief is not little, and I have seen
the tears run down the cheeks of some as they did eat; lamenting that they
were forced to leave that celestial banquet, with their Sovereign Lord, and
only good; to feed and feast, a corruptible body, their greatest enemy, and
cause of their most hurt, and evil.

9. But let them not be troubled, that they do not discourse, nor know what
they do; and only rest in that sweet content, with God, for he teaches them
in an instant as is said, more, then what with the discourses, of all their
life, they whould be able to reach unto: therefore our Holy Mother does advise
to stay in that silent quietness without noise of inward words, enjoying that
sweet content attending to nothing else; for now she is in possession of what
she sought for; so that all her discourse, is now in vain, and to noe other
purpose, then to trouble her in her joy and rest. Yet if her quietness, and
fervor be declyning, or decaying; it will do well, to make some amorous act
which may blow the coal, and keep in the fire of divine love, least it should
decay, and perish; but this act must be made slowly, and attentively, with
great sweetness, for if you use any force to increasse the seruour of your
spirit, it is no other, then to cast water to smother and extinguish that little
fire, of devotion, which is as yet burning; for this being a supernatural
gift, and his work, you must with humility give his divine Majesty way, to do
in you, and with you, what he thinks sitting; and it is his work, to
increase it, or diminish it; for it is beyond our reach; and therefore in vain
we labor, to attempt that which surpasses our ability, and exceeds our
forces; and if the understanding shall seem to bring reasons to move the soul
to more sorrow, or gratitude, let not the soul permit it, nor regard it; but
keep the understanding as quiet as she can, without troubling her self; and
if she cannot so do, let her keep her self in her rest, and content; and not
mind, what the understanding does in that; but leave him of, to himself;

10. You must also note, that as I said formerly, she must not be desirous of
gusts, and consolations; but content herself, with all indifferency, in what
shall be done by his divine Majesty, and be as Gusts and consolations must not
be desired in prayer, nor affected, for it shows little humility.
ready, to help our Savior, to carry his cross; that is, to suffer aridityes,
temptations, and contradictions, as to be feasted at his table, with delights,
and consolations; for truly; the more we desire, and seek after these gusts,
and comforts, the less we shall have of them, and the less mortified, and
perfect we shall be; for it is a great want of humility, as I said elsewhere;
and for that presumption, and want of humility, the soul is deprived, of what
comforts, she had; and often does remain in great aridity. Therefore we must
always humble our selves, and acknowledge our selves, unworthy of any favors
from his divine Majesty, whom we offended; and with plain simplicity, offer
our desire, and some resolution, or purpose, to do somewhat, though never so
little to content, and please him; with which he is more pleased, then with all
the learned discourses, eloquent words, and pregnant reasons, which can be
offered to him.

11. And when the soul is in that quietness, and so near to his divine Majesty
and after that she is now familiar and satisfied with great joy, and content,
is the best and only time, to pray, and commend the necessityes of the Holy
Church, the souls of Purgatory, the conversion of sinners, our parents, friends
and benefactours, and other necessityes to his divine Majesty; not by noise of
words, but by an affection, and feeling desire, that his Majesty will be
pleased, to grant, what is desired; for it is no more then to have these in
your mind, and with a simple look, to present them to him, for he does well
understand the least of our desires, and that simple memorial, with a sincere
affection, does prevail more with him, then all the rethorick of the world;
and if the recollection or quietness be great, the soul cannot without much
trouble, either produce or attend to any inward framed words; Also it would
divert her attention from the better, and principal object: as if one looking
with content on a sweet picture, should hear a noise behind him, and should
turn about to see where, and what that noise is; would not he be diuerted from
that content; which he had in beholding the picture? doubtless he would; it is
the same in this; for if the soul that is seriously applied, and ioyed in God,
should look back and attend to the framing, and noise of the words, inwardly
pronounced, by this attention, she would be diuerted from that sweet content,
which she had in God; therefore words of discourse must be omitted, or that
content lost.

12. Our Holy Mother does declare in In the castle of the soul. man's. 4.
a good manner the difference betwixt the comforts, and consolations, which
proceed from our discourse, and that which his Majesty gives, without our
labor; comparing them to water, which in two ways, or manners does water a
garden, the one is brought from a far of, with labor, and through conducts;
or gutters, and falling into some sisterne is distributed, or cast here and
there to water the garden, this is like the noise, and labor of the
understanding, that with many reasons, and discourses, does move the will, to
some pious affection, wherein she is comforted and delighted: but the other is
near hand, and at home, increasing always, in silence, and not perceived,
whence it comes, but the sisterne is seen full, and running over, which
waters the garden better, more plentifully, and without the labor of the
gardener, by reason the spring is in the bottom of the sisterne, whence
without noise, the water does issue. even so, the gusts, and comforts, had in
quiet prayer, do proceed from the ever living spring, that great God, of
glory, and all consolation; who is in the center of the soul, and without any
industry or labor on our part, does fill up the sisterne of our heart with
unspeakable joy, whence not knowing how, the water of comfort, ouerflowing, in
silence runs to all parts of the garden, that is, to all the powers,
senses, and the very body it self, watering, and delighting all; and they
admire, whence that so great content should be, which they do feel; and in
this sweet content and delightful admiration they do rest. the other water
does penetrat but little, in comparison of this; for this does enter into the
very depth and inward substance of the soul; and leaves her satisfied for a
long time, by reason it is more plentiful, and in greater abundance.

13. And this is the benefit of an humble soul, for as water remaine's not on
the tops of hills, or mountains, but falls into the low places, and valleys;
so The good of a humble soul.
the water of comforts, and the grace of God, cannot stay upon the hills, or
mountains of proud and presumptuous spirits, but do fall into the valley of
humility, which is the humble heart, that thinks lowly of it self; for he
does love to be with the humble, and upon them his Holy Spirit does rest, and
to them he gives his grace, and bestows such favors upon them, that with
the great content, and inward joy which they feel, the powers, and senses are
suspended. when he is so pleased; and the waters of delight, do so recreat.
and comfort both soul, and body, that some being sick going to prayer, and
brought to this quietness, are not only during the time of that prayer,
senseless of any sickness, but after prayer, are void of all pain, and in
good health; and many going to it with sore heads, after that prayer, are very
well; and this is a known thing by experience;

14. So that this prayer, leaves great effects in body, and soul; for beside
what is said above, it dilateth the heart, and makes the soul, more capable of
divine favors, and free from servile fear, worldly affections, and proper
interest, she now does take delight in doing of pennances, she regards not
commodity, or health; so she may but please and serve God in any thing; her
faith is more liuly, her desire to suffer persecutions, and wrongs, for love of
him, increases; she does more fear to offend God, then all the torments and
devils, of hell; by reason she does now love him, whom she does then perceive
to be truly love, and praise worthy, by all creatures, for his own goodness,
and perfections; and therefore she does understand, that it is an unworthy
thing, to offend so high a Majesty, in the least thing: which does cause her to
keep a pure conscience, as near as she can; her hope, and confidence, in his
divine Majesty, and desire to enjoy him in glory for ever, is greater, and more
constant, then formerly. and thus are the labors of a loving soul well
recompensed.

15. O how highly then ought we to esteem this benefit? and desire to please
him, who has so great a care of us; O my dear Jesus, the true lover of humble
souls, why are there not many more, that by this way of prayer, do seek
after thee, to partake of these divine benefits, and celestial communications,
since thou art so good, so liberal, and willing to enrich all, with these and
many more heavenly blessings and favors? our Holy Mother says that the reason
of it, is, In her life chap. 11.
that we do not dispose our selves, as we ought, and put on a strong
resolution to forsake all things at once, and our selves chiefly; but do
reserve some interest, or other, that we ought for his pure love, utterly to
mortify, and forsake; though we esteem them, but small matters: which really
are of great importance, though it were, but our affection, to our parents, or
friends; or perhaps; they do not believe what is written of these things; by
reason they seem to them impossible; and that what is said of these rare
matters, is but a flowrish of fair and sweet words, and no real truth; but my
God, thou do well know, that they are real deeds, and therefore, the
humble souls, that go on in thy service by this way of prayer, thou do
often make wonderful to the world, in their lives, and works; which others
do not take to heart, nor consider a right. Therefore I beseech thy divine
Majesty, to give all that shall read this book, and follow this path of
prayer, a true feeling of what is here said; for then they shall see, and know
this truth, and how far short, all words, and expressions, are, to what
really, and joyfully is had in this blessed exercise of prayer.

THE III. CHAPTER. Of the sleep of the Powers.
1. IN the former degree, you have seen what quiet prayer is, and how sweetly
the soul is pleased, with the inward content, and satisfaction, which she does
feel therein; so that she does think, that there is nothing more to be desired
in this life. But whereas the power of God, is infinite, and his works, without
limit, we must conceive always greater matters, of his divine Majesty; and
that as we dispose our selves, (with the grace of God) increasing daily in
humility, and love; he will impart his blessings, and communicate his favors
more and more unto us.

2. Yet true it is, that the least of these divine, and supernatural
communications, is so sublime, and transcending the capacity, of our weak
understanding, and is so comfortable, and delightful to the soul, not used to
the like; that she does esteem it very much, and thinks that nothing more,
or greater can be had, or desired in this life; But the, ways, and inventions
of God, to communicate himself to souls, and bring them to his divine love,
are many, and far beyond our reach, and understanding; and he is powerful to
give them great gifts, and unknown favors; though it is impossible for us, to
express by words, the favors which we do receive in prayer, being
supernatural, unless his divine Majesty be pleased, to give us, the ability,
to know the gift, and how to make it to be understood, by words; for there is
great difference betwixt feeling, and understanding, what we feel; and as our
Holy Mother says, it is one favor to receive a gift, and an other to cause us
to understand the supernatural, gift, which we receive; In her life chap. 17.
and an other, to know, how by words, or examples, to express it, and cause
it, to be understood; by our directour;

3. And this, as a special favor was In her life Chap. 30.
granted unto her by God, above any, that I have seen, or read that wrote of
those divine communications; for the very cleerest of them all, is obscure
enough; but she as one well experienced, and instructed by the holy Ghost, has
so plainly and clearly declared the several ways, that in every degree of
prayer, God works in the soul, and what effects he does produce in her, and
what in these occasions, the is to do, and how to behave her self, that the
directour knows, reading her writings, what to examine, and the penitent how
to understand, and declare herself, that her directour may be well informed of
her spirit, and conceive things aright; which otherwise, though never so
learned, without the experimental knowledge of them, he could not understand,
nor she express; and so the penitent soul by the Ghostly Father not
understanding her, might suffer very much, and be hindered of her spiritual
profit, as our Holy Mother and others that she writ of, were; and put rather
backward, then forward in prayer, and virtue;

4. Now to speak more of this degree, then is spoaken, in the first chapter,
seems superfluous; but dear Christian soul, the more that such matters, as
these, are repeated, and some little thing, given better to be understood, the
more profitable, they are, and not in any way superfluous; therefore out of her
works, I will add (to what is formerly said of these degrees, and of this in
particular) that which I have observed, which may be the better understood by
this example.

5. A young chield, desyring somewhat that he does want, not able to help
himself, does fall a crijng and is not at rest, until his Mother, or nourse
does take him, into her lap or arms, and gives him the breast to suck; with
this, he is silent, and quiet, and when he has taken sufficiently, and his
belly is full, as we may say, he begins to slumber and fall a sleep, and at
last, he is so heavily and deadly a sleep, that she takes the dugge out of
his mouth, and places him where she please, to rest, he not knowing, nor
feeling what is done to him, or with him. In like manner, the soul in
meditation is the child crijng for somewhat that she does want, and is not at
rest, until his divine Majesty does take compassion upon her seeing her
weryed, and almost tired by the labor of the understanding and will, seeking
to find him. then taking her into his lap, he gives her the teat of his holy
presence, which is supernatural, by which she begins to suck the sweet milk of
devotion and divine consolation, and is thereby made silent, and contented,
this is quiet prayer, then having taken sufficiently of that celestial nectar,
in that quiet content, with the dugge in her mouth (as we may say) or that
divine presence, she is so over delighted and satisfied, and all the powers so
ioyed, that by degrees they begin to slumber, or fall a sleep, forgetting by
little and little, all things of the world; where they are, and what they do;
this is called, the sleep of the powers, yet is not the soul in a dead sleep,
for she holds the dugge as yet in her mouth, and do not omit to work
somewhat, at last she is so replenished with that divine liquor, as one drunk
and quite overcome, she falls into a dead sleep, she loses the dugge, and
forgets absolutely all whatsoever is in heaven or earth, and then she is put to
rest; yet; where or how, or by whom, she knows not, being drowned and in
gulfed in the divine essence with all her powers united, the poor body for
that present, left quite forgotten, senseless, and in a manner dead; and this
is called union. that is, the soul and all the powers are vinted to the divine
essence, and she becomes one with God, or as our Holy Mother says, he takes
her and shut's her up within himself. in the height of this union, the soul
knows and understands nothing; but soon after, (for it holds not long) she
knows what a great good she did enjoy wherein all goodness is. But now to the
sleep of the powers I return, which are not lost, yet the joy of the soul is
so great, that she knows not what to do with her self through the vehemence
of love, and she cannot contain her self, her joy and glory is so great; she
feign would cry out, to give notice to all creatures, of her delight, and
pain, (for this excess of love is not without a delightful pain; that all
might partake thereof, and praise God; she does feel those effects in her
self so perfectly, that they put her far beyond her self;

6. And, then she does speak many words, of love, in the praise of God,
without any order, not knowing what to say, or do. the will seems to be in a
kind of frensy with love, the understanding does see so many things together,
that she knows not what to fix upon but is kept suspended in admiration. the
memory myndeth nothing, but what is present, so that the soul, in this
spiritual frensy and strange disposition, knows not what best to do, whether
to be silent, or speak, to lough, or weep; for she is in a restless
quietness, and a sweet rest lessnesse through love: then to think of
returning, to use the things of this world again, is very odious to her; to
walk, is troublesome; to speak and not of him, is very painful, to eat, is
a kind of death, though nature does require it, Se her life chap. 37.
to sleep is worse; in fine, all things which may in any wise hinder her, of
the enjoying so great a good, though for a moment, and for her very health,
does molest her, and gives her no satisfaction, nor content;

7. She does not desire to see, or speak with any, in this world, but with
such as are in the same frensy, or sick of the same disease, feign she would
enjoy God wholly, and know nothing but him; it seems, that S. Augnstine was
sick of this disease, when he said, our heart, o Lord, is always unquiet,
until it rest in thee;

8. Of the soul also in this spiritual drunknesse, it is said in the
canticles; he brought me into the winecellar, and ordered Cant. 2. v. 4.
in me charity, there she was overcome with the strength of those divine
liquours, she became wholly drunk with love, she could go no further, nor part
the place, but fell into the arms, and sweet embracements of her beloved, who
placed his left hand under her head, and embraced her with his right; by the
left, understand his mercy, keeping her from sin, least she should fall, and
by the right, his love covering her over with many graces, blessings and
favors.

9. O Blessed drunknes, o happy foollishnes, o divine frensy, o celestial
love, who can tell your worth? O true lover of our souls Christ Jesus, how
forcibly with the odours of thy sweet ointments, do thou draw young Virgins,
to wit, pious souls, after thee? if the love of mortal creatures, be so
forcible, as to deprive people, of their wit, and the use of reason, and even
to cause them run naked and sensles about the streets, what shall we say then
of this divine love;

10. These pious souls, O Lord, are in love with thy infinite goodness they
are ravished with thy rare beauty, they are over delighted with thy sweetness,
they are not themselves, they are unquiet, and have no rest without thee; they
feel inwardly a burning fire, which does consume them, and what is it? but
that fire of charity, which thou have ordered in them? they are by it strongly
in love, yea drunk with love, and quite beside themselves; they do love, and
know not what, but what they love, is that which thou art; feign they would
enjoy thee entyrely, and not by parts, being their only good; this they
desire, this they inquire after, but know not, how it may be had; which makes
them wholly restless, until they rest in thee; for whether sickly or healthy,
ill, or well, living, or dead, in heaven, or hell; they regard not; so they may
be with thee; for they are wholly thine;

11. This divine love, does leave them no other force or ability, then to leave
themselves wholly to God, and give consent, that he may dispose, all, and do
with them, what he please, and as he thinks fitting; in so much, that then
they cannot (though they would) apply them selves to any other thing, but to
adheare to God alone; neither can they divert themselves never so little,
without great pain.

12. Here they cannot but be attentive, hear, see, and know his sweet
whisper, pleasant voice, and Holy will, with great content; here they may say
with Samuel the Prophet, speak o Lord for 1. king. 3. v. 10
thy servant does hear, that is to say, is attentive to hear, and know, what
thy will, and pleasure is, to obey and fulfill it; and with Holy David, say, I
will hear, Ps 84. v. 9.
that is, attend to what my Lord shall speak in me; for he does speak peace
unto his people; as if he said; I will give care attentively to the words of my
God, for they are of that Majesty, and virtue, that though my soul were in
darkness, tempted, and troubled, the only sound of his voice disperseth all on
a sudden, leaves a light, and inward peace to all my powers, and senses, with
so great joy and satisfaction; that they are wholly recollected, and settled, and
in a manner totally drowned in delight.

13. VVonderfull are the effects that God works in the soul, that is in this
degree, far surpassing those of quiet prayer; for beside that she does
possess his divine Majesty, more entirely, then in that; and that her joy, and
delight, are greater; her love increases to a great height, and her virtues
are more solid, and her inward change is noted, by her outward behavior, which
she cannot cover, nor hyde; for all her actions are more stayed, and grave, then
formerly; and she would not live longer in this life, if she could; and her
desire is so great to be with him in endless rest; that it were sufficient to
end her, if it were not that she does think to do him some service, in
suffering the miseryes, and persecutions of this world, for love of him,
esteeming that as yet, she did very little, or nothing, in his service, who, is
goodness it self; and to whom she is so much obliged;

14. Her intention to please and honor him, is pure without any self
interest; she feare's no trubles, nor any thing of this world, but to displease
him, in the very least imperfection, she does proceed with all fidelity, and
sincerity; her conversation is only, and wholly in heaven, with, and for God;
she does not affect her own content, or gust, though never so spiritual, so
much, as the honor of God, and to do his will in all things;

15. O love great is thy worth, and greater thy work, they that do possess
thee cannot but work; they aspire to great matters beyond their ability,
thinking all things possible to love; therefore S. Paul said, I can do all
things, in him, Philip. 4. v. 13
who does strengthen me, Christ, they are never better feasted, never more
ioyed, and delighted, never more sweetly comforted, and contented, then when
they suffer troubles, disgraces, persecutions, torments, and even death it
self, for their beloved; therefore our Holy Mother S. Teresa was wont to say
to In her life chap. 40.
God, (with whose love she was inflamed) grant me o Lord either to suffer, or
to dye; for nothing but suffering for his sake could preserve her life; for in
this she had some content: and her compagnion in her troubles, the venerable
Father John a cruce, always desired, either to suffer, or be contemned; and
thus God is truly wonderful in his saints; for what can be more admirable,
then to see one desire and thirst after those things. which are contrary, yea,
destructive to nature, as to suffer torments, and death it self? but this is
the priuiledg and efficacy of divine love, which can have no ^est, but in the
nest, where it was bred. and whence it came, so God loved the world, that he
gave them his only son, who suffered death with love of them.

16. But you must observe, that though commonly, in this degree, the
understanding, and memory are so well employed, that they have no ability or
power to apply themselves to any other thing, then beholding and enjoying what
our Lord is pleased, to represent unto them. Yet some times his Majesty whose
captives they are, is pleased, to set them free, and at liberty; and though the
will does remain strongly united, they may employ themselves in outward works
of virtue, as to frequent the quire, sing, write, read, and other works of
charity, according to their state of life, which in deed, is a great benefit;
for then Martha, and Mary, the active, and contemplative life, like two loving
sisters, do walk hand, in hand together; for the will (as Mary) remaining in
his sweet repose, and delightful contemplation; they (as Martha) are well
employed in outward actions, and some laudable occupations; yet they are not so
attentive outwardly, that they do wholly forget the inward; and we may compare
them to one, who has one eye looking on what is outward, and the other to what
is inward; for they do well know, that the will (which is their principal
part) does remain there united in joy; and that there, their most attendance
ought to be; so that they are not perfectly in the one, nor in the other, but
this good, that memory, and cast of the eye, to what the will is a doing,
brings to the soul, that when the outward employment is ended, they quickly
desire, their former solitude, and are easily retired, and recollected, with
the will; and then the soul does remain in great quietness, tranquillity, and
inward peace, with admirable content and satisfaction, by reason all do
concur and assist her, more seriously, completely, and perfectly to enjoy her
only good, and praise her God without impediment.

17. At other times. his divine Majesty is pleased to keep the will and
understanding captives, and united, leaving the memory, and imagination free at
liberty, and they finding themselves alone and not regulated or directed by the
understanding, are very unquiet and troublesome; and do endeavor to disturb
the soul from her peaceable content and rest, desirous to bring the other
powers, to themselves, but though it be a cruel war, they are able to effect
nothing, wanting the assistance of the understanding, and will; yet howsoever,
they do molest her much, and the imagination does present so many things,
running from one, to an other, that the poor soul cannot do what she would; by
reason whereof, she does often lament, and make her moan to his divine
Majesty, that she is so divided, and not wholly united in his love, and praise;
and at length, he causes them for her comfort, to be united with the other
powers, and to burn in, and with the same fire, in which the others are almost
consumed, loosing in a manner their natural being, and living supernaturally
in him. In this, and the like cases, and occasions, when any of the powers, are
at liberty, and troublesome, you must do as is formerly said of quiet prayer,
not regard them, nor attend to what they do; but as a wiseman takes no notice
of what a fool says, or does; so she must do with them, and remain, as much
as she can possibly in her sweet rest, and repose. this is of importance to be
known by such as are come to these degrees of prayer.

18. And when a soul is come so far as to begin to be wholly dead to all
things of the world, and live to God alone, her desire to be with him, and
enjoy him, is to vehement, and her pain thence so great, that if his divine
Majesty by a special way, had not prevented it, and preserved her, it were
more then sufficient (as is said) to seperat the body, from the soul; for she
can think upon nothing, desire nothing, is satisfied with nothing, but God
alone, and the enjoying of him, in his kingdom, of glory: which she cannot
have being a prisoner, in the miserable and corruptible body; and therefore
there is no death, so cruel, that could be offered, but she with unspeakable
joy, would endure; that set at liberty, she might the better, and without any
impediment, possess for ever, whom she does, so dearly love, our Holy Mother
does affirm that the pain and agony, that the soul has in this degree, with
that desire to be dissolved, and live with Christ, where he is seen clearly
face to face, is such, that the soul has need to have great courrage to
bear, and endure it. Therefore she advises that the soul in this occasion*
must resolutly cast her self wholly into Gods hands, and care; and leave her
self, to his Holy disposing in all things; for she does know, that she cannot
do little, or much in this case; neither has she other ability, but to give
her consent, and resign her will, to receive those, favors, and embrace such
gifts, as his divine Majesty is pleased to bestow upon her;

19. To this happiness ordinarily, they only come, who are mortified, void of
self interest, diligent in Gods service, fervent in his love, prompt to do
his will, careful and sincere, in all that is to his honor, glory, and
praise; these are they, that his Majesty brings into the wynecellar, to
drink of the choice and best, to eat at his own table, to be in his private
chamber, to rest in the place of repose, and bed of delight; o how sweet is
their conversation, how divine their embracement, how strong their love? he
said to his spouse, with perpetual charity I loved thee; Here he gives her a
taste, a beginning, and a feeling of those joys, Jeremy 31. v. 3.
and glory which are eternal; O who would not labor to attain to so great
happiness, which is so easily granted, and had.

20. Come dear Christian soul, to him, by the practice of this Holy exercise
of prayer, put on once a good resolution, and though perhaps in the beginning
you may have some difficulty and be in darkness, yet in time with your
perseverance, you shall be illuminated, and eased, come to him, I beseech you,
though never so heavy laden with sin, be not a shamed nor a frayd, for he is
truly in love with the least and worst of us all, and I believe far more
forward with love of us, then we can be with love of him; this, his coming from
heaven to earth, his Bitter Passion, his Precious Blood shed, and his painful
death on the cross for us; does testify; come therefore with confidence to
him, and you shall not be confounded, nor get a denial, nor repulse; the
manner how to come to him, King David does declare, saying; with all my heart I
sought after thee; (and not Ps. 110 v. 145.
with a divided heart) that is, that he loved nothing else but God, for he
resolved not to admit any other love, into his v. 145.
heart but his. and in an other verse of the same psalm, he said, I cried unto
thee o Lord with all my heart; and therefore he was heard; for his prayer, like
incense, ascended unto God, from the altar of his penitent and loving heart,
and it was so grateful to his divine Majesty, that the 1. king^ 13. v.
Scripture says, that he was a man according to God's own heart.

21. Be not thou then daunted, come to this thy loving Lord, take delight in
prayer, in his holy conversation, and service; come with all thy heart, and
then ask what thou will for thy good, and doubtless it will be granted; the
petions of thy heart he will regard; and if thou will dispose thy self well,
and be perseuerant, thou may obtain this happy degree of prayer, and at
last, his divine Majesty seeing thee according to his own heart, will crown
thy labors with many divine favors, and celestial benedictions, even in this
life; and in the other, in the land of the living, with endless glory, and
felicity, and thou shall see him face to face, where he is enjoyed, and shall
be praised by his Holy Saints and Angels, for all Eternity. Amen.

THE IV. CHAPTER. Of the Prayer of union.
1. IN the former chapters, you have seen how God does bring a soul from the
cares and troubles of the world, to a solitude formerly unknown, a
supernatural state, where, in silence, he speaks to her heart; Now from that
silent and quiet rest, and from that delightful sleep wherein the soul
falls a dijng to all things of this world, through love; his divine Majesty
takes her wholly to himself, and does conclude a spiritual marriage betwixt
them both; in so much, that she is perfectly dead to all the world; that is to
say, her affection is wholly mortifyed, having no inclination to any thing
created, and she is living only to, and in God, united to him, by a celestial
conjunction; that is, by all her substance, and powers, to hs divine essence,
and substance, in which, she is so far carried beyond her self not knowing
how, or whither, that she cannot perceive, whether she be in the body, or no,
in the world, or out of it, for she is sunk in the depth, and altogether in
gulfed in that incomprehensible ocean of his divinity, having lost the use, of
all her powers, and, inward, and outward senses; and is become the same, and
one spirit with him, and therefore it is called union, because two distinct
things, are made one;

2. In this union she knows nothing, but that her joy and satisfaction, is
excessive great; but afterward, she can well perceive that her profit is far
transcending that of the former degrees, and that her virtues are more solid,
and of higher perfection; she in this union does not labor more, but God does
work in her, she is the patient, and he the, divine agent, who does produce
those wonderful effects, and make her admirable to the world, she has enough
to do, to receive those divine favors, and celestial gifts, she is not
satisfied with admiration, seeing the great goodness, and liberality of God,
toward such as she is; which does cause so great humility, and love in her,
that she would even an nihilat her self in the presence of so high a Majesty;
she is so drowned, that the body is quite forgotten and during that union, it
is void of hearing, seeing, and feeling, all her powers and senses are absorpt,
and in gulfed so deeply in it, that there is no memory left of what they were
meditating, thinking, reading, or doing, but their joy cannot be expressed;

3. Yet, as it is formerly said, this total union does not continue long,
before some of the powers are permitted to return to their own operations,
the will still remaining strongly united, but they are so far beside
themselves, that they can get no content or rest; until they return to their
principal again, and eat of the same meat, and drink of the same liquour,
and then they remain suspended, and united as formerly; neither can they tell
how long, or short a time, they are in that union; and though it were long,
they are so swayed with over great delight, that it seems to them but very
short;

4. I have known one that was as yet but in the other degrees, and when the
hour of prayer was spent, he could hardly be persuaded, that it was so, for he
thought really, that he had not been more then the space of one Aue Maria in
it; not knowing what prayer he was in; what shall we think then of this?
certainly the least part of it, cannot be expressed by all the eloquence, and
rethorick of the world, as it is; much less, the rest, which is more;

5. O how admirable and far surpassing all understanding it is, to comprehend
how Gods Holy divinity does enter in, and penetrat the whole substance and
essence of the soul, leaving in her, a perfect impression of himself, that she
is no more what she was, but truly deified, altogether in gulfed in the blessed
divinity, now quite forgetful of her self, and all that is in heaven and
earth; for she is in possession, of him, who contains all, and is more then
all, and is her all; so that in the other, she may be well said, to be a dijng,
but in this, to be truly dead, as you see, but to God alone, in whom she does
live, and who does live in her.

6. This is a most happy state, a blessed rest, a sweet repose, a heavenly
drunknes, a joyful alteration, a loving embracement, a delightful union, a
divine transformation, a total Deification, and a blisfull marriage,
confirmed; and signed with no less then his own most Glorious divinity, that
as a bride and bridegroom, they are one spirit, she is partaker of his glory,
looks to his family, and attends only to those things, which belong to him,
and to his honor, glory, and praise; and he has care of her, and of what does
belong to her; now she is so burning with his love and so solicitous of his
affairs, that she is never idle, she does thirst vehemently after the
conversion of sinners, and salvation of souls, as a thing belonging to her
beloved, and to his honor, and glory; and to undergo, and effect this great
and difficult work, she does find her self stout and courragious, and would
give a thousand lives most willingly (if she could) to gain one soul, and
therefore her prayers to God, are many, and have no end; her tears and
pennances for them, are great. no troubles can break her, no persecution,
fear her, detractions do not grieve her, murmuration and diffamation do not
disquiet her, she takes contentedly, and joyfully, all disgraces, so she may
gain but one soul to God, and in this, she is continually laboring; and to
make his goodness known to all, that they may love, and serve him, and with
greater fervor always praise him; and that they may daily increase in all
virtue, and perfection.

7. To hear any to flatter, or praise her, is a torment to her, to see her
self esteemed, and honored, is her greatest affliction, for she clearly
knows, that she deserves it not, and what good, virtue, or gift is seen in
her, is not from her self, but from the fountain of all grace, mercy, and
goodness, her heavenly spouse, without any merit on her part; and therefore to
him she does refer all honor, and praise, to whom alone it is due;

8. The resolutions of such as come to this state, to do some heroyick works,
for the love, honor and glory of God, are as strange, and admirable as the
rest; they know not what to do with themselves, they are so transported by
love beyond themselves; and this love does enable them and strengthen them to
do, what to others might seem impossible, hence our Holy Mother S. Teresia
did In her life chap. 18.
make that admirable vow, to do in all things, what she conceived, or should
be informed, were most to God's honor, and glory, or of most perfection: which
is a wonderful thing; and a rare act. to tie her self so strictly under the
penalty of a mortal sin, doing the contrary. But this is the efficacy and
effect of divine love, and this she did exactly perform during her life. and
her desire of god's glory and honor was so great that she prayed earnestly
that his divine Majesty would deprive her of the favors which he bestowed
upon her, and give them to others that might do more good with them, for the
conversion of soul's, and the good of his Church, only that he might be the
more honored, glorified and praised;

9. One of these souls, though but simple and ignorant; will do more good in
the Church of God, then many eloquent preachers with all their art and
learning. Consider S. Francis, who had no learning, and our Holy Mother, a
simple woman, yet it is admirable to see what great good they have done in the
Church of God; and how many thousand souls by their means were, and are daily
saved; and so of others, who did the like; the spirit of God does efficaciously
concur with them, and their words, do powerfully move such as they converse
with, to a virtuous life, and the love of God. of these things you may read
more at large in her life, and works; for I do speak but briefly of them
here, to give some small notice of what his divine Majesty is graciously
pleased to work in the souls which dispose themselves, and endeavor in what
they can, to love, and serve him; that others may be encourraged to use this
Holy exercise of prayer, in which God does communicate his favors, and gifts to
devout souls, and give them a taste of those joys, which are in heaven. I
beseech his divine majesty to grant this gift of prayer to many, for his
glory, and the good of his Holy Church. Amen.

THE V. CHAPTER. Of several other eleuations of the spirit, and how they
differ from union.
1. Our Holy Mother does declare, that they that come to perfect union,
commonly have visions and revelations, extasis, flights and rapts, and that
though, the extasis, flights, and rapts seem to be one, and the same thing,
yet in truth, they are not, as they who have experience of them, by their
effects can easily observe in themselves, I shall touch briefly some of them
here, and so with God's help, end this work; leaving the reader to peruse
them more fully, in her works, whence I have collected these, and where they
are far more plainly expressed, then I do here.

2. The difference betwixt union, and these others, and of these betwixt
themselves, is known by their effects. and first the effects of union, are
inward only, the soul alone enjoying that happiness, of which I spoake in the
former chapter, for the body is senseless, and destitute of any operation, or
comfort; I speak of the total, or perfect union; but in the extasis, or ra^^^
the effects are inward, and outward; for the body is not destitute of its
operations; also one may resist the union; though with great pain, but not the
others; for often on a sudden, the soul is surprised, and carried away, she
then not thinking of God, and unless the rapt be very great, or in the height
(for then she knows nothing as in the union) the senses are not lost, and one
may perceive, that the head is drawn after she spirit, and somtymes by the
force of the spirit, the whole body, is elevated up into the air, and the
party then seeing the body, so far above ground, does begin to fear, and
wonder at it; yet in this, both body, and soul have great comfort, and joy.

3. Here the soul does observe the great power of God, to whom there can be no
resistance; but when he is pleased, he will eleuat both soul and body, without
our consent, and against our will; for at these times, as we are nothing, so we
can do nothing with our selves, but he, as Lord of all, disposes of his own,
as he thinks fit, so that the soul is carried in these rapts, she knows not
whither, how, or by whom, but away she must go; and for her greater comfort,
his divine Majesty is often pleased to show unto her, the kingdom of heaven,
and what glory, he has prepared there for his true servants, for ever; at
other times, the Angels; then some saints, also his magnificent power, and he
does make 2. Gor. 12. v. 4
her understand high misteryes, and great secrets, of which, as S. Paul says,
it is not lawful to speak; also she does see the Queen of Angels, the
Mother, of God, in great glory, and the sacred humanity, of our Savior, in
unspeakable Majesty, and glory; and when he is so pleased she does enjoy the
sight, and company of the most Holy Trinity; and at other times she is endued
with the spirit of Prophecy; and knowledge of things to come: and the
understanding of the Holy Scripture. our Holy Mother In her life chap. 37. and
Man's. 7. chap. 1.
does relate (as by obedience she was commanded) how the holy Trinity did
appear unto her in the very center of her soul, and that she could not but see
every person, and the admirable glory, and Majesty, that was present; she did
speak to every person, in particular, and they to her, in which, her joy, and
content, was so great, that it cannot be imagined; and it is no wonder, if the
senses should not return to their own functions from so great happiness,
that they do there enjoy; neither would they willingly, unless it were as
servants do, to obey and fulfill the will and command of their Lord; for his
Majesty will often have it so; either for her spiritual profit, the good of
others, or his own honor and glory.

4. She also does relate how she was in a rapt elevated and taken to behold the
kingdom and Glorious inhabitants of heaven, her own parents, and some friends,
and was brought to the blessed throne of God, to behold how the eternal Se her
life chap. 38.
word, the second person of the holy Trinity, the son of God, is resident in
the bosom of his Father, and she says, that the soul in these occasions can
do nothing of it self, nor behold little or much, but only, what our Lord will
have her to see, or know; and as there be several degrees of eleuations, of
the spirit, or rapts; in every one of them, the light is greater, the knowledge
more and purer, the alienation from all things created, more perfect, the
virtues more solid, humility chiefly, more profound; and the love of God,
increasing, (as they ascend, one degree, after an other,) is so ordent and
vehement, that the soul does loath to live on earth, and her absence, or
separation from God, is so heavy a load, that she does live but a painful
life, or rather, a tormenting Martyrdom, and lingering death; so that all her
desire, is to be dissolved, and be with Christ; yet though the pain, which she
does suffer, is very great, her inward joy, is no less, if not more; but you
shall see what she speaks of rhese degrees.

5. The first after union, is, when the soul (like unto a flame proceeding, or
ascending from a well kindled fire) burning with the fire of divine love, goes
out of her self, ascending upwards, and some times it goes to a great height
far beyond the fire, whence, it does proceed, and this does seem to those,
that went no further, to be the same with union, but it differs much. For
union, is like to the fire, which only burns inwardly, not giving any flames
ascending upwards; but this going out of her self, is like flames ascending
upwards from the fire, and not to the fire it self; so that this fire
increasing, and not able (by reason of its vehemence) to contain it self from
blasing forth, the sweet wynd of the Holy Ghost blowing on it, the soul is
elevated out of her self, and as this firye flame increases, it does more and
more consume in her, all terrene affection, and leaves her, far purer, and
with greater freedom, and liberty, then in union; and though she knows not
how it came to pass, yet she cannot but admire to see such an alteration and
change in her self; and her profit to be far greater, and with very great
joy.

6. At other times, his divine Majesty is pleased that the soul be struck and
wounded at the very heart with a fearful noise in the most inward of her
substance, by a certain delicat, subtle, and penetratiue impulse, and, as it
were with a fiery dart: or bolt on a sudden, proceeding from a thunder she not
knowing how or by whom it came and though she has hence great pain, her joy
and comfort, is far greater then in the former, and though this noise is not
heard, with corporal ears, for it is inward, and a very silent noise, yet
instantly heard, and understood by the soul; and she does clearly and perfectly
know that she is so called upon, by God as with a whistle and that she cannot
but hear it, and suddenly feel a great certainty of his presence, and it is
of that Majesty and efficacy, that it causes all the powers and senses
instantly to be recollected, attentive, and give their attendance, though at
that present, they were much distracted, and they dare not then move, or stire;
and this celestial call, impulse, or fiery dart, does so inflame her, that she
is burning and a consuming with the fire of divine love, penetrating through
her very bowels and the very inward substance of the soul; and her pain by
reason of the wound, and the vehemence of love, is so great, that she cannot
contain her self, but lament, and with most sweet, and amorous words,
complain of her pain, (not being able to do otherwise) to her dearly
beloved, whom she knows to be present, and will not manifest himself, which
is a spur to forward and augment both love and pain; and though this pain
is with unspeakable delight, it does not continue long, but comes and goes,
and always does leave the soul inflamed with divine love; her desire to
please him, and serve his majesty in great matters, does increase; and her only
fear, is, least she should become ungrateful, for this, and his other great
favors, and benefits, which does encourrage her daily to better her life, to
content him the more.

7. Note that in this rapt the powers and senses are not suspended nor drowned,
but all stand in admiration, to see the soul in so great pain, worthy of
compassion, and yet with unspeakable delight; they wonder much what this should
be, and they can neither help, nor disturb her, but remain in their
attendance, with admiration. In these degrees, it does happen that the soul
has many strong and sudden motions, when one does hear a good sermon, or God
well spoaken of, or praised, or music, or at the sight of some sweet, and
devout picture; and this comes with an impulse in the depth or most inward of
the soul so vehement, sudden, and swift, that she cannot resist it, more then a
child, to a Giant, but away she is taken, and elevated sometimes above all that
is created, where she has the visions, and revelations formerly mentioned, and
with the greatness of the glory and Majesty which she beholds in God, she is
much terrified, and does conceive a reuerentiall fear, which causes the very
hairs of her head to stand, and then she does grieve, that she, or any other
ever offended a Lord of so high, and incomprehensible a dignity, power, and
Majesty; and some times it is so excessive, that the body in the rapt is
elevated forcibly a great height from the earth, as loathing all things on
earth, and tending to the place, where it does expect to be in endless
happiness;

8. Neither is the soul, and powers for a long time after these great rapts
perfectly themselves; for they are not yet out of that sweet sleep, or risen
from that delightful drunknesse, for they had Ps. 35. v. 9.
taken plentifully of the varietyes, and abundance of his house, and drunk
without measure of the torrent of those divine liquours, with so excessive
delight that they for a time after know not where they are, or what they do.

9. Also when they return to themselves all things of this world are so
disgustfull, and displeasing to them, by reason of the great joy they had, that
they have an auersion from them, and would not daine, if they could, to use the
least of them;

10. She declares an other degree, or sort of rapt, which she does call, a
flight of the soul, far different from the rest and greater, this she does
compare to a fire that suddenly falling, does fire, and burn all, whence
proceeds a great flame; so as the soul is suddenly fired all over, and does
burn so strongly with the fire of divine love, that her spirit like unto a
great flame with a most swift flight gets out of herself, in such a delicat
and subtle manner, that it is admirable, and in an instant she is placed where
she does see and understand many great misteryes together, with all clearness,
and truth; and she does not only see the Holy Trinity and speak with every
person, but also does obtain some particular favor of each of them.

11. Likewise she does relate that God does show how all creatures are
contained in his divine essence, and may be seen as in a fair christiall
glass; suppose, says she, that there were a great round cristiall glass,
greater then all the world, without which there is nothing, and in which all
things are included, and seen very clearly; the same conceive of God, in whom
really, and truly, all things are contained, and even the very thoughts, words,
and deeds, of every one in particular, may be plainly seen; she says that
this vision was one of the greatest favors, which God did, unto her, and that
a soul has great need of a strong courage, to behold what are there, chiefly
the horrid and foul sins committed against his divine Majesty, and the many
abuses and iniuryes which daily are done to him in the world; this is able and
sufficient (she says) to cause a separation and an absolute division of the
soul from the body, if God had not given her strength to bear it, or disposed
of her otherwise;

12. She does also speak of an other sort of rapt far beyond the rest, and
says, that it is more then a rapt, for it is a very vehement and eminent rapt,
and of great value and worth, this suddenly, at the hearing. God well spoaken
of, or calling to mind that he is absent, whom she does love most entirely, and
often without any of both, she does find in her self a vehement motion, and
desire to be with him, which is so forcible, that in an instant it does
penetrat the soul wholly; she knows not how it is, but does feel it, and is
not able to resist it, and she is taken, and powerfully carried beyond all that
is created, and placed in a strange solitude, desolat, and destitute of any
comfort from heaven and earth, and she does conceive, that none of any of both,
would keep her company, or be a comfort to her, in that desolation; neither
does she desire any comfort or company from them, but would there willingly
suffer and dye.

13. And it does happen as she says, that his divine Majesty does communicate
him self to her in so subtle and admirable a way, that it cannot be
understood, less expressed by any, but by himself; but she has so clear a
knowledge then left in her, of his greatness and goodness, and his other
incomprehensible perfections, that it does increase her love, and augment her
pain and torments; love does burn, and consume her, her desire to be with
him, is able to separat the soul from the body, and she does not know how to
help her self, but by death, and therefore dye she would, to enjoy his blessed
presence in glory; this torment is the greater, that the memory of him, is so
perfect and clear; notwithstanding he does absent himself, which adds much
to her affliction.

14. In other degrees, or rapts, the joy does mitigat her pain, but in, this,
she is destitute of all joy, or consolation; and left in the furnace of
tribulation, which is a very strong martyrdom, and so painful, that as joy,
and over much delight, in the other degrees, did suspend the powers, and
senses; so pain does in this. and it is of so great vehemence, that the very
body does partake with her, of it, and it is so disioynted, that a^ the members
seem broaken, and for many days after no one member can be moved without
great, and inexplicable pain.

15. It is able to move a stony heart, to read how our Holy Mother does
describe it, in her life, and what lamentation In her life chap. 20.
and loud cries she gives out, to express her pain, only desirous to be
dissolve and be with Christ, and for her great torment, in that solitude, she
is put in mind of that verse; I watch, and am as she Ps. 101 v 3.
solitary sparrow alone, in the top, or roof of the house; and she thinks
then that she is so; and in that case, and solitariness; she does remember
these words, Ps 41. v. 4. and 12.
(without procuring it) where is thy God. as if it were said, to her, where is
he, in whom thou have placed all thy confidence, where is he? why does not he
now help thee in this distressed case? has he so forsaken thee, whom thou
do, so dearly love, and seek after? now he has left thee destitute of all
comfort, and consolation; if he had loved thee, he would not forsake thee thus?
are all thy labors come to this, that thou art left in desolation, without
comfort, or help from heaven and earth? where is thy God? this (God so
permitting) does duble her pain, and increase her desire, so vehemently to
see, and be with him, that it is sufficient to take away many lives, if she had
them; and that saying of S. Paul was represented unto her, I Gal. ^. v. 14.
am crucified to the world, and the world to me, so that she remains in the
greatest torment that may be imagined, as it were crucified, betwixt heaven and
earth;

16. Our Holy Mother does compare this pain to the pains of Purgatory, it is
so excessive, and when the soul does perceive that his divine Majesty, is to
bring her into this solitude, and anguishes of death (for truly it is no other)
she naturally does fear, and tremble; but once that she is in it, she would
not be out of it: true it is, that the sensitive or inferior part cannot but
loath it, being so over painful, and apt to separat the body from the soul;
yet the superior, or spiritual part, takes content in so suffering, for the
love of God; esteeming it, as in deed it is, of great value, and profit. fot
in this, she is most like unto our Savior Crucified, destitute of any comfort
Math. 27. v. 46.
from heaven or earth, which caused him to say, my God, my God, as what have
thou for saken me; and therefore she does reject all that formerly were wont to
comfort her, to remain in this pain, and conformity to Christ our Savior
suffering, for as the gold by fire, she in this, is tried, purified, and
refined, as if she were come from Purgatory; her love is now purer, and so
excessive great, that nothing can content or satisfy her burning desire, but
the possession, and enjoying of God wholly as he is, and not any particular part
of him; and since she cannot justly procure her own death, to be with him;
with great tenderness, of heart, she does lament, and bewail her long
bannishment, resigning her self wholly to his divine disposing, and earnestly
praying that her living as yet, in this case, may be very highly, to his
honor, and glory, which she does always, and in all things regard more, then
her self; and desire, rather then her ease, or to be free from her pain,
though she were certain, it should continue to the world's end.

17. In this pain, dying life, and excess of love, toward God, our Holy
Mothers soul was commonly in her later days, and the impulses of love, were so
penetratiue, and forcible, in her; that with the vehemence of one great impulse
of love, her pure and blessed soul departed the body, (not of any other
sickness) and ascended into glory, where she does most happily enjoy him, whom
she so dearly loved; this she did declare appeering to the venerable Mother
Catherin of Jesus Prioresse of Beas the very day of her death; I beseech his
divine Majesty, to grant this divine love, to all that are desirous to serve,
and love him, with truth, though it be with never so great pain, yea, cost
what it may. Amen.

THE VI. CHAPTER. Of the manner of inward speeches, visions, and revelations,
and how to discern the true from the false.
1. SOme speeches, and visions are outward, as when a thing is heard, or seen,
with corporal ears, and eyes; so one man does see an other present, and hear
him discoursing, or speaking of somewhat; Others are inward, that is, heard,
seen, or understood far within the soul. of these some are imaginary, others
intellectual; the imaginary, is, when a thing is represented in some form, or
shape, to the eyes of the soul; as for example, when you frame in your mind,
the image of your friend, who is absent; you do see him inwardly, in a manner,
as if he were personally present, you see his gestures, and behavior, and may
be moved, out of that sight, to love him, or grieve for his absence, or to hate
him, and his ill condition, or behavior, and thus Christ our Savior or his
saints may appear, in the understanding; and it is called therefore imaginary.

2. But the intellectual, is without any image, shape, or form; yet of more
certainty, then the others, for spirits have no shape nor form, but being
present, they see, and understand, in a more perfect manner, then in the other
ways; what each other does intend. as the Angels do see, and clearly
understand, one, an other in heaven: and in these three ways, there are
speeches, visions, and revelations; the first is most subject to deceit, the
second not so much, by far; for the devil can turn him self into the shape,
of an Angel of light, to deceive; but the last, is least of all subject to
deceit, as surpassing the actiuity, or reach of the devil; and therefore is
most secure, and without danger.

3. But that his wyles, and ways may be known, and discovered; and that a
soul may not be much troubled, to know (if she has any visions or revelations)
whether they be true, or false. our Holy Mother does lay down certain signs,
and tokens, to discern the true, from the false, as when they are from God or
the devil, and also to know when they may be framed by the imagination, which
in some is very liuly, and active.

4. First observe, that when any words, are spoaken outwardly, or inwardly, if
they be from God, they come with cleernesse; that of the devil does bring
darkness. also when they are from the devil you may resist, and reject them,
and divert your understanding, and not attend unto them, when you please; but
if they be from God, do what you may, and divert your self, never so much,
you cannot hinder it, but must even against your will, hear, and see, what is
said, or done, so clearly and distinctly, that you shall not forget, one
syllable, though you would, all do remain so perfectly printed in the
understanding. also by this, his divine Majesty, will have us to know, that he
is all omnipotent and the true Lord of all, who alone, has all dominion over
us, and whose power, and will, none can resist, but must see, hear and
understand, when, and what he pleases; and if the words be of Prophecy, they
shall hardly be ever forgotten till they take effect, for they leave so great a
certainty of their truth, in the soul; that she cannot but believe, that all
will be truly performed accordingly, as they are foretold, though by all
reason, circumstances, and the present difficultyes, they seem impossible. of
this she had great experience;

5. Note also, that some understandings, are so pregnant, and the imagination
so liuly, that they frame and represent things very perfectly, and persuade
themselves that they see, and hear, what truly they do not; but it is a thing
invented, according to their fancy, by themselves. and it may be understood
thus; when a thing is framed by themselves, they cannot but observe, and
perceive the understanding working, and framing what it would, and producing
the words though never so subtily; also they are dumb words, without any
light, or good effect in the soul, also you may omit to see, hear, or speak,
when you please; but when they are from God, they come with light, and
cleernesse, as is said, and you cannot divert your self, but must attend, and
the understanding is set at rest, and in so great quietness that of necessity,
you must give ear to what is said, and see what is presented, and they are not
dumb words, but his words, are words, and works together; and some times,
though they be not words of devotion, but of instruction, admonition, or
reprehension, in an instant, they do dispose, and recollect the soul, and do
move her to a loving tenderness, and illuminat, quiet, and delight her; which,
words, or sights framed by the devil, or our selves, cannot do; and when the
soul is in any affliction, temptation or aridity, though never so great, at the
hearing of one word, or at any sight, that is from God, all does vanish away
suddenly; she remaining with great light, quietness, content, and joy. which
the others do not; by this, the soul that is practiced, does well know, when
they are from God, or no; and how powerful, and operative his word is; and of
what grear efficacy, his visions are;

6. Moreover, you may observe, that in an instant (which is to be well noted)
many long sentences, and arguments are spoaken, and understood (when it is from
God) and the soul, shall remember every word, and syllable, which in a long
time, and with much study, and industry, the understanding would not be able to
frame, or compass. Also they come with such Majesty, and efficacy, that when
they are reprehensiue, they cause the soul to tremble and shake, and if they be
of love, they make her to, long, languish, and in a manner, melt to nothing
with love, but when they are false, they work no such effect; and therefore
the soul does make little account of them, and do cast them at naught; so that
neither the devil, nor our imagination, though never so quick, and liuly, can
work, or cause those good effects in the soul.

7. In like manner, when the words, speeches, or visions are from the devil,
they do leave, and work evil effects, and not good, in the soul; as
darkness, aridity, disquietnesse; and though the devil does work some
sensible gust, in that occasion, which may deceive beginners, and those of no
experience; yet they who once tasted of the true visions, and speeches, will
instantly know the difference betwixt them; for they that are from God, do
leave in the soul a gust, very sweet, pleasing, forcible, and delectable, with
great quietness, and it is so deeply imprinted, that it cannot be forgott. but
that other which is false, does suddenly decay and vanish away, as if there
never were any such thing; neither is the soul any thing betterred by them.

8. Also the devil is never able to counter fit, or appear with that majesty,
light, cleernesse, and liulynesse, with which our Savior does appear; for he
does come so resplendent and glorious, and his person, is so beautiful, that
the soul cannot but know that it is he, and often his glory, and her joy, at
his presence, are so great, that she is wholly ravished and deprived of all
forces; and this does leave in her, a true feeling knowledge, that he alone, is
absolute Lord, of heaven and earth; and with this, she is extremely comforted,
having a liuly impression of him printed in her understanding, even after he is
parted, which the devil cannot effect, let him do what he can. In this manner
his divine Majesty was present for some years with our Holy Mother wheresoever
she went; But in the intellectual vision, which is more evident, eminent, and
more secure, from all deceit, (being very supernatural, and representing the
Angelical manner of knowing, or understanding) without words, forms, or
shapes, or any image, by a notion so divine, with admirable light, and
cleernesse, she does know, and see, in the very center of the soul, the most
Blessed Trinity; and in this manner, the three persons, remained in our Holy
Mother, as witnesses of what she did, and they did often admonish, and
forewarne her, to prevent some imperfections, into which in occasions, she had
fallen, if she were not foretold of them; and she was so replenished with
knowledge of divine Misteryes, and those chiefly, of our Holy faith, that she
was able to dispute, and convince the most learned protestants, show their
errors, and make the truth plainly, and evidently appear. this she does
write, at which, I think, none can admire, she being full of divine wisdom,
taught and instructed by the truth it self.

9. And observe that these high and great visions, are not as a certain
presence of God, or some influence of the divinity, which in quiet prayer,
union, or other degrees of supernatural prayer, are had; but in these, is the
blessed body, and proper person of Christ himself, true God and man, the very
son of the Glorious, and immaculat Virgin Mary, of which, the soul cannot
doubt; neither can the devil, as is said represent such great beauty, glory,
and Majesty, with which our Savior does appear, for all the glory that can be
imagined, is but a dark cloud compared with this. and here also is the most
Holy Trinity it self, the very divine essence, one God, and three persons, and
each of them do speak to her, and she to them, and of every of them, she does
beg, and obtain some special favor or gift.

10. And note, that some times, there are words, without any vision, the party
not knowing how, or whence they come, but they are heard, with the corporal
ears; other times inwardly, in the very depth of the soul, but clearly, and
perfectly understood; also there are visions, and no words, yet the soul does
get great benefit thereby; and there are visions and words to gether. But in
what kind so ever they be, the soul, by the signs, and effects mentioned, will
easily know, whether they be good, or no, true, or false, which is a very great
comfort to her; moreover when the visions, and speeches, are true, they work
so effectually in the soul, that she does find her inclination to vices, and
imperfections, decay, and true virtue taking root in her, which the devil with
all his wit, and wyles, is not able to do. Blessed be God who has provided
so well for his own servants: he is truly wonderful in all his works, and as
he is omnipotent, so nothing is to his divine Majesty impossible.

11. But though these signs, here laid down, (by which one may discern the
true from the false, and the good from the bad) are very good; yet she does
advise, In her life chap. 19.
though the favors be great that none must trust little, or much, to himself,
or his own judgment, but in all, and every thing, be circumspect and prudent,
only acquainting his Ghostly Father, or directour, with what visions, or other
favors, God does grant unto him, and both of them, must not diuulge any of
them, but use all secrecy, and silence, commending it to God, until time does
try the truth; or his divine Majesty, by some other way, does make it manifest,
and known, if he will have it so. for the devil is apt, to tempt, and deceive,
and our nature is prone, and inclined to proper esteem, and vain glory, on
small occasions, much more in these like;

12. And such as are desirous of true perfection, must be careful not to
affect, or seek after supernatural gusts, visions and revelations; for it is
a true token of an vnmortifyed spirit, little humility, and much presumption;
and to these God does not commonly give those favors; but to the humble, that
think themselves altogether unworthy of any such; for humility in this way of
Spirit, does prevail much with God, and gayneth all.

18. Moreover if in these supernatural degrees, you find your prayer always;
after one manner; and your gustes, and quietness of spirit, at all times to be
the same; your prayer is to be suspected, not to be right, but from Satan; and
in visions, if you can for a long time without alteration, behold that which
does appear, whether it be our Savior, or any Saint, it is to be esteemed, an
illusion, and deceit of the devil; for all these great unions, rapts and
visions are of no continuance, but speedily do alter, and pass away; that is
to say, they do not continue in that height of Majesty or glory, though they
may continue in a more obscure manner. and be present, and perfectly perceived
for a very long time.

14. And you must observe that in these visions of our Savior, and his saints,
you must have a great respect unto them, though they be from the Devil, and
make your spiritual profit of them; for you are not to hate, or contemn a
sweet picture, that represents one whom you dearly love, because it is made
by a painter of an evil life. but rather love it, by reason it does put you in
mind of your beloved, which is a comfort to your mind. even so, though the
devil being an excellent painter, should frame or represent in us, the form or
image, of our Savior, or any Saints, we must not disrespect it, because it is
framed by him, but use it for our profit, with humility, and reverence, for
their sakes whom we love, and it does represent.

15. Also you must not think them the holiest, that have consolations,
visions, and revelations; for many are great saints, that never had any of
them; and others, that had visions, and gusts, are not therefore saints, for
true sanctity, as I often said, does consist in solid virtue, and true
conformity of our will, to the will of God, in all things; but the visions, and
gusts, are good, when they are from God, yet not to be affected, or desired;
and the best, and most secure way, is, to be indifferent, to be disposed of, as
his divine Majesty shall think fit, and esteem our selves unworthy of any
favors.

16. Our Holy Mother does give us notice of other deceits, which are incident
to many, that have some degree of supernatural prayer, and do use great, and
indiscreet pennances, and thereby do bring themselves to great weakness; and
of others, who by nature are delicat, tender, and weak; these souls feeling
in prayer those gusts, and over ioyed with consolations, and inward sweetness,
do languish, or rather through weakness yeald, as one whose spirits, are
decaying, and failing, and do leave themselves in a manner dead, as if they
were in a kind of rapt, by which, nature is extremely hurt, and more weakened;
and they think it to be some effect of prayer, or the spirit of God, that does
work so in them, and therefore they remain in that manner for some hours to
gether.

17. But they must resist that weakness, and shake of that sluggish
disposition, for it is no other: and if that weakness, does proceed from too
much austerity, or penance, by the advice of their Ghostly Father, or
directour, they must eat, and drink, sleep, and recreat themselves well, for
some days, until they acquire strength; for as is said, indiscreet penance,
is hurtful to body and soul; and if it does proceed from the tenderness, or
weak constitution of nature, they must be more employed, in the active life,
and outward things, then in the solitary, or contemplative life; for the very
solitude, is able to make them weaker: and therefore, let them be obedient,
being applied to outward things, and let them be sure, that this is very
gratfull to God, and they no less saints; for as I said, sanctity does not
consist in contemplation, or having visions, or such like; but in true virtue,
and conformity, of our will, to the will of God;

18. So that if obedience command the active more, or rather then the
contemplative to be observed; we must be wholly indifferent, and resigned to
embrace it with content; also every complexion, is not fit for solitude,
contemplation, and much recollection; for some that give themselves to this,
cannot go forward, nor profit, by reason of their indisposition of nature,
that would be saints, if they had applied themselves, to the charitable and
humble works, of the active life; for though Martha gave her self, to the
practice, and exercise, of the active life, yet she was a S. as well as her
sister Mary Magdalen, who gave her self wholly to the contemplative.

19. So that they must in this case, resist that weakness, and believe for
certain, that it is no effect of supernatural prayer; for in this sort of
prayer, the body is rather comforted, and delighted, then troubled, or weakened;
by reason the over great content, and joy of the soul, does redowne to the
body, and it does partake of her inward felicity, as it is known by
experience, unless it be in the prayer of union, when the soul, powers, and
senses, are wholly united, and drowned in Gods divine essence, for though then
the body be destitute, of all force, this does not continue but for a short
time (as I said elsewhere) and it does return to it self again, with
strength, content, and great satisfaction; and in that union, though the body
be for a short time, as dead, yet the soul it more lively inwardly with God;
which in that other, she cannot be, but heavy, and dull; without any good
effect, yea rather with many evil, and hurtful, to body, and soul. Observe
also, (if God be pleased to give you any of those favors, of Rapts, visions
Revelations or other supernatural things of that sort) whether you be
terrifyed or fearful, at first, for commonly, if they be true, they work that
effect in the soul, though soon after, she is in great quietness, and content;
moreover you must not go to prayer through curiosity to know any thing by
revelation, nor adheare to your own opinion, or proper judgment, concerning
any thing revealed, but easily submit to the saying of your directour, or other
learned men. Likewise mark, whether they be of vain things, without any
necessity, or profit to your self or others. and note, that whenever by
visions, words, or any such, (which you have in these degrees of supernatutall
prayer) you find not your soul bettered in humility; or that you perceive in
your self, any little smoke of self interest, proper esteem, or vain glory,
make no account of them, but set them at naught, as false, and proceeding from
Satan; but the prayer, or vision, bringing, humility with it, is to be much
esteemed, and God highly praised, with many thanks for it.

20. Dear Christian soul, you may read of these things more at large in the
life of our Holy Mother, and in the books which she wrote, called, the castle
of the soul, or the mansions, and the way of perfection. for I have collected
these thence; only that they, which God does bring to these degrees or have
visions, or revelations, may understand, reading this little treatise, what
prayer they have, and whether their visions, be true, or false, that they may
not be troubled, or in continual fear of being deceived, by the devil, as our
Holy Mother was; which will be a great comfort to their mind, and quietness to
their conscience.

THE VII. CHAPTER. Of some observations for the better understanding of what is
said concerning Prayer.
1. WHereas in the treatise of Prayer there is often mention made of the
sensitive appetite, inferior, and superior part of man, also of several
degrees of contemplation, (which I suppose are known to the learned) I thought
good for the better satisfaction of the ignorant, and unlearned, to speak
somewhat of them in the conclusion of this work. The sensitive appetite, is a
faculty consisting of two members; in the inferior part of man; and has its
seat in the liver and heart, or as others say, in the heart only, and it has
for its object, sensible good or evil, as it is apprehended by the imagination,
as convenient, or disconuenient. the members or parts of it, are the
concupiscible, and irascible. The office of the concupiscible part, is, to
incline to, and be moved to that which is good or agreeable to it, and to
decline, and shun that which is evil, or contrary to it; The office of the
irascible part, is, to fight against the difficultyes, which may occur in the
acquisition of the good, and shuning the evil; in these two, the eleauen
passions, which are in man, are resident, six in the concupiscible, and five in
the irascible.

2. The passion is a motion of the sensitive part, which is moved by the
apprehension of some good, or evil, as convenient, or disconuenient, pleasing
or displeasing to it. The passions of the concupiscible are love, desire, joy
or gladness, hatred, flight, grief or sadness. Love is a propension of the
appetite toward that which is apprehended as good; desire or concupiscence is
a forwardness, or extension of love to obtain and embrace the good beloved;
Joy or gladness is a motion of the appetite, rejoicing in the possession of
the good present; for example, one seeing a fair horse, perceiues in him self
an affection, or likeing to him, then desire, or concupiscence puts him on to
cheapen, and buy the horse, at last having bought him, and being in possession
of him, he feels an inward joy, and delectation, with which he is satisfied.
Hatred is a displicence or abhoring that which is apprehended to be evil or
hurtful. flight, is a turning, or going from it, sadness or grief, is an
affliction or oppression for the evil that is present. as for example, one that
is indebted knowing that a certain officer has a warrant to apprehend him, by
chance does see him coming toward him; at the first sight of him, he is
troubled, and does find an horror or dislikeinge in himself of it; then he
desires to shune him, but if he be taken, he is daunted, afflicted, and his
heart oppressed. and as the former passions, do follow good, so these do shun
and fly evil.

3. The passions of the irascible part, are hope, stoutnesse, despair, fear,
and anger. Hope is a motion, or erection of the appetite toward the good which
it apprehends may be had though with difficulty. Stoutnesse is a motion of the
appetite, by which it is encourraged against the opposite difficultyes which are
imminent, and may hinder the acquisition of the good hoped for; despair is a
motion by which the appetite is afflicted and dejected; by reason it apprehends
that the good hoped for, through the difficultyes imminent cannot be obtained,
or had. Fear is an act of the appetite by which it is oppressed, with the
apprehension of the future eiul, which it thinks will happen; Anger is an act
of the appetite by which is it moved to revenge any injury received.

4. And you must understand that the passions always come's with some
alteration of the body, chiefly of the heart, where all of them do end. also
you are to observe, that when we say the appetite does follow, or shun good, or
evil, we do not mean that, which is good or evil in it self only, but also
which is apprehended, and presented by the imagination, to be such for often we
do imagine that to be good, which is absolutely evil; and that to be evil,
which is good; as for example, one that is by some accident greatly afflicted,
and in despair, thinks it a great good to rid himself of that affliction,
by ending his life with poison, as many do, which is evil in it self;

5. Moreover note that all these passions, do follow the knowledge that
preceede's from the senses, and seeks after the three goods, which are in
request with the lovers, of this world; and do abhor the contrary euiles;
the first good, is that, which is called honest, that is, the esteem or honor
of this world, the second is that good, which is profitable, as riches wealth
etc, the third good is called delectable, as the pleasures of this life. The
contrary euiles are, Infancy or disgrace, discommodity or want, grief or
sadness, which increases in some to so great a height, through the heaviness
and dullness of spirit, and the languishing disposition of the body, that they
are unfit to do any spiritual exercise; so that such as are inclined to
melancoly are unfit for the state wherein the exercise of mental prayer, and
virtues, is much used; for they are apt in occasions to fall into that evil.
and observe that if the passions be sweetly allured. and by reason, brought to
follow virtue, which is truly good, they conduce to life everlasting; but if
they follow their own dispositions, and ways, they lead to endless damnation.
which by the following example may appear.

6. But for the better understanding of it, I will first show what the
inferior and Superior part, or portion of man is. for by that you may know
when you do follow vice or virtue, good, or evil. and as the Superior and
inferior part does proceed, the habits of vices, or virtues are acquired. The
inferior part of man, is the understanding, as it does consider, order, and
direct his actions, and other things, according to the maxims, and rules of the
world, or created things. But it is commonly taken by spiritual men for, the
whole sensitive part, with all its members, in as much, as it may obey the
understanding and will. But as the understanding does consider eternal things
and direct his actions and all thing according to the law of God, (...) is
called the Superior part, or portion of man. Now to the example. A religious
man that is bound by his institute to do nothing without the license of his
Superior, being very thirsty, and hot, walking in the garden, does find a
fair apple fallen from a tree, looking at it, the sensitive appetite is moved
with a desire to eat that apple, then the understanding discoursing according
the law of nature, conceiues, that the eating of that apple is not only
pleasing, and delectable; but it is also profitable for his, health; for it
will mitigate that heat, and quench his thirst, and this conceit is proposed
to the will with those circumstances, all which is the work of the inferior
part.

7. If then the understanding which is ordered according to the law of god,
the will concurring, or permitting, which is the Superior part, do neglect to
consider that, to eat that apple is against the law of God, being a breach of
his institute, or if he does take notice of it, and sleighting it, gives a kind
of tacit consent, that the will may take delight in it, and so the apple is
eaten, without license; this consent is a sin, mortal, or venial, according
to the quality of the matter; as if it be in a matter of mortal sin, it is
mortal, if, of small importance, it is but venial. this is called a lingering
delight. But it is an express consent, when the understanding deliberatly does
consider it, and the will adhere to it, so considered; so that the Superior
part ought to suppress that motion, of the appetite, and with contrary
reasons, to those of the inferior part, persuade to omit the eating of the
apple, as being a sin, deserving God's displeasure, the pains of hell, and the
loss of the joys of heaven, for ever. Also it might say, alas, what a small
and transitory delight or content thou shall have in eating that apple, by
which thou shall loose eternal joy, and glory. or thus, (when the inferior
part is earnest and the appetite much moved) my soul, did not our Savior
Christ Jesus do much for love of thee, and wilt not thou forbear this little
for love of him* perhaps for this one act, ouercoming thy self, he will
confirm thee in grace for ever, and such other like.

8. By this little knowledge of the inward man, you may the better regulat your
self to divine matters, and by conderation, or meditation, come to the
contemplation of those things which are eternal. for meditation is a discourse
of the understanding by which we labor to find out the truth of things; which
being found, the understanding does rest, beholding that truth with content,
which is contemplation. In meditation, we are like a ship at Sea, tending
toward its port of haven, through many dangers and cross winds. for there,
come's, one cross wynd, of an evil representation, then, that, of an other
distraction, then a tempest of some great temptation, then the heavy waves of
the sensitive appetites and passions (though not always) giving us very little
rest, but (as the ship with contrary wynds, and swelling sea's,) do toss us
too and froe. think then what great labor must the Superior part take in
this case? therefore great diligence, and art, is to be used, to get forward,
and secure our selves, that all difficultyes overcome, we may rest at length,
in the haven, of sweet contemplation, (which is but a simple view, or beholding
of the known truth, with content (for there, we are like a ship at anchor,
and rest, in the haven, so long, and so much desired, and wished for. by which
you see, that meditation, is the high path way to contemplation, and without
the long use and practice of it, that rich jewel of conte^plation is not had

9. Contemplation thus described, has three degrees, the one natural, the
other supernatural, the last divine; by the first we contemplat God, as the
author and creator of all things, and natural verityes, in them: as many
philosophers did; in the second, by a supernall light infused, we contemplat
God, as the author of grace, of whom we receive spiritual favors and
benefits; for we are borne the children of wrath, and by grace in baptism we
are made the children of God. and come to know the works of grace. by the
third, which is divine, (as proceeding from the gift of the Holy Ghost, called
wisdom) we contemplat God, and his divine perfections; as that he is infinite,
immense, eternal, goodness it self etc. to these three degrees of
contemplation, there are three appetites, or facultyes in us corresponding. the
sensitive, the rational, and the spiritual; by the first, we love God, for
our being as our creator, by the second. we affect him, for his many benefits
of grace, as our chief benefactour; by the third, we love him, for his divine
perfections only, as worthy of all love for himself; and according to these
three, we may regulat all our actions, in this life; of these that proceed
according to the first S. Paul said. The natural man 1. Co. rinth. 2. v 14
Collos 3. v. 5.
(that is, he that follows sensuality) receives not the things of the spirit
of God; of the second, that tend to Christian perfection, he says. mortify
your members, which are upon the earth; of the third, it is said by God to
Abraham Genesis 17. v. 1.
walk before me, (that is in his Holy presence) and be perfect, as Abraham,
and David did, who said to God, the meditation of my heart, is always
acceptable in thy sight. for those do all things for the honor and glory of
God.

10. Yet mystical divines do speak of an other degree of contemplation which
they call, Sapientia vnitiua, an uniting wisdom; and it does consist in the
affection of the will, rather then in the operation of the understanding, for
by anagogicall or ardent acts of love, and divine aspirations, the will
inflamed, in a manner without the operation of the understanding, gets out
of it self, earnestly endeavoring to be united, and to adheare actually to
God. this is, of great perfection. But that divine contemplation of which I
spoake formerly is an act of the understanding suspended in admiration of
eternal things, proceeding from the gift of wisdom with an inward gust, and
experimental taste of celestial sweetness; for beholding so many rare and
stang things together; the understanding stands in admiration, this admiration
causes a serious attention, this attention brings a pure and very clear
knowledge of Eternal verityes, with so great inward gust and sweetness, th^^ the
understanding remains wholly suspended; hence divine love increases, the soul
is inflamed, and knows not what to do with her self.

11. The effects of this divine love, are many, but those principally, An
ecstasy, by which the soul seems to go out of her self with seruour of
spirit, to be transformed into her beloved; then liquefaction. which is a kind
of tenderdesse, or melting of the soul, that the pores all open, she might
draw her beloved into her self as the sponge does water. Union by which they
are united, and do touch each other. as we see two things joined together.
mutual inhesion by which hey now united, do strictly embrace each other.
Penetration, by which with cordial affections she gets within her beloved.
Transformation by which she (...) to be changed, into the form and perfections
of her beloved. Zeal by which she does so burn, that she can endure no
Society of any in that good, which she does possess; these effects of love are
more forcibly produced when the thing beloved is in her possession; but if her
beloved be absent, her desire to enjoy him, is so vehement, (and this is called
fervor) that it does procure an other effect of love, called languor; by
which, (out of the excessive grief and pain, which for his absence she does
conceive,) she is often in danger to dye. for in deed it is able to procure a
separation of body and soul, and it does happen to some. you may read of these
things more at large in several books, but chiefly in the book written by
the R. Fr. John of Jesus Maria, called the instruction of the nouices; and that
which he wrote of oration, and contemplation in the treatise of the passions;
note that all the degrees of prayer and contemplation of which our Holy Mother
speaks, may be reduced to those formerly mentioned. as the prayer of
recollection, quiet prayer, sleep of the soul, union etc. which are
supernatural, and have contemplation.

12. As for a rapt, it is a certain elevation by which the soul is exalted, by
the spirit of God, to supernatural things, with a kind of abstraction from the
senses; you must observe here, that a rapt does include a violence which does
not consist in that the soul is carried toward God, by reason, that is
agreeable to her nature, but because, she is with so great swiftnes carried from
the senses by that abstraction, yet the senses as is formerly said are not
wholly lost, unless it be when the rapt is in the height, but they are much
altered by reason of that sudden and violent abstraction of the soul from them,
yet they do well perceive in that rapt (when the body is elevated from the
ground) that the body is in that height, which causes great admiration in the
soul, so that the rapts properly do not consist in the affectiue, but in the
knowing powers. as when the understanding with a kind of alienation from the
senses, or with some intellectual vision, is elevated, and suddenly, snatched
away, or the phantasy, or imaginatiue to some imaginary vision.

13. The reason why rapts cannot be in the will, is, that the will is a kind of
propension or inclination to that which is good, and the more forcibly or
violently it is drawn, the more conformable it is to his, inclination; for
that cannot be said, to suffer violence, which is moved according, to its
natural disposition; but the more forcibly it is moved toward its object, the
more delightfully it works. So that the rapts (by reason they come with
violence against the natural disposition) cannot be in the will. yet the
vehemence of the affection of the will, or sensitive appetite, is often the
cause of rapts, when the soul does very forcibly adhere to those things. which
she does affect, for by that force, she does compel the knowing powers, to
attend to the objects, which she does love, as it were with a certain violence
drawing them from all other things. and the sensitive appetite does the same.
therefore they that naturally have vehement inclinations or affections, must
divert their mind, to some other thing, when they find their desire inflamed,
least they be deceived, thinking that to be from God, which is from nature, or
the devil; for if it be from God, though the soul endeavor to resist it, all
will be in vain; for it will take effect;

14. Note, that in this, a rapt does differ from an ecstasy, that an ecstasy, is
without violence, and therefore it is in the will, as is formerly said, for it
is but a going out of it self, by love, to what it does affect; and a rapt is
always with violence. also the calling, or inward touch of God, and certain
abstractions by which his divine Majesty does forcibly draw the soul unto
himself as her Lord, are the cause of rapts; likewise by some light, or inward
flame, also by some instillation of great sweetness, into the sensitive
appetite, in like manner, by a kind of secret whistle, and many other unknown
ways, God does efficaciously draw the soul to himself, by which, he does
give her notice that he is absolute Lord and creator of all.

15. Moreover, rapts do produce other effects in the body, as its forces to
fail, to wax cold, to fall into a kind of dead fit, to be elevated from the
earth, to hang in the air, to be very light and agill, as not having any
weight. There are other rapts, which are not so forcible, and are imperfect, by
which. the soul is not so drawn from the senses but she may speak some words,
and give out heany sighs and groans, and somtymes the vehemence is such that
they cast blood, and the body does tremble and shake with strange fits, and they
do leap, run and cry out by reason of the excess of inward joy. this is
that celestial or divine drunknes of which I spoake before. To conclude, love
is the prime and principal passion, by which a man is drawn to all his
operations; therefore S. Augustine said, my love is my poise or weight, and
whither soever I am carried, thither I am carried, to wit, where his love is.
For all the rest of the passions do follow love, as for example. I desire to
have a thing, not for any other cause, but that I love it; I do not rejoice,
or delight my self, but in that which I love; also I do not hate a thing but
because it is opposite, and contrary to what I love; and therefore I do fly
and shim it. likewise I do not hope or fight, but for what I love, nor grieve,
but for the evil which does hinder me from what I love, and so of the rest;

16. He therefore that intend's to acquire virtue, and the true love of God,
must heed carefully to what his love does tend, (whether to that which is
truly good, and not apparent; or, to that which is according to the laws of
God, and not to the desires of nature; or to that which is truly virtuous, and
not vicious,) and if he find, that it is not right, with sweet persuasions, and
solid reasons, let him always endeavor to reduce it, to piety, and those
things which are eternal; as if it be moved by the beauty of any creature;
instantly, say, how far more beautiful, and worthy of all love he, is, who
made that beauty, why then do not thou seek after him who is eternal,
rather then after this, which is to day, and gone to morrow. thy God is beauty
it self, from whom all beauty is, he then is more worthy of thy love, then
this, which is, but a shadow of what is love worthy in him? O my sweet soul,
love not that which brings thee to hell, but what may bring thee to heaven, and
endless joy. See, that what thou can love most on earth, will fail thee, and
decay, being but momentary, but if thou do love God, thy sweet and loving
creator, and redeemer, he will never fail thee, but bring, thee to enjoy
himself in endless glory. thus sweetly you must in all occasions labor to
induce your soul to the love of God, and those virtues which are contrary to
your vicious inclination or love.

17. Dear Christian soul I wrote this chapter for the better understanding of
what is in the second and third part of this book, for there, it is said, that
you must mortify your passions; how can you mortify what you do not know; for
though you feel the passion, yet you know not what it is, or whence it is;
which being known, with more ease you may mortify it, and prevent its swelling
rage. and so by degrees going from virtue to virtue, from meditation, to
contemplation, from contemplation, to a true transformation in God, you shall
enjoy, the beginning of true felicity in this life, and completely in the other,
which I most humbly beseech God of his infinite goodness to bestow on thee and
me. Amen.

This book is endend, to the honor and glory of God, and the most Blessed V.
Mary this 8. of September 1651. and if there be any thing in it, contrary to
our Holy Faith, I do most willingly submit both it, and my self to the
censure of the Holy Catholic Roman Church.

By me, S. B. native of the city of Dublin.

THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS, Of this Third Part of the Soul's Delight.
CHap. 1. p. 1. A brief relation of supernatural prayer. Chap. 2. p. 19. Of
Recollection and quiet prayer. more in particular. Chap. 3. p. 36. Of the
sleep of the powers. Chap. 4. p. 55. Of the prayer of union. Chap. 5. p. 62.
Of Several other eleuations of the spirit, and how they differ from union.
Chap. 6. p. 78. Of the manner of inward speeches, visions, and revelations, and
how to discern the true from the false. Chap. 7. p. 94. Of some observations
for the better understanding of what is, said concerning prayer.
Of the most marcable things contained in this third Part. The first figure,
will show you the page, or side of the leaf. The second, when it is. will
design the marginall Number, where that is to be had which is sought for. and.
this word ibid. Shows that it is in the place lastly cited.
A.
ACquired virtues. what p. 3. n. 2, Acquired prayer what. p 4. n. 3. Abbayes
built in solitary places in former times. and wherefore. p. 6. n. 5. Attention
to discourse, or inward words, do hinder the benefit of quiet prayer. p. 31.
n. 11. Absence from God a heavy load to a loving soul. p. 66.

B.
THe Body does participat of the inward joy, in supernatural prayer. the Body
in union woyde of sense. p. 56. n. 2. the Body elevated above ground in rapts.
p. 63. n. 2. The true Body of Christ, is seen in some visions. p. 85. n. 9.

C.
COnsolations not to be affected. p. 29. n. 10. Consolations and comforts,
which comes by discourse, far different from those which God gives in
supernatural prayer. p. 31. n. 12. Consolations and comforts supernatural,
does recreat body and soul. p. 32. n. 12. They give health to the sick. p. 33.
n. 13. divine Communications are highly esteemed by the soul. p. 37. n. 2.
Charity ordered in the soul. p. 43. n. 8. and p. 44. n. 10. Christ more in love
with us, then we with him. p. 35. The way to come to God. ibid. Concupiscible
part of man what. p. 95. n. 1. Contemplation what, p. 102. and p. 104. n. 10.

D.
DIscourse not, to be used, nor regarded in quiet prayer, and wherefore. p. 27.
n. 9. and p. 31. n. 11. Death desired; to be with God. p. 74. n. 13. Desire.
what. p. 69.

E.
ELeuations of the spirit in prayer are many, yet distinct betwixt themselves,
and from union. p. 62. n. i. Their difference is known by their effects. p.
63. n. 2. Exrasis, have their effects inward and outward. ibidem. Ecstasy
described. p. 105. n. 11.

F.
FOrce not to be used in prayer, and why. p. 89. n. 9. Flight The passion.
what. p. 69. n. 2. Flight the rapt compared to a sudden fire. p. 71. n. 10.

G.
GOds presence supernatural. p. 4. n. 3. and p. 10. n. 9. and p. 24. n. 5. God
and his Angels. where. p. 7. n. 7. God does work recollection in us. p. 10.
n. 8. God does reward our labor in prayer. p. 8. n. 7. Gusts in prayer not to
be desired, and why so? p. 29. n. 10. God containing all creatures in himself,
seen in a rapt and the sins committed on earth. p. 72. n. 11. Ghostly Father
to be acquainted with all visions. etc. p. 87. n. 11.

H.
HVmility to be used in prayer. p. 28. n. 9. want of Humility in prayer very
prejudicial. p. 29. n. 10. It is not want of Humility to acknowledge. that one
is favored by God, p. 25. n. 7. It rather moves to greater humility. ib. The
benefit of a humble soul. p. 33. n. 13. Hatred what. p: 96. They are not the
holiest that have visions. p. 89. n. 15.

I.
IMagination troublesome in prayer. p. 47. n. 17. Very liuly in some. p. 81. n.
5. Infused virtue, what. p. 3. n. 2. Infused prayer, what. p. 4. n. 3. Infused
prayer is commonly given to mortifyed souls. p. 5. n. 4. Inferior part of man
what. p. 99. n. 6. Joy what. p. 96. Joy suspendeth the senses. p. 74. n. 14.

K.
Knowledge clearer and purer in every degree of rapts. p. 66.

L.
Love praised. p. 47. n. 15. Love what. p 95. n. 2. Love like a flame ascends
upwards from the soul. p. 66. n. 5. The effects of divine Love. p. 6. n. 8 and
p. 105. n. 11.

M.
MArriage spiritual. p. 58. n. 6. Meditation what. p. 101. n. 8. Music often
the cause of rapts. p. 69. n. 7

N.
Noise inwardly heard how it terrifieth. p. 68. n. 6.

O.
OFfice of the concupiscible and irascible part of man. p. 95. n. 1.

P.
PRayer supernatural. p. 4. n. 3. 4. Why do not many profit, and receive
great favors of God in prayer. p. 35. n. 15. Passion. what. p. 65. n. 3. Power
of God not to be resisted. p. 64. n. 3. The powers, for a long time after great
rapts not themselves. p. 70 n. 8. Pain suspendeth the powers in a certain
rapt. p. 74. n. 14. The Prayer that is always after one manner is to be
suspected. p. 88. n. 18.
Q.
QViet prayer. what. p. 13. n. 11. 13. and p. 22. n. 4. In what does it
principally consist. p. 23. n. 5. Some are mistaken, thinking they loose their
time, when they do not discourse in quiet prayer. p. 26. n. 8. What to do in
that prayer, if fervor be decaying p. 28. n. 9. what the soul is to do in
that quietness. p. 30. n. 10. 11. Other effects of quiet prayer. p. 34. n. 14.

R.
REcollection. what. p. 8. n. 7. 8. 10. and p. 19. n. 1. More particularly and.
p. 22. n. 4. Rapts, with their effects. p. 17. n. 13. and p. 62. n. 1. 2. 3.
Specially. and. p. 107. n. 12. More clearly. rapts are not in the affectiue but
knowing powers. ibid. n. 12. 13. Religious seeking after the things of the
world, are like dogs returning to the vonit. p. 20. n. 2. 3. Revelations,
visions and speeches intellectual, and imaginary. p. 78. n. 1. 2.

S.
Sleep of the powers described. p. 13. n. 11. and p. 41. n. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.
11. to 16. Solitude fit for contemplation. p. 5. n. 4. 5. The description of
solitude. p. 7. n. 7. Spiritual solitude. p, 8. n. 7.

Sensitive appetite, what. p. 95. n. 1.

Superior part of man what. p. 99. n. 6.

Supernatural prayer the reward of purity and solitude. p. 5. n. 4.

Supernatural prayer. see prayer.

Spiritual drunknes. p. 43. n. 8. 9. to Suffer for God's sake gives great
content to a soul in love. p. 48. n. 15. Simple souls being virtuous, do more
good in the Church, then many learned. p. 61. n. 9. Sadness what. p. 99. the
Senses not lost in all rapts. p. 63. n. 2.

T.
THe Holy Trinity often seen in several visions. p. 64. n. 3. and p. 71. 10.
To be terrified at the first receiving of any great favors, from God, a good
sign. p. 93. 19. S. Teresa, dyed of love, and not of any other sickness. p. 77.
n. 17.

V.
Union described. p. 14. n. 11. 12. and p. 41. and p. 55. n. 1. 2. Very
clearly. the effects of union great. p. 59. n. 6. 7. 8. The divine essence does
penetrat the whole substance of the soul in some unions. p. 58. n. 5. Union
distinguished from extasyes, flights and rapts. p. 63. n. 2. Visions, a
special sort of them described. p. 71. n. 11. Visions divided into outward and
inward, and these into Imaginary and intellectual. 78. n. 1. 2. how to
discern when they proceed from God, or the devil. p. 88. n. 18. whether from
God, or framed by our selves. p. 81. n. 5. p. 16. Those without words
described. p. 86. n. 10.

W.
THe will what. p. 107. n. 13. The whistle of God p. 68. wiles of the devil
discovered, by certain tokens and g^e^s. p. 78. n 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.


