SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Angola Seed: SHOWING Its Admirable VIRTUE IN
CURING All DISTEMPERS OF THE EYES.

Written by a Doctor of Physic in the Country to Dr. Goddard, one of the
Royal Society at London, Anno 1660.

London Printed, etc. 1682.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the Angola Seed: SHOWING Its Admirable Virtue in
Curing all Distempers of the EYES. In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, wherein you give me an Account of a strange sort of
Distemper in the Eyes of the Inhabitants about London: And I find you desire
that I would communicate what useful Observations I have made in that
Distemper.

I must tell you, that our Country Folk are infested with the same Distemper,
and I attribute it unto some unusual Qualities in the Air and Winds at this
time; and I find that the use of an American Specific does great Service with
us: I learned it of an Indian Doctor; it is a sort of a Scarlet Seed with a
small black Speck in it: They are not easy to be met with, I once had some
from a Druggist in Walbrook, but have forgot his Name. They singularly dry up
Rhumes in the Head, strengthen the Optic Nerves, cool Inflammations in the
Eyes, and comfort the Animal Spirits; they cleanse and heal: By their Balsamic
virtue disperse the cloudiness of the Brain, and clear the Sight. I am credibly
informed that Dr. Stepkins that Eminent Oculist, performed many Admirable Cures
with them, amongst Men, Women and Children.

One of your Citizens of London, who has consulted with Dr. Turbervil of
Salisbury, came into our Country, having a grievous Opthalmy, desired my
Assistance, finding no Relief by his Advice. I directed him to the use of these
American Seeds: I gave him the Tincture, Spirit and Extract in Waters, and also
in Milk, and in all the liquid Aliments he took, and I caused him to wear a
Necklace of the same. It dried up all his Rhumes in Forty days time.

An old Gentlewoman whose Eyes were almost put out by the Evil, and had not
only an Inflammation, but a Cataract was much feared, because some of her
Relations had been blind by that Distemper. I applied the same Remedies to her,
and it succeeded to Admiration.

A young Woman whose Eyes were wonderfully inflamed after the Small Pox, and so
weak she could not endure to look against the Light, and in great Pain; she had
been blooded, and Purged, and Bannio'd and Blister'd, and Cupt, had made two
Issues, and a Seton in her Neck; and the Lady Ivy had applied many Eye-waters,
and Powders and Ointments for seven Months* and all to no purpose; and at
length the use of this Specific perfectly recovered her Eyes, to the great Joy
of her Relations and her self.

A Child about four years old, whose Eyes were extreme bad, and lay under the
hands of a Woman who pretended great skill, she picked Five pounds out of the
Parents pocket, upon a Promise of Cure, but never performed it. But at length
one who had received Benefit by this Specific, recommended it, and received
thanks for so doing from the Child's Friends, and it has been well ever since.

A Minister whose Eyes by Reading and late Studying had a violent Defluxion of
Rhume upon them, that they always looked Blood-shotten; after the use of other
Methods for two Months together, to no purpose; and then hearing of this
Medicine, applied himself to it, and only washed his Eyes with pure
Spring Water, and this Specific perfectly recovered him.

A young Child born blind, was helped by the Nurses taking these Drops, the
Child only sucking her Milk, but its Distemper was an Opthalmy, but not a true
Cataract.

There was a whole Family very much Distempered with Hot Rhumes in their Eyes;
three of the Persons were in danger of Cataracts growing in them: They had used
all sorts of Applications, and had suffered three pretending Women to tamper
with them several Months, and at last hearing of these Scarlet Seeds, wore
Necklaces of them, and took the Tincture made of them in all their Drink, and
in a Months time were perfectly Cured, only taking twenty Drops at a time.

FINIS.

