THE Fatal Jealousy.

A TRAGEDY.

Acted at the Duke's Theater.

Licensed

November. 22, 1672. Roger L'Estrange.



LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the White Lion, next Chancery Lane end in
Fleet Street. 1673.

The Actors Names.
Don Antonio. A Jealous Lord. Mr. Smith. Don Gerardo. Friend to Antonio. Mr.
Medburn. Don Francisco. A Young Lord. Mr. Young. Don Sebastian. Friend to
Francisco. Mr. Crosby. Jasper. A Villain. Servant to Antonio. Mr. Sandford.
Pedro. Servant to Antonio. Mr. Burford. Servant To Gerardo. Mr. Norris. Captain
of the Watch. Mr. Nath. Leigh.
Soldiers.
Women.
Caelia. Wife to Antonio. Mrs. Shadwel. Eugenia. Sister to Caelia. Mrs.
Betterton. Flora. Waiting Woman to Caelia. Mrs. Osborn. Nurse To Caelia. Mr.
Nokes. Witch. Aunt to Jasper. Mrs. Norris.
Spirits. Gypsies.
PROLOGUE
By Mr. Smith.

TO you, great Sovereign Wits, that have such sway,
Without Control to save, or damn a Play;
That with a pish, my Anthony, or so,
Can the best Rallied sense at once over throw;
And by this power, that none must question now,
Have made the most Rebellious Writers bow,
Our Author, here his low Submission brings,
Begging your pass, calls you the Stages Kings;
He says, nay, on a Play-Book, swears it too,
Your pox uppo'nt damn it, what is here to do?
Your nods, your winks, nay, your least signs of Wit,
Are truer Reason than e're Poet writ,
And he observes do much more sway the Pit.
For sitting there h'has seen the lesser gang
Of Callow Critics down their heads to bang;
Lending long Ears to all that you should say,
So understand, yet never hear the Play:
Then in the Tavern swear their time they have lost,
And Curse the Poet put them to that cost.
And if one would their just Exceptions know,
They heard such, such, or such a one say so;
And thus in time by your dislikes they rise,
To be thought Judges, though indeed but spies.
This is not fair your Subjects to betray
To those that strive to Rival you in sway;
That will in time by your expense of wit,
Vsurp over us, and your successors sit.
These and some other dangers to remove,
We beg that though this Play you disapprove,
Say nothing of it here, and when you're gone,
We give that leave you will take to cry it down;
Thus you preserve your power, and we shall be
From Fopps, and Demi-Criticks Censure free.
Subdued by force, we Tyrants thus obey,
But Ladys, you like lawful Monarchs sway,
You Rule by Love, and Pardon faults with ease,
In Subjects that do all they can to please.
By faction they condemn, you by our Peers;
And he is guilty sure such Trial fears:
And though our Author pleads not guilty now.
And to his Trial stands, he hopes that you,
Will not too strictly his accusers hear,
For if this Play can draw from you a Tear,
He Will slight the Wits, Half-Wits, and Critics too;
And Judge his strength by his well pleasing you.
THE Fatal Jealousy.
Act the First. Scene the First.
The Curtain drawn Discovers Don Antonio and Caelia in Morning-Gowns. Chamber
and Bed. Cael. MY Lord, you well may blame my conduct of that business,
Since it produced such dismal Accidents,
As my heart trembles but to think upon;
Yet for Don Lewis's Innocence and mine,
In the contrivance of that Fatal Meeting;
I must for ever, during Life, be Champion.
And, as he with his dying breath protested,
He never meant wrong to you; so am I ready
To dye a Martyr to my Innocence.

Anto. Come, come, these are but wyles to Palliate things,
Can you believe me stupid, or an Ass?
To think my Wife should meet a Man in the Night;
Nay, more; a Man that was my seeming Friend:
Yet taken in at Window privately!
Nay, which was most, stay with him two full hours,
And in a Room made proper by a Bed,
And yet not Cuckold me; the thing's too plain,
I do not doubt the deed, which Iv'e Revenged
In part, by killing him: No, I am mad,
That you should think so meanly still of me,
As to hope time may alter my belief;
Which is by such unerring Reasons fixed:
Or else that you suspect my Truth, when I have sworn
By all things sacred; nay, upon my Honor
(Which I am so Jealous of) that if you would
Relate the truth of your so close amors,
I from my memory would blot it all,
And look on you at worst, but as the Widow
Of your dead Cousen Lewis.

Cael. Good my Lord,
Forbear to use these killing Arguments,
Which every moment give me many Deaths,
Rather be like your self, that is Generous,
And kill me once for all; torment me not
By giving no belief, either to Vows
Or Actions that have spoke my Innocence:
Reflect (my Lord) on the unwearied pains
Iv'e took to gain your pardon for his Death.
Think with what patience I Have suffered still
Your often starts of Passion, which sometimes
Have never produced the effects of Cruelty.
And without boast, my Lord, you well do know
My Friends were much too strong for yours at Court,
Then had I but made known your severe Carriage,
Or suffered your surprizal -- it is too plain;
Yoor Life had been a forfeit to the Law.
And were I but the wanton Wife you think me,
What would more welcome be then that Revenge --
Here on my knees I beg again, my Lord,
You would persuade your self, that what I told you
Was cause of that close meeting, was so truly,
And no invention; and as this Day
Began our Nuptial Joys, so let it end
Our Marriage Discords; then shall I have cause
To keep it Annually a Festival;
In thanks to Heaven for two such mighty Blessings.

Anto. Caelia, stand up, I will persuade my self.
By this -- I will as much as e're I can,
Kisses her. That thou art Innocent, for if thou be not,
What Woman in the World ought to be thought so?
But prithee be discreet, manage thy Actions
With strictest Rules of Prudence, for if not,
Like to a Bow or'e-bent, I shall start back,
And break with passion on thee: will thou be careful?

Cael. Oh! I am paid for all my sufferings,
This kindness does or'e-joy me, which, my Lord,
Let me for ever lose when any Act
Of mine, shall justly make a forfeit of it.

Enter Flora. Flor. My Lord, here is Don Gerardo come to see you.


Anto. Admit him in.

Exit Flora.
Cael. I will retire, my Lord.


Anto. You need not, Caelia.
Enter Gerardo. Welcome, Gerardo, this is like a Friend,
That name should know no Ceremonious Laws,
Let them make formal Visits that maintain,
As formal Friendships; ours is tried and true.

Gerar. This, as I take it, was your Wedding Day,
At which (your pardon, Madam, for a truth.)
I was a Jealous waiter; your great worth
Made me to fear I then had lost a Friend,
And in that room should an acquaintance find.

Cael. But now, my Lord, you see how you mistook,
I was a Rival to his Mistresses,
But to his Friends, one to increase their number.

Ger. I find the truth so great, I wish you may
Live long and happy to possess that place;
Yet I Will confess I did not lose my fears,
Till my dear Friend was pleased to use my Sword,
As Second, in the Quarrel with your Kinsman,
The Unfortunate Don Lewis; and I protest
Such Joy I met to be employed by him,
That I never sought to know what caused the quarrel.

Cael. My Lord, I beg your pardon,
I have some little business in my Closet
Which forces me retire.

Ger. Your Lady looks as if she were displeased.


Anto. That Kinsman whom I slew is never named,
But if she hears it she avoids the place.

Ger. I Am troubled much to be the occasion now.


Anto. No matter, Friend, she only knows the cause,
Why from such Friendship we grew Enemies,
And there is reason why she should be grieved.

Ger. That sudden and so secret Quarrel
Did much amaze all Naples;
And I (as Actor in it) often have been pressed
To tell the cause, which yet I never could.

Anto. No, Friend, nor never must:
The Generous Lewis; so I Will call him now,
Since he so bravely died, was always just
During that little time he breathed this Air;
After his mortal Wound, for he Related
A Story of it fitted us for pardon:
Yet never told that Secret, only known
On Earth, to him, to Caelia, and my self.

Ger. I Am not inquisitive, nor never was,
There may be secrets fit for no Man's hearing.
And it is an Act of Friendship full as great.
To tell a Friend I hide a secret from him,
As to Relate it, since they both show Candor --

Anto. Happy Antonio, in a Friend so just!


Ger. Happy Gerardo, rather, that can say
He Is sure he has a Friend, that dares employ him;
For confidence in Friends makes Friendship sure.

Anto. And dearest Friend, I Will not doubt yours so much,
To think you would not use this Life of mine,
As 'twere your own in any thing concerns you.

Ger. Never doubt it, Friend, I soon shall find occasion
Boldly to use the power, and to speak truth;
My coming now was chiefly to that purpose;
Though I intended to spend this day too
In Recreation with you, and to see you Bedded,
Like a new Bride and Bridegroom,
Then wishing you long: long and lasting Joys,
Retire, and wish to Copy out your Life.

Anto. Has Don Gerardo Service for Antonio,
His own Antonio, and yet defers to name it?
Speak your Commands, that I as swift may fly
To put 'em into Action, as I did
At first to meet those pleasures Lovers long for.

Ger. My fears persuade me I shall speak too soon,
Yet dress your self, and come into the Garden,
I with impatience there will wait to tell you.

Anto. Go then, you shall not long be silent.
Ex. Gerardo. Who waits there?
Enter Pedro, and Exit. Pedro, call my Wife --
My Wife, said I! Gerardo, did thou know
The secret fears contained within this Bosom,
Thou Would sooner pity me, than wish my Life:
How can I think her story of the Jewels,
And other matters 'bout her Fathers Will,
Could have produced so scandalous a Meeting?
And yet she still avows it! Oh, Jealousy!
Where will these panting fears still hurry me?
I hourly seek to find what I would give,
A thousand Worlds my heart would never believe;
And yet for what do I thus vex my self?
For that, which if 'twas gone, I could not miss;
No, would I could, for then I Would never fear,
But when I found her Honor gone astray,
I Would send her Life to fetch mine back again.

Enter Caelia. Cael. What Is your Command, my Lord?


Anto. Prithee, my Dear, do not retire too much,
But show a merry freedom to our Friends,
That they may think us happy, themselves welcome.

Cael. My Lord, I shall, and reason have to do it;
But I desire you would dispense my absence,
Only a little time, I being preparing
A general Confession I shall make to Morrow.

Anto. You Will be too long about it.


Cael. No, my Lord, I take the shortest way
In writing what my thoughts can re-collect.

Ant. You would not let me read it, when you have done?


Cael. I do confess I should be loath, my Lord.
But yet from any Sin concerns your self,
I am as free as are the purer Angels,
Or may I find no profit by my Prayers.

Anto. I will believe thee; go, make haste and do it.
Ex. Caelia. Yet, if it be possible, I Am resolved to see it;
'Tvvill Cure my fears, perhaps, or change their Natures,
And make 'em certainties the lesser evil cause sooner Cured:
For Jealousies with fear does plague the mind,
But that is Cured when certainties we find.
Ex. Anto.
The Scene changes, Discovers Jasper, as from Bed, Buttoning himself. Jasp. Oh,
plague of this Old Bitch, she has kept me
So awake with her Coughing all Night, that I
Have quite out-slept my self.
Looks on's Watch. By Heaven near Ten a Clock, and she not gone
Yet -- plague on her -- she will be caught, and I shall
Be turned away -- why Nurse -- make haste, it is Ten a
Clock and past, you will be wanting.

Nurse within. That cannot be, alas, the times but short
That I Have been with thee, my Dear.

Jasp. No, perhaps you think so;
But let me ever want money to drink,
If I have not thought the time longer
Then her Life has been, and that began beyond the memory
Of ma. What drudgery am I forced to undergo to
Get a little money to support me -- that I may Live to
Watch all apted times for my Revenge on this whole
Family, who Rise upon the Ruins of our House.
This Nurse of Ninety never stays with me but I Would as
live have been Rid by a Nightmare.

Enter Nurse. Nurse. What Is that, Night-Mate? Am I a Nightmare?


Jasp. No, Nurse, I said, I was troubled with a Nightmare,
And should be worse, were it not for thy Company.

Nurse. Nay, I am good Friend of thine every way.


Jasp. That Is true; but Nurse make haste, for I am
Damnably afraid Flora suspects us e're since
She took me in your Chamber, and if she should
Take you here, and tell my Lady, I should be turned
Away, for you know she loves me not e're since I
Gave my Lord notice of her meeting Don Lewis,
To give him the money and Jewels, her Father
Left privately in her hands for him when he died.

Nurse. I Chuck, but why did thou do so?


Jasp. In hopes to have got some of the money for my
Discovery, what made her tempt me with the
Trust of money, and give me none to keep Counsel.
But prithee Nurse be gone.

Nurse. I, give me but one buss, and I will.

Kisses him, and is going.
Jasp. What a belch was there to perfume it?

She comes back.
Nurse. Sweet Rogue, I cannot go without the other kiss.


Jasp. Oh, Nurse! you will undo me; prithee no more.


Nurse. What, Rascal, slight my favors? you shall repent it.


Jasp. No, Nurse, think not so, but --


Flora within. Why, Nurse, Nurse, my Lady wants you; come away there,


Flora within. I know where you have been all Night.


Jasp. Why, there it is -- this is what I feared, I am undone,
A plague of Cubbard Love -- step into the Closet.

Nurse. What Is that you say, Cubbard Love?


Jasp. No, no, prithee no Arguments, but step into the Closet.


Flora within. Why, Nurse, I say! why don't you come away?
My Lady wants you.
Jasper goes to the Door.
Jasp. Flora, what is the matter with you? Nurse is not here;
Do but come in and see.
Enter Flora.
Flor. Come, come, she must be here; for she
was not in her own Bed to Night, and where should
She be, but with you?

Jasp. With me! what the Devil should she do with me?
Cannot her Old Chopps mumble her Beads over, but I
Must keep count of her her Pater Nosters: No, no, she is
Gone on Pilgrimage to some Shrine, to beg Children
For my Lady; it is a devout Old Woman.

Flor. Devout! I, her Devotion and yours are much alike,
The Fit never took you but once in your Lives, and
Then, it is true you wept at Prayers, that was, at your
Own Christnings.

Jasp. Prithee more Charity, sweet dear Flora; come, let
Me kiss thee.

Flor. Pray forbear, I Would sooner kiss a Horse.


Jasp. Why so scornful, dear Flora?


Flor. That Is not my business; come, tell me, where is the Nurse?


Jasp. Prithee, why do ask me for the Nurse? Do think
I am so hot to make Love to a Monument? Why, she is
Old enough to be Mother of all Mankind; her skin's
Turned to parchment, he that should enjoy her, had as
Good lie with a bundle of Old Records. In truth, she is
Fit for nothing now, but to be hanged up amongst the
Monsters in a 'Pothecaries Shop, where, with abuse to
The Beast, she would be taken for a large Apes skin stufft
With Hay. Ah, Flora, if she were as Young as thou art,
then't might be likely, I might find her when she was lost.

Flor. Well, if she be not here now, I Am sure it was not for
Nothing you once lost your way into her Chamber,
And staid all Night.

Jasp. Mere Drunkenness, by this Light, Flora! Why, if it had
Been a Vault full of Dead Carcasses, I should have slipped
Into it in the pickle I was in -- Nay, for ought I know,
With more pleasure too.
Enter Nurse.
Nurse. Now out upon you for a Rogue,
There Is no enduring this.

Jasp. Do but hear me, Nurse.

Flor. Ay, hear him, Nurse, he will be sure to recant and
Swear you're as sweet as -- a -- fogh -- so sweet --

Nurse. What, Hussy, dare you abuse me -- I that gave suck
To my Lady before thou wast born -- you Young Whore.

Flor. Young Whore! why not Old Whore, Nurse, as well as
Young Whore?

Nurse. You damned Young Slut, I Will tear out your Eyes.


Flor. My Feet shall save my Eyes, except you can outrun
Me to my Lady.
Exit Flora.
Jasp. Have not you made fine work now? I but dissembled
To take off suspicion -- and you must show your self,
I Am sure I shall be turned away for your folly.

Nurse. But dissembled, said you? Marry, there is dissembling indeed.


Jasp. Nay, Nurse, consider, do think I would have spoke so
In thy hearing, had it been for any other thing? But
Prithee kiss me -- I protest you are as sweet as Arsifettito.

Nurse. Arsifettito! What Is that?


Jasp. A Rich perfume the Chemists make, and good against
Fits of the Mother. But what shall I do now? I shall
Be turned away.

Nurse. I Will warrant thee, I Will place thee with Eugenia, she
Shall take care of thee for mine and a Friends sake
Of hers.

Jasp. Ay, ay, that is Francisco; but you have promised me
Often to tell me a secret concerns them; prithee
Do It now, Nurse.

Nurse. But will you never speak on it? If you do, I shall
Get no more money for thee, Jasper; that is the way,
I get all, Chuck; no, no, no matter what is between them,
Trust thou to me.

Jasp. Well, Nurse, I thought you had Loved me, but I see
You do not; you know I can keep secrets.

Nurse. Ay, but this is such a one I dare not tell it; besides;
It was not Eugenias-fault at first -- alas, poor
Fool, she was in a sad taking, when she found
Her Cousen Francisco in Bed with her.

Jasp. In Bed, say thou?


Nurse. Lord bless me! what have I done? If you should
Tell now.

Jasp. Never fear it, tell me all: I would not for the
World have mist this Story, it makes a full amends
For all my Crosses; come, Nurse, prithee quickly
Tell me all passages.

Nurse. I tell no more, my mind misgives me I Have said
Too much already.

Jasp. Not tell me more, Old Beldame? Speak it quickly,
Or what I know shall soon unto my Lord.

Nurse. How now! Is this dissembling too?


Jasp. No, it is as great a truth as what you told me of,
Don Francisco's Bedding with Eugenia; tell me the
Rest, and by it save your Life.

Nurse. Dear Jasper, be not angry, and I will.


Jasp. Come, Nurse, do it, and then we will kiss and be Friends.
I shall have use of her.
Aside.
Nurse. Now thou shall have my heart; and thus it is:
Don Francisco does often meet Eugenia in the
Garden, who, to avoid suspicion, after her Sisters
In Bed, by my means gets her Nightgown, and
Puts it on so to avoid being known, should any see her.

Jasp. Oh, Excellent! when do they meet again?

Nurse. I Have promised him this Night, though she was loath,
Till I told her he would but take his leave, for she is
Grown a little backward, now she is to marry Don Gerardo.

Jasp. Is she to marry him, say thou?


Nurse. I, sure, for he makes Love to her, and she is so hot
Upon It, that she vows after this Night never to meet
Francisco any more; but I Will go Live with her,
And so shall thou.

Jasp. Ay, s^^ will -- in the Garden, say thou, and in her
Sisters Gown, no body with them!

Nurse. Yes, the Lord Sebastian, he knows all, and always
VVaits upon 'em.

Jasp. That Is well, keep thou the secret close, and never fear me;
But if my Lord should ask suspitiously questions
About his Wife -- name Pedro to him, say, when he is
From Home, that Fellow stays too long within her
Chamber, and say, that Flora waits; leave me to prove
It true.

Nurse. Why, it is not so, I dare not tell my Lord so damned a Lie.


Jasp. Why? You Are a Fool, there shall no hurt come of it,
Only we will be Revenged of Pedro, and that Slut, for
They Are our Enemies; besides, if you will not, I Will swear
You told me so, and moreover, let him know all the
Rest you have told me.

Nurse. Nay, don't be angry, and I Will do any thing.


Enter Caelia, Pedro, and Flora. Cael. Oh, thou Old doting Fool! what, still
remain here!
What punishment is proper for thy Age? As for you,
Sirrah, I believe my Lord will find a way quickly to
Send you packing.

Jasp. It may be so, but it is without a cause,


Cael. Impudent Villain! how I do hate thy sight.
Follow you me.
To Nurse.
Ex. Cael. Nurse, and Flora. Ped. What, in the dumps, Seignior! all a mort for
your
Mistress, faith man, take it not so to heart, there are others
In The World as Young, though few may be as handsome.

Jasp. Ay, Sir, it is to be supposed; you can boast it by Experience,
There are Young Ladies for spruce 'Pedro's -- Jasper --
Must be content with their Nurses.

Ped. Content, say you? I, Marry, if she content you not, the
Devil cannot; why, she is a Dish of variety, like a huge
Olio; there is all Ages of Women in her. Thou art
The happiest man in a Mistress, Jasper -- faith, I envy thee.

Jasp. It Is very well.


Ped. Not too well neither.


Jasp. You may laugh; you stand on the top of Favor,
Have a care of falling down, I may catch you
One day.

Ped. No, never with an Old Woman; it is worse then
Committing Incest; to Cuckold, for ought I know, a
dozen Generations.

Jasp. Rest you merry, I can leave you.


Ped. But I Will not quit you so.

Exeunt.
Enter Antonio and Gerardo Discoursing. Ger. In this, dear Friend, consists my
happiness;
Therefore deny me not -- Why pause you, Sir?
My fears are come about --

Anto. What, has Eugenia given her consent?


Ger. I say not so, my Lord, but her denyals
Were spoke so faintly, I Interpret well.

Anto. Dear Friend, I am afraid you do mistake
The Object of your Joys, let me persuade
You to believe, there is not that happiness
In Marriage-Beds, as single People guess,
No, no, so far from that, that thousands be
Flattered by hopes to endless misery.
And where there is two obtain their hearts desire,
Ten thousand miss it, and in grief expire.

Ger. Were these Positions true, there is no man, sure,
If VViddowed once, could other Wives endure.
And yet we see the first deprived of Life,
There Is few that seek not for a second Wife.

Anto. It Is true, though strange, but yet our minds are such,
As always find too little, or too much;
Desire's a Monster, whose extended Maw
Is never filled, though it does all things draw:
For we with envious Eyes do others see,
Who want our ills, and think they happy be,
Till we possessing what we wished before,
Find our ills doubled, and so wish for more.

Ger. Suppose all true which you would have me fear,
Ills in possession still the greatest are:
And my desires to such a height do rise,
TO attain their ends, I should all else despise.

Anto. Since you are resolved, I Will not your ends deny,
But pray my words prove false when e're you try;
Though well they speak, who say the damned State,
Chiefly consists in wishing things too late:
Eugenia's Father left her to my care,
Which trust to end so well I did despair:
Then name the day of Marriage --

Ger. No delay
My thoughts admit; I wish it were to day.

Anto. That cannot be, to Morrow I approve.


Ger. Time will fly slow, though Impt with wings of Love.


Enter Caelia and Eugenia. Cael. My Lord, I beg your pardon for a short
interruption.


Ger. Madam, it is I have cause to beg your pardon,
Thus to detain your Lord, on's Wedding Day,
A Day in Justice should be wholly yours.

Cael. My Lord is happy so to be detained,
And I am always happy when he is so.
But good, my Lord, your Ear --

Ger. Madam, if you repent not what you have said,
Whispers Anto. he takes a paper privately out of her pocket. In answer to
those Vows of my Affection,
I then dare hope I may in time be happy.

Eugen. Though I never thought your words were further means,
Then to pass time away in Raillery;
Yet were my Answers such, as if you had
Told me a real Story of your Love:
And the same Answers I Will again renew;
My Will's confined; my Father's last Commands
Left me no Choice but another will;
If I were free, I then durst speak my thoughts:
But I, in all, my Brother must obey.

Ger. He checks your Actions only, thoughts are free,
Suppose him willing, would you favor me?

Eugen. But to suppose without his Will's a Crime,
If I that supposition should declare.

Ger. I do confess I should be loath to own
That Blessing which I rate above my Life,
If 'twere bestowed by any hands but yours;
Therefore by all your hopes I do conjure you,
If you dislike my Love, Command my silence.

Eugen. Interpret well my blushes, when I say
I cannot find a thought for such Commands.

Ger. Then I am happy 'bove the reach of Envy;
For I have his consent already granted,
He named the day of Marriage as you entered.

Eugen. You see, my Lord, that I had cause for fear,
Since I Am bestowed, and my consent never asked.
Sure my dead Father never designed it so?

Ger. Madam, I beg your pardon, for a truth
Might well excuse your Brother in this matter;
I urged to him I doubted not your favor,
On which Condition he did grant me his.

Eugen. I shall hear further of it from himself,
Till when, I beg your pardon.
Offers to go out.
Anto. Sister, pray stay, for I have business with you.
I know, my Dear, you never Loved that Fellow,
Which since you do not, though he serves me well,
Yet I Am resolved for this to part with him,
Though I could think a Pension for your Nurse,
To keep her at a distance, were as well.

Cael. Though now her dotage makes her want discretion,
Her Love to us was great.

Anto. Come, trouble not your self about it, he shall go.


Cael. My Lord, I Will trouble you no further.


Ger. I Will wait upon you, Madam.

Ex. Gerar. and Cael.
Anto. Sister, you know your Father was my Friend,
And was so confident that I was his,
He trusted all your Fortunes in my hands,
Though he had Brothers Living when he Died,
He told you too, and left it in his Will,
That what you had was mine, if you did Marry
Without my Approbation: Is It not true?

Eugen. Sir, it is a truth I Am glad of.


Anto. These things your Kindred though, did call contrivance,
Which made their hatred rise so much against me,
It makes a few'd betwixt our Families,
Which soon would come to Blood, but for Respect
They bear my Wife, their Cozen.

Eugen. Brother, I cannot answer for their Actions,
My own Respects to you were never wanting.

Anto. I do not deny it, Sister; and to prove
I never did, nor will deserve worse from you,
If you are willing now to change your State,
And know a man preferred in your Election,
Let him have Blood and worth, you and your Fortune
I freely will resign into his hands.
Then truly speak your thoughts.

Eugen. Surely, my Lord,
You Would scarcely think I should be worth your care,
If I should choose before you named one to me.

Anto. Sister, I see your Kindreds Jealousies
Partly infects you too; but to remove them,
What think you of Gerardo, for a Husband?
My wishes meet with yours, if he is their Object;
You know I Am no Dissembler.

Eugen. Nor shall you find me so; for I confess
In this you prove your Kindness, Care, and Justice;
And I must meet it with my greatest thanks.

Anto. I Am joyful for it; to morrow is the day,
A private Wedding will prevent all Rumor,
You Would best withdraw then to provide your self.
Ex. Eugen. What Paper's this I got out of her Pocket?
Pray Heaven it be the right; it is the same,
The very same -- what makes me tremble!
Is It horror or desire, or both assault me?
Be it what it will, it is Hell to live in doubt;
But stay, my Conscience says it is Sacrilege --
What Is that? A word by cunning Priests invented
To keep the Cheats they live by from our knowledge;
As the Egyptian did with Hieroglyfficks;
But be it what it will, a Name, or thing,
I Will read it, for it may Cure my Jealousy,
And surely that exceeds Hells misery.
But to my Closet, where no Eye can see,
All are called Pious, who live scandal free.
Exit.
Enter Eugenia and Nurse. Eugen. Since he has promised but to take his leave,
And neither then, nor never urge more Sin,
I am content to give him this last meeting.

Nurse. He Will be a glad man, I Am sure -- but what shall poor
Jasper do?

Eugen. If he will marry you, I Will keep you both.

Nurse. Thank you, Madam, I Will tell him your good will.

Exit.
Eugen. What by this cursed Sin am I reduced to?
To be a Slave to Slaves; nay, worse, a Bawd,
A Name so base, professed ones do detest it,
And yet I Am one, this cursed Hellish Hagg has made me so.
The first did sell, and then betrayed my Honor,
Yet thinks she has obliged me by the Action.
Nay, I am forced to say so now to please her;
Some heavenly Angel make me Chaste again,
Or make me nothing, I am resolved to try,
Before I Would still live Whore, I Would choose to dye.

Enter Jasper. Jasp. I Am come to thank your Lady-ship for the great care,
Nurse says, you have of me; but faith, Madam, I
Was never made to be Steel to a Tinder-Box; she is
Mere Touch-wood; no, I Am not for Marrying great
Grannums: But if your Lady-ship knows any Young
Dame, that wants a strong back to do her drudgery,
Though it be in her Lord's absence, I Am content.

Eugen. What, is the Fellow mad?


Jasp. No, Madam, not mad at all, but can as soberly keep
Council as the best Young Gallant of 'em all; and am
As able to do the feat: Please your Lady-ship to try me,
And praise me as you find; if you dislike my work,
I Will lose my labor, and have nothing for my pains.

Eugen. Oh, strange, unheard of Impudence! Out, Villain.

Ex.
Jasp. So scornful! Villain! Nay, if you call me so, it is time
To be so; what a Devil ayls my face, that she contemns
Me thus? May be my Nose is not long enough she thinks,
Pox on her Pride, it is that or'e-comes her Leachery -- I must
Alter my Trade, for I was never born I see to thrive by
Love; then I Will set up a shop of hatred, and the Wares I
Vent shall be Revenge, that may hit; but hold, my Lord.

Enter Antonio. Anto. What have I got? Am I more satisfied
By this same Paper then I was before?
No, not at all; and yet why should I not?
There Is not a thought set down concerns me --
Yet that is her policy --
She either feared that I should get the Paper,
Or else on purpose did contrive I might;
But how can I know that? This Jealousy,
If it continue long, will make me mad.

Jasp. Well, the Devil has put him on this pin merely
To do me a kindness.

Anto. And yet it must continue, who can Cure it?
Ay, there is it, who can Cure it? Then I must be mad!
Nay, I Am mad already, stark mad! --

Jasp. My good Lord.


Anto. What Is the matter? I fear he heard me.

Aside.
Jasp. I come to take leave of your Lordship, I have
Enemies I hear have turned me going.

Anto. Is It not deservedly, thou Goat?


Jasp. Yes, yes, it may be so, since they will have it so;
But if I had never seen, I had never been turned
A way for doing: If I were as ready to make
Mischief, as I am feared to be; Nurse and I had not
Been only the Sufferers.

Anto. Explain your Riddle, Sirrah.


Jasp. Nay, let my Tongue come out e're I say any thing to
Disquiet your Lordship, I love you better.

Anto. Disquiet me! What lies within thy power to say that
Can disquiet me?

Jasp. Nay, nothing it may be, my Lady is my Lady, and
You are a kind Lord, that is all I know; so begging
Your Lordships Discharge, I Am gone, and then your
Fears are over.

Anto. Villain, thou'st given me poison; my veins swell
With it, produce the Antidote, or I Will dissect thy Soul
To find it out; what is it you know that can disquiet me?

Jasp. I know little, my Lord, to'th' purpose, besides, it will
But vex you, since there may be no harm in it.

Anto. Come, come, no going back, tell quickly what you know.


Jasp. I know, why, I know that my Lady hates me,
Because I told your Lordship the time she was to
Deliver the Jewels and Money to Don Lewis, and
Still she calls me false in being true to you -- but --

Anto. But what?


Jasp. But if I should say all I know -- well, but let
That alone, good, my Lord, your Discharge.

Anto. Vile Dog, do raise my Anger for to play with it?
I Will vent it upon thee then.
Draws, and cuts at him.
Jasp. Hold, hold, my Lord, and I Will tell all I know.


Anto. Let Us hear it.


Jasp. When you lay hid about Don Lewis's death, I Have
Often seen a Lady in the Night to meet two Men
In The Garden, but am not sure it was your Lady.

Anto. What makes you name her then?


Jasp. Her Gown, I think it was her Gown.


Anto. Wa'st often, say you?


Jasp. Yes, every Night, except you lay at home, for I
Took pains to watch, they never failed coming,
But there was but one of them went into the House,
Sir, and he neither would not stay above an hour
At most: this is all.

Anto. All, quoth a! What Devil would have more,
If 'twas my Lady.

Jasp. I cannot say that, but yet I dare be sworn it was
Her Gown, I do believe, I mean, I think it was.

Anto. Could you not guess the men?


Jasp. I think they were Francisco and Sebastian.


Anto. It must be they; a plague upon their Fewds;
They can Revenge themselves upon my Wife:
Go, call the Nurse, this she must needs conspire in;
But keep all private from her.
Exit Jasper: Is she so bucksome? Has she more Kinsmen Stallions?
I Will cleanse her Blood, or empty all her veins;
Confessions calls she these! Betwixt Religion and her Leachery
The Devil dances Barley-break -- but hold -- why
May Not the Rogue contrive this for Revenge?
For if I reflect his pretending not to tell, did but
Usher in the Story. I must be cautious of a too light belief.

Enter Caelia. Cael. My Lord, by Accident I Have lost a Paper, which troubles me.


Anto. A Paper, say you? I took up one in the Garden, and I
Think this is it.

Cael. It is, my Lord, and I rejoice no other Person found it.


Anto. Why, what is it?


Cael. It Is the Confession that I told you of.


Anto. I might have read it then, and never asked you, had
I but known it.

Cael. If your Lordship pleases you may read it.


Anto. No, no, I will not, but prithee keep it better.


Cael. My Lord, there are some Tenants, who desire to express
Their Loves by Rural Recreations --

Anto. Bid them stay, their sporrs are more in season after Dinner.
So willing now to have it read, and yet before so backward!
Ex. Cael. Why, this confirms me she is false, it was contrived
On purpose for my sight. The Devil's not so cunning
As a Woman.
Enter Nurse. Oh, Beldame, are you come? Tell me, you Bawd,
Who Whores my Wife? For Whore I know she is,
And you're her Bawd. Tell me, I say, the man,
The place, the Circumstance, and very time,
Or I will quarter thee, and throw thy flesh to'th' dogs.

Nurse. Alas, my Lord, I know nothing but that when
You're from Home, Pedro goes to her Chamber, and
Stays there all Night, but what they do, I know
Not, for none but Flora's with them.

Anto. Pedro! Oh monstrous, she would devour a Legion!
Is It every Night, do you say?

Nurse. Yes, every Night; but I durst never tell you!
Alas, she sucked these Breasts.

Anto. Show me this Night Pedro, in Bed with her,
Or I will cut thy Tongue out.

Nurse. It Is impossible when you are at home.


Anto. I will contrive a Journey out of Town, but will at
Twelve return, then let me in; for if you fail
I Will cut your Throat.

Nurse. I Will do my best.

Exit.
Anto. Pedro! What sordid Devil prompted her to that?
Why, I am known to all the World a Cuckold;
The very Boys in the street must point at me;
But hold, this new Intelligence struck out the old,
And made me quite forget about Francisco.

Enter Jasper. Oh, Jasper! I Am confirmed my Wife's a Devil,
And I will send her to the rest e're Morning;
Go and contrive a Letter from Don John;
Shall intimate he is sick, and wants my presence,
Then I Will contrive the rest.

Jasp. Be not too rash, my Lord, might I advise
You should be certain e're you Acted ought.

Anto. How can I be more certain then this Night,
To be Eyewitness of her Lust my self,
As Nurse has undertook I shall.

Jasp. Ay, Sir, but things may fail, and they not meet.


Anto. Name a more certain way then.


Jasp. My Lord, there lives a Woman in the Suburbs
Mighty in Science, who by Art can tell
All that she pleases, I Would have you go to her.

Anto. Is she of your acquaintance?


Jasp. No, my Lord, she scorns such things as me,
She Is for the great ones; though for Charity,
She sometimes helps poor people to their goods,
I Am sure she would serve your Lordship.

Anto. I fear she will never trust us, lest we should betray
Her to the Inquisition.

Jasp. No fear of that, she cannot be betrayed,
She knows Men's business er'e they come unto her.

Anto. Well then, contrive my absence, I Will go thither,
I Am sure to know whether she cheats or no,
For if she names Don Lewis amongst the rest,
I shall believe her. Well, about the Letter.
Exit.
Jasp. Are you there with your Bears; Don Lewis say you?
Marry now I find 'twas Jealousy of his Wife;
And not the matter of Money made him kill him,
Whether he was guilty or no; I Will be sure he shall not
Be forgot, for I Will before hand to my Aunt, and tell
Her all; I hope, she is a Witch; the People say so, a
Mighty Artist I am sure she is, for she has done
Strange things, and all men fear her, besides I
Know she loves me, and will strive all she can to
Do me good, and hap what will my Lord will
Think me honest; for Night will surely show his
Sister to him, dressed in's Ladies Gown, what though
He kill her, the mistake will lie of the Night, and not
On me, thus I make good the Villain that she called
Me, in my Revenge on her; and if Nurse fails me
Not, I Will have my Lady, and Pedro; finely firkt. --
When this is done, my Lord rewards my care,
Let him the danger I Will the profit share.
And since things Excellent commended be,
'Tshall be my Aim t'excell in Villainy.

The End of the first Act.

Act the Second.
Enter Jasper and the Witch. Jasp. 'THis kindness, Aunt, I beg, your Art must
do;
For I have no way else to save my place.

Witch. Why, it is impossible; I Have no such Art
As People think, to call up Spirits to me;
Nor know I any thing, but what is told me.

Jasp. Now you dissemble, Aunt, for have not you often
Raised Storms, have rent up Trees, and shook strong
Towers? Seeming to threaten Nature with it is end;
And at such times have sent strange shaped
Spirits, who have restored to owners stolen Goods.
These things so many know, it is impossible
For you to keep it private; but I find,
Rather then trust me with your mighty secrets,
Or help me with your Art, you will see my Ruin.

Witch. These things you speak of, people think I do,
And so I Would have them; for it is the only way I have to Live:
The Vulgar People love to be deluded;
And things the most unlikely they most dote on;
A strange Disease in Cattle, Hogs or Pigs,
Or any Accident in Cheese or Butter;
Though It be but Natural, or a Sluts fault,
Must strait be Witchcraft! Oh, the Witch was here!
The Ears or Tail is burned, the Churn is burned;
And this to hurt the Witch, when all the while
They Are likest Witches that believe such Cures;
Could I do all that People think I can,
I Would never take pains to find out stolen Goods,
Or hold intelligence with Thieves to bring them,
Merely to get my Bread; no, I would make
The Universe pay Tribute to my power,
And all the Bugbear Lords Inquisitors
More tremble at my Name then I do now
At theirs: Ah, Jasper, would I raise
Storms when I would, blast Corn, turn Rivers backward,
Change shapes, moved where I pleased in the Air,
And that so fast, as thought it self would
Hardly overtake me:
What is it I could not do? if all were true
The Foolish People think, the Pope himself would
Quickly lose Respect,
And none be thought infallible but I.

Jasp. I Am sure I tremble for your want of power,
More then I should to see Hells dreadfull'st shape,
For I must fly the Town.

Witch. Jasper, not so; though I can raise no Devils,
Yet I Confederate with Rogues and Tailors,
Things that can shape themselves like Elves,
And Goblins --
And often do like Spirits haunt great Houses,
Most times to steal, but many times for mirth;
These I Will soon send for; arise, my Pincula.
Enter a little Devil, and tumbles the Summerset.
Jasp. Heavens bless me! save me, good Aunt.


Witch. From what? You Fool, it is but a little Boy,
Which I instruct to carry on my Cheats:
Come, leave your Fooling, I have business for you;
Uncase your self, and quickly go and find
Ranter, and Swash, Dive, Fob, Snap, Gilt, and Pick-lock,
Those are my Archest Devils; as you go
Call upon Dog'rell the Ballad-maker, and say
I want him strait, bid them be sure
To bring home half a dozen more with them,
For I shall need their help, let them not fail,
For money's to be got.

Devil. It Is that will make them come; I Will haste, forsooth.

Exit.
Jasp. I Am glad it is gone, for surely it was a Devil,
What ever you pretend.

Witch. You Are a Fool:
It was a Boy, I tell thee, and no Devil;
Nor am I a sorceress, though I could wish
To do thee good I was: But it is no matter;
Bring thou thy Lord, I Will practice well enough
To make him think all true, that I shall show him.

Jasp. You now Revive my Drooping Spirits, Aunt, and
Make my hopes grow strong! Ah sweet Revenge,
How my soul Dances but with thoughts of it;
Assist me, Aunt, to get this mighty Blessing, and I
Shall dye your slave.

Witch. O rare Boy!
How I rejoice to see this Spirit in thee,
For it is the virtue of our Family
To seek Revenge, not basely swallow wrongs:
Don Sancho De Monsalvo, thy Grandsire
Was for a while Vice Admiral of Spain,
But then disgraced turned Pyrate and Revenged
With Fire and Sword on all Mankind, the wrongs
He thought the Court had basely placed on him;
At last he was betrayed and lost his head,
Thy Father turned Bandetto, what he got
I did dispose of for him; but his Fate
Betrayed him too to Death by Execution:
Since when I by these Arts do strive to live,
And thou art forced to serve --
That very Lord, who does those Lands
Possess should have been thine.

Jasp. But will e're long mount to some higher sphere,
Or dye in the attempt; this Plot, perhaps, may do,
And I thereby obtain some part of my Estate
Again; for if the plotted mischiefs shall succeed,
I Will tell him whom I am, and my resolves, either
To share his Fortunes or Reveal all. Then I will
Rise Don Jasper De Monsalvo, and Cheek by Jole,
Ask how Antonio does. Then don't forget the names.

Witch. Not one of them: I know them very well.


Jasp. Farewell, Dear Aunt, but don't you seem to know me.


Witch. Out you great Fool! What become my Instructor?
Be careful of your self, and fear not me. Farewell, boy.
Exeunt.
Enter Antonio, Gerardo, Caelia, Eugenia, as to a Masque, and take their seats.
Ger. Have you heard, Madam, what they represent?


Caelia. My Lord, I Am told they mean to play the Gypsies,
And tell our fortunes to us.

Anto. I would they could.


Eugen. If all Man's life determined is before,
I would not know my Destiny methinks,
For good is best, when least it is Expected;
And bad foreseen is doubled by our fear
Things certain no foreknowledge can prevent
Such knowledge only can bring discontent.

Ger. In this with you I perfectly agree.


Anto. Yet for all that I wish I could foresee.


Caelia. My Lord, what profit by it would you gain?


Anto. 'Twould cure doubt to me the deadliest pain.


Ger. Doubt is the effect of fear or Jealousy,
Two Passions which to Reason give the Lie
For fear torments, but never does assist,
And Jealousy is love lost in a Mist.
Both Hood-wink truth, then go to blind-mans buff,
Cry here, then there, seem to direct enought:
But all the while shift place making the mind
As it goes out of breath despair to find.
And if at last something it stumbles on,
Perhaps it calls it false and then it is gone.
If true, what is gained only just time to see
A breachless Play a Game at Liberty;
That has no other end then this, that men
Run to be tired just to set down again.

Anto. This is a truth, and so for ought I know,
To the same purpose tends all things we do:
Life's a Disease, and yet we seldom say,
That Man is sick whom we see laugh and play;
And it is as well to bid the Bedridden ride,
As to bid Men in doubt be satisfied:
For it is the mind's Disease, and Physic should
Be proper to it, or else the Patient's fooled.
And there is no Drug in Nature doubt to Cure
But only one, and that is to be sure.

Cael. Yes, Circumstance, my Lord, if well applied.


Anto. I Have known that often fail, when it was tried.
But they come --
Flourish.
Enter first Gypsy, and sings. 1. Gypsy. COme, come, away; follow, follow
your Prince,
I am King of the swarthy Complexions;
Follow me that can lead you through Chimneys and Chinks
To steal Bacon and Pease,
Nay, sometimes with ease
To a Feast of the choycest Confections.
Come, follow me then, come away, come away.

Enter second Gypsy, and sings. 2. Gip. We know no Rebellion, but obey, but
obey,
To our King we are just,
And true to our trust,
Leaving discord to those, that their Princes oppose,
When by the Spirit of Treason in Nonsense they pray.

Enter all the rest, and sing. Chor. We know, etc.


1. Gip. Come then, and follow, a prize, a prize, a prize.


2. Gip. Give the word then, and holloa.


All. A prize, a prize, a prize.


1. Gip. Here are Gallants and Ladies have Fortunes to tell.


2. Gip. We Will tell them good Fortune if they give us aspell.


1. Gip. A hand crossed with silver the Spirit infuses.


2 Gip. There Is no Prophet lately that mettle refuses.


1. Gip. Men get Heaven now by Bargain and Sale.


Chor. Masses, Trentals, and Dirges
Are not had for no Charges,
And a Vicar for nothing will not tell you a Tale.

All. Masses, etc.


1. Gip. All things are bought and sold.


2. Gip. Good Fortune goes with Gold.


1. Gip. Fall on to your Trading then.


Men Gip. We Are for the Ladies.


Wom. Gip. And we for the Men.


1. Gip. To Cael. Lady, you have lost a Lover,
Cross my hand, I Will more discover.

2. Gip. To Anto. My Lord, I know you baseness scorn,
And would be loath to wear a Horn.

1. Gip. To Eug. Lady, some do speak you fair,
That hatred to your welfare bear.

2. Gip. To Ger. My Lord, you Love a handsome Lady,
She Loves you as well it may be.

1. Gip. sings. Thus we seldom miss the matter,
Things past we can tell, by these Generals well,
And never stay to prove the truth of the latter.

All. Things past, etc.


1. To Cael. You shall Live long and happily, Lady.


2. To Anto. My Lord, I can tell you, good Fortunes your Friend.


1. To Eug. You shall e're long play with your own Baby.


2. To Ger. Your Love, my Lord, will have good end.


1. Gip. sings. Thus we Live merrily, merrily, merrily,
And thus to our Dancing we sing;
Our Lands and our Livings
Lie in others believings,
When to all Men we tell the same thing:
And thus to our Dancing we sing.
Thus we, etc.
An Antique of Gypsies, and Exeunt.
Anto. By this we see that all the Worlds a Cheat,
Where truths and falsehoods lie so intermixed,
And are so like each other, that it is hard
To find the difference; who would not think these People
A real pack of such as we call Gypsies.

Ger. Things perfectly alike are but the same;
And these were Gypsies, if we did not know
How to consider them the contrary:
So in Terrestial things there is not one
But takes its Form and Nature from our fancy;
Not its own being, and is what we do think it.

Anto. But truth is still it self.


Ger. No, not at all, as truth appears to us;
For oftentimes
That is a truth to me that is false to you,
So 'twould not be if it was truly true.

Enter Pedro and a Servant, with a Letter to Antonio. Serve. My Lord, Don John
salutes you in that Letter.


Cael. How does my Cousen, Friend?


Serve. Madam, I fear he is drawing near his end.


Cael. 'Pray Heaven divert it.


Anto. The Letter shows, that Death did guide his hand;
It only says, Oh Friend, come now or never.

Ger. How did his Sickness take him?


Serve. Chacing the Buck too hard; he hot with Labor,
Drunk of a cooling Spring too eagerly,
And that has given him pains, the Doctors say,
Will give him Death immediately.

Cael. Heaven grant him help.


Anto. Return, and tell thy Lord, I Am at thy heels.
Pedro, bring my Boots, and bid two Horses be made
Ready.

Cael. Whom do you take, my Lord?


Anto. Pedro: -- but hold, Jasper is not discharged,
I Will even take him.

Cael. Jasper, my Lord! Pray take not him.

Enter Ped. with Boots.
Anto. Why not him, there are no Nurses there?
Where Is Jasper Pedro?

Ped. He said he would not dine, and went
Abroad, yet I suppose he may be now in's Chamber.

Anto. Reach my Boots, who has worn 'em lately?
I do believe you get into my Boots.

Ped. I, my Lord.

Strikes Pedro with a Boot top.
Anto. I, you, my Rogue! Go, see for Jasper.

Exit Pedro.
Cael. My Lord! Why do you thus disturb your self?


Anto. You see the blow don't maim him, you need
Not be concerned.

Caelia. What means my Lord?


Anto. As you hate Jasper, I hate whom I please.


Enter Jasper. Cael. His sight strikes terror to me!


Anto. Jasper, make ready, you must go with me.

Exit Jasp.
Cael. Here on my knees I beg you would not take him:
But if you be resolved, let me go too.

Anto. That cannot be: Don John's a Batchellor,
And is not fitted to have Women guests.

Cael. I will dispense with any thing, my Lord,
Then let me go, or do not take Jasper.

Anto. Come, I must break this Childish way of yours,
Jasper shall go, and you shall stay at home,
And so Farewell; make merry with our Friends.

Ger. Do not resolve, my Lord; see how she takes it.


Anto. This passion soon will over; farewell, Friend,
I shall return to give Eugenia to you.
Exit Anto.
Ger. I never perceived his will to reign before,
Some sudden fancy makes him Obstinate.

Eug. So, give her Air, she comes to her self.


Cael. Where is my Lord! What gone! am I deluded?
I Saw an Angel lead him back again.

Ger. Her fancy is disturbed, make no answer:


Cael. Why Sister, where is my Lord?


Eug. Do not disturb your self, my Brother's well.


Cael. Get me a horse, for I will follow him.


Enter Antonio Bleeding. Anto. Fetch me some water there.


Cael. My Dream was true, my Dearest Lord's returned!
What makes you Bleed?

Anto. As I was lifting up my Foot to the Stirrup, my Nose
Gusht out a Bleeding.

Eugen. My Sister dreamt, an Angel led you back,
And I believe it now.

Ger. Pray take some other with you, I, if you please
Will keep you Company.

Ant. No, I Am resolved to stay, and send him word, I am
Took ill my self; my Nose leaves Bleeding.

Cael. I am satisfied, my Lord, you do not go, and therefore
Will Retire.
Ex. all but Anto. and Gerar.
Anto. Do so, my Dear.
Now I must tell my Friend, I dare not stay,
'Twould look but ill to say a Bleeding Nose
Made Don Antonio slight his dying Friend.

Ger. If that was all, it would; but yet reflect
There are more Prodigies forbid this Journey
Then Caesar had t'avoyd the Senate House.

Anto. Had Caesar not been slain, those Accidents
We now call Prodigies, had been forgot;
And so will these when I am safe returned.

Ger. Consider but your Ladies high concern,
Her sudden sounding, and recovery,
On which she cried an Angel brings him back,
Your Bleeding and Return speaks she dreamed true,
The stopping of it too was not the least,
All these together force me to believe
That you from heaven these warnings did receive.

Anto. Surely, Gerardo, we must heaven offend
To think that it these Accidents should send.
It is detraction to the Powers above,
To think they suffer what they don't approve;
For if they did this to divert my ill,
They go about, for they might change my will:
But mine is more firm; nay, more, should I not go,
The threatened ill I meet, for ought I know;
For if their boads be certain, then I may
Meet the effects whether I go or stay.

Ger. Vainly we speak of heaven, when vainly we
By human Wit set Rules to heavens decree,
The power that made us gave us scope of will,
Freely to take the good, or choose the ill:
And though it can, it does not change that course,
Only persuades to Act what it could force.

Anto. This you believe, but you must pardon me,
If in this point I don't with you agree;
For if to Man such a free will be given,
That damns all Praescience and so baffles heaven:
But I delay whilst Reason bids me go,
And Reason it is, since it to me is so,
Then pray divert my Wife, so farewell, Friend.
Exit.
Ger. Farewell: May all my to nothing tend;
Yet still I fear what should the Reason be,
That I should fear, yet nothing fearful see,
I am resolved to send some Servants out
Shall wait him at a distance;
In doing all I can, I do the best,
I can no more, let heaven do the rest.
Exit.
Enter Don Francisco and Nurse. Fran. Well, it is so sweet a sin to Wench in
danger,
That I am like to lose the best part of my Recreation;
But prithee Nurse, tell me, what causes this change?

Nurse. Now if I would be hanged, I cannot forbear telling.
Faith, my Lord, Gerardo's like to be the Man now,
Though I am for your Lordship still, you're my best Friend.

Fran. By heaven I Will be his Death, and hers to boot;
Can she slight me for him, he Whore our Kindred!
When did he first enjoy her?

Nurse. Not so, my Lord, he is to Marry her.


Fran. Nay, if it be so; then I Am Revenged already,
For's joining with Antonio against our house,
He Is Antidated Cuckold, and by me!
O rare Revenge! There Is for thy News, Nurse.
Gives money to her. Were all my Enemies but served the same;
At a more full Revenge I Would never aim.

Nurse. Methinks you should not be so merry for losing my
Lady; 'faith, had I known it, you should not have come
Into the place you wot'on, by my means.

Fran. Nay, be not angry, Nurse, I find her drift,
She loves our family, and studies to Revenge it.
To make him Cuckold; how it pleases me!
Poison, nor Poniards is not half so well,
Go, tell her; Nurse I Am glad she takes this way:
I glory in her love! by Heaven I do,
I Will find Sebastian out, and laugh with him,
Till I even split my sides.

Nurse. Sir, you will tell no body I hope.


Fran. No, none but him:
To say as he goes by, there goes my Cuckold;
And then to laugh, go Nurse, and tell her
I Will be sure to meet --
Exit.
Nurse. Another double Pistol for my Jasper!
I Will have him one whole night for this.
For to speak truth, I find the Rogue does not love me:
Heavens! What a bad world is this,
An Old Woman, though never so willing,
Can scarce get a friend for ready money:
When such as Eugenia can make the Gold fly about;
But time will come she must be fain to turn tail,
And pay for one as I do, or go without.
But it pleases me, my Lady says, he shall be my husband,
Then I shall need give money no longer: for faith if he
Be negligent, I Will ring him a Peal to quicken him to his duty.
Thus married once, I Will do like other wives
That make their husbands drudge for quiet lives.

The End of the Second Act.

Act the Third.
Enter Don Gerardo with a Book in his Hand. Song.
1.
SOme Happy Soul come down and tell
What Joys are those with you do dwell?
If it be Happiness like ours below,
Which from our want of ills does only flow,
Then it is plain that mighty theme
Of Immortality is but a Dream.
2.
It Is Love, it is Love, for nothing can
Give real Happiness to Man,
But Joys like those that Lovers Souls enjoy,
Which here on Earth there is nothing can destroy;
Ay, ay, it is Love only can be
The Happy Souls endless felicity.

Ger. What a dull, heavy load hangs on my Soul!
Weighing me down to Earth, as if 'twould say
'Twas weary of its Burden, and resolved
To shake it off, and mix with its first matter;
What is the thing, called Death, we mortals shun?
Is It some real, or is it a fancy only?
Like that imaginary point in Mathematics;
Not to be found only in definition:
It is no more: Death, like your Childrens Bug-bears,
Is feared by all, yet has no other Being
Then what weak fancy gives it; it is a Line,
But yet imaginary, drawn betwixt
Time and that dreadful thing Eternity;
I, that is the thing, it is feared; for now I find it:
Eternity which puzzles all the World,
To name the Inhabitants that People it:
Eternity, whose undiscovered Country
We Fools divide, before we come to see it;
Making one part contain all happiness,
The other misery, then unseen fight for it.
Losing our certains for uncertainties;
All Sects pretending to a Right of choice;
Yet none go willingly to take their part,
For they all doubt what they pretend to know,
And fear to mount, lest they should fall below:
Be It as it will; my Actions shall be just,
And for my future State I Heaven will trust.

Enter a Servant. Returned already; what can be the cause?
Serve. Sir, Don Antonio likewise is returned.


Ger. What reason had he for it, do thou know?


Ser. My Lord, I do not; for we by your appointment
Having took Horse, did with our greatest speed
Pursue the Road should lead us to Don John's;
When near a Thicket stands some two Miles off,
I spied Antonio lying on the ground,
And Jasper walking of the Horses by him,
Fearing his seeing us, we took the Thicket,
Where sheltered from their Eyes, I left my Fellows.
But I approached as near as possible,
Hoping I did you Service, if I could
By their Discourse gather their cause of stay.

Ger. 'Twas like thy self, both diligent and prudent.


Serve. But all my care did signify but little,
The Wind blew fresh, and rustling in the Wood,
Wholly destroyed their Voices, so that few words
Of what they said I heard; and those I did,
Came so divided they had no connection.

Ger. What sort of Actions did you then perceive?


Serve. My Lord, I saw Antonio much disturbed;
Sometimes he would rise and walk a turn or two
With eager pace, then stop as suddenly,
Then stamp and tear his hair; then loudly cry,
She Is dead, she is dead! Oh, Caelia, Oh, Antonio!
Then lie him down again, and rest a space:
Sometimes call Jasper to him, talk a while,
And soon again rise in another Passion;
Seldom I heard a word, except a Curse!
Or now and then a Name; as Lewis, Caelia,
Pedro, Francisco, Flora; nay, my Lord,
Sometimes I heard your Name, and then Engenia's;
Then suddenly holding his hands to Heaven,
He Would down again, and there a while would role.

Ger. These Actions sure did seem a perfect madness.


Serve. It seemed indeed a madness methodiz'd,
Like theirs who are Transported far with Passion.

Ger. But how perceived you Jasper bear himself?


Serve. Quite in another manner, but as strange!
For when his Lord looked down, his looks would be
As full of mirth, ready to burst in Laughter;
That I perceived he scarce contained himself:
But if his Lord did look about to speak,
Then was his Face demure, with hand on Breast,
Turning his Eyes to Heaven, and groaning sighs,
As you have seen, my Lord, a Canting Preacher
Aiming to cheat his Audience, wanting matter,
Sigh to seem Holy, till he thought on something.
So at that distance seemed his Actions to me;
But when his back was turned, the Rascal would
Make Mouths, and point with signs of greatest scorn.

Ger. There is some Fatal Villainy in this;
Some Mystery beyond my Fathoming:
But how long staid they thus?

Serve. About two hours, when mounting both their Horses,
I took mine, and un-espy'd did dog them to the City,
And where they Housed I know not; for they entered
Remote from Home, and I in the streets soon lost them.

Ger. Do both your Fellows know this?


Serve. No, my Lord,
I did not think it would become my Duty
To tell them any thing but what they saw.

Ger. I never knew thee yet mistake thy trust;
Thy secrecy was well: Preserve it still,
For I must use it further, therefore go,
And Charge your Pistols, we must walk a Round
About Antonio's House to watch their motion;
For there the Scene must lie of this design;
If there be mischief in it, thy courage now
(If theirs occasion) must again be tried.
And well Rewarded too.

Serve. It Is so, my Lord,
Above all other ways in that you trust it.
But I Will be gone, and Execute your Orders.
Exit.
Ger. A Faithful Servant is the best of Friends,
Since he is nearest always to assist us;
But stay, I cannot guess from all I Have heard,
The cause that should disturb Antonio;
Except it is Jealousy: Yet how can that be?
If Caelia's vicious there is no virtuous Women.
But now I think how much he railed at Marriage,
And more our Arguments concerning doubt,
These things persuade he is Jealous! But of whom?
The more I think, the more I am confounded!
How Clouded Man
Doubts first, and from one doubt does soon proceed
A thousand more in solving of the first;
Like Nighted Travelers we lose our way;
Then every Ignis Fatuus makes us stray.
By the false Lights of Reason led about,
Till we arrive where we at first set out:
"Nor shall we e're Truths perfect Highway see,
"Till dawns the Daybreak of Eternity.
Exit.
Enter Eugenia. Eug. I am amazed the Nurse should stay so long;
My Anger makes each minute seem an hour:
That Woman is a thing made up of mischief;
Some Fatal Devil sure did guide the Choice
My Mother made, in choosing her our Nurse.
She Is Fool to the height: And yet has wit enough
To tread all Labyrinths of Treachery;
But that is no wonder: For who is Treacherous
That wants not Eyes to see it is ugly Form?
For now I fear, and I believe not vainly,
That Villain, Jasper, knows all my concerns,
Or what could prompt him to that Impudence
He did express in his address to day.
Enter Nurse. Thou fatal Hagg, thou Mother of all mischief,
What Devil taught thy perjured Tongue the way
To tell the shame which thou did first occasion?

Nurse. Pray what ayls you, Madam, are you mad?


Eug. I wish I was, as I have cause enough,
For then I should not know the shame attends me,
In being Table-talk for every Rascal,
As thou (Hell thank thee for it) now have made me.

Nurse. I made you Table-talk! There Is no such thing;
I Have been too faithful to you, that I have;
Losing my sleep full often to watch your pleasure.
And is this all I get? It is no matter, I
Shall be even with you.

Eug. Threaten on (for thou have Acted all thy threats, Imp)
In letting Jasper know my shame and folly.

Nurse. Jasper knows nothing, that he does not, from me,
And I will ask him; fore your face, I will,
If I e're said Francisco lay with you.

Eug. It Is plain, thy guilt transported thee to madness,
Else thou would never make thy Tongue a Herald
So loud, for to proclaim to all the House
The Action you would persuade me still is secret.

Nurse. If you talk loud your self, why may not I?
But I Will bring Jasper to you shall deny all.

Eug. What mischief upon mischief she designs?
Do think, like thine, my Modesty is gone?
To have this argued out before my face
And such a Villain y? --

Nurse. A Villain, say you?
No Villain neither, I would have you know;
No more then is Francisco: pick that bone,
Or if you will, I Will bid Gerardo do it.
Dee' think to rail at me? Is that my thanks?

Eug. My fears I see will force me to dissemble;
Nurse, I but tried thy patience; I believe
Thou would not tell that secret for the world;
No, though it were to Jasper.

Nurse. Jasper's an honest fellow, and no Villain;
And did he know a secret, he could keep it.

Eug. But have you told it then?


Nurse. No matter what I Have done, I will not tell you,
Because you vexed and rated at me so.

Eug. Well, Nurse, I did believe you loved me better.
Weeps. And would trust me with any thing you did,
But I perceive your kindness all for Jasper.

Nurse. I love Jasper well, and love you too,
And you shall have no wrong I warrant you.

Eug. The thing is plain, I need nor ask no further.
But where is the remedy? Nurse, prithee tell me,
What did Francisco say unto my message?

Nurse. I, there is a business now worth asking for.
He says, he is glad you will condescend to meet;
Nay, he is a glad man, I Will tell you that, in faith;
He bid me say, you were a gallant Girl,
So to Revenge his quarrel on Gerardo.

Eug. Gerardo, said you! O thy mouth's a Sieve!
There Is not a secret thou can keep a moment;
Did I not charge thee not to name Gerardo,
Till I should speak of it my self to him?
Nay, it is the greatest motive makes me meet him,
For to prevent the mischiefs else may follow;
Well, I am cursed for sin, and thou art made
The cause of the sin, and curse that does attend it.

Nur. What, are you got to railing again for nothing?
Pray who has most discretion to tell a business,
You, or I? But you, forsooth, are grown so proud of late
Because you hope to Marry Don Gerardo;
That there is no speaking to you: Marry gip.
'Faith I shall spoil your Market.
Exit.
Eug. Do thy worst (for I am resolved to suffer once for all)
Death would be better then this Slavery,
And that is the worst can happen
Should she tell my Brother, or Gerardo, my whole story;
That Is dying once, but I by fear thus fooled,
Do hourly dye, since still I Death behold.
Exit.
Enter Jasper and Antonio. Jasp. My Lord, I Am confident this is the House,
Wherein the Woman Lives I told you of.

Anto. Knock then; and if she comes, do you speak to her,
I Will stand aloof a while, and hear you talk.
Jasper knocks.
Enter Witch with a block Rod, which she turns over her Head, whilst Jasper
makes a private sign of his Lord's being there. Jasp. Hail, Reverend Mother; I
suppose you are
That famous Artist who Commands this House,
Which if you be, with confidence I beg,
You would resolve some Questions I should ask;
Which if you please to do, my gratitude
Shall be proportioned to the kindness done.

Witch. What prating Fellow's here? Your Lord Antonio
Need not to doubt my Art, or if he did,
He might have sent some wiser Man to try me.
Come, come, my Lord,
I am no Cheating Chemist, that requires
A Faith in Fools to make his work successful.
No, no, my Power is boundless, I can search
The secrets of your Soul, and when I Have done,
Solve all the doubts that there possess your mind;
That Women should be Women, is no wonder.

Anto. But that Women should turn Devils, is.


Witch. No, no, my Lord, I am no Devil neither.


Anto. Mother! I meant not you, when I said so.


Witch. Son, Son, excuse it not, you have no cause
To love us Women much, and I Am not angry
At what you said, though I know what you meant.

Ant. Then, Mother, by these Powers you practice by,
I do Conjure you, show me all the truth
Of what you know concerns my coming hither.

Witch. Come, enter in, my Lord, and nothing fear;
There Is not a doubt of yours but shall be clear.
I Have sent a Spirit out, who will e're long,
Bring all the Names of those have done you wrong.
Ex. and return.
Enter Antonio, Jasper, and Witch, as in the House; in the Scenes a Chair, by
which Jasper stands, and Witch goes round. Witch. Sit in this Chair, my Lord,
whilst I do draw
A Sacred Line, which shall the Spirits aw.
About, about, I tread a Round,
Where I tread is Sacred Ground.
Thus and thus the Air I charm,
To keep my Circle free from harm;
Thus I sprinkle Water pure,
And by it all the Charm secure;
The Spirits that fiery are dare not come near us,
Earth, Air, and Water do make them to fear us.
Then boldly sit, boldly see, boldly despise
What Spirits soever do happen to rise.
Witch sings. Rise, arise, arise, rise and come away,
My little pretty Spirit Puncula:
What, not appear at thy Mistresses call,
I Will surely torment thee; thou shall not suck at all.
Arise then, I say --

Spirit within sings. Spir. I come, I come away,
The Wind it blows hard, and forces me astray.

Witch. Let Us wait a little, he will appear, my Lord.


Anto. Fear seizes me so fast, that all my Spirits
Retire, and leave an Ague in my Joints.

Enter a Spirit. Witch. Come, have you done
What I gave you in charge,
If you have, I command you to tell it at large.
Spirit sings. As you bid, I did go to the Caverns below
Where the Spirits Inhabit that Govern the Wind.
And though in their motions they be,
And see
Far, far quicker than we,
Yet no Intelligence there I could find.
From thence, like Lightning, I shot to the Pole,
Where at a hole
I glided to the Region of the Air:
But the Spirits above
Do Mankind so love,
That they drove me from them with despair.
From thence, in a moment, to Aetna I came,
Where the Spirits of fire that Inhabit that flame:
Told me, all that I sought for they knew;
Though to Spirits of Earth,
As I am by Birth;
They Would not tell it; yet hither they flew.
And hereabouts they stay, till you pray,
And atone them with Offerings to tell your desire;
For these from of Old
Have been Lovers of Gold,
The Mettles being Governed by Spirits of fire.
Exit.
Witch. It Is necessary, Son, you throw them something,
For over these Spirits I have no Command.

Anto. Oh, any thing; take this and throw it them;
But do release me of the fear I Am in,
And quickly solve my doubts, take all I have.

Witch. There is Gold, there is Gold to you Spirits of fire;
He does willingly offer what you do desire.

Enter first Spirit, second Spirit Ascends. After some flashes of fire they
sing. 1. Spir. What Spirit did Lewis attend?


2. Spir. It was I.


1. Spir. Declare to that Lord what you know.


2. Spir. I need not, the cause he did dye
Was that truth to him known long ago.

Chor. He Is dead, he is dead, he is dead, and now
For hot desires,
In endless fires
Must Live, must now for ever Live with us below.

Chor. He Is dead, he is dead, etc.


Anto. Horrid and wonderful.


1. Spir. Who all Caelia's Crimes does know?


2. Spir. It is I, but must not show
All her ill,
For I will
Third Spirit Ascends. Fit her better e're she go
To her Paramour below.

3. Spir. But I that Francisco attend,
Can declare,
That he as a Friend
To Don Lewis does share
In The stolen Embraces of Caelia's sweet Arms;
They kiss and lie down,
Then Lewis bemoan,
Thus with thoughts of Revenge they double Loves Charms.

Chor. They kiss and lie, etc.


Anto. Thus I have warmed a Viper in my bosom,
That wanted only heat enough to sting me,
And give me Death it self.

1. Spir. After him can Pedro stay til't be day;
Thus they sport the Night away,
Flora watching whilst they do
Laugh at you,
Saying, where is the Cuckold now?

1. Spir. They sport.


2. Spir. They laugh.


3. Spir. They kiss and play,
Till your return, does make them mourn,
And spoils their Holy Day.

Chor. Thus they will do until they dye,
When we in Hell, shall think it well
To have their pleasant Company.
They Descend.
Anto. And that shall be this Night; make ready then
Fires that may fit so brave a pack of Letchers;
If you delight in Offerings; and for Gold
Can but increase their Torments, I will sell
All my Estate to turn it into that,
Daily to add more fuel to their flames.
Let Fools that spend their Wealth on Priests for Prayers,
Be Cheated still, I Will take a surer way,
Torments for Souls are penny-worths I Will buy,
And there is Reason in it; for it is likely
Hell may take Bribes, when surely Heaven will not.
Oh Excellent project! Is It not a good one, Jasper?
By Hell it self, this Night Hell has them all.

Witch. Your Lordship's much disturbed, I by my Art
Will cause the Air to give a Melody,
So to compose your Spirits to themselves.
She waves her stick. Music and an Antic Dance of Devils handing the Purse
(Antonio threw) to one another, toward the Close of which a noise without
makes both Music and Dance stop: But beginning again, a noise within makes them
fly. The Witch trembles.
Within. Break op'e the doors, nay, sure enough they are here.


Anto. By Heaven some Cheat, for these can be no Devils.
I Will follow them, and see --
Draws his Sword.
Jasp. It is some trick to draw you from the Circle.

Jasp. holds him.
Anto. Be what it will, Death cannot make me worse;
Unhand me then, or I will sheath this in you.
Exit.
Witch. O, we are undone, the Officers will enter,
Noise continues. And my Lord will see the holes they creep into,
And so discover them, then we shall all be hanged.
I Will tell my Lord the truth of all the Cheat,
And that way save my Life.

Jasp. What Is that? No stratagem to help it?
Have you no hole near us, Aunt?

Witch. Yes, here is one, but should we go into it,
The other taken once, will soon betray us.

Jasp. I Will hazard that, rather then certain Death.
And therefore to save one, I Will hide you there.
Kills her.
Witch. O thou ungrateful Dog, do kill me for my Love?


Jasp. No muttering, Aunt, dye quietly, and lie as
Quietly; it is the greatest kindness you can
Do me: So, now a ready lie clears all I hope.
Runs her through often, then throws her into the hole, she should him, then
lies down and trembles.
Enter Antonio. Anto. The Officers entering, they all vanished.


Jasp. The last is well.


Anto. Where Is the Witch? What makes you tremble so?


Jasp. O, do not take me too, good Devil, do not.


Anto. What ayls the Fellow? Jasper, don't you know me?


Jasp. Alas, is it you, my Lord?


Anto. Ay, where is the Witch?


Jasp. She got upon a fiery Dragons back,
And mounted like a Rocket through the Air,
Leaving me half distracted.

Anto. It Is strange and wonderful.

Enter Captain and Watch.
1. VVatch. Here Is two of them.


Capt. My Lord Antonio! It Is strange to meet you thus
In a suspicious House so late in the Evening.

Anto. Riding by the River side to take the Air,
My Horse threw me, which made me see
For some convenient House to rest a while,
And met with this, wherein I have slept this hour,
And I believe had done so longer yet,
Had not your noise awaked me.

Capt. My Lord, I Have no Commission to enquire
Into Persons business of your eminent Rank;
It is for other Men that I search now,
Some half a score the most notorious Rogues
About the Town were seen to enter here.
Saw you none such, my Lord?

Anto. No, on my Honor;
For since I entered here, no human shape
Was seen by me, but one Old withered Woman;
And where she is gone, I know not.

Capt. My Lord, that Woman is the greatest Cheat
About the Town; the simple think her a Witch;
But I can witness for her she is none;
My Lord, you will pardon me, if I search for her.

Anto. With all my heart: Pray find her if you can;
'Twas my misfortune doubled to light here.

Capt. It might have proved so:
Search the House.
Exit VVatch. I Will tell your Lordship what I know of her.
Walking my Round one Night, who should I meet,
But (as I thought) two Devils, by their shapes;
An Old one, and a Young one, so they seemed:
At first the sight amazed me, but at last
My Reason telling me, if they were Spirits,
The mischief they intended they might do,
Though I should run away: I bid my Guard
Stand, whilst my self advanced near these shapes,
Which as I did, the little Devil fled, the other seemed
To turn it is Eyes to fire, and glare upon me;
I still advanced, Armed with my former thoughts,
And as I nearer came, the fire grew duller,
Yet still it stood, for truly it could not run,
Proving, when I laid hold on it, this Old Woman,
Cased in a Leopard's skin; the fiery Eyes
Proved but two Lobster-shells: So she confessing,
That for a Living she did use these Cheats,
Helping poor People to their stolen Goods,
In Devils shapes to countenance the Trade.
And that the other was a little Boy,
Trained up as her Familiar, whom she producing,
I only threatened them, and let them go.

Anto. A subtle Cheat it was, and very likely,
And you deserved Reward that did detect it.

Jasp. A Halter it should be, were I to give it.

Aside.
Enter the Watch with one of the Devils Remarkable Habits, and a Viol. 1.
Watch. We Have searched sufficiently, but all we find
Is a poor Devils skin, and a base Viol.

Capt. I, this is like the other, I Am glad 'twas found,
'Twill prove the story true I told your Lordship.

Anto. It does, to my amazement.


Capt. I Am glad it was my hap to meet you here,
Your Lordship might have got some mischief else.

Anto. I might indeed, and I Am beholding to you:
And, Captain, take my word, I Will speak your worth
To the Viceroy, who is my Kinsman,
And will take care for to advance your merit.

Capt. In that you will bind my Service: Yet, my Lord,
Shall I not wait your Lordship to your House?

Anto. No, 'twill be wondered at, besides, I Have Horses here.


Capt. Then Health and a good Night attend your Lordship.


Anto. I thank you, Captain; here, Watch, there is some-
Thing for you.

1. Watch. Bless your Noble Lordship.

Ex. Capt. and VVatch.
Anto. Jasper! Did you hear this?


Jasp. Ay, my good Lord, and wonder at it too;
But I do still believe she is a Witch, and only
Did pretend such things to the Captain,
To save a Burning from the Inquisition.

Anto. Fetch our Horses.
Exit Jasper. I do observe this Rogue
Strangely to be amazed, what er'es the matter;
I do believe that this was all some Cheat.
Yet how could that be too, who could Name Lewis.
But I am mad to be deluded thus!
For now I think on it better; in my Passion
I hinted Lewis as a proof for all;
And then this Rogue stood by -- Ay, there it is --
He Is a Confederate, and contrived all this,
To be Revenged, but I Will dissemble yet,
And trace his mischiefs further, then I Will kill him,
And stop his mouth from publishing my folly:
Had not this Accident so strangely happened,
What mischief had I done before the Morning:
I Will put him to his Trial in the Garden,
Which if he fail in, there shall end his Life,
And he will deserve it too, when mischiefs tend
To such a height, they must in mischief end.
He that contrived so many to destroy,
Will scarce be punished if he barely dye,
Therefore his Villainy shall further swell,
When'ts at the height I Will Lanch his Soul to hell.
Exit.
Enter Francisco and Sebastian. Sebast. Cousen, believe me, I am loath to go,
And I could likewise wish that you were so.
Often have I feared the danger when I went,
Yet dreaded more the sin then punishment.
For I considered, should I then be slain,
That Death would but begin an endless pain;
Then pardon me, though I could well obey
All Friendships Laws, I dare not do it this way.

Fran. Sure Cousen, you are sick, or lately have
Had melancholy thoughts about a Grave:
Is this Sebastian, he, whose ready hand
Was quick to Act all Friendship did Command?
He, who no sooner heard Francisco say,
A Danger's there, but made that strait his way,
And now he is turned my Ghostly Father sure.

Sebast. I would, so I might make a Ghostly Cure.
Francisco, thou art sick, and so am I;
Sick at our Souls, and should we chance to dye
E're our Disease was Cured, it is ten to one,
We should in an Eternal Fever groan.

Fran. Come, prithee say no more, it is ominous,
I wonder much what it is should make thee thus.
Come, you must go this Night: I Will tell you why,
'Twill be the last, for she is to Marry,
To Marry Don Gerardo! O it is rate,
I am Revenged to the purpose.

Sebast. Sure you are
Turned Coward, or you never would glory in
Revenge so base, this doubles all your sin.
Gerardo's brave, and sure all Honor bleeds,
When such are Wounded by Ignoble deeds.
It is the Curse of Man, that he must be
Subject to shame by Women's Levity;
But hold, I wrong Eugenia, if I blame
Her, and not you alone, for all her shame.
You Robbed her of her Chastity by force,
Though fear of shame still kept her from Remorse.

Fran. Pish! Force! That was her policy to you,
She did no more then what all Women do,
Seem to resist what they do most desire,
To raise the flame, yet seem to cool the fire;
Believe this Truth, Sebastian, Women can
Resist it, and perform it more then Man.

Sebast. Thus like the Devils we at first betray
Their Innocence, then blame on them we lay;
As if their guilt could have another cause
Then that which it from our Temptation draws.

Fran. Let it be so, I Will not dispute it now;
It grows too near the time that I should go,
And though my Actions do so much offend,
I will not doubt to find another Friend.

Sebast. Do you so little prize Eugenia's Fame,
That you can suffer more to know her shame?

Fran. Sebastian, you mistake, I do not go
This Night on the same terms I used to do.
No, it is to take my leave, for she does vow
In spite of fear she is turned virtuous now.

Sebast. Nay, then I Will go my self, happen what will,
For it is only dangerous to do ill;
My Company her Virtue may protect,
And I should sin, if that I did neglect.

Fran. That shall not need, for I Am resolved to speak
Nothing that may her Resolution break.

Sebast. Go boldly then, for in a cause so good
He Is more then Coward fears to shed his Blood;
And though I think Antonio would be glad
That he our Lives at such advantage had;
Yet I this Night durst boldly meet him there,
Since in my Breast such Innocence I wear;
By this security I plainly feel
It Is guilt that wounds us deeper far then steel.
Exeunt.
Enter Caelia and Eugenia. Cael. Blame not my Husband, Sister, 'twas my fault,
I strove against Reason to oppose his Will.
Had I forborne my importunity,
It Is ten to one he had not been so wilful;
Husband's prerogatives are absolute,
Their wills we must obey, and not dispute.

Eug. I beg his Pardon, if I think amiss,
But I believe there is some design in this;
His Eyes showed more of Anger then could be
A bare concern for's Friend's Infirmity.

Cael. I will no censure on his Actions lay,
My Duty is for their success to pray.

Enter Don Gerardo. Ger. Your Servant, Ladies, where is Don Antonio?


Cael. Why, at Don John's, my Lord, do not you know it?


Ger. Then he is not come back, as I had thought.


Cael. My Lord, why thought you so?


Ger. Madam, I did not know but that he might,
Since it is not five hours business to Ride thither,
And to return again; but, Madam, pray
How came the Lord Francisco to be here?
I think he does not use it.

Eug. Francisco! O my fears!


Cael. No sure, my Lord, he never came within these doors
Since my good Father died.

Ger. Sure I Am mistaken, Madam, if I did not
Meet him just now as he came forth this Room:
And more, he shak'd his head in Anger at me.

Cael. I Am sure, my Lord, you're mistaken much,
For you're the first that entered here but us.

Ger. It may be I Am mistaken.


Cael. Yes, sure, my Lord, you are.


Ger. Madam, if your Commands
To Eugenia. Extend to any thing within my power, pray name it,
I shall be proud to serve you; else I Am gone,
For I have certain business does require it.

Eug. The greatest Service you can do to me,
Is to be careful of your self, my Lord.

Ger. This kindness does oblige me, pardon my haste,
Good Night, and Rest unto your Ladyships.
Exit.
Cael. Good Night, my Lord;
Flora is so possessed her Dream is true,
She dare not venture in that Room again.

Eug. She is not such a Fool, sure.


Cael. Well, Sister, I am not well, and will to Bed;
The Nurse will wait on you, I Will send her to you.
Come, Flora, go with me.
Ex. Cael. and Flora.
Eug. Madam, good Rest unto you.
This I can wish to her, whilst I must want it:
Gerardo sure has some Intelligence
Of Don Francisco's coming to me;
Or else why Named he him, for well he knows
He never used to make a Visit here:
Well, if he does, I cannot help it now.
The time draws nigh,
That I must meet Francisco! Oh, that word
Gives heaviness a new unto my Soul,
And makes my thoughts run backwards,
The Accidents oth' day seems Ominous
To all the House, but most of all to me,
My guilty Breast feels most of misery.
This time will quickly over, then I shall
See what they tend to, or not see at all.
"There Is comfort yet, that miseries at height
"Lose their first property, which is to fright.
Exit.
The End of the Third Act.

Act the Fourth.
Caelia on a Couch, Flora by her. Cael. FLora, I cannot sleep, for all my
thoughts
Infected with my griefs, fly up and down,
Collecting only things to keep me waking.

Flo. I Will not stir from you, Madam, 'all this Night.


Cael. Flora, thy diligence deserves Reward,
And I Will not long be backward for to thank thee.
But prithee sing that Song I love so well,
That harmony, perhaps, will Charm my cares,
And give my senses Rest.
The Song.
1.
Flor. sings. AH, Choridon, in vain you boast,
You still do Cloris Love;
For better it is your heart were lost,
Then thus suspicious prove:
You then would kill me by disdain,
But dying thus you blot my Name.
For all will say
Cloris was false, and went astray;
Cloris was false, and did deserve her shame.
2.
For happy Shepherd, well you know,
Your Fame does mine excel;
All Generous Choridons do know,
But none my Tale can tell:
Cloris, though true, must lose that Name,
But Choridon will keep his Fame;
For all will say
Cloris was false, and went astray,
Cloris was false, and did deserve her shame.
3.
But Cruel Shepherd, when you hear
That I am dead indeed,
I do believe you will shed a tear,
Though now you have decreed,
That Cloris true must lose that Name,
For Choridon to keep his Fame;
And then you will say
Cloris was true, and never did stray;
Cloris was true, and I deserve her shame.

Flora. She Is fallen asleep, may none but happy Dreams
Possess her Fancy.
The Scene shuts.
Enter Antonio and Jasper in the Garden. Anto. Your confidence in this does
much amaze me.


Jasp. Sir, still I Will pawn my Life, that what I said,
Appears e're long a truth Infallible,
And your own Eyes will bear me witness of it.

Anto. Well, pitch upon a private stand for us,
That you know most convenient.
Ex. Jasp. Strange it is,
If this should prove a falsehood after this;
I Have threatened him with Death upon the failer,
Yet still he has persisted to affirm it,
Besides, I climbed the Garden Wall before him,
And that way gave him time for his escape,
If he would design to make it: These Circumstances
Do half persuade it is true. Oh, apprehension!
So terrible the consequence appears,
It makes my brain turn round, and Night seem darker.
The Moon begins to drown her self in Clouds,
Leaving a duskish horror every where,
My sickly fancy makes the Garden seem
Like those benighted Groves in Pluto's Kingdoms,
Which Poets fancy that the damned Inhabit.

Jasp. My Lord, my Lord.

Enter Jasper.
Anto. What now?


Jasp. The Garden Door just opens, step this way, lest
You be seen.
They stand close.
Enter Francisco and Sebastian. Fran. It Is hardly late enough, we will stay a
little,
For I perceive no light in the usual Window.

Sebast, But are you confident Antonio's absent?


Fran. I Am told for certain that he went from home
To see Don John Valasco, who is sick.

Sebast. Nay, then with safety we may walk a turn,
Though I confess, do what I can, my fears
Surmount my Reason, and persuades there is danger.

Fran. A hundred times I Have past it in as much,
Yet then with confidence you slighted all;
Prithee forbear to urge them any more;
I Am half turned Coward with your fears already.

Sebast. Let Us take a turn then further from the House,
And by some other talk divert our thoughts.
Exeunt.
Anto. Jasper, I find thy Informations true,
Thus far at least; these are my Wife's kind Couzens.
Hell rid them from the World.

Jasp. A hundred times they had been here before
In as much danger: Mark you that, my Lord?

Anto. I, and his Soul retorted back the Lie,
For they in all their Lives never knew a danger
Equal to that they are near: Hark! how the Owl
Summons their Souls to take a flight with her,
Where they shall be Eternally benighted:
Now I again believe it was a Witch;
For here methinks I see a thousand Devils
Waiting in the Air with fire-forks in their hands,
Just as our City Sergeants wait with Maces,
To toss their Souls to their Eternal Prison;
Look there, that flash of Lightning does confirm it.
Nay, do but stay a little, you shall have all.
All, all; not a Soul of them shall escape this Night.
No, no, 'twill spoil good Company to part them.
But hold, a Light appears, draw back to cover.
Exeunt.
Enter Francisco and Sebastian. Sebast. The Light is there, make haste and give
the sign.

Francisco strikes a Key upon his Sword; Eugenia appears above in Caelia's
Gown.
Eug. Who Is there, Francisco?


Fran. The same, and would desire your Company below.


Eug. This distance fits us better! Oh, Francisco,
Had we but always kept it, I had been
A spotless Offering to my Bridal Bed,
But now must cloud my Marriage Joys with shame,
And fear of what will follow.

Fran. Pray descend, this distance is not safe,
The Family may chance over hear our words.

Eug. I Have more cause, should I come down,
You would attempt my strength, and Argument
To violate my Vows, as first you did
My Virgin-Honour.

Fran. No, upon my Life, do but descend,
And may the Heavens pour all their Vengeance on me
If I do attempt you with a syllable
To break your Resolution.

Eug. Is any with you?


Fran. Yes, my Friend, Sebastian.


Eug. Let him speak, then.


Sebast. Madam, upon my Life, I will secure you,
And glory I have so much cause to do it.

Eug. Your Virtue I rely on for my safety.

She takes the Light from above.
Enter Antonio and Jasper. Anto. I cannot hear their words, yet I Am sure
It Is Caelia's there, her Habit tells me that.
Let Us draw a little nearer.

Sebast. Look there, Francisco, are not those two Men
Are creeping there?

Fran. It Is so, let us slip aside.

Ex. Fran. and Sebastian.
Enter Eugenia below. Eug. Where are you, Cousen Francisco? Are you there?


Anto. I, here, here, perfidious Woman.

Stabs her, she falls.
Eug. Oh, Francisco, it is an inhuman deed,
Ex. Ant. Jasp. To kill me thus, 'cause I would sin no longer,
But thou have kept thy word, and took thy leave.
As I must now, of all the World, and thee -- oh, oh --

Enter Gerardo hand Servant. Ger. Pray Heaven I be'n't too late, the Garden door
So open makes me wonder: Heard you no groans?

Serve. I think I did, my Lord; hark, Sir again.


Eug. Oh, oh; I fain would live a little longer,
If but to ask forgiveness of Gerardo,
My Soul will scarce reach Heaven without his Pardon.

Ger. Who Is that would go to Heaven, and wants my Pardon?
Take it, what e're thou art, and may thou be
Happy in Death, what e're thou did design.

Eug. Is that Gerardo's Voice? Sure loss of Blood
Does make my fancy Idle: Is It Gerardo?

Ger. Thou greatest Blessing of my Soul, it is.


Eug. No, no, my Lord, you will abhor my Name,
When I shall tell the story made me thus.

Ger. Heaven knows I sooner should abhor my Life:
But tell me the Author of this horrid mischief,
That I may fly as quick to my Revenge,
As these sad thoughts do seize upon thy Soul.

Eug. When you shall hear my story, your Revenge
Will, as I fear, vent against me in Curses.

Ger. Were thy Crimes great as theirs that left thee thus,
By all thy Virgin hopes I would not Curse thee.

Eug. My Lord, that is it you are deceived in.

Ger. Nay, now thou rav'st -- help me to bend her body
Her loss of Blood will keep her story from me;
And I shall Live in the dark, and never Revenge her.

Eug. Alas, my Lord, my Cousen, base Francisco,
Being let in by my accursed Nurse,
Came to my bed, and there by force and strength obtained
His hated ends.

Ger. Oh, damned Villain, he shall not long survive
To boast of it.

Eug. Had I staid there, and not consented further,
I should have needed pity, and not pardon.

Ger. Tell all the rest, for this is so surprising,
I Would fain persuade my self it was a Dream.

Eug. After this Fatal loss, a shame succeeded,
Shame that produced fear; infused by threats
Urged both by him and her, wherein they said,
If I refused to grant that willingly,
Which he at first did force, they would declare
The Action to the World, so to disgrace me.

Ger. O that old wrinkl'd Hag! that she should plot this.

Eug. What will not wicked Age effect for Gold?
But they at last made fear or'e-come my Virtue,
And I by that made all their guilt my own,
Meeting him here still when he did appoint.

Ger. Well, this confessed, how came you by these Wounds?

Eug. My Lord, Francisco did entreat my Company
This Night; when as I entered,
Without a word, but here, perfidious Woman,
He stabbed me in the Breast, and left me thus.

Ger. Had thou been dead, and Angels told the story,
I should have thought, in Envy of thy worth,
They had invented it, and never believed it.

Eug. I have no breath to tell you; oh, my Lord,
I do forget, they still are in the Garden --
Have a care of --
Dies.
Ger. Have a care of what? Oh, speak, Eugenia, speak.
She Is gone, she is gone; and could not tell her mind:
What is it I must have a care on! O some Angel
That waits to show her Soul the way to Heaven,
Come back and tell me, what it was she meant:
Was it her Reputation she took care of?
No, no, that cannot be, had it been that,
She might have kept the story to her self:
And there been Canonized: Was it of me
She did express her care? If so, 'twas needless;
For he that lets me Live to kill Francisco,
Though he does so by me, when that is done,
Shall have my thanks and Prayers in the other World;
But stay, they are in the Garden, I Will go look them,
"For if Revenge so just I do delay,
"I shall deserve Heavens Vengeance for the stay.
Exeunt.
Enter Francisco and Sebastian. Fran. Who should they be I wonder talked so
long?

Sebast. Sure, when she found us not, she would retire.

Fran. No doubt on it; yet I am not satisfied what two
Those were, and why they staid so long.
Could your Ear reach to understand their words?

Sebast. No, not a syllable more then a humming noise.

Fran. Nor mine; but now they are gone, let us walk that way,
'Twill be the best to miss them.

Sebast. Content.
Exeunt.
Enter Don Gerardo and Servant. Ger. It is in vain to look them if they hide,
The Garden's large; besides perhaps they are gone;
We Will to the Body.

Serve. You're by it now, my Lord.

Ger. This Accident amazes me so much,
I go I know not where.

Enter Francisco and Sebastian. Serve. See there, my Lord, two Men.

Fran. We Are pretty near the Window, there is no Light.

Ger. Have at thy heart, Francisco,
Ger. and Servant draw. This Token from Eugenia.

Fran. Nay, then, at thine: Be whom thou will, that Name
Tells me you are no Friend.
They Fight, the Servant shoots Sebastian just as Francisco ruas Gerardo
through, which pursuing, Servant kills him too.
Sebast. Courage, Sebastian's by thee.
My fears are come about, for I am killed;
Francisco, fare thee well.
Dies.
Fran. It Is double Death to see my Friend dye thus.
Was It not enough, you Fates, to take my Life,
But I must guilty be of murdering him.

Serve. My Lord, how do you?

Ger. Making what haste I can to meet Eugenia.

Serve. O me! Unfortunate!

Ger. Bewail me not; Death is a pleasure to me,
Since I can see Francisco lie there by me;
But ask him e're I dye,
What made him kill Eugenia?

Fran. What, is Eugenia Dead?

Ger. Why seems it strange to thee, who basely have
First Robbed her of her Honor, then of Life.

Fran. Gerardo, it was cruelty to kill her, being as
Yet she had not done thee wrong, and dying,
I rejoice I have Revenged her.

Ger. Francisco, sure thy Crimes have made thee Devil,
Or thou would never transfer thy Treachery
By murdering her, and place it thus on me.

Fran. May I reach Heaven as I Am Innocent
Of any Death but yours: Which if a guilt
Forgive me Heaven and you as --
Dies.
Serve. He Is dead, my Lord.

Ger. With such a Lie in's mouth;
O Heavenly Angels lead me not this way,
For he must always walk in the paths of falsehood;
Remove me nearer to Eugenia's Body;
My Spirits faint apace, and I must follow:
One word, and then farewell;
I have no time for to Reward thy care:
Here, take this Ring, and give it to my Brother,
He left it with me when he went to Travel;
Tell him I still preserved it for his sake,
A faithful pledge of our United Friendship.
Bid him, that by this Token he believes
Three words I left within my Cabinet
Concerning thee this Evening: He will do it,
And use thee as a Friend, as I have done.

Serve. I Will bear the Ring, but not the Message, Sir;
I never will seek for Friends when you are gone.

Ger. I do conjure thee do it: Tell our story too
As true as is thy self: But have a care,
Wound not Eugenia's Fame more then must needs.
Francisco's and Eugenia's dying words
Will make it strangely dark, as it is to me,
But I must leave it so!
Give me thy hand, commend me to Antonio;
Alas! I had forgot him, pray Heaven his story
Produce no further mischief; tell Caelia nothing
Befor't be day: Business comes thronging on me,
But I faint -- make but one Grave, and lay us
In it thus -- Farewell.
Dies.
Serve. Now dies the justest Man the Earth contains,
And I would do so too, but that I know
Self-murderers never must keep him Company;
I Will set the Bodies up against the Wall,
And call the Watch; what if they say I Am guilty,
And make my Life to answer all these Deaths:
Why, let them do it, for Death would now be well
Since to survive his loss to me's a Hell.
Exit.
Enter Antonio and Jasper. Jasp. Come, come, my Lord, the coast is quiet now.

Anto. I hope that Pistol saved our swords a labor.

Jasp. I Am sure they could not leave the Garden yet,
But we must needs have seem them.

Anto. Nay, I Am sure they did not pass the Garden door,
For if they had, we should have stopped their Journey.

Jasp. I think I heard a talking up this way,
After the Pistol made us leave our Post.

Anto. Though I did leave the Door, yet still my Eye
Was bent that way, and I saw none to pass.
But stay, where is Caelia's Body?

Jasp. See, my Lord,
There is a Man does hold her in his Arms.

Anto. It is Francisco sure! Have at his heart.
Runs at Gerardo. How Is this, not stir! Nay, then he is dead
Already -- the Moon deceives me, or it is Gerardo.
Oh Heaven's! It is my Friend, dead, dead, and stiff,
And my accursed hand has Wounded him.
This is not Caelia neither, but Eugenia in her Gown!
What strange mistakes are these?

Jasp. But who are here?

Anto. What, more!
By Heavens Francisco and his Friend Sebastian!
Both dead too! Death has had a Feast to Night.
Do not we Dream? As for this Woman's Death,
Surely her Fathers Soul did guide my hand
To strike the blow, since needs she must betray
Her Honor to Francisco, in these meetings!
But oh, my Sword has pierced my Friend Gerardo.
What Fatal Accident mixed his Blood with theirs.
But stay, there is Light appears, slip into the Grotto.
Exeunt.
Enter Servant, Captain, and Watch, with two Torches. Serve. Here is the dismal
place I told you of,
And here the Bodies.

Capt. A sight most terrible in time of Peace!
But did Francisco still deny her Death?

Serve. To his last moment;
He did confess he had abused her,
But would have placed her Death upon my Lord.
And seemed as much to wonder we denied it
As we that he did so.

Capt. What said Sebastian?

Serve. He scarce did speak a word after I shot him.

Capt. Had we not best to knock, and call Antonio?

Serve. He Is not at Home.

Capt. Yes, but I Am sure he is.

Serve. He was not late at Night, for I was there.

Capt. That Is strange, for just at shutting in of the Evening
I met him at a House that stands in the Suburbs,
Saying, he would go Home.
I think however we had best to knock.

Serve. My dying Lord made it his last desire,
That Caelia might not be disturbed this Night.

Capt. Well, take the Bodies up, and keep them safe,
You shall to the Viceroy's presently with me,
I scarce perform my trust, if I detain
The knowledge of so strange an Accident
A moment from his Ears, whose Wisdom will
Direct in this, which far exceeds my skill.
Exeunt.
Enter Antonio and Jasper. Jasp. You see, my Lord, that I was in the right,
I only said, it was my Ladies Gown,
But never did affirm it was her Person.

Anto. And I am glad it is not: Now, if Nurse
Fails too in her discovery, I am safe;
For if we keep our Council, all these Deaths
Lie pat amongst themselves, and there is not one,
Except Gerardo, that I Would wish alive;
He was my friend, and it looks Ominous,
That I should Wound him so, though after Death:
Jasper, thy diligence shall not want Reward,
But that must follow: Come, let us away.
Exit.
Jasp. My Reward follows! I believe it does;
'Faith, my good Lord, be sure it be a good one,
Or be content to hang for Company;
Now hap what will, I Will rid him with this murder;
Till I do make him spend's Estate to Bribe me:
"I was his Slave before for fear; but now
"I Will make him mine, since I this secret know.
Exit.
The End of the Fourth Act.

Act the Fifth.
Caelia Discovered in Bed, Flora by her. Cael. SUre 'twas a real Pistol-shot
that waked me,
Yet from a Dream so terrible, it did it,
That I had rather never sleep again,
Then hazard such another: I thought I saw
Lie dead by me,
My Lord Antonio, Don Gerardo, Jasper,
The Nurse, Francisco, and the Young Sebastian,
With Pedro, and thy self; this dreadful sight,
Or else the Pistols noise, I spoke of, waked me,
And made me cry help, help, which frighted thee.

Flor. Why truly, Madam, it was a dreadful Dream,
And I as much was frighted at your call,
Yet, for my own part, I did hear no Pistol.

Cael. It may be then, it only was my fancy,
For truly all my Dream seems still to me
So like a truth, that I can scarce distinguish
Whether I then did wake, or now am sleeping;
And but I see these things, and thee so plain,
I should conclude my Dream did still continue.

Flor. Pray Heaven divert all mischief from the house,
For I have heard it said by Learned Men,
Nay, and Religious too, that Dreams like these,
That stick so fast upon our fancies waking,
Are guided by a power that is more then Chance,
And always are portents of something like them:
I Am sure, for my own part, do what I can,
That Dream I had will not yet leave my head,
Which makes me think Jasper designs me mischief.

Cael. Flora, you go too far, Dreams are but shadows
Reflected from some Acts the day preceding,
As ours are now; for from those Accidents
Of my Lords taking Jasper, the Dream you told,
And Don Gerardo's naming of Francisco,
Mine now is formed: Thus they but succeed
Things past, and not prognostic things to come.

Flor. Pray Heavens these do not do it, but I Am afraid.

Enter Nurse, frighted with Eugenia's Ghost. Nurse. Stand off, stand off, what
makes you follow me?
I Am sure I did not kill you, if you're dead,
Or if you be not, why are you so pale? --
So, so -- she is gone -- but what made me come hither.

Cael. What, do you study ways to fright me, Nurse?
It is no proper time to play your tricks.
What makes you up at such a time of Night?
Look, how she stands amazed, and does not answer;
Think you I take a pleasure to be frighted?
That you persist in it still?

Flor. What, is the Woman mad, or would be thought so?
What makes you stand and stare thus?

Nurse. Did you see no Body?

Cael. Who should we see but an Old doting fool,
That turned a Child again, would Act like one,
And cannot find a proper time for it neither.

Flor. What make you up so late, Nurse?

Nurse. What Is that to you? It may be I sat up
To make my Lady merry with this Jest,
But now, forsooth, I Am grown too Old to please her.
You are her favorite -- what, come again?
O, do not stare so at me!
Shreeks. Exit.
Cael. There Is something more in this then barely play!
How the Old Woman star'd? sure she is run mad!
For shame, or sorrow Jasper goes away.
Prithee follow her.

Flor. Since you will have me, Madam, I will do it,
Though I dare scarcely venture.
Exit.
Cael. The greatest Object pity has, is Age,
When it returns to Childishness again,
As this Old Woman does; and though we say,
That Age is Honorable, we only mean,
When Gravity and Wisdom are its marks,
And not gray hairs, and froward peevishness,
As ten for one, are known by to be Old,
And though we see this true, yet we would all
Prolong our time to that decrepid state,
When nothing but contempt can wait upon us;
How strangely sin dastards our very Reason,
Making that guide us to desire known ills
Rather then Joys, that promised we deserve not;
For the best Men through sense of guilt do fear
To change for unseen Joys their troubles here.
Exit.
Enter Nurse. Nurse. If this Ghost follow still, 'twill make me mad;
For sure it is a Ghost it looks so pale;
Ay, and Eugenia's Ghost, I Am sure it is;
But who should kill her? May be Don Francisco!
Oh, there it is again -- It Is not my fault --
Oh, do not follow me then: What shall I do?
See there again, she points unto her Breasts --
It Is gone again, I fear 'twill make me mad --
I Will go to Prayers: But I forget my business,
My Lord will come, and I must let him in,
And show him what I promised, or he will kill me.

Enter Flora. What, come again! Oh, Heavens! I Will stop my Eyes.

Flor. Nurse, are you mad?

Nurse. No, you would make me so! But I desie thee --
Be gone, thou Spirit, in the name of Heaven, be gone.

Flor. Who should be gone?

Nurse. Thou! for you are the Devil. Come not near me.

Flor. My Lady sent me to you --

Nurse. No, no, she did not, for she loved me always,
And would not send the Devil thus to fright me.

Flor. I am no Devil, Nurse, look upon me, I Am Flora.

Nurse. Ay, where is the Spirit then I saw just now?

Flor. There was no worser Spirit then my self.

Nurse. No; 'pray Minx, what makes you follow me?
I Will set you back again in the Devils Name,
Come you to spy my Actions.

Flor. No, Nurse, my Lady sent me, don't be angry,
She was afraid that you were running mad.

Nurse. I, mad, it may be so; now I am Old
I must be mad, forsooth; but time has been,
There Is never a Servant durst have laughed at me,
Nor I Will not take it now, no that I will not,
I Will tear your Eyes out first.
She runs after Flora, who still is too quick for her.
Flor. Nay, softly, Nurse; so, so; ay, there!

Nurse. Where, where? I see it now, It Is strangely pale!
O, do not fright me so; it is gone again.
And now I shall have time to follow you;
Nay, now I Will tear thy Eyes out.
As Flora runs away, she falls, Nurse gets upon her
Flor. Oh, Nurse, Nurse! have mercy on me,
Do not scratch me so.

Nurse. I Will be thy Death, there is nothing shall preserve you.
Ah -- are you there again! The Devil, the Devil.
Exit.
Flor. 'Twas well for me her madness work't again,
And made her take a whim to run away,
She would have killed me else, do what I could;
I Will stay no longer, lest she come again.
I Would not be in her fingers as I was
For all I Am worth.
Exit.
Enter Captain, Watch, and Servant. Capt. When I consider every Circumstance
Of what you tell, and what I know my self,
I must conclude, I ought not to defer
To search Antonio's House: if he is from home,
As you pretend he is: It makes me think
There is some strange Intrigue designed by him.
For why should he turn back, as you relate,
And then obscure himself in such a House?
Besides, he told me, he was strait for Home,
And yet it seems he was not, as you say.

Serve. It Is truth, upon my Life, he was not there
At past the hour of Nine.

Watch. Who comes there!
Enter the little Devil, and runs and skulkes. Captain, the Devil, the Devil!
See where he stands?

Capt. Of My Conscience! The Witches little Familiar again!
If you're afraid, let me come, I Am used to
These sort of Devils! Come, come, uncase,
It sputters like a Cat, Captain to him. Uncase, young Gamester, what slippery
pranck
Are you about now? Don't you remember your
Last escape, Sirrah?

Devil. Pray Master don't whip me, I Will tell all.

Capt. Out with it then; where is the Old Witch, your Mistress?

Devil. Alas, Captain, she was killed to Night when
You brought in the Watch to search our House.

Capt. Killed, by whom?

Devil. I know not that, but we were putting a cheat
Upon a Lord there, by contrivance of his Man,
And when you knocked, we ran to our lurking holes
To hide us, but when the Coast was clear, we came
Out, and seeking for my Mistress, found her dead in one
Of the holes, thrust through her Body with a Dagger in
Three places.

Capt. What cheat was that you put upon the Lord?

Dev. We Acted like Devils, and in a Song made him
Believe his Wife did Cuckold him.

Capt. This was Antonio, whom I met there, Sir.

Devil. Ay, that is his Name, a mighty furious Man,
He said, he would kill them all before 'twas day.
He made me quake to hear him; I hope now,
Captain, you will let me go.

Capt. No, no, you Rogue! If he has done more mischief
You shall be hanged, except you find your Fellows
That joined in the cheat with you to make him Jealous.

Devil. I Will bring you presently to them, and show you all
Their holes; they did but send me out to watch when
The Coast was clear!

Capt. Who, say you, set you on to this design?

Devil. An ill-look'd Rogue, his Man, the Witches Nephew;
I think they call him Jasper.

Capt. Well, take the Boy, and call some of your Fellows,
And there surprise them all: I Will not defer
My searching to prevent the mischief
That Don Antonio further may design,
For I believe he had a hand in this
Was done in the Garden, however the mistake
Did happen to begin between the Dead.

Serve. Come, Sir, make haste, for I begin to fear
Some Tragedy is Acted in the House,
For Don Antonio's Rage is always quick,
And they have touched the string will stretch it highest.

Capt. Come then, let us hasten back.
Whistling behind the Stage.
Enter Nurse. Nurse. Ay, that is his whistle, and I must obey't.
Why Pedro, Pedro! What, are you dead asleep?
Pedro, I say.

Pedro within. Who calls?

Nurse. Pedro, rise quickly, my Lady Caelia wants you.

Ped. What can she want me for at such a time?

Nurse. I know not, but Flora came, and said you must
Come quickly, I think, to Ride to my Lord.

Ped. I come, but I Will have a care of your Tricks, Nurse.

Nurse. What tricks? What do you
Enter Pedro in a Nightgown, with his sword in's hand. Do with your Sword?

Ped. Why, Nurse, you may have malice, and malice
May seek mischief, which because you are no Witch,
And cannot come through a Keyhole to compass,
For ought I know, you call me out to do it -- ha!
What whistle's that?
Whistle.
Nurse. What whistle! Are you mad! Go to my Lady.

Ped. Still I suspect you.
Exeunt.
Enter Nurse, with Antonio and Jasper.
Anto. Are they together, Nurse?

Nurse. Yes, my Lord, the more's my sorrow!

Anto. Nay then, I see the Devils did speak truth;
Francisco, their kind Cousen, Whor'd them both,
By Heavens they took their turns, I see it plain!
O that I could invent some horrid Death,
And had but time to execute it on them;
But since I cannot, plain stabbing will do well,
The less they have here, the more they will find in Hell.

Nurse. I hope you will not kill your Lady, Sir!

Anto. Not kill her! But I must.

Nurse. What have I done? Oh, oh.
Cries out oh, oh.
Anto. Hold, stop your mouth, I Will stop it for you else,
They Will hear her, and escape!
Come, Jasper, are you ready?

Jasp. Yes, my Lord, I follow.
Exeunt.
Nurse. What have I done, one Murder on another?
I see 'twas he that killed Eugenia, now,
By's naming Don Francisco; oh, that Jasper --
Oh, the Ghost again -- what shall I do?
Exit.
Caelia in Bed, and Flora all Bloody. Cael. I Am sorry that I sent thee, since
she is mad,
But would 'twas day, that I might get her looked to.

Flor. I Am sure she has scratch't my face sufficiently.

Cael. It Is well it was no worse.
Pedro knocks.
Flor. Alas! she will come again!

Ped. Flora, Flora.
He knocks.
Flor. Who Is that, Pedro! What Is the matter with you?

Ped. Nurse called, and said my Lady would speak with me.

Cael. Bid him come in.

Flor. My Lady bids you enter.
Enter Pedro.
Cael. Pedro, the Nurse is mad, I did not call you,
You see how she has scratcht poor Flora's Face,
She came just now shreeking and staring hither;
If you could lock her up into some Room,
It would do well.
A noise, Exiturus, he fights, and Enters with Antonio, whom when he sees, he
lets fall his point, and is killed. Jasper runs Flora through.
Ped. I hear her coming up.
Thieves, Madam, Thieves!
Oh Heavens, it is my Lord!

Anto. Damned Letcher, so it is!
What, does your Courage fail you --
There, take that --
Runs him through. And boast in Hell that Don Antonio's Sword
Did thee thr Honor to send thee thither.

Flor. O Heavens! My fears were true, the Rogue has killed me.

Anto. Now Monster of thy Sex, see this, and tell me
Falls and dies. What are the effects you do expect from it?

Cael. Death, that is less terrible then is your Anger,
Which I perceive by it is effects already,
Upon that Innocent Man cannot stay there.

Anto. Are your concerns for him, when they should be
Employed to Heaven for mercy to your Soul?
Nay, then Hell take it is Quarry; this for Don Lewis,
This for Don Francisco; and take this last
For thy insatiate Lust with that damned Hind.

Cael. This killing me, my Lord, is very cruel;
Since I never sinned in thought against your Honor.
This, as I do expect Eternal Rest,
Is such a Truth, that I can dye in it.

Anto. O Hell and Furies! This Woman's impudence exceeds you all.
See there a Dog just wreeking from thy Bed,
Hot with the Labor you have put him to
And yet in thought you did not wrong my Honor.

Cael. From my Bed, my Lord! You are abused;
That fellow was not here full half a minute,
E're your self entered! Oh, I can no more --
Heaven and the World grant Pardon for my Blood.
For truth it self bears witness; I dare say
That more I sorrow for your guilt then Death.

Anto. If this be true, tell me as thou art dying,
What made him here at such a time of Night?

Cael. I cannot tell more, then that the Nurse did send him;
And she is run mad with guilt, or shame, or both!
Oh, I can say no more -- the Room turns Round;
My Lord, farewell -- Heaven pardon you all Blood,
As I forgive you mine -- oh, oh, --
Dies.
Anto. Her Death both staggers, and amazes me!
Are these Dead too?

Ped. Not yet, my Lord, I am not.
Your Sword has left me some small time for Prayers,
And it had need; for I believe few Souls
Can be assured to find their way to heaven
Without more warning to begin their Journey.
But yet I do not find much cause for doubt.

Anto. Nay, if thou'st hopes, by that I do conjure thee
Tell me, what brought thee hither?

Ped. The Nurses madness;
She called me from my Bed, and told me, Flora
Was sent to bid me come unto my Lady,
Which though I scarce believed, yet I did do it.

Anto. Why did you say it was her madness did it?

Ped. My Lady said she was so, for she came
Not long before shreeking into this Chamber,
So as you entered I was going down
To lock her up till morning in some Room:
This, as I hope for heaven, my Lord, is true.

Anto. Then it is as true, that I must never hope for it.
For I have killed a Wife of such obedience --
But hold, I Will pump the Nurse -- who set her on
To tell me this.
Enter Nurse frighted.
Nurse. O! whether will you drive me!
Be gone, be gone!

Anto. Here, here she comes, I Will make her tell me all.

Jasp. But I Will prevent the story if I can. --
Jasper Runs Nurse through but is staid by Antonio.
Anto. What, does the Villain mean to kill her yet?

Jasp. Does she not deserve it? To invent such lies,
And do such mischiefs with them.

Nurse. O thou damned Rogue! 'Twas thou that made me do it.

Jasp. You lying VVitch, be damned --
Offers at her again.
Anto. Forbear, you Rogue, I Will do as much for you else.
Speak, why you did it?

Nurse. My Lord, he threatened me, and made me do it;
And taught me to call Pedro when you knocked.

Ped. Look to your self, my Lord, he will kill you else.
Jasper runs Anto. behind.
Jasp. This way is only left -- hell take your Tongue.

Anto. Ah, thou have killed me; yet I have strength enough
To send thy Soul to hell.
They fight. A noise without. Jasper is mortally wounded.
Jasp. It Is done, I am caught at last in my
Own Trap. Oh, I deserve my Death for want
Of foresight, to let him Live a spy upon my Actions.
I should have served you thus, and thus,
Runs Pedro through as he lies, and Nurse. And thus -- and you too thus.

Ped. Oh, O, O!
Pedro and Nurse Dye.
Anto. Infernal Monster! how his malice lasts.

Within. This way's the noise.

Enter Captain, Watch, and Servant. Capt. What horrid sight is this? We come
too late.

Anto. Too late indeed, except you would come to save
The best of Wives that there lies murdered
By my accursed hand.

Capt. What, Caelia dead too! What made you do it, my Lord?

Jasp. Alas! he cannot tell; the Jealous fool
Was but an Instrument in my Revenge;
It Is only I can tell you why she died.
But yet I would not give that satisfaction,
Did I not fear my Name would be forgotten,
Except this Tale of my Revenge was known;
In which I shall live famous. --

Serve. O thou Dog! Do glory in the mischeifs thou have done?

Jasp. I, and have reason; name the man that ever
Did in one Day contrive so many Murders,
And make 'em all Successful.

Capt. But what should move thee to this Villainy?

Jasp. For that you will not wonder.
I am Jasper De Monsalvo, Heir to that Estate
This Lord does now possess.

Anto. Ah Heavens! some of that desperate Bandity
Did once attempt my life.

Jasp. Yes truly --

Anto. Poor Caelia, it is no wonder thy mind did boad
Great misciefs from this Fellow, being Son of
One did still contrive to kill me, for what the
King after just forfeiture for mighty services
Had given my Father.

Jasp. O Revenge!
Thy sweetness takes away the taste of Death.
But you will lose my story; which in short is this:
That Lady loved me not, and therefore I
Made her Lord Jealous, took him to a Witch,
And there I fooled him finely: Till the Jade,
Who was my Aunt in deed, at your approach
Would have discovered all; which I prevented,
And stopped her Mouth with this: Then I contrived
To kill Eugenia, knowing she would meet
Francisco in the Garden; that I did
Because she called me Villain, and refused
To lent me Whore her too, as did her Cousen;
And more, I knew the simple Lord I served
When he had Murdered her, as I should make him,
Would thank my Care, and well reward it too:
Nay, I Would have him do it for his own safety,
That still the Murder might be thought Francisco's;
You know the rest in the Garden. I taught besides
That damned Old Hagg, whose fear has made me thus,
To put this trick on Pedro: I bid her call him
When she should hear us whistle, then in haste,
And all undrest send him to Caelia's Chamber,
Whilst we, let in, might meet him coming thence,
Thinking the Cuckold's Rage would murder all,
And never hear 'em speak; but there I failed,
Their dying words betrayed me, that is the worst,
Or I had lived to glory in their Deaths;
But this my Comfort is, he will not survive me,
I have done his business too before I dye.

Serve. Was er'e so Impudent a Villain seen?

Capt. I Will try to stop his wounds, that so
I may keep him for Execution.

Jasp. Stand off, by Hell,
He that comes near me finds his Death with this!
Think you I Am grown so tame to dye by Law;
No, no, I Will not endure a formal Trial,
To be upbraided with those things I think
Deserve a Trophy rather then Contempt,
Which since I know will follow, here is my Bail,
This will deliver any man from Jayl.
Let Cowards dye by hanging; such as I
As we live bravely, thus dare bravely dye.
Stabs himself.
Capt. He has done well; no Excutioner
Could have been found so bad as his own hand,
And Hell will give him what he wants on Earth:
And yet, my Lord, it troubles me for you,
Since my Place binds me to secure your Person,
To answer Law for all your Rage has done.

Anto. Shame almost stops my mouth; yet, Captain, know
My wound will not give me time for that misfortune;
Stay but a little, let me fix my Eyes
On what lies here, for that alone would give me
A sudden Death, had I no other hurt.
I dare not hope for Heaven, having done
So black a Murder on such Innocence,
And yet I do believe her Charity
As it did dying, still does beg that Pardon
Might from above be granted to my soul,
Which if I miss, as I have cause to fear,
Then sure I shall be turned into a Devil
For ever to Torment his Cursed soul
That led me to these mischiefs.
'Twould be some ease, if Heaven but granted that,
But I begin to faint! Oh, Blessed Soul
Dart forth one Beam of Light, to guide the way,
Or I shall always wander in the dark.
Night seizes me already: yet from hence
In spite of death my soul shall take her flight,
Go where I will, I thus set out a right.
Dies.
Serve. Hes dead --

Capt. By dying so, at least he is thus far happy,
That he Escapes the Punishments of Trial,
And the Exemplar death must have attended
Which to a man so Jealous of his Fame
As he was, would have been a Hell on Earth.
Your Duty to your Lord will keep you safe,
Yet you must to the Viceroy go with me
To be a Witness there of what has happn'd,
The story else will seem Incredible.

Serve. I am ready, Sir, for all you shall Command.

Capt. Oh Jealousy, thou sickness of great souls,
To what a Rage did thou transport this Lord?
For had his Wife been false it was not good
By Murdering her to drown himself in Blood;
For Lust may be Excused since flesh is frail,
But Murder on the Soul does guilt Entail.

The Curtain Falls.

EPILOGUE
By Mr. Harris. A Tragedy, and not Heroic Verse,
The Comic part fit only for Farse;
No Atheism, nor any man we know
Abused, no repartee, nor splendid show;
But very little Bawdy, and less wit,
The Devil's in it, cries one, if this Play hit.
Faith -- may be not, and may be too it will,
For Chance sometimes exceeds all rules of skill.
As he who Rageing did his Pencil throw,
And Painted that by chance, he could not draw
For we have seen, and lately too, a Play
Cried down by those that cannot keep away
And when they come spite of themselves they stay.
And to our sorrow we have others known,
That for their wit have Wit it self outdone,
And yet you wits, that praise 'em seldom come.
So the Goodman, oft-times for cause unknown,
Leaves well-drest Beauteous Wife for Homely Joan.
And you that Misses keep too, I Am afraid
Do sometimes make them Jealous of the Maid;
So if this Play not dressed by rules of Art
Should with some Trick of Nature catch the heart;
We'd give you leave to rail, and never fear,
Because we are sure you would come to do it here.
Gallants you see what e're you say or do,
Plays will be writ, and we shall Act 'em too.
Some will for pleasure, some for profit write,
Some for Applause, and some will do it in spite,
Such bit by Critticks, strait run mad and bite.
This does our bu'sness: but we'd have you know,
We wish we'd none but true brisk wit to show,
We silence wish that Men might hear a Play,
And wish that Vizard Mask would keep away:
But we as well might wish we were those Kings
We sometimes Act, as hope to see these things.
Then since to rail of the Stage and in the Pit,
Must in this sickly Age be counted Wit;
And that the Infection connot be subdued,
We Actors for our own sakes do conclude,
The Itch to write and rail will never be cured,
And therefore faith let them be both Endured.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 17. Line 36. For your read their. p. 23. l. 19. f. Tailors r. Juglers. p.
31. l. 18. r. my fears. p. 38. l. 7. r. Villain by. p. 51. l. 6. f. first r.
worst. p. 53. l. 35. f. his r. in. p. 57. l. 11. f. there r. then. p. 58. l.
36. f. this r. his.


