THE VVHIPPER WHIPPED.

BEING A REPLY Upon a scandalous Pamphlet, CALLED THE WHIP: Abusing that
Excellent Work of CORNELIUS BURGES, Dr in DIVINITY, one of the Assembly of
DIVINES, ENTITLED, The Fire of the Sanctuary Newly discovered.

Incerti Authoris.

Qui Mockat, Mockabitur.

Imprinted, M. DC. XLIV.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF KING CHARLES, My most dear and dread Sovereign.
SIR,

BEpleased to cast a gracious eye upon this Book, and at Your leisure (if Your
Royal employments lend you any) to peruse it.

In Your Three Kingdoms, You have three sorts of people: The first, confident
and faithful; The second, diffident and fearful; The third, indifferent and
doubtful.

The first are with You in their Persons, Purses, (or desires) and good wishes.

The second are with You neither in their Purses, nor good wishes, nor (with
their desires) in their Persons.

The third are with You in their good wishes, but neither in their Persons, nor
Purses, nor Desires.

In this Book, these three sorts are represented in three Persons, and
presented to the view of Your Sacred Majesty.

You shall find them as busy with their Penns as the Armies are with their
Pistols: How they behave themselves, let the People judge: I appeal to Caesar.
Your Majesty's honor, safety and prosperity, The Churches Truth, Unity, and
Uniformity, Your Kingdoms Peace, Plenty and Felicity, is the continued object
of his Devotion, who is

SIR, Your Majesty's Most Loyal Subject, The Replyer.

THE WHIPPER WHIPPED.
THere came, by chance, to my un-enquiring hand, a Pamphlet called The Whip;
whose Pharisaicall Author pretended a transcendent Zeal to my first eye; but,
after a leafes perusal, I found his flame so extremely hot, that his Religion
seemed (for want of due stirring) burnt too; and so much tasted of the Brass,
that no Orthodox palate could relish it, nor a well-grounded Conscience digest
it: The namelesse Author had an Vtopian spirit; and the Government he best
affected, was Anarchie: He was a Salamander; his very dwelling was in Fire: His
Heart was a sink of Ignorance; his Spleen, a spring of Gall; a Shemei, a
Rabshekah: his mouth ran bitterness and malice; and his Pen slow'd venime, and
Rebellion.

The object of this fiery Pamphlet, was the orthodox and most excellent work of
Doctor Cornelius Burges, a man of singular parts; and, at this time; a worthy
Member of the Synod, or Assembly of Divines; entitled, The Fire of the
Sanctuary newly discovered, or A Complete Tract of Zeal, and printed by George
Miller and Richard Badger, anno 1625. which, this Pamphleters unlearned Pen
has so poorly answered, so impiously maligned, so maliciously calumniated,
that I have thought good to east away some Ink upon him, (not in vindication
of the Doctor, whose Conscience, enlightened by the Scriptures, needs no
Champion) but to rectify the abused vulgar; who, by the help of such
Pneumaticall Fantasticks, have turned their leaden apprehensions into
Quick-silverd Zeal, which has swallowed up and devoured their duty to their
betters, their fair demcanour to their equals, and their charity to all
Relations.

This unworthy Pamphleter, in the Progress of his more unworthy work, against
this worthy Member, uses that method, which Beelzebub the prince of Flies
prescribes him; who, like a Fly, buzzes through his whole Larder, blowing here
and there; but leaving such fruitful corruption, that, in short time, his
whole store, nay (if possible) the very Bread of life, molded by the hand of
heaven, which he has set apart in his margent, would grow unsavory.

He begins at the Dedication Epistle, repeating the Doctors words, then
poisoning them with his own Calumnies; whereunto, if your Patience (equal
Readers) will admit me, by the name of a Replyer; you shall have all woven
together in one Loome: Wherein I purpose not to load your ears with those his
frivolous preambles and impertinences, which would swell this Pamphlet beyond
your Patience; but, suddenly to rush into the List.

D. Burges Dedication Title. To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of
PEMBROKE, etc.
Calumniator.
Popery, and Superstition at the first dash! Dedication is a mere Popish
Ceremony, begun by the Antichristian Hierarchy, derived from deo and dicatio,
which is a vowing to God: It was first used when Steeplehouses, or
Meeting-places were built, which Papists call Churches, dedicating them to God;
or to those they honored as much, Saints, whereof some of them are now roaring
in hell; under which pretense, they juggled holiness into them, more then into
Barnes or Stables: Now this Book the Doctor dedicates to the Earl of Pembroke,
whereby he secretly acknowledges him either a God, or a Saint; If a God, he
blasphemes; If a Saint, he lies; for he was a Courtier, and preferred the King
before the Elect; whereas Saints imitate God, and should be no Respecters of
persons; in whose eyes, Kings and Subjects are alike.

Replyer.
When Ignorance has shot forth her shady leaves, how quickly Impiety budds!
and, then, how suddenly Rebellion blossoms! Ignorance first taught thee a false
Etimologie of a word; then, Impiety suggests a slight estimation of a Church;
and then, Rebellion insinuates a disreputation of a King. Now, one lash more at
school, would have helped all this, by curing that Ignorance, and letting you
know, that Dedication is derived from De, (here taken perfective) and dicatio,
(which is an offering or a presentation) which two words, joined, carry the
sense of a full or total presentation of this Book to whom he presented it.
Now Call. where is the Blasphemic? or where is the Lie? Let them even both return
to the base mouth from whence they came; And that one lash more which might
have cured thy Ignorance, in time, might save Gregory some labor; and thee,
some pains, in an undedicated Meeting Place.

D. Burges in the Epistle Dedicatory.
It (viz. this Treatise) speaks of Fire; But such, as was made to warm, and
not to burn any thing, unless stubble.

Call.
I knew what temper your fire (your zeal) had, (lukewarm Master Doctor) apt
to receive warmth or flame according to the times.

Rep.
It is the devils custom to leave out half the Text: Let me supply your
defect, Call. To warm solid hearts; Not to burn any thing but such stubble as
you, and then the sentence is perfect.

D. Burges.
Here is no ground for an Utopian spirit, to mould a new Commonwealth; no
warrant for Sedition to touch the Lords Anointed, so much as with her tongue;
No occasion administered to Ishmael to scoff at Isaac; no Salamanders lodge
themselves here.

Call.
An Utopian spirit is a word of your own coining, whereof I confess my
ingenious ignorance. But I perceive, this opinion which you pin upon Pembrok 's
sleeve, admits rather of an old Popish Government, then of the moulding of a
New, by an holy Reformation: It makes such an Idol of your King, (whom you
falsely term the Lords Anointed) that it brands that hand with the aspersion
of Sedition; and that tongue, with the guilt of Impiety, that touches him;
whereas Kings are but men, and wicked Kings but Beasts, in Gods eye, and the
righteous have Gods power, and may touch them; nay, and scourge them too; But,
I fear, your Zeal burns now only to light your Doctorship to a Deanery: What
you mean by Salamanders, I know not.

Repl.
You profess Ignorance, Call. in the beginning and ending of your learned
speech, and discover Treason in the whole Body: The first Ignorance you
profess, is, of an Vtopian spirit, wherein I thus inform you: It is a
fanaticall spirit, even your own spirit, by which you pray Nonsense by the
hour, preach Treason by the half day, and ejaculate blasphemies every minute.
Your last ignorance is, of the Salamanders; wherein I thus instruct you. They
are the fiery spirits that dwell within your flaming bosoms, by which ye
murder, under the pretense of piety; rob by way of Religion; and fling dirt in
the face of Majesty by color of zeal: No wonder, Call. those spirits are
unknown to you, when ye know not of what spirit ye are: As for the body of
your speech, we leave it to the judgment of Authority.

D. Burges.
But here is a flame that will lick up all angry wasps, and inflamed tongues
that presumptuously and without fear speak evil of dignities, and of things
they understand not, railing on all not so free as themselves to foame at the
mouth, and to cast their froth on all that are near, without difference.

Call.
This your Flame, Courtly Master Doctor, lights us to understand, that your
saintly Patron had then some remarkable Living in his Gift; or power, to make
you one of the Kings Chaplains, in ordinary; strengthened, with the hopes
whereof, you thus magnisie dignities, that is, Kingship, Lordship, and
Bishopship: And I am verily persuaded, if Amaleck or Esau, (whom God cursed)
were in being, your linsy-woolsy Zeal would endeavor to vindicate them from
that Curse; Or if Caiphas, the High Priest, were placed in office here, you
have a Pensill to paynt his Wall white enough, for Paul to curse.

Repl.
Call. I fear you are one of those angry wasps the Doctor's Zeallicks up, and
his Pen (now above 19 years old) discoverd your nest, being a faction now in
power, and prophesied of above 1500 years since; whose mal^pert, saucy, and
slovenly Tenets were well known to him, to be the Ivy of the true Orthodox and
Primitive Religion, whose ambitious and fiery spirits, (hating all Government
both in Church and State, casting their foame and froth in the face of Majesty
and Hierarchy, without respect of honor or place) his conscience (enlightened
and instructed by the holy Scriptures) hated with a perfect hatred, and used
his best means to suppress and quench.

D. Burges, in his Preface.
My sharpness against some Democraticall Anti-Ceremonians is not meant to weak
Consciences, joined with pious, sober, and peaceable courses.

Call.
Mark, whilst this sharp Doctor would boast of a virtue called Moderation, he
turns Advocate to that detestable sin of Lukewarmnesse: As if he should have
said, My sharpness against the enemies of Popery, extends not to them, that
are not too active and zealous of Gods glory. Doctor, this Fire will hardly
make your Pot boil.

Rep.
Mark how this bitter Calumniator acts his own part to the life; at one
breath, both wresting the words, and wronging the person: And how it offends
him, (whose glory is to set weak Consciences upon the Rack) to see another,
fearful of offending a weak Conscience: Call. This Zeal will make your pot
boil into the Fire.

D. Burges.
But I speak to such as keep a frantic coil about Ceremonies, and think they
never take their level right, but when, with every bolt they shoot, they
strike a Bishops Cap sheire off his head, and yet are more fantastical,
ignorant, proud, self-willed, negligent and deceitful in their particular
Callings then many whom they despise and condemn to Hell for carnal men,
forsooth, as any observing eye may easily discern.

Call.
So, Master Doctor; I now call both the Parliament, and the whole Assembly of
Divines to witness, you are either a Malignant, or a Turnecoate: When you
read this clause, remember your own late Votes, and tell me, what Mettle your
Conscience is made of. Tell me now, in sadness, Doctor, Are they ignorant,
proud, self-willd, negligent, and deceitful in their Callings, that inveigh
against Ceremonies, forsooth? that endeavor to strike off a Bishops Cap,
forsooth? Once again, I say, remember your own Votes and blush: Nay, if, with
the Satyr, you can blow hot and cold with one Mouth, you are no Divine for me,
forsooth.

Repl.
You triumph Call. too much before the victory, and crow too considently upon
your own Dunghill: I justify the Doctor in what I know: you condemn him, in
what you know not: What his Votes were, or how, or when made, it matters not to
me, but his opinion (declared to all the world) proclaims him no less then
Orthodox: I look upon him as a Divine, absolutely; not as an Assembly-man,
relatively: The Satyrs hot breath warmed his fingers, which else had been too
cold: The Satyrs cold breath coold his Breath which else had burnt his lips:
The first was Breath; The last, but Wind.

D. Burges.
Touching the Carriage of Zeal toward Princes, my CONSCIENCE witnesses with
me, in the sight of God, that I have spoken nothing, but what in my judgment
is the Truth, without sinister or base intents.

Call.
This Clause stands like a Pander to keep the door, till you have committed
your spiritual Fornication within; and to anticipate your believing Reader,
whilst you basely flatter Princes; wherein, you have engaged your Conscience,
and attested God concerning that your opinion, we shall hereafter understand;
which in his due place, you shall not fail to hear of.

Repl.
How like a snarling Cur you gurne before ye bite: Call. as you have acted your
first part, in showing your teeth; so, anon, we shall expect your second part,
in clapping your tail betwixt your legs, and shamefully running away.

D. Burges.
Nor do I touch on that, presuming to teach my Betters (but rather as men use
to do, when they go for Orders, or a Benefice) to give account.

Call.
Doctor, It is the property of Dogs to baule at Beggars, or Inferiors, who
come empty Isanded; but to fawn upon their Feeders, and wag their flattering
tails at those, from whose well furnished Trenchers they expect some scraps:
No, you presume not to teach your Betters; Tell me, Doctor, who sent you? Whose
Ambassador are you? Come you in your own name? It seems you do: He, in whose
Name you should come, knows no betters: The Truth is, Christ sext you; but
Antichrist (from whose surrogates you had your Orders) signed your Commission:
Christ sent you to Preach, and Antichrist bad you take a Benifice by the way;
which (speaking to your Betters) you here craftily insinuate in your Simile:
Jesuits beg not, but point ye where the Box stands.

Repl.
Your saucy Impudence, Call. Votes Modesty a vice, and rudene^se, Zeal: Our
blessed Savior says, Give unto Caesar those things that belong unto Caesar; and
Saint Paul, Honor to whom Honor belongs, commanding all things to be done
decently and in order: Which is too neat a Doctrine for your nasty spirits:
God, who is no Respecter of persons inmatter of Justice, commands you not, to
disrespect persons, by way of manners: Diet for Princes and Pesants require
several dressings: When Saint Paul said to that heathen King Agrippa,
Beleevest thou the Prophets? I know thou beleevest; have not you blasphemy
enough to traduce the Apostle of a courtly lie? I fear, your Rabseka-spirit
would have lent him courser language. And as for the Benefice you say the
Doctor insinuates in his Simile, you might have charitably translated it into
two or three Sequestrations, and then it had been tolerable.

D. Burges.
And yet I would teach withal: I mean, the boystrous Multitude; who, ever
prefer the rough Channel before the temperate shore, and think no man preaches
well in a Prince his Court, but he that is so fiery and rude (plain as they
call it) as with his Thunder shakes the very house: And if he cast no squibs in
a Princes face, or preach not like a Privy Councellor, they say he has no holy
Fire in him.

Call.
How this temporizing Doctor still courts Preferment! In his last Clause, he
Craftily insinuates for a Benefice; and in this, as grossly for a Court
Chaplainship, wherein, he openly discovers how his silken Conscience stands
qualified for such employment, being more ready to sow Pillows under Princes
Elbowes, then denounce Judgments against their sins; declaring himself a
professed enemy against the, boisterous multitude, who love the rough Channel;
And who are they? Even those Nathanian spirits that dare tell the King, Thou
art the Man; and professing himself a Friend to such as love the temperate
shore; And who are they? Even such as flatter Princes into the flames of hell.
A fit Doctor to consult and vote in the Assembly.

Repl.
It is one part of the devils office, Call. to accuse man toman, which Office, I
fear, you rather execute under him, as his Child, then usurp from him, as a
Stranger: Gods servants must wear Gods livery, Meeknes; They must reprove with
wisdom, sobriety, and mildnes; especially, the sacred persons of Kings: God was
more in the still voice then in the thunder: Squibs, taunts, and Raylings are
none of Gods ways; but love, temperance, and moderation: If your house have a
slaw, or an unsound pillour, will you, straight fire it; and, not rather prop
it, and, by degrees, strengthen it, for after service? Gods fire, (that
appeared in the bush) gave light; but, burnt not; But your Zeales have no
patience, demolishing and consuming, even from the Cedar that grows in Lebanon
to the Hysop that is upon the wall: If such fire become the Assembly, then take
out Burges, and put in Peter's.

D. Burges.
If men dislike a Book in this Age, their Censure is usually, It has no salt
in it: A discourse of this nature should have salt good store, for all
sacrifices must be seasoned with salt; So is this, but intended to season
only, not to fret any, unless by accident.

Call.
But if salt has lost it is favor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? So has
yours, Doctor; Your Sacrifice then will quickly stinck: You are a very bad
Physician for the soul; Your kichen Physic (for you have no other) were good
to keep a healthful soul in a good state; But when feavors of lust, dropsies
of drunkenness, plurisies of Blood, faint fits of Lukewarmnesse, etc. accost
the soul, your seasoned Brothes will fail: sometimes the disease will require
vomits, purges, phlebotomy, cautherizing, scarifying, cutting, etc. But, I
fear, your end is rather to cure your own defects, then your patients
distempers.

Repl.
I fear, Call. some of the Doctors salt has fretted your chapt fingers; which,
perchance, you strive to wash out with your own vinegar, which so much troubles
you: you name some diseases in others, but forget your own, both acute and
chronicall, the cardiaca passio, the tumor of the spleen, the petulancy of
the tongue, the Cold Fits of uncharitableness: The first, second, and fourth
of these are inward and habitual; and, I fear, incureable; but for the third,
the Beadel of Bridewell will be your best Physician.

D. Burges.
Thus have you my Apology (if it be one) as a small skreen to hold between you
and the fire, if you think it be too big, or too near, and that it would heat
you too much.

Call.
Doctor, Your Apology is as needless as your work: Your Fire (whereby (I take
it) you mean your Zeal newly discovered) is but an Ignis lambens, or as
rotten wood, shining in the dark; Or if it be a true Fire, it is but of
Juniper, which rather serves to perfume a princes chamber, then to warm a
Christians heart; and so dull, that it requires, rather, a pair of Bellows,
then a Sk^eene.

Repl.
I hope, Call. It is not such a fire as yours, called Ignis fatuus, which
entices poor souls, (wandering in the dark,) to break their necks; But (as
you have excellently, (although against your will) termed it) a fire of
Juniper; No perfume, sweeter; no Coals, hotter; This Juniper fire sends up
sweet perfumes of Comfort to the broken heart, and contrite spirit; but
threatens the fiercest of Gods Judgments to the Rebellious and impenitent
soul.

Here, Reader, be pleased to pause a while, and to understand, our Calumniator
has done with the Doctors Preface, intending now to set upon the body of the
work it self; wherein, he undertakes not his Task progressively, but
selectively; whether, he drives at one subject, collecting what he finds
scattered through the whole book; or whether his wit can only dance after a
Pipe of that nature, I cannot resolve you; You have it as I found it: This I
perceive, by his straggling Method, that it was leap year in his Brains, as
well as in his Calendar; And so, we begin again.

The Fire of the Sanctuary uncoverd.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 39. lin. 13.
It had not been lawful for Elijah to put those Idolaters to the sword, if he
had not been able to plead special Commission from God, as he did.

Call.
Take heed Doctor, you run not your self out of the Assembly into Ely house:
What special Commission had our Parliament to do the like? Yet how many
thousand more have perished by the sword, at their Command? Are not they wise,
and truly religious, and holy Merchants for Gods Glory, and blessed Agents for
our Kingdoms Reformation? And would they do such an act, and stand guilty of
such a Fratricide, so horrible a slaughter, had they not a Warrant for it?
Come, Doctor, It is wisdom to retract and change a misopinion: It is a good
bargain, to change for the better, and get 400. l. per. annum. to boot, and
God knows what be sides.

Repl.
You ride, Call. upon the surer horse, as the case stands now: Take heed of the
Kings plunderers. The Parliaments Authority is inscrutable, and too great a
mystery for a private man's Capacity; But if the Doctors opinion be firmly
grounded on the word of God, my Confidence of his Piety is such, that neither
fear of Prisons, nor hope of Fortunes, are able to divert, or to corrupt him:
But, Call. it had been better worth your pains, to have refuted his opinion, by
the strength of holy Scripture, then pinned your implicit faith upon the
Authority of men, though never so learned or religious, being the self same
Error, we cry down, in Popery.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 40. line 21.
He that being under authority will rather resist then suffer, makes the Cause
suffer by his resistance, and so in stead of standing zealously for it, he does
in effect raise forces against it.

Call.
A high and desperate Malignancy! A Doctrine most dangerous and damnable! not
only contrary to the practice of all Churches, that labor for a Reformation,
but directly opposite to an Ordinance of Parliament also. If this Doctrine be
permitted from the Pen of an Assembly man, without punishment or public
Retractation, our Cause will carry warm Credit; and his bosom a strange
Conscience: If this Clause be sound, we are at a weekly cost to much purpose;
If unsound, our Assembly has a sound Member.

Repl.
No question, Call. that Malignant Doctrine has been the ancient and received
Tenet of former days; neither do I know any Religion so opposite to it as the
Church of Rome, which holds it not venial, but meritorious, not only to resist
but also to depose the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate; But we are better
taught by Scripture, and not alone commanded, but also find it frequently
exemplifyed unto us by holy men, to give all passive obedience to the power of
our Princes, whether good or bad; without which Gods true Religion, would,
surely, want that honorable Confirmation of holy Martyrdom, which formerly it
had; But whether the year 1642. brought new inspirations and revelations with
it, or whether the thousand six hundred and forty one years before it, slept
in the darkness of this point, deluded by false Translations, the Doctor (if you
repair to him) no question, can render you a satisfactory account.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 41. line 20.
Zeal may stand with suffering and fleeing, but not with Resistance, which is
Flat REBELLION; And no good Cause calls Rebellion to aid.

Call.
Here Is more Water from the same Ditch, but a little more stinking, through
the addition of this odious word REBELLION: What Malignant Devil haunted this
Doctors Pen? Nay, in those ^alme days, when that base term (REBELLION) was
hardly understood, but in our Prayers Confessive; Nay, scarce then; A word,
more fit for those that can submit to the inordinate power of a Prince, and
crush Religion in a Commonwealth.

Repl.
How now, Call. Does your shoe pinch you there? Dare you resist who have liberty
to flee? Can you resist, and not rebel? Can you do the Act with a good
Conscience, and not hear of the Action without impatience? How willingly can a
dog foul the room, and how loath to have his nose rubbed in it? Did not I
tell you, in the Preface, (where you showed your teeth) that you would clap
your tail between your legs anon, and run away? He whose enlightened judgment
there called his God to witness, has condemned your Cause, styled you by the
Name of Rebel, and branded your actions with the style of flat REBELLION: His
Conscience, then, had neither Fear to pinch it; nor Affection, to enlarge it;
nor could his Merits aim at any By-respects for his maintayning of so known a
truth, so doubly fortified both by the law of God and Nature: REBELLION is a
Trade the Devil is free of: It is both Trade and Devil too: No wonder, Call. to
see you run so fast; You know who drives you: Nay, he has driven you so far
beyond your senses, that you hold him only loyal, that rebels; and him
rebellious, only, that submits.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 45. lin. 20.
I think no wise man doubts, that even in the purer times of the old Church in
Israel, corruptions grew in Ceremonies as well as in the substance of Gods
worship, and yet pry into the Scriptures never so carefully, we shall not find
any of the most Zealous Saints fall on fire for Ceremonies, which is worth
observation.

Call.
A true Chip of the old block Canterbury, who after he had familiarized the
name of the Altar, in the common care, (not daring to bring in
Transubstantiation, with a full Tide) innocently left out those words in his
Service book, which only made the difference betwixt a Sacrifice, and the
Sacrament; so that, but one step more, and the work had been fully done. So
this our Doctor (not daring to urge Ceremonies too loud, lest the Godly should
hear him) sets the peaceable Custom of the former Saints betwixt him and the
danger of all good men's Censure. He made the example of the Saints the wall by
which his creeping Popery might hold, for fear of falling; who, (had not this
blessed Parliament dropped down from heaven, to crush these Superstitions in
their Rise) had been, by this, as perfect a Proficient as the worst; had had
his high tricks, his low tricks, and perchance, his Merry tricks too, as well
as his fellows.

Repl.
How you wonder at a spark of fire, Call. when just now your eyes dazzled at the
flame I Did not the Doctor, in his Dedication, as good as confess himself an
enemy to Anticeremonians? did not your self tax him of rank Popery? and yet,
what a business now, you make of his creeping Ceremonies? The liar, Call. and the
malicious, sometimes, are alike forgetful; But, to the purpose; If you loved
the substance of Religion more, you would have more lamented that sea of
Christian blood, that has been shed about these Ceremonies, then I find you
do: We contend, so much, about the shell, that, I fear, we have lost the
Kirnell: But this know, Call. so long as you traduce your brother, and thus
abuse your spiritual father, neither the love of God, nor the God of love
abides in you.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 66. line 14.
Again, let such as be Zealous sticklers for Democraticall, or Aristocraticall
discipline, consider how ill the Church can be governed by one policy, and the
Commonwealth by another.

Call.
Our Doctor is grown a Machiavilian; and forgets that Piety is the best
Policy; We, living under a Monarchical Government in the commonwealth, how
he pleads for a Hierarchicall government in the Church? consequently,
dissallowing Democraticall or Aristocraticall Discipline, which our gracious
Parliament is now setting up; But't is no wonder to hear him, that has so
Zealously pleaded for the Robes and vanities of the whore to apologize for her
government; and, by consequent, for the whore her self also!

Repl.
When Ignorance and Folly meet, how malice domineeres? How this government, by
Bishops, erected in the Apostles days approved by Polycarpus, Saint John's
Disciple, and Irenaeus the Disciple of Polycarpus, Ignatius, and all those
first Planters of the Gospel; submitted unto by the whole Primitive Church;
confirmed by Lucius, the first Christian King in this Island; afterward,
established by so many Acts of Parliament, (as yet unrepealed,) and freely and
personally exercized by so many godly and learned Martyrs; how this Government
sticks in ignorant Cal's stomach? whose forgetful malice, would make the
Doctor an enemy to the proceedings and designs of Parliament, whose writings
were printed so many years before this Parliament was dreamed of: As for his
pleading for the whore, this know; had the popish Strumpet found no better
friends then he, she had wanted that retrograde Mercy of a Third part, when the
Protestant Matrone must be content but with a Fifth.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 68. line 20.
It was long since the Zealous Complaint of a Holy Man, that men could no
sooner get up their names in the world, and be able readily and confidently to
muster up a few places of Scripture, nothing to the purpose, but they thought
themselves sufficient to encounter Moses himself, setting upon him as furiously
as Dathan or Abiram ever did: Happy were this age, had it none of that Temper.

Call.
But has that holy man no name, Doctor? or, was it your own self? The man we
know not, but his Intentions are apparent; namely, to conclude none able for
the Ministry, but such as have first their Ordination from your popish Bishops,
from whose imposition of hands, they presently receive the spirit; till then,
being neither called nor qualified: brave Iuggling! when the laying on of
Symonaicall hands must enable a drunkard, or a whore-master, or worse, to
preach the sacred Word, and administer the holy Sacraments, who now, by the
virtue of this Hocas pocas, has a capacity to forgive sins, being (though
formerly very ignorant) now gifted more or less, according to the gift he
brings; where they that are called by the secret working of Gods spirit,
inwardly, enlightened by knowledge, and especial Revelation, and able for
Interpretation (though never gifted with tongues) were not permitted to
exercize their ministerial Function: but imprisoned, persecuted, and pilloryed.

Repl.
True, Call. you hit the intention right; and have so plainly discovered yours
too, that every fool may read it; and (being converted by you) approve it,
too: wherein, you intimate, how needless, Ordination and Learning are, to
qualify a Minister; and, that any, who finds himself gifted, may execute the
Priestly office. Tell me, Call. may any, that has skill to make a shoe, a hat,
or a suite, profess the Trade, till he be made free? Your Halls say, no: Why?
he has skill in the Mystery, and his Apprentiship is served! what hinders him,
he cannot practice? His Master must make him free, and he must perform the
City Ceremony. And shall the calling of a Minister be undertaken by every
unexamined tagrag? Shall every Coblor, Feltmaker, or Taylour intrude into that
honorable calling, and be judges of their own sufficiency? and leave their
lawful Trades for unwarrantable Professions, according to their own humerous
Fancies? Our bodies, Call. expect the help of the most rational and authorized
Physicians; but our souls can be content with every Emprick, and accept of
every Theological Mountibank: As for our Bishops you term Popish, How many
of them have lately forsaken (for their Conscience sake) their lively-hoods,
and fled from the Popish faction in Ireland, hither, where, instead of
charitable relief, they are thrasht and tribulated, with another Flayle?

D. Burges cap. 3. page 70. line 11.
The next way we can possibly take to the best Reformation is by prayers and
tears.

Call.
I see, the Doctor loves to sleep in a whole skin, and far enough off from
Resisting to blood: It Is true, Prayers and Tears, are said to be the weapons of
the Church; And happy it were if such weapons could prevail: But where
Entreaty finds defect, Compulsion must make supply; If Prayers cannot, Swords
may: If Tears may not, Blood must.

Repl.
Let them perish by the sword, that take up the sword; And let them that thirst
for blood, guzzle blood until they burst: David, that fought Gods Battles,
commanded by Gods own mouth; nay a man after Gods own heart; yet his hand (that
was in blood,) must not build the Temple; And shall we expect, by blood, a
Reformation of the Temple? The stroke of a Poleaxe is not acceptable, where
the noise of a Hammer was not warrantable.

D. Burges cap. 4. page 79. line 4.
When many people are demanded their Reasons of diverse opinions, which they
stoutly stand unto, is not their answer thus? Because the contrary is against
the word: Being pressed to show wherein, they reply, We are but ignorant
People; we cannot dispute with you, but so we are taught by Reverend men, if
you talk with them they will be able to satisfy you to the full.

Call.
Do, Doctor, offend those little ones, and despise Gods Blossoms: All have not
learning to maintain their Opinions, by Argument, and Sophistry. The battle
is not always to the strong, nor the Race to the swift: The persuasion of a
Conscience is an able proof; and the opinion of holy men a strong Refuge:
Better to stand courageously (though ignorant) in a Good Cause, (as some do)
then to maintain Error (as you do) with learned Impiety.

Repl.
Hence it is Call. your Cause is stronglyer defended by the Sword, then by the
Pen, whose Ignorant Patrons, can better thrash then plead: It Is confessed, the
persuasion of a wel-grounded Conscience is a good proof to the party so
persuaded; but here it sticks, not able to convert a brother. Review those
world of Pamphlets, of both sides published, and weigh them; In those of the
one side, you shall have the full consent and Harmony of Scriptures; strict
precepts, commanding; holy Examples, confirming; and all, undeniable pressed, and
learnedly urged home to every Conscience that is not seired; On those, of the
other side, what Wresting of Scriptures? What allegorizing of plain texts?
What shuffling? What faultring? What obscurity of style? What Rhethoricall
pretermissions of things material? What pasquills? What invectives? What
raylings? What bitterness? Enough to discover a Bad Cause, and to disparage a
Good: But, Call. your unmaintain'd Opinions are pinned upon the Authority of
men: Say, where is the Papist, now? Is not Implicit Belief one of our greatest
Quarrels with the Church of Rome, even unto this day? Did not our Savior
himself condemn the old Pharisees, for their Traditions? If this be not blind
Zeal, that Scripture is Apochrypha, which said, Without knowledge the mind is
not good. Pro. 19. 2. No, Call. such Zeal is the mother of all Sects and
Heresies, being guided by the opinion, we conceive, of those men, who are
subject to Error, because but men: I advise such to keep their ears open; and
their mouths, shut.

D. Burges cap. 4. page 82. line 12.
I wish it were no breach of Charity, to compare the stirrs of our Brownists,
Anabaptists, and Familists, and all the Rabble of such Schismatic sectaries
(who may truly be termed Puritanes) with this inconsiderate action of those
rude Ephesians, (Acts 19. 32.) If there be any difference, it is only in this,
that these mad Martin mar prelates profess in their words, that they knew
God; but in their works, they deny him.

Call.
All that hate Popery and Popish Prelates, are, in our Zealous Doctors esteem,
Brownists, Anabaptists, and schimaticall Sectaries, which he brands with that
(now almost forgotten) style of Puritanes; all, far honestci men then himself;
whom (compareing them to those rude Ephesians) he makes (according to the Kings
unworthy Declarations) the Authors of all these Commotions, calling that worthy
man Martin marre-prelate, mad, for touching the apple of his eye, the
idolatrized Hierarchy. A Malignant of the right stamp, and coined at the Kings
own Royal Mint?

Repl.
Once again, good Call. (if it will not too much prejudice the progress of your
wit) correct the frailty of your Memory; and remember, the doctors book, which
you so soundly answer, was Printed in the year 1625. which was a little before
this unhappy Commotion; which, you say, he fathers upon the Brownists and
Anabaptists, and schismatic sectaries, according to His Majesty's
Declaration: Truly, Call. your malice may rather brand him for a witch, then a
Malignant; but your discretion may hold him rather for a Prophet, then either;
that, so long since, foresaw this: Indeed, in that point, he jumps word for
word with His Majesty's Declaration: and, if the King speak true, the Doctor
speaks not falsely: For what His Majesty writes, now, by way of history, our
Doctor delivered then, by way of Prophecy.

D. Burges cap. 4. page 137. line 20.
Such as make a great blaze when prosperity, credit, Peace and Preferment are
Bellows to blow it; but are so carried about as hay in a whirlwind with the
blast of Time, that they will be ready to fire that which before they
maintained, if the wind turned never so little about, and through fears or
hopes, will be of any Religion and temper, that the strongest faction embraces,
resolving to go no further then a fair wind and weather, and a calm tide will
carry them; And if any storm arise, presently to make to the shore, to prevent
peril of life and goods; Such Zealots I say as these never had any Coal from
the Altar, to kindle their Sacrifices; they never knew what it is to aim at
the Glory of God.

Call.
Your Doctrine is good, had it been as well followed; Say Doctor, who was he,
that a little before this Parliament (when our brethren the Scots made their
first approach into this kingdom, and whom a little after, the King Injuriously
Proclaimed Rebels) in his Sermon at Magnes Church by London Bridge, flew in
their faces, vilified them with opprobrious terms, styled their design,
Rebellion, proclaimed them Robbers, Ravishers, Traitors, and the disturbers of
the Churches Peace, called their Doctrines schismatic, new fangled, and
seditious, brought in to refine us, (with this addition) God will not be
beholding to the Devil to sweep His Church; And not above a month after, at the
beginning of thu Parliament in another Sermon at the same place, out of this
Text Act. 17. 30. (And the times of this Ignorance God winked at, but now
commaneth all menevery where to repent) took an occasion to eat his words, and
contradict every thing he formerly delivered? Who was the cowardly cur then?
according to your own phrase page 138. line 3. Who is the Sheeps-heads now
according to your own term? page 139. line 23. Who turned his Fiddle to the
Base of the times? page 147. line 1. Who is guilty of Parasiticall baseness?
page 147. line 18. Who is the Whiteliverd Christian to be turned out among dogs
and hell hounds? page 182. line 11. Doctor, now you have told us what he is,
the whole parish of Magnes can tell you who it is. Who was it that was so
active for the oath Ex Officio, so eager for the two shillings nine pence so
contentious with his parishioners? The Clergy can witness the first, the City
can testisie the second, Magnes can attest the last: Yet all this was done by
way of zeal.

Repl.
Call. First your tongue is no slander, Secondly your profession gives you a
Patent under the broad Seal to lie: but to spoil your jest, if any such man
was, (...)? True, Saint Magnes was the Doctors Church at that time, and if any
slipped into, and abused his pulpit, and himself, no question but the Doctor is
as much troubled for it as you are pleased with it: But who ever you tax (if
you play not the Poet) he may, in spite of your bitterness, justify his
seeming Contradiction, and eat his words as harmelesly as a Potato pie in
Lent: Whether the Seots were Rebles or no, was no matter of Faith, but Opinion;
The object of opinion is Reason, and it alters with Reason; When His Majesty
proclaimed them Rebels, (being a matter of fact and state,) was it not reason
for him to own it? But being pleased, by pardon graciously to take off that
odious imputation, it had been neither reason, manners, nor safety not to
approve of it. When a ship has made a voyage with one wind into New England,
will you blame it for returning back with a quite contrary? No wise man Call.
will do it, unless you, or such as you were in it.

D. Burges cap. 4. page 93. line 13.
It is then a clear case, that a Christian is not bound to reprove, or
discourse of Religion to known or suspected scoffers: If he testify in secret
to his God, his dislike of such Varlots, avoid needless society, and
unnecessary commerce with them, and in his soul, secretly mourn for their
dishonouring God, he has done his duty.

Call.
By your leave, Doctor, Your zeal here smells a little too much of the Coward:
Did your dying Savior endure the base Scoffs, and bitter Taunts of the Jews,
for your sake, and is your Reputation so dainty, not to abide a little jeering
for his sake? Will your zeal sell Gods honor for the impatience of a Scoff?
Were it your own case, I fear, Your wit would find spirit enough, either to
contemn it, or retort it: But you will away, and complain to God in a Corner:
Metal to the back! Doctor, He that refuses the vindication of Gods honor,
denies him; And he that denies him at Court, him will God deny in his Chamber:
Can you hear your Sovereign abused and be silent? perchance (as the case now
stands) you can, and make one for company, too, if you fear not his prevayling
power. But can you hear your bosom friend injuriously reviled, and lend him
no Apology, but run away; and whisper in his ear a tedious Complaint? If this
you can, you are no friend for me: This (if your zeal belie not your
conscience) must serve Gods turn, nay more, you have done your duty too.

Repl.
Have you not an inhibition, Call. to cast Pearls before Swine? Are you more
tender of Gods glory, or more wise to propagate it, then David, who accounted
it his duty to keep his mouth close whilst the wicked were before him? Call.
your zeal tastes a little too rank of the mother; a Bellings-gate zeal, where
the Revenge is often more sinful then the Offense: Perchance you would spit in
the offenders face: That zeal is a strange fire, that produces such moist
effects: Call. your Religion is too rhumatick: Sure, Saint Peter had a good
quarrel, to draw his sword, yet the action had too much rashness in it (as
well as blood) to be accepted: Where the party offending is not capable of
reason, or the party Vindicating, has no capacity of discretion, the action is
not warrantable: Better to bear the hazard of some dishonor, then to have it
indiscreetly vindicated.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 262. lin. 22.
The supreme and sovereign Prince, who has none between him and God,
representing the person of God, executing his office, and in this respect,
bearing his name, to whom he only is accountable for all his actions, by way
of Summons and command, this person, I say, must in all things, and at all
times, be handled with all humility and due respect of that high place he
holds; so as all may be taught not to despise, but to honor him, the more,
by the carriage of those that are, in case of necessity, to treat with him in
the name and business of his God.

Call.
How now, Doctor? None between him and God; Only accomptable to God for all
his Actions? Sure, Doctor, You are now besides your text: Shall whole
kingdoms, then, depend upon his extravagant pleasure? So many millions of
souls lie open to the tyranny of his arbitrary will? Is he not bound to his
own Laws? not limited by his Coronation oath? May he alter established
Religion, by the omnipotence of his own vast power, and turn Gods Church into a
Rout of Infidells; and our Liberties, into a tenure of Villanage? Is this your
Zeal for Gods glory? The man has overwhelmed his Judgment in the deep gulf
of flattery, and lost himself in his own Principles: Can he represent Gods
person, that commands what God forbids? Does he execute Gods office, that
forbids, what he commands? If this be zeal, or common Religion, let me turn
Amalakite, or any thing that is not, this. No, no; Doctor, (saving your private
engagements, and expectations,) Kings are no such persons as our late Idolatry
has made them: The trust of Kingdoms is put upon them; which, so long as they
faithfully discharge, they are to be honored and obeyed; but, once being
violated, their Covenants are broken; and they are no longer Kings; The safety
of the people, is the supreme Law; and people were not made for the good of
Kings, but Kings, for the good of People.

Repl.
How this Doctors loyalty, good Call. offends you! If he would temporize as you
do; abuse and slander Scripture for his own liberty, as you do; fly in the face
of Majesty, as you do; endeavor to introduce a new Government in Church and
State, as you do; Blaspheme God and the King as you do, he were then a holy, a
well-affected man, a Saint, or any thing that is good; But now his Conscience is
directed by the Scriptures, his Judgment enlightened by the Scriptures, his
words warranted by the Scriptures, especially in a Case of such Consequence,
Away with him; He is a disaffected person, a Malignant, and what not, that is
Bad? But concerning Kings, Know, They represent Gods Person, whether good or
bad; If good; they represent him in his Mercy; If bad, in his Judgments: Christ
has a Rod of Iron, as well as a Golden-Scepter; a Nebuchadnezzer, as well as a
Josiah; a Nero, as well as a Constantine: We must stoop to both: He that
submits not to the power of a bad King, Kicks against Gods Judgments; But he
that resists, snatches Gods Rod out of his hand; and, refusing Correction,
falls into DAMNATION: We must submit to the Higher Powers. Romans 13. 1. And who
are they? Whether it be to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors that are
sent by HIM. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. From whence necessarily this follows; That
Power which he warrants not, we have no Warrant to obey; and, Those Ordinances
his power signs not, we have no Commission to observe; As for your slighting
and deposing Kings, the Current of the Scriptures runs strong against you, and
all the examples of Gods children (through the whole book of God) bend another
Course, They know no deposing of Kings but by death; no determination of
Passive obedience, but by fire: But whether our Translation of the Scriptures
be the same with former Ages; or whether some strange light has darted
inspirations into these our later days, (which the Apostle denominated
perilous) I leave to the learned Synod; who, I hope, will at length consult us
into a Religion, which shall need no future Alteration; or that Alteration no
further effusion of Christian blood.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 272. line 19.
God made a Law to all, Not to revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of the
people; which Law prohibiteth not only Imprecations, and seditious Raylings,
(which is a hellish impiety, though it be but in word only, be the Prince
never so impious) but even all rude, bitter, and unseemly speeches, although in
secret to himself alone, much more, in public, or in other places behind his
back.

Call.
What pains the Man takes to pick out Texts to countenance his
Idolatry-royall! True, Kings are called Gods: But what follows? They shall dye
like men: Concerning which dying not a word; because it is so opposite to a
Living, which is the only Butt he aims at: But mark the Doctrine his
Court-ship raises from his well chosen Text, Though Princes be never so
impious, yet to reprove them roundly (which in his language is seditious
railing, rude, bitter and unseemely speeches) is a hellish impiety; and, in his
King-clawing Judgment, must neither be done in public, nor yet in private.
How ready are such Officers to light Princes to the Devil!

Repl.
Call. If he light Kings to the Devil by his point of Doctrine, you take a
speedy course to send his subjects after him, by your use of exhortation: But
mark your own words, you first intimate that he makes him a God; then,
conclude, He lights him to the Devil: You that can so suddenly make Contraries
meet, reconcile the King and his two Houses: The issue then of all, is this;
You say, He makes the King a God, by flattering Idolatry; and, I say, you make
his subjects, Devils, by your flat Rebellion: Calvin, whom you confide in, tells
you, That Princes (though most wicked in their Government) yet in respect of
the dignity of their places, their name and Credit must be spared; But see, a
greater then Calvin; Elihu, the moderatour betwixt Job and his miserable
Comforters (Job 34. 18.) says, Is it fit then to say to a King, Thou art
wicked? and to Princes, ye are ungodly? Behold, a greater then Elihu, Solomon
(whom ye blasphemously less Credit then either, for his partiality, being a
King) says, Eccles. 8. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who
shall say unto him, What do thou?

D. Burges cap. 7. page 274. line 19.
God has engraven so large and fair a Character of His Imperial Image in
their foreheads (viz. of Princes) as must be sacred in the hearts of all, and
bind not their hands only, but tongues also to the good behavior, and that
for ever. Nor is this carriage only due to good princes, but universally to
all.

Call.
Sacred? a little further: nay, then make him Almighty too: and even, fall down
and worship: Make him your graven Image, your Dagon, and hoyst him up for a
God; but be sure the Ark be away: Nay, though an Idolator, an Infidel, sacred
too: Make him your Bell and Dragon; but you do well to bind his subjects hands
to their good behavior, for fear some Daniel be among them.

Repl.
How now Call. Is your furnace so hot? you forget that he is Gods Vicegerent,
you make so bold with; Remember, there be birds of the Air, and things with
wings; Had you lived in Nebuchadnezzers days, you would have saved him much
Fuel, and his Officers some labor: Questionless, your furnace had consumed
the three passively obedient Children, and been too hot for the fourth to walk
in.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 277. line 17.
Invectives (though but against an equal, or infeferiour) are ever odious, but
against a Prince, intolerable.

Call.
If Invectives be so intolerable, let Princes be so wise as not to give
occasion, and deserve them.

Repl.
If all should have according to their deservings: I fear, Call. the Psalm of
Mercy, would scarce advantage thee.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 278. line 6.
An indefinite Reproof of sin in public is enough; If this serve not to
reform a Prince, forbear; More will make him worse.

Call.
Kings are past Children, to be whipped on others backs. The Scripture will show
you some Prophets that feared not to rouse the very persons of Kings, by name;
and rattle them soundly, and before their people too: But, Doctor, you have
either no Commission, or are afraid to execute it: You flee to Tharshish, when
you should go to Nineveh; You whisper softly, lest they should chance to hear
ye; and give your Royal Patients no Physic but Cordials, for fear it work
and make their queazy stomachs sick.

Repl.
The actions of Prophets, which had immediate Warrants from heaven, are no
presidents for later times; neither durst those courageous Prophets speak
before special Commission: Did Eliah stir to reprove King Ahab till God had
given him charge to go? 1 King. 21. 17, 18. Amos prophesyed not against King
Amaziah, till God especially commanded him: Ordinary reproofs must not be
copied from extraordinary Embassages; but from their usual Sermons, which in
their reproofs, were for the most part, indefinitely uttred to all, in
general; by name, to none. But you, that have fresh Influences of the spirit,
may Boanarge it where and when ye please, and play the Bedlems in divinity; But
remember what is said to those that exceed their Commissions, Who has
required these things at your hands?

D. Burges cap. 7. page 280. line 18.
What shall they answer unto God, who being but private persons discontented,
shall take upon them, Shimei like, to revile and traduce their Sovereign
behind his back, and presume to make every Tavern and Alebench a Tribunal,
whereat to accuse, arraigne and condemn the sacred and dreadful person of the
Lords Annoyted (whom they ought not to mention without a holy Reverence) and to
censure all his Actions, before their Companions as confidently as if he were
the vassal, and they the Monarch: Has not former experience told us, this is
the high way to all Treasons and Rebellions?

Call.
When Princes offend their God in suffering, or partaking with Idolaters, shall
subjects be afraid to offend them? Shall Gods name be abused and torn in
pieces with their execrable oaths and blasphemies, and shall their dainty names
be held so precious, as not to be spoken of; or (as our Doctor says) not
mentioned without a holy Reverence? Shall Gods most sacred and just Commands be
despised and slighted by them, and shall their profane Injunctions not be
unperformed, without presumption? their unlawful Commands not violated without
Rebellion? Weigh these things with the balance of the Sanctuary, and you shall
find, that you either want true Zeal; or your Zeal a right object.

Repl.
Call. review your own Argument; and you will (with the help of some reasonable
discretion) find it (TEKEL) weighed in the Balances, wanting in weight; In
case, thy Prince should offend his God, in wounding and tearing his holy Name
by oaths and Blasphemies; Put case, he should justle Gods sacred Laws out of
the Land; violate them in his countermands; profane his Temples with Idolatry,
or Barbarism; will this warrant thee to dishonor him, whom God has commanded
thee to serve? to rebel against him, to whom God has commanded thee to be
subject? to disobey him, whom God has commanded thee to honor? Because he
offends his God, will thou aggravate the offense, in offending him? and rebel
against God, in rebelling against him? Weigh these things well; and let thy own
conscience (if not bribed with partiality) be thy Judge. Think thou this
rabble of rebellious and seditious Rakeshames, that style themselves by the
name of Mercuries, Seouts, Weekly Intelligencers, etc. but, indeed, a pack of
Alebench Whistlers, decayed Captains, and masterlesse Journymen, that want
more hairs then vices; and, for Thirty pieces of Silver, betray the Lords
Anointed; for half a Crown a week, fly in the face of Gods Vicegerent; and,
under a pretense of Reformation, sell themselves to all wickedness; that, like
Sampsons Foxes join tail to tail, and carry firebrarnds about to set the
gallantest Kingdom in the world on a light flame; think thou that these are
pleasing to the God of Peace? Think thou, these brazenfac'd Monsters, with
their meditated lies, malicious scandals, printed (and shamefully permitted) in
their seditious Pamphlets, are pleasing to the God of Truth? Think thou,
these undecent and preposterous actions, tending to the confusion of
well-establisht Laws, and to the disturbment of a long settled Government, are
pleasing to the God of Order? Think thou, that they, and their Abettors will
pass unpunisht? No; Call. If our King fail in his duty to God; and we, in ours
to him; God will keep us still divided in our affections so, that we shall
join in nothing, but in drawing down Judgments upon the whole land; which,
without Accommodation (the King always living in his Royal Posterity, and the
Parliament never dying) will perpetuate us in blood, till the utter Ruin both
of Church and State.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 282. line 16.
If good People should discern some Errors, (and those not small) in Princes,
the best Pattern they can propound themselves is, that of Samuel (1 Samuel 15.
35.) mourning and praying for Saul, not for Form only but heartily, and
fervently indeed; and the worst they can pitch upon (unless they proceed to
open Treason) is that of common Newesmongers and seditious spirits, who cannot
make a Meal, spend a Fire, drink a Pint, or drive away one hour, without some
pragmaticall discourse, and censure of Princes, and their State-Affayres.

Call.
Nay Good Doctor; we have had many Samuels (or as good) that have fasted and
prayed, at least these twenty months, That God would be pleased so turn the
Kings heart, and bring him back to his Parliament, but God has stopped his ears
against us, and will not be moved. And, since God has made his pleasure so
openly known through the whole Land, (nay through the world too) that his
Majesty's heart is fully resolved and knit to Popery and Superstition; shall we
subjects (whom it so much concerns) be afraid to communicate the business to
one another? Your conscience, Doctor, is grown a great Royalist; but your
tender Zeal of your Princes honor will hardly stop our mouths or close our
ears; Our Case is so, that our discourse of him, and States-matters too,
cannot be too pragmaticall (as you call it) We must, now, take advantage of
those his faults, which our Fasts, Prayers, and Petitions could not redress;
And, since his cruel Course of life, and soild behavior will not be a perfect
white, we must die it into a sadder color; and these his Crimes, which our
tears cannot wash sairer, (for the comfort of ourselves and Children) our
reports (for the countenance of the Cause) must make fouler, for the
exasperating of our Confederates, and encouragement of our soldiers; so, that
by this christian Stratageme, through, the enterchange of news (which you
condemn) we may facilitate our own designs.

Repl.
Call. Your christian stratageme is but the modest term of a devilish project,
or, in plainer English, a piece of errant knavery; wherein the father of your
contrivements receives much glory; and the God of Truth, no less dishonor:
Read that statute which God made, Levit. 19. 16. Thou shall not go up and down
as a Talebearer among thy people; where, in the end of the verse, he signs it
with I am the Lord. The falsenes of the Tale doubles the sin; the baseness of
the end trobles it; the person damnifyed (being a King) makes it, quadruble;
the persons venting it, (being subjects) makes it terrible; but the place where
it is commonly vented (being Pulpits) makes it horrible; and by the ministers
of the Gospel too; and in the name of the God of truth too, almost impardonably
damnable; Now Call. Tell me how you like your Christian stratageme; No wonder,
if your Samuels were not heard: It Is well for you, Gods Ears were closed
against their prayers: Had he not been deaf in Mercy: and merciful to
admiration; and admirable in patience; they, surely, had been heard in
Judgment, to the terrible example of such unparalleld Presumption. How often
have your solemn Petitions set days apart, for the expedition of your
Martial attempts in a Pitched field, or for the raising of a Seige? How often
have your solemnities been showed in plentiful thanks givings for the blood of
those thousands, whose souls (without infinite mercy) you cannot but conceive,
in one day, dropped into the flames of Hell! What Bells? What Bonefires? What
tryumphs? And yet, for the success of your often propounded, and (sometimes)
accepted Treaties of Peace, what one blessed hour has been sequestered? What
Church door has been opened? Which makes me fear (and not without just
Cause) your Fastings and Prayers have been rather to Contention, then to Unity;
and that they have rather been attractive for Judgments, then for mercies,
upon this blood-bedabbled Kingdom.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 284. lin. 1.
As for such as will not take out this Lesson, let their eyes, their tongues,
their tears, their sighs, their coats, their prayers be what they will be,
their Carriage savoureth not of Zeal for God, which thus casts dirt and Mire
upon the face of his Vicegerent, and tends to the taking away the life of his
life in his subjects hearts, in which all good Princes desire as much to live,
as to enjoy their Crowns; And if it be not lawful thus to smite at their
Persons, with the tongue only, shall that be thought Zeal for God, which
seeks their deposition from that Crown, which once a just free and absolute
Title of Inheritance has set upon their heads?

Call.
Doctor, you are very confident of your own learning, and definitive Judgment,
to tie every man's Zeal to your Rules: and it seems, you are more tender in
flinging Dirt (as you term it) in your Sovereigns face, then in preserving
his soul from the flames of Hell: Neither do I conceive it a thing so heinous,
to take his Subjects hearts from him, as to unite them in the superstitious
Bonds of Popery: And as for your deposing him from the Crown, (which you
falsely call his absolute Inheritance) if he break the Covenants, whereby the
Crown is set upon his head, he dissolves his own Authority, and our Obedience;
and himself is become his own deposer.

Repl.
Call. It is not the Doctor, that prescribes Rules to another Zeal, but the
holy Scriptures, from whence he draws his infallable principles, and
Conclusions; And whereas you censure him for more prizing the cleanness of his
sovereigns face, then the welfare of his soul, your malice wrongs him in your
hop-frog confutation; wherein, you make a wilful preterition of that point,
whereof you censure his neglect, in the wrong place. And whereas, you turn
Deposition upon the default of Princes, know, kingdoms are neither Copyholds,
nor Leases; subject, either to forfeiture, or Reentry: Kings have, from God,
their power of reigning; from Man, the Ceremony of Coronation: To God they must
give account, (not man) on whose pleasure their Titles absolutely depend.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 288. line 4.
In fine, David thought him (viz. that slew Saul) worthy of no Reward but
death; and of this, so worthy, that instantly he gave order for his execution,
with this sharp sentence uttered, Thy Blood be upon thine own head, for thine
own mouth has testified against thee, saying, I have slain the Lords
Anointed; A memorable example, and an Argument unanswerable against all
King-killers, and deposers of absolute Princes, absolutely anointed by just
title, as here with us.

Call.
Here, revereud Doctor, Your Simile limps: First, David was a Prophet; and,
(knowing the Crown so near his head,) spared that life, which he knew so near
a Period; not willing to dabble his Conscience in such needless blood:
Secondly, (being confident himself was the next successor) commanded present
Execution, to terrify his new Subjects from the like presumption: Thirdly,
(Though you deny it) our Kings hold not their Crowns by such an absolute
Title, as those of Judah and Jerusalem.

Repl.
Is the Doctors Simile lame, Call. Sure, 'twas your ill usage made it so: But
say, was David a Prophet? Had he special Revelations? then, doubtless, his
ways and actions were the best presidents for us, to follow: But was he a
Prophet? Then, sure, he knew it a heinous sin, to take away the life of Gods
Vicegerent (though an Idolater) Had he special Revelations? then,
questionless, he knew death a just Reward for killing the Lords Anointed
(though a wicked King.) But did this Prophets heart smite him, for cutting off
his Sovereigns skirt? then, sure, God will not let him go unsmitten, that
takes his Crown from off his head, or power, from his hand: But, Call. how truth
will be confessed by your unwilling lips! which intimate, the Prophets conscience
had been dabbled in blood, had the deed been done, and his subjects guilty of
presumption, that should do the like: And, whereas you deny our Kings so
absolute a power, or title as the Kings of former times, you should have done
to better purpose, to show, who limited it, and when; for your own single
assertion is not Classical.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 290. line 2.
Authority is ever one of Envies eye-sores: Subjection a yoke, that Humane
Nature loathes. Although Inferiors cannot help it, nor durst complain,
Liberty, Liberty is every man's desire, though most men's ruin.

Call.
When Authority is put into a Right hand, Subjection is no Burden to a good
heart: But when Tyranny usurps the Throne of Monarchy, then the people may
suspend Obedience, and cast off the yoke of their Subjection: We that are
received into the liberty of the sons of God, and made heirs of an everlasting
kingdom, have too much privilege to be enslaved to men, or made vassals to
perpetual bondage: If desire of holy Liberty be our labor here, eternal
Sovereignty shall be our Reward hereafter.

Repl.
He that gives Authority, knows not where to place it: The people were pleased
with goodly Saul; God was pleased to choose little David: Tell me, did the
burthen-threatning hand of Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, the king of Israel and
Judah; or Jeroboam (the rebellious subject of Rehoboam) who made Israel to sin,
deserve the Scepter? By your marks, neither; In Gods wisdom, both: The one, to
crush the liberty of the too proud subject; The other, to exercise the
consciences of his chosen people: In both, to work his secret pleasure. But
Guild Hall has wiser counsel; and your Conventicling wives are fitter Judges
for the setting up, or pulling down of Kings; for regulating the power of the
good, or limiting the prerogatives of the bad: But, 'twere fitting, first, to
correct S. Paul's Epistles, or to vote S. Peter's works APOCRYPHA; who, both,
instruct us to submit to the Authority of kings, good or bad; But, indeed, the
Liberty of the Subject had been a strong plea, had not His Majesty spoiled
their jest, and granted all 1 Trienniall Parliam. 2 Starchamber. 3 High
Commission. 4 Shipmoney. 5 Coat and Conduct money. 6 Monopolies. 7 Forests. 8
Tunnage and Pound. 9 Regulate the Clerk of the market. 10 Knighthood money. 11
For the continuance of this Parl.
Petitions; and the Badge of slavery had been unanswerable, had not our
glorious Savior honored, and worn it upon his seamlesse Garment: The God of
glory endured what we despise; and showed that example, we scorn to follow.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 307. line 14.
For my part, I am so far from taking away Prayer from preaching, that I
could wish not only more preaching in some places, but more Prayer also in
other places; and I mean, only that Prayer which is allowed too: In
performance whereof (if the fault be not in them who undertake it) much more
good will be done, then will be acknowledged by some, who magnify preaching,
rather then adorn it; Yea, I will add, more then by some men's preaching,
admired by so many.

Call.
It is very much, Doctor, you durst so openly wish more preaching in those
days, when your dumb-dog-Bishops silenced so many; and most of all,
themselves: Nay, you are not ashamed to wish more Prayer too: What a Lot is
this, among so many Sodomites I But after all this, Lot was drunk: Our Doctor,
being afraid to be thought too righteous, put in one her be that spoiled his
whole pot of Porrage: I mean (says he) that Prayer which only was allowed:
And what Prayer was that? even that English Masse-book, which (God be thanked)
the sacred piety of Soldiers, and the holy boldness of Inferior Christians,
has most blessedly taken away. This is that Prayer, our Doctor desires only
should be used; This is that Prayer Book, our preaching Doctor deifies, and
prefers before some men's preaching (and who were they, in those Episcopal
days, who knows not?) admired by so many. This is that Prayer Book, that
Prelacie, which this temporizing Doctor has now extred into Covenant (in the
presence of Almighty God) to suppress.

Repl.
It seems Call. this Book of Common Prayer is your maine quarrel here; and
Bishops, by the Bye: Tell me, who composed that Book? In whose Reign was it
composed? and what Authority confirmed it? Were not those blessed Martyrs the
composers? they, who gave their bodies to the flame, in the defense of the true
Protestant Religion, and in defiance of that superstition, whereof you say it
is a Relic? Dare you vye piety with those Martyrs, that are so daynty of your
passive obedience? They composed it; You defy it: Was not this detestable book
composed in that pious Saints days Ed. 6. of holy memory, when the Protestant
Broom swept cleanest? and when the cruelty of that bloody Religion was but
newly out of breath, and fresh in Memory? This blessed Saint allowed it; You
despise it: Was not this book, ye so revile, confirmed by Act of Parliament (in
those days) the Members whereof were chosen among those that were (excepting
the blessed Martyrs) the greatest sufferers under the tyranny of that barbarous
Religion, whereof, you say, it favors? The Authority of this great Council
confirmed it: You condemn it: Did not the Phoenix of the world, and of her
Sex Queen Elizabeth, of everlasting Memory, (in whose days God so smiled upon
this kingdom) and that Monument of learning and wisdom, King James, of never
dying memory in all their Parliaments, establish it? Yet, you revile it: Did
not your self, in your oath of Allegiance, swear to maintain the King in his
established government, in Church and Commonwealth? Yet, in this particular,
you violate it. Ponder all this, Call. and, then, reviewe your own words, and if
you blush not, you are brazen-faced.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 309. line 21.
If they can pick out some boldfac'd mercenary Emprick, that by the help of a
Polyanthea, or some English Treatise, can make a shift, five or six times a
week, with his tongue, and teeth, to throw over the Pulpit a pack of stolen
wares, which sometimes the judicious hearer knows by the mark, and sends it
home to the right owner again.

Page 310. line 15.
Or if the man has been drinking, feasting, or riding, that so no time is left
to him to search so far as a naked Commentary, Postel, or some Catechism, yet
adventures on the sacred business of preaching, carrying to the Pulpit a bold
face, instead of savory provision, and thinks it sufficient, that the people
hear Thunder, though they see no Rain, and, that loudness will serve, for
once, instead of matter; because (if he be earnest) silly women, and some
ninnyes more will count him a very zealous Preacher, and impute his want of
matter to his wisdom and desire of edifying, not to his want of study, or
ability, and say, He preaches to the Conscience: He stands not upon deep
learning: He reproves sin boldly, that is to say, other men's, therefore they
love him: not theirs, otherwise, they would abhor him.

Call.
And such a deal of Trumpery, that my pen tyres before it come to the ^^adious
Journies end of his invective speech; wherein, I have so much charity left to
excuse him; in that, he personates some Ministers, whom his malice conceives no
better then fools; Who, indeed, though they make no flourish, quoate no
Fathers, repeat no sentences of Greek and Latin, and preach not themselves
(as our learned Dr. does) yet edify the simpler sort of people more in two
hours, then he with his neat Orations and quaint style does in five Sermons,
ushered in by his Popish Lettany. These are those men who (in his last clause,
he covertly says) are admired by too many, and whose preaching less edifies
then the superstitious Common Prayer book: Doctor, leave your gibeing, and
presume not too much upon your learning and wit, which God has given you, as a
sharp knife to cut your own Throat, And deride not those whose Defects of
learning are so bountifully supplied with Inspirations and Revelations of the
spirit.

Repl.
Take heed, good Call. you merit not the Honor to be called the Dunces
Advocate: These are the men, that carry their Provaunt Sermons up and down the
Country, and in their people-pleasing Lectures, cry up Liberty, and prate down
Government; cry up the Spirit, and beat down Learning; cry up Sedition, and
preach down Authority. But tell me, Call. where were all these Edifyers, these
inspyred Pneumasticks, when the daring Pens of Fisher, Campion, Harding, and
other learned Heretics breathed forth their threatenings against the true
Protestant Church? when as the hot mouthed Challenges of Romes Goliahs thundered
in our English Host, where, where were all those long-winded Lecturers? Which
of them took up the Sling? What one amongst them threw down his Gauntlet? Who
among so many, struck one blow in the just defense of the true Reformed
Religion? Or tell me, without blushing, where are they that did it? These, that
bravely rusht into the Lists, defied the Enemy, grappled with him; nay, laid
him on his back; tore the Crown from the bold Strumpets head, and snatched the
Cup of poison from her trembling hand, what Palm, or what Reward have they, I
shame to tell: These, like undaunted Champions endured the Brunt, in dust and
sweat, and stoutly undertook the Cause; whilst they, like Trouts, all day
betook them to their Holds, and now, in the dark night of Ignorance, prey upon
the Churches Ruin: They fish in Waters, which themselves have troubled. These,
these are they, that lead silly women Captive, and creeping into Widows
houses, devour them under a pretense of long Prayer; Learnings shame,
Religions Mountebanks, the vulgars Idols, and the Bane of this our (late
glorious) now miserable Kingdom.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 319. line 22.
God made a Law, that every word of an Accusation should be established by two
or three witnesses: This Law is revived by the Apostle in the Gospel, and
applied to the Case of Ministers. Against an Elder receive not an Accusation,
but under two or three witnesses. 1 Timothy 5. 19. By an Elder, meaning a
Minister, as Saint Ambrose, Epiphanius and others rightly do expound it.

Page 129. line 9.
It were therefore a most uncharitable, and unchristian Course upon a bare
Accusation of an Enemy, to condemn a Minister, before himself be heard, and a
competent number of Witnesses of worth produced against him.

Call.
How now Doctor, does your Guilt begin to call for more witnesses? Are you
tormented before your time? The Law (you speak on) would in these days, be
needless: Our Ministers faults are now writ in their foreheads, and as
apparent as the Sun at noone, whose lewd and looser Conversations, are impudent
Confessions, and visibly manifest, enough without farther Witnesses: Our
Crime-discovering Century, is both Witnesses and Jury, and the pious Composer
thereof, a most sufficient Judge: But some there be so craftily vicious, that
they can keep their words and Actions from the eyes and ears of Men: For such,
I hold a reasonable Presumption, Evidence enough; Others there be, whose vices
want no Witnesses, but, perchance, their Witnessses, (as the too partial world
expounds it) want worth and Credit. Some measure worth by a visible Estate;
some, by unimpeachable honesty of body, or behavior; others, by a religious
demeanor according to established canstitutions; whereas, for my part, If a
poor handicrafts man, or whose Infirmity denies him a through-pac'd honesty, or
whose piety is a little zealously refractory to established discipline; nay, be
he a convicted Anabaptist, or Blasphemer, or what not? (in case it be for the
Cause) that brings an Accusation, or appears a Witness against a Malignant
Minister, I question not, but such a Witness may be valuable.

Repl.
The Law denies it, Call. But now the Law's asleep, all actions are arbitrarie:
But the ground of that Law was very just; for, as Theodoret in 1 Timothy 5. says,
Because Ministers touch sinners to the quick, it exasperates many against them;
in respect whereof, their Accusations require many witnesses. Eutichianus an
ancient Bishop, about the year 276. after Christ, (if Bishops retain any
credit more then a Turk) Ep. 8. Episc. Syri^. admonishes, to weigh well the
Accusation of a Minister, because the faithful execution of his Office gains
him many enemies. He also proceeds to disenable all Heretics, all suspected
of Heresy, excommunicate persons, Malefactors, Thieves, Sacrilegious,
Adulterers, that seek to Witches, or Conjurers, and all other Infamous persons.
In the 3. Council of Laterane (Vide Append. Council. Lat. 3. par. 50. cap. 69.)
It was decreed, That upon an unproved accusation of a Clerick, his own single
oath should free him. It was agreed in the 7. Council of Carthage, that all
servants, Stage players, unclean persons, wanderers, all that came uncalled,
all under 14. years of age, and all that the Accuser brings from home with
him, shall be rejected, as Witnesses, against a Minister. Another Decree of
Analectus, denies the Accuser to be a witness, or the witnesses to be such as
are revengefull, and must be clear of all suspicion. In a Synod at Rome, about
Constantines time, it was decreed, No Deacon should be condemned under 44. able
witnesses: Such tender care was, always, had of the accusation of a Minister.
But now Call. your Tenets can (in favor to your new fashiond pieties) qualify
secret whoremasters, open blasphemers, and such as your self; nay, one single
Accuser (and a sorry one too) will do the feat.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 232. line 20.
But what? is every tatling Basket-maker, or Butcher, or mincing She a fit
Judge of a (Ministers) doctrine, and meet to reprove and confute him for it? Is
that Zeal, which catches at pieces of sentences, and then runs away; and
gives out, that he preaches false doctrine, contradictions, or Invectives, to
shame him to his flock?

Call.
Doctor, if some of your Coat (I name no body) were as tender of your Lives,
as ye are of your Doctrines, you would have fairer reports: But your bent is to
bring the vulgar to believe your words without Examination; and, then, you would
preach them into what Religion ye list. Could you but once work them to
Implicit faith, the Kingdom of Antichrill were more then half set up: The
horse that winces, is galled somewhere, or we account it the trick of a Jade,
that fears riding. God has commanded all to search the Scriptures; and will
ye take Pett if we examine the Doctrine you raise from thence? Did our Savior
storm, when the Sadduces reproved his words? How often were his Doctrines
traduced, as false? How often was his Authority questioned? nay more, denied?
Yet he reviled them not. Doctor, stroke down your stomach; The closer you
follow Christ, the cheerfullier your flock will follow you: But know, in things
so near concerning us, our mouths shall be as wide as the faults, be they of
Potentates, Generals, or Princes: and if they do not what our Conscience tells
us is their duties, they shall not fail to hear ont.

Repl.
Call. I think Ignorance has given thy tongue a Bribe, thou playest her
Advocate so well: Both of their lives, and doctrines, Ministers must give
account to God, and his subordinate Authority; and not to you: Call. you forget
the Calling of a Minister: He is your spiritual Father: Cham was cursed, for
discovering his fathers nakedness. Put case, your Minister should show his
nakedness in some Error; either, of life, or doctrine; it were more modest
piety for you to cover it with your silence, or to recover it by your prayers,
then to upbraide Him with it. Had you searched the Scriptures as you ought, you
would as well have condemned the saucines of the Sadduces, as the mildnes of
our Savior, whose high Authority needed no Credit among men; but our poor
Ministers (whom the least breath of a Mechanics mouth, is able (now) to ruin,
and undo both wives and children, without compassion) have reason to be moved
with such affronts: But, Call. perchance, you vindicate your own natural
father, whilst you revenge your self upon your spiritual; from whence, arises
this doctrine; You have more love to the flesh, then to the spirit: No
question, Call. your fancynesse is universal, and fears not to be exercized
upon the Sword, as well as Keys; Your Prince has found it; Your General has
found it; whose slow designs cannot agree with the Constitutions of your too
fiery spirits, your discontents have found unbridled tongues, to propagate your
liberties, although by blood; But the Synod, (whose consultations are to settle
peace in our distemperd Church) can go their own paces, without petition or
complaint, from whence, arises this doctrine; You love your own safeties above
the glory of God.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 335. line 21.
I wright this, to clip the wings of those Batts, and Reremice, that are ready
to fly in the Ministers face upon all occasions, with false accusations, fancy
Reproofs, and proud Censures of his Ministry, desiring to be teachers of Law,
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

Call.
Doctor, you still harp upon the same string: But do these Batts, these
Reremice trouble you? Then walk less in the Dark; (You know my meaning) But
you now pick a Quarrel against your forenamed Reprovers, That they desire to
be teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor what they
affirm. How your Orthodoxe nose swells at that! If ye would be oftener in your
Pulpits, there would be the less room for them: But tell me, Doctor; If a
Smith or a Tinker should happen to be gifted, and strike a Nail of edification
into the spiritual foot of an unregenerate brother, and thereby save his
soul, would it trouble you, because the Smith was not called? would it grieve
you, because the Tinker had no Ordination from a Bitesheepe? If a good deed be
done, true piety will never blame the hand that did it.

Repl.
Call. You have twice together, out of your sinck of bitterness belched out
your naucious malice upon the Dr. in these dark words, (I mean no body, and
You know my meaning) which like the flatus hypocondriacus (fuming from your
spleen, the Receptacle of all base humors) troubles and distracts your head.
But, in His Name I defye both them, and thee: And, as for your Tub-preachers,
you so much defend, I perceive by your Metaphor, they edify the clean contrary
way; Concerning whom, this only. When the great Block of Religion is removed,
then such Buggs appear: Rebellion, like an Easterne-wind, brings in such
vermin: When Jeroboam rebelled against his lawful Sovereign, and dispossessed
him of the Crown of Israel, he made Priests of the lowest of the people, which
were not of the house of Levi. 1 King. 12. 31. And this became sin unto the
house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of
the earth. 1 Kin. 13. 34. But your Tubbists have learning enough, and
understanding too, sufficient for an Auditory composed of such as you, whom
Ignorance cannot injure.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 360. line 11.
If he that seems religious, will yet be idle, false, undutifull, and stub
borne, rail at Ceremonies, Bishops, and Common Prayer, disdain to be
corrected, and maintain his fault; that man or woman will never have any true
Religion in him, till with a Cudgel all these Counterfits be beaten off.

Call.
As our Doctor has, formerly, in his several Clauses and Chops of Zeal set
down the particular Items of his ill-affected and malignant opinions; so in
this last, he has comprehended all in a Summa Totalis: And, to conclude mark
one thing, right worthy to be observed; and then, farewell; He, that has
buzzed so long about the Room, like a Flesh-Fly, has now discovered himself
to be a Hornet, with a sting in his Tail: He has, at length, turned the
weapons of the Church into a Cudgel; and changed the peace of the Gospel into
Club-law.

Repl.
Call. If the Doctors Inventory please thee not, the fault lies in thy own
Ignorance, that know not how to prize such Jewels; Grains are fitter for
Grill, then Pearls: Our Doctor, whom you revile, is neither Fly, nor Hornet,
but a painful Be; who, though he carry a sting in his Tail for such
turbulent spirits as you, yet he has likewise honey in his Bag, for such as
shall deserve it: Think not his Zeal cruel, because, it mentions a Cudgel; A
Cudgel draws no blood, as your encouraged Swords have done: If Iustruction
will not do, Correction must; but Love, in both; If Saint Paul cannot persuade
subjection to higher powers, Nor Solomon obedience to Sacred Majesty, Paul's Rod
is for the stubborn heart, and Solomon's Scourge for the fools back.

HEB. 6. 4, 5, 6.
It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Spirit,

And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come;

If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance: seeing they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

To the Readers.
NOw the business is ended. If you look upon this skirmish with a general
eye, you will see nothing but (as in a Battle) smoke and confusion: But if you
mark every ones particular behavior, you will easily distinguish betwixt a rash
fiery spirit, and a truly valiant. In the Doctor, you shall find a David,
fighting Gods defensive Battles, without sinister respects, or private
passion: In Call. you shall see the son of Nimshi, matching furiously, and hewing
down the Priests of Baal, yet nevertheless a great worshipper of Calves: In
the Replyer, you may behold Jonathan coming a Reserve to David, though
perchance shooting his arrows sometimes wide, and sometimes open: It lies in
you, Readers, now, to judge, and give the Palm: For the Doctors part and mine
(would Call. durst make the third) we both resign our shares: Let Truth be
crowned with the Victory, and the God of Truth, with Glory.

FINIS.

