QVATERMAYNS CONQVEST OVER CANTERBVRIES COURT.

OR

A Brief Declaration of several Passages between him and the Archbishop of
CANTERBURY, with other Commissioners of the High Commission Court, at six
several appearances before them, and by them directed to Doctor Featly; with
their several Conferences; and the Doctors Reports to the Court.

As also his imprisonment by virtue of a Warrant from the Lords of the
Council, with ten privy Councillors hands to it.

With his appearance before the Lords of the Council, and his Answers to the
Archbishop and the Lord Cottington, concerning Conventicles, and his Answer to
four Queries, propounded unto him concerning the Scots.

As also his trial three several Sessions, by virtue of a Commission in Oyer
and Terminor at the Guild Hall London, and his blessed Deliverance.

And lastly, A Prayer, and Thankesgiving, in an acknowledgement of Gods mercy
in his Deliverance.

By ROGER QUATERMAYNE

LONDON

Printed by Tho. Pain, for Roger Quatermayne, and are to be sold by Samuel
Satterthwaite, at the sign of the Black Bull in Budge Row near Tantlings
Church, 1642.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER;
Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the FATHER, and from our LORD JESUS CHRIST.
BEloved, Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try
you, as though some strange thing had happened unto you; but rejoice in as much
as you are made partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be
revealed, you may be glad also with exceeding Joy. It was the counsel of the
blessed Apostle Peter, as you may see in the first Epistle of Peter the fourth
Chapter the 12 and 13 Verses. And the same Apostle gives the reason thereof in
the 14 v^rse of the same Chapter, says he, If you be reproached for the Name
of Christ, happy are you, for the spirit of glory, and of God, rests upon
you. But says he in the fifteenth verse, Let none of you suffer as an evil
(...), a murderer, or as a busy body in other men's matters; Verse. 16. But if
any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God
in this behalf. For as the Apostle Paul says in the twel^ Chapter to the
Hebrews, verse. 6. Whom the Lord loves he chastises, and scourges every son
whom he receives. And he lays down a reason why the Lord does chastise his
children, and that is not for their loss, but for their benefit, which is that
they might be partakers of his holiness For I^ that the sufferings of this
(...) are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed, Rom 8. verse. 18. For
it is an Apostolical Injunction laid upon the Saints, that every one that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. And indeed, it is a great
honor for Believers to be called thereunto, being the proper gift of God: For
to you it is given, not only to do but to suffer for his Name. Upon all these
blessed Considerations, (Christian Reader) I have made bold to present before
the eyes of thy understanding, a view of several afflictions which have
be^alne me in this my Pilgrimage, by those which have taken upon them the name
and title of the Fathers of the Church, but are indeed, and in truth, the
enemies of Christ, and his Gospel, and as opposite to the power of godliness,
and the sincere ways of the Saints; as that cursed Abaddon, or Apollyon of
Rome is or can be, as has and does appear daily by their bloody proceedings
against the faithfullest Ministers, and sanctifiedst, and sincerest Professors,
that has been, and are living amongst us; Witness their (...) proceedings
against Doctor Layton, Master Peter Smart, Doctor Bastwicke, Master Prin, and
John Lilburne, with diverse others.

And lastly, Concerning my self, who had like to have suffered Ship wrack
under the guidance and conduct of these Romish Pilots, leading and guiding me
through so many by-ways, Rocks, and Sands, that had not the Lord mercifully
and miraculously preserved me, I had been taken in their Nets, and swallowed up
in the pit that they had dug for me; so maliciously were they bent against
me; as in the sequel of this Story following, shall with Gods help more fully
appear.

Beloved, (Christian Reader I would not have troubled thee with these few rude
lines, had not I be^n solicited thereunto by many, both judiciously wise, and
religiously honest; whom I much respect, as in duty I ought, they persuading
me that the carriage of the business, by Gods especial assistance, might
prove to be a ground of great encouragement unto others, that might in time to
come be brought to the same condition, and put to the same straits that I have
been in.

Truly, there is no reason why we should be troubled or discouraged with any
of their frowns or threats; for the Lord has to me, and will to all his, make
good his promise, That He will give us a mouth, and a tongue to speak, that the
enemies shall not be able to resist. You see it to be a truth in all those
valiant warriors of the Lord Jesus before named; with many others that I could
name, but that I am unwilling to be tedious.

Only look to thy Cause, that it be warranted by the Word; Look to thy
Conscience, that it be cleansed from sin; Look to thy heart, that it be
purified by faith; and to thy Conversation, that it be unspotted in the world;
and then being thus armed on the right hand, and on the left, go on thou
valiant man in this thy might, in a strong opposition against the foolish,
ridiculous, popish, superstitious Ceremonies, and deadread-Service, which the
blind, lame, dumb, scandalous Priests and Prelates of this age so stand for;
and be you not discouraged from your holy duties of Religion, by reason of
these vile (...) of Conventicles, and the like, that is cast upon it. For
assuredly it is and has been, the strong Arm of our God, to shake this (...)
Antichristian Hierarchy, and therefore for sake not the Assembly of the
Saints, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10. 25. Through the disheartning Sermons
of some Ministers among us, who by their preaching formerly did promise much
better service, then now they perform to the Church, whereby they give us just
cause to suspect their fidelity in their Masters work, and they brow beat
their weak Brethren, who according to their measure, and the gift of God
received, do labor to build up one another in their most holy faith, and
comfort others with the same comforts that they themselves are comforted of
God. But Beloved, You that have tasted how sweet the Lord is in these sacred
Ordinances, let not go your hold of Christ by them, but follow after the
Mark, (...) the prise of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus; For, in due
time ye shall reap if you faint not; therefore, lift up your weak hands, and
strengthen your feeble knees; For certainly, Your redemption draw^th nigh; You
shall be delivered from the power of these Antichristian Prelates, and their
tyranny.

But, Beloved, least whilst I go about to counsel and encourage you, I
forget my self, I will address my self to make you acquainted with some
passages in the ensuing Discourse, that so I may insinuate my self into your
affections, and gain some time from your more necessary employments, to cast
your eyes upon some of these more pleasing passages, in my following Discourse,
that may recreate your spirits, and not corrupt your judgment.

Christian Readers, For unto you do I dedicate this Narration of my troubles,
pain, and charge, that you may be encouraged in your Christian Course without
fear; for, wh^ is it that can harm you, if you be followers of that which is
good? 1 Pet 3. 1.

In the first place, You may gather some things to inform your judgments from
my Answers to the great Arch-Pilot, who would seem to be the guide of all the
Ships that floate on the Cantaburian Sea; he writing himself to be the Primate
and Metropolitan thereof; who if you trace him aright, you shall (as I have
done) find out his ignorance, untruths, malice, and flattery.

Secondly, You may there find all the brood of Inquisi ors in a strait, for
want of an honest Rule to walk by, there being no Law to justify their
proceedings.

Thirdly, You may there find the Advocates complaining like Dianaes Chaplains
in Ephesus, for the loss of their Trade, with execrable curses on me for the
same.

Secondly, Some benefit you may get in the several passages at the several
appearances that I had before them at the High Commission Court; where you may
find them put to a stand, when I come up close unto them, in regard of the
Laws of God and of the Land.

Thirdly, Some benefit you may get, if you be not wanting to your selves, by
reading the Discourse that was between Doctor Featly and my Self, concerning
an action and rule, as is there laid down.

Fourthly, Some benefit you may get by reading that large Discourse I had with
the Lords of the Council; wherein it pleased the Lord most graciously to carry
me along in my Answers without offense unto them, and yet kept my Conscience
uncorrupted.

Lastly, Some profit you may reap by the proceedings against me at the Guild
Hall London, three several Sessions, both in point of charge, in respect of
Jury, as also in regard of Witness, and the malice of my persecutors; and in
observing the hand of the Lord in my deliverance, which was not ordinary, but
extraordinary, his blessed Name be praised therefore.

Thus have I given you a hint of some things considerable in the ensuing
Discourse, which if thereby God may be glorified, you may be edified, then have
I that which I aimed at.

How if it be against all this objected, that I seem in this my Epistle to
justify my self in my carriage of the whole business, and much to derogate
from the credit of mine enemies. You know what the Apostle says, You suffer
fools gladly, because you your selves are wise. Truly, if I had known any
thing in any of my Spiritual Adversaries worthy of remembrance, for their
credit I would not have detained or kept it back, but have freely yielded it
unto them. Put when I consider what I have by experience found, and what others
have felt and found by their cruel proceedings and dealings with them or
against them, I could do no otherwise then I have done, least as Job says,
While I give flattering titles to men, the Lord should confound me. And to
Apologize for my self, if I be not mistaken, I have already said, that I have
put this to the Press by Solicitation of others. And ^not seeking shelter, as
is usually done, under some great Patron to defend me, thought it my duty not
to detain the truth in unrighteousness, but to declare it nakedly, without
either fear of foes, or hope of reward, but only that God might be glorified;
for whom I have suffered all this, and much more; and will with Gods help
continue to the end, what ever may fall out in the way. As also that you might
be encouraged to go on in your Christian course of profession of the Gospel
without fear, and to store your selves with such promises of divine knowledge
in spiritual things, as that those which walk in darkness, observing no
Rule, by leaning to their own understanding, may be convinced by your
invincible boldness in standing in, and for the truth.

And thus not troubling you any farther at this time, only one Request I have
unto you, that you will be thus favorable unto me, that where I shall come
short, or overlash, through want of memory, or weakness of judgment, in any
of the several passages and carriages of my Answers, you would be pleased to
cover them with the Mantle of love and charity, and by observing my
imperfections, to get strength to overcome the enemies of God and of his truth.

And thus I commit you to God, and to the Word of his grace, who is able to
build you up, and give you an inheritance among those that are sanctified by
faith in Christ Jesus.

I rest your loving Brother, and fellow-Souldier, in the quarrel of Christ and
his Gospel, ROGER QUATERMAYNE.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHRISTIAN READER.
IT is an Axiom in Nature, That things are so much delightful, as they are
seasonable; and we have it confirmed by more then ^mane authority in Pro 25.
11. Words in season ar^ as apples of gold with pictures of silver. This
Consideration (Courteous Reader) without any other Preface, might hallenge a
mat^ between thine eye and this Discourse Thou are bear presented with a
suffering Discourse in suff^ring times; It has been the lot of the Church and
people of God in all ages and generations to be the butt and mark, at which
the enemies of Gods truth and glory, have shot their (...) arrows of malice
and cruelty; God has but a few precious ones in the world, upon whom, he has
set his love and glory; and they are the men which are most of all vilified and
contemned: the enemies of Gods Church have been always exceeding enraged
against them, but now more then ever, their time being but short, and their
enmity everlasting: there has sprung up in this last age of the world, a
cursed generation, (shall I say of men) nay, of Vipers, who slily and
insinuatingly have more ruined the Church, then all the open persecutors that
ever were, who under pretense, of being called Fathers of the Church, have been
the most merciless, and dangerous tyrants that ever it had; I mean the
Prelates, with all their hellish retinue, who have drunk so deep of the
poison of Aspes, and have so intoxicated their brains with that same bloody
Cup of the Scarlet Whore, that they can spit nothing but poison and malice,
against the truth and people of Christ.

And therefore have they labored to put scandalls, and nicknames, (never
heard of among Christians, until these innovating Prelates brought them in)
Scandalls, I say, upon Religion, and the sincere Professors of it; calling them
factious, seditious, Cum id genus monstris; their foul-mouthed Chaplains, and
their graceless Curates, in every Sermon almost, have not ceased, in their
Turkish Dialect, to power out their venom on the most judicious, and holy
Christians: Neither was this their malice only against some malignant Spirits
(as they called them) but even against the very power of godliness, in any poor
soul that professed it. As one of their reverend Champions most wickedly said,
That if he had Jo. Lincol. now York.
had the power that Canterbury had, he would not have left one Puritan in
England this day. Manifold and apparent discoveries we have had of their
cruel tyranny, and their Arch-pittie, both on the bodies, estates, and
precious Consriences of the dear Saints of God; they have not only undone
many families in the Kingdom; but have the guilt of the blood of thousands of
souls upon them, which are this day in hell for want of the precious means of
grace, which should have fed their souls to life eternal.

I need not acquaint thee with their cruel tyranny in the persecuting of th^se
Worthyes of God in their High Commission Court, that Hellish Inquisition of our
Land; thou have here a sufficient light to see their grace in their dealings
with this Worthy of God; of whom I may say in another cause as the Apostle
says of himself 2 Corinthians. 11. 5: He is not a whit behind the chiefest of
these Worthyes that have sacrificed their lives for the cause of Christ.

Concerning the Discourse, I shall say no more, but only this, Read it, and
if thou find any good by it, give God the glory, and the Author thanks. I
know (Christian Reader) that manifold are the temptations which thou meetest
with daily in the flesh: And indeed, Christ tells before hand, what his service
will cost, If any will live godly in Christ, he must suffer persecution: But
yet be not discouraged, though we sow in tears, we shall reap in joy:
though we have a nipping Autumn, we shall have a Joyful Spring; go on thou
blessed Christian, and the Lord go with thee; fight the battles of the Lord
Jesus, quit thy self like a man, be courageous for God and his Cause; start
not aside for all the malice of the enemies; God has whet his Sword against
them, and thou shall ere long see them all dead on the shore before thee. Our
Fathers believed in him, and they were delivered; David, and Jeremiah, and
Daniel, and Paul, and all the excellent ones of the Earth have gone this way,
and are now in Heaven singing Hallelujahs to all eternity. And these were for
Examples to us, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 6. God never set any upon high
employment, but he gives him proportionable strength, He will not suffer you to
be tempted above that you are able, but will give an issue with the temptation,
that you may be able to bear: The duggs and breasts of the Scripture are even
bursting with promises of this kind, Open your mouth wide, and he will fill
it: There are a kind of people in the world, who go for professors and would
think it a great matter to deny them the name of Christians) who will be
content to follow Christ, while Christ is advanced in the world, and seems to
be a good neighbor, but when he comes to be thrust out of the Court, and out
of the Council, and out of esteem with the men of the world, they are afraid
to follow him too close at the heels, least he should dash out their brains;
they will be religious and wise, they must not thrust themselves into danger
they say; it is good sleeping in a whole skin; and indeed, it is no marvel to
see men fall away as leaves in Autumn, and perish everlastingly; for they
never took Christ upon his own Conditions, they never were really ingraffed
into him; they hung as the Ivy to the ^ake, they had a kind of external
being in Christ, but they never drew the sap and luice of spiritual life from
him. In a word, they never had the true and genuin blood of Christ running in
their veins. Yet ( Christian Reader let not thy heart fail, neither be
discouraged at this, Be faithful to the death, and thou shall have the crown
of life.

I will not Apologize any farther for the Author or the Work, they both
deserve thy Christian acceptance; only my prayer to the throne of grace for
thee shall be, That a double portion of the Authors Spirit may be powered on
thee in the reading of it, that thou may be able more valiantly to stand in
the Cause of Christ, and fight his battles against Gog and Magog, and all the
cursed enemies of Gods Church, that so having fought a good fight of faith,
thou may in the end receive the end of thy faith, the salvation of thy soul;
so prays thine and the Authors friend

CUT. SIDENHAM.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 13. for first of Numbers, read fifth of Numbers, page 21. line 33.
for Gavaston read Carlton.

QVATER MAYNES CONQVEST, OVER CANTERBVRIES COURT.
MY first Apprehension was on Ashwednesday in Hillary My first Apprehension.
Term, the 12th. day of February 1639. At which time, came two Pursevants unto
me, with an Attachment from the High CommissionCourt; under the hands of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Nathaniel Brent, and Sir John Lamb: at which
time, I unwisely entered into Band of one hundred pounds, to appear in their
Court: and my first appearance was in Easter Term, the second day of the
Term, being Thursday the 23th of April. 1640.

My appearance being made, I was called, and presently they My Appearance
called for a Book, which being tendered unto me; I asked what I should do
with it: they told me I must take my Oath; I answered, I would not take any
Oath, I knew no cause why I should; the Officer that attended the Court, opened
the Book, and I said, I could open it my self, if I would read in it. Then
Doctor Reeve said, I must take my Oath, to answer to such Articles, as were in
Court against me; I told him, I knew of no Articles; neither do I know
wherein I have offended: The Doctor told me, if I would take my Oath, I should
know: I answered, I would take no Oath, I did not hold it lawful. Thus much
between the Doctor, and my self.

Archbishop. Then said the Archbishop, Master Quatermayne, Master Quatermayne;
I hear you, though you speak but softly, you seem to scruple at the Oath
taking; you need not to do it, you think it to be an accusing Oath, but it
is not so, it is a purging Oath.


Quatermayne. My Lord, I think it to be an accusing Oath indeed.


Archbishop. It is not so, but it is a purging Oath.


Quatermayne. My Lord, I need no purging, for I have not offended: yet
nevertheless, if you will so administer it, I will take it: because I find in
the first of Numbers, an Oath of Purgation, so that it agree with other
Scriptures, that it may be an end of strife.


Archb. Such an Oath may this be, for any thing that I know to the contrary.


Quater. My Lord, I do not know wherein I have offended, nor any that does
accuse me.


Archb. Yes, there is your accuser, Doctor Reeve.


Quater. Doctor Reeve, are you my accuser?


Doctor Reeve. Yes, said Doctor Reeve.


Quater. Then put you in my Articles, according to Law, and I will take forth a
Copy of them, and show them to my Counsel, and I will advise with my Counsel,
and I will either demur to them, if they be illegal, or else I will put in my
answer, upon my Oath: that is as much as the Law requires, and so much I will
do, and more I will not.


Doct. Reeve. That the Court will not allow, said Doctor Reeve.


Quater. Then said I, I will do no otherwise.


Archb. Master Quatermayne, said the Archbishop, you speak like a very
Rational man, and I do admire you should be so Rational in one thing, and
come so short in another! Truly, I will do you all the favor I can; Nay, more
than the Court will allow, or bear me out in: I should be very loath you
should cast your selse into danger.


Quater. My Lord, I am not willing to thrust my self into danger.


Archb. Nay, said the Archbishop, give me leave to express my self.


Doct. Reeve. Hear my Lord, said Doctor Reeve.


Quater. I will, said I.


Archb. I will tell you, said the Archbishop, the danger of not taking the
Oath; and I will tell you the utility, and benefit of taking the Oath: The
danger lies in this, that after twice or thrice admonition, we can proceed
against you, pro (...), and that is as you know, to take you as guilty of those
things that are objected against you, and then we can imprison and fine you, as
we shall see cause: and the benefit l^eth in this; that after you have taken
the Oath, for any thing that I know to the contrary, you may presently be freed.


Quater. My Lord, it is not the danger, of not taking the Oath, that does
dismay me; nor the vtility orbenefit that does allure me: I have kept a Court
in my own Conscience, before I came hither; and I have sought all the Records,
and from the first of Genesis, to the last of the Revelations, I do not find
it lawful for me to take the Oath.


Archb. Master Quatermayne, this Court has stood this hundred years, and has
been stablisht by all the Acts of Parliament that has been since, and do you
come to judge our Court, and question our Authority?


Quater. My Lord, I come not to judge your Court, nor to question your
Authority: the thing that I come to question and find, is the things that are
enjoined me; whether I may do it with a good Conscience, yea, or no?


Archb. Master Quatermayne, what Ministers are you acquainted with?


Quater. Withmany, both in the City, and in the Country.


Archb. I think so; what Minister will you make choice of, to resolve you?


Quater. None my Lord.


Archb. None, that is strange.


Quater. My Lord, I need none; for I am already resolved: besides, no Minister
can satisfy me, but the Word and Spirit of GOD. And again, I will not
ensnare, nor entangle any Minister to resolve me, that am already resolved.


Archb. Nay, Master Quatermayne, there shall be no Minister entangled nor
ensnared, I will promise you.


Quater. Not by me, said I.


Archb. Nor by me, nor yet by the Court: What Minister do you know, that has
been entangled or ensnared?


Quater. My Lord, I do not come to accuse.


Archb. Master Quatermayne, then let me appoint you to go to a Minister.


Quater. My Lord, I will not be refractory; I will reason with any man, in
things that concern GODS glory, and my own good, so it be within the compass
of my time, place, and calling.


Archb. Nay, I will not lay any heavy charge upon you, do you know Doctor
Featly?


Quater. Yes.


Archb. Will you go to him?


Quater. Yes my Lord, or to any other whom you will appoint.


Archb. Nay, it shall be only to him: I hope he will give you full
satisfaction.


Quater. I do not doubt, but I shall be satisfied; for I am already satisfied.


Archb. Master Quatermayne, where dwell you?


Quater. In Mary Overis Parish.


Doct. Reeve. In Mary Overis Parish, said Doct. Reeve; and why not Saint Mary
Overis Parish?


Quater. Saint Mary Overis, or Saint Saviors, call it what you will, it has a
double Name, and I care not for the Titles.


Archb. That is not far from Doctor Featli's.


Quater. If it were much farther, with Gods help I would go to him.


Archb. Do so, I pray Master Quatermayne, and reason with him, and let him
report, how he finds you, and repair hither again.


Doctor Reeve. The next Court day, said Doct. Reeve.


Archb. No, said the Archbishop, repair hither this day fortnight, and I hope
by that time, you will be resolved.


Quater. My Lord, I am already resolved.


Archb. By that time, I hope, you will be otherwise resolved. Master
Quatermayne, what do you follow now?


Quater. I follow now soliciting of Causes.


Archb. Oh! in the Common Law; why then you know there is an Oath administered
in all Courts.


Quater. My Lord, I know there is, there is an Oath for the King; there is an
Oath between King and Subject; also, there is an Oath between Plaintiff, and
Defendant; and there is an Oath for clearing a man's self in some particulars.


Archb. You know in Star Chamber, there is such an Oath as this is.


Quater. My Lord, with subjection to better Judgments, if you do proceed, as
they do in the Court of Request, Chancery, or Exchequer, or Star-Ch^mber,
which is in this manner: the Plaintiff, or Informer, does first put in Bills of
Articles, Informations, or Complaints, or the like: and then the Defendant
takes forth a Copy of them, and car^eth them to his Counsel, and advises
with his Counsel, and does after demur to them, or puts in his answer upon
Oath: and so will I do here, if you please, or the Court, to let me see those
Articles that are against me.


Doct. Reeve. The Court will not allow of that, said Doctor Reeve.


Archb. Who was it that came to you, Mr. Quatermayne, said the Archbishop?


Quater. It was Mayle the Pursevant, such a one, so that he may g^t money, he
cares not what hurt he does.


Archb. Mr. Quatermayne, we do not use to have the Officers of our Court
traduced, or evil spoken of.


Quater. It may be so; but will you be pleased to give me leave to prosecute
against him, according to Law, and I will make him appear to be as Notorious
a Wretch, as lives.


Archb. I, with all my heart, I will give you free leave to prosecute against
him, or any other Officer of the Court whatsoever: We do not fit here to
maintain any in their wickedness.


Doct. Reeve. You have so affronted the Court, I have been the Kings Advocate
almost these twenty years, and I never saw the Court so affronted before; you
have spoken enough to lay you by the heels.


Quater. Did not you say, Doctor Reeve, even now, that you were mine accuser?


Doct. Reeve. Yes.


Quater. Then it is not fit you should be my Judge.


Archb. Mr. Quatermayne, I have often heard of your name, but I never saw your
face before.


Quater. My Lord, I was borne not far from you.


Archb. In what place?


Quater. At Watlington in Oxfordshire.


Archb. That is a good way off, above ten miles.


Doct. Reeve. Near Challgrove, said Doctor Reeve.


Quater. Within two or three miles of it, on this side.


Archb. It was not in the Country, but here in London, and near to it; but I
am sorry to hear, what I do hear of you.


Quater. My Lord, I have not offended the Law in any thing, to my knowledge.


Archb. Where did the Messenger find you?


Quater. At my own house.


Archb. Who was with you?


Quater. My Wife.


Archb. And who else?


Quater. No body else.


Archb. What time was it, that the Messenger came to you?


Quater. At five of the clock in the Morning.


Archb. You rise betimes in the Morning Mr. Quatermayne, and go abroad, and
he could not find you at home at other times.


Quater. I do rise, and go abroad, as my occasions serve.


Archb. Yea, and it is very well, and honestly done so to do Mr. Quatermayne:
Well, Mr. Quatermayne, I pray repair to Doctor Fea^ly, and then come hither
again this day fortnight; I hope by that time, you will have your judgment
rightly informed; We have done for this present: Farewell Mr. Quatermayne.

This is the sum, and substance of my first Appearance at Lambeth house, and
when I went away, a great number of people, came away with me, which was agreat
offense unto them; in so much, that the Officers said, half the Court goes
away with Master Quatermayne.


Now follows the Conference between Doctor Featly and my Self at his house.
I Came to Doctor Featly, according to my direction the The Conference.
next week following, to confe^e about the Oath; whom I found very Wise,
Rational, and Discreet; and he took much pains to persuade me, the Oath
was lawful, and might be taken; so it were ministered with Caution, and
according to Law: and he pressed me with his own Example, who had taken the
Oath, and as he said, had warily, and wisely subscribed thereunto; did avoid
much danger, which other wise had fallen upon him: then I requested the Doctor
to give me some Scriptures, as might clear the thing in hand, (...) he very
reddily condescended thereunto: which Scripture, I here insert in Figures, for
brevitie sake: The (...), was the 4th of Jeremy, and the second verse. The 22.
of Exodus, the 11. verse. The first of Kings, the 8. chap the 31. verse. The
10th of Ezra, the 7. verse. The 13. of the Romans, the 1. verse. Which
Scriptures, how purtenent they are to the Oath, Ex officio, I leave to you to
judge. After the Doctor and I had much talked, concerning the lawfulness, and
the unlawfulness of the Oath, he very modestly, and moderately, reasoning with
me; told me, he did commend me, in using the best means that I could, in
satisfying of my Conscience, in things of such Consequence as this is: and
therefore saidhee unto me, the Cause being your own, it lies you upon to give
me your doubts, and I will do my best endeavors to give you satisfaction:
Then Sir, said I, I will be bold to propound some things unto you; then said
the Doctor, I pray do Master Quatermayne, what you please.

I have been a Doctor this one and twenty years, but I Doctor Featly.
never had any man so Rational to reason with me before; I hope our meeting
will be to Gods glory, and our own goods, I hope you will get some benefit by
me, for I will do my best endeavor to get by you, I promise you; therefore I
pray Master Quatermayne speak your mind.

Quater. Sir, if you please, we will reduce the Oath to action, and then bring
it to rule.


Doct. Featly. Yea marry Sir, with all my heart, that is a good way indeed.


Quater. With subjection to better judgment, I do conceive every action that
is good, must have these three things in it, that which is last in prosecution,
must be first in intention.


Doct. Featly. In truth, well spoken Master Quatermayne, it must be so indeed.


Quater. The end to which it must tend, the rise from whence it springs, the
means by which it is accomplished; they must be all good, or else the action
cannot be good; the end must be the glory of God, and the good of the creature;
the rise must be from a soul sanctified, in covenant with God by faith in
Christ Jesus, or that is conducible thereunto; and the means must be according
to the will of God revealed in his Word: all which I refer to your grave and
wise co^deration.


Doct. Featly. Nay, certainly, Master Quatermayne, all this is truth.


Quater. Then Sir, with subjection to better judgment, I shall produce and lay
down, three Rules to try an action by.


Doct. Featly. I pray do Mr. Quatermayne, this is a very profitable way of
reasoning.


Quater. The first Rule is the third of the Romans the eight verse, Thou shall
not do evil, that good may come thereof: The second Rule is the fourth of the
Philippians, the eight Verse, Furthermore Brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are worthy of love, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, or if there be any praise, think on these
things: The third Rule is the first of the Thessalonians, the fifth Chapter, the
twenty-two Verse, Shun all kind or appearance of evil.

Now Sir, if you please, we will bring the Oath Ex Offic^o to Rule, as it is
an action; and Sir, as I conceive, under correction, of all the Scriptures you
have named, there is but one that is purtenant to the purpose.


Doct. Featly. Then said the Doctor, it is the fourth of Jeremy, the second
Verse.


Quater. You say true, said I, and therefore I pray Sir, bring the Oath Ex
Officio to that Scripture, and open that Scripture, and show how lawfully by
that Scripture I may take the Oath.


Doct. Featly. That will I gladly do, said the Doctor.

First, Thou shall swear in truth, says the Prophet; and that

Secondly, Thou shall swear in judgment, and that do I believe

Thirdly, Thou shall swear in righteousness, and that do I also


Quater. Now good Sir, give me leave to deal with the Oath, and with (...)
Scripture, and to bring it to the Rules afore-cited.


Doct. Featly. Yea, with all my heart, said the Doctor, God forbid else, it is
very fit that we should labor to have our judgments informed in every thing.


Quater. Then Sir, in the first place, I cannot swear in truth, Pilate did
Christ, what thing is truth, I must answer him in this particular, I cannot
tell, and that because truth is wrapped up and hid from mine eyes, either in the
administration of the Oath, or in the Oath it self, that I cannot see it.

Secondly, I cannot swear in judgment, because my judgment Solomon says,
Where there is not judgment, the mind is not good.

Thirdly, I cannot swear in righteousness; for it is an unrighteous is God
glorified, nor my brother edified; which ought to be the end of every action.

And now as concerning the rise from whence it came, we will examine that.


Doct. Featly. I pray do so, I like this very well.


Quater. Then Sir, you may remember the Oath was grounded on a Statute in Henry
the fourths time, and it was a cursed curb or scourge, invented by the Papists
and Prelates, to punish and put to death the people of God, under the name of
Lollords, who then were true Christians. And this Oath was suppressed in King
Edwards days; and in Queen Maryes days it was set up again; and in the
first of Queen Elizabeth, it was suppressed, and the High Commission Court was
established, and has continued by the Bishops ever since; and they have made
use of this Oath, both to suppress the people and truth of God, and therefore
the rise of this Oath cannot be good.

Thirdly, This Oath is contrary to all good means, for by the Law of God,
every thing should be determined by two or three Witnesses; and this Oath
causes a man to be his own accuser, witness, and judge, contrary to the Law of
God, and of the Land, and the Law of Nature, and therefore this Oath as it is
an action, neither is nor can be good, and therefore to be avoided.


Quater. Now Sir, I pray, let me ask you a question or two.


Doct. Featly. What you will Mr Quatermayne, and I will endeavor to answer you.


Quater. What benefit shall I have by taking the Oath?


Doct. Featly. A two fold benefit:

The first is your liberty, and that is a great benefit, as you know.

Secondly, If you will call for it, you may have a Promoter of the cause, and
he shall give you good security to pay the cost of the Suit, if you overthrow
him, and this the Court cannot deny, if you will challenge it at their hands.


Quater. I do acknowledge Sir, that both these be good, so that I might have
them with a good conscience. Now Sir, I will bring it to the first Rule, and
that is this, Thou may not

Again, secondly, for me to have my cost allowed me, and What will it profit a
man to win the whole world, and loose his own soul.

Again, for the second, bring the Oath Ex Officio to the second Rule, and see
what good report it has among its neighbors; I never heard wise man nor
fool, good man or bad, speak a good word for it; surely, if it were good,
there would not yesterday have been at the Parliament House so many hundreds as
was to speak against it.

Thirdly, Bring it to the third Rule, which is, Shun and avoid all appearance
of evil; and this is not only an appearance, but evil it self, and
therefore to be avoided.


Doct. Featly. Truly Mr Quatermayne, you have reasoned to the purpose, I am
sorry that time calls me away from you. What is it you would have me to
write? I will write what you will have me to write.


Quater. No good Sir, by no means, I will not appoint you what to write, for
then it will be my report, and not yours; therefore I will leave it to your
wisdom, and Gods guiding to direct you; write what you please.


Doct. Featly. Truly Mr Quatermayne, I will write nothing that shall do you any
hurt. I pray will you fetch it upon thursday morning, and my man shall deliver
it unto you.


Quater. This is the sum and substance of the Conference between Doctor
Featly and my self, being to him directed by the High Commission Court.


Here follows a Copy of Doctor Featly's Report to the High Commission Court
upon our Conference.

To the Right Honorable and most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, Lord
ArchBishop of Canterbury his Grace, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Mettopolitan.
IN obedience to an Order made by your Grace in the Dr Feally his report.
Honorable Court of High Commission, on Roger Quatermayne, Gent. Came to my
House the fifth of this instant May, to confer with me; whom I found
conformable to the Doctrine, Discipline, and all holy Orders and Constitutions
of our Church; save only he makes some scruple in taking the Oath Ex Officio,
and in that also he seems to me very desirous to receive satisfaction; and
if by your gracious favor and goodness, he may obtain a longer time of
respit, more maturely to consider of the point, and resolve his Conscience, I
conceive good hope that he will conform himself to the public Justice of
this Kingdom, and submit in all things to the proceedings and Order of this
Honorable Court.

Your gracious humbly devoted, DANIEL FEATLY.

Quater. My second appearance in the High Commission Court, was the seventh of
May 1640.


Bishop Wrenne. I being called by Bishop Wrenne (the ArchBishop being absent
that day) the Bishop of Ely asked me, if I would take the Oath.


Quater. To whom I answered, as before, that I would not take it, for I did not
hold it lawful.


Bish. Wrenne. Why, said the Bishop, you were to go to Doctor Featly, and that
he should report hither how he found you.


Quater. To whom I answered, I did go according as I was directed.


Bish. Wrenne. Well, said the Bishop, and what do you say of Doctor Featly?


Quater. I answered and said, that he was a very wise and judicious Gentleman.


Bish. Wrenne. How? said the Bishop, a wise and judicious Gentleman, and yet
not give you satisfaction, concerning the lawfulness of the Oath.


Quater. I answered, that does not follow, he may be a wise and a judicious
Gentleman, and yet we may differ in our judgments in this thing.


Bish. of Bathe and Wells. Then said the Bishop of Bathe and Bishop of Bathe
and Wells.
Wells, it is like you will never take the Oath while you live.


Quater. To whom I answered, it is very like so indeed.


Bish. of Bathe and Wells. Where is Doctor Featly's report?


Quater. Here it is, said I, and gave it into their hands.


Bish of Bathe and Wells. Then said the Bishop of Bathe and Wells, the Doctor
speaks very well of you.


Quater. I answered, I hope I shall give him no cause to the contrary.


Bish. Wrenne. Well, said Bishop Wrenne, Master Quatermayne, take a longer time
for it, and inform your judgment.


Doct. Then said a Doctor, inform your self with wise and judicious men, such
as Mr Suitt, Doctor Gouge, and the like.


Quater. I answered, trouble not your self, I will go to such as I think
fit, both wise and honest.


Bish. Wrenne. I pray, said Bishop Wrenne, do so, and come hither the first
day of the next Term.


Quater. I answered, I could not come then.


Bish. of Bathe and Wells, Then said the Bishop of Bathe and Wells, why?


Quater. I answered, I was to go into the Country to visit my friends, and
that I could not return so soon.


By. Wren. Well, said Bishop Wren, let it be the second Court day, and in the
mean time inform your judgment; for assure your self, if you do not conform
your self, we will take another course with you.


Quater. I answered, I would do any thing that an honest man should or ought to
do, or else I would suffer for it: if you will convince me by Scriptures, I
shall willingly submit thereunto, or else suffer as a Delinquent.


Bishop Ba. Well, M. Quatermayn, I hope you will between thy and the next
Term satisfy your conscience.


Quatermayn. I answered, I am already satisfied.


Bish. Bath. I pray M. Quatermayn come again the next Term.


Pursevant. Then said the Pursevant, I pray M. Quatermayne, Pursevant.
take your company with you, for here be an hundred and fifty Puritants.


Thomas Squire. How do you know that? said an honest man. Thomas Squire.



Pursevant. I know them, said the Pursevant, by their eyes, they look upward.


Tho. Squire. Well said the honest man, there shall be three hundred the next
Court day (which was done accordingly, as I suppose.)


Doctor. Then said a Doctor, A pox a God on him, if he will not take the Oath,
we may burn our books. And this is the sum and substance of my second
appearance.


Quater. My third appearance in the High Commission Court, was the eighteenth
day of June, 1640. at which time the Archbishop and Bishop Wren were both
present together, the Archbishop with a very stern countenance spoke unto me
in this manner.


Archbishop. Mr Quatermayne, are you yet resolved to take the Oath?


Quater. I answered, I am not yet resolved to take it, I do not find it l^wfull.


Archbishop. Then said the Archbishop, It was lawful before you were born; and
I will make it both Law and Justice too, before I have done.


Quater. My Lord, if you do, then you and I shall not differ.


Archb. Then said the Archbishop, you were wished to go to Doctor Featly, and
that he should report to the Court how he found you.


Quater. I answered, I did go according as I was directed.


Archb. Then said the Archbishop, where is the Report?


Quater. I answered, I brought it into the Court the last Term.


Archb. Where is it? read it, said the Archbishop.


Clerk. Then the Clerk read it.


Archb. What is the reason you are not resolved to take the Oath? Did not
Doctor Featly labor to inform your judgment?


Quater. I answered, he did his best endeavor.


Archb. You stand much upon Scripture, did he not give you Scripture enough for
it?


Quater. I answered, he gave me four Scriptures.


Archb. Well, and what do you say of those Scriptures?


Quater. I answered it was the holy Word of God, but nothing to the purpose,
for the lawfulness of the Oath taking.


Archb. Then I see it is not Scripture that will satisfy you.


Quater. I answered, if you do convince me by the Scriptures, I will submit.


Archb. I pray by what rule will you be judged?


Quater. I answered, by the Law of God, and of the Land.


Archb. What do you mean by the Law of God and the Land?


Quater. By the Law of God, I mean the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament. And by the Law of the Land, I mean^ the Stature Law of the Kingdom.


Archb. You are very often up with the Law, pray God you are as willing to live
by the Law, as you are to vindicate your own cause by the Law.


Quater. My Lord, if I do not, the Law is open against me.


Archb. Well, you shall know before I have done, that our Court is both Law and
Justice; and that we do not sit here to keep sheep: and I promise you we will
not wait upon you no longer than the next Court day, and therefore inform your
self, and resolve to take the Oath; for I am resolved to take another course
with you, if you do not.


Diverse spoke. Then said diverse Doctors, send him away to Diver^ spoke.
prison, you have admonished him oftentimes enough.


Archb. No, said he, I will wait upon him one Court day more.


A Doctor. My Lord, said a Doctor, pray ask him if he hold A Doct^
not our Court, and the Administration of the Oath unlawful, but the
Archbishop answered nothing.


Doctor. Then said a Doctor, Do you hold our Court and the administering the
Oath unlawful?


Quater. To whom I answered, What have you to do to examine me? you are no
Commissioner, if your Court or you do that which is unlawful, you shall
answer (...) it your s^lves for my part. What I do shall be lawful, or else I
will not do it.


Archbishop. Well, said the Archbishop, repair to Doctor Featly once more, and
see if you can receive satisfaction from him, and repair hither again this
day (...), and resolve beforehand to take the Oath; for, assure your self, we
will not have his Majesty's Court so slighted, and Commission ^spected; and if
you do not satisfy your self, you shall go another way directly.


Quater. This is the sum and substance of my third appearance at Lambeth.
House; and when we had done, the Purse^ did wish they were rid of the Puritans,
for they were ready to be stifled with them.


Pursev^nt. Then said one of them, this is the C^mpion of Purs^vant,
the Puritans.


Doctor. No, said a Doctor, Master Quatermayne is no Puritan, he does not fast
and pray, he is too fat.


Quater. Whence we may take notice, that they are convinced in their
consciences, that these duties of Religion ought to be performed, and that
those whom they call Puritans, do perform them.

My fourth Appearance was the twenty-fift day of June, 1640.


Quater. I having been with Doctor Featly the second time, with diverse others;
and his occasions were such as we could not reason together, and therefore he
did report to the Archbishop, that after the Term he would do his best
endeavor to give us satisfaction, which gave me good content, for by this
means I was preserved out of prison.


To the Right Honorable and most Reverend Father in God, the Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, Primate of all ENGLAND and METROPOLITAN.
MAY it please your Grace, I understand by my servants, that Master Roger
Quatermayne, and Io Garbraim, and diverse others were at my house, since the
beginning of the Term, appointed, as they affirmed, by order of this
Honorable Court, to confer with me; but being this Term to provide for a
trial at the Exchequer Bar, and being Sued both in Chancery concerning a
Lease pretended to be made by the Provost and Fellows of Chelsey College, and
in the Kings Bench, for the House wherein I dwell, and by occasion of these
Suits, enforced to attend in diverse Courts, I could not appoint them any time
or place where they should certainly meet me: But as soon as the end of the
Term shall give me some respit from these vexatious Suits, I will do my best
to give them satisfaction; the rather because I find them all willing to be
informed, as they profess to me, and some of them conformable in all things to
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, save only they make
scruple of the Oath Ex Officio.

Your Graces humbly devoted, DANIEL FEATLY.

WHen I came and appeared in the Court, I being called the Report was read, and
the Archbishop was so impatient, that he would not endure to hear it read
through, but said

Archb. That Mr Quatermayne was the Ringleader of all the Separatists.


Quater. Notwithstanding, I was one of their greatest opposits in regard of
some particulars then said.


Archb. The Archbishop, Mr Quatermayne, I perceive that Doctor Featly has no
time to reason with you, by which you have a long time to consider, and so have
we also, I pray do you resolve your self between this and the next Term,
for we will demur no longer; you stand very much upon Scripture and Law.


Bish. Wrenne. I, said Bishop Wrenne, he is a great Scriptureman, I warrant you
my Lord.


Quater. My Lord, if you please to make proof of me, I shall be able to
answer you, if you please, or any other to convince me by Scriptures, as I said
before, I shall be willing to submit or suffer.


Archb. Well Mr Quatermayne, I pray satisfy your self between this and the
next Term; and I pray let us request one thing at your hands when you are
gone, that you do not report that we are cruel, and merciless, and
oppressors of men's consciences; you have found no hard measure at our hands,
we have not dealt unkindly with you, but it is the course of you all, to raise
evil reports of us, though we in obedience to his Majesty's command, sit to
do justice. Farewell Mr Quatermayne, and God speed you, and inform you
against the next Term.


Officers. Then said the Officers, we are glad we shall be rid Officers.
of the Puritans, I pray take them along with you Master Quatermayne.


Quater. I answered, where one will go with thee, ten will follow me; this is
the sum and substance of my fourth appearance at Lambeth House.


Quater. And home I went accompanied with the Saints of God (...) my house, and
Mayle the Pursevant like the Devil in the first of Job went with us.

My fifth appearance at Lambeth-House was the fifteenth day of October 1640.
When I came thither the Court was Adjourned to Paul's; and I asked of Medall,
one of the Notaries, where the Court was kept, and he told me it was appointed
to be kept in the Convocation-House all this Term. But, said he, let it be
kept where it will, there is nothing for you to do, for you are not in the
Bill this week, nor will you be called upon this week.


Quater. I answered, are you certain of it?


Notary. And he said, yes. Notary.



Quater. So I returned home accordingly; and so much for that time; yet
nevertheless, there was a hubbub at the Convocation-House that day, although I
was not there; and therefore I was not the cause of the tumult.


Quater. My sixth appearance was at the Convocation House in Paul's, the 22 day
of October 1640. At which time the High Commission Court was pulled down; but
for as much as the whole business was opened before the Lords of the Counsel,
and answered before the Justice of Oyer and Terminer, by virtue of a Commission
under the great Seal of England (for the Prelates use when the King went into
the North) I was caused to answer three several Sessions holden in the
Guild Hall for the City of London; all which I shall hereafter lay down,
therefore I refer all till its proper time and place.


Quater. In the next place, follows my whole business before the Lords of
his Majesty's Privy Council: First, my apprehension; and secondly, all our
proceedings.


Quater. On Satterday, which was the 24th day of October 1640. about eight of
the Clock at night, as I was going to my House, a Messenger from the Privy
Council came unto me, with a Warrant, and ten Privy Counselors hands to it,
and carried me away prisoner to the Catterne. wheel in Southworke; for his
Warrant was so strict, that no Bail would be admitted of, for I had neighbors
that offered body for body, but the Messenger durst not accept of them. Truly,
the Messenger was in such a condition, that he trembled, as if he would have
sunk. But I bless the Lord, I was never more cheerful in all my life; but
there was such vild aspersions cast upon me, and such false informations given
to the Lords against me; and the Messengers charge so strict, that he wondered
to see me so cheerful and well contented; and I told him, there were three
things that made a man cheerful; a good God, a good Cause, and a good
Conscience; and I praise God in this thing all these I have. Afterward, I
understood that the Lords had given him order, that I should not be carried to
prison, for the prison would be pulled down, and I rescued from him; neither
that he should carry me with any tumult, for fear of the like danger that
might ensue; so upon the Lords day following, as aforesaid, in the afternoon I
was brought to White Hall before the Lords of the Council, and when I came
thither, Sir Dudly Gaveston his Clerk began to examine the Messenger, Clerk
of the Co^cell.
whether he had found me or no.


Pursevant. To whom he answered, yes; what Quatermayne, yes, Quatermayne, said
the Messenger. Where is he, said the Clerk. Here is he, said the Messenger.


Quater. Then the Clerk looking upon me, supposing I had not heard them, said,
he is a proper tall man; but before God, he will be hanged, all the world
cannot save him. I nnderhearing of him, thought though all the world cannot
save me, yet God can, and I was no whit discouraged by his words, as knowing
my hope was not in the world, but in God only. There I waited certain hours,
while men stared on me, and every one censured me, and condemning me. At the
length I was called in before the Lords, where was about sixteen or seventeene
of them together, and when I had stood there a pretty while, the Lords looking
one upon another, and then upon me; at last spoke the Lord privy Seal to the
Archbishop Privy Seal.
of Canterbury, My Lord, what say you to this man?


Archb. Then the Archbishop said, this Mr Quatermayne standing here before your
Lordships, is such a one as will not submit to our Court, nor our authority,
especially our High Commission Court; neither will he subscribe to the Oath Ex
Officio, although I have used all means to inform his judgment, and resolve
his conscience, and therefore I appointed him Doctor Featly, to whom he
himself was willing to go, that so he might receive information of his
judgment from him, and I never used him unkindly, I appeal to himself, for I
never imprisoned him, nor threatened him with imprisonment, and yet
notwithstanding, he is so far from the taking the Oath, that he has been in
the Country in diverse places, both in Oxfordshire and in Barkshire, and there
has drawn much people together, and preached unto them and made Conventicles,
as I am credibly informed by diverse wise and judicious Gentlemen, that he has
preached and made Conventicles in the Country in diverse places, and at sundry
times.


Archb. Master Quatermayne, were you not at Farrington the latter part of this
Summer?


Quater. No, my Lord, I was never at Farrington in all my life.


Archb. I was informed that you were, and that you drew much people there
together, and made Conventicles.


Quater. I was never there.


Archb. Were you not that ways?


Quater. Yes, my Lord, though I will not take the Oath Ex Officio, yet I will
speak the truth in any thing that shall be demanded, I was at Longworth.


Archb. And did you not there draw people together, and make Conventicles.


Quater. No, my Lord, I did not draw people together, nor make Conventicles.


Archb. My Lords, for any thing that I do know to the contrary, Master
Quatermayne was the principal cause of the mutiny upon Thursday last at the
Convocation House at Paul's, although he was not called, nor did we intend any
more to call him, and therefore in as much as he does not, neither will submit
to our authority, I will have no more to do with him, but refer him to your
Lordships.


Quater. Then spoke the Lord Privy Seal in this manner following.


Lord Privy Seal. Quatermayne, Quatermayne, Quatermayne, Lord privy Seal.
You keep a fair quarter, you quarter it indeed, you are a Separatist, an
Anabaptist, a Brownist, a Familist, and you are Preacher to them all, and they
all receive quarter from you; and you upon Thursday last raised a multitude of
them, and made a mutiny, and you pulled down the High Commission Court, and no
Court of Justice can stand for you, you will pull them all down, as you were
the cause of the High Commission Court pulling down the other day, as we shall
justly prove, and you are like to suffer for it, I will assure you.


Quater. My Lords, is it your pleasure, that I shall speak? (and they all
answered, Yes.)


Quater. Then I turning my self to the Archbishop, said, for answer to your
Lordships, whereas you say, I do not submit unto your High Commission Court, I
thus far submit, as being bound in a band of one hundred pounds to attend
your Court, I have always attended, as I have been appointed; and whereas your
Lordship says, you have used all means to inform my judgment, by appointing
me to go to Doctor Featly, I do acknowledge it a truth, and the Doctor did
take pains therein. And whereas you say, you used me not unkindly, in not
imprisoning, nor threatening of me, I do not lay any hard thing to your charge.
But for my not taking the Oath Ex Officio, my Lords, I will give all your
Lordships a reason thereof; it is not for want of information of my judgment,
for my judgment is rightly informed, and I do know and will prove it, that
the Oath Ex Officio, is contrary to the Law of God, and of the Land, and of the
Law of Nature, and therefore I neither did nor never will take it.

Then turning my self to the Lord privy Seal, I answered him in this manner;
As for all that your Lordship has said, it is impurtenent, and to no purpose,
it is no way proper, nor appertaining unto me at all; all that your Lordship
has spoken, I will reduce into two heads, and answer it in two words. Whereas
your Lordship says, I am a Separatist, a Brownist, an Anabaptist, and a
Familist; all which, I do deny, and will prove the contrary; and for proof
hereof, if you will be pleased to call in the Messenger, he shall prove that I
was at Saint Georges Church, and heard both Service and Sermon this day.


Lord of Dorset. Can you make that appear, said the Lord Lord of Dorset.
of Dorset.


Quater. Yes, my Lord, if you please to call in the Messenger, he shall
justify it.


Lord Dorset. No, said the Lord of Dorset, it shall suffice, I think you speak
truth.


Sir Francis Windebank. Master Quatermayne, said Sir Francis (...) Francis
Windebanke, Secretary of State.
Windebank, Do you receive the Sacraments in our Church?


Quater. Yes, I receive both the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper; and
all my children have been Baptized in this Church, according to the (...) of
the same.


Lord of Dorset. Can you make all this appear to be true, M Quatermayne, said
the Lord of Dorset?


Quater. Yes, my Lord, by a thousand witnesses, I will not tell a lie before
your Honors for a hundred pounds.


Lord of Dorset. I think you will not, says the Lord of Dorset.


Quater. Then I turned my self to my Lord Privy Seal, and (...) my second
head, thus; That I was not nor could. not be the cause of the mutiny in Paul's,
I will give your Lordships a just account, how I spent my whole time on
Thursday (...).

In the Morning when I went from my own house, I past over the Water to
Bridewell, to an honest man, that has some Suits in Law, to advise with him
the best I could for his own good, and stayed with him the space of an hour;
and from thence I went to Friday Street, to a Merchant, and there I continued
about an hour more; and from thence into CloakeLane, and from thence into St
Thomas Apostles, and there stayed until dinner time; and from thence I with
one more went to the Dagger in Fryday-street, and there we dined, and our
dinner cost nine pence; and from thence we walked together to
Pauls-Church-yard, and from thence he went about his occasions, and I into
Paul's to attend the High Commission Court; I went alone, no body with me, and
when I came thither, there stood a man in the Convocation. House-dore, and I
asked him if the High Commission Court would be kept there that day or no, and
he answered me, yes, then said I, what is the reason the door is not yet
opened, then said he because the Court is not yet come, and when they are come,
there will not be room enough for them; then said I, remove the Court where
room is, and I walked down into the body of the Church, and one came unto
me, saying these words; Master Quatermayne, what do you here? To whom I
answered, I was bound in a band of one hundred pounds there to be.


Friend. Why, said he, Is your business not yet ended? Friend.



Quater. I answered, no; neither do I know when it will.


Friend. Then he asked me, what they did intend to do with me?


Quater. I answered, I could not tell.


Friend. Then said he, will you take the Oath Ex Officio?


Quater. I answered, no; I will never take it.


Friend. Then said he, what will they do?


Quater. I answered, I know not, it may be they will imprison me, the
Archbishop did threaten me, that he would the last Term.


Friend. No, said he, I think they will not be so forward, they have other
business to do.


Quater. Then I left him, and I walked quite through Paul's, all alone, no body
with me, and went into the Booksellers Churchyard, and there made water
against the payles, and returned again through Paul's to the High Commission
Court, and the Court was set, and I went up into the Court, and did diligently
hearken when my name should be called; and after a while people coming in,
they made a hemming, hooting, and shouting, and thronging into the Court, and
upon my self, so that I was forced and constrained to put on my hatt to save
my belly, and cried out unto them, take heed of my belly, you hurt me with your
thronging upon me; and presently as the people shouted, the Court began to
rise, and Sir Nathaniel Brent, being one of the first that came down, I went
down together with him, and he turning back unto me, said:


Sir Nathaniel Brent. What a tumult is here, Mr Quatermayn, Sir Nathaniel Brent.
this is not long of you, I hope?


Quater. It is in no wise, but Sir, I am bound in a band of one hundred pounds
here to appear, and if you have nothing in Court against me, why should
honest men be troubled? The Knight replied thus:


Sir Nathaniel Brent. Pray Mr Quatermayne, come to my house to morrow or next
day.


Quater. To whom I replied, I would with Gods help; and while we were thus
talking, came the Register, and said:


Register. This is long of you, Master Quatermayne, all this Register.
tumult.


Quater. To whom I answered, you speak falsely, are you the Register of the
Court, and do you lie, you do speak falsely, you have my band of one hundred
pounds, give me my band, and I will neither trouble you nor your Court.

Then I parted from the Knight, and I came to the South door of Paul's, and the
Court was shut up, and all the people were gone, and then I went into
Pauls-Church-yard, to look for my wife, and leaning my back against a Drapers
stall, I saw the Cushions fly over men's heads, and into the dirt, and men
kicked them; but who they were, I know not; but my Lords, under your Lordships
favor, I do conceive that the Commissioners themselves were only in the
fault; for, if they had done as in other Courts of Justice, that is, in this
manner, Be uncovered in the face of the Court, Gentlemen keep silence, Give
audience to the Court; or my Lords, in the third place, if they had made
Proclamation, and deferred the Court until some other time, there would have
been no tumult at all, but they brake away from the Court, and the people
followed hooting as Birds at an Owl.

After all this, my Lords, I with my wife and her sister and two or three more,
went into the uppermost house in CarterLane, and there we drank a cup of Beer
together, and then parted some of the company; my self, my wife, and one other
went to Master Seamans his Lecture in Bred-street, and there heard both Service
and Sermon. And thus have I given your Lordships an account, how I spent the
whole day on Thursday last.


Archbish. Then said the Archbishop, but you were in the Country, and there
you made Conventicles and preached.


Quater. My Lord, I was in the Country, but made no Conventicles, nor yet did
preach.


Quater. My Lord, I never made any Conventicle since I knew any thing that was
good. But I was close by where a fearful Conventicle was, and that upon the
Sunday or Lords day, where were at the least two thousand met together, to
blaspheme God, and to profane his holy Sabbath, abuse his creatures, and to
misspend their precious time, to the great dishonor of God, and the
provocation of the eyes of his glory. And my Lords, except your Lordships
speedily look to it for a Reformation, the judgments of God will fall upon
this Kingdom. But my Lords, if this be a Conventicle, when the judgments of
God be upon the Land, for a people to meet together, and humble themselves, and
pray before the Lord; we are far off from Salomons judgment; for he says,
If the Lord send a judgment among the people, if the people that are called by
his Name, shall humble themselves, and pray and seek his face, and depart from
their wicked ways, God will hear from heaven, forgive their sins, and heal
the Land.

And my Lords, are not the judgments of God upon us? is here not the plague of
pestilence, and a threatened famine, and the sword of war hanging over our
heads? and shall not we my Lords, humble our selves in the sense of Gods
displeasure? It is an argument, my Lords, that there is no Religion among us.


Lord Newborg. Then said the Lord Newborg; at such meetings Lord Newborg
as these are, Master Quatermayne, in what manner do you perform your d^ties?


Quater. My Lord, thus; We pray, and we read the Scriptures, and as well as
we are able find out the meaning of the Holy Ghost therein, and what we
understand from the Word, we impart to our company.


A Lord. So, said one of the Lords, and is not this Preaching? A Lord.



Quater. No, my Lord, I do not understand it so, it is nothing but godly
Conference, which every Christian man is bound to do and perform; for it is
our duty to edify and build up one another in our most holy faith, which we
cannot do, except it be opened unto us.


Archb. Then said the Archbishop, this is his constant practice in City and
Country, to draw people togeth^r, and to make (...).


Quater. My Lord, I want information in my judgment, I understand not wh^t you
mean by Conventicle, I did alw^yes think, that public duties did not make
void private, but that both might stand with a Christian.


Archb. No more it does not, said the Archbishop, but your Conventicles are not
private.


Quater. My Lord, I am sure they are not public; I pray, my Lord, inform my
judgment what a Conventicle is.


A^chb. Why, this is a Conventicle, said the Archbishop, when t^n or twelve or
more or less, meet together, to pray, read, preach, expound, this is a
Conventicle.


Quater. My Lord, I do not so understand it.


Archb. No, says he, my Lord Chief Justice, I appeal to you, whether this be
a Conventicle or no.


Sir Edward Littleton. But my Lord Chief Justice answered Sir Edward Littleton.
nothing.


Quater. My Lord, under your Lordships favor, I know it is no Conventicle,
neither by any Statute, nor Cannon Law of this Kingdom, if this be a
Conventicle, then I will be a Conventicler while I live, with Gods help, I
kept a Conventicle in my house the last Wednesday, if this be a Conventicle. My
Lord, I did never come to your Court, but I set apart the day before to (...)
to God for a blessing to direct me how to carry my self before you.


Archb. I, so you may in private, so it be only with your own family.


Quater. And no body else, my Lord, truly my whole family consists wholly in my
wife and my self, and therefore I must call in my neighbors to help me, for
this duty if it be kept as it ought, will require more than a man and his wife
to keep it.


Archb. You were at Watlington, and there be many of the Scottish faction there.


Quater. At Watlington, my Lord, I was borne there, will you not give me leave
to go into the Country to visit my friends.


Archb. Yes, but not to make Conventicles, and Preach.


Quater. My Lord, you said I might in private, and when I am there, I am as at
home, and my Lord, we always did it in private, and not in the public
Congregation.


Lord N^wborg. Then said the Lord Newborg, how do you pray, M^. Quatermayne,
at such meetings?


Quater. My Lord, I will tell you how we pray, we pray thus, that the Lord
will be graciously pl^ased, out of all these combustions and confusions, to
bring forth a sacred Order for the establishment of the Gospel, the rooting
out of Popery, superstition, and Idolatry. For the uniting of the two Kingdoms
together, England and Scotland, in peace, and settling his Majesty and his
posterity Royal in peace, that so we may live under our own Vines and
Fig Trees, to serve our God, and to be loyal and obedient to our King and
Sovereign, and loving and charitable one to another.


Lord Cottington. Then said the Lord Cottington, the Lord, Lord Cottington.
the Lord, and why not our Lord, or Jesus Christ, or God Almighty?


Quater. My Lord, I am not willing to mis-phrase the Scriptures, neither am I
willing to displease your Lordships, therefore, whether I say our Lord, or God,
or Christ, or God Almighty, the Scripture will bear me out in what I say.


Lord Cottington. The Lord, the Lord, what Lord do you mean; do you mean
the Lord Wentworth?


Quater. No, my Lord, I do not mean the Lord Wentworth, I know him not, nor
am I acquainted with him, but that Lord that I mean, is the Lord of Heaven and
Earth.


Lord Privy Seal. The Lord, said the Lord Privy Seal, Lord Privy Seal.
Do you find fault with the man, for saying the Lord, he speak^th to the
purpose, why is not the Lord in Scriptures as well to be spoken, as our Lord,
or Christ, or God All-mightie?


Lord of Dorset. My Lord, said the Lord of Dorset, you loose time, the man
speaks punctually to the purpose, the Lord, it is the principal title that
God is denominated in the Scriptures by.


Archb. You were at Watlington, and there be of the Scottish faction.


Quater. My Lord, I know not what you mean by the Scottish faction.


Lord Cottington. Yes, said the Lord Cottington, I think you do, and I
believe, if you were well examined, you would be found one of the principal.

Then many of the Lords cried out of the Scots, and called them Rebels and
Traitors.


Archb. I, said Canterbury, we have proved them Traitors and Rebels.


Lord Cottington. They must needs be Traitors and Rebels, when they shall come
in such hostile manner, to invade his Majesty's Realm, and rob and spoil his
Subjects.


Archb. I, said Canterbury, and under pretense of Religion, to invade the Land.


Lord Cottington. Then said the Lord Cottington, what do you think of the
Scots, Mr Quatermayne?


Quater. My Lord, if you examine my conscience, I pray do it by Scriptures.


Archb. You say right, said Canterbury, I never did otherwise, nor will do.


Lord Cottington. Then said the Lord Cottington again, Master Quatermayne,
what do you think of the Scots?


Quater. My Lord, I think more than I will speak.

Then said another Lord, you hear that they be proved traitors, what do you
think of them now?


Quater. My Lord, I have thought formerly, that those things that your Lordship
now says were not true, I know not now what cause I may have to al^er my
thoughts.


Another Lord. But what do you now think of them, Master Quatermayne?


Quater. Then said I, my Lord, if they be Traitors, let them suffer as Traitors.


Lord. Master Quatermayne, what do you think of them?


Quater. My Lord, whatsoever I think, I will say nothing.


Lord Goring. Then said the Lord Goring, Master Quatermayn, how do you judge
of the Scots? speak your mind freely, you need not be so shy, here is none
that will wrong you.


Quater. My Lord, I cannot judge at uncertainty, I hear one thing now, and
another thing anon, I hardly hear one thing twice together, and therefore I
will suspend my judgment.

Then said two or three Lords together, what do you say of the Scots? speak
your mind freely, you hear they are proved traitors.


Quater. My Lord, you say you have already proved the Scots Traitors, and I
have said, if they be Traitors, let them suffer as Traitors, and my Lord, if
you have proved them Traitors, you do not want my approbation; for if I say,
they are Traitors, or if I say, they are not, it proves them neither to be, nor
not to be Traitors, and therefore I will say nothing.


Sir ^homas Row. Then said Sir Thomas Row, and the Lord (...) Tho. Row.
Goring, What do you believe concerning the ^cots, i Master Quatermayne?


Quater. To whom I answered, my Lord, I do believe all the Articles of my
Creed.


Sir Thomas Row and Lord Goring. Then said both those, I Sir Tho. Row. and Lord
Goring.
think you do, for you seem to be a man of judgment, but do you believe
the Scots are Traitors?


Quater. My Lord, it was never no Article of my faith, for I never found it in
my Creed; with that they all smiled.


P. S. and Arch. Then s^y the Lord privy Seal and the Archbishop, Well, for
all this, we shall prove, that you were the chief cause of the riot at Paul's
on Thursday last, and therefore Sir John Banks, I pray receive information
from Master (...) General.
Lathom, and Master Lathom go you to Master Attorney General, and give him
instruction, how he shall draw the Bill of information.


Quater. My Lords, if you please, you may make an end of the busin^sse without
any further trouble, for whatsoever I have spoken before your Lordships, I will
prove by sufficient witnesses.

Then diverse of them said, We have sufficient proof Master Quatermayne, that
you were the cause of the Tumult, you shall go forth, and if we have occasion,
we will call you in again anon.


Quater. So I departed from them, thinking by their fair speeches and
carriage, I had been directly freed, but it proved otherwise; for in my
absence, the Register had informed them very falsely and wickedly, and promised
to prove against me, whatsoever he said.


Then afterward the Messenger was called unto, and was by the Lords charged to
look unto me, and keep me safe, but to use me kindly.

And one of the Lords said, for ought I see, he will maintain any thing he
has done. And so I returned again in peace to my prison in Southwarke. And
this is the sum and substance of the Conference had with the Lords of the
Council. And the Lords writ a Letter, and sent it by another Messenger to
Sergeant Green in London, (I will not say as David by Uriah but I leave it to
your wisdom to judge by the sequel of the Story following.

Upon the next day, which was the twenty sixth day of October, 1640. I was
carried into London to Sergeant GreenesHouse, and when I came to him, he did
appoint me to be at the Guild Hall at two of the (...) the same d^y. And when I
came there, there was a great preparation, both Holberts, Bills, and Constables
Staves, to the number of three or four hundred, never the like in London seen
before, and three or four thousand Auditors and Spectators, and all their
Conference was about me; and all concluded, that I should dye; and many sweet
and worthy Christians came to me, to comfort me. But especially, Master
Goodin, that Reverend Divine, who told me, I was not a man to be pitied; and
his reason was, because I was able to bear my burden, and those that were
miserable, were to be pitied.

Then came the Lord Major and his Brethren in Oyor and Terminor, the Commission
being read, a Jury of Inquiry was impanelled, of three and twenty men, round
about Doctors Commons, which is the foundation of Ignoramus School; a Jury of
life and death being in readiness, (for their intent and purpose was I should
have dyed before next morning) the Bill was given to the Jury, where in were
fifteen persons more, for show only, their aim being only at me, as by the
sequel it did appear; a great number of persons were produced to take their
Oaths against me, which they did to the purpose, as they thought; Then was I
had into the Court of Aldermen, to be examined by Sir Christopher Clethero, Sir
Edward (...) Sergeant Green, and Sergeant Fesant: which examination of mine,
with my own hand (...) annexed; because it is included in my Speech with the
Lords of the Council, I here omit, as being too tedious.

After my Examination, I was caused to walk in the Gallery, conveyed into that
place (as it seemed unto me) as a sheep to the sl^ughter. It was in such a
place, as I might have called long enough before I could have been heard, and
there was a back way that I should have gone to execution, had the Jury but
found the Bill, as I was informed by honest men.

And now I return to the Jury, for the carriage of that there were indirect
courses used by all the Sergeants, to inform the Jury against me. Likewise a
Sergeant of the Sheriffs, did most grossly abuse the Jury and himself. But
the Jury could not agree, there, were many want (...) among them, that had
never been of a Jury before, as I have been likewise informed.

There were two very understanding men, one Master Nicolson, and Mr Mcredith,
that h^d been Grand Jury men oftentimes before, and they made it appear
plainly to the Lord Major and the Sergeants, that I was every way innocent, and
could not be guilty, and all the Oaths that had past were to no purpose, and
not concerning the thing at all; yet notwithstanding, by the information of the
Sergeants, and the pressing upon them by the Officer of the Court, one and
twenty of them were agreed to find the Bill.

But beloved Christian, take notice I pray thee, of the special hand of God,
and join with me (...) thanks giving to the Lord, for so great a Deliverance.
When the Jury came in, Sergeant Stone, who ^ar Judge of the Court, asked them
if they were agreed, Master Nicolson said, We are not agreed; we find it
ignoramus, we cannot find Master Quatermayne guilty; with that, there was a
great shout in the Hall with a thousand voices, as taking it for granted, I
should be freed.

Then said the Forman of the Jury, there be one and twenty of us agreed; then
said the Judge, you may yield up the Bill, they are some wise men that shall
stand against one and twenty, Who shall speak for you, said the Iudge^ our
Foreman, said the Jury, Give up your Bill, said the Judge, here it is, here is
nothing written in it, said Sergeant Stone; then said the Foreman of the Jury,
But we are all agreed of our Verdict; How do you find it, said Sergeant
Stone. Then said the Foreman, A B^ll of Error, wherein the words of the
Prophet a^e made good, Man purposes, h^t God disposes; You are all agreed
indeed, said the Lord Major S Hen: (...): For one says, ^gnoramus, and all the
rest says, A Bill of Error. Wherein Christian Reader, (...) give thee another
hint of a special mercy; for, if the Lord Major had been willing to have had
my life, as I judge more charitable of him, he might have bid them return into
the Jury room, and write upon the Bill, and then I had been found, but the
Lord (...) his heart, that he appointed them a longer tim, and adjourneth the
Court until the Tuesday (...) following, which was the third day of November
(the first day of the Parliament) in the afternoon. I conceive one reason my
Lord Major might have the twenty-nine of October, he was to leave his place,
and it was his wisdom not to carry the guilt of innocent blood with him upon
his conscience, and peradventure he might also think that they would proceed
no further, in regard of the Parliament. And this is the sum and substance of
the first proceedings in this Sessions, which continued until between seven
and eight a Clock at night, and then to my prison again, with as much joy and
peace as I could contain or hold, attended on by hundreds of the Saints of
God. I looked on that place in the one and thirty Psalm, the fifteenth Verse,
where the Prophet David says, My times are in thy hands: Whence I concluded
thus much, that if my times were in Gods hands, then neither in Canterburies
nor in Cottingtons hands, and that as the creature could not give life, no more
it could not take away life. But I concluded, if my death might be as Sampsons,
the pulling down of the English Antichristian Hierarchy, the pulling down
the Devilish spiritual Courts, then should I gladly sacrifice my life in the
cause of the Gospel, for Christ and his true English Church.

And now to return back to that from which I have a little digrest; Between
that time and the next Sessions, the old Lord Major going out of his place, and
the new one coming in, the spirit of jealousy fell into the hearts of my
enemies, and wrought so deeply in them, that they plotted more cunningly to
take my life then before, they being afraid, as indeed it did fall out, that
the Jury would learn more wit and be better advised between that and the next
Sessions, made the Commission, and Bill, and Jury, and all void, as if nothing
at all had been done, and our three London Sergeants in their Scarlet rode in
their Co^ches to the Court, to procure a new Commission sealed, which they got
upon the Lords day in the morning Of Sir Jo. Finch Lord Keeper.
about Sermon time. And then the new Lord Major, Sir Edward Wright sent for
Smith the Sergeant, giving him a strict Charge to warn a Jury of special able
men, telling him that it was for a business of greater consequence then he
took it to be, and so it was done accordingly. And now Christian Reader, I
will lead thee along from my Prison in Southworke, to my next Sessions holden
in the Guild Hall in London; where were twenty Constables, and each man had
twenty Watchmen to attend with Bills, and Halberts, and a greater number to see
me then at my first coming; more to see me then were to see Doctor Ducke let
down and pulled up with a Rope at the High Commission Court in Paul's.

So we ascended up into the Court, and the old Jury fitting themselves to give
in their Bill, all jointly did assent to give up their Bill Ignoramus. But when
they came into the Court, supposing to begin where they left off, they found it
otherwise, for there was a new Jury impannelled, and a new Commission read, and
a new Charge given, and the old forsworn Witnesses anew swo^ne, and the old
Jury much disgraced by Stone our London Sergeant: which Jury had learned more
wit or wisdom in his absence, then ever he would have taught them being
present. So the new Jury being called by their names, they answered to them,
three and twenty were summoned to appear, and did all appear, but six of them
were not called, because (said the Register) they are Puritans, of Quatermayns
faction. Then Stone the Sergeant, sitting as Judge, told me it was not fit I
should be in the Court. Then said I to my Lord Major, my Lord, so your
proceedings be to Gods glory, and the good of the Commonwealth, and in a just
way for my own particular, my presence shall not be hurtful to you; you have
chosen a Jury of wise discreet Gentlemen, I am willing to refer my self unto
them. Then said Sergeant Stone, K^epe him safe Messenger, you must look unto
him; Then I answered him again, My cause is good, and I will not start, though
you would give me a thousand pounds. Then answered my Lord Major, I think you
will not Master Quatermayn, then the Jury looked upon me, and when they looked
upon the Witnesses, how like Rogues they looked; then I answered Said the Jury.
they are of the Court, meaning they were of the High Commission Court. So the
Jury going into the Iury-roome, my adversaries thought, they had expunged all
Puritans out of the company, but they were utterly deceived; for one Master
Lee, a Vintner at the Sun Tavern at Criple-gate, a very wise and judicious
man, did so debate the matter with the rest of the Jury, that notwithstanding
my enemies, which were the enemies of the truth, had cast such aspersions upon
me, saying, that I was an Arian, an Anabaptist, a Separatist, a Familist, and
the like, he made them to see clearly, that the Bill could not be found against
me, yet notwithstanding, they did not make an end that night. At length the
Jury being often called upon to bring in their Bill, it being late in the
night, the Jury came forth, and Sergeant Stone asked them if they were agreed,
they answered they were not agreed, then inquiry being made how the business
stood, seven would have found the Bill, and ten were against it, and so the
Sessions for that night ended, until the next Friday following, being the
sixth of November 1640.

Loving Christian Reader, I will put thee in mind of one thing, my persecutor
said, he would have my life, though it cost him five hundred pounds, and
another said, that if Quatermayn were not hanged within six hours, he would be
hanged for him; but the first has mist of his purpose, and the l^st has time
enough to choose his Gallows, or to repent hims^ of his precipitated malice.
And this is the sum and substance of our second S^ssions, and I returned home
to my prison again, waiting upon the Lord for my free and full deliverance in
his own good time.

In the mean time, there were three or four Letters sent from the Lords of
the Council, or the Councellor of the The Archbishop.
Lords, to the Lord M^jor and the Sergeants; but what was in them, I know not,
God in his due time, I hope, will reveal it. Besides, diverse Messengers were
sent to the place where I was imprisoned, to see whether I were safe or no. And
now Christian Brother, I shall lead thee to my Gayle-Delivery.

And this proved a Sessions of peace, for when we came thither, there was
neither Constable nor Watchman, so the Jury after some certain time came forth
and desired audience, for they would give up their Bill, and the three
Sergeants would not receive it, by reason that my Persecutor the Register of
the High Commission Court was not there, but at length Lathom came in, and then
the Jury was called, and they were all agreed but one, and they yielded up the
Bill, and it was a Bill of Vera, for one Reynolds a Waterman and Ignoramus for
all the rest. At which word, there was a great rejoicing among the people; but
Lathom looked as pale as ashes, then I blessed God with these two words, Truth
is strong and will prevail; and then diverse good Christians took me by the
middle, and said, Master Quatermayne, you are sr^ed; and I said, Blessed be
God, who is the deliverer of his people. Then William Barrife, who was one of
the Jury, was called for, who would not assent with the rest of the Jury; but
see the hand of God in this also; for he was fined forty shillings for his
absence, and was glad to submit to his Brethren, and entreat the favor of the
Court for his fine. Then I spoke to my Lord Major and his Brethren, saying; Is
it in your power to free me, seeing I am freed by the Jury? And they answered,
No. Then I asked if they had not authority in those Letters that they had
received, to free me; but they answered me, No. Then I told them, I would use
means my self. And thus was I most graciously delivered from the Lion, and
the Bear, and the uncircumcised Philistims, and the Diotrephes, the troubler
of the people of God, by their prating of many swelling words of vanity; But
the Net is broken, and I am delivered; to God only. be the glory; and to the
Instruments thereof due respect and praise.

AMEN.
THE PRAYER.
THou, oh Lord God omnipotent reigns, holy are thy ways, just are thy
works, great are thy mercies, dreadful are thy judgments, oh King of Saints.
Oh Lord, who is like unto thee? Thy goodness and mercy, Oh most mighty God,
encompasseth us round on every side. Thou, oh Lord, have said, Thou will be a
wall of fire round about thy people, and the glory in the midst of them. Thou have said, Thou will be a Sun and a Shield to thy Servants, and no good (...)
wilt thouwithhold from them that walk uprigh^ly before thee, but grace and
glory will thou give unto them. Thy people of old believed in thee, they called
upon thy Name, and were delivered. Thou never ^allen them that put their (...)
thee. Oh Lord who is it then that does know thy Name, but will trust in thee.
Oh Lord, I am thy Serva^t; the Son of thy hand^; Thou haste broken my bands
in sunder, and set my fe^te in a (...), that I ^ht (...) the ways of thy
C^mmandements, and so serve thee with an upright heart, and a willing mind. I
have ^ound by (...) experience, Oh Lord, that the issuos from death are in thy
hands. The enemies plotted and contrived to take away the life of thy Servant,
and yet behold Lord, thou did most (...) deliver him.

The Net was laid, the Pit was dug, thy servant freed, and his and thine
enemies ensnared and covered. Oh Lord, praise waits for thee in Sion, and
unto thee shall the Vow be performed. Thou hear Prayers, and therefore unto
thee shall all flesh come. O Lord, thou haste done wondrous things. Thy
promises of old are faithfulness and truth. Oh Lord, what shall I render unto
thee for thy great goodness, and loving kindness, showed to thy Servant. I
will take the cup of Salvation, and give praise unto thy name, Thou haste good
Lord, preserved me from the Lion and the Bear, and the usurping tyrannous
Philistims of the Kingdom, to what end, dear Father, but that I should not
forget the loving kindness of the Lord, but be still mindful of his Covenant.
Thy outstretched arm has been my defense. Thy right hand, Oh Lord, has the
pre-eminence. Thy right hand dear Father, has brought mighty things to
^asse. I shall not dy^ through the malice of the enemy, but (...) live, through
the goodness of my God, to declare the loving (...). nesse of the Lord. I am
resolved to make my boast of thy praise, all the day long my tongue shall never
cease to speak of thy goodness whilst I have a being; for, Thou bring
down to the grave, and raisest up again. Thou do all thy works to be had
in remembrance of all that are ^ound about thee.

If any Creature that ever thine ^and has made, has cause to magnify thy
Name, and to declare thy praise, then have I much more. Mine enemies did as it
were cast Lots upon my Vesture, and had so numbered my days, as that they
thought within six hours to take away the life of thy Servant; and yet behold
Lord some dead, ^me run away, and others imprisoned, as thine the Churches, the
States, and G^mmon mealths enemies and yet dear Father, thy Servant preserved
alive, to take notice of thy mercy in believing thy holy promise, where thou
say, Thou will deliver the righteous out of trouble, and bring the wicked in
their stead. Oh Lord, I have found that my tim^ are in thy hands, and not in
the han^ of my enemies; yea, I ^ve and do find by blessed experience, o^
Lord, that as the creature cannot give life, so neither can it take life away,
Dear Father, I received my life from thee, to glorify thy Name in the
discharge of the several actions and duties in my place and calling, and
should the enemies deprive me of it, to the shame and reproach of the Gospel.
Oh Lord, thou haste forbidden it, and so it is come to p^sse, for ever blessed
be thy N^e for it. Lord, thou haste said, that we should be brought before
Princes and Rulers for thy Name sake, and yet we should not fear nor take care
what to speak, for thou will g^ a mouth and a tongue, and behold, dear Lord,
thou haste made this promise also good to thy servant. Wherein thou did so
guide him and direct him, as that he did neither deny the truth, nor corrupt
his conscience, to please the times; at that time, dear Father, thou did
sill his heart full with joy, and peace in believing, that all things should
work together for his good, when the enemies, oh Lord, did coop him up and
appoint him as a sheep for the slaughter. ^hen did thou lengthen his life,
and prolong his days, to tell of all thy wondrous works. I will therefore
sing of thy praise all the day long; for thou haste showed kindness to thy
servant. Thou haste multiplied thy hand of bounty, I will never forget thy
free and full acts of love vouchsafed to me.

Dear Father, I beseech thee to direct thy Servant what to do, and how to
carry himself in this his Pilgrimage, that so ^e may glorify thy Name, and
endeavor to (...) thy people, that others may by his example be encouraged to
walk on constantly, conscionably, and faithfully, in the pursuit and practice
of all the duties of Christianity.

Blessed Father, Lord of life and glory, I do most humbly desire thee so to
direct me by thy Word and Spirit, that as thou have miraculously and mercifully
preserved me from all dangers on the right hand and on the left, from the
malice and fury of mine enemies, I may now in an humble acknowledgement of thy
goodness, walk before thee in all holy and humble subjection to thy blessed
will in all things. To this end, I beseech thee, ^athe my soul (...) that
^ountaine that thou have opened to the house of Judah, and the Iohabitants of
Jerusal^m to wash in. Make good that holy promise more and more to my soul,
wherein thou have said, Thou will wash me from mine u^cleannesse, and sprinkle
me with clean water. Dear Father, it is thy good pleasure, that in Christ
the Godhead should dwell bodily, that so I might be made partakers of the
divine nature, yea, that in him all sulnesse should dwell, that so I might
receive grace for grace. Now I besecch thee, dear Father, let it not be with
me as with Pharoahs lean Kine, that I may still feed upon the fat and (...)
promises of the Gos^ell, and yet remain a starveling to thy great dishonor,
and the reproach of Religion. But grant, (...) beseech thee, that in the use of
all holy means I do so plentifully enjoy, I may grow up to that age, stature,
fullness, and (...) of thy saints in Jesus Christ, that so as thy band has and
still is upon me for good, so my heart may always meditate on thy Statutes,
and my tongue may speak of all thy wondrous works. Blessed Father, I be seech
thee to anatomize my heart, and spiritualize my soul, and see if there be any
wickedness in me; and by thy Word and (...) it, divide between the Soul and
Spirit, and joints and marrow of my corruption, and so separate between the
precious and the vile; that all iniquity may be removed far away from my
person, and from my Tabernacle, that so O Lord, for the time that is to come, I
may wall evenly with thee in the path that is called holy, that so I may have
my fruit in holiness, and at the end eternal life, that being guided by thy
counsel here, I may at last be brought to glory. Good Lord grant that I may
never be of that number that does so we to the (...) to reap^ corruption, but
of those that does so we to the Spirit and reap life everlasting, that I may
never as formerly dig broken (...) that will hold no water, but that I may
drink deeply of that fountain of the water of life, my fresh springs being
found in thee, that so (...) soul may be filled with the fruits of
rightcousnesse, which is to the praise of thy rich grace by faith in Christ
jesus.

Dear Father, I have three grand enemies to grapple with, the world, the
^lesh, and the Devil, the least of which is too great for me to (...), if my
weakness be not supported, and my wants supplied. But yet I know that through
Jesus Christ that strengthens me, I may by faith make the Devil fly,
overcome the world, and get my own heart purified: (...) although holy Father
of my self being poor, weak, and contemptible, I can do nothing, yet through
Jesus Christ that strengthens me, I can do all things; for he is the right
hand of thy power, and strong arm of thy salvation, in and from whom thou have
received full compensation to divir^ just^ce for the sins of all the Elect,
and in particular for me thy unworthy servant. I beseech thee (...) Lord, so
long as thou have any employment for thy unworthy servant in this (...) and
transito^y life, so long as these few broken ends of mortality does remain,
be thou pleased, who does all things according to the counsel of thine own
will, so to uphold me in the way of holiness, that in all the actions of my
general and special calling, I may glorify thy great Name, (...) my
Brethren, propagate the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, stop the mouths and
put to silence the tongues of wicked and ungodly men, for this is the will of
thee my God as touching thy servant.

I beseech thee, O Lord, be not angry with poor sinful dust and ashes, and I
will speak but this one time, and it is in the behalf of the generation of
thy first borne, whom thou from eternity have set thy love upon, and still
(...) delight in to extend mercy to. It is the Vine which thine own hand has
planted holy holy, Lord, look down from Heaven, behold, and visit this Vine.
The straits of thy people are great, but deliverance is in thine own hands,
thy mercyes are thine own, I beseech thee therefore, O Lord, consider how
deeply thine own glory is involved in the great cause of thy Church. Behold,
the insolency, pride, and subtilti^, of thine enemies, and look upon the
imbecilitie and weakness of thy people, and let that ancient motive which
from the beginning, and (...) ages, did stir thee up to do good to thy
people, provoke thee at; this time to be merciful to thy Church, because mercy
(...) thee.

O Lord, thou have in thy Word spoken great things of thy Servants concerning
their deliverance, and also gathering thy Churches from the four Corners of
the World; and that thou will raise up thy Jerusalem, and make it the praise of
the whole Earth, and is not now the time come wherein thou will extend thy
mercy to Sion? O Lord is not yet the time fully come? Has she not line long
enough in the dust? Has not the Plowers plowed long furrows on her bucke for
a long s^ason? Has not O Lord, the Fox^, the subtle Foxes broke off her
fruitful bows, spoiled her grapes, and would not let them cluster? Good Lord,
has not thine enemies mingled our Wine with water, our silver with dross, and
thy pure worship with superstitious vanities? And shall they, O Lord, prosper,
that thus run along in their wickedness, eating up thy people even as bread,
^vouring thy precious Saints, and sacred truths, as much as in them lies? And
will not our God return, and cause the light of his countenance to sh^ne upon
his. Sanctuary? Thou have said, O Lord, that thou never biddest the sons of
Jacob seek thy face in vain; is not the time yet come that the Stone cut out
of the mountain without hands, shall grow to be a Mountain, and fill the
whole earth? When, O Lord, will thou give the Kingdoms of the earth to the
Saints of the most High? When shall our Sister that has no breast, desire the
sincere milk of the Gospel? When Lord, shall those dry bones live? When dear
Father, shall the great River Euphrates be dried up, that thy redeemed may
pass over? When shall that Monarch of Rome and Hiera^chy of England which
makes the real Antichrist, not only be discovered, but rooted out and
consumed, that thy Saints may rejoice their hearts, and warm their hands at
that great bonefire so long desired, that the Lord Jesus Christ may reign in
his Church.

Dear Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, Gird thy Sword upon thy thigh, O thou
most mighty, strike through the loins of thine, and thy Churches enemies. Root
out all them that delight in superstitious vanities; avenge the quarrel of thy
Covenant, and maintain thine own glory. Bless thine own work, O Lord, the
great Reformation already begun in this Kingdom; yea, bless O Lord, the
Parliament, that strong arm of flesh, which thou have sanctified and preserved
to do great things by, let not our hopes be made frustrate; let not the
malicious purposes of thine enemies come to pass, least they grow too proud.

O Lord, Bless the Kings Majesty, with spiritual, corporal, and eternal
Blessings, that he may so comply with his Parliament, that all differences may
quietly be composed, Religion may flourish, scandalous dumb dogs removed, and
faithful Pastors and Teachers planted in their rooms, with those sacred
Governors and government; which Christ has instituted in his Church. Bless
the Queen, the Prince, and the rest of that royal Race: Lord, let thy
blessing be upon all states and degrees of people, as if their names were
particularized before thee. Good Lord, cause Wars to cease in Ireland; let
justice and mercy meet together in that Kingdom, that thy enemies may justly
be punished, and thy people mercifully delivered. Bless those Forces that are
employed for that service; send more, and prosper them also; that the great
good work hoped for, may be most blessedly accomplished. Good Lord, bless thy
blessed people of the Scots Nation, by whom thou have done so much good to this
Kingdom, and all others, that thy poor servant is bound to pray for, by
duty, Religion, or any band or tie of nature or grace, even for the Lord Jesus
Christ his sake. In whom, and for whom, thou receivest poor sinners to mercy.
To whom with t^ine own Majesty, and God the holy Spirit, three persons, one
only holy wise God, be rendered, as is most due, all honor, praise, glory, and
thanks, now, hence forth, and for ever.

AMEN. FINIS.

