THE LOYAL CONVERT

VIRO. Improbus haec tam culta novalia miles habebit? Barbarus has segetes?

HOM. (...).

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall. 1644.

To the Honest-hearted READER.
READER,

IHere protest before the Searcher of all hearts, that I have no End, either of
Faction, or Relation in this ensuing Treatise. I am no Papist, no Sectarie, but
a true Lover of Reformation and Peace: My Pen declines all bitterness of
Spirit; all deceitfulness of heart; and I may safely, in this particular, with
saint PAVL, say, I speak the truth in Christ and lie not, my Conscience
bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, that I neither walk nor write in
craftiness, nor handle the holy Scriptures deceitfully: Therefore if thy Cause
be Jesus Christ, in the name of Jesus Christ, I adjure thee to lay aside all
wilful ignorance, all prejudice, all private respects and Interests, and all
uncharitable censures: Deal faithfully with thy Soul, and suffer wholesome
admonitions: Search the several Scriptures herein contained, and where they
open a Gate, climb not thou over a Style, Consult with Reason herein
exerciz'd, and where it finds a mouth, find thou an ear: And let Truth
prosper, though thou perish; and let God be glorified, although in thy
Confusion.

THE LOYAL CONVERT.
THe kingdom of England, that has for many Ages continued the happiest Nation
on the habitable earth, enjoying the highest blessings that heaven can give, or
earth receive; the fruition of the Gospel, which settled a firm Peace; which
Peace occasioned a full Plenty, under the gracious Government of wise and
famous Princes, over a thriving and well-contented People, insomuch that she
became the Earths Paradise, and the Worlds Wonder, is now the Nurcerie of all
Sects; her Peace is violated, her Plenty wasting, her Government distempered,
her People discontented, and unnaturally embroiled in her own Blood, not
knowing the way, nor affecting the means of Peace; insomuch, that she is now
become the Byword of the Earth, and the scorn of Nations.

The Cause and ground of these our National Combustions, are these our
national Transgressions, which unnaturally sprung from the neglect of that
Truth we once had, and from the abuse of that Peace we now want: Which, taking
occasion of some differences betwixt His Majesty and his two Houses of
Parliament, has divided our Kingdom within it self, which had so divided it
self from that God, who blessed it with so firm a Truth, so settled a Peace, and
so sweet an Unity.

At that sin brought this division, so this division (sharpened with mutual
Jealousies) brought in the Sword.

When the Lion r^^res who trembles not? And when Judgment (...), who is not
troubled?

Among the rest, I (who brought some Faggors to this Combustion) stood
astonished, and amazed; to whom the mischief was far more manifest then the
Remedy: At last, I laid my hand upon my heart, and concluded, It was the hand
of God: Where being plundered in my understanding, I began to make a scrutinie,
where the first Breach was made, that let in all these Miseries.

I found the whole Kingdom now contructed into a Parliament, which consisted
of three Estates; A King, a House of Peers, and a House of Commons; by the
Wisdom and Unity whereof, all things conducible to the Weale-publique were to
be advised upon, presented, and established.

I found this Unity dis-joynted, and grown to variance even to Blood: The
King and his Adherents on the one party; and his two Houses and their Adherents
on the other.

The presence of this division, was the true Protestant Religion, which both
protested to maintain; the Liberty of the Subject, which both protested to
preserve; the privileges of Parliament, which both promise to protect: Yet
nevertheless, the first never more profaned; the second never more
interrupted; the third never more violated.

Standing amazed at this Riddle, I turned, mine eyes upon his Majesty; and
there I viewed the Lords Anointed, sworn to maintain the established Laws
of this Kingdom: I turned mine eyes upon the two Houses; and in them I beheld
the Interest of my Country sworn to obey his Majesty as their supreme
Governor.

I heard a Romanstranoe cried from the two Houses I read it; I approved it; I
inclined unto it: A Declaration from his Majesty; I read it; I applauded it; I
adhered to the justness of it: The Parliaments Answer: I turned to the
Parliament: His Majesty's Reply; I returned to his Majesty.

Thus tossed and turned as a Weatherc^^k to my own weakness, I resolved it
impossible to serve two Masters.

I fled to Reason; Reason could not satisfy me: I fled to Policies Policy
could not resolve me: at length, finding no Counselor, but that which first I
should have sought; I hyed me to the Book of God as the Great Oracle, and
ushering my Inquest with Prayor and Humiliation, I opened the sacred leaves,
which (not by chance) presented to my first eye the 20 of the Proverbs, v. 2.
The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion, and who so provokes him to
Anger, sins against his own soul.

Now I began to search, and found as many places to that purpose, as would
swell this Sheet into a Volume; so that in a very short space, I was so
furnished with such strict Precopts, backed with such strong Examples, that my
Judgment was enlightened, and my wavering Conscience so thoroughly convinced,
that by the Grace of that Power which directed me, neither fear, nor any
By-respects shall ever hereafter remove me, unless some cleaner light direct
me.

But, above all the Rest, a Precept and an Example out of the Old Testament
(strongly confirmed by a Precept and an Example out of the New) settled my
opinion and established my Resolution.

The first Precept out of the Old, Jeremy, 27. v. 6. Where it pleased God to
own Nebuchadnezzar his servant, (although a Pre. 1.
a known Pagan, a professed Idolater, and a fierce Porsecuter of all Gods
Children) concerning whom he says, v. 8. They that serve not the King of
Babylon, and that will not put their necks under his Yoke, I will punish them
with the Sword, Pamine, and the Pestilence, till I have consumed them. v. 9.
Therefore hearken not to your Diviners and Prophets, that say unto you, You
shall not serve the King of Babylon, for they prophosio a lie unto you, v. 10.
But the nations that shall serve the King of Babylon, and bring their necks
under his Yoke, those will I let remain in their own land, (says the Lord) and
they shall till it, and dwell therein.

Can there be a stricter Precept? or could there be a more impious Prince? And
yet this Precept, and yet this Prince must be obeyed nay, sub paena too; Upon
the pain of Gods high wrath, fully expressed in Famine, Sword and Pestilence,
not only upon the People, but upon the Priests also, that shall persuade them
unto disobedience.

The second Precept is enjoined us out of the New Testament, Romans 13. 1. Let
every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for Pre. 2.
there is no power but of God; the Powers that be, are ordained of God:
whosoever therefore r^sisteth the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and
they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. This Power, (this King)
to whom S. Paul commands this subjection, was Nero, the bloody persecutor of
all that honored the blessed Name of Jesus Christ.

Gods Command should be a sufficient Argument, (...) is enough: But when he
adds a Reason too, he answers all Objections: But when he threatens a
punishment (no less then damnation) upon the resistance thereof, he has used
all means to persuade a necessity of obedience.

Let every soul be subject.)

Not equal, much less superior. And what is taking up of Arms, but an
employed supposition of at least equality? What are the hopes of conquest but
an Ambition of Superiority? What is condemning, judging, or deposing, but
Supremacy? For it is against the nature of an Inferior to condemn, judge, or
depose a Superior.

And, lest the Rebellious should confine his obedience to a good Prince, the
next words reply.

For there is no Power but of God.

Power in it self is neither good nor evil, but as it is in subjecto, the
person; If an evil King an evil Power, if a good King, a good Power: God
sends the one in Mercy; and we must be subject; the other in Judgment, and we
must be subject: in things lawful, actively; in things unlawful, passively:
If a good King, he must have our praise and our plyance; If an evil King, he
must have our Prayers, and our Patience.

He that resists the Power (whether good or evil, for all power is of God)
resists an Ordinance of God (Ordinances of men are not resisted without ruin)
and whosoever resists, shall receive, but what? (...), damnation to
themselves.

Now compare this place with that 1. Cor. 11. 29. He that shall eat this Bread,
and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, eats and drinks, What? (...),
damnation to himself. If then there be proportion betwixt the Sin and the
Punishment, you may hereby gather the heynousnesse of disobedience, the
punishment whereof is the very same with his that is guilty of the Body and
blood of our Lord; to the one for not discerning the Lords Body, to the other
for not discerning the Lords Anointed.

The Lords Anointed? And who is he? None but the regenerate: Ob.
Christ is not Christ to any, to whom Jesus is not Jesus.

Gods Word answers your silly Objection, not I: was not Ans.
Saul Gods Anointed? Was not Cyrus Gods Anointed, and 1 Samuel, 26. 9.
many more whom God acknowledges so and yet wicked Kings?

Cyrus is mine Anointed yet he has not known me.

The first example for our Obedience the Old Testament Example 1.
proposes to our imitation, Dan. 3. 16. Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon
sets up a golden Image, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, were commanded to fall
down and worship it.

The King a known Pagan commands gross Idolatry, did these men conspire? Or
(being Rulers of the Province of Babel) did they invite the Jews into a
Rebellion? did these to strengthen their own Faction, blast their Sovereigns
Name with Tyranny and Faganisme? Did they endeavor by Scandals and impious
Aspersions to render him odious to his people? Did they encourage their
Provinces to take up Arms for the defense of their Liberties or Religion? Did
they seize upon or stop his Revenues? or annihilate his Power? did they
estrange themselves from his Presence? Murder his Messengers. Or would they
have slighted his gracious Offers? No, being called by their Prince, they came;
and being commanded to give actual obedience to his unlawful commands,
observe the modesty of their first answer; We are not careful to answer thee
in this Dan. 3. 19.
matter; and being urged, ma^ke their pious Resolution in the second: Be it
known, O King, we will not serve thy Gods, nor Dan. 3. 18.
worship the golden Image which thou have set up.

The King threatens the Furnace, they yield their bodies to the Fornane and
say, God whom we serve will deliver us out of thy Dan. 3. 17.
hands, and not, he will deliver Thee into our hands. They expect deliverance
rather in their passive Obedience, then in their actual resistance.

But they were few in number, and their Forces not considerable. Ob.


Admit that, which all Histories deny. Was not God as able Ans.
to subdue Him with so few, as to deliver them from so many? Had their
weakness less Reason (for the Cause of Gods apparent dishonor) to expect a
miraculous assistance in those days of frequent miracles, then we after so
long a cessation of Miacles? Gods glory will not be vindicated by unlawful
means, or unwarrantable proceedings.

I, but we take up Arms, not against the King, but against his evil
Counselors. Ob.


Adherents ye mean. A rare distinction! And, tell me; whose power have his
Adherents? The Kings: By which appears, Ans.
ye take up Arms against the Kings power; He that resists the power (it is
not said the Prince) shall receive damation. Eccl. 8.
Again, Where the word of a King is, there is power. God joined the King and
his power, and who dare separate them? They that take up Arms against the
Parliaments power (you say) take up Arms against the Parliament; do not they
then that take up Arms against the Kings power, by the same reason, take up
Arms against the King? Now, look back upon your intricate distinction, and
blush.

But, if the King betray the Trust reposed in him by his Subjects, Ob.
they may suspend their obedience and resist him.

Kings are Gods Vicegerents, and cannot be compelled to give Ans.
an account to any, but to God. Against thee, against thee only Psalm. 51. 4.
have I sinned: That is to thee, to thee only must I give an account. Though I
have sinned against ^riah, by my Act; and against my people, by my Example, yet
against Thee have I only sinned. You cannot deprive, or limit them in what you
never gave them. God gave them, their Power, and who are thou that dare
resist it? By me Kings Reign. Prove. ^, 15. Ob.


But, his Crown was set upon his Head by his Subjects upon such and such
conditions.

Why was the penalty, upon the fail, not expressed them? Ans.
Coronation is but a humane Ceremony. And was he not Proclaimed before he was
crowned? Proclaimed? But what? A King? And did not you at the same instant by
relative consequence, proclaim your selves Subjects? And shall Subjects
condition with their King, or will Kings bind themselves to their Subjects,
upon the sorfeiture of their power, after they have received their Regal
Authority?

But the King has, by Writ, given his power to his Parliament, Ob.
and therefore what they do, they do by virtue of his Power.

The King, by his Writ, gives not away his power, but communicates Ans.
it. By the virtue of which Writ, they are called ad tractandum and consulendum
de arduis Regni, to treat and advise concerning the difficulties of the
Kingdom: Here is all the power the Writ gives them, and where they exceed,
they usurp the Kings power, being both against the Law of God, and the
constitutions of the Kingdom.

Well, but in case of necessity, when Religion and Liberty lie at the stake,
the Constitutions of the Kingdom (for the preservation Ob.
of the Kingdom) may suffer a Dispensation.

Admit that: But what necessity may dispense with the violation of the Law of
God? the deviation where from is evil, and Ans.
Thou shall do no evil that good may come thereon.

But, we take not Arms against the King, but only to bring Delinquents to
condign punishment. Ob.


And, who are they? even those that take up Arms for the Ans.
King; which an unrepealed Statute, 11. Hen. 7. acquits. But, admit Statutes
may be broken, and you seek to punish them; Who gave you the power so to do?
The Law: And what Law denies the King power to pardon Delinquents? God that
has put power into the hand of Majesty, has likewise planted mercy in the
heart of Soveraigntie: And, will ye take away both his birthright and his
Blessing also? Take heed, you do not slight that, which one day may prove your
Sanctuary.

But, the King, being a M^^r Monarch, is bound to his Ob.
own Laws.

There be two sorts of Laws, directive and coercive: As to Ans.
the first, he is only bound to make his account to God; so to the second, he
is only liable to the hand of God: who shall say unto him, what do thou?

But Kings now adays have not so absolute a power, as the Ob.
Kings mentioned in the Scripture.

Who limited it? God or man? Man could not limit the Ans
Power he never gave: if God, show me where; till then, this objection is
frivolous.

But, when Kings and their assistance make an offensive, and a Ob.
destructive war against their Parliament, may they not then take up
defensive Arms?

It is no offensive War for a King to endeavor the Recoverie Ars.
of his surrepted right; however, are not the Members of a Parliament Subjects
to their Sovereign? If not, who are they? If Subjects, ought they not to be
subject? Gods people, the Jews, that were to be destroyed by the Kings
Command, Hester 8.
neither did not durst make a defensive War against his abused power, until
they first obtained the Kings Consent.

But admit it lawful, (though neither granted nor warranted) that subjects may
upon such terms make a defensive War; does it not quite cross the nature
of a defensive War, to Assail, pursue, and dis-possesse?

When you shot five pieces of Ordnance, before one was returned at Edgehill,
was that defensive? When you besieged Redding, which you after slighted, was
that defensive? When you affronted Basing-house, was that defensive?

The warrantable weapons against an angry King, are Exhortation, Disswasion,
wise reprenfe (by such as are nearest to him) Petition, Prayer, and Flight. All
other weapons will at last wound them that use them.

The second Example was left us out of the New Testament, Example 2.
by Him that is the true president of all holy obedience, our blessed Savior;
whose humility and sufferance was set before us as a Copy for all generations
to practice by. 1 Pet. 2.


The temporal kingdom of the Jews, successively usurpt by those two heathen
Princes, Augustus and Tiberius, two Contemporaries, was his natural
Birthright, descended from his Type, and Auncestor King David. Had not he as
great an Interest in that Crown, as we have in this Commonwealth? Was not He
as tender-eyed toward his own natural people, as we to one another?

Was not the Truth as dear to Him, (who was the very Truth) and the way to it
as direct to Him (that was the only Way) as to us?

Was not He the great Reformer?

Had the Sword been a necessary stickler in Reformation, how happened it that
he mistook his weapon so? In stead of a trumpet, he lifted up his Voice.

Were Plots, Policies, Propositions, Prophanations, Plunderings, Militatie
Proparations, his way to Reformation? Were they not his own words, He that
takes up the Sword, shall perish Mat. 26. 52
by the Sword? Nor was it want of strength, that he reformed not in a Martial
way: Could not he command more then twelve legions of Angels?

Or had he pleased to use the Arm of flesh; could not he that raised the dead,
raise a considerable Army? Sure, S. John the Baptist would have ventured his
head upon a fairer Quarrel, and S. Peter drawn his sword to a bloodier end; No
question, but S. Paul, the twelve Apostles and Disciples would have proved as
tough Colonels as your associated Essex Priests did Captains; and doubtless
S. Peter, who converted 3000 in one day, would have raised a strong Army in six.

Our blessed Savior well knew, that Caesar came not thither without divine
permission; In respect whereof, He became obedient to the very shadow of a
King; and whom he actively resisted not, he passively obeyed.

I, but there was a necessity of his obedience, and subjection, to Ob.
make him capable of a shameful death.

No, his obedience, as well as death, was voluntary; which makes you guilty
of a shameful argument. Ans.


But, He was a single person; We a representative body: what Ob.
is unexpedient in the one, is lawful in the other.

Worse and worse! If our blessed Savior be not Representative, Ans.
Tell me where of art thou a Member? woe be to that Body politic, which
endeavors not to be conformed according to the Head Mystical.

He preached Peace; Your Martial Ministers (by what authority they best know)
proclaim War: He, Obedience; They, Sedition: He, Truth; They, Lies: He,
Order; They, Confusion: He, Blessedness to the Peacemakers; They, courage to
the Persecutors: He, Blessedness to the persecuted; They brand them with
Malignitie that call them blessed.

God was not heard in the whirlewind, but in the still voice.

But, his thoughts are not as our thoughts, neither are our ways like his
ways.

But, whence proceeds all this? even from a viperous Generation (which has
long nested in this unhappie Island) and those increased multitudes of simple
souls, seduced by their sceming sanctity, who taking advantage of our late
too great abuse of Ceremonies, are turned desperate enemies to all Order and
Discipline, being out of charity with the very Lords Prayer, because it comes
within the Popish Liturgy.

How many of these have lately challenged the name of sanctified Vessels, for
containing the poison of unnatural Sedition? How many of these have usurpt the
style of well-affected, for dis-affecting Peace? How many of these have
counterfeited the honor of good Patriots, for largely contributing toward the
Ruins of their Country? How many does this Army consist of? How for their
sakes is Blasphemy connived at! Sacrilege permitted! How, for their
encouragement, are Lies and brassebrow'd Impudencies invented, nay published
(nay published in their very Pulpits) and tolerated (if not commanded) even by
them, who (pe^chance, were this quarrel ended) would throw the first stone at
them! How many of our Learned, Religious, and Orthodox Divines (who by their
able Tongues, and Pens, have defended and maintained the true ancient and
Catholic Faith and vindicated the Reformed Religion from the aspersions of
her potent Adversaries) are now plundered in their Goods, sequestered in their
Livings, imprisoned in their Persons, (if not forced in their Consciences)
whilst their Wives and poor Children begging their Bread, are left to the
mercy of these, (...) merciful times; even for the encouragement of them,
whose pedantick learning durst never show her ridiculous face before an easy
School-man, whose livelyhoods they unworthily usurp, not dispensing the bread
of life but the darnell of giddy-headed fancy and sedition, abhorring the way
to peace, and maligning those that ensue it.

I, but we desire Peace, so we may have Truth too. Ob.


What mean ye by having Truth? The preservation of the old Truth, or the
Institution of a New? Ans.


If ye fear the alteration of the Old, (having your Sovereigns Oath, which you
dare not believe) what other assurance can you have?

The Blood you shed, is certain; the change you fear, is uncertain: It is no
wisdom to apply a desperate Remedy to a suspected disease.

If the enjoyment of Peace depends upon a full assurance of Truth, our discords
may bear an everlasting date: God has threatened to remove his Candlestick and
our wickedness justly fears it; And so long as we fear it, shall we abjure
Peace, the blessed means to prevent it? He that seeks to settle Truth by the
sword, distracts it.

Or, is it a Truth ye want? If so, Is it of Doctrine, or of Discipline? If of
doctrine, Actum est de nostra Religione, Farewell our Religion. Or, is it of
Discipline? Discipline is but a Ceremony. And did the Lord of the Sabbath
dispense with a moral Law, for the preservation of an Oxes life, or an Asses?
and shall we, to alter some few indifferent Ceremonies (allowed by the
Parliaments of three pious and wise Princes, and the practice of many holy
Martyrs, who sealed the true Protestant Religion with their Blood) cry down
Peace, and shed the blood of many thousand Christians?

Our seduced Protestants will have no set Forms of Prayer but what proceed
immediately from their own Fancies. This is their Truth.

Our Semi-separatists will hear our Sermons (if they like the Teacher) but no
Divine Service. This is their Truth.

Our Separatists will not communicate in our Churches, nor join in our
Congregations. That is their Truth.

Our Anabaptists will not baptize till years of discretion, and re-baptize.
That is their Truth.

Our Antinomians will have no Repentance. This is their truth.

Our Independents will have an universal Paritie; This their Truth.

Good God, when shall we have Peace, if not till all these Truths meet!

But, Christ says, I come not to bring Peace, but the Sword: Ob.
therefore, for the propagation of Peace, it is lawful to use the Mar. 10. 34.
Sword.

So, He is termed a stumbling block, and does that warrant us Ans.
to stumble? So, He says, All you shall be offended because of me; 1 Co. 1.
23. Mat. 26. 31. Romans 7. 7.
and does this patronize our Offenses? The Law is good and just: Because then
we had not known sin but by the Law, is it therefore lawful for us to
sin? God forbid.

Our Savior brings the Sword among us, as wholesome meat brings sickness to a
weakly sick stomach, or physic to a body abounding with Humors; not
intentionally, but occasionally.

Thus, by your erroneous and weak mistakes, you make the Prince of Peace the
Patron of your unnatural War; and the God of Truth, the president of your
unexamined errors.

But, Almighty God, the Champion of his own Truth, and maintainer of his own
Cause, has (to mere then common admiration) appeared in this great enterprise.

He that delivered Isreal's handful from the hand of Pharoahs Host, has showed
himself in the (almost incredible) proceedings of this heaven-displeasing
War; the brief relation whereof may move those hearts, that are not seated,
or stone, to melt into a thankful acknowledgement of his Power, and remain as
Monuments of his Mercy, that children (yet unborne) may say hereafter, God was
here: viz.

The two Houses of Parliament made first a general seizure of all the Arms,
Ammunition, Castles, Forts, Magazines, and Ships, (being the whole visible
strength of this unhappie Kingdom) to whom (having now settled the Militia,
both by Sea and Land, in their own hands) tides of Proposition- gold came in
upon the Public Faith; Money (like blood from the Liver, conveyed through
all the veins) issued to make a large supply, and where it stopped a while,
mountains of massy Plate, from the vast Goblet to the slender Thimble, this
Faith removed into their safe possession: And when the great Milch-Cow began to
slake, they pressed her nipples, and by hard streyning renewed the stream. As
Physicians evacuate the Body, sometimes by Vomit, sometimes by Purge, sometimes
by Phlebotomie, sometimes by sweating, sometimes fluxing, sometimes
diuretically, yet purge but the same peccant humor; So did they, first by
Proposition, then by way of Contribution, now by way of Loan, then by way of
Subsidy (no less then 50 at one time) here by way of Assessement, there by
way of Twentieth part, then by way of Excise, one while by way of
Sequestration, then by way of Plunder, but still the issue, MONEY: And to work
the better upon the Affections of the Multitude, all this for the behoof of
King and Parliament, for the pretended defense of (God knows what) Religion;
insomuch, that men came in like Swarms to the next Tree, or rather like
treacherous Decoys, with their innocent multitude, into the Net, and Horses
without number.

Thus were they supplied with all necessaries which the Arm of flesh could
provide for the waging of an unconquerable War, whereon the Money already
expended, makes no less figures then 17. Millions Ster. besides the Revenues
of the King Queen, Prince, Duke of York, and the whole Estates of all such as
take up Arms against them, besides free Quarter, and Soldiers yet unpayd. His
Majesty on the other side, driven away with a few Attendants, not having among
them so many Swords and Pistols as these had Cannons, wanting both Money,
Horses and Ammution, only what he received from the piety of some believing
Subjects, (whose ears were Pamphlet-proofe against all defamations, and
scandals cast upon sacred Majesty) finding slender Provision in his own
Dominions; and that stopped or seized, which came from foreign parts. No
Shipping, but what he purchased with the precious and extreme hazard of his few
(but valiant) Subjects: No Arms, but what he gained by the courageous venture
of his own neglected life, the subject of our cortinuall Prayers. Yet, has
God covered his head in the day of battle, and blessed him with such success,
that He is (by the Divine Providence) become a great Master of the Field, and
almost able to maintain fight with his own Ships at Sea.

The God of Heaven bless him, and prosper him, and make his days as the days
of Heaven, that being here the Faiths defender, he may still be defended by the
object of that Faith.

Nor is the providentiall hand of God more visible in prospering him then in
punishing his Enemies, whose ruins may remain as Sea-markes to us, and
Pyramids of Gods Power, whereof a touch.

Sir John Hotham, then Governor of Hull, who first defied and dared his
Sovereign to his face, what is become of him? How stands he a Mark betwixt
two dangers, having nothing left him but guile enough to make him capable of a
desperate Fortune?

Master Hampden, that first waged Law and then War against his own natural
Prince has not he (since these unhappy troubles began) bin first punished with
the loss of children, nay visited to the third Generation, to the weakening (if
not ^^ining) of his Family, and then with the loss of his own life, in the
same place where he first took up arms against his gracious Sovereign? was
it not remarkable that the Lord Brook who so often excepted against that clause
in the Lyturgie, (From sudden death good Lord deliver us) was slain so
suddenly? who was so severe an enemy against Peace should perish in the same
War, ^e so encouraged? Who, so bitterly inveighed against Episcopal
Government, should be so shot dead out of a Cathedral Church? who laboring to
put out the left eye of established Government, his left eye, and life were both
put out together?

How is Duke Ham^l^on (scarce warm in his new honor) taken in his own ^^re,
having entangled his Lord and Master in so many inconveniences?

How is Holland, whose livelihood was created by his Sovereigns favors,
branded with a double treachery, and like a Shittlecock fallen at the first
return, and scarce able to raise himself by a sorry Declaration?

Is not Bristoll Fines (who at his Council of War condemned and executed
innocent blood) himself condemned, (pleading innocence) at a Council of War,
from the mouth of his own General, though finding (perchance) more Mercy then
he either deserved, or showed? But that blood that cried to him for Mercy, will
cry to Heaven for vongeance.

And are not many more ripe for the same Judgment, whose notorious Crimes have
branded them for their respective Punishments?

How many of those blood-preaching Ministers have died expectorating Blood,
whilst others at this time laboring under the same Disease, can find no Art to
promise a Recoverie? All whom I leave to possible Repentance, and pass over.

Cromwell, that professed desacer of Churches (witness Peterborough, and
Lincoln, etc.) and Rifler of the Monuments of the dead, whose prphane Troopers
(if Fame has not forgot to speak a Truth) watered their Horses at the Font, and
fed them at the Holy Table, that Cromwell.

Sands, whose sacrilegious Troopers committed such barbarous insolences, with
his (at least) connivence, in the Church of Canterbury, and used such inhumane
tortures on the tender breasts of women, to force confession of their hidden
goods, the golden subjects of their Robbery.

What can the first expect, and what reward the other has found, I neither
prophecy nor judge. If these and such as they, do fight for the Beformed
Religion, God deliver every good man both from them, and it: Cursed be their
wrath, for it is sierce; and their anger, for it is cruel.

These (and of such many) are they, that whilst they pretend a Reformation,
need first to be reformed.

Nor do I, in tasking this Army of such impious barbarismes, excuse or rather
not condemn the other; whereof no question, too great a number are as equally
profane; whilst all together make up one body of wickedness, to bring a ruin
on this miserable Kingdom; for whose impieties his Majesty has so often
suffered.

I but his Majesty's Army (besides those looser sorts of people) Ob.
consills of numerous Papists, the utter enemies of true religion.

To whom the King has sworn his protection, from those he Ans.
may require assistance.

But, unto all his people as well Papists as Protestants, he has sworn his
Protection; therefore from all his subjects, as well Papists as Protestants he
may require assistance.

Neither does he call in Papists as Papists, to maintain Religion (as himself
has often manifested) but as subjects to subdue, or at least qualify Sedition.

The aid of the subject, is either in his person or in his purse; both are
requirable to the service of a Sovereign.

Put case his Majesty should use the assistance of none but Protestants; Tell
me, would ye not be apt to cavil that he is favorable to the Papists; neither
willing to endanger their persons, nor endamage their purses; or, at least,
that they are reserved for a last blow?

Or, in case Papists should largely under-write to your Propositions, send in
Horses, Arms, or other Provisions, would you not accept it, and for its sake
their persons too?

Are you so strict in your Preparations, as to catechize every soldier? Or, to
examine first every Officers Religion? Or, having the proffer of a good Popish,
or debaucht Commander, tell me, should he be denied his Commission?

Remember Sir Arthur Ashton, whom His Majesty entertains by your Example.

These things indifferently considered, it will manifestly appear, that the
honest-minded vulgar aremeerly seduced, under the color of piety, to be so
impious, as by paysoning every action of their lawful Prince, to foster their
implicit Rebellion.

But, in case, your side should prosper, and prevail, what then? would then
our Misertes be at an end? Reason tells us, No, God keeps us from the
experience: Think you, that Government (whether new, or reformed) which is set
up by the sword, must not be maintained by the sword? And how can Peace and
Plenty be consistent with perpetual Garrisons, which must be maintained with
a perpetual charge; besides the continual excursions, and conniv'd-at
injuries committed by Soldiers, judge you?

Or, put the case, this necessary Consequence could be avoided, think you the
ambition of some new Statesmen accustomed to such Arbitrary, and necessitated
power, on the one side, and the remaining loyalty of His Majesty's
dis-inherited Subjects watching all opportunities to right their injured
Sovereign, and themselves, on the other side, would not raise perpetual
tempests in this Kingdom?

Or, if such an (almost) unpreventable evil should not ensue, think you, such
swarms of Sectaries sweat for nothing? Are their purses so apt to bleed to no
end? Will not their costs, and pains expect, at least, a congratulatory
connivence in the freedom of their consciences? Or, will their swords, now in
the strong possession of so great a multitude, know the way into their quiet
scabbards, without the expected liberty of their Religions? And, can that
liberty produce any thing but an established disorder? And is not disorder the
mother of Anarchie? and that, of Ruin?

Open then your eyes, closed with crasse, and wilful blindness and consider,
and prevent that, which your continued disobedience will unavoidably repent too
late.

But, the truth is, They are all Papists, by your Brand, that comply not in
this action with you: Admit it were so; Are not Papists as tolerable for His
Majesty, as Anabaptists, Brownists, Separatists, Atheists, Antinomians, Turks,
and indeed all Religions and Factions, nay Papists too, for His Subjects? These
of His Majesty's side come freely, out of their Allegiance, as Subjects: Yours,
are preached in, coming out of obstinacy, as Rebels: They, at their own
charges proportionable to their Abilities; These like Judas, selling their
Sovereigns Blood for ill paid wages: Yet, both sides pretend a Quarrel for
the true Protestant Religion.

Good God! What a monstrous Religion is this, that seeks protection from the
implacable opposition of her two Champions!

His Majesty protests to maintain it: The two Houses protest to maintain it:
O, for an Oedipus to read this Riddle!

His Majesty adds one Clause more, wherein if the other Party would agree, the
work would be at an end, which is: According to the established Constitutions,
by Oath taken by him at his Coronation; And there the two Houses leave him
contending for a yet undetermined alteration.

And, for my part, I dare not conceive such evil of the Lords Anointed, and my
gracious Sovereign, as to fear him perjured.

Hatn not His Majesty, in the presence of that God, by whom he reigns,
imprecated the Curse of Heaven on him and his Royal Posterity, (Sub Sigillo
sacrament. too) if He, to his utmost, maintain not the true Protestant
Religion exercised in that blessed Queens days, and propagated by the blood
of so many glorious Martyrs (at which time God blessed this Island in so high a
measure) if he preserve not the just Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty
of the Subject?

Nay, more, did not his Majesty so promise the severe execution of the Statute
against all Recusants, that if he failed, he desired not the aid of his good
Subjects?

What interior person would not think his Reputation wronged, not to take up
considence upon such terrible terms? What notorious evil has his Majesty
perpetrated to quench the sparkles of a Common Charity?

Consider, O, Consider; He acts his part before the King of Kings, whose eye is
more especially upon Him; He acts his part before his fellow Princes, to whom
he has declared this his Imprecation; He acts his part before his Subjects,
whose stricter hand weighs his pious words with too unequal Balances.

Were he the acknowledger of no God, yet the Princes of the earth, (if guilty
of such a Perjurie) would abhor him. Or, were all the Princes of the earth,
blind, deaf, or partial, would not he think his Crown a burden to be worn
upon his perjured brow before his own abused people? Or, (having renounced his
Subjects aid, upon his fail) could he expect that loyalty, which now he wants
upon a mere suspicion?

But: He is a Prince, whom God has crowned with graces above his fellows; A
Prince, whom, for his Piety, few Ages could parallel.

What Vices of the times have branded his Repute? His Youth, high diet,
strength of body, and Sovereign Power might have inclined, and warpt him to
luxurious vanity, as well as other Monarchs, whose effeminacles have enerv'd
the strength of their declining Kingdoms; How many would have held it a
Preferment to be Attorney to His Royal Lust, or Secretary to His li^some Sin?
Yet, he remains a president of unblemisht Chastity.

He might have pleased and pamperd up his wanton Palate with the choice of
curious Wives, to lighten Cares which wait upon the Regal Diadem; Yet, he
continues the pattern of a chaste Sobriety: He might have magnifyed his
Mercy, and sold his Justice, to reward a Service, in pardoning offenses
(committed by those of near relation) yet He abides the example of inexorable
Justice.

These and many other eminent Graces, and illustrious Virtues can claim no
Birth from Flesh and Blood; especially, in those, whose pupillages are
strangers to Correction; Nor is it safe Divinity, to acknowledge such high
Gifts, from any hand, but Heaven.

Which, being so, my Conscience, and Religion tells me, that Almighty God, (who
is all perfection) will not leave a work so forward. so imperfect; but, will,
from day to day, still add and add to his transcendent virtues, till he
appear the Glory of the World; and, after many years be crowned in the World
of Glory.

Martial. llb. 8. Ep. 66.

Rerum prima salus, and una Caesar.

Postscript to the Reader.
NOw thou have heard the Harmony of Scriptures, without Corruption; and the
Language of Reason, without Sophistry.

Thou have not only heard Divine Precepts, but those Precepts backed with holy
Examples: Neither those out of the Old Testament alone, but likewise out of the
New. Being now no Matter lest for thy Exceptions, prevaricate no longer with
thy own soul: And, in the fear of God, I now adjure thee once again, as thou will answer before the Tribunal at the dreadful and terrible day; that thou
faithfully examine, and ponder the plain Texts which thou have read, and
yielding due obedience to them, stop thine ears against all sinister
expositions; and remember, that historical Scripture will admit no
allegorical interpretations. If any thing, in this Treatise, shall deserve thy
Answer, do it punctually, briefly, plainly, and with meeknes; If, by direct
Scripture, thou can (without wresting) refute my Error, thou shall reform,
and save thy Brother; If not, recant thine, and hold it no dishonor to take
that shame to thy self, which brings Glory to thy God.

1 PET. 3. 15.

Be always ready to give an answer to every one that asks you a reason, with
meeknes and fear.

FINIS.

