A SPIRITUAL TREASURE Containing Our OBLIGATIONS TO GOD, AND THE VIRTUES
Necessary to A Perfect Christian.

Author Written in French By John Quarre, Englished By Sir THOMAS STANLEY, Knight.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Thomas Dring, at the George in Fleet Street, near
Saint Dunstans Church, 1664.

To the LADY STANLEY.
MADAM,
WHAT You here receive, is due only to Your self, it being the Product of that
contemplative retirement to which my dear Father resigned the two latest years
of his life; The Author is highly esteemed in his own Country; and has met
with so good Reception in ours also, that he already sees a Second Impression,
which in this Age, not a little commends a Treatise of this Nature: Upon this
occasion I was solicited by the Stationer to acquaint the Reader (by whom it
has been so kindly entertained) with the Name of the Person to whom he is
indebted for the English Edition: And having herein satisfied the Importunity
of the One, and the Curiosity of the Other, it rests only I present it to Your
Ladyship, together with the humble Duty of.

Madam, Your Ladyships Obedient Son, Thomas Stanley.

PREFACE.
UNder the name of Sprirituall Treasure, behold the Image of a perfect
Christian, which I here present thee, Devout Reader. It has taken the name of
Treasure, because it contains, as in a hidden mine, the highest divine truths
of Christian Piety; it is a Pourtract of Perfection, the Image of a true
Christian, or all which the Son of God has left to his Church. And those
which I propose to you in this Treasure, represent a lively Image of that
perfection whereto we are called, and, by the grace of Christianity conducted.
Perhaps you may remember that this Book has heretofore appeared under the same
name, but it was upon another design. For then it treated only of some
particular Virtues, such only as serve to subject the soul to the guidance of
God, and the spirit of grace* It had then no other object, but the resignation
of the Creature to the will and work of the Creator. Now it is universal, and
withdrawn from a limited subject, speaks in general, explains the Principles
of Christianity, and describes the principal Virtues necessary for a perfect
Christian. As for the style, it is concise, confining it self to the truth
which it exposes the most plainly that may be, despising all Ornaments of
words, since truth has so much luster of it self, as she need not borrow of
others. The World perhaps will not hearken to it, or, suffering it to speak,
will not understand it, for its Doctrine is too divine, its Principles too
high: That which it proposes is wholly contrary to what the World professes.
And it is much to be feared that many will dispute it, considering that
falsehood and malice have taken such deep root in the greater part, as loving
nothing but vanity, and unwilling to consent to truth. We live in an age so
corrupt, that even Christians many times fear to be good, least they should be
persecuted, and are ashamed to appear virtuous, least they should be derided.

Hardly can it promise it self a better reception amongst them that make
profession of Piety, for there are many that seek nothing but their own
satisfaction in the most holy things; self-love has such absolute power over
souls, that they flatter themselves in every thing, believing all to be good
which is agreeable to them: and on the other side, seeming Devotions, have so
much applause among men, that it will be hard to persuade the contrary. So that
our perfect Christian who speaks here purely of Truth, and truly of Piety,
cannot easily avoid the various censures of men. For as he speaks Christianly
(for his style is in the spirit) so he condemns freely all that is not worthy
of God in the purity of the spirit; which may appear strange, and those who
confide too much in themselves, esteeming nothing but their own actions, will
soon condemn this manner of Discourse. But what remedy? shall we therefore
injure Truth? no, she will appear before the eyes of men, in despite of the
World, and although she may meet with spirits little capable to receive her,
yet it is always good to expose the Image to the view even of her greatest
Enemies, for by this means they will be forced, seeing her, to confess they
have no virtue, that they walk in the night of untruths, and perhaps they will
apprehend their own misery, and be afraid to loose themselves.

And if there are any who think themselves already arrived at the highest point
of perfection, flattering themselves in their own esteem, when they shall here
consider the excellencies of Christianity, the purity of the spirit of grace,
and admire the designs of God upon souls, and see what is necessary for a
perfect Christian, they will open those eyes which self-love had bewitched, and
acknowledge that their actions come far short of their own esteem of them; and
then humbling themselves even to the center of their nothing: they will resolve
to seek God, to serve him in spirit and truth, after a manner worthy of God.

However they who take the pains to read this little work will see, that many
deceive themselves to their great mischief, and will learn that it is not a
small matter to gain Heaven (for to such only is Paradise open) and that there
is required more purity and virtue then we ordinarily propose. For if the life
of a true Christian be a life of God in man; if true perfection be an amorous
possession of God, what purity, what virtue must there be in him who will
possess so rich a Treasure, and pretend to an estate of divine?

This is a point you must consider of (friendly Reader) as being that which
ought to be the only object of your actions. For if you will open your eyes to
see what God requires of you; if you will rest your thoughts upon the
excellencies of the state of Christianity, you will learn that your heart must
be the Throne of the most holy Trinity, who will establish his Kingdom therein;
your Soul a Heaven where God will glorify himself; your life, the life of God
who lives in you, that you may reign with him. To conclude, you shall know that
you are only in the World to please God, and to do his will in the purity of
his spirit always holy: is not this an affair of great importance? If for
your satisfaction and profit you desire to comprehend what I say, and to know
the motives and obligations that you have to love and serve God perfectly. Read
the two first parts of this Work; the third and fourth show you the way you
must keep, and the Truths that are necessary to live a good Christian: the last
gives you a pattern of true piety. Read and you shall learn how to be a good
Christian.

A TABLE of the several Chapters treated of in this Book.
The FIRST PART. Of the Divine Prerogatives whereunto man is raised by the
State and Grace of Christianity.
The first Prerogative.
CHAP. I. How by Baptism Man is appropriated to God, and consecrated by the
blessed Trinity. Page 1 CHAP. II. How holy the life of a Christian ought to be,
consecrated to God by Baptism. 10
The second Prerogative.
CHAP. III. Of the Filial adoption of God, whereto all Christians are called.
16 CHAP. IV. Of the uses that Christians ought to make of filial adoption,
whereto they are advanced by Baptism. 21 CHAP. V. What the Actions of
Christians ought to be. 27
The third Prerogative.
CHAP. VI. Of the happy Commerce and Society that Jesus Christ will have with
Christians by the Mystery of the Incarnation. 36 CHAP. VII. Of the uses
Christians ought to make of Grace proceeding from the Mystery of the
Incarnation. 42
The fourth Prerogative.
CHAP. VIII. Of another kind of Society and Union of Jesus Christ with
Christians, by the Sacrament of the Eucharist. 47 CHAP. IX. The Design of Jesus
Christ upon Christians in this most high Sacrament of the Eucharist. 53
The SECOND PART. Wherein are proposed the sundry Motives which oblige
Christians to Perfection.
CHAP. I. The Obligation that we have to acquire true Virtues, wherein consists
the life of the Soul, and the inward life of a Christian. 65 CHAP. II. That the
possession of God is the end of a Christian life, whereto we cannot arrive, but
by the grace of Jesus Christ. 73 CHAP. III. Of the practice and means whereby
we may arrive to the possession of God, of his grace and spirit. 78
The first Motive.
CHAP. IV. That by Creation man is obliged to tend to this perfection, and to
resign himself to God. 84
The second Motive.
CHAP. V. That Man, in as much as he is a Sinner, and the child of Adam, is
obliged to seek God as the only remedy to his evils. 91 CHAP. VI. Of the state
of Man after the sin of Adam, and of the need he has of his God. 99
The third Motive.
CHAP. VII. That a Christian is a Member of Jesus Christ, and as such he must
be ruled by the Spirit, and live the life of Jesus Christ. 108 CHAP. VIII.
Practices to help a Christian to live in subjection to Grace, and the spirit of
Jesus. 115
The fourth Motive.
CHAP. IX. That this Precept, to love God, does oblige us to perfection, and
makes us go out of our selves to be God's. 121
The conclusion of the second Part.
The care and vigilance which a Soul must have which seeks perfection, and
would live in true subjection to the grace and conduct of Jesus Christ. 131
The THIRD PART. Proposing diverse Dispositions and Virtues necessary for a
Christian to arrive to that perfection whereto he is obliged by Christianity.
CHAP. I. What those Dispositons are, and how necessary they are to be practice
of Virtue. 138 CHAP. II. Several practices, whereof we may make use to attain
Christian Virtues. 147 CHAP. III. That the adherence of a Soul to Jesus Christ
is the most perfect means to possess all Christian virtue. 156 CHAP. IV. The
means whereby we may arrive to the adherence of our souls with God, and the
obstacle which hinder it. 163
The first Disposition.
CHAP. V. Of the spirit of Faith, and the necessity thereof. 169 CHAP. VI. Of
the use of Faith, and how we may practice it. 176 CHAP. VII Of the effects that
Faith produces in our souls, and of the esteem of God. 184
The second Disposition.
CHAP. VIII. Of Humility, and the means to obtain it. 192 CHAP. IX. Of the
knowledge of God and our Selves. 197
The third Disposition.
CHAP. X. Of an effectual desire to be God's. 204
The fourth Disposition.
CHAP. XI. Of the purity of the Hearth. 208
The fifth Disposition.
CHAP. XII. Of Self-denial, and the necessity thereof. 220 CHAP. XIII. What
abnegation is, and the means to attain it. 227
The abridgment of the third Part.
CHAP. XIV. Treating of the dependence of the Soul upon God. 237
The FOURTH PART. Shows how we must guide our selves in all occurrences, and
in all estates of humane life.
CHAP. I. Of the care a Christian ought to have to perfect his exterior. 246
CHAP. II. That in all our Actions we must follow the conduct of God. 256 CHAP.
III. That a Christian must do all his Actions for love of God, and for God. 266
CHAP. IV. Of the complacency and self-satisfaction which draws us from the pure
regard of God, and of the purity of intentions which must be in our actions.
274 CHAP. V. Of the care a Christian ought to have, to do all his Actions
according to his vocation, and to maintain himself in the order and conduct of
God. 282 CHAP VI. What the Directors of souls ought to be. 290 CHAP. VII. Of
the fidelity of the soul, and of its necessity in the ways of grace, and the
actions of a Christian. 298 CHAP. VIII. Of Infidelity to grace, and how a man
ought to live in his Vocation. 306 CHAPTER IX. How the Christian ought to comport
himself in the exterior use of all things. 314 CHAP. X. Of Sufferings, and the
esteem we ought to have of them, 260 CHAP. XI. How the fear of Suffering draws
us from the way of perfection. 336 CHAP. XII. Of the Dispositions wherewith we
must bear Sufferings, and all the adversities of humane life 346 CHAP. XIII.
How we ought to suffer in the spirit of Christianity. 356 CHAP. XIV. That we
must suffer out of a zeal to the Justice of God. 367 CHAP. XV. The continuance
of the precedent Chapter and of the spirit of repentance. 274 CHAP. XVI. The
abridgment of the fourth Part, treating of Christian grace. 384 The SEQUEL.
290
The FIFTH PART. Treating of true Piety, and he more particular Duties of a
Christian toward Jesus Christ our Lord.
CHAP. I. What Devotion is, and wherein true Piety consists. 396 CHAP. II.
The necessity we have to be Jesus Christ's, if we would attain true Devotion.
406 CHAP. III. Of Piety to Jesus Christ and its principal effects. 414 CHAP.
IV. The right which the Son of God has to us; Motives obliging us to be his,
and to adhere to him by true piety. 423
The Continuation.
CHAP. V. Of the Motives which oblige us to belong to Jesus, and to serve him
by true piety. 428 CHAP. VI. Of the state of Subjection to Jesus Christ,
considered as the principle of Christian Piety. 437 CHAP. VII. Containing
certain interior acts for those souls who are desirous to be established and
confirmed in true piety. 442 CHAP. VIII. That an adherence to Jesus Christ by
true Piety, makes us partakers of the several conditions of his life. 450 CHAP.
IX. Certain dispositions necessary for the devout soul that would participate
of the grace and estates of the life of Jesus Christ. 457 CHAP. X. That
Christian piety obliges us to submit our life and actions to the honor of
Christ. 465 CHAP. XI. The Use and Practice of what has been proposed. 473
CHAP. XII. How the Christian that seeks true piety, is obliged to imitate Jesus
Christ. 481 CHAP. XIII. The Practice of what has been proposed in the
imitation of Jesus Christ 489 CHAP. XIV. Of Temptations and Oppositions
happening in the way to perfection, and the exercises of Piety 498 CHAP. XV. In
what Disposition the Christian ought to be, that he yield not to such
temptations as occurr in the exercises of piety. 507 CHAP. XVI. Of Temptations,
and the advantages a Christian ought to make of them. 512 CHAP. XVII. Of
Resignations in Temptation. 519 CHAP. XVIII. Diverse Uses that may be made of
Temptation. 525
The End.
SPIRITUAL TREASURE. The first Part. Of the Divine Prerogatives whereunto man
is raised by the State and Grace of Christianity.
The first Prerogative.
CHAP. I. How by Baptism Man is appropriated to God, and consecrated by the
blessed Trinity.
BE ye perfect, Mat. 5.48.
even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect: These are holy words, words
of truth, pronunced by the Holy of holies, the God of Truth; words that import
the beginning and eminency of the estate which we are to attain; words worthy
to be engraved not upon the fronts of our house as a celebrious Sentence of the
Ancients; nor printed in our foreheads, in great Characters, like the Law of
the Jews, But in the center of our souls, and bottom of our spirits. For in
these divine words, we behold as in a table brought from heaven, what we are,
and what we ought to be. We see that we are the image of God by creation, and
ought to be his resemblance by sanctification. Our soul bearing the image of
God, is capable of God himself, and has an essence so noble and divine, that
nothing can satisfy, nothing can fill her but an infinite essence. Besides, we
learn that our soul being called to the resemblance of God, nothing can ennoble
her, nothing can perfect her, but the greatness and very perfections of the
Divinity. And to this it is that Jesus Christ invites us, when he says, Be ye
perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect; This only is the subject of this
little Work. I would to God, that they who are transported with the wonders in
Nature, who can admire her greatness, rare varieties and perfections, who
willingly confine themselves to the contemplation of the motions of the
heavens, of the extent of the earth, of the depth of the sea, of the admirable
secret properties of every thing, would turn back their sight into themselves,
to take notice what they are, and what they ought to be, to contemplate the
singular perfection enclosed within their own souls, the greatness whereto God
will raise them, and eminency of that state to which they are called.

If other Creatures are objects able to ravish our spirits, and oblige them to
contemplation and admiration, with how much more reason ought we to employ our
selves in the consideration of our own soul, for which all things were created!
If virtue, says Plato, be so beautiful, as that her luster is able to
transform our hearts, and force us to love her, what then is the soul, of which
virtue is but the ornament? O soul, says one of the Fathers, thou love the
world, yet thou thy self art of more value then all the world! Thou admirest
the Sun, and yet art more beautiful then all the Stars; Thou do contemplate
heaven, yet art exalted above the firmament. Thy God only is above thee, all
creatures are under thy feet; Let us begin to prepare our hearts to these
thoughts; let us call back our distracted spirits from so many objects; let us
withdraw our wandering eyes from so many curiosities, and undeceive our hearts
charmed by so many vanities, that we may apply or selves to the acquisition of
this knowledge, for in being ignorant of these truths, man is estranged from
God and himself, serves the creatures who were made to serve him, makes his
vanity an ornament, and advances above himself, that which ought to be under
his feet, and farther loosing himself in the curious pursuit of creatures or
pernicious affection to the world, he no more thinks of himself, and, which is
worse, seems no longer to know his God. Hence spring all evils which overflow
the earth, all vices and disorders in the life of man. Nor is it strange; for
how can a Christian serve his God, if he esteem not his greatness, and be
ignorant of his divine adorable perfections; and how shall he know them, if he
seldom, or never consider them? Beside, how is it possible for a Christian to
render unto God what he ought, and to live as God requires, if he take no time
to reflect upon himself; if he know not what he is, whence he comes, whither he
goes, how he lives? In this it is he ought to employ his thoughts and time. The
highest employment of man, says Heraclitus, is to seek himself; and we say, the
most necessary; yet we are not with Democritus to put out our eyes, and deprive
our selves of the sight of all creatures, thereby with more ease and attention
to apply our selves to the study of this high philosophy, the knowledge of God,
and our selves; we need not go to such an extremity. On the contrary, let us
preserve our eyes and attention to contemplate at leisure the image which I am
going to describe unto you. It is the pourtracture of a true Christian, in
which shall be drawn in lively colors the Christian virtues, and represented
the dispositions, actions, and piety, wherein all Christians ought to live.

To speak after this manner is proportionable to this subject. He that would
make a man to see what he ought to be, must draw his picture, that he may see
and contemplate himself therein. The soul like the eye sees all things, yet not
it self unless by reflection. To make her know her self, a glass must be set
before her, wherein are represented the true beauties of the state of grace,
the excellencies of Christianity, her obligation to perfection, her capacity to
possess God; that, considering all these, she may see what she is, and what
she ought to be to her God.

Thus seeing her self, she knows her self, knowing her helf, she esteems
accordingly of her own being, life, and condition, and by these degrees,
arriving to this esteem, she faithfully endeavors to render God the honor,
love, and service due to him, careful to lead a life suitable to the condition
and dignity whereto God has called her.

To represent to the life so great perfection, and to acknowledge what the soul
is before God to whom she is called, and may arrive by the assistance of a
supernatural power; We must consider the essence and grace of the Mysteries
wrought by the Son of God upon the Earth, and what he has accomplished in
Heaven, because they are the beginning and source of all Graces wherewith we
are enriched; they make us know what God requires of us, what he will operate
in us and by us. These then we must propose. Behold three which we must make
choice of, including all the Excellencies of Christianity; whatsoever is to be
said of the rest, is to be deduced from these.

The first estate wherein we are established by the grace of Christianity, is
that which we receive in Baptism, where we are consecrated to the most holy
Trinity. The excellency of this estate consists herein, that the most holy
Trinity by this Sacrament of Reconciliation, giving us at once a new being, and
a new birth, it sanctifies and consecrates us by an Unction altogether
extraordinary and divine, and by this extraordinary consecration draws us from
our selves, separates us from the common Tempests of the world, to dedicate and
refer us wholly to his honor and glory, to call us to a holy conversation
which we ought to have with divine persons, as the beloved Apostle says, That
our fellowship may be with the Father, 1 John 1.3.
and with his Son Jesus Christ; that by this society we may become worthy and
capable of the effects of grace and divine communications to be with God, and
possessed of God. That which makes this favor most admirable, is, that the
most holy Trinity does vouchsafe to apply it self to the accomplishment of
this work in a very particular manner; it sanctifies and consecrates us, not
after that ordinary way wherewith it acts and performs all other works common
to the three Persons; but in this work of grace and sacrament of life, it
consecrates us in a manner wholly singular, and full of mysteries, altogether
great, and full of love. The Father sanctifies us, giving us his Son; the Son
becomes incarnate, suffers, and rises again for us; the holy Ghost works in us
Justification, infusing into us the abundance of those Graces the Son merited
for us. Thus the three Persons by distinct operations proper to every person,
effects in us this work of graces and love in this manner. Thus the most holy
Trinity applies it self wholly to us after an extraordinary manner, and proper
to this Sacrament, to consecrate us to their glory and honor, a consecration
so high and mysterious, that it contains all the Truths of Faith, whence the
Fathers call Baptism the Sacrament of Faith. This is the first dignity whereto
the Christian soul is advanced, but this is not all. Let us go on and penetrate
further into this mystery of Love, and we shall see that this consecration (O
miracle of the infinite bounty of God!) places us in God, and is the cause of
Gods being in us, not after the manner that he is in all other things, nor by
any gift or created grace, but after a wholly extraordinary way, which gives
him to us, and causes him to dwell in us. Here God does disclose his heart to
us; the Father shows and gives us his Son; the Son gives and applies himself
to us in the Spirit, and in the grace of his Mysteries, and both together
making one profusion and communication of their love, send and give us the holy
spirit. Thus the three divine persons dwell in us, consecrate us, and fill us
with their presence and abundance of graces. That which is admirable in the
excess of this divine Love, making this grace and estate singularly eminent,
is, that there is not any other Creature, not the Angels themselves are
advanced to this Dignity; it is reserved only for Christians who are
consecrated to the most Holy Trinity, after so holy and mystical a manner. It
would require a large Discourse, to teach us to comprehend such rare
advantages; but let us content our selves to consider: first, that all
creatures are referred to God, but a Christian not only referred, but
consecrated; as if you should say, that he belongs more to God, and is more
holy then all other creatures. O how beautiful is this truth, worthy to make
us lift up our hearts to God!

Secondly, we know that both Angels and men in the state of Innocence, were
replenished with the graces and gifts of God; but the Christian, in the state
of Christianity, is not only filled with divine gifts and benefits, but with
the most holy Trinity it self, which dwells in him, and consecrates him after
the manner we have declared.

Thirdly, all creatures, even Angels themselves, behold God in some of his
divine qualities, as the Seraphins in his love, the Cherubims, in his
knowledge, the Thrones in his stability, and so the rest; but the Christian by
a happy advantage, beholds and relates to him in the extent of all his
greatness, not only as Creator, but as Father, Savior, and Sanctifier; not
only as God considered in his Nature and divine Essence, common to the three
Persons, but by a happy reflection he distinctly beholds the three divine
Persons, and refers himself to God as the Father, as the Son, and as the holy
Ghost. Thus by one special and singular Grace communicated to him in Baptism,
he is consecrated to the most holy Trinity, and made the Temple, Throne, and
Residence of the ineffable, immense, and adorable Trinity. What can be more
said?

CHAP. II. How holy the life of a Christian ought to be, consecrated to God by
Baptism.
WE cannot say too much upon this Subject, which contains so many excellencies
of the soul, and such extraordinary favors of God; and when we have said all we
can, we must acknowledge it is far short of the Subject. We know that God works
great matters in the souls of his Elect; that his love, mercies, and divine
liberality, are as incomprehensible as ineffable, which being so, what can be
added to the love that God expresses to the world in the mystery of the
Incarnation? What more can be hoped? If according to the mysteries of our Faith
we believe God gave his Son to the world, making him like unto us, to make
himself more capable of being merciful unto us; we cannot doubt, but that the
same God of love will show himself bountiful in all things else, since he has
made such an extraordinary communication of his love, and of himself in thus
giving us his Son, it cannot seem strange, if now after so divine a gift, he
bestow on us his graces to exalt us to so holy a being; an estate which
consecrates us to make us capable of possessing God. Nothing is impossible to
him that can do all things: we ought only to consider a perfect knowledge of
the truth of Christianity, and a disposition to receive all that God will give
us. It were to be wished, that all Christians did follow the light of Faith as
they are obliged, that being guided and illuminated by this heavenly Pharos,
they might know the dignity and excellency of these mysteries, that knowing
them, they might adhere to them; that adhering to them, they might become
capable of that grace which they include and God will communicate to us, that
we may thereby profit as Christ wills, who offers his gifts, desiring we should
receive and use them according to his intentions. This counsel we ought to
follow in all these mysteries. Let us begin by him, and examine what it is that
God demands of us for the benefit of this regeneration and Baptism. Being
consecrated to God by Baptism after so divine a manner, we are no more now our
own, but belong wholly to him, nor ought we to make use of our selves but for
him. If any profane thing being offered to God, consecrated by ceremonies, or
dedicated to celebration of the divine office, is by this means abstracted from
common use, and its particular end to be wholly employed in sacred things; much
more a Christian consecrated to the holy Trinity by Baptism, solemnly
dedicated to Gods service, and referred to his glory, ought to be withdrawn
from himself, and such profane customs as of himself he may commit in his life
and actions, to be referred in whatsoever he does to the service and glory of
God.

From these proposed Truths it follows, that the grace of Christianity
communicated by Baptism, whereto we have right by this Sacrament does advance
man above all creatures, and withdraw him from this world, to associate with
God, and to become his Temple and Throne of rest; that being separated from
care and love of the creature, he may cleave to God only.

The soul may be compared to the woman in the Apocalypse, Revel. 12.
clothed with the Sun, and having the Moon under her feet, to tell us that our
souls being replenished with the true sun of Righteousness, ought to raise
themselves above all Creatures, and possessing God, contemn all that is not
God, of God, or for God. The learned Origin says, That we ought to esteem, as
beyond and above the world, all that is consecrated to God; meaning only those,
who by the Ceremonies and ancient Customs of the Church resign themselves to
Gods service. If this be true in bare Ceremonies, how much more is he whom God
himself consecrates in this Sacrament beyond the world, and above all things.
This is the effect of the words of Jesus Christ, when speaking of the spirit of
Christianity which he had infused into his Apostles, he says, recommending
them, and with them all the Elect unto his Father; John 15.19. Joh. 7.16.
The world hates you because you are not of the world, I likewise am not of the
world; where we see evidently, that according to the designs of Jesus Christ, a
Christian must be no longer of this world, nor pretend further to the creature
then the Son of God did, when he became man, and lived upon earth. We learn
further, that by this consecration, and the state whereunto we are advanced by
Baptism, God assumes a second interest in us, besides that of creation, and in
compliance with this new right, we ought to be more his, and live only for
him. For he has right to make in us, and of us all that he pleases for his
glory, and the accomplishment of his divine will. I need give no other reason
hereof then that of the Apostle, Know ye not that your body is the Temple of
the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
which is in you, which ye have of God. And ye are not your own, for ye are
bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit,
which are Gods. Consider deliberately this Christian truth, weigh all these
words, and ye shall see how much ye belong to God, and ought to live for God.
Reject not this as a matter new, or too high; it much imports to your good. If
you cannot comprehend it, at least admire it; and since they are truths, you
ought to believe them; by Faith you shall enter into an estimate of your
estate, and acknowledge it is so divine and eminent, that you cannot comprehend
it, but can only say that he that is all power will effect great things in
you. Now if you will endeavor to profit by these proposed verities; First,
take heed you commit no sacrilege in serving any other but God, since ye are
consecrated for his glory; be careful to refer your self unto him, and to offer
to him all your actions, be they never so little, for they all belong unto him,
and he knows how from the lowest, meanest things to bring honor to himself.

Secondly, seeing God has separated you from the world, consecrating you for
his glory, and that, by Baptism, solemnly in the face of the Church, you have
renounced all its greatness, and varieties, Take heed you deceive not God, or
rather your selves, adhering to the creature, searching after, and following
the Vanities of the Time; but see that in pursuit of this promise you have made
to God, you do disintangle your self all the days of your life, as much as you
can possible from these Creatures.

Thirdly, take your affections off from them: and if you will do well, despise
them all for God, that your heart, consecrated by an Unction so holy, may be
only for God, and love none but God. The best foundation of Piety is to enter
into a great esteem of God, and what you are unto him, so to contemn the world
and all therein.

Fourthly, Seeing you have no right to your self, being marked with the
character of Gods substance (so Saint Cyprian calls the love of God) and are
wholly his, let him make use of what is his; go out of your self, go out of
your own Interest to God, aim at nothing but the glory of God, and therein
place your principal care; for there is nothing more important in the life of
a Christian, nothing more profitable or necessary then to leave wholly himself
to God, and to search diligently after God only. This it is that God requires
of you, for this benefit whereunto you are obliged in the susception of
Baptism, and by the state of Christianity.

The second Prerogative.
CHAP. III. Of the Filial adoption of God, whereto all Christians are called.
THe mystery of the Incarnation, a work of Love, and the Masterpiece of God,
ought to be considered as the foundation of all the Mysteries of the Life of
the Son of God. From this they have their dignity and excellency; from this
they flow as from their source and principle; this we ought to look upon, and
adore as the Cause of all our happiness, for in and by it we have all that we
can-desire; all the greatness, all the privileges and abundance of grace
communicated to us in the state of Christianity flows from this ineffable
Mystery as its spring. It requires an eternity to consider so worthy an object,
to look into the excellencies, and to contemplate the effects thereof.

Let us here make a pause to consider this grace the most advantageous of all
we have received from the Son of God in this Mystery, which gives us right and
admission to all the rest, the grace of Filiation, which makes us children of
God by adoption, a grace given to men, when the Son of God becoming man, made
men the sons of God. By this benefit we are no longer the sons of Adam, but of
Jesus Christ, who is God, called by the Prophets, The everlasting father. By
this grace Christians have a new being, a new life, which honors and
imitates the new life of Jesus in his holy humanity, springing from this as its
source and principle. For as the word unites it self to our nature in the
Mystery of the Incarnation, replenisheth and dwells in it as in his proper
body, consecrates and elevates it to all the Grandeurs of his divine Filiation;
so the same Jesus unites himself, not personally, but by a new Grace, and after
a singular manner, proper to the state of Christianity, consecrates us, dwells
in us, and advances us to the communication of the rights, goods, and
greatness of his filiation, and would have us ( O excess of love!) to be that
by grace which he is by nature, which he would have not only to be
accomplished in glory, but in grace, not only in Heaven, but upon Earth, where
we are truly Sons of God, and in that quality henceforward, we enter into
alliance with him, we have right to his heritage: and, which is more ( O that
we would consider it!) he gives us power to call God our Father, to look up to
him as such, to relate to him in this quality, in further assurance whereof he
gives us his spirit. This St. Paul teaches, Romans 8.15, 16.
when he says, Ye have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba
Father, the same spirit it self bears witness with our spirit that we are
the children of God. It is an effect of the mystery of the Incarnation, and
privilege and excellency of Christianity. Let us deliberate further upon it.
St. John, summing up the graces received from God, in the Mystery of the
Incarnation, ranks this the first, for it is the foundation of the rest,
saying, To them he gave power to become sons of God. Jo. 1.12.
If you would comprehend some part of this great favor, think that as there is
nothing in Divinity greater then to be the Son of God by Nature, so ( but to be
God himself) nothing is greater then to be the Son of God by grace. St.
Cyprian admiring in God the title of Father, says, It is an ineffable name
containing the Mysteries and Secrets hid from our spirits, incomprehensible by
our understanding. If then to be Father in the Deity be a thing the most
mysterious and ineffable that our souls can imagine; by consequence, to be son
of such a Father is a favor and dignity incomprehensible. The beloved Disciple
causes us to admire at this great benefit, when he says, Behold what manner of
love the Father has bestowed upon us, 1 John 3.^.
that we should be called the sons of God, and be such in effect. St. John
Damascene speaks to this purpose, That the eternal Father sent his Son into
the world to produce Children that should be such to him by Grace, as Christ is
unto him by Nature; and therefore in pursuit of this Commission, the Son of
God, from the time that he became the son of man, has created by his power,
begotten by his love, and acquired by his merits, and given by his Spirit, many
children to his Father, who can breath nothing but glory to his Father, and no
longer live, then by his Spirit and Life.

But to search with greater admiration into this Truth, we must consider the
manner by which he creates in us so divine a work. We must observe, that in
Baptism, we not only receive grace, and faith, by the habitual virtues and
gifts of the holy Spirt, but are also marked with the Character of God,
received and owned as his children. The manner whereby God effects this is
admirable; for as the Father has sealed Jesus Christ with his Seal, and made
him his Son, communicating to him his Essence, and making him altogether equal
to himself; so Jesus Christ does comunicate to us what he himself is, marketh
us with his seal, makes us and owns us as children, and makes us as it were
another himself. Wonder, says Saint Augustine, and rejoice, brethren, we are
made of Christ. In pursuit of this benefit, the eternal Father has given us
the Spirit of his Son, which dwells in us, Romans 8.9.
according to the Apostle. What can we think to be greater? If we go further
herein, we shall find, that we are not advanced to this admirable estate of
being the children of God by any simple acceptance, or by bare ceremonies, but
by something more real that passes into our souls, as Saint Paul implies, by
these mystical terms: Not by works of righteousness which we have done, Tit.
3.5.
but according to his mercy he saved us. It is not for our works, says he,
that the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, that the
spirit is given us by Jesus Christ, and that Jesus is sent upon this design by
the eternal Father, three circumstances worthy great consideration.

To conclude the greatness of this benefit, let us observe with Dionysius the
Areopagite, that we are advanced to this divine estate by a new birth, and
divine regeneration* which the Son of God operates in us in the bosom of the
Church our Mother, to the honor of God, and in imitation of his eternal
generation in the bosom of God the Father.

CHAP. IV. Of the uses the Christians ought to make of filial adoption whereto
they are advanced by Baptism.
THe Truths that we have treated of are high, and would require a large
Discourse; but that our design, being to prescribe the practice of filial
Piety, we will only represent as much as is necessary to manifest what we are,
and what our life ought to be in conformity to so eminent an estate.

First then, we must take notice, that in the Language of the Scripture, a
Christian is a new Creature in Jesus, 2 Cor. 5.17.
and according to the word of the Son of God, a man, if he be a Christian, John
3.3.
must be born again of God; and consequently must have a new being, worthy such
a birth. Now, according to the order that God has established in all things,
we say that the action and operation must be conformable to the being. Whence
it follows, that the state of a Christian being a holy divine estate, that
makes him the Son of God, as truly by Grace, as Jesus Christ is by Nature; his
actions also and life ought to be wholly divine, and conformable to the state
of the Son of God. This is the Doctrine of the Apostle, who says, Be ye
followers of God, as dear children. Ephesians. 5.1.
This Principle granted, we must see what benefits we can derive from thence.

The first is a contempt of this World, for it is the heritage of the children
of Adam, condemned by a determined sentence, and a day of execution appointed,
when by the Justice of God it shall perish in a general Conflagration.

Let us then despise this heritage of Adam, and seek that of the children of
God, Heaven, or, to say better, God himself; Say with Jesus Christ, Joh 18.36.
with a sound heart, My Kingdom is not of this world. Remember that you must
keep the rank of the Sons of God, as Princes of the Blood: And as the Princes
of this world do maintain themselves in their Estate, and that greatness which
their Birth allows them, so do you courageously maintain your selves in all
rights due to you by this new divine Birth. O how great and sublime is it, if
you behold it with the eye of Faith! The rank you are to hold with the
Creatures of heaven and earth, is the same with Jesus Christ, who accompanies
you to his estate and greatness, the grace of the Son of God, which you receive
as a Christian gives you right to his heritage: Romans 8.17.
If children, says Saint Paul, then heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ.
Now, the bosom of the eternal Father, is the only heritage of Jesus Christ;
there is his eternal dwelling, there his repose, there the seat of his
delight, the Throne of his greatness; Even this is the rank you ought to keep,
there ought to be your repose, your delight in the fruition of this only
happiness: Remember that the bosom of God is the place destined for your
eternal dwelling, a place of glory, and permanent felicity. God only is your
heritage, undervalue not him for transitory vanities of this world; forsake him
not for the whole world, unless you would be for ever miserable. Admit this
truth farther into your heart, believe it not an imagination of a new Piety;
it is the foundation of Christianity, the ground and principle of the state of
Grace, which considering intentively, you will wonder to see Christians confess
these truths, and hope for so great a good, yet become so blind, as to suffer
themselves to be deluded by deceitful vanities, and vain illusions of the
creatures, to sell their birthright for a mess of pottage; and whilst they
pretend to be the children of God, glorying in so divine a being, to live like
the children of men, thinking of nothing but the earth.

The second benefit is a great desire of Paradise, sighing daily thousands of
times after our heritage, Heaven, bewailing the want of, and demanding the
liberty promised and due to the children of God. In this thought of our
Celestial Sion, our sweet Country, we grieve to see our selves so long in a
strange Land. It is hard to attend with so great impatience a happy day, a good
hour, an honor which we are made to hope for; yet we are without sense in
attaining it, the true and ineffable joys of Paradise. Great God! can it be
that the Manna of Heaven should not cause us to loath the Onyons of Egypt? How
long, children of men, how long shall we have hearts of Adamant, insensible
toward the things of Heaven, yet open for the transitory goods of this cursed
earth, to love lying, to follow vanity, to despise eternal truths. There
cannot be a folly more condemnable: Let us open our eyes, and grieve to see our
selves so fastened to the creature, so confident in vanity, so little relishing
and esteeming heavenly things. Let us be ashamed to see the children of heaven
eat the food of Swine in a strange land, not remembering the abundance of all
things in their Fathers House.

Thirdly, we learn that we must live nobly, like the children of God; Let us
take heed we dishonor not our extraction, and degenerate from the place whence
we came: Let us keep the rank we have received in the House of God. The Emperor
was derided for it, who past his time and life away in catching Flies; let not
us do so, amusing our selves about the creatures, and only laboring here for
earth, since we know all in the world is of less value then a Fly, and that in
the sight of God, the universe is less then the least Atome; Let us rather
imitate that other Prince, who invited by honor and the greatness of his
birth, would never run nor play, but among Kings, his equals: Applying this to
our Subject, let us say, that a Christian being the child of God, and
consequently Prince of Heaven, ought to expect no heritage but Paradise, to
seek no other company but Saints and Angels; to take no content but in Jesus
Christ, endeavoring to follow him in all, to imitate him in all, since he
hops to reign with him.

These Truths deserve to be deliberately considered. Saint Cyprian, in a
Discourse upon the Ascension, raises them higher, saying, That Christians, as
children of God, are obliged to be like God. The same is the Doctrine of Saint
Paul, Ephesians. 5.1.
Be ye followers of God as dear children. The reason of this Precept is
evident; for, if as children of God, we will enjoy his glory to eternity, the
possession and the heritage of Jesus Christ, and become one with him, must we
not necessarily be like him, in purity, in perfection, in sanctity? If we will
possess God in God, and live eternally in the bosom of God, must not our life
be wonderful, our actions holy, if we will merit an estate so perfect and
holy? Nothing is more just! Herein appears the Christian estate so great,
divine, and perfect, in that making us children of God, it gives us right to
the heritage of God, obliges us to lead a life worthy such an heritage. By this
principle we see how much they are deceived, who think and speak meanly of
Christianity, or living a life common to the children of the world, promise
themselves the heritage of the children of Heaven. Let us teach them how they
ought to live, and show what the actions of their life ought to be, who call
themselves Christians.

CHAP. V. What the Actions of Christians ought to be.
SEeing the state of Christianity is so eminent, that it advances the soul to a
filial being so divine, it follows that the actions of Christians ought to be
eminently devout and perfect. This truth is proved not only by the common
principles, that the life and operations of every thing ought to be conformable
to their being; but likewise by another maxim of Christianity, that a
Christian receive all by Christ, and in Christ; and as the Apostle says, Romans
11.36.
of him, and though him, and to him. In pursuit of this Principle, all the
actions of a Christian ought to be done in the Spirit of Jesus, and in respect
to God, which makes them high, perfect, and holy; High, as proceeding from
Christ its principle; Holy, as being wrought in him; perfect and pure, as being
wrought for him; such actions we truly call Christian.

To explicate this more particularly, we must observe, that a true Christian
action must be done in grace, in the spirit, in the dispositions, wherewith
Jesus Christ performed his actions, during his wayfaring life, yet in a
different way, for the son of God as God and man did act after a divine manner,
proportioned to the eminence of his estate. To work after this manner is proper
only to him, to this we cannot arrive, neither must we aspire unto it, but we
are obliged to act after a manner very near this, and the highest that can be,
excepting this. For, the manner that we ought to observe in our actions
springing from the son of God, must by consequence be very like it. So a
Christian action should be that which is made in the spirit of God that Jesus
Christ has borne upon the Earth, accomplished in the holy and perfect
dispositions of the Son of God himself. By this only Circumstance we may judge
of the difference of our actions, for all that we do without the spirit, and
without dispositions agreeable to an action worthy of God, is to do nothing, or
very little, such actions ordinarily proceed but from a naturrll inclination,
or, which is worse, from the instigation of our own Lusts and Love of our
selves. Let us farther consider this Truth, which will seem hard or new to
those who know not the excellency of Christianity, who never regard the
purposes of God, who are ignorant of the mysteries of their salvation. When the
life and actions of a Christian are said to comprehend their perfection, you
must remember that the Son of God came into the world, not only to
communicate to us his grace, but to dwell in us, and give us his spirit and
life, to give them to us, not only to justify us, and, as we say, to put us
into the state of grace, but to be in us, to dwell there, to be the beginning
of a new life, and new spirit in us, and to give us dispositions proportionable
to such an estate. This the Apostle teaches when he says, that the eternal
Father has put the spirit of his Son into our hearts, Romans 8.16.
and that the spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God; whereby we see, that being justified by the state and grace of
filiation and divine adoption we live in the life and spirit of God, which is
made our life and spirit, which is in us, dwells in us, governs us, inlivens
us, and is the Principle of our Actions, makes them pleasing to God,
supernatural, and worthy of Paradise. Thus the life of a Christian, according
to the determination of God is far above all lives, a being above all beings. I
leave you to judge what the Actions of Christians ought to be, proceeding from
a principle so holy and divine.

You will find all the very reasonable, and admire the bounty and wisdom of God
in this Conduct of our souls, if we will consider that the eternal word was
made man, that by debasing himself, he might render to his Father an honor
worthy of God, he came upon the Earth to establish, by the merit and by the
spirit of his Cross, the Kingdom of God in our souls, and to make us worthy to
serve and honor God, after a manner worthy of God. For this cause he advances
unto himself, he consecrates our lives and actions by his Death and blood, and
that they may be referred worthily to the honor and glory of his Father, he
unites himself to us, communicates to us his life, his spirit, and
dispositions, to make us capable to praise God according to his greatness,
which we could never do, if we did not take of him, and from him, this power
and disposition. This he gives us when he dwells in us by the grace of
filiation and divine adoption, whereto we are advanced when we are made
Christians. Hence we see, that Christian Actions ought to be holy, perfect, and
divine, that a Christian Life ought to be the very life of Jesus Christ, living
and working in him by his spirit. His actions, his inward dispositions must be
a lively image and perfect expression of the actions and holy intention of
Jesus Christ. But alas, we think no more of these Truths; Christians are become
so blind, that we may well complain and say with the ancient Philosopher, That
the life of man is spent either in doing evil, or in doing nothing, or in doing
preposterously what he ought to do.

To undeceive our selves of these common abuses, to enter farther into the
knowledge of the state of the grace of Christianity, and to see more evidently
what we ought to be, let us further remember, that as Christians, we are
members of the Son of God; he is our head, a head that infuses life in us. In
this quality he has right to live and act in us as our souls act and live in
our bodies. This considered, we must say, that as the essence and excellency of
a Christian consists in his being a member of Jesus Christ, so the perfection
of Christian duties, is, that they are operated by Jesus Christ living and
operating in us as his members. I say not only that we must imitate the Son of
God, and do all our actions in Grace, that thereby they may be called
Christian; but also, that they ought to be with the same intentions and spirit
wherewith Jesus Christ did act on Earth, which he communicated to his Church,
and to all his. Our Actions ought not only to be good and reasonable, but to be
worthy of the Son of God, our head, whose members we are. Therefore they must
be animated by his life, guided by his motions, and regulated by his
intentions, seeing that to this end, he gives us his spirit and life to be our
spirit and life, and that he gives us freely abundant grace, in him and by him
to accomplish all our actions. This is of great importance; for which we shall
one day render a strict account, when God shall judge the uprightness of men by
so extraordinary a favor. Certainly he will examine and punish the ignorance,
the contempt and abuse of so many graces, which he has acquired for us by his
travells and cross, and offers us with so much love and bounty.

This will appear yet more evident, if we consider the common belief of all the
faithful, who acknowledge that the life and actions of a perfect Christian,
ought to be actions of grace. Let us therefore examine what the Essence and
Dignity of this grace is; for supposing that the life of a Christian is a life
of grace, we must necessarily grant, that our actions by consequence ought to
be conformable and correspondent to the sanctity and dignity of the grace which
gives them life, sanctifies them, and advances them, since they must be
proportionable and semblable to the cause.

We know that the grace which sanctifies and gives life to our actions, is a
grace made for the Son of God, that from him it flows into us, that we are not
replenished and enriched, but from his bounty. This granted, our life and
actions must be holy and perfect by the same sanctity and perfection, which is
in Jesus Christ, which is lovingly communicated to, and engrafted in our souls,
sanctifying, enlivening and perfecting our life and actions.

When we say that this Grace comes from Jesus Christ, we express in this alone
the excellency and dignity of it. For to know the dignity and eminency of the
grace of Christianity, it suffices not to say, as we commonly do, that it is
supernatural, because in it there is nothing singular. For the grace given to
Angels and to man before his fall, was also supernatural. We must say, that the
grace of Christianity, is a grace made for the Son of God, and consequently
worthy of the greatness of the Sanctity, and divinity of the incarnate word;
this makes it the raiser of an Order, and gives it a being much different from
the first, and from the order merely supernatural. This gives it a being and
order as different from the grace of the Angels, as they are from Jesus Christ,
as the son from the servant. Now applying what we have said, that Actions
ought to be conformable to their Principle, we conclude that the actions of a
Christian being sanctified and enlivened by the grace and spirit of Jesus,
ought also to be wholly conformable to Jesus Christ; their principle being more
then humane, more then angelical, conformable to the purity and sanctity of
the grace of the Son of God, worthy the Labors of his Cross and death. To
this end, St. Paul advises, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye
are called; Ephesians. 4.1.
words that deserve to be considered, since that God will demand an account of
us of his favors and benefits, and will judge our actions and lives, according
to the dignity of our vocation; according to the perfection and sanctity of his
Grace, in brief, according to the life of Jesus Christ, which alone ought to be
the rule and Law of Christians.

Furthermore we must consider the rule of God over our Souls, wherein we may
admire the ways and means, whereby the divine bounty, and infinite wisdom of
God, uses to give us graces, necessary to accomplish our actions, in that
perfection and sanctity that he requires. I intend not to speak of the secret
and unknown means, of the graces, inspirations, motions, and speedy succors
wherewith God is pleased to illuminate our Spirits, to inflame our wills, and
to direct all the motions and actions of our life. But I desire only to insist
upon the consideration of the Sacraments, that the son of God has left in
his Church, as channells by which he continually powers out this grace into us.
Baptism consecrates us to the most holy Trinity, makes us the children of God,
members of Jesus Christ, Temples of the Holy Ghost, and holy Vessels which
bear Jesus Christ, who dwells in us.

And the Eucharist (which is among the Sacraments as the Sun among the Stars)
gives God to us, and with him all the greatness of heaven, elevates us and
unites us, to God, changes and makes us little gods; What would ye more? Why is
God think you so profuse of his gifts, of his graces, of himself, but to
operate in you all that I have said, to give you a life and actions conformable
to the being whereto he has elected you? Let us weigh these truths at our
leisure, and study to attain to the perfection that God requires of us. Let us
take care, that all our actions be holy and worthy of God, and let us not be
carried away by the humor, or rather by the infidelity of such as ignorantly
despise these important truths, and necessary exercises.

The third Prerogative.
CHAP. VI. Of the happy Commerce and Society that Jesus Christ will have with
Christians by the Mystery of the Incarnation.
THe holy Trinity, having consecrated the Christian by Baptism, adopted and
received him as a son, enters into a particular society with him, and by diverse
Mysteries, which the eternal Word has operated upon earth; God enters into a
Communication with men, lives and converses with them: So Saint Paul, speaking
to new Christians; Ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but
fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God.

Let us stay here to contemplate this benefit: Adam being fallen from the happy
estate of grace by his rebellion against God, no sooner tasted the Apple of
disobedience, but he felt the punishment of his sin, and was at the same time
driven out of Paradise, and banished the happy commerce and holy familiarity
which he had with God. This exile was the greatest rigor wherewith the divine
Justice could take vengeance on his sin: This separation made his estate
miserable, and the condition of his children most unhappy. We should in this
malediction and just divorse for ever have continued, if the Son of God had not
come to re-establish all things, to return us to God, and to restore us with
much advantage all other happiness that we lost by sin: So that as the Apostle
says, Romans 5.20.
where sin abounded, grace did much more abound; for we enter into a
familiarity and communion with God, far more holy and divine then that of Adam
by Jesus Christ, we converse with God, go to him, are with him, worthy the
Spirit and Grace of Christianity.

Few value this truth; men who only follow their own ways, nourished with
earth only, to whom the delicates of heaven are unsavory, can never relish
this grace, nor be sensible how much the presence of God is necessary. Therein
appears the corrupt estate of this Age; all creatures resent the presence of
their Creator; Nature it self has engraven in the bottom of our essence, a
desire of the presence of God: The most barbarous Nations, forced only by this
instinct, in the blindness of their false Religion, sought, esteemed, and
desired some visible mark of the presence of those they call their gods. None
but those of this Age, have an indifference to these truths, forget God, mind
only their own actions in this world, and are ignorant of the happiness of
Heaven, and despise it.

To awaken and draw us forth of this darkness, consider that Faith teaches us,
that the happiness of the Saints consists in seeing themselves to be in the
company of God, and the greatest recompense God promises to our travels, is to
make us partakers of his glory, to raise us to his greatness, to enter into an
eternal communion with us. Jo. 17.24.
I will, says Christ to his Father, that they also whom thou have given me, be
with me where I am; implying the society and communion of God with us, and
promising, that eternity shall never separate him from him that serves him.

Now, if the happiness of the blessed in their estate of glory consists in the
presence and familiarity of God, we cannot doubt but the happiness of the just
upon earth consists in knowing how to preserve themselves in this desirable
familiarity and presence of God: The intent of the Son of God at his coming
into the world, and becoming an Inhabitant thereof, was, to sanctify it by his
presence, and establish his power therein, and dwell with us to the end of the
world, Mat. 28.30.
as he promised at his death. This is it that he wrought by the mystery of the
Incarnation, making himself man, to live among men: For this cause in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, he becomes the food of man, communicates to his
abundant graces, inriches us with his gifts, that by all these endearments and
singular favors he might separate us from the creatures, and reduce us to a
divine society and communication with him.

Let us consider these two mysteries of our Faith and Love, mysteries which
give God to us, and cause us to dwell with God.

The last is the mystery of the Incarnation, a mystery of Love, an eternal
mystery; for God shall be man, and man God for ever; a mystery causing God to
live the life of man, and man the life of God, which between God and man,
effects an union and society so divine and intimate, that he could not do any
thing more holy, nor desire any more intimate, since it is substantial and
personal, and shall subsist eternally. Entering further into the consideration
of this Mystery, we shall see evident signs of this holy Communion. God makes
here a new World (as the Scripture calls it) a World of Grace, and of holiness,
a World which he governs by a new conduct and providence. For whereas before
God confining himself within himself, spoke not to the World, but by his
Prophets; now by the accomplishment of this Mystery, he comes out of himself,
speaks to us, and instructs us by his Son. Four thousand years he guided the
World and his Church only by his Angels the Interpreters and Oracles of his
divine will. Now Jesus guides his Church by himself, he infuses holy motions
into our souls, by his spirit, (always holy) he governs all, is present with
all, and is found by all. What presence or commerce with God would you desire
greater? what greater society then that of the word, by the Mystery of the
incarnation? To know it more particularly, consider these Circumstances.

First, in this Mystery God lives the life of man, and man the life of God, a
life of society, a life humanely divine, and divinely humane, for Jesus is God
and man, in Jesus we adore and acknowledge two lives, one of God in man,
another of man in God.

Secondly, by this ineffable union, God communicates himself to man, and by
this communication appropriates to himself all that is of man with such
wonderful wisdom, that, not dishonouring his divine greatness, he takes upon
him all the lowness of man, and subjects himself so really to our infirmities,
that we say God is dead, God is born, etc. and man by a happy exchange is
lifted up to all the greatness of God, enthroned in the bosom of the eternal
Father, where he eternally enjoyes the proper glory of God. Let every tongue
confess, that in Jesus Christ by that hypostaticall union, accomplished in the
Mystery of the incarnation, man enjoyes the glory of God, his greatness, light,
and life.

Thirdly, As for the life and divine mysteries of the Son of God, we see he
presented it to us the space of thirty three years, conversing with us as one
of us; was an Infant in his first appearing, labored in his youth, did live
and eat with sinners in his wayfaring life. He disdained not to succor the
infirm in his miraculous life. In a word, he resigned himself into the hands of
sinners a Sacrifice, and was offered a holy offering on the Cross, for the
sins of the World, (O wonderful!) he died between two Thieves in the company
of men, so much pleased with the society and commerce of men.

What Religion ever had the presence of its God so visible? what being was ever
advanced to so great an honor? To none but the Christian is this great favor
granted, a Commerce so sacred, that it makes man, God, and God, man. By the
ineffable mystery of the incarnation, God unites the Earth to Heaven, and
Heaven to Earth. The God of Heaven dwells upon the Earth, according to that of
St. John, Joh. 1.14.
The word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, all nature rejoiced at this
happiness. St. John transported with love and joy, representing to the world
the truth and excellency of this benefit, says, 1 Jo. 1.1.
It is the same God that we have heard, that we have seen with our eyes, which
we have looked on, and our hands have handled. So true is it, that God by the
mystery of the incarnation is with us, and converses amongst us, after a
society wholly divine, and only proper to the state of a Christian.

CHAP. VII. Of the uses Christians ought to make of Grace proceeding from the
Mystery of the Incarnation.
IN pursuit of these proposed Truths, what may we judge to be the intentions of
God, but that his will is, that we should enter into a holy and divine society
with him, and that we should separate our selves from all that may hinder or
profane this holy conversation with him, since that Jesus Christ thinks of us,
converses with us by his divine mysteries, unites himself unto us, and abaseth
himself to be as one of us, to be among us, we ought likewise to think of none
but him, to love none but him, to converse with none but him, and like the
Apostle, dwelling upon Earth to have our Conversation in Heaven. Phil. 3.20.
Justin Martyr, showing what Christians ought to be, says, Christians are in
the body, but they live not according to the body, they dwell upon the Earth,
but their Conversation is in Heaven. This God requires of us, this we ought to
be in the state of Christianity; this is the use we ought to make of the spirit
and grace flowing from the Mystery of the incarnation.

But alas, it is pity that Jesus being now revealed unto us, living with us
and amongst us, we apply thereto so little of our selves, of our thoughts, and
of our love, and busy our selves in things so small, profane and mean, even
such as are unworthy of man! Let us do like him; Love made him forget himself
to converse with us, let us come out of our selves, and forget all things, that
we may raise our selves to him, that all our content may be in him.

Moreover, the state of the Grace of this Mystery, obliges us to be holy,
seeing Jesus Christ with whom we converse is holy. The Apostle says, 1 Pet.
1.15.
as he that has called you is holy, be ye also holy in all manner of
conversation, speaking, walking, working, and whatsoever you do. He that lives
after any other manner, says St. Cyprian, then holily, dishonours the title of
a Christian, and is a reproach to Jesus Christ. Let such as believe not
sanctity necessary for all Christians, as well as those who live included in
Cloisters, consider these words.

We see in the Mystery of the incarnation, that the Son of God enters into
Commerce and society with us, dwells with us, is clothed with our humanity;
God is made man, that man might be made God, Exodus 7.1. Psalm. 82.1, 6.
not by simple denomination, as God said to Moses, I have made thee a God to
Pharaoh, and Kings in the Scripture are styled Gods, but really, and by a being
which deifies them. For as they are true Children of God by Grace, and as truly
children by Grace as Christ is by Nature, so they are Gods by Grace as Jesus is
God by Nature. And if there be any who find this Truth difficult, let him
consider with St. Augustine, that it is no harder for God to make a man truly
God by Grace, then it was for him to cause the Son of God to become truly man;
neither is there less repugnance in making man God by Grace, then in making God
man by the Mystery of the Incarnation. Since then by this Mystery of Love, God
is made man, why by an emanation of the same Mystery may not man be God? And as
by this society, union and life, which the Son of God has undertaken, the
nature of man is the highest, most divine and greatest communication that God
could give; so has it effects wholly conformable to what it is; for as the
Mystery was only operated for God's glory and man's advancement, so it
produces infallibly the effects of glorifying God in a manner worthy of God,
seeing man, that is God adores God, and advances men to such a dignity, as to
be able to be Gods, and Children of God by Grace.

Reflecting upon so eminent a truth, do we not see clearly, how holy and
perfect the life of a Christian ought to be, being called to so high a dignity,
a Prerogative only proper to a Christian? if a Christian must with all his
power lay hold of this estate whereto God has advanced him, he ought also to
have a particular care to become worthy to entertain this grace, and to dwell
with Jesus Christ in a great union and dependence, that he may receive of him
all the effects of this divine Mystery, by whom all must operate in our souls,
and he must particularly dispose himself to receive the effects and Graces
which uncessantly flow from this Mystery of Love and Communications; for on
this fidelity of our souls, and on our union with Jesus Christ, depends the
foundation of all Good we can hope for. And as all the happiness of the
Creature consists in his being confirmed to his God, and dependant on him more
then the beams on the Sun; so all the happiness of a Christian, is to be bound
and united in a most intimate society with Jesus Christ, from whom being
separated, he becomes unworthy of the estate whereto God has destined him,
deprives himself of all good, and can hope for nothing less then a world of
mischiefs. The greatest pain of the damned is to see themselves separated from
God, banished his company for ever, and the happy communion of the Saints. In
like manner, the greatest evil that can arrive to Christians, is to feel
themselves far from Jesus Christ, separated from him from whom they have all,
and deprived of the desired effects, which they might receive by his
conversation. Let us take heed we fall not into this mischief, and since
nothing can separate us from Jesus Christ but sin, let us shun sin more then
hell it self; And since nothing deprives us of the fruits and happy effects
which we ought to receive of the society and commerce with Jesus Christ by his
divine Mysteries, but the Love of the World, business and commerce with the
Creatures; Let us strongly endeavor to separate our selves from it, and
courageously quit it (at least in our affection) if we cannot otherwise for the
Love of Jesus Christ; and let us quit that for the love of Virtue, which we
shall one day be constrained to do by the necessity of Death.

The fourth Prerogative.
CHAP. VIII. Of another kind of Society and Union of Jesus Christ with
Christians, by the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
NExt the ineffable Mystery of the Incarnation, we have nothing more worthy
consideration in Christianity, then the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in which
God shows the last touches of his love, and makes us most clearly see the
designs he has on our souls.

Faith teaches us, that by the Sacrament of the Eucharist, Love transports
Jesus, out of himself from the throne of his greatness to our baseness, causing
him to live with us and in us, such is the purpose of Jesus Christ, as he
himself said, as the institution of this divine Sacrament, to establish between
him and us, a mutual cohabitation, that by this Mystery of Love, he may enter
into a true society with us, be united to us, and continue his life of
conversation among us men to the end of the world.

He does perform this promise of dwelling with us and in us, by this high
Sacrament, which according to the Doctrine of the Church, is an imitation and
extension of the mystery of the Incarnacion to every Christian. This mystery
shows the commerce, communion and particular residence which God has in every
one of us: For as the communication which the Son of God has made of himself
to our nature united to his divine Person by the mystery of the Incarnation,
is an imitation and extension of the supreme communication, adorable and sacred
society in the holy Trinity among the Persons, and consequently is the most
high and divine communication that God could do out of himself; so the
Eucharist which is an extension of the Incarnation in every one of us in the
most divine and abundant communication that God can do in the order of grace:
For Jesus Christ in this ineffable sacrament, gives himself wholly to every one
of us, and advances us, and by his virtue, draws us wholly to him, by his power
transforms us into his qualities, makes us heavenly and eternal like himself,
establishes his Throne and dwelling in us by this divine mystery.

Moreover by this Sacrament of union, God is present with us, is amongst us,
and united to every one of us after a manner so admirable and divine, that we
being not able to give it a name, call it Sacramental, as an Union wholly hid
from our eyes, and covered under the shadow of Faith, nevertheless, a true
Union, an Union that contains in it self, and settles in us the presence of
God, makes us to be in God, and God in us. Thus God is altogether upon the
earth in the midst of his People by the Eucharist, and he is in Heaven in the
midst of the Angels and Saints, in the throne of his Majesty, filling at the
same time both Heaven and Earth with his glory, presence, and grace. Briefly
this Sacrament of Love gives us God, causes us to live with him, and of him,
puts us into a commerce and society with him, and that with so much privilege
and advantage, as we say, that in this Sacrament of the love and fullness of
God, we enjoy Jesus more happily and more perfectly then the world did
heretofore in the time of his Incarnation during his mortal life upon Earth.

I will more clearly demonstrate it, that we may the more esteem so great a
benefit, and the excellency of the state of Christianity, whereto we are called
by the mercy of God.

First, They who lived in the time that Jesus conversed visibly upon Earth, saw
him, but did not enjoy him, few persons knew him; he was not then seen but in
his lowness, as says the Apostle, in the likeness of sinful flesh. Romans 8.3.
In the Eucharist we see him by Faith, a light as true and more infallible then
that of the Sun it self; we do adore him in his greatness, in the state of
that glory which he has in the bosom of his Father; we handle him, we touch
him, we eat him. After this manner he is ours, he will have us to be his; he is
in us and we in him, we live of him, and for him as he lives for us, and the
life that he lives in us is so divine, that he composes it to the life that he
leads in the bosom of his Father. Now what more solid union, what more intimate
society, what more divine commerce can be imagined, what greater can we require
of God?

Secondly, During his life here, he taught and redeemed Mankind, he dyed and
merited for them, but he gave nothing, or if he gave it, was little in
comparison of the liberal profusions which he makes of himself in this
ineffable Sacrament, where he merits no more (for it is not the time) but gives
himself to Christians, and with himself all the treasures of grace and
holiness. This is a Sacrament of Communion and communication, whereby the Son
of God communicates to every one of us, a life of grace, the seed of glory. In
a word, he communicates himself here as he communicates himself to the Saints
in the state of Glory, yet after a different manner, and conformable to the
diversity of the states of the Church militant and Tryumphant. Add to this,
that in the time of the Incarnation Jesus Christ was upon the earth, without
power, covered with our infirmities, living in our weakness, subject to the
empire of death. Now we possess and enjoy him in the bosom of his Father, in
the extent of his power, having in his hand the conduct of Heaven and Earth.
Then he was in the World in poverty and privation; but in this Sacrament of
Love and communication, he enjoyes the fullness of his greatness, and is only
here, that he may communicate them.

Thirdly, Here on earth during his mortality, he was seen but sometimes, and
that successively, for some saw him in his infancy and no more, others in his
youth, some felt the effects of his power in working of miracles, many were
witnesses of his death and sufferings. All this past, and was seen but in a
small part of the World, in Palestine, in Jerusalem; all the rest of the World
was in darkness, and saw not this beautiful Sun, nor enjoyed this agreeable
light. But in the Mystery and Sacrament of the Eucharist, Jesus as given to all
the World, all the people of the Earth enjoy him from the East to the West,
from the North to the South; there is no Nation where the Christians possess
not Jesus Christ, and in him all the estates and several Mysteries of his
life, all that he is and shall be eternally.

Jesus in his life on Earth, was in the quality of a servant, Mat. 20.28.
as he says of himself, He came not into the World to be ministered unto, but
to minister; also he was subject to Angels, to men, even to the very devils,
when he gave them power over his life, in the time of his sufferings. But in
this divine Sacrament, he is as in his Empire, and in his Paradise; we there
adore him as our spouse, governing his Church, like the Sun enlightening our
souls, like a Prince, establishing the Kingdom of his grace, and the power of
God in our spirits, we there acknowledge him as a propitiation for humane kind,
rendering to the eternal Father the honor that is due to him. In brief, in this
Mystery of Love, we behold Jesus Christ, as in the throne of his greatness,
where he receives throughout the World, the adoration of his people, and the
duties of our souls. In this manner the Earth is made a Heaven, and we have our
God with us and in us. Let us consider these truths, that so we may profit
thereby, and let us see what this divine bounty will work in us, which makes
such an abundant communication of it self in this Sacrament.

CHAP. IX. The Design of Jesus Christ upon Christians in this most high
Sacrament of the Eucharist.
WHat think we God requires of us for so powerful a work of his Love? What
design can he have upon Christians in so divine a communication, so general a
profusion of his gifts.

First, he will change us, (a happy change for us) for he changes us into
himself, according to Saint Austin: I shall be changed into thee, but thou
shall not be changed into me.

Secondly, he does thus change us, not so much by a gift, or created grace, as
by his holy humanity, and the power of his divinity.

Thirdly, the Son of God, effecting this change out of the excess of love, make
use of this means to unite himself to us, and to assume a new power over us, as
of a thing that belongs to him. For having by his body taken possession of our
member as his, and made us members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone, by his divine sacrament of union, love, and unity, he assumes power
over us by a right to him for ever.

When we shall consider these three Circumstances, what can we think or say,
but that God will have us no longer men, but gods? He will have us to go out of
our selves to be in him, and cease to be that which we are, to be what he is? O
how great is this! How clearly does the holiness of the Christian estate
appear? seeing then this benefit is so heavenly, and the communication so
divine and wonderful in this ineffable sacrament, we are by consequence obliged
to make uses conformable to the thing it self, and to the designs of God, of
which I shall propose some.

First, That your sole contentment be to be with God, who takes such pleasure
to be with you; that all things be unsavory to you, that all the pleasures of
the world be contrary to your heart; renounce all lying and vanity. Let even
your smallest entertainments and ordinary actions be in him, who is in the
bottom of your heart, who testifies such a singular love unto you. This
practice and affection will not be difficult, if you be truly disposed to
virtue; for being virtuous it will be hard to take recreation in any created
thing, not in the least unprofitable word, because a perfect Christian takes no
pleasure but in God, and that which is of God, for being a member of Jesus
Christ, as such he is to act holily, he must live of the spirit of Jesus
Christ, no way recreate himself but in him, and in holy and virtuous things.

Secondly, Recollect and form often in your soul a great and continual desire
that God be in you all that he ought to be, and that you cease to be all that
you are. Have a great desire to loose your self, and to go out of your self,
and that your being be annihilated and consummated in that of Jesus, who is in
you. This is the point whereto you must arrive, if you will that God should
possess you.

Thirdy, Desire and require, that Jesus Christ destroy in you, all that is
contrary to God, that he establish in you the Kingdom of God; that he take from
you the dominion which self-love, the vanity of your nature, and your
inclination usurp over you and the creatures.

Fourthly, Resign your self to the will of Jesus Christ, who by this adorable
sacrament of Love will receive you into himself, and place you in his life and
his being.

Abandon then your self to the desire that he has to possess you, a desire as
great and perfect as the Love wherewith he gives himself to you is infinite.
Pray him to destroy in this present life the being that you use and abuse, that
by the power of his spirit and love, and by the virtue of this ineffable
sacrament he may make you what he is, that is to say, Love, Life, and Truth.
Behold what God requires of you; if we regard intentively the essence and the
excellency of this mystery, if by the spirit of Faith we weigh the effects it
produces in us, it will be easy to acknowledge them, and soon shall we be
constrained to confess that this sacrament of Love does appropriate us wholly
to God, draws us from our selves and the world, and separates us from the
commerce of creatures, that we may be knit in heart and spirit to Jesus Christ,
despising all things for his love and glory; so shall be verified the word of
the Son of God to his Father in the excess of his Love, speaking to him not
only of his Apostles, but of all good Christians; They are not of the world,
Jo. 17.14.
even as I am not of the world. This is the spirit of Christianity, the
excellency of this divine estate.

That we may the better remember, this you shall see in a little Picture:
First, the grace and spirit of Christianity consecrates us to God, and imprints
in us a character of the power of Jesus Christ, to whose Empire we must be
subject for ever, and must undergo to all eternity both in heaven and earth the
state of service and subjection to the spirit, grace and conduct of Jesus.

Secondly, The grace of Christianity makes us the children of God by mercy, and
gives us right of inheritance to the greatness and true glory of Jesus Christ.
By this grace we have no more part in the world, because it is the heritage of
the true children of Adam, but we have right to the Possession of God who is
himself the heritage of his children.

Thirdly, This grace draws our spirits, our hearts, and our affections from our
selves, and all creatures, to unite us to God; it gives us right to enter into
familiarity and alliance with the Son of God, who making himself man by the
Incarnation, would be amongst us, to the end that we might be with him. He
enters into society with men, invests himself with our miseries and
infirmities, to communicate to us his life his spirit and greatness. Thus by
the grace of this mystery, we go out of our own Interests to enter into the
Interest of Jesus Christ, whereof the Apostle speaking of the things of the
world, Phil. 3.8.
he says, I count them but dung that I may win Christ.

Fourthly, In brief, by the state of Christianity, we are advanced to the
participation of God, who will be all in us, that we may be in him, and Jesus
Christ by his body and blood which he gives us in the Eucharist, does elevate
and unite us to God, makes us live by his life, communicates to us all that he
is, that he may be all things to us, that the world may be nothing to us.

Thus the grace of Christianity unites us to Jesus Christ, replenishes us with
his life and spirit, makes us another himself, and therefore obliges us to go
out of our selves and the world to be in Christ Jesus. I know we must be in the
world and make use of the world, so long as it shall please God to continue us
in this place of captivity; but we must not be of the world, we must live here
as in a place of passage, and make use of all in the world, as of a winter
garment, ready to put it off when the Sun of righteousness shall come to his
meridian, when it shall please God. Let us use all the creatures as a necessary
medicine to the present state of our infirmities and occasions; but let it be
withal, loathsome unto us, as violating our Love, which desires nothing but
God, which takes delight in nothing but God, which aspires to nothing, and
hopes in nothing but God.

The conclusion of the first Part, What the life of a Christian ought to be.
Behold here the Excellencies of Christianity, which we have proposed in few
words, as having no further design nor intention in this volume, then to show
that the life of a Christian ought to be conformable to the state of grace, and
dignity, whereto he is advanced by Jesus Christ. Now to enter into this
knowledge, it suffices that we see what we are. This is that which I designed
to demonstrate in this first part, proposing as in a little Tablet, the
essence, dignity and eminency of the grace of Christianity, which I have done,
briefly, expressing only the principal Truth of this subject, leaving the rest
to the piety and consideration of those that would profit thereby.

Now if we look back with the eye of Faith upon that which has been said, we
shall clearly see what a Christian life ought to be, and shall know that the
design of Jesus Christ, informing his Church, has been to consecrate, to
appropriate to himself, and to unite himself divinely to our souls, and to
separate them from themselves, and from all creatures, that by a happy
revolution he may be in us, and we in him, we may live in him, and of him as he
lives in his Father, of the life of his Father, that so he may restore us to
his Father, and reunite us to himself, from whom we were separated by him, by
being our own, and having relation to the Creature.

Herein is comprised the perfection of a Christian life, whereof we cannot
speak more then in the words of St. Paul, ye are dead, Col. 3.3.
and your life is hid with Christ in God; a passage which contains an apparent
contradiction. If we are dead, how can our life be hid in God, who is the true
life? If we are in God, who is the life of our souls, how are we dead? The
Apostle means that our life is life and death; our life is a life of grace,
which is the true life of souls, and much better then the soul is the life of
our bodies, and the proper effect of the grace of Christianity, is to operate
in us that which natural death does. By death the soul is separated from the
body, and all things in the world. So grace should separate us from our selves,
from all things, from sin, that, being wholly so separated, we may be dead to
our selves, and to all things, that we may live in God and of God.

This expression of the Apostle, further shows all the properties of a
Christian life, the end whereof is, that, being separated from all we may be in
Jesus Christ, that is to say, united by an indissoluble Union to Jesus Christ,
life of his life, and be referred with him to the glory of the most holy
Trinity.

The life of a Christian, St. Paul says is hid, because it is indeed hid from
the sight of the World, which neither sees it as it is, nor esteems it; and
(because it is little, humble, and abject) disdains to behold and to take
notice of it, as unworthy the name and society of men. They that will live
Christianly, will not subject themselves to the corruption of the men of this
age; so this life is hid from the sight, and more from the power of this world,
for the soul that lives christianly, is above all humane power, and insensible
to all contempt and confusion; and as the Diamond continues entire, and
strengthened by the violence of blows; so the perfect christian remains more
content in the violence of Temptation, more assured in the motions of disgrace,
more firm amidst the batteries of afflictions, even Prosperity changes not his
spirit, he is alike in all things, for by grace and true Christian virtues, the
soul is raised above all things, and lives in God; Ye are dead, and yet your
life is hid with Jesus Christ in God.

Such is the life of a christian according to St. Paul, a life that imitates
that of Jesus Christ upon earth, who according to the Oracles of the Prophets,
was despised and rejected of men, a Man of sorrow, and acquainted with grief,
and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him
not. When Hell, the World, Devil, sinners, thought to triumph over him, Jo.
10.18.
and ravish both his honor and life at the same time, he triumphs over them,
showing that he has power (as he says) to lay down his life, and he has
power to take it again at his pleasure. Thus the life of Jesus Christ is hid
from the eyes of men, who know him not, and from their power, seeing he
triumphs over his Enemies, over death and sin. Such ought to be the life of a
Christian. Ephesians. 4.22. 23, 24.
St. Paul says the same in other terms, when he exhorts the Ephesians, that
they put off concerning the former conversation, the old Man which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts: and be renewed in the spirits of their mind,
and that they put on the new Man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness. This is the first Protestation we make in Baptism, in which
solemn action, before that we are consecrated to the holy Trinity, received and
made the children of God, we make a particular protestation, to renounce Adam
and the World, and adhere to Jesus Christ, to separate our selves from the one,
to unite our selves to the other. So in this action so holy and happy, we
uncloath our selves of the one, to cloth us again with the other, that is the
first step we make into the state of Christianity, according to St. Paul. And
if we believe his Doctrine, we see that the perfection of a Christian and all
his happiness consists in adhering to Jesus Christ, to be united to him, and
clothed with him. For as all the grandeur of humane nature (which was chosen
in the Mystery of the Incarnation to be the nature of God) consists in being
united to the word, which subsisteth in him, and operates by him: so all the
perfection of a christian soul, consists in dwelling in Jesus Christ, in
adhering to him, and operating by him; all the perfection of a christian soul
consists, in that it dwells in Christ, that it adheares to him, that it lives
of his life, and operates not but by his spirit.

Now this cannot be, but when the Soul is divided from it self, Col. 3.9.
and from all creatures; for according to St. Paul, We are to put off the old
man with his deeds, and to put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge
after the Image of him that created him. Whence it follows, that abnegation
and uncloathing, is the principal point of christian perfection, so necessary,
that St. Bernard says; It had been better for us never to have been, then to
dwell in our selves, and to our selves; for the greatest misfortune of the soul
is to see it self separated from God. But God comes not into, neither dwells in
the soul, till such time as it goes out of it self, uncloathes and annihilates
it self. And the greater its annihilation is, the more it makes place for God.
If it take but little away, God fills it with little, if it deprive it self of
much, God fills it much, and without doubt he will take it up, and dwell wholly
in it, if the soul do annihilate, and wholly uncloath it self.

We see and adore this proceeding of God in the Mystery of the Incarnation,
the cause and example of the life of our souls. For the eternal word choosing
humane nature, to unite himself unto it, and to operate in and by it our
redemptions would uncloath it of its own substance and humane person, to show
us that we are not acceptable to God, if we do not abandon our selves; and
that, if we divest our selves of our selves, and deprive our selves of all
created things, God will fill us with divine things, for Grace as well as
Nature, abhorres vacuity.

Let us learn then to deprive our selves of humane things, that we may be
enriched with divine. Let us go out of our selves, and quit the commerce that
we have with the creatures, to be in Jesus Christ, to enter into society and
communion with God. Let us renounce our own spirits and government, to leave
our selves to that of Jesus Christ, and suffer him to live and reign in us,
according to what he truly designed of us. In brief, let us divest our selves,
of our selves, to re-invest our selves with the Son of God. Herein consists
the happiness of our souls, and that Christian perfection, that we ought to
search for here upon earth; The necessity and practice whereof, are in the
following Treatises.

THE SECOND PART. Wherein are proposed the sundry Motives which oblige
Christians to Perfection.
CHAP. I. The Obligation that we have to acquire true Virtues, wherein consists
the life of the Soul, and the inward life of a Christian.
MAN being in honor abides not, Psa. 49.1^
but is compared unto the Beasts that perish. Thus David, describing the
deplorable estate of man after sin, a sad condition, a miserable fall! which
has deprived man of the gifts of God, and the favors wherewith the powerful
hand of the Divinity, had so liberally enriched him, and degraded him of all
honor, and put him into a condition of meanness, impotence and error. This
goodly spirit of man, or rather this man all spirit, is now nothing but flesh;
this beautiful Soul which breathed for nothing but Heaven, entertained it self
so deliciously in the knowledge of infallible Truths, and was enriched with
contemplation of the greatness of God, as with Divine Dew, and heavenly Manna,
after so deplorable a fall, obstinately links himself to the perishable goods
of this World, believes in lies, seeks after vanities, and can no more elevate
himself to God; so miserable and impotent has sin made him. O unhappiness
which cannot sufficiently be bewailed! Man, who by the happiness of his
creation, had eyes to contemplate only his Creator, and converting himself
wholly to him, had no heart but to love him, no spirit but to adhere to him;
after so fatal a cast, wholly turned away from God, regards nothing but
himself, is wholly converted to the Creature, lives as a Beast, only upon the
Earth, and like a Beast without judgment.

The Apostle goes further, for describing the estate whereto the sinner is
reduced, he declares him incapable of the knowledge of things which are of the
Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man, says he, receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Hence I doubt, least the ways I intend to propose,
which are according to the Spirit of God, appear too high, or above the
capacity of our spirits. I confess they are so, if we look upon man in the
state of sin, impotency, and the corruption of his Nature. But we shall find
the contrary, if we consider that the Son of God came into the World to
relieve man after his fall, to restore him those gifts with advantage which he
lost, to render him capable of God. In brief, he was made man to teach man the
true way to love and serve God; he gives the power, having settled in his Church
an inexhaustible Treasure of Graces, whence all souls may draw strength in
their weakness, succor in their necessity, and ability in the very impotency
of their nature. Here, of Jesus man and God, we are to learn the way to love,
and adore, and to serve God; from him we must have the grace to do it. We must
in and by Jesus, operate above our strength, above our being, and natural
power, and nothing ought to seem difficult to us, or impossible for him, seeing
he gives us his grace and spirit in abundance to accomplish it.

To believe this, we must look back upon the designs of the Son of God, in the
Profusion of his gifts and graces, and leasurely examine with the eye of Faith,
what he will operate in us, by his grace and divine communications. At the
first view we shall see that Grace draws from us our impotency, advances us
above our nature, gives us a new being, a new life, a life entire and wholly
hid in God, a life proper to the state of Christianity, according to which all
Christians ought to live. The Son of God speaking to the Samaritan, and in her
to all the faithful, makes a Discourse hereof worthy to be considered,
expressing an intention to establish his Church. Joh. 4.23.
The hour shall come, (says he) and now is, wherein the true Worshippers
shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, for the Father seeks such to
worship him. The reason he adds, God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, v.
24.
must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. What more powerful and clear
testimony of the will of God, who tries and elects Souls that worship him, in
spirit and truth? If he himself does choose them, and call them to this new
life, is it not necessary, that in pursuit of this election, he give them grace
necessary to arrive at such an estate? Let us consider this passage, and ponder
all the words of it.

1. Jesus Christ shows us that our life must be holy, and severed from the
creature, seeing that we must serve God in Truth, without amusing our selves
with the vanities and things of the Earth, which are nothing but lying. In
truth, that is to say, conformable to the Greatness of God, and to that
principle whence the Soul takes power to serve God, the grace, spirit, and
dispositions of Jesus Christ, the spirit of Truth.

We learn further, that if perfection of this life is inward, pure, holy, and
absolutely divine, seeing it is, and subsists in the adoration of God, who, as
he is a Spirit pure and holy, will be served and adored in Spirit.

2. Jesus Christ teaches, that we must wait upon him for this Grace, necessary
to accomplish his Commands, who requiring of us a life so pure and perfect,
obliges himself to give us necessary Graces to arrive unto it, since that
without him, we can do nothing of that which he teaches. In brief, we see how
much we are obliged to require this grace, to search after it, to submit our
selves unto it, and to endeavor to become worthy of it. We must not in a
matter so important, as this of our salvation demurre in consideration of our
impotency, or experience of our own incapacity, but raising our selves above
our selves by the spirit of Faith, we must hope in him who commands nothing
impossible, who gives grace abundantly, to accomplish what he demands.

These are the first dispositions of a Christian, and which those souls, that
have any desire to live Christianly, ought first of all to learn. But it
happens quite contrary; the understanding of men is so corrupt, that they
desire not these internal solid virtues, nor require them of God, and, which is
worse, many think it unnecessary to possess them; and that such a life as we
call interior, is for few persons, as if Jesus Christ speaking to the
Samaritan, had spoken only to Her, and not to the whole Church. Others
persuade themselves, that it is impossible to attain them, as not believing the
Apostle, who says, I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me,
Phil. 4.13.
a manifest error wherein many lose themselves, in not sufficiently considering
what they daily see by common experience set before their eyes. If weakest
Women, Virgins and Children, have had strength sufficient, notwithstanding
their young and tender bodies, to embrace tortures almost insupportable, and
have by Grace been strengthened to overcome those difficulties, why should not
we believe also, that abandoning our selves to the power and conduct of Grace,
and becoming faithful to the designs of God, we may have sufficient grace and
capacity to acquire these virtues? If by the help of grace they can attain
strength of body to support the rigours of a penitent life, wherefore by favor
of the same grace, may not we arrive to the possession of that true virtue
wherein a Christian life does consist?

What difficulty do we find in this kind of life? all the obstacle, (if we
nearly consider it) proceeds from not understanding what is the interior life
of the Soul, many believe it a kind of an abstract life, and of the other
World, a life full of care, a life which is an enemy to humane society. Others
consider it as a life of insupportable solitude, and inaccessible
contemplation; every one speaks of it as he pleases. Some condemn it; others
say it is impossible, most believe it difficult. Let us not insist upon words,
they are explicated to all senses; let us only say, that the life we call
interior, is no other then the life of the Soul, the life of the Soul is God,
the grace of God, the life of his grace, the mother of all virtues. Thus then
the interior life is no other then a virtuous Christian life, to which life all
Christians are obliged. An inward and spiritual man must fear God from the
bottom of his soul, must highly esteem of all that is in Christianity, and in
the Church of God, must be vigilant to do nothing to displease God, careful to
preserve his Soul and Conscience in the purity of grace, and, as the Apostle
says, having a good Conscience in all things, Hebr. 13.18.
to have an esteem of God from the bottom of his heart, and of all that belongs
to God, and to carry a mean esteem of himself and all Creatures. To live in
this manner, is that which I call an inward life, the rest without this is
nothing, and to teach Souls any other life, is to betray them.

Now who sees not that all Christians are obliged to this kind of life, if they
will be saved? who finds not now how much this life is easier then it was
represented, and all together contrary to what was expected? Let us then take a
firm resolution to embrace it, and to give our selves with all our Souls to
him, who has given himself to us. He has right and power to live in us, to do
in us, and of us all that he pleases. Let us only take care that we commit our
selves to his conduct, and to the operation of his holy Spirit, and being
assisted by his Grace; Let us cheerfully endeavor the acquisition of Christian
virtues; Let us so order, that grace may reign in us, according to the design
of God, that God may dwell in us, as in a living tabernacle, which Jesus Christ
has consecrated by his blood, and we shall see by experience, that with the
Apostle, Phil. 4.13.
We are able to do all things through Jesus Christ, who strengthens us.

CHAP. II. That the possession of God is the end of a Christian life, whereto
we cannot arrive, but by the grace of Jesus Christ.
BEfore I proceed, I must suppose that I speak to souls desirous to live
virtuously and perfectly in the state of Christianity, according to Jesus
Christ, the Law and Rule. My address is to such who are faithful Dispensators
of the gifts and graces of God, will make use thereof according to the designs
and intentions of the Son of God, endeavoring to profit a hundred fold.

The first thing that I ask of them, is, What is the end of the life and
actions of a Christian? For as in things natural and artificial, the first
thought and knowledge of the workman, is the end of his work; so in Piety, we
must consider and know the end, and the life of Christian actions, that knowing
them we may resolve courageously to undertake them, and promise our selves
great fidelity in the practice of all that shall be proposed to us, or is
necessary for to arrive at so happy an estate.

We know the end of a Christian soul is nothing but God, Ephesians. 1.23.
who is he that fills all in all, says the Apostle; whom it seeks to, and
possesses as its sole happiness, and to enjoy him for ever. None reject this
truth, though it appear high and extraordinary; for they that discourse
ordinarily of Christian perfection, say all that it consists in the love of
God, and in perfect charity, which is true. But if we consider what this love
means, we shall find, that it is nothing but the possession of God, for the
love of God has privilege and power to give God, who is essential love. Thus
considering this truth, we shall find that perfection consists in love, which
love gives us the possession of God; therefore the perfection of our soul must
be the love of God: He that will comprehend the excellency of this, must know
the greatness and dignity of God, from which knowledge he shall learn what the
life of our souls must be, what our entertainments, and how holy our actions
ought to be: For if the means be proportionable to the end, it must necessarily
follow, that the end of our souls, being supernatural, and nothing less then
God himself, the means also that we must use to arrive to this end, must be
supernatural and divine. They therefore who seek perfection in the enjoyment
of this end, must have a particular care, not only to embrace all actions and
uses which may conduct them, but shun and contemn all vain and superfluous
things, which serve not to attain to this end, and must detest them.

We must remember that we cannot arrive at this end; nor to the possession of
God, (who is the perfection of a Christian, his fullness, and the consummation
of his soul) but by the conduct of God himself, by grace alone and mercy, and
according to the testimony of Jesus, none can arrive to the knowledge of God,
but by his divine Light, and by a special Revelation: Mat. 11.27.
No man knows the Son, but the Father, neither knows any man the Father,
save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. And when a man shall come
to this knowledge, he can make no good use of it, unless he be aided with a new
favor; he cannot go to God, nor enjoy his grace or spirit, unless he be aided
and guided by him who says, Jo. 14.6.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no man comes to the Father, but by me.
And that which shows our greatest impotency or need of Jesus Christ, and his
grace, is, that without him, we can do nothing worthy and capable to approach
unto God, and enable us to possess him: Joh. 15.5.
Without me, says he, you can do nothing. On the one side the soul sees and
confesses, that God is her perfection, her happiness and heritage, that in him
she has all; that he alone is her sufficiency, her life and consummation. On
the other side she finds, that she cannot go to him, nor enjoy him, nor think
of him, but by him, that is to say, by his grace, by his infinite mercy; she
feels that she bears in the bottom of her being, not only incapacity, impotency
and feeblness, but of opposition to grace, to the gifts and work of God. On the
other side, she carries the effects of Gods love, she knows the power of God
over her, who can advance her to what degree of communications it shall please
him, and do in her, and by her all that he pleases.

In this consideration, man must adore the secret Judgments, will, and
designs of God over his Creature; he must humble himself in his nothing,
annihilate himself in his humility, and by his knowledge see into the little he
is, the need he has of God, and the misery of a Soul without grace. He must
not content himself with the bare Knowledge of these truths without making
use thereof; the spirit of God can furnish him with several ways to do it.
Behold here three Acts very profitable and necessary to be done as often as we
can with serious application.

1. The soul must resign it self to grace, to all the designs and counsels of
God over it, with a desire to depend efficaciously upon the spirit and conduct
of God, to follow all the ways, to undergo all the effects of the grace and
dispensations of God.

2. The soul must produce an act, whereby offering her consent to God, as much
as is required; she must protest that she consents then and always to all the
operations of Jesus Christ in her, and to all the designs that he has upon
her, of what kind estate and manner soever they be.

3. She must renounce within her self fervently, all her right over her self,
her inclinations, interest, obstruction, and imperfections within her,
imploring the bounty of Jesus, and the power of his spirit, to annihilate in
her all her imperfections, to take from her all hindrances, opposite to the
spirit, grace, and conduct of God. Lastly, she must study the practice of
virtues when occasion shall present them, after the manner proposed, whereof we
now begin to treat.

CHAP. III. Of the practice and means whereby we may arrive to the possession
of God, of his grace and spirit.
IT much imports souls that seek after God, and would live in the perfection of
Christianity, that they endeavor to enter and settle themselves in good and
solid dispositions, for that God chiefly regards in us; and we are not ignorant
that the operations of Grace are always proportioned to the disposition she
puts or finds in the soul. Now amongst all dispositions, the most solid and
necessary, the chief path of the soul to true virtue, is Love and knowledge of
truth. We must love truth, and strongly adhere to it: we must wholly study to
fill our spirits with the knowledge of this Truth, that it may be unto us a
foundation to Christian life, a light in the direction and conduct of our
actions. Therefore before I propose any practice, I always put Truth for a
foundation of Exercises necessary to our subject.

Let us then consider as a certain Principle that the more we act for our
selves, and for the Principles of our being, and nature to conduct our selves,
or our own spirit, the more we estrange our selves from God, and by consequence
from the end for which we are created, from the perfection whereto we are
obliged. The spirit which is in us is the spirit of Adam, our nature, the
nature of Adam, therefore is it a nature become damnable by sins, a spirit
infused into us by the Serpent, possessing us in the consent of Adam. This
spirit and nature is subject to the power and malice of the Devil and sin,
and consequently cannot act but according to the power and malice whereto it is
a slave, for operation follows essence. As this being therefore is estranged
from God, and enemy to him, Ephesians. 2.3.
for by nature we are born the children of wrath, says St. Paul) so it cannot
act but against God. Now by this reducement, man is drawn out of this
Captivity, freed from this bondage, and made a new subject to Grace; he acts no
more according to the Principle of his own being, but by the Principle of
Grace, which gives him a new being, making him a new Creature in Jesus Christ.
To arrive to this Liberty, which we call the Liberty of Grace, and of the
children of God, two things are requisite, the mercy or grace of God, and the
consent and cooperation of the soul. The Christian therefore that will live
virtuously, must first give himself to God, offer him his will and entire
consent to all the designs he has upon him, and to all the effects which he
will by his grace operate in him: Then he must study and labor to withdraw
himself from this bondage, to shake off the yoke of sin, which oppresses and
drags him whither it will to free himself, he must quit himself, that is, his
imperfections, his passions, inclinations, and, much more, sin; he must kill
this spirit of Adam, and pluck it up by the root, that it may the better make
room for the spirit of God; that this holy spirit may live in him, and act by
him, otherwise he can no way possess the true christian virtue, nor attain the
perfection, whereto he is obliged, nor the end whereto he is created, the
possession of God.

Whence it follows, that the first exercises whereto the soul must apply it
self, is to place it self in the liberty of grace, to draw it self out of the
bondage of sin, and to annihilate in it self the spirit of Adam, which it
carries in the very marrow of its bones. Here it must begin, all other
exercises are but unprofitable without this, and all it does will be to no
purpose, unless it arrive to this point. For we must remember, that the virtue
to be truly Christian, is the spirit of Jesus, who acts in us, and that the
perfection of a Christian consists in love, a love that is never without the
possession of God; it is easy then to conclude and believe, that he that will
be virtuous, and a perfect Christian, must make room for God in his heart,
there establish God, there cause his spirit to rule and live. He must root out,
and expel all that is contrary and in enmity to God, even all that is not God;
Mat. 12.30.
for he that is not with me, says Jesus Christ, is against me. The true
exercise and principal care of a Christian consists herein, all others that
abut not upon this, we must despise, saying with St. Paul, in Jesus Christ,
neither circumcision avails any thing, Gal. 5.6.
nor uncircumcision, but faith which is by love.

Now the only question is, how we may arrive to this happiness; herein is the
difficulty. We say it is by inward and outward mortification, by the senses,
and by the spirit, by vigilance in all things, that we neither receive,
consult, nor do any thing contrary to God, or that may displease him; by
prayer, by discourse. In fine, it is by the grace of God, for it belongs to God
alone and Jesus Christ, to make us free, and draw us out of the captivity of
our selves and sin. If the Son shall make you free, Jo. 8.36.
you shall be free indeed, says Jesus Christ. It is an effect only of the
mercy of God, who alone can give us a new estate, and reestablish all in us.
Wherefore when we have labored and done all that we are able, we must think
that we have done nothing, we must have recourse to grace; we must enter into
an humble resentment of our misery, we must cry after Jesus Christ for our
relief. Herein it is good to form often these following acts, or rather to
carry them continually in the bottom of our hearts; we must desire, with a
desire full of efficacy to be filled and possessed by Jesus Christ, to submit
all to him, to require this grace of him with humility; to offer and present
our selves to him for it, giving him from this time, and always the consent
that he requires of us, and when we find that he gives us the first fruits of
his spirit, that he begins to live and move in us, then we must be faithful in
correspondence thereunto, and preserve a great attention to his motions, and
divine and inward operations.

2. We must often renounce our selves, our self-love, and our spirit, to
sacrifice our selves before God, that is, to renounce our own Intentions,
inclinations and dispositions, to live no longer, then in the holy will,
intentions, divine and adorable dispositions of Jesus Christ. For as anciently,
the victime was not only killed, but also consumed before God; so we must
offer our selves after the same manner, that God may annihilate and consume in
us, all that is of us; we must ask it of God, not out of self-interest and
profit, but for his glory, out of a desire that his holy will may be fulfilled
in us.

3. We must pray Jesus Christ to work in us an effect of his power and love,
and not to wait after our infirmites, to establish in us his Kingdom, his
glory, and the power of his grace and spirit.

4. We must by little and little, with care mortify our nature, all that is in
us, and of us, and with the same care effect a continual annihilation, of our
spirit, of our judgment, and of our own motions, for they are contrary to God,
and repugnant to our good.

This being granted, we shall see how much we are obliged to alienate and defy
our selves, seeing that all that is of us, as being of us, strives to separate
us from God; and therefore this that is of us, must be mightly humbled, when we
see that the source of all our evils is in our selves, and that we have a
continual inclination to evil. Let us weigh these truths, and endeavor to
bear these dispositions, seeing they are necessary to perfection, and to
establish us in the Kingdom of Grace; that so placing our selves under the
conduct of God, we may be enabled to live in a perfect conformity to his holy
Will.

That we may be the more encouraged in this labor, let us speak of the Motives
that oblige us to seek this perfection.

The first Motive.
CHAP. IV. That by Creation man is obliged to tend to this perfection, and to
resign himself to God.
WHen we say that man is obliged to tend to perfection, we impose not a new
Law, but propose the indispensible duty he owes to his Creator. For as a
creature he belongs to God his Creator, he depends on him, and (though he would
not, yet) must he subsist only by him. In this quality he must live not only
subject to his government and conduct, but is obliged by the Law of all created
beings, according to the intention of his Author, and the end prescribed him:
For as the creature has no other being, then what he received of his Creator,
so his being has no other power nor end, then what he, who gave him that
being, gives and prescribes to him. By the same Principle that he received his
being from God, he is obliged to act conformable to the power and end
prescribed to him. All creatures employ themselves according to the capacity of
their being, in that for which God created them; they tend directly (if they go
not aside) to the end for which they were created and ordained. Man above all
the rest, ought to do the same, to live according to the capacity he has
received of God, incessantly to tend to the end which the divine wisdom has
proposed to him: For God in the creation of the Universe, seemed to have regard
to nothing but man; he stayed not till he had made him, thought only of
perfecting him: he made the world, says Saint Basil, as if he applied not
himself unto it; he spoke but a word, and the World was made; but man, the work
of his hands, to which he applies his care, he polisheth him with the touches
of divine perfection, makes him the Masterpiece of his work, the last draught
of his created perfection, framing him after his own Image, and designing him
for Heaven.

In what respect soever then we consider man, we shall see by the condition of
his being, and favor of his Creator, that he is obliged to great perfection,
since the capacity and end of his being regards nothing but God. He is in a
capacity to love him, and is created to possess him. O man! why do thou not
see the dignity of thy being, the happiness which thou may possess, the
eminency of the condition whereto thou art created? Thou only of all creatures
bear the effects, the favor and love of thy Creator; thou only art capable
to love him; that which he has refused all other creatures, he has in
abundance bestowed on thee. After so great a favor dare thou appear without
love? Can thou live without loving him who created thee only to love him?

When we say that man by the condition of his being has a capacity to love
God, we mention the highest benefit, the most signal favor that he has
received of his Creator, for the capacity to love him, gives him power to
possess him.

All creatures, indeed, even the most insensible, feel the Majesty and Power of
their Creator; they are left to the conduct and government of their God, but
not one has power to love him, but man, who was created only for this end,
being made capable to love his Creator. Therewith God has not only given him
this capacity, and the advantage of so noble and divine a quality, but wills
also that all that he has created, should further him in this love, and serve
as motives to teach him to love. Is not man then obliged to love, so good, so
kind, so liberal a Creator; and if he be obliged to love him, is he not as
much obliged to perfection, seeing this perfection consists in love, which
gives us God.

God in creating man, uses another means to oblige him to him, and to seek
perfection in that, besides making him capable to love his Creator, he has
assigned as the end and perfection of his being the possession of his Creator.
This resentment the Father of nature gives us. Faith teaches us that the end
of man is supernatural, that this end is no other then God, whom man must
possess. Thus by Creation, man is not only in a capacity to love God, (a most
singular favor) but has also for his end the possession of God himself.
Whence we must conclude, that as every thing seeks its perfection, and by a
natural and necessary instinct, runs to its last end to enjoy it and repose
there; so man being created to possess God, his ultimate end, carries an
instinct that draws him to God, and by the same Law whereby he is naturally
obliged to seek perfection, he is obliged to love and seek God in love and
possession, in whom consists his perfection. This instinct is natural and
proper to him, as it is natural to a stone to tend downward, and to fire to
mount upward; whereby it is evident, that we must promise our selves not only
in Heaven the fulfilling of this Law, but we must begin it upon earth, and from
the first use of our reason, observe this precept. Indeed this capacity of Love
is fulfilled and perfected in Heaven, only in the state of glory, but we must
begin to love here. We must resign to God who is our end, if in the end we will
possess him, for whatsoever a Man sows, Gal. 6.7.
that shall he also reap says the Apostle. To this God invited us by the
benefit of Creation, to this he obliges us by an eternal Law, a Law which he
has engraved in the Center of our being, a Law which can by no means be
defaced during our life, a Law indispenceable. For man was only created to
love God, and has no capacity more natural then that of Love, his only
business both in Earth and Heaven, is to love God and possess him, wherein
consists perfection.

Considering these truths, it is impossible to conceive to what blindness the
corruption of times have reduced the spirits of men, who being born for Heaven
only, spend all their thoughts on Earth, and separating themselves from their
God, are so strongly fettered to the Creature, that they know not what
perfection is, believing they have power to dispense with so holy a Law. But
can this Law of Love be blotted out of our hearts? Can we despise it,
notwithstanding the many reasons that oblige us to it? Is there any thing more
reasonable then to love them that love us? what greater love could God testify
to us, then to make us capable to love him, and to create us to possess him?
even nature obliges us hereto, this benefit is an act of Love. God loving us to
be beloved again, we can do no less in acknowledgement of this benefit of
love, but perfectly love him; we can never deny we are obliged to this
acknowledgement, if we would not be convinced of ingratitude, nor can we
acknowledge it but by loving him. God who is all fullness and self-sufficiency,
can receive nothing of us but love, and therefore by the same Law, whereby we
are obliged to acknowledge him our Creator, we are obliged to love, and
consequently to be perfect, since perfection cannot be without love.

God himself has engraved this design, imprinted this Law of Love in the
Center of our souls, and bottom of our hearts. Therefore as Thomas of Aquin
observes, the form of our heart bears the image of this Love, it is large at
the top, and pointed at the bottom, open to Heaven, shut to Earth, to show us
that we live only for Heaven, that our heart the seat of Love, is open only
to receive and bear the influences of Heaven, and not capable to have any
besides him, who reigns in the Heavens: and the form of our body straight and
tall, tells us, that Heaven only is the object of our sight, the subject of
ous love.

The soul by its most sensible inclinations, is carried on to this love. By the
same necessity that the part loves the whole, the son his Father, man is
obliged to love his God, by Creation his Father, his all; and were it not that
the soul ruins these motions by strange love whereto she ties her self, she
would feel her self so powerfully attracted thereby, that she would not be able
to restrain the violence, or to stop the course thereof. This is so true, that
do she what she can, though she do suffer her self to be transported with the
love of Creatures, to the prejudice of the love of God, yet can she not root
out these resentments of God, so deep this Law of acknowledging her God is
engraved in her being. For when she has loved all but God, she sees that she
has loved nothing, she knows that there is neither firm content, assured
repose, nor true perfection, but in the love of her Creator. Now though we
would disingage our selves from this Obligation, yet is it impossible, for God
who wills that we love him, makes use of all things, yea even of our self-love
to attract us to his love. In loving our selves, we love naturally what is
good, our own good. Now God is not only the true Sovereign good, but by
creation he would be the only good of our souls, that we might love him in
this quality, for what is more to man then God? The Lord is my heritage and my
portion, Psalm. 142.5
says David. If naturally every thing loves his particular good, why should
not a man be obliged to love his God, who is his true, his only good; and if
he be obliged to love him, he is by consequence obliged to possess him, and in
possessing him, to be perfect, which is the scope of this first Motive.

The second Motive.
CHAP. V. That Man, in as much as he is a Sinner, and the child of Adam, is
obliged to seek God as the only remedy to his evils.
WE are Criminals, the children of death, guilty Laesae Majstatis Divinae; the
World understood aright, is but a Prison, where we are detained, during the
excution of the Sentence pronounced against the children of Adam the Offender,
we being such, have forfeited our right, we are deprived, and made unworthy of
all sorts of graces, forfeited our privileges; for as children of Adam, as
sinners, as culpable before God, we have no more any right our selves, to our
life, to our actions, to the world, or to any creature; but having lost all by
Sin, we are left wholly to the Justice of God, who by reason of our offense,
has reason to dispoyl us of all the gifts of grace and nature, and to do with
us as pleases him, according to the rigor of his equitable Justice. Moreover,
as children of Adam, we are so miserable, that we may truly say, there is
nothing more unworthy, more unprofitable, more incapable then man; his
unworthiness is so great, that he cannot think one thought of God, be it never
so little, if God of his mercy does not infuse it into him; he is unworthy to
present himself before his Creator, to appear before the Throne of his
sovereign Majesty even to demand grace and pardon for his sins. This
unworthiness arrived to such a point, that it was necessary the Son of God
should be made man; that God immortal should be clothed with our mortality, to
purchase for us by his blood and death, a power to serve him; to merit for us
by his life and sufferings, the graces necessary for us, to produce good
thoughts to obtain for us permission to present our selves to God, and before
him, to reinstate us with a hope of pardon and trust in his Grace.

Man as a Sinner, is so unprofitable and incapable; that without Gods
particular grace, without an effect of his divine mercy he can do no good work,
nor hope for any blessing or favor; and if he receive any, if he find himself
replenished with love and hope, or capable of any good, it is only by the
bounty of God, who, though justly provoked, stays the effects of his Justice,
that we might taste the fruits of his inexhaustible goodness. Considering these
motives and truths, let us stand here before God, as guilty of divinae
Magistatis laesae: Let us look upon our selves as sinners, and we shall clearly
see, that by this estate we are left to Gods Justice, that we must of necessity
leave our selves to his conduct and divine will. For if for civil crimes men
worthy of death are left to the Laws of Justice, and the will of their Prince,
who will dispose of their life and goods as pleases him; certainly man, as a
sinner worthy of death, ought to be left to the will of his God to do with him
according to the rigor of his Justice, or effects of his mercy.

This is the first practick to be learned from this Motive, for the soul in the
consideration of these truths, ought to do that in love, humility, and choice,
which she cannot avoid upon constraint. A Christian, as the child of Adam, and
so a sinner, must put himself before God, resign himself wholly to him, and
with an humble submission and contentment of spirit, receive from his most wise
hand, all the effects of his divine conduct, and accept, with a resignation,
good and evil, privation and enjoyment, all that may happen unto him. Above
all, he must be careful to continue in a profound humility before God, exposing
himself to the rays of his divine mercy, to move him to pardon. From this
Principle, we draw a second practice, seeing the need we have of God. For
considering our selves to be so wretched and miserable, we are obliged to seek
a remedy for our evils. Now as this cannot be found but in God, the repairer
of our faults, the freer of our souls, it will follow, that by the knowledge of
our miseries, and the weight of the iniquities which oppress us, we are driven
to have recourse unto God, even by the same exigence whereunto sin has
reduced us, and are obliged to seek out God. Every way that man considers
himself, he finds himself in a want of God, and consequently obliged to seek
God, as the only happiness of his soul, the only remedy of his evils.

The better to understand this, we must remember, that by sin, man is equally
miserable in two considerations, the rigor and violence of sin which oppress
him, and the evils and disorders whereinto sin precipitates him; from which
two states, he cannot get but by possessing of God. For the first, faith
teaches us, that man cannot get out of sin, do whatsoever he can, if God
himself come not to relieve and deliver him. Man, of himself, may lose himself,
may plunge himself, may sell himself, may enslave himself, but he cannot free
himself, nor bestow himself, but by the mercy of God, who gave us his Son, to
re-establish all things in us, as the Apostle affirms. Now, this
re-establishment is done only by the spirit of love and charity, which is the
spirit of God in us, given to us. From whence we see, that he that will avoid
his miseries, and shake off the yoke of sin, must necessarily possess God, who
only can free him.

Hence we may observe, what a work the conversion of a soul to God is, and the
freeing of a sinner, by what way soever it is wrought in man. To apprehend
properly the importance of this work of grace, we must say, that he that would
be converted, and delivered from sin, must not only go out of his sin, but
must also possess God, and consequently by the same Motive that he desires to
go out of his sin, he is obliged to dispose himself to possess God, and to
become worthy of so holy an heritage; for to confess his sin, to turn to God,
to be delivered from his sin, and to possess God is all one thing; wherein
appears the need we have to seek God, and how seriously a Christian ought to
labor in an affair, wherein his eternal safety does consist.

The second state of our miseries, does no less oblige us to seek God then the
former, for by the effect of sin, and the Tyranny it exercises over us, we
are continually tossed about, disordered made vagabonds, and precipitated from
imperfection to imperfection, from sin to sin, from trouble to trouble. This
evil has no remedy, what resolution soever the soul takes, what diligence
soever it uses, what habit soever it assumes, it will never find calm, rest,
or deliverance, till it has found and possesses God, and be possessed of him.
Never shall she be in true liberty, Christian liberty, the liberty of the
children of God, until she possesses the spirit of God; wherein they deceive
themselves, who to acquire the peace of the soul, and true liberty of the
spirit, use a thousand practices, and a multitude of exercises; peace and true
Christian liberty, being not to be found but in the possession of God. Many
things indeed that we speak and do, serve to lessen our trouble and thraldom,
but not one can give true liberty, or the peace of the spirit, but the
possession of God. The reason is demonstrative; nothing can have peace,
liberty, and repose, but in its proper Center. God is the Center of the soul,
therefore in God alone is her peace, liberty, and repose, and as long as she is
with God, and possesses him, she is in liberty and repose no longer. Whence we
evidently conclude, that while the soul is separated from God, she is
tyrannized over by the malice of sin, continually drawn into circumstances,
terms, and subversions. And souls that make show to search after the truth, and
to live in the purity of Christianity, if they seek not God purely, and
seriously; if he dwells not in the bottom of their hearts, shall never live
but in disquiet, and in trouble, in scruples, and in Pannick terrors: For it is
an infallible maxim, That man can never rest but in the possession of God, the
contre of his soul.

In this we see the strict Obligation that we have to seek God, and to study
Christian perfection, which consists in the possession of God. This is the
resentment, the desire, and demand of the Spouse, when she runs after her God,
crying to him, Cant. 1.7.
Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest; where thou make thy
flock to rest at noon, for why should I be as one that turns aside by the
flocks of thy companions? This holy Lover knows, that as long as she is
separated from her God, she shall be subjected to error, and to the tyrannical
usurpation of sin: she knows by experience, that he that is not with God in the
pessession of his spirit, shall always be overwhelmed with all sorts of
misfortunes, led captive, and dragged by his own lusts, deceived and betrayed
by the foolish love of the creatures, and therefore she seeks her God, with so
much ardor and affection. They that will withdraw themselves from these evils,
and assure repose to their consciences, peace to their spirits, and quiet to
their passions, must do the like; they must seek God purely, sincerely, and
with perseverance; they must endeavor to possess him, that they may find in
him a perfect liberty and assured peace. Saint Austin says all this in two
words; O Lord, our heart is always unsettled and uquiet, until the time it
shall repose in thee. Then again, addressing his speech to men; Wherefore,
says he, O men of nothing, do you wander in the search of many things?
Wherefore does your covetousness make you unconstant, vagabonds in your
thoughts and desires, seek, seek him who is all things, in him you shall have
all, there you shall find rest and remedy for your miseries.

This care we must have; which cannot be sufficiently recommended to you;
therefore, as it is of consequence, we must proceed in discourse of it.

CHAP. VI. Of the state of Man after the Sin of Adam, and of the need he has
of his God.
ALl the duties of the soul are comprised in these words of David, Psalm. 34.14.
Eschew evil, and do good; words that contain all Laws, divine and humane; for
they only forbid evil, and command good; words so absolute and generally true,
that he who keeps this Commandment, shall certainly be perfect. It is not
needful to explicate this Proposition, it is a natural Precept, a Law God
has graven in the bottom of Reason, that none might be ignorant of it, that
all might be without excuse before the Tribunal of God. Notwithstanding, (O
unhappiness of humane nature!) since the sin of Adam, we are become so
unworthy, so criminal, that we cannot, without the favor of God, either
eschew evil, or do good, so evident is it, that man has need of God.

As children of Adam, we are children of malediction, begotten in a general
condemnation, conceived in sin, born children of wrath. Adam indeed gave us
nature and life, but subject to the power and malice of sin, which subjects us
to the Devil, confining us to his will and conduct. From the womb we bear the
yoke of sin, as the Scripture says, we are in the Kingdom of death, so far
impotent and evil, that without the grace of God we can do nothing but works of
death and captivity, wherein we see the need we have of God to avoid this
misery. For if from our birth we are subjected to the tyranny of sin, doubtless
we should be drawn to all sorts of vice; there is no sin which man would not
commit, if God did not withold him; Every imagination of the thought of his
heart is only evil continually (says God of man) so evil, Genesis 6.5.
that he would lose, and incessantly precipitate himself in desires of sins and
abominations, if God by his power did not withold him; so true is it, that we
cannot fly evil without Gods help, we are so much slaves to it, that only God
can free and draw us out of this captivity.

This it is Saint Austin means in his Confessions, when he thanks God, not
only for delivering him from the sins he committed, but also for restraining
him from all others. I ascribe it unto thy grace, says he, that thou have
dissolved my sins, as the Sun does Ice. I refer to thy mercy, all the sins
which I have not committed. I confess that all has been forgiven me, as well
that which I did of my own will, as that which I did not commit, being
prevented and aided by thy grace. Where he teaches us, that without the grace
of God we cannot shun evil; thus is manifest the need we have of God. If the
Lord of Sabbath (says St. Paul out of the Prophet) had left us a seed, Rom 9.29
we had been as Sodom, and been made like unto Gomorrah.

This is not hard to conceive, if, by the way we consider, that man, as the
Son of Adam, is degraded from the justice and holiness of God, deprived of
grace, despoyl'd of all his gifts, cruelly wounded in his nature, is separated
from God, has wholly converted himself to the Creature, and being reduced to,
and plunged in this deplorable condition, is so impotent, that he cannot raise
himself according to his end and perfection up to God, unless assisted by the
grace of Jesus Christ, who only can draw us out of the abyss of sin,
reinvest us in holiness and mercy, as with new gifts merited by his death and
sufferings, he alone can lead us to God; and as without him, we separate our
selves continually from God, so with his assistance we approach unto him, and
by his grace, we who were children of cursing, are made children of God and of
blessing. Wherein, on one side appears the miserable estate whereunto we are
reduced as children of Adam; on the other, the great need we have of God and
his assistance. Now in considering these truths, if we have any sense of
salvation, will we not immediately say that we are obliged to seek God, to
implore the power of his spirit, and strongly to renounce the power of sin,
the spirit of Adam, and to resign our selves wholly to the grace and conduct of
God, protesting and acknowledging before the throne of his mercies, the need we
have of him, to eschew evil, which is man's first duty?

If we examine the need we have of God, to do good and practice virtue, we
shall find our selves in the like indigence. Faith teaches us, that we cannot
do any work of salvation, if we be not joined to God by grace, and, as Jesus
Christ says, as the branch cannot bear fruit except it abide in the vine, Jo.
15.4.5.
no more can ye, except ye abide in me. We can do nothing of our selves, as our
selves, because sin has brought us into such a condition, that being
dispoiled of the gifts of God, and made unworthy of his grace, we are reduced
to such impotence, that we can neither serve nor love God, nor do any good
work, if we have not of him grace, strength, and merit to do it. He alone gives
us the thought of good, nor is that sufficient, he must give us also the will
and resolution to accomplish it, which when we have also received, if God
himself give us not the accomplishment of it, it is nothing. For
notwithstanding all the good will and resolutions in the World, we shall never
put them in practice without grace, and after all this perseverance in good, is
necessary, for he only shall be crowned who continues to the end. Rev. 2.10
Yet we cannot have, nor merit it, it is the gift only of the mercy of God, a
pure effect of his bounty. Herein appears the extreme need that we have of God,
how necessary this grace is to us, not only to do well, but also to persevere.
From these truths we learn that a Christian that will be saved, must not only
have a good will, or entertain a good intention, but further he must seriously
seek God, adhere to him, and possess him, since in him alone consists the
grace that is necessary, to do well, and to end well, in a holy perseverance.

Salvation is not a thing so easy as we conceive, for we have nothing at all
in our selves as our selves, that can help to save us. On the contrary, all
that is in us, is in opposition to grace, and by sin conspires our ruin. He
that will save himself, must seek from without himself the way of his
salvation, the power to do works worthy of Paradise, the power to serve God,
which he cannot find but in Jesus Christ, there he must seek it, of him alone
he must have the power to serve God, the merit of his good works, the grace of
perseverance, and the conduct of his life: consequently, he must possess and
adhere to him, if he will attain his happiness, nothing else is of advantage,
Joh. 15.5.
seeing Jesus Christ says himself, Without me ye can do nothing.

Rules and Constitutions may be given us; Uses and Documents may be prescribed
to practice Virtue, and to attain to Christian perfection, but all will be
without profit and stability, if we go not out of our selves to possess Jesus
his spirit and grace, to receive in him and of him, true Virtue, stability and
perseverance. For the grace of Jesus is wholly to have true Virtue and
Christianity, and perfectly to accomplish the actions and practices that are
proposed to us.

If we examine these principles of truth, we shall immediately find from whence
arriveth an evil commonly observable in the Church of God, that many souls
live in a good observance, labor much, and exercise themselves in the practice
of the number of the Virtues, yet make little or no progress toward the
perfection that they desire, and never arrive at the end which they propose to
themselves. If a reason may be given for a misfortune so general, it
appears, that this cannot proceed from any thing, but that such souls seek
not God purely, nor resign themselves to his conduct, to follow with simplicity
and fidelity, the order which God has established on them, but with a respect
to themselves, desirous to rise and arrive to an estate whereunto God does not
call them; or they refuse to labor with fidelity, to attain that whereunto God
calls them. They regard not God, they work not by grace, nor seek it where it
is, but trust in their own strength, and work not with submission to grace it
self. They seek not in Jesus Christ strength and power to work, for they think
not of it, being so blind that they rely upon themselves, and by secret esteem
of their own actions and Labors, easily persuade themselves, that there is
Virtue, where none is, and that they are in some estate of perfection, when
they are very far from it, confiding in their own good will, or in a simple
intention, which they think good. Believing this enough for them, they neglect
or despise all the rest, which is of greater importance.

Now, to remedy this evil, which is not to be neglected, you must practice what
I shall tell you.

1. We must be in will and perpetual desire of God, in a resolution not to
love or act, but by grace, and by the spirit of Jesus; this desire is a
disposition little known, yet more important then it seems; for God will be
desired, and takes pleasure to see a soul thirst and run after him: We see that
he deferred his great mercies, and gave not his son to the world, till 4000
years after man had desired him.

2. We must demand his spirit with earnestness, crying from the bottom of our
hearts, after Jesus the only freer of our souls, the true principle of grace.

3. All our recourse must be to Jesus; not relying, or confiding in any thing
but his power, virtue and grace, to love, and act by his dispositions. This is
properly that we call acting by the spirit, and by submission to grace.

Let us proceed to the consideration of truth to give our selves light, and to
let those that would be saved, know the need they have of God, and the rule
they ought to observe in their actions, to render themselves worthy of God.
Faith teaches us, that every good gift, Jam. 1.17.
and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
Lights; that the eternal Father gives us all by his Son and in his Son,
and consequently the Son of God is made all things to us, in him we have all,
out of him we have nothing, whence he is called the gift of God; Job 4.10.
And St. Paul speaking of the eternal Father, who gives us his Son, says,
that he is made all things unto us; by him we are in Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30.
who becomes unto us by God, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Redemption. These words represent unto us two truths. First, That we are in
Jesus; which shows us the adherence we ought to have to Jesus Christ. The other
that we have all in him, as having the Son of God, in whom is true love, true
wisdom, and assured salvation.

By those truths we learn that Jesus Christ being the true gift of God, we have
nothing if we possess not him. We must therefore labor to become fit to
possess him with the effects that he will operate in us. Herein consists the
practice of Christian life, to receive Jesus as a gift of God, to possess him
as a great treasure, to offer him to God, to refer him to his Father, and with
him our Being, our life and actions. Our soul must be continually employed in
this double practice, in these two continual motions toward God, one to
receive Jesus Christ who is the grace of graces, the other to offer him to his
Father, he being the gift of gifts, and with him to refer our selves entirely
to the glory of his Father, and accomplishment of his holy will.

The third Motive.
CHAP. VII. That a Christian is a Member of Jesus Christ, and as such he must
be ruled by the Spirit, and live the life of Jesus Christ.
THe most noble Quality man can have on earth, the most happy condition whereto
he may be advanced, is that of a Christian. By this state, God always good and
full of mercy, relieves him in his faults, repairs his losses, calls and
associates him to his divine greatness. By the grace of Christianity he is the
child of God, and member of Jesus Christ, and capable of the life of his own
Son, and by consequence he will fill him with the spirit and perfections of God.

Thus the Apostle speaking of the Eternal Father, Gal. 14.1.
says, that he has sent forth the spirit of his Son into our hearts, assuring
us, that by this spirit, we are sons of God; and he frequently calls Christians
the members of Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 5.30.
This quality and motive is the foundation of the state and spirit of
Christianity, that shows what a Christian ought to be, and how eminent and
accomplished the perfection is whereto he must arrive.

Saint Paul tells us, Col. 1.18.
we are members of Jesus Christ; the Church is a body, the mystical body of
the Son of God, whereof Jesus is the head, Ephesians. 4.25. 1 Cor. 6.15.
and Christians the members; Ye are the body of Jesus Christ, and members of
his members, says the Apostle; Know ye not that your bodies are the members of
Christ? This Text is clear, which if we consider intentively, it will furnish
us with rich thoughts, and lift us up to the knowledge of the dignity of a
Christian. I leave it to the piety of the reader to insist upon this subject.
If according to the Doctrine of the Apostle, we are members of Jesus Christ, it
must follow, that we wholly belong to Jesus Christ, and are to him in truth and
by grace, that which by nature the members are to their head. By the head the
members are enlivened; the head has the care and guidance of them all: so in
Jesus, and by Jesus, we are enlivened, guided, and advanced, of his fullness
have we all received, Joh. 1.16.
says Saint John; he is our life, the soul of our souls, says Saint Austin,
and much more, then the soul is the life of our body. Now, if the head and soul
enliven, guide, animate, and make the body to subsist, if the body have a
continual dependence on the conduct and motions of the soul, is it not also
agreeable that a Christian be animated with the spirit of the Son of God which
he possesses, and whereof he is wholly possessed, that he be wholly left to
the care and conduct, and motions of Jesus Christ, of whom he is a member?

These are the two Estates wherein a perfect Christian must be; he must possess
God, and be resigned to the conduct of the spirit of God. We have already
showed how much he is obliged to seek God, and to possess him, if he will
arrive to the perfection to which he is called. It remains that we know how he
must resign himself wholly to God. As members of the Son of God, we are
necessarily and essentially (if I may so speak) left to the love, care, and
conduct of the heavenly Father, which love is the same love which he has for
his Son, the same conduct that he has over him. For we are part of his Son,
being his members, and, as the Apostle says, his fullness. The Church, says he
is the body of Jesus, and the fullness of him that fills all in all, wherein
we see the happy estate of a Christian, who by the grace of Christianity, being
made a member of Jesus Christ in pursuit of his state is left to the same care,
the same conduct, the same love that the eternal Father has for his Son.
Being then arrived to this happiness, what remains, but to live with great
vigilance, to put our selves, to leave our selves, and to maintain our selves
in this love of the eternal Father, to abandon our selves, soul and body, to
divine conduct, to remain in this union and unity with his Son (for he looks on
us in his Son, as members and part of his Son) and also being united to Jesus,
to submit our selves to the disposal of his spirit, and to the motions of his
grace, as the members are to the head.

It was the request of Jesus to his Father the last day of his life, the eve
before his death; for this he made that prayer full of love, repeated at large
by Saint John, wherein he begs of his Father, that he would have the same love
for us that he had for him from eternity, and that he would be by grace to us,
what he is to him by nature, that the same unity of love that binds them
together, may be in us, that we may not live but in this love, in this uion and
unity, that we may live in him by his spirit and love, as he lives in the unity
of the spirit and love of his Father. Words of love, and of truth, words of
efficacy, words which clearly show the designs Jesus has over us, what he has
merited for us, and what ought to be the life of a Christian, and in whom
consists the spirit of Christianity.

If we proceed a little further in the consideration of the lights of Faith, we
shall find a new light which discovers this truth. The Economy and the works
of God in the Mystery of the Incarnation, teach us that the whole conduct of
the Church, all the regency of the world, and by consequence the government of
all souls in general, and every one in particular is left to Jesus, who is the
way, the truth, and the life of our souls. He is, says the Apostle, our
Fullness; he is our All, and that which raises the conduct of Christ, and
renders it admirable, is, that it is accompanied with wisdom, power, and
infinite love: For he employs his power wholly to furnish us, to assist us in
all things; his wisdom leads us to God, and establishes us in the state and
perfection God requires of us; and he employs his love to enrich us with his
treasures, to enlighten us with his spirit, to guide by his light, and to
communicate to us, by the excess of his bounty, his being, his life, and his
greatness. Thus the quality whereto we are advanced by Christianity, being made
members of Jesus, renders us worthy of the care and conduct of the eternal
Father, and binding us to Jesus, makes us by grace one with him, partakers of
his greatness.

This expresses the perfection whereto God has called us; These truths
considered, will cause us highly to esteem the grace and state of Christianity.
These motives are so powerful, that they seem not only to invite, but to
constrain us by amorous allurements to resign our selves wholly to God. Let us
add a common Doctrine of Saint Bernard, as the last draught of this admirable
conduct. The conduct, says he, of Jesus in us, is admirable, in that he has
as much care of one single soul, as well as of all; his wisdom is employed for
one soul as well as for all; and he loves one soul with the same infinite love
wherewith he loves all; yea, he loves his elect and Christians, with the same
love wherewith he loves himself. Here let us stop, for more cannot be said;
Let us adore this love which operates with great things in the souls of the
Elect. Let us love him who loves us so much; and let us live the life of him
who lives in us. If we reflect upon these truths, justly may we be astonished
at the obstinacy and blindness of those who make so many difficulties to resign
themselves wholly both body and soul to the conduct of God, and absolutely to
abandon themselves to the providence, love and wisdom of Jesus. What? can any
man yet doubt of the bounty and love of God? distrust his wisdom after so
manifest a truth? Is it possible a Christian can imagine that he is to take care
of the creature, that humane prudence is necessary where God vouchsafes by his
bounty to apply and employ his care, wisdom, and infinite goodness? But only to
apply himself to the way of God, that is to say, with an application worthy of
God, perfect as God is perfect; good, as God is good, accommodating himself,
notwithstanding to the commodity and feebleness of the creature.

If we adhere to these truths, it is fit, that as members of the Son of God, we
live subject to his will, abandon our selves to his loving conduct,
endeavoring nothing so much as to please and satisfy him. This God requires
of us; to this all Christians are obliged; and therefore, to profit by this
third Motion, let us go out of our selves, let us quit the care of our selves,
a care that nourishes nothing but complacency and self-satisfaction, which
altogether confides in the disordinate love of our selves: Let us resign our
selves wholly to his care and providence of him, who uncessantly fixes the eye
of his infinite bounty upon us; Let us trust in him who has a heart all of
love, who only thinks of us, and be all to him, and for him; Let us endeavor
to have no satisfaction nor complacency but in him, seeing he alone according
to the Prophet, Jer. 31.3.
Loves us from eternity, calls and draws us lovingly to come to him, and to be
his. If you now require some forms for this Resignation, I will propose them.

CHAP. VIII. Practices to help a Christian to live in subjection to Grace and
the spirit of Jesus.
THe Christian who would profit by the Motive we last proposed, must weigh the
quality he has in being a member of Jesus Christ; for Jesus being his head,
will unite himself to him, appropriate himself to him, possess him, incline
him, infuse into him his own being and life, guide him on the earth, as well as
redeem him on the Cross; and by a particular bounty, love him with the same
love that he loves himself, and as the head loves his members.

1. To make use of these thoughts, the Christian seeing himself so chosen,
united, and amorously drawn to Jesus Christ, must make a particular profession
and protestation to adhere to Jesus, to renounce all humane prudence, all care
and conduct of himself, leave himself wholly in all things, to the power,
providence and conduct of Jesus. Farther, he must yield up all the right that
God his Creator has given him to his liberty to his life, to his actions, and
to all inferior creatures, putting it into the hands of Jesus Christ upon whom
he must depend in all things, protesting that he will use them no farther then
as dependant on the conduct, intentions and will of Jesus.

2. The true Christian must make a strong resolution to rely only on God, all
other things being indifferent unto him, whence he will endeavor to follow and
accept with tranquillity of spirit, all that God ordains, and to establish
himself wholly in this confidence of God, in this conformity and relyance on
the conduct of Jesus. He will study to bear in his heart and soul, a contempt
of all natural prudence, in making little account even of things that depend
on his grace, saying to himself, that he will only rely on Jesus who is his
All, and that whatever happen, supernatural grace, which is the light of
Heaven, will never fail to give him as much knowledge and experience in all
things, as shall be necessary for him, but far more profitably, and more
perfectly then humane prudence can do.

3. As this manner of doing may have great and continual oppositions, so the
Christian, who desires to please God, must endeavor to live with vigilance
over himself, and particularly have a great care to mortify the assaults of
Nature, the motions of the humane spirit, and the applications and agitations
of the wisdom of the flesh, all which opposes the spirit of God. And because
nature uses to insinuate amidst grace, and, disguising her self, dissemble to
be what she is not, (we not knowing it, and even contrary to our own
intentions) to prevent this deceit, and to assure our selves in a matter so
dangerous, yet hard to be discovered, it is necessary that the Christian with a
great humility, and a desire full of efficacy, renounce all the motions and
effects of nature, and give himself with all his heart to the spirit and grace
of Jesus. After all which he must yet have a great vigilance upon the bottom
and the dispositions of his soul, that with a great fidelity he may live in the
subjection he ought to the grace and conduct of Jesus.

To help us in this practice, and to see how important it is; we must consider
that the effect of the grace of Christianity, may be reduced to one point: The
designs of God upon our souls are reduced to one thing only, which it is
their aim to effect in us. This point which God will do in us, is to establish
his sanctification, glory and Kingdom in our souls. This is the end of his
design, whereto all the effects of his grace and divine operations tend. Whence
we may infer, that if God requires nothing of us, nor has no other design on
us, but to establish in our souls his empire and the Kingdom of his spirit and
grace, we also must have no other care, desire, or application, then to subject
our selves to the Kingdom of God, to live in the obedience and conduct of his
spirit and grace. And as all the designs of God unite themselves in this one
point, so the Christian must labor in this point, that he may be, in all, even
to the least of his thoughts, and actions, and smallest motions of his soul,
subjected to the Kingdom of God. Hereby I mean that all the motions, thoughts
and actions of a Christian must be ruled and subjected to the love, power,
will, and conduct of God, that with peace and inward content, he must receive
the effects of God, and walk with fidelity in the ways God requires, that God
may reign perfectly in him by his love and grace, and that he may reign here in
all those ways and manners, (that is, as gloriously) as he raigns with the
Saints in Heaven, proportionably notwithstanding to our present estate and
meanness.

I know not whether a true soul that has true faith, can make this point hard
to it self. I cannot believe that a Christian will oppugn this Truth, and
less imagine that a soul it cannot arrive to the possession of a solid and
Christian virtue, if she walk not by the way, and light of the truths proposed,
if she do not found her self upon this spirit. For if we consider and believe
that we are members of Jesus Christ, true, not imaginary members, not of a man,
or Saint, but of Jesus Son of the living God, and that in this quality we are
truly and immediately united to him; if I say we consider our selves as such,
do we not at the same time see, that we are united to God, and that by such an
union we must be animated by his spirit, live by his life, and be governed by
his conduct. This is the first condition whereunto we are raised by
Christianity, the first grace we receive in Baptism. What virtue and
perfection can that soul have, which lives not conformable to this estate? what
does that soul learn which knows not his truth? To what end is the rest of our
practice and this great fabric of devotion which we propose to our selves, if
we lay not this first foundation which is so necessary, that without it all the
rest cannot subsist? If we have God for us; if we are united to him, as members
to the head; yet if we are not resigned as we ought to his infinite wisdom and
loving conduct, why do we trouble our selves with all the rest? To what end so
much care, so much prudence, and humane providence? To what end so many
desires? He is too covetous, whom God suffices not. What can a soul desire, to
whom its God and Creator is made all things? And if it cannot find rest in
this, where can it find rest? What can content him, who is not content with
God, says St. Prosper? Certainly that soul is very blind and miserable, which
is not content with providence and the love of Jesus. I demand all that you
would have of humane prudence in all things, (we shall find but two many
reasons to invite us) but a soul brought up in the knowledge of the truths of
Christianity, and nourished in the esteem of God, will say with a holy person
of our time, that the poor Doves are more pleasing to God then the Serpents.

Let us then raise our selves up to God, trust in him, adhere to his spirit,
and beg light of him to penetrate into these truths, to bear the effects of
them, and grace to live faithfully in his ways. There remains one motive more,
to see the obligations we have to belong to God, and to adhere to him, if we
will arrive at perfection.

The fourth Motive.
CHAP. IX. That this Precept, to love God, does oblige us to perfection, and
makes us to go out of our selves to be God's.
COntinuing the designs we have undertaken in this second Part, to show by
diverse Motives the Obligations all men have to be perfect, and to adhere to
God, and live in subjection and submission to his conduct and grace; It remains
that we consider in this last Motive, the essential and indispensable
Obligations, that we all have to the Precept of Love, and consequently to
perfection; to which end we must consider the two estates in the Church of God;
the estate of the ordinary Christian, and that of the more Religious, not to
examine them, but to behold the abuse of the former, too lightly believing that
perfection and solid virtue is not for them, and losing themselves in this
Error, persuade themselves that a Christian, as Christian is not at all
obliged to interior life and virtue, but that it is a work of supererogation,
and an unnecessary labor to be busied in acquisition of Christian virtue, and
possession of inward perfection; a manifest Error, the more damageable in that
it derogates from the honor of God, gives license to the world; and blinding
their souls, looses them, and makes them slothful in the search of the right
way to salvation. To undeceive our selves then in a matter so important, and to
secure our salvation, which otherwise would remain very doubtful, we must
intentively observe the obligations of these two estates, that by this
knowledge we may know what we ought to be.

Saint Thomas Aquinas teaches us, that the soul that professes Religion,
enters into a stable and permanent estate wherein she seeks after true and
solid perfection, devesting her self of all that may hinder her arrival to
this perfection. By this solemn profession, she renounces all things, taking in
this manner of life, as says Moses the Abbot, the ways, instruments and means
to attain certainly to this perfection, so much commended and recommended by
Jesus Christ. For this Reason she makes vows to separate her self from her
self, and all other creatures, to appropriate her self to God; and if she take
heed to all the circumstances which accompany this action, or, if lifting up
her eyes to Heaven, she considers the will of God toward her in her vocation,
she knows that by the estate of Religion, she enters into a profession which
must sever her from the world, and whatsoever is in the world, to unite her to
her God, and to place her, if we may so say, in the bosom of God, to live upon
earth, the life that the Angels live in heaven, to lead, in a holy communion,
the life that God leads in his holiness, that is to say, the life of God in
God; For as God is busied wholly in the knowledge and love of himself, so the
soul which desires to perfectionate her self, is not busied in Religion, but
in a pure and continual contemplation of God, and in acts of love, which she
does with great care and vigilance; For, for the soul to be as God would have
her, and arrive to the eminent and divine estate whereto God has called her,
must be accidentally, and by grace that which God is substantially, and by
nature. This is much in few words to extol the Religious estate, and makes us
see how holy it is whereto they are called. But we are to understand, that what
is said, extends to all Christians; for the estate of Christianity is an estate
stable and permanent, which calls and leads us to the participation of a divine
life, an estate permanent and indispensable; for it is marked with the
character of Baptism, which according to the Principles of our Faith, can
never be defaced; an estate holy and of a particular sanctity, which only
appertains to Christianity, since it is consecrated by the unction of the most
holy Trinity, confirmed by the grace of adoption, and enriched with the fullness
of the holy Ghost, who is given us by confirmation, and conserved by the
sacraments; an estate permanent, seeing it is indispensable, for no Christian
can go out of, or have a dispensation from the obligation he has to his
perfection, a perfection not indifferent, but Evangelicall and Christian, which
the Son of God mentions in the Gospel with such high and divine words, words
not of counsel, as many think, but of command, in clear and express terms,
testifying his will; words addressed not only to the Religious, but to all
Christians: Matthew. 5.48.
Be ye perfect, says he, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.
What can be said more? or spoke in more express terms? How would we have more
clearly expressed what this perfection ought to be, then to say, you must be
perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect?

This perfection consists in the union of the soul with God, and this union is
made and accomplished by pure and perfect love; the love of God, coming from
God above, which alone has power to give God to us, and to unite us to God.
All Christians in general, are called to the union which is made on earth by
grace, and in heaven by glory.

Whence I first infer, that as all christians are called to this union of the
soul with God, so are all obliged to that love which makes this union, that is
to say, to a love, pure, holy and worthy of God, a love expressed and lively,
represented by the mouth of God in these words, Mat. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart: his words so express it,
that they speak all the perfection of love, so general, that they oblige all
to this love.

I infer secondly, that the perfection whereunto the Religious are called, is
not different from that whereto all christians are obliged, wherein many
deceive themselves. The reason is clear, and the deduction of it is easy. For
if perfection consists in the unity of the soul with God, an union wrought by
true love, and all christians as well as the Religious, are called to this
union made by grace upon earth, and in Heaven by his glory. Finally, if it be
commanded to all christians, and to all men as well as the Religious, to love
God with all their heart, that is perfectly, and as much as they can in this
mortal life by the aid of grace, it follows evidently, that these two
estates which appear so unlike, are alike in the same obligation of seeking
perfection, though by different ways.

In fine, who can doubt so manifest a truth? no man can be ignorant that the
Commandment of Love is common to all men, of what estate soever they be. No
man can deny but that Love is the bond of perfection, so St. Paul calls it.
Col. 3.14.
There is no difference then but in the way and means that we are to take, to
arrive to this perfection. There are diverse, and we must esteem all, and regard
them with respect. But if it be a question to make choice of some way to arrive
to this love, and if we must have Laws and Maxims to conduct us thereunto, and
to conserve us therein, it is certain, we cannot find them more pure, more
divine, and more assured then in the Gospel where the Son of God himself as
Author of Christianity shows us the way, gives us the rule, and proposes to
us the maxims which we ought to keep, to guide us to this love which he
commands, to live in this union, and to arrive to this perfection whereto we
are called, and therefore Christians living according to the rules of the
Gospel, shall infallibly arrive to this high perfection, and enjoy this most
desirable union. So St. Paul speaking of Christianity, In Jesus Christ, neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor incircumcision, but a new Creature, and as
many as follow this rule, grace be unto them and mercy. Under the name of
Circumcision, he teaches us that nothing in the World, no estate is worthy to
be esteemed but that of a new Creature. Christianity only, gives us the grace
and power thereof; wherefore that is the rule whereof the Apostle here speaks.
Whence we learn the eminency of the state of christianity above all others. We
see then how true it is that we are all without exception, obliged and called
of God to love and to perfection.

This and more, which might be said on this subject is true; and yet
notwithstanding it is certain, that christian perfection is as the Sun proposed
to all christians in general, the Precept of Love is equally given to all men,
and consequently, all are obliged to the same perfection, which is all the
Argument wherewith I would undeceive such christians as would exempt themselves
from both.

This granted, it rests only to consider the qualities of love; it must be
pure, perfect, and indissoluble, the three properties of love in Christianity:
Pure, for it regards nothing but God; if it regard any thing else, it is not
for God, nor according to God, whence it comes, that that which regards pure
love, does separate us from our selves, from all our interests, and alienates
us from all creatures, as far as they obstruct our love to God. This love makes
us regard nothing but in the belief that God is there present by his immensity;
we neither taste nor feel them further then as they bear the presence of God;
for God being in all things, the soul that loves him, enclines to him, seeks
him, and finds him every where. This love must also be perfect, God says so
expressly; We must love him with all our soul, and with all our strength: There
is no need of explicating these words, they are too clear, and evidently show
us that God will have us love him with all that which we are, that is perfectly.

This love must lastly be indissoluble; no force must separate us from God, no
violence must tear this love from our hearts; no creature in heaven or earth;
no fear of death, or of the loss of all we enjoy; no good, either present or
future, must separate us from this love which must be in us more powerful then
death, more indissoluble then unity.

Now making use of all that we have said, and reducing to practice all the
proposed truths, we shall find what we sought in this tract; we shall see that
by a necessary consequence, we are all obliged to divorce and separate our
selves truly and strongly from all that hinders us from loving God perfectly.
We are obliged to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect; this perfection
is not without the true love of God; this love cannot be in us, but in as much
as we are separated from our selves, the world, and all Creatures. Whence we
learn, that a Christian obliged to the love of God, and to perfection, cannot
arrive to this estate which he seeks and is commanded him, if on the one side
he be not wholly subjected to God, and on the other altogether separated in
spirit, conduct, and love from all the Creatures. Therefore he must apply
himself earnestly to this exercise of subjecting himself to God, and devesting
himself of himself; for it is certain, the soul can never acquire this divine
spirit, nor arrive to Evangelicall perfection, if she stay in her self, obey
her own will, and follow her own motions.

To dwell in our selves is, to think of our selves, to take care of our selves,
to have a continual regard to our selves, and our self-Interests, to use the
powers of our souls for our selves, and our own satisfaction, and not purely to
please God. To love thus is to wear the mask and false appearance of virtue,
but not to have the reality.

By these Principles of piety, it is easy to see, how dangerously they deceive
themselves, who speaking of Religious souls, who are in a most pure and perfect
estate, and according to the eminency of their vocation, say they ought to be
night Christians, as Stars in the Firmament, and persuade others that they are
not obliged to the perfection of inward virtues, and that it is enough for them
to become punctual, and to live with order and fidelity in their exterior
conduct, making them believe that they are capable of no more; that this
self-desertion is above their strength, nay that it were folly so to leave
themselves to live in such a general manner of abandoning themselves. This is a
manifest error, for not only the religious estate, but even that of
Christianity, obliges all Christians to the practice of these virtues, seeing
they are obliged to be perfect, according to the Commandment of Jesus Christ,
as does easily appear by all the Motives handled in this second Part. Now if
all they who aim at perfection in any profession whatsoever, must enter into
this conduct of grace and subjection, if they must live devesting themselves to
obey God more perfectly, and to live the life of God, which is the life of a
true christian, the true life of grace; what ought those souls to do, who by
particular graces and allurements of special favor are called by God,
cherished and enriched with his gifts? O how great will these obligations
appear to those that consider them? O how ought such souls to take care, and
be vigilant to cooperate with the designs of God upon them, and to become
faithful, according to the estate and fullness of grace communicated to them.

This would require a long deduction, for nothing is of more importance, or
needs a more ample discourse to content our spirits, and satisfy our piety.
But it shall suffice that we show the fundation and principles thereof; of
which we shall now speak.

The conclusion of the second Part. The care and vigilance which a Soul must
have which seeks perfection, and would live in true subjection to the grace and
conduct of Jesus Christ.
WE have clearly enough deduced and demonstrated by diverse motives, the
obligation all Christans have to seek perfection, and wholly to subject
themselves to the spirit and conduct of God; yet must we not understand this
Doctrine so generally, but that there is something more to be done, and that we
fail not in our care and vigilance to cooporate with the work of God in us, and
to become faithful to his conduct; and here we will show what this care and
vigilance ought to be.

Let us first enter into consideration of the excellencies of our soul, that
knowing it, we may be ravished with its beauty, elevated and excited to
conserve it carefully, in perfection according to the design of God upon us.
This knowledge is not easy, for the soul is such a lively Image of the
Divinity, and God has invested her with so many lights, that our spirits are
too feeble to sustain the beams thereof, and to penetrate the splendour of this
beauty. If we will speak of her, we must say that she so perfectly represents
her Prototype, God, that as we cannot better comprehend God, then in averring
he is incomprehensible; so we cannot enter better into this knowledge of the
perfect beauties of our soul, then in saying, she cannot be known. For all that
we can say of her, is below her, so near does she approach to the infinite
greatness, and ineffable perfections of her Creator. The highest that we can
say of her, that seems to imply the last draught of her perfection, is that she
is a capacity of God, an Image, wherein the perfections of the Divinity are
engraved; so as we may compare it to a Seal, wherein the Image of a Prince is
perfectly and artificially cut: As the Seal is capable of receiving the soft
wax applied to it, and imprints thereon a second Image; so our soul, which is
the Image of God, is capable of receiving God, and receiving him once, she
bears a continual Image of him, his true resemblance. The soul therefore, in
as much as she is the Image, is also a capacity of God, since as the Image she
is capable of receiving God. And this capacity is the ground of her being, and
containing in it all her perfections and beauty, comprehending all that can be
said of her.

It is not hard to penetrate this truth, if we consider the designs of God in
the creation of the soul, for Faith teaches us that God alone is the end of our
soul, her fullness, that he has created her to enjoy his greatness, to
associate her into his glory, to communicate to her his divine perfections. In
pursuit of this design it was, that he gave her so great an amplitude and
capacity, that she cannot be filled but with God, which caused Saint Bernard to
say, that our soul may be occupated by all things in the world, but that she
cannot be filled with any but God, who created her for himself alone, to fill,
to live in her, and to advance her to the enjoyment not of gifts, not of grace
only, but of glory, and of the essence of Divinity.

All this begins upon earth, and is consummated and perfected in heaven; indeed
it cannot be in heaven, if it begin not upon earth, since the soul after death
enjoyes but what she has merited in her life, for we see that here below the
soul receives her God by grace, she receives him in his loving communication,
and she is filled of God by his Spirit which dwells in her, and in Heaven she
possesses him fully by glory.

By this possession, all her capacity is filled according to all Gods designs
upon her. Thus Saint John, We know that when he shall appear, 1 John 3.2.
we shall be like to him, we shall see him as he is. Now, we cannot see God,
and be like to him in glory, which is a pemanent estate without possessing him;
and we cannot possess him but in this capacity which is given us by God, which
is the foundation of our being, and all the perfection of our soul, so great a
perfection, that we conceive it farther then we know the greatness of God. For
as God is great, this capacity is great, ample, and admirable. This deserves
profound consideration, and may serve to all men as a powerful motive to sever
themselves from all upon the earth, and to seek God only. for whom alone we are
created, who alone is our fullness. This truth discovers the favor we receive
from this infinite goodness, the soul being a capacity of God, as also
continually regarded by him, who sees her; yea, he sees her, and he regards her
to raise her to himself, to fill her, and fully and perfectly to possess her,
in a manner worthy of God, and conformable to his love. He will be all things
in this soul, he will be her life, her love, her good, her confidence, her
heart, her spirit, her power, and her conduct; briefly, he will be her All, her
fullness upon earth by his graces, and in heaven by his glory. Hence therefore
may we take occasion to admire, and eternally adore this infinite and
inexhaustible bounty, which deigns to communicate himself, with such an
exstreme profusion of himself, who by an incomprehensible counsel of his
eternal Wisdom, has created man upon the earth only capable of his divine
communications, who only is a pure capacity of God, who gives him power to
receive the abundance of his gifts, and to bear the greatness of his Divinity.
As Soon as we reflect hereupon, we shall see the duties of our soul, what our
care and vigilance must be: For the soul being a capacity of God, what remains
for her to do, but to render her self worthy to possess him, and to be filled
with him, and altogether to abandon her self to his conduct and grace. She is
obliged to esteem nothing but him, to live only for him, being created only
for him; and this being the end of her being and life, she must have no care
upon earth, but to suffer her self to be filled with God, to be possessed and
ruled by his spirit, and by his power. Thus we are obliged to two things: one
to have a care and vigilance to take all away that may separate us from God,
and make us unworthy of his divine and loving communications. The other, to
have a like vigilance over our selves, over our motions, over our desires, over
our intentions, and over our actions, that they depend on God, and be wholly
submitted to his loving conduct. Let us yet say this more clearly, if it be
possible, in two words: The soul ought to have no care, but that God be in her,
repose in her, dwell in the bottom of her heart, fill and possess her,
according to all the designs that he has on her. This done, and the soul
living in this care with fidelity, God reposing in her, as in the Throne of his
love, will communicate to her what gifts, and enrich her with what graces he
pleases, and in fine, conduct her in the ways that he desires, the soul
having no other desire then that God may be in her, and she in God, that is,
after the manner that God ought, and will be, according to the greatness and
excess of his love. This is the One thing that is necessary, Luke 10.42.
whereof Jesus speaks to Saint Martha, the source of all happiness, the top of
all perfection, which Jesus calls in Magdalen, the better part. Let us pray
to God to place us in this happy estate, to make us penetrate his truths; Let
us give our selves to him to enter therein, and banishing all care, all
thoughts, all love, let us only regard Jesus; Let us require nothing but
Jesus; Let us love none but him, who loves us above his life; Let us cast our
selves at his feet like Mary Magdalen, and there melt our hearts, Luke 7 34
and consume the poison that is in them with the beams of this Sun of love,
that he may replenish us with his grace, with his love, and with his spirit,
that we may live only by Jesus, Joh. 20.13.
and as another Magdalen, seek nothing but Jesus; Let us now propose the
dispositions necessary to attain so happy and desirable a Being.

THE THIRD PART. Proposing diverse DISPOSITIONS and VIRTUES necessary for a
Christian to arrive to that perfection whereto he is obliged by Christianity.
CHAP. I. What those DISPOSITIONS are, and how necessary they are to the
practice of VERTVE.
IT is now time to enter into the practice of that virtue whereof we treat, and
that we set our selves on work, to acquire the spirit to live the life that God
requires of us, whereto we were called from the first time that we became
Christians. To attain this happy estate, there is need of continual
Application and travail, for, we must not think to arrive thereto at one leap,
but we must bring dispositions suitable to so worthy a subject, and labor not
only to attain hereto, but also to persevere therein; which we must do the
more willingly and courageously, in that we are certain, this way is the
foundation of all our happiness, the true way to Christian perfection, and
makes us live the life of grace, whereto we are called.

The first thing whereto we must bend our study, is to know and acquire the
inward dispositions necessary to lead us to Christian perfection, and to make
us live the life of grace, which is the true life of a Christian; this we are
to learn in this third Part. And for as much as this Doctrine is proper for all
sorts of virtues, we will speak first of it in general, as well that we may
the more easily come to the knowledge of the particular, as because many seem
to seek virtue, and frequent the exercises of Christian piety, yet think not
upon a thing so necessary, nor know what this disposition is, or wherein the
spirit of virtue does consist, which is the soul and form of action. So that
laying hold only on the outside of virtue, and considering it but as a body
without a soul, they are deceived in their imaginations; and believing they do
much, they promise to themselves great profit, rendering themselves punctual,
and taking a great heed to some exterior practices of virtues which they
propose to themselves. We see many with much vigilance every day or week, take
some virtue to practice, they watch if they are wanting to emergent occasions,
and carefully mark their defaults, to accuse, and, (if it be possible) to amend
themselves: but after long practice, we see they make small profit, because
they forget the interior, and put not themselves into the spirit of virtue, to
practice it with necessary and convenient dispositions. To prevent therefore
the inconveniences which occur in this subject, we must observe that in a
Christian life, all estates wherein the Christian soul may find it self, and
all the virtues that she can practice, have ordinarily the Dispositions which
ought to accompany or precede her, and virtue has a spirit, which is as its
essence, or rather as its soul, which, as a form does enliven and perfectionate
her.

The soul that will live the life of grace, and will acquire solid and
Christian virtues, must carefully have regard to such dispositions that she may
possess them, to do the action which she does, perfectly; seeing that in her,
virtue is exterior and superficial.

She must further acknowledge and seek out what is the spirit of virtue, or (as
some say) what is her essence, that practicing that virtue, she may effect it
in her spirit, that is, bear inwardly the sense of that virtue, as outwardly
she produces the action. Thus shall she practice virtue in her heart inwardly,
as she does practice it by her hands outwardly.

This is founded upon general principles, that the exterior is nothing
without the interior; so that we must first labor to form and perfectionate
our interior, which is to exterior actions, as the wheels of the Clock are to
the weights, or rather as the soul is to the body.

All the World holds this for truth; yet we seem not to consider enough, what
the meaning of interior is, that only the intention must be good, as many
think and believe; that it suffices in all things to have a good intention, and
simple regard to the Action. But when we speak of the interior, we mean the
bottom of the soul, which is to Christian actions life, as the Earth is to the
fruits she produces, and as the root is to the Tree, which it nourishes and
enliveneth. The bottom of the soul is the true principle and life of all our
actions. By the bottom of the soul, we understand a true and real goodness
which is in the soul, a pure intention that accompanies her; grace that assists
her, necessary and suitable dispositions to the virtues which are in her, all
this I call the bottom of the soul. What will it profit a man to practice an
action of outward humility, and to do it with a good intention, if in the
bottom of his soul he has a proud will? what does it serve for in a Christian,
to get the true virtue of charity outwardly, to give alms, and be liberal, and
in the bottom of his soul, to bear a heart pitiless and covetous? It is
certain, that after this manner, he shall never acquire virtue, though he had
all the good intentions in the world; because the foundation of his soul,
(which is the true interior) is not good: the first thing he must do, is, to
perfectionate the bottom of his soul, and to form his interior after the
manner proposed, to know the essence and spirit of virtue. Let us propose a
particular example of some virtue, as a rule for all the rest; we will take
humility, which is necessary for all Christians. If we would acquire this
virtue, and practice it, we must first know wherein it consists, that when we
would produce the acts thereof, we may form them in the interior spirit of
this virtue, conformable to our knowledge of it. For how can we practice a
virtue, if we know it not? How shall we perform an act of humility, if we know
not what humility is? We must then study to know the virtue that we would
acquire, unless God himself incited by his bounty, give us the spirit of it,
without knowing it. But speaking according to the ordinary ways of the
practice of virtues, we must know them, that when we would acquire them, by
practice, we must endeavor to do the Acts, and accompany them with a sense and
thought of virtue.

We must further yet put our selves into dispositions interior and convenient
to the virtue we would acquire, as in the virtue of humility, it must be in an
esteem of God alone, in a mean opinion of our selves, in a desire of confusion
and contempt, and to do this from the bottom of the soul. The soul being in
these dispositions, will endeavor to apply her thoughts thereto, when it shall
be time to do any outward actions thereof. For example, If she do an act of
outward humility, it will excite in her heart a thought and a sense of
humility, and awaken in her some disposition conformable to this virtue, Romans
11.16.
and so she will do this exterior Act, by an esteem and pure desire of
humility, with mean esteem of her self. To do an action after this sort, is
that which I call to do it in the spirit, and in the dispositions of virtue.

To see how necessary this is, we need no other Witness then Experience; no
other Judge then Reason; for how can we (for example,) get the virtue of
humility, though we should perform infinite and extraordinary acts of it, if we
know not this virtue? and if in practicing it outwardly, we reflect not upon it
self? How can we conceive that a man can attain this virtue by any
extraordinary practice whatsoever, if we bring contrary dispositions? It is
evidently impossible. We must therefore take care to establish it in the
dispositions of virtue, and first labor to form her interior; for he that
shall have an ill foundation in his soul, cannot produce good fruits. Can we
acquire humility, if at the same time that we produce exterior acts of
humility, our soul is filled with esteem of our selves, our spirit full of
doubleness, our sense given to curiosity, our whole heart tied to our proper
interests? It is clear, that in so doing, it will be an impossible labor. We
must then confess, that to attain true Christian virtues, it is necessary to
have inward care, (that is to say) that the first thing we must study, is to
take care that the bottom of our souls be good; Rom 11.16.
If the root be holy, so are the branches. Then we must labor to acquire the
dispositions necescessary to accompany virtue; to do otherwise, is to take the
shadow, and to leave the substance, to bear the image of virtue, and to have
the reality of vice; it is to pursue continually, and to take nothing but
flies. We see the experience in them, who think only of the exterior, and have
no care but of certain superficial practices and rules, that look not to the
bottom of the interior, but very little or afar off; such souls are void of
God and without virtue, having only a deceitful appearance, like false pearls,
which are filled but with wind, mountains in show, but touch them, and you
shall see come out of them nothing but smoke. Virtue is an heritage too noble,
it must be bought with good money, I mean, it must be gained by practices
suitable to her dignity. Let us apply our particular subject to that we have
said in general. We treat in the Discourse of the life of grace, of Christian
perfection, and of the subjection wherein a soul ought to be toward God; and
it being proposed, how to acquire true virtue, it consequently treats of
annihilating the spirit in our selves, the care and conduct we have of our
selves, to resign us to God, and not to live, but in subjection to his spirit
only, and to his grace. We have made the necessity of this estate sufficiently
appear, and the obligation that we have thereto; there rests nothing but to
show the means whereby we may enter into these dispositions suitable to her,
without which we may truly say, that the soul shall never attain the true and
constant practice of virtue, which yet is necessary to many who think not
thereon; For, we may averr, (not without fears and regret that a great number
of souls shut the door of their hearts to God, oppose themselves to Jesus
Christ and his grace, and by consequence will never arrive to perfection, what
pains soever they take, because they neglect and disesteem the practices of
true virtue, and slight them, to adhere too much to their own sense, to love
themselves too much, and to seek too greedily their proper interests. This is
that (to speak properly) which hinders them from resigning themselves to the
conduct of God. Hence it proceeds, that by too much seeking after their own
satistaction, their profit, and the contentment of their spirit, they grieve
the spirit of God, captivate grace, and lose themselves in seeking themselves;
and in stead of uniting themselves to God, they separate themselves from him,
and (which is more to be feared) they go out of the ordinances of heaven, and
from the counsels of God, to follow their own will, their own desires, and
their own conduct, to tie themselves to their own flattering affections. It is
they must give remedy to their own mishap; Let us leave them, to speak to souls
who will quit themselves wholly to acquire the happy possession of virtues.

CHAP. II. Several practices, whereof we may make use to attain Christian
Virtues.
SInce the life of a Christian must be a life of grace, a life representing the
life of God, expressing in man the perfections of Divinity, it follows that
the actions of a Christian, proceeding from such a Principle, be great and
suitable to such an estate, and worthy the spirit of God, which dwells in it by
the grace of adoption. And if the virtues of a Christian are so worthy and
rare; certainly the dispositions must be also great, the way to obtain them
singular, and the practice extraordinary; For as there is great difference
between the moral virtues of Philosophy, and the supernatural of a Christian,
so must the practice hereof be different and extraordinary.

The wisest of the times past, gave Precepts to form man, and instate him in
the most perfect use of reason; they prescribed Laws to overcome and subject
the passions to the reasonable will, the most noble part of the soul. But all
this considered, is no more then to make us perfect men, that is, very
reasonable; but our business is to make our selves perfect Christians: and as
it is much more to be Christians, then to be men (there being a great
difference between them;) so the practices imposed for attaining these two
estates, are different, one as much advanced above the other, as the state of a
Christian is above that of a man, as grace is above nature. We must now build
upon this foundation, and advance the edifice of Christian perfection upon the
principles we intend to propose. Therefore we must speak and act as Christians,
not as Philosophers. I say then, to attain Christian virtues, we must before
all things, have a great desire of Christian perfection, and a resolution to
labor in the acquisition of true virtues, as much as is necessary, and as God
requires of us. This desire must be efficacious and permanent, from the bottom
of our heart. It is good also to awaken if often, and to form acts thereof with
application of spirit.

The first means to obtain virtue is prayer. The soul that applies her self
with perseverance to prayer, cannot fail of the possession of virtue. Prayer is
understood two ways; first as a demand, as if we should say, that if we demand
virtue of God, Jam. 1.5.
he will give it us. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives
to all men liberally. This Proposition is true in this sense; but this demand
must be accompanied with these considerations, true desire of virtue,
perseverance in prayer, a vigilance to become faithful to the grace that God
communicates to us; otherwise our demand will be without effect, our prayer
without fruit. It is not sufficient for the soul that would be said to arrive
at Christian perfection, to nourish in it self virtuous desires, and to demand
them of God, if she be not also careful to demand them as she ought, and if she
does not with vigilance labor in the practice and exercise of these virtues.
God will have us cooperate with his grace, and put to our hand to do with him
what he will operate in us; so that to obtain virtues, we must demand them of
God, but in demanding them, we must labor therein. Thus we must understand the
acquisition of virtues by prayer. This Proposition is built upon this truth,
That we cannot have virtue unless God give it, and God gives it not, but with
an intent that we should cooperate therein, and that we should labor on our
parts, showing in this cooperation, the fidelity of our souls. For this end
has God given us free will.

There is yet another way of obtaining virtues by prayer, understanding by
prayer meditation, or as we say ordinarily, mental prayer. The soul, which
applies it self to this exercise, considering the greatness of the Divinity,
the verities of Faith, the beauty and stability of eternal things, the
inconstancy of temporal, the vanity of all in the World, easily apprehends the
love of Truth, and a contempt of vanity, (two, foundations necessary to the
perfections of a Christian life) the soul by this exercise, remaining united
and tied to God, receives the rays of this divine light, which is the life and
way of our souls, and if she persevere with fidelity, must at last be wounded
with this love which she so contemplates. By this means entering into the
enjoyment of divine love (which is always liberal of Communications,) she
will infallibly receive the Virtues necessary for her, and be enriched with
most pure gifts, agreeable to the greatness of God, who will give her more then
sufficiently graces convenient for living in the perfection of Christian
Virtues: wherein appears the necessity and profit of this manner of prayer,
which elevates us to God, causes us to enter into a conversation with God,
unites us to him, enlightens us, transforms us, and disposes us to the life of
grace, and leads us to the acquisition and possession of true Virtues. Food is
not so necessary to the life of the body, as this manner of prayer to the life
of the soul, and the acquisition of Virtues.

The second means to acquire Christian virtues, is mortification, which is
absolutely necessary to the soul that will live the life of grace, that is to
say, Christianly. We must remember, and intentively consider that we are all
the Children of Adam, living his life, following the inclinations of the being
of Adam; to be christian, is to be the Child of Jesus Christ, to live his life,
wholly to follow the spirit, motions, and holy inclinations of Jesus Christ:
into this state and new-being, we are put by Baptism. Gal. 3.27.
As many of you (says St. Paul) as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ, meaning they are made like the Son of God; they are by grace, that
which Jesus Christ is by nature.

This truth granted, it is easy to comprehend the necessity of mortification.
If to be christians, we must be re-invested in Jesus Christ, that is, live of
his spirit, and follow his motions and inclinations, then to arrive to this
happiness, we must uncloath our selves of the spirit and inclinations of Adam,
and we must, to speak in the words of the Apostle, Put off the old man, Col. 3
9, 10.
and put on the new man; this cannot be done but by mortification, which is the
more necessary, in that the inclinations and spirit of Adam, are as much
different from those of Jesus Christ, as the Heaven is distant from the Earth.
These two spirits are as contrary one to the other, as the animal is to the
spiritual, according to the Apostle, who says, 1 Cor. 15.47.
The first man is of the earth earthy, the second man is from Heaven, and
cannot accord together. Now to argue by the rule of contraries, we must say
that to establish the one, it is necessary to annihilate the other; to plant
good, we must root out evil: so he that would love christianity, that is,
according to the spirit and virtue of Jesus Christ, must take away and mortify
the spirit and inclinations of Adam, which are in all, always contrary to
Jesus Christ. The Son of God came into the world, 1 John 3.8.
as Saint John says, to destroy the works of the Devil. The spirit of Adam is
a sinner, and his inclinations are but concupiscences, works of the flesh,
therefore is the Son of God come to destroy them. We must also labor and
cooperate with him to destroy in us, and to root out of us, all that sin has
put in us, wherein mortification assists us.

This that Divinity which we call mystical, teaches us, which requires that a
christian to arrive to that perfection whereto God calls him, passes through
the purgative life, in the ways of mortification, annihilation and
resignation, that by this exercise, the soul may purge and cleanse it self from
all that is in her opposite to grace and the true possession of God. This
Doctrine is founded on a Truth which most know, but consider not sufficiently;
That the whole nature and being of man is corrupt, all his inclinations turned
to evil, carrying the center, the source and seed of all vice and imperfection
in it. Now to order it so, as that this nature of Adam, this being, may be
possessed of God, replenished with virtuous inclinations, and that he may have
in himself true charity the seed and principle of all Christian virtues; he
must necessarily take from it the evil that is in it, for the good and
perfection cannot be there but in taking away, and rooting out the corruption
and imperfection, which cannot be done without a serious and continual
mortification inward or outward. Whence we learn, that to acquire christian
virtues, it is not enough to demand them of God by prayer, which we call a
demand, nor to consider them in mental prayers, and to make good resolutions
thereon; it is not enough to know them and desire them, nor to do acts of them,
and to produce many practices of them; but we must also root out of the
foundation of our soul, all that which is contrary to virtue. The man who
desires to live a good christian, and aspires to true virtue, as the only way
to Heaven, must not so much busy himself in the acquisition of virtues by the
practice of them, as he must labor to root out of his heart, and pull out of
the foundation of his being, all oppositions, inclinations and customs contrary
to true virtue. For as soon as he has emptied his heart of all that is
displeasing to God, and contrary to him, God will from that moment, replenish
and possess his heart, and liberally extend to him the graces and virtues
necessary for him; but withal, according to the measure in which God gives
them to him, he must be faithful on one side to correspond with the grace
given him; on the other, he must labor to render himself more and more capable
of the spirit and possession of God; he endeavoring to cleanse and purify his
heart, and God continually replenishing, and consecrating it for his own
dwelling, and sanctifying it by his grace.

By this amorous combat, God always gives, and is always augmenting his gifts,
man receives, and in receiving, disposes himself more and more, to receive more
abundantly the sweet bounties of God; all which is done in the soul
proportionably to her purifying and mortifying her self from all that is
disagreeable and contrary to the spirit of God. By mortification and the
purgative life, we not only understand corporal austerities, such as affect
the sense; as macerations, fastings, and other exercises, which rob the sense
of what is most agreeable to it (which although they be good and profitable,
and sometimes necessary, yet are they not principal) but we apply this
Doctrine, first to interior mortifications, whereby the soul purifies her
heart, annihilates her sources therein, and pulls away the roots of
imperfections; and of all that is displeasing to God. By this exercise, she
stifles, as much as she can, the seeds of self-love, though hid in every thing;
she strives to gain a perfect victory over her self; her principal care is to
annihilate her will, her intentions, her desires, her thoughts and inclinations
to those of God; choosing in all things that which is most pure, most
conformable to the spirit of Jesus, most opposite and contrary to her own
inclinations and unruly affections. Hereunto she wholly addicts her self;
herein she is very vigilant; she knows it generally, a maxim, that the more
the heart of man is filled with the creatures, and the love and regard of
himself, the more she is separated from God, void of his spirit and true
virtue: Therefore she endeavors to exercise her self in this interior
mortification: Another Reason which obliges us to the spirit and exercise of
mortification, is, that the Devil makes use of our inclinations, of our habits,
of our desires, and of our self-love; yea, he makes use of our selves against
our selves, and of our nature, subjected as well by the sin of Adam, as our
actual sins; he makes use, I say, thereof to cast us away, and to separate us
from God, even in things most holy, and the most interior, and therefore to
avoid the perils, and to take the weapons from the hands of our enemy, whereof
he makes use to undo us, we must necessarily pass through the purgative life;
we must go out of our selves, out of the life of Adam, to be in Jesus Christ,
and to live of his life, and we must mortify our selves to make place for God,
and take from our heart all that may displease him, that is opposite to his
grace, and by this exercise, we shall easily arrive to the acquisition of
Christian virtues.

CHAP. III. That the adherence of a Soul to Jesus Christ is the most perfect
means to possess all Christian virtue.
THat virtue which we call Christian, is a hidden treasure, hid in God, the
very life of a Christian according to the Doctrine of the Apostle, Col. 3.3.
Mat. 13.46.
is such, it is the Pearl in the Gospel, which he who would obtain heaven must
seek and buy; he must seek it in God with all diligence, and buy it at the
price of all the world. Nothing is more precious then true virtue, which alone
renders us like to God, and worthy of Paradise, all things else are nothing but
vanity, amuzement of spirit, and unprofitable travel.

Of known and ordinary means to arrive at the possession of so rich a treasure,
there is one to be preferred before all others, which though little considered,
and, perhaps, little known, is most important, without which all others are
ineffectuall. This is the adherence of our soul to Jesus Christ; This puts us
into possession of virtues: He who adheres to Jesus Christ, is one spirit with
him, possesses him, and in him all virtues.

To comprehend this truth, we must remember that we said, that Jesus Christ is
our All; whence it follows, he is our humility, our love, our patience, our
virtue; and he that shall possess him, shall possess all in him; He is the
foundation, the treasure and riches of the soul; 1 Cor. 1.30.
He is made unto us, says Saint Paul, wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification and redemption. Who then would have wisdom, righteousness, and
other virtues, let him adhere to Jesus; He that would acquire and possess
perfection, Col. 2 3.
let him possess Jesus, for in him, are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. The Apostle explains this further, Romans 8.32.
saying, The eternal Father gives us his Son, and with him freely gives us
all things; by which words, he not only implies, that by his merits, by his
grace, and for his love we have all, but moreover, that with Jesus Christ (note
the energy of this word, with Jesus) we have all, possessing him we possess
all; we must add, that if we do not possess, nor adhere to Jesus Christ, we
cannot have true christian virtue.

This truth is not hard to conceive, if we consider the essence of christian
virtue and perfection, which is the spirit of Jesus, or Jesus himself living in
us, and working in us that which is well pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.21.
says the Apostle. Our ordinary manner of speaking, teaches us as much, for
we say, virtue and christian perfection, have their beginning in grace from
whence they spring, and what goes out of a just soul, that we call grace. Now
the soul cannot be in grace nor just, but by the habitation of the holy spirit,
living and acting in her. So the Apostle, The love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5.
which is given to us, whence we infer, that if to live in christian virtue, we
must be in grace, and if grace be no other then the holy spirit, living in us
and there acting, seeing the holy spirit is no other then the very spirit of
Jesus, it follows evidently, that to live christianly, we must possess true
virtues, and to possess them, we must possess Jesus, and adhere to him, for
grace and righteousness consists in this possession.

Let us rise higher, and come to the source hereof, Faith teaches us, that in
Adam we are divested of innocence, fallen from the state of grace and
perfection, whereto we were destined by Creation, and by the first designs of
God. By this fall we have lost for ever the virtues, graces, and supernatural
gifts, wherewith the infinite goodness of God had enriched and clothed the
first man. At the sight of this misfortune, God being moved, only by his own
goodness to be merciful to us, would raise us from this fall, and enrich us
more then ever with his graces and heavenly favors; where sin abounded,
says the Apostle, Romans 5.20
grace did much more abound. To raise us to this happiness, he would give us a
new beginning of life and grace, his only Son Jesus Christ, who being made
man by the mystery of the Incarnation, is established Father and principle of
that being and life of grace which should be in man. As we participate in sin
of the evil of Adam, and are with him despoiled of all virtues and grace,
adhering to him, as to our natural principle, and have with him his being and
his nature. So adhering to Jesus Christ as to our Head, our new Principle, we
participate of his being, of his spirit, of his grace, and of his virtues. This
witnesses the Forerunner of the Messiah, who says, Of his fullness we have all
received, Joh. 1.16.
and grace for grace. From this being, deliberately considered, we may derive
worthy documents to our subject: First, we see how much we ought to adhere to
Jesus, if we will live his life, and participate his virtues, which are the
only Christian virtues; for in as much as we adhere to Adam, we are not
capable of any thing, but to live the life of sinners, we have no right to the
life of grace, to practice or possess any Chrstian virtue. If we will live the
life of grace, and obtain power to practice and possess virtue, we must lay
hold of Jesus Christ, and to receive it of him, we must adhere to him; for we
cannot possess him, but in adhering to him; wherein appears also the
necessity of this adherence. From this truth, we draw a second document, how
much they deceive themselves, who speak meanly and indifferently of true
Christans, or of a thing proportioned to our reason and being; For according to
the Principles of Christianity, and words of Saint Paul, as Christians, we must
put on the Lord Jesus Christ; Romans 13.14.
that is, the gifts of the graces and virtues of Jesus, in such manner, that we
may be like unto him, in such a degree of perfection, that we may bear in us an
expression and a lively image of the life and virtues of Jesus. Christian
virtue, is not animitation of the life and virtues of a perfect man, not of
Adam, considered in his Innocence and original Justice, to have virtues after
this manner, were not much; it is a lively Image of the virtues of Jesus,
Man-God; or to say better, it is the life and virtue it self of Jesus in man:
As men are distinguished by their habits, so are true Christians from others,
by these virtues; and these virtues are distinguished from all others (if there
be any) by the spirit of Jesus.

Here then appears the divinity and perfection of Christian virtues, they are
the virtues of Jesus himself, according to which, the Apostle says, we are new
creatures: As creatures of Jesus, 2 Cor. 5.17.
we must bear his Image which is divine and celestial, not that of Adam, which
is humane and terrestrial, that is, our life and virtues must not be of a man,
but of God; life and virtues as different, according to the Doctrine of the
Apostle, as heaven is distant from the earth, as unlike as Jesus is to sinful
Adam.

Finally, by these Principles, we learn (and it is that I would most persuade)
that the way to obtain Christian virtues, the most powerful means to arrive to
perfection, is, to adhere to Jesus, to prostrate our selves frequently before
the Throne of his greatness, to subject our selves to his sovereignty, to give
our selves to him and to his virtues, to endeavor to be replenished with his
spirit, to bear him in the bottom of our hearts, that as the center is in the
midst of its circumference, he may be in the midst of our hearts, as the center
of our being and our souls; We must look upon this practice as very important
to the soul, and adhering to Jesus, and possessing him, she shall possess all
in him, and easily obtain all from him; a truth none can be ignorant of that do
acquire virtues; We must have them in Jesus, and of Jesus, their only
principle, Object and Prototype, upon whom we must mould our actions, and form
our life; By him the eternal Father speaks to us; by him he teaches us; In a
word, by him he gives us this life, the life of grace, the life of perfection,
the life which is no other then Jesus living in us; He that has the Son, 1 John 5.12.
has life, and he that has not the Son, has not life, says the beloved
Disciple. What is there more clear? there only remains to practice what we
have said.

CHAP. IV. The means whereby we may arrive to the adherence of our souls with
God, and the obstacles which hinder it.
TO know truth, and not practice it, avails little. God in the Gospel,
threatens many stripes to the servant that knows the will of his Lord and
Master, Luke 12.47.
and does not according to it; To what purpose is it to love virtue and embrace
vice? to praise good, and to follow evil, is to be condemned out of our own
mouths. We say it is not enough to love, to esteem and to know Christian
virtues, as others do, but we must bear the effects of them, and make use of
them as God requires: We are therefore now to show how we must practice what
has bin already said. To do a Christian action, requires not only that it be
good, and done in grace, but it must be done with the spirit of grace, the
spirit of Jesus Christ, which he pours into us in such manner, that all the
virtue which is in us comes from him, with such dependence, that as the members
receive of the Head, so Jesus being our Head, and we his members, we can
receive nothing but from him in the state of grace, which is so true and
necessary, that he himself says, As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
Joh. 15.4.
except it abide in the Vine, no no more can ye, except ye abide with me; our
soul is barren, and without the fruit of grace, if she dwell not in Jesus
Christ, and take not from him all her juice, life and true virtues. To adhere
to this holy spirit, a man must be divested of himself, severed from the
creatures, not only by will and good intention, but by effect also; he must
have a continual recourse by grace, with a spirit of submission and dependency
upon grace, that it may have power to act freely in him; we must regard the
virtue in Jesus Christ, and imitate it, especially those virtues which are most
eminent in his life, the bases and foundation of solid perfection, as profound
humility, purity of heart, contempt of the world, and the like solid virtues,
only appearing in the Son of God. But we must take heed, that in the practice
and exercise of virtues we seek them not so much because of their excellency,
nor to become thereby better or more perfect, nor for our own interests, but
chiefly, and above all, for the glory of God, for the honor of Jesus Christ,
imitating him in our life and actions, that we may live in a manner pleasing to
him; and since the end of our actions must be the glory of God, it is
convenient, that we have no other design then to please and glorify him. If
you desire a more express practice, I propose it thus. When we have formed some
good resolution in prayer, or that the doing of some act of virtue is in
question, we must presently give our selves up to the Son of God, that we may
accomplish this act of virtue, according as he desires, and according to the
designs of his Cross, it not being necessary to form any particular intention
or design; as for example, being to form a resolution to practice humility, let
us say in our heart, I give my self to thee my Jesus, to enter into thy spirit
of humility, I will pass with thee all the days of my life in this holy
virtue. I invoke the power of thy spirit upon me, that it may abase my pride,
and I will keep my self with thee in humility, I offer thee the opportunities
of Humility, which shall present themselves in my life; bless them if it so
please thee, I renounce my self and all things, which may hinder me from
having part in the grace of thy humility.

The like may be done in all other virtues or good intentions which we offer to
God; in this manner they shall be founded on Jesus Christ, made in the spirit
of grace, not in our own spirit, made truly christian.

Let us not contemn this practice, neither as too much elevated, nor as
superfluous, it is easy and necessary; we speak not of humane action, but a
christian action, perfect and worthy of God, suitable to our condition and
dignity, whereto we are elevated by the grace of christianity, which is so
great, that St. Peter calls us a chosen Generation, 1 Pet. 2 9.
a holy Nation, a peculiar people, and to crown all this, St. Paul says, we
are the members of Jesus Christ, and as such, 1 Cor. 6.
we must live no other life then his, not act but by his spirit, and in his
intentions. Upon this foundation, may be built all that can be said or thought
of the perfections and excellencies of christianity; all is said, when we say
Jesus is our head, and we his members, he is the principle of the grace
necessary for us in all things, we must take all of him, he is the end of our
life and actions, we must refer them all to him, and to his honor. In fine, he
is the prototype and the exemplary cause, we must all regard, and continually
contemplate him, not only to imitate him, but to imprint his life and virtues
in us. This is the essence of christian perfection, which St. Paul means in
those words full of love; My little children, Gal. 4.19.
of whom I travel in birth again until Christ be formed in you. He would have
Jesus Christ formed in us, great words, which represent to the life, the
excellency of Christian virtues. This it is which I demand of fouls, and would
cause it to be understood if possible, as being of importance to remedy many
abuses, and unprofitable things which we meet with in the practice and ordinary
exercises of Christians, for want of taking hold of things in the beginning,
and not entering into the spirit of grace, for want whereof do we not see many
souls who keep most holy constitutions and very good rules, others that do
frequent actions of virtue, many who follow and oblige themselves to spiritual
exercises and practices, yet nevertheless, advance not toward perfection, nor
have any solid virtue; They always labor, but never gain any; they
continually travail, but never arrive at their journeys end. Though all that
they do, seems to be done in grace, and that, (as is believed) they have not
their conscience charged with any sin, yet they profit not in any manner; all
that can be said of such persons is, that they are not the worst. What is the
cause of this evil? whence comes it, that they profit nothing amidst so much
care and Travel? The evil comes from this, that such souls have not sufficient
recourse nor submission to grace, they are not tied to Jesus Christ; they
scarce think that there is a Jesus Christ; they have no distrust of themselves;
they seek not God, but their self-satisfaction, and their particular Interests,
and which is worse, by a secret and dangerous consequence they rely upon their
own courage, upon their travel and exercises, and promise to themselves too
much of their own strength, and tying themselves to diverse practices whereof
they make use, they tie also their happiness thereto. If you demand whence it
comes, that they have not solid virtues, it is easily perceived, it is because
they amuse themselves much in unprofitable things, trifles, and exterior
things, they enter not into the practice of true and solid virtues, they esteem
them not, and hardly know them; if they do practice them, it is but
superficially, they have but the appearance of virtue; all that they possess
thereof, is like the grass upon the house top, which withers away of it self;
of which we must take heed, and carefully remedy it, least passing our life so,
we travel in vain, and run without arriving to our end, and that under those
fair appearances in the most part of our actions, Mat. 25.12.
we be not of the number of the foolish Virgins, of them to whom God says at
the hour of death, I know you not, for God tells us, Mat. 7.21.
not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. And certainly, there are an infinite number of christians, who will
find themselves deceived, when God shall make manifest the secrets of hearts, 1
Cor. 4.5.
and judge the justice of men, because that believing themselves rich in good
works, and charged with the fruits of christian penitence, they shall find in
their hands nothing but wind, and shall see in their life, nothing but
appearances of Virtues. And therefore in an affair so important, we must be
vigilant to act christianly, and to do works worthy of God, which shall gain us
the eternal possession of God. This subject being of high enterprise, I will
propose the dispositions, which seem to be most necessary.

The first Disposition.
CHAP. V. Of the spirit of Faith, and the necessity thereof.
THE first and principal Disposition which the soul that will live
Christianly, must have, is Faith; He that comes to God, says the Apostle,
Heb. 11.6.
must believe that he is; and without Faith, it is impossible to please him.

This Disposition is not only the first, but cause of all other; what the root
is to the tree, the foundation to the building, the mother to the infant, the
same is Faith to all virtues, and to a Christian life. Whence on the spirit of
Faith, depends all the happiness and perfection of a Christian soul; or on the
other side, from littleness of Faith, springs all the evil, all the
abominations in the life of man. The soul that is guided by the spirit and
light of faith, knows what it is to love, and what to detest; for faith is
nothing but truth, the spirit of faith is properly the spirit of eternal
truth, wherein is seen the strength of faith. He therefore that has faith has
the spirit of truth, and by this spirit of truth, if he possess it, and suffer
it to guide him, he easily discerns good from bad, true from false, the flesh
from the spirit. This faith, this spirit of truth shows the soul what the God
is that she adoreth; from thence she is carried on to love him, to fear him,
and to live in a continual respect of his divine presence. Faith, says God,
is the principle of all being, the end and center of all things; that out of
him, all is but a dream, that all creatures are vain, that God is in all
things, Act. 17.28.
that he gives life and being to all; that all things depend on him. This makes
the soul know that she ought to esteem God alone, and all that belongs to God;
that all the rest is nothing but vanity and lies. This light and spirit of
faith teaches that God is eternal truth, his works are truth, his words and
promises true and infallible. This causes the soul which is guided by the
spirit of faith constantly to adhere, and strongly to rely on the truths and
maxims of Christianity, which are the works and the words of Jesus, God and
man; she believes firmly, that what he has said will come to pass, what he
has promised is certain, the truth that the eternal Father has revealed to
us by his Son are infallible and eternally the Son of God, who is the truth
uncreated, is a God which can neither deceive nor lie.

Hereupon the soul, by this spirit of truth, remains indissolubly tied to all
that God has said and revealed by his Son, so as she cannot taste, nor
understand any humane reason or object; she will not hearken nor adhere to any
thing but to the truth of faith; she will only follow the maxims that Jesus
Christ has left us in his Gospel, and imitate the example of his life and
divine virtues, the rest she despises as unworthy a Christian soul, which ought
not to be guided by, nor live, but in the spirit of truth; and certainly, so
the Christian must live. All the world confesses, that God alone is truth,
that the only spirit of God is the only spirit of truth; whence it appears,
that all that is not God, and according to the spirit of God, is but vanity and
lies. This granted, how can they live, who have any other object then God? Here
let us make reflection on the point, we shall show how much they are deceived,
who in matters of faith, and in the conduct of their life separate themselves
from this spirit of truth to seek humane reason, ways of prudence, maxims of
wise men, who measure perfection and Christian virtues, according to their
proper sense, according to their own spirits, such souls cannot but fall into
an abisse of errors and doubts, or at least such persons believe little, doubt
of all things, live a life more like Philosophers then Christians, and make no
great account of a thousand good things which are useful in Christianity.

To remedy this, they must learn that faith, the spirit of truth, and the life
of Christ, must be the only rule and guide of our actions and life, in such
manner, that to go out of this rule and conduct, either on the right hand or
left, is always to err from the right way.

2. Considering what we have now said of truth, we clearly see how necessary it
is to be established in the spirit of faith, and to take truth for our object
and conduct. All other spirits are deceitful and lying, whence it follows,
that souls that will live in Christian perfection, must commence by this
exercise, and must necessarily lay the spirit of faith as the foundation of
virtue, if they would obtain any. As faith is the door whereby we enter into
the house of God, and are made children of the Church, so must she be the
beginning of the life of a Christian, and the spirit wherewith he lives, and
endeavors to acquire virtue: Where we must mark in the conduct of souls, how
necessary it is to establish them in the spirit of faith, and to accustom them
to walk in the light of truth. This is the first Lesson we must propose to them
in this point, wherein we must keep and exercise them, as that which is only
profitable, and without which nothing is stable or true, not to entertain and
amuse (I dare not say, to deceive) them by so much prudence; by the
consideration of so many humane reasons, and by the example and actions of men;
a hard case, that the devout of this age take so much care to recommend and
obtain moral and civil Virtues, and mention not, nor consider but
superficially the divine and necessary. Let us learn and say with Jesus Christ,
that Truth alone shall save us, and that truth must be the foundation and
establishment of our life, if we will live true Christians.

Hence the soul, that will arrive to christian perfection, must shut her ears,
divert her thoughts from all that the humane spirit, reason and self-love, can
inwardly represent, and must not hearken to them who regard not God purely, but
measure the greatness of Heaven with the eyes of flesh, by the smallness of the
earth, and speak of virtues and christian perfection, according to their own
sense, more like Philosophers then Christians. Such persons by their discourse
and conference study to destroy the maxims of Jesus Christ, to establish humane
prudence, and use their uttermost to abase virtue, and make it humane. In a
word, they only labor to make man reasonable, not to make him a perfect
christian. Upon such occasions, the soul that seeks true perfection, and will
follow Jesus Christ, must stand upon her guard, and avoid such persons, and
with great care, must prevent humane prudence from annihilating in her the
spirit of faith, and the esteem of the things of God. If it happen that a soul
see her self among such persons, and shall understand their discourse to be
such, it will be good at that instant, by a sweet elevation of spirit, to give
her self to God, and renew if she can, her esteem of Truth in a thought of God,
renouncing the persuasions of the humane spirit, and protesting that she will
receive no other conduct or light then that of Faith, nor other interior
dispositions then those of Jesus Christ, according to the truths that he has
left to his Church.

If notwithstanding all this, the soul remain in fear, or trouble of spirit, or
feel the spirit of faith to diminish in her, then she shall give her self more
strongly to God, and recollecting her self, she shall with an humble spirit,
stir up in the bottom of the heart, a confidence in God alone, and a diffidence
of all things. In fine, she shall divert her self from all thoughts which
trouble the repose of her spirit; and captivate her judgment, her reason, and
humane essence to the spirit of faith; she shall undergo with an humble
patience the pains which she feels, contenting her self by an act of her will
to subject her spirit to all that Jesus has said, without regarding any other
thing; and in this manner she shall keep her self united with Jesus Christ, and
in a secret silence shall employ her self in him, not about the business in
question.

This act is heroic, because his disposition is hard, and strikes our senses
rudely, and sometimes it is painful, but it is withal certain and pleasing to
God. It is not painful otherwise then as our reason, our judgment, and the
love of our own interests is living in us. If we would annihilate all that, it
would be easy for to overcome, and to believe rather in Jesus Christ, then in
men, and our own sense, yet must we not (whatsoever difficulty we meet with)
neglect this labor; for as the soul has nothing more assured then faith,
nothing more profitable, or more powerful then truth, so the Devil fails not
also all the ways that he can, to draw us from the conduct of faith, and to
annihilate in us the light, and to force us from the adherence to truth, if not
all at once, yet at least by little and little. The soul therefore must take
heed, she be not here deceived, seeing all her happiness consists in walking in
the spirit of faith, and with the light of the truth. This exercise is
important; let us see how we are to behave our selves therein.

CHAP. VI. Of the use of Faith, and how we may practice it.
THe soul may be guided two ways, by the natural light of reason, which is
weak and deceitful, ever fallible, and by the light of faith which is
infallible, powerful, certain, proportioned to that state of glory whereat we
aim, it is a supernatural light given by God to guide us to Heaven. The first
is common to the souls of the World, by St. Paul, Romans 9.8.
styled children of the flesh; the second proper to souls, which live perfect
christians, who resign themselves to the spirit of God, and to his conduct, who
trust only in God, adhere to nothing but to the faith which they have in the
words of Jesus Christ, and the Maxims of the Gospel. It is the property of a
christian to live and guide himself, according to the light and truths of
Faith, lights much above the natural light of Reason, to this end is he made a
Christian. It Is true, the way of faith is hard, because it captivates the
judgment, it is above our sense, it combats humane reason, it is hidden, and
very spiritual, yet must we, nevertheless, follow and embrace it, because
Jesus Christ gives it, because it is certain and infallible, because it is
suitable to the ways of God, who leads men in this world through obscurity,
having reserved knowledge and light for heaven.

There are, who will think that the soul may be deceived by this way, our
spirits being too feeble, this way too eminent, and that it occasions a
perpetual combat in the spirit: As it is troublesome to a man to walk in
darkness, so it is hard for the soul to go this way of Faith, which is obscure
and hidden. But if we would learn it well, we must say the contrary, all other
ways are uncertain, and deceitful, virtue alone is infallible, we shall never
be deceived, if we stick to it. It were to have a mean esteem of Gods graces,
and to be ignorant of the Principles of our salvation, to believe that the
faith God has given us to conduct us, is capable of loosing us. Let us
remember that God has given us the light of faith to guide our reason, and
that our reason must submit thereunto, and in respect of Faith, be annihilated,
as Saint Paul says, We walk by faith, not by sight; meaning, that to live
Christianly, 2 Cor. 5.7.
we must let our reason be guided by faith, not faith by reason; wherein we see
the designs of God in the rule of our souls, the necessity of our walking by
the light of this torch, or according to the ordinary manner of speech, see how
necessary it is for him that will live a perfect Christian to follow only the
light of faith, and to learn to make use of Evangelicall truth.

If at any time the souls who take this way are deceived, it is in that they go
out of it, and (being persuaded by the Devil, or self-love, or the vanity of
the humane spirit, which esteems it self in every thing) withdraw themselves
from the conduct of faith to follow that of humane prudence, choosing to be
guided by the rules of the flesh, and the spirit of worldly vanity, rather then
by the maxims of Jesus Christ, and the spirit of heavenly truth. Thus indeed
they find themselves deceived, and fall into misfortunes, not for having taken
this way of faith, but for having quitted it, and adhered to humane prudence,
and the light of reason, which like an ignis fatuus, will lead us out of the
way, unless we be aided by a supernatural force, and guided by a more sure
light, such as is this of faith. But to the soul that is faithful, applying
her self to the truths of Faith and Maxims of Christianity, that seeks God with
simplicity and humility, there must necessarily arrive great profit and
advantage in christian perfection. We must not therefore condemn this way, and
reject it as too high, too difficult, and too painful; for it is the way that
the Son of God himself has left to his Church, and commanded all his
children. But on the contrary, we must teach it every one, accommodating our
selves to their several capacities, and giving them all the means to pursue it,
without going out of it, least they be deceived. If we find here any
difficulty, it is in our selves.

There are two things in man which hinder his progress this way, one is esteem
of himself, and of his own spirit; the other is the Love that he bears himself,
and, for his own sake, to the Creatures. To pursue this way, and to make use of
Faith, he must go out of himself, and renounce his own spirit, and raise
himself above all Creatures, to adhere to truth, to believe and to make use of
what he did believe; he must renounce his judgment, his reason and his sense*
and annihilate them. If our reason, sense, and judgment, repugne the truth
proposed to our belief, we must quit our reason and our sense, to unite our
selves to the truth. If, for instance, it is proposed, that the uncreated
eternal word become man; that God died; reason and sense oppose this truth;
Reason cannot comprehend that the eternal God should make himself subject to
Time, the immortal submit himself to Death; yet to believe this, our Will
moved by grace, notwithstanding the opposition of reason and sense, must say, I
will believe and adhere to the truth proposed. The will adhering hereto
commands reason and judgment, which obeying her, believe what she proposes;
the understanding which uses to command and be free, renders it self captive
and obedient, annihilating its own thoughts and reason, that so it may adhere
to the truth proposed, and form an act of Faith.

Thus we are to understand that of Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 10.5.
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. By faith the
understanding which uses to command, is made captive and obedient to the Will;
therefore the soul in the practice of Faith, goes out of her self, and no more
obeys her judgment or sense, she no more regards her self, but the truth
only, which she embraces as her object, adhering and uniting her self thereto.
Thus by Faith, the soul is elevated above her self, to be tied and united to
the eternal and infallible truth revealed and proposed to her.

This well considered, will show us the excellency and dignity of faith, by
which knowledge we shall learn how much we are to esteem the state of
christianity in general, and the life of a christian in particular, seeing,
that according to Gods designs, and the grace of Jesus Christ, the christian
as christian must live and be guided, only by the spirit of truth and light of
faith, which being divine and supernatural, draws us out of our selves, to
unite and tie us to God who is truth. We shall moreover see by what has been
said, that faith is not what we think; it consists not in great learning, in
many reasons, and several Arguments; on the contrary, it is for the simple,
and for those who can go out of themselves, who can annihilate themselves in
their reason, and quitting the regard of themselves and other creatures, adhere
and follow the truth of faith. Therefore it is said commonly, that the learned
and wise of the world, who have most prudence, most reason, the most solid
judgment and capacity of spirit, have likewise most opposition to faith, for
they are less able to go out of themselves, to annihilate their own spirits
and judgments. Thus Jesus Christ, after he had summed up the truths of Heaven,
and described the contentments of the glory of the just, Mat. 11.25.
concludes with an Enthusiasme of truth. I thank thee O Father, says he, Lord
of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things, (these truths) from
the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes, to the humble and
meek. Which shows that the knowledge of truth, and of the spirit of faith, is a
gift of God, that God gives it to the humble and little ones; that to adhere to
it, we must humble and abase our selves. In a word, to make use of the truth
and faith conceived, we must go out of our selves, and out of esteem of our
selves. Let us practice this, for it is our principal design.

To make use of faith and truths conceived, we must first consider what faith
proposes, but we must consider it barely and simply without any discourse upon
it; we must adhere thereto, and having adhered to it, we must act and do all
things in pursuit of this adherence. Let us propose an example in common
things, to facilitate the practice. I look upon God, I consider his infinite
essence; I see that in respect of his divine Majesty, all creatures are as
nothing. Having taken and imprinted this thought in my spirit, I believe, and
immediately adhere thereunto, saying, it is true. Then making use of this truth
which I believe, I despise all that is not of God, and that belongs not to God,
for the act of faith which I performed, teaches me that all the rest is
nothing, all creatures are nothing before God. In like manner, amidst my
actions, making use of the truth that I profess and believe, sometimes I
despise one thing, sometimes another, esteeming God only, but accounting all
the rest as nothing. Thus I act in the spirit of Truth, and make use of Faith.
Let us give an example more common.

I would form in my self the presence of God by the principles of Faith.
Hereupon I will rouse up in my spirit the thought of that truth which teaches
me God is present every where, and thence infer, that consequently he is in my
heart, with the same greatness and Majesty that he is in Heaven, amidst the
Cherubims and Saints, for it is the same God. Having conceived this truth, I
adhere to it, and say it is true; then making use of it, I find my self in the
presence of God, who is in my heart; I hold my self before him in great
reverence; I walk with recollection of spirit, and a sweet application of my
soul to God who is present. Now I look on him with love, next I adore him,
doing all these actions by the principle of truth. This is to make use of
Truth. The thing is not hard, we must only apply our selves heartily hereunto.
For according to the measure that we advance and perfectionate our selves in
this exercise, shall our actions be perfect, and performed in the spirit of
truth. This is a point of much importance; I wish I could persuade all
christians to it, for it is the foundation of true piety, and the cause, root
and source of all good actions.

CHAP. VII. Of the effects that Faith produces in our souls, and of the esteem
of God.
Heb. 11.1.
WHen the Apostle says, Faith is the substance of things hoped for, he would
compare faith to substance, and say, that as substance is the support of all
Accidents, so faith is the support and basis of all Virtues and Graces. Faith
is the first gift of heaven, and the eldest of the graces of God; she contains
and substains all the virtues of Christianity, according to the faith in us,
and the use we make thereof, are we virtuous, and advanced in Christian
perfection. As this is the first of Gods gifts, so the first care of a
Christian must be to compass so fruitful and profitable a grace. This is a
talent whereof God will demand a most exact account, when we shall appear
before the tribunal of his divine justice. God gives us not so great a grace
but to profit thereby, and make use of it. It belongs to God alone to give
faith, to move our will, to illuminate our understanding; but it is in man to
make use of it, and to show by his works the faith he has received of God. In
fine, what advantage is it to possess faith, which is an infused habit, and to
let it sleep in us, to possess truth, and to keep it under restraint? Faith, we
say, is a supernatural habit, a light of grace; we must therefore put it in
action, and make use of this light to walk forward in the ways of grace and
path of virtue. This is the design of God, evident in the mysteries of
Christianity; the eternal Father sent and gave us his Son, the uncreated and
essential truth to speak to us, and conduct us in the spirit of truth; the Son
conversed among men to bear witness, Jo. 18.37.
(as he himself says) unto the truth; the same Son of God ascending into
heaven, sent to us the Holy Ghost, the spirit of truth, to enlighten us, and
teach us the truth. And why has God so great a care, that we should know the
truth, but because the knowledge of that might save us, and make us free; that
is, that the light of the truth, which is the spirit of faith, might draw us
from vice and sin, to lead and confirm us in the acquisition and possession of
virtues.

Look upon a soul, guided by the spirit of faith, you shall see that
immediately she detests ill, and embraces good, it is the property of it to
engender and form acts of virtue. If the soul knows the greatness of God,
making use of the knowledge of this truth, she will presently be carried to a
great esteem of God. From this esteem springs reverence, reverence operates
love, love brings the soul to God; the soul so united by love, fears to
displease him; This fear, which is an effect of love, brings into the soul, a
vigilance not to offend him; she loves, but it is to please him in all things.
This vigilance forms a purity in the soul; this purity renders us worthy to
possess God. Thus faith summons all the virtues, Heb. 10.38.
embraces them, and binds them all together, and as she is mother, so is she
also nurse of them. In brief, she is the foundation of the Christian life, the
nourishment of all good actions: This is the meaning of Saint Paul, who said,
The just shall live by faith; the reason is plain; Faith is a light of truth;
he then that walks in the light of faith, walks in the truth; and to walk in
truth, is to hate sin, which is a liar. This is to live in the practice and
possession of true virtue, and in the terms of the Scripture, to live in Jesus,
Joh. 11.26. Joh. 14.6.
who is the way, the truth, and the life. It therefore greatly imports souls
which will live good Christians, and obtain true virtue, to establish
themselves in the spirit and use of faith, to demand it of God, and to refer
all their good exercises thereunto, which is truly the foundation of all the
rest, the principle, the entertainer and supporter of Christian perfection;
this exercise is very large. Faith and truth have effects almost innumerable;
He who applies himself thereto, shall taste the fruits more or less, according
to his care therein. But if we would know the most important where we must
begin, I answer, it is the esteem of God, wherein the soul must entertain it
self much, and lay a good foundation to arrive at this esteem. It is not
necessary to enter into a high and extraordinary knowledge of God, but to make
use of the Principles of faith, and a frequent loving and affectionate
consideration of God; we must never speak of God, or of any thing that
concerns him, but in words worthy of the subject, with a sense full of respect
and reverence, when we speak or think of the things of heaven, we must believe
they are ineffahle, far above all that we can think or speak; We must not make
small account of what concerns God, but on the contrary, we must have from the
bottom of our souls, a great esteem and belief of all that God has done, of
all he has said, and of that which he has left to his Church. In God there is
nothing little; God is as adorable and estimable in the least, as in the
greatest. Finally, it is very profitable and necessary to the soul that gives
it self to this exercise, to draw from all things, and upon every subject an
esteem of God, and to form in heart, solid and serious thoughts thereof. To
assist us in this practice, and to advance us in this virtue, we ordinarily
make use of reading, prayer, and meditation. But it is good to take heed how we
are guided in this exercise of prayer; how we make use of the thoughts, the
light and knowledge we receive herein. Many seeking only their own satisfaction
in it, do nothing but busy their own spirit; they seek and aim at nothing but
relishes and resentments; they leap from one subject to another; they run from
the first point to the second, and apply themselves sometimes to one affection,
sometimes to another, spending the whole time in a multiplicity and disturbance
of thoughts.

To profit herein, we must proceed otherwise; for in these exercises, and all
other, we must only seek to know the will of God, to esteem it, and to make
our selves worthy the graces necessary to accomplish his will, and to please
his divine Majesty; and having put our selves in the presence of God, by the
Principle of faith, we must lay hold upon truth, we must rest therein nakedly
and simply, we must adhere thereunto, and keep our selves firm in this first
view, with care quietly to leave our spirits to be replenished of God, and
bathing our selves, as it were in this thought, we must unite our selves to
this knowledge, imprinting by degrees in our hearts, the light, strength, and
knowledge of the proposed truth; whether the knowledge be great or little, we
must always keep our heart and spirit open and free to receive the thoughts
thereof. These will put us into an esteem of God; by this esteem, we shall
easily be carried to an humble respect and desire to serve and love so high a
Majesty; and we need not doubt, but that many things will be done in the soul
by Christ, if she dispose her self thereto as she ought; if she leave her self
to be guided by his spirit, and abandon her self to all the effects of grace,
attending them with an humble patience. But, Oh the misfortune of our
self-love! the soul seeking her self, and her own satisfaction, withdrawes and
separates her self from God, to follow her own inclinations, to content her
sense, and to employ her self in what she pleases, making her self hereby
unworthy to feel the grace of the presence of God, and to bear the effects of
truth.

It were easy to deduce all into particulars, if it were necessary; but not to
trouble my self with all the failings that happen in this exercise, it
suffices, that I say, that the first study of the soul must be to know God
according to the lights and truths of faith, to adhere strongly to this
knowledge, to enter into an esteem of his greatness, and then to honor and
adore him with an honor worthy of God. These words express much, and include
the first duties of the soul, and show wherein she must employ her self with
care before all things.

Hence we may learn, that their practice is not good, who as soon as they enter
into some knowledge and esteem of God, and receive some light in the
consideration of the truths of faith, whereby they feel themselves moved, and
as it were drawn by an humble respect and inward reverence before God, instead
of staying and receiving at leisure this little touch, this sweet beam of
Heaven, following this little interior light, and annihilating themselves
before the supreme Majesty of God, they retire from it under pretense of a
false humility, to apply themselves to other thoughts, and fearing evil on
purpose to lose time and be deceived, or to lose themselves in their estate,
they shut the ear to God, and their eyes to the light, to entertain themselves
in their own conceptions and imaginations, and in the consideration of
themselves. We see by experience that this way is ill, we may easily observe,
that such souls never advance, or if there appear some advancement, it is but
in appearance, besides that, it is always in fear, and in a spirit of
self-love, never in solid virtue; the reason is manifest. If prayer be an
elevation and union of our heart, a speaking of the soul to God, it is hard to
conceive how we may advise to quit this application of the soul to God, to
torment her imagination, and cast her into the consideration of exterior
things, into the examination of diverse circumstances, into a continual regard
of what we are, and what we ought to be?

But wherefore all this, seeing it pertains to the matter of prayer? let us
leave it to them who treat thereof, and content our selves to conclude with
that which we would persuade that the first thing that he must practice, who
will live a perfect christian, is to live in the spirit, and to walk in the
light of faith, and by this light to enter into an esteem of God, which is
supported upon the knowledge of his greatness, and of what he is. What course
we must take to obtain this knowledge, we will proceed to speak of in the
subject of Humility.

The second Disposition.
CHAP. VIII. Of Humility, and the means to obtain it.
THe design of this Discourse is to draw to the life, the Picture of a true
Christian, describing one after another, not all the virtues, but those only
which are most necessary, and the bases and foundations of Christianity, the
Mothers and Nurses of the rest. Faith leads the way, humility follows, for,
as much as we know and esteem of God, so far are we humble. Faith makes us know
God, humility leads us to God; Faith disposes us, and shows us true virtues,
humility acquires them, and being acquired conserves them. This is she that
opens and makes plain the way to charity, and who is as it were the Mistress of
Gods House; she alone lays up, and keeps safe the divine gifts. St. Paul by
way of excellency, calls her the virtue of Jesus; for besides that, this virtue
appertains to him, more then to any, and that the whole course of his life, and
the mysteries of his sufferings were ever accomplished in humility; it is
moreover his virtue in that he published it, and recommended it to the world,
and wills that his humility be the object and example of the life of men: Mat.
11.29
Learn of me, says he, for I am meek and lowly of heart. It is he that has
thundered and pronounced this sentence; Mat. 23.12
Whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased, and he that shall humble
himself, shall be exalted; natural and powerful words pronounced by the mouth
of Truth. Why should we seek further evidence, how acceptable this is to God,
and how he rewards this truth, and how necessary it is for him that will be a
perfect Christian? Let us no further demurre upon this subject, but examine
wherein it consists; let us learn what humility is, that is it we are most
ignorant of.

Humility is truth; to be humble, is to walk in the spirit of truth. I say,
humility is truth, because true humility consists in this, that God by his
infinite bounty, by his operations of love and grace infuses into the soul, a
light which makes it see the truth in all things* more or less, as it pleases
God. This light, which brings with it knowledge, abaseth and annihilateth the
soul in her self, and causes that in all things she annihilate her self,
because this truth teaches her what God is, and what the creature is; so that
this grace, which I call the light of truth, gives not only knowledge, but
also actually annihilates the soul, and detains her in her lowness, in her
nothing; and being in her nothing, she is truly where she ought to be; for
hereby she is in the truth, and acting in this state, she walks in the spirit
of truth, which is the same, as to act with humility. Many will wonder hereat,
who thinking they have humility, have it not, who thinking to attain it by
certain exercises of humiliation, do but deceive themselves; not but that their
exercises are good, and conduce to humility, but if we pass no further, if we
possess not the spirit of truth, acting by the same spirit, which is the spirit
of God, and of simplicity, we may make many acts of humility, but we shall not
have humility; for humility, in its formality and essence, consists in the
spirit of truth and simplicity; the spirit of truth and simplicity is God. To
be humble then, we must act in this spirit; I will explicate, and make this
more intelligible.

Humility is a supernatural light, which I call the light of truth, because it
makes us know things as they are. On one side it draws and advances us to the
knowledge of the infinite goodness of God, and other his divine perfections;
and by this knowledge, forms in us an esteem of the supreme Majesty of God; On
the other side, the same light causes us to see what we are, our own meanness,
unworthiness, impotency, indigence, the truth of our nothing, and by
consequence, before God, she makes us see the truth, which consists in the
knowledge of God and of our selves. This truth so conceived, possessing our
spirit, and and acting in our soul, annihilates and debases us in all things,
in all our actions, with so much facility, that the soul can do no otherwise;
for she cannot but act according to her knowledge; so that acting wholly
according to this light, and taking all things as she conceives them, she walks
in humility, and, as we say, humbles her self, and in effect, she does humble
her self, not knowing it; for she has no eyes but to see the truth, no power,
but to act according to truth.

I call here humility, a light, and a light of truth, for so in effect she is;
whence it follows, that by humility, we arrive to the knowledge of truth, as by
the light of the Sun we see the Sun; so by the light of the truth, wherein
consists humility, we see truth. Thus we understand it; when we say that God
reveals his divine secrets and greatness, and teaches the truths to humble
souls. Mat. 11.25.
Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto babes, that is, to the humble, says Jesus Christ, to his Father.

Whence we infer, that to understand the Catholic and supernatural truths,
and to possess them, we must go to them with humility, not sufficiency, nor
capacity, much less curiosity; God is pleased with little ones; so much
reading, so much curiosity, so many Questions, so many Reasons, wherein men
take pains, are unprofitable labors; and rather separate us from Christian
truth, then bring us nearer to it; Isa. 57.15.
for God dwells with the humble spirit, says the Oracle of heaven; so that
retyring our selves from the truth, is to make us incapable of humility, and
without humility, we cannot come to heaven; whence we may imagine what danger
the spirits of this Age run into.

Further, we may learn from what has been said, that they who will acquire
Christian humility, must not stop at exterior actions of meanness and
humiliations, nor at words of confusion and abasement, nor at some submissions,
and accommodations, although they be frequent and profitable; but we must pass
further, and penetrate the center of the spirit, there to establish the throne
of truth, and to make our heart the treasury of the light of God. To be humble,
we must endavour to know the truth; we must possess it, we must act by the
Principle of truth; which being done, it will be easy to come to the
exterior, and to produce infinite acts of humility and annihilation; for we
cannot have humility, without doing all these actions; but a man may do all
these actions without having humility. But we must now know, how we may acquire
the knowledge of truth.

CHAP. IX. Of the knowledge of God and our selves.
THe knowledge of truth consists in knowing God and our selves; a man may
arrive at this knowledge two ways, by infusion, by acquisition. The first
comes from God alone, who communicates and infuses into our soul a light
springing from truth, which we call the spirit and light of faith. This light
brings and gives the knowledge of God and of our selves; and this knowledge as
well as the light, is an operation of God, who by this divine light which he
spreads in us, annihilates our soul, and in all things detains it wholly in
this annihilation, wherein consists humility: Thus is humility a grace infused,
and a pure operation of God alone; this operation is greater or lesser,
according as God pleases, who by the communication of this divine light,
consummateth and annihilateth the soul more or less, as he pleases, for his
glory. This first manner is for few persons, because few are advanced to this
way, few render themselves worthy of such grace.

The second, and more ordinary is acquired. We propose diverse means to acquire
the knowledge of God, and of our selves, the most common and easy whereof, is
consideration and application assisted by grace, without which nothing can be
done. We arrive to the knowledge of God, not by sublime penetration of the
Attributes of Divinity, that is not necessary, and few are capable of it, but
by faith. When the soul considers God as he is simple, proposed in the Creed to
us, according to the bare and simple signification of the words, as all good,
all wise, all mighty, this manner is sufficient. Therefore we must accustom our
selves to make use of that which Faith proposes, and after excite in our selves
the thought of God, and entertain our selves therein, not by speculation, but
by obedience and affection which is that we call an affective thought of God,
as if we should say in our hearts; yea my God, thou art wholly wise, and wholly
good, I will leave my self to thy conduct, I will submit my self to thy divine
will. By these frequent thoughts of God, the soul unites it self to God,
adheres to his truths, and by little and little, ascends to the knowledge of
God. This manner is not hard, neither requires it any rule, we must only be
vigilant often to apply our selves thereto, when any thing gives occasion
thereof. To arrive to the knowledge of our selves, it suffices not, to consider
our own impotency, our feebleness and our imperfections, we see them, and know
them but too much, we make a custom of it, and this truth will never lead us to
humility, but we must elevate our thoughts, and make use of the knowledge of
God, thus. The soul must present it self before God, and having conceived as
well as she can the infinite being, and sovereign Majesty of the Divinity
before which she is, she regards him, she adores him; then she begins to
compare her being with that of God, she entertains her self in this thought,
and in this regard, and presently acknowledging the exaltation of the divine
essence above her own, she accounts her self as if she were not, by reason of
the infinite distance she sees betwixt God and her, and in this view she
regards her self, rather in a not being, and a nothing then in a being. The
soul filling her self with this thought, and possessed with this truth, humbles
her self in the knowledge of her nothing, and abases her self as much as she
can. For having conceived the greatness of God throughout, she sees that she is
a mere nothing. This truth annihilates all creatures, yea the most perfect upon
earth, and the Saints in Heaven, forced by this principle, humble themselves,
and make themselves as nothing, before the supreme and incomprehensible Majesty
of God, in respect of whom all creatures together, are not so much as one grain
of Sand. The soul in the sight of this truth, must say in her self; If all
creatures are nothing before God, Isa 40 15.
what am I who am the least? And if I am nothing before God, can I make my self
any thing? If before the Creator, I find not my self, by reason I am so much
plunged into nothing, would I to the prejudice of truth, appear to be something
before the Creature? In the consideration of this truth, the spirit is
vanquished, the soul knows what she is, and is constrained to humble her self.
We must pass farther, and enter into the consideration of the total and
absolute dependence wherein the soul is in regard of God, a dependence so
great, that she holds only of God, she subsisteth not, nor moves but in God,
with so much necessity, that the beams subsist not by, nor depend more on the
Sun, then the soul does on her God: O happy dependence, which gives us God, and
binds us to God! In considering this truth, the soul finds that she is nothing,
and that she has nothing, either in the order of the essence created, or in
the order of grace, for all is in God, and depend on God in such manner, that
if God should wholly withdraw himself, she should leave to be that which she
is, and should find her self in her nothing. So that if she have any thing, she
sees that it is in God, not in her self; in him says St. Paul, we live and
move, Acts 17.28.
and have our being. Reflecting hereupon, she says in her heart, If all that I
have belong not to me, nor is of me, but of God, and belongs to God, then am I
nothing, nor have any thing. Wherefore do I flatter my self, and believe my
self to be something, when in truth I am nothing? why do I glorify my self,
and please my self in that which belongs not to me? wherefore should I
attribute to my self, the honor, contentment and glory, which belongs only to
my Lord? No no, I will keep in my meanness, I will hide my self in the abyss
of my nothing, and if God be merciful unto me, and out of his bounty give me
something, I will hold it of him, I will only keep it for him, and I resolve
from this time, and to all eternity, I will live in the dependence that I owe
to the regard of my Lord and God.

Let us not stay here, but advance forward to the light of truth, and let us
cast our eyes upon the need we have of God, and we shall find what we are, and
that we are nothing, nor have nothing, as having received all of God, and we
possess nothing, either temporal or spiritual, in nature or in grace, but
only that which God reserves; and if he should be pleased to withdraw his
gifts, or cease to preserve them, we should find our selves like Adam, naked
and poor, and should return to our nothing.

Let us behold our selves then so naked and divested, and let us pause upon
this thought, and upon this consideration, and we shall be ashamed to look upon
our selves, and we shall be forced, whether we will or not, to humble our
selves, but with a humility full of love and confidence, which shall make us
lift up our eyes to Heaven, to behold him on whom we so absolutely depend from
whose hands we have received all, and must yet every moment receive influence,
conduct, grace, and stability, and that so necessarily, that if we happen to
separate our selves from him, and if he but stop his assistance and his
concourse, leaving us to our selves, we assuredly shall fall, and in an instant
lose all, in what state soever we are of Sanctity and grace. O most powerful
Truth, to humble us if considered; a truth that humbles the most holy and just
upon earth, and which annihilates the Angels and Seraphims in Heaven, a truth
which makes the glorious spirits, Angels and Saints who enjoy God, to
acknowledge that they have nothing but of the mercy of God, and that they have
no stability but in God; an acknowledgement so strong, that it were able to
pluck them, and unite them to him indissolubly, if otherwise they were not tied
to him by the state of glory.

This is the very state of a soul of Jesus, who knowing the greatness of God,
and seeing himself his Creature penetrating those truths by a light springing
from the personal union of the word, a light worthy of the glory of the Son
of God, humbles it self but with a humility that shall be eternal, a humility
more profound then that of all the Saints and Angels, a humility which alone is
worthy to honor and adore the infinite Essence, and the supreme Majesty of
God. So that these truths annihilating all the spirits, and humbling all the
Seraphims, nothing but man shuts his eyes against so great a light. Jesus
Christ and these Seraphims, humble themselves in the throne of their glory, and
men glorify themselves sitting on the Dunghill of their vices. O hardness and
obstinacy of humane spirits! O the power of the blind ambition of men, who see
and confess these truths, who bear the marks of them, who feel the violence of
them, yet remain insensible, triumph in their wickedness, and refuse to act by
love and virtue, what they shall be constrained to do by Justice and rigor,
for those who exalt themselves shall be humbled, but humbled by the revengefull
hand of Almighty God. Let us open our eyes and acknowledge; let us descend into
our selves, and from the bottom of our nothing, cry to God that he would give
us that light of truth. Let us adore this truth of Jesus Christ, and let us
resign our selves over to his power, and invoke the force and spirit of his
humility, that it may consume in us the vanity and ambition of the spirit of
Adam that lives in us, and communicate to us so necessary a virtue.

The third Disposition.
CHAP. X. Of an effectual desire to be GOD'S.
AS the spirit of Faith is great in us, so let us make use thereof, and esteem
God according to the same proportion, and enter into this Disposition,
absolutely necessary to all souls who go the ways of grace, and abandon
themselves wholly to our Lord. This Disposition is a pure and perfect desire to
belong to God at any price whatsoever, and to be his purely without any other
regard then of the greatness and sovereign Majesty of God, who deserves to be
loved, served and adored, because he is God, and shutting the eye to all
considerations, to all hopes and all profit, we must say and bear in heart this
truth, I will be Gods for his own sake. This desire will not be so difficult as
it appears, if faith be living in us, and if we bear a true esteem of God. But
we must proceed further, this desire must not be in the mouth only, but in the
heart; to be pure, it must regard nothing but God, to be perfect, it must be
infinite without limitation or restriction, as if we should say, I will be Gods
in all that he wills, and in sign of the perfection whereinto I desire to
enter, I will know nothing of all that he desires of me, I content my self to
be in a bare abandoning of my self to all the thoughts, all the designs, all
the Counsels he has formed of me in the Cabinet of his eternal wisdom, to all
the thoughts Jesus Christ had of me on the Altar of his Cross, sacrificing
himself to the glory of his Father, and offering with himself the souls of his
Elect. I offer my self to him to be all that he will, and to leave all the
effects of his divine pleasure, be it of Justice or of love of abandoning or
enjoying, of abundance or privation, of fervor or of drought. In brief, I will
have no other desire but to be Gods, to be all that he will, that I should be.

This is the adorable estate into which the soul of Jesus Christ entered the
first instant of the Mystery of the Incarnation, as soon as it was united to
the Word, for in the same moment his soul produced an act of obligation of him
to be wholly Gods, wholly obedient to his divine decrees in all the ways which
he ordained upon him, and upon his life, in the ways of humiliation, of
sufferings, of privation, cross and death. This is also the estate and first
disposition whereinto the soul must enter that seeks God, and will live
Christianly; but she must remain herein with such stability and constancy, that
she may render her self immutable, in regard of his disposition: For in
whatsoever change she finds her self, she must never quit this disposition; on
the contrary, it is herein that she must establish and settle her self more and
more, and all her care must be, to bear it, not in her mouth, nor in her will,
but in the bottom of her heart, and center of her soul.

We have said, that this desire to be God's, must be pure, simple, naked, and
absolute; therefore, to form this desire and make it perfect, we must not
receive into our spirit, any reason, any consideration, any interest, but only
say, and say it truly, I will be Gods for Gods sake, according as God will have
me, and in such manner as shall please him.

This Disposition thus explained, teaches us, that they who seek Christian
perfection, and faithfully resign themselves to Jesus Christ, to live in the
state that pleases him, must not desire to know or understand what God will do
with them, nor what he will say to all the motions which they think, or in all
that they understand, nor in all the diverse estates spiritual or temporal,
wherein they find themselves; (that is, neither necessary, nor profitable) on
the contrary, to desire to know and understand all that passes, and examine
whence it comes, and whither it tends; this were to draw her self out of
resignation, and to go out of the purity of this Disposition, it is only
necessary that the soul have a great vigilance to recive all of God, and to
receive it in the manner that God requires of her, and to bear it with the
spirit as he will, and to make use of it with the purity that it merits. In
this point consists the fidelity of the soul, and the perfection of this estate.

To facilitate this, it is good for the soul to present her self often before
God, exciting in her self an efficacious desire to do the pure will of God, and
to do it in the disposition and manner that he requires, without knowing what
he will, and she shall often offer her self to God for this end.

Moreover, it is very profitable to offer our selves to God, and to form a
general will to practice all sorts of good, though we have no light nor
feeling, contenting our selves with a resignation to God, and taking care to
follow him, and to cooperate faithfully with the graces and motions we receive
from him. It is a Maxim in Piety, that the soul must not seek any sense, any
light, nothing of particular, but keep and conserve it self in a pure estate to
be Gods, to do his divine will, and to render her self faithful to his graces,
remembering, that we have nothing to do in this world, but to submit to the
will of God, to receive his gifts, and to render them again unto him.

The fourth Disposition.
CHAP. XI. Of the Purity of the Heart.
WE proceed in our design of drawing the picture of a perfect Christian, which
consists in representing the principal virtues wherewith he must be invested,
and the dispositions wherein he must be, to become fit to bear God, and to live
only upon the spirit and grace of God, as in the Church he is fed with the
body, and drinks the blood of Jesus Christ. Among the true vertus, which we
must possess, that which is as the gold, and enamel of all the rest, is purity,
a virtue altogether necessary, yet either despised, or little known. If we
would see the necessity thereof, let us only consider what is the end of a
Christian, and wherein consists the perfection of the state of Christianity.
The perfect Christian must live the life of grace, which is the life of Jesus
Christ, he must carry God, he must possess God; Jo. 14.23.
If any man love me, says Christ, he will keep my words, and my Father will
love him, and we will come into him, and make our abode with him; which we must
not only understand of justifying, and inherent grace, a gift created and
given of God, but of the real true habitation and presence of God in our
souls. The soul of the just, says the Wise man, is the Throne of God; and the
Apostle says often, that our souls and bodies are Temples of God: 1 Cor. 6.19.
Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost?

Reflecting on this so manifest a truth, we must say, that to receive and
possess God in our soul, we must have the purity of God; and in a word, without
flattering our selves with vain hopes, and disguizing or covering the truth,
let us consider a little seriously what the place ought to be where the Majesty
of a God will dwell for ever; what ought his dwelling to be of whom David
says, Thou dwelst in the sanctuary, Psalm. 22.4.
and in the holy of holies? What ought the heart of a man to be where God has
made himself a seat which he has chosen and consecrated to be the throne of
his love? We must believe God will require in us a purity worthy of God, seeing
he who is purity it self, will dwell eternally in us. This purity that God
demands, and whereof he is worthy is so divine, that our strength cannot arrive
unto it, he must give it, he must assist our importance; there is nothing but
the fire of his love, the lightning of his light, the force of his grace, and
the power of his spirit that can purge, expiate, and consume all in us that is
contrary to this purity. In brief, it belongs to God alone to place us in the
purity that he requires of us: This shows how much those souls are deceived,
who think to possess God, and be well with him, yet are more remote from him
then heaven is from earth. We need not but to behold and judge by the effects,
what its cause is. Now, as this purity is altogether necessary to possess God,
so it is our part to desire and to demand it of him, and our principal care
must be to purify our heart, to make it to bear God, we must offer it to him,
that we may bring to our selves the effect of this saying of God to his Spouse,
and to all others; My son, give me thy heart, we must give and resign it to
him alone, Prove. 23.26.
it is his desire, it is our duty, and our happiness, if he will vouchsafe to
accept it, it will be his when he pleases to make it such as he requires it.
This is not all, we must cooperate herein, and labor with care and vigilance,
that we may employ our selves herein with courage, and labor with profit; let
us therefore see wherein this purity consists.

The purity of the heart may be understood two ways; one, that we must purify
our heart from all sorts of sins, and voluntary imperfections. God enters not
into a malicious soul, nor inhabits in a body enslaved to sin; we mean, not
only gross sins, but ordinary failings, even all faults, be they never so
little: For, God being purity it self, cannot inhabit in a heart, if he find
not, or put not therein this purity; and being infinitely good, he infinitely
hates evil, whatsoever it be, and though the least faults drive not God out of
our souls, yet they make a division and unsettle the soul from God, they make
great spoil in the heart, they undermine it, they brand it, they indispose it;
and being so, it is disagreeable to God, and becomes the object of his Justice.
The soul that knows how to esteem of God, and bears any impression of his
purity, will think more then I say, and never consent to the least
imperfection, all is insupportable to her that she knows to be disacceptable to
God, she has no consideration of estate, honor, her own good; or of men,
where she sees there is any thing capable to offend the eyes and heart of her
God; all her care is to detest and extirpate, not only the least faults, but
to quit, renounce and separate her self from whatsoever she knows to be
displeasing to God. It is the chief advice of St. Augustine; Before any work,
says he, be sure to purify the heart, and take from it all that you observe
displeasing to God. When he would have us take from our hearts all that is
displeasing to God, he discovers a great secret; he would have us go out of our
selves, and take out of us all that is of Adam; he would have us annihilate our
inclinations, because whatsoever is of Adam, is impure, and opposite to Jesus
Christ, and ever contrary to him; whence we conclude, that he who would possess
Jesus, must do all he can possible, to dispossess himself of, and to drive away
Adam, this spirit of Adam, and his inclinations can no more subsist in the soul
with the spirit of God, then the Idol Dagon could stand before the Ark of the
Covenant. All that is in us, and is not of God is impure and unworthy of God,
and all that is out of God, can produce no good, nor any thing worthy of God;
these are great truths, such as might transport our spirits, yet let us not be
astonished at this Proposition as too high and impossible, and we shall see
that therein is nothing too much, but rather far less then so worthy a subject
merits, if we consider how pure that soul must be that would please God, be in
God, and possess God, and what purity it must have to be one with God, for
thereon the life of a Christian happily terminates. O great God, how many
deceive themselves! O God of adorable purity, how few are fit to possess Thee!

By the light of these truths we may discover the abuse and deceits in
christian devotion. Some think that they hold God by the hand already, and
believe themselves well advanced in perfection, in that they communicate, in
that they fast and pray every day, and a thousand such like things, wherein
they exercise themselves, they have the taste and sense of devotion, they speak
well of God, and if you will believe them, they say they are ravished in God.
But consider them well, you shall find they live wholly according to their own
inclinations, they mind only their own Interest, they care only to satisfy
themselves, in a word, they are but themselves, and full of self-love, you
shall know these Trees by their fruits, and the end will let you see, that do
but touch these Mountains, and nothing will come out but smoke. God dwells not
with Baal; let us not go two ways, the soul who will possess God, who is
purity, must be pure, must purge and take from it self, all that displeases
God, for flesh and blood possess not God.

There is another deceit whereto we must take heed, which is of those that
believe they do much, and think that God is endebted to them, when their
Conscience troubles them not with any deadly sin, that is, when they themselves
say they avoid them all for that, according to the truth of this proposition
simply taken, it is certain, he who dies without mortal sin, shall be a Saint.
But laying aside many things that may be said against this abuse, I will only
make it appear, that they support themselves upon a Reed, for I advise all
those souls that speak so, to acquaint themselves with their own state, because
that to know the state of our Consciences and our faults as they are, we must
know what they are before God, and by the light of God. We cannot have this
knowledge, but in as much as we are filled with the light of truth, and as we
esteem God and his greatness: But if we did esteem God, and acknowledge his
greatness, and if we did live in the light of the truth, we would never speak
thus. On the contrary, we should not only shun mortal sin, but even the least
faults, for knowing God, and esteeming his greatness, we love him, loving him,
we fear to do any thing that may displease him, be it never so trivial, and
they therefore who only regard and fear the grossest sins, and care not for
the rest, assuredly, neither know nor esteem God. They know him not, for they
cannot know the state of their Consciences, and consequently, they deceive
themselves when they ground their assurance on a pretense that they are not
troubled with mortal sins, and that so much the more in that they care not for
all the rest, believing they are well assured of their salvation. Alas, who is
he that can be assured he is worthy of love or hate? what presumption is it in
men of this age, to assure themselves amidst so many dangers? Saint Paul, the
mirror of Sanctity said of himself, I know nothing by my self, yet I am not
hereby justified; and elsewhere he says, 1 Cor. 4.4
that he runs and labors always, because he is not arrived to that perfection
God requires of him. Phil. 3.12.
We must say the same in what state soever we are. Whence I conclude, that to
live in the purity that God requires of a Christian, he must not only shun all
sin, but further have a general care and particular vigilance to do nothing,
which may displease God, whatsoever it be, and must neglect nothing conducing
thereto; and herein consists purity in the first sense.

Purity taken in the second manner, implies no other thing then a pure regard
of man to God, be it for the soul or for the body. This purity is greatly
important, and altogether necessary to those who would live as perfect
Christians, by this purity, the soul regards only God, she does nothing but in
the sight of God, she seeks nothing but his Will, if she love, it is only God,
if she affect any thing else, it is only for God, and according to God, in
every thing she seeks his glory and satisfaction, all creatures are before her,
as if they were not; in this consists the essence of this virtue. Perhaps we
shall make it better known by proposing the ways and means, whereby we may
arrive to the acquisition of so divine a virtue.

The first I place in purity and simplicity of intention, when the soul in all
that she does, annihilates all her intentions, her desires, her motions, her
thoughts, and admits none but the pure desire of complying with God. I call
this intention simple, because it must be clear and naked, without consulting
Reason in any thing. This intention is simple, because it is one wholly, and
always equal in all things, it regards God only, and him continually; in
brief, this intention and regard is simple, because it only rests upon God;
the soul that seeks this virtue, seeks only God. O how desirable is this
virtue! how happy is this manner of life! This is that which unites the soul to
God, that which pleases God, and is fit to bear God.

The second means to arrive at the possession of this virtue is, by denying
our selves, when we renounce our selves, and admit no resentment that bears
impurity and respect to our selves or the creature, as the esteem of our own
merit, of our capacity, of our vocation, the content of a Neighbor, the profit
of Friends, the acquisition of Virtue and such other things that cause us to
stray from God. We must annihilate all these resentments and thoughts to
persist in the unity and bare simplicity of the pure regard of God; the
pleasure of God, his glory and his content is a thing more important, and
infinitely of more worth then can be imagined, yea, then the salvation of all
men. The soul therefore that seeks God and perfection (for that is all one)
must carefully take heed to this manner of purity, for to regard any thing but
God, and to love out of God, is to love unworthily, and to love any other thing
with God whatsoever it be, to think thereon, to seek it, and to care for it, is
to make too little account of God, it is to esteem his love too meanly. Men
addicted to this World, will pass over this lightly, and perhaps with
contempt, but I wish all that heartily seek God, and are in the number of those
whom God holds in his hand, and regards to all eternity with a regard of love
and good will, that they think of what worth this eternal regard of God is,
who regards us without ceasing, that they consider what God deserves, and
demand of God that which he pleases for this regard of his love; I am confident
that these thoughts would lead them to true piety.

The third means to attain this Virtue, is vigilance, whereby we take heed to
that which God does in us, to correspond faithfully with the designs he has
to purify us, for by this virtue he is infused, and God by his operations
incessantly purifies us. It is the duty of the soul, to watch the occasions
that God gives her, I say to watch, for the love of our selves is very cunning
to separate us from God, and to apply us to our senses, under pretense of
virtue and necessity. The devout soul must seriously take heed, least she
destroy in her self the works of God. This is the design of Satan, they are his
ordinary subtleties that deceive the most fervent, by this means, destroying
in them all that God intended. It requires a very quick sight to perceive these
snares, and a great vigilance to correspond with the work of God, and to act
with the purity of God, for to this point it must arrive. To this end will
contribute much the second means we have proposed, which makes us renounce our
selves, and annihilate in us all regard to the Creatures, that God alone may be
the object, the hope, the confidence, and the whole of our soul.

The brightness and beauty of this virtue, will hurt their eyes, who too much
love themselves, for they must quit all to possess it, they must have neither
heart nor eyes for themselves or the creatures, and this they cannot digest,
who esteem themselves perfect enough, and think they hold God inchain'd by the
chains of their devotions, which they love even to idolatry, despising and
neglecting this virtue which gives us God, out of an opinion that they already
possess him. The sloathful will not regard it, because it exacts two much care
and vigilance, it is for them who love God, or who seriously desire to love
him, to esteem this virtue, and to seek it fervently; for where love is, there
the eyes are, and we desire not to please but where we love. Let us love, and
we shall find nothing difficult. Is it not an intolerable blindness, to see so
many refusalls as we make to so great a happiness, and to make difficulties,
when God will love our souls, when he will replenish them with himself. He will
provide for them, he will conduct them, therefore he will separate them from
themselves and the Creatures, that the heart may be pure, and fit to receive
him who is purity it self? O soul! says Saint Cyprian, If thou suffice God,
let God suffice thee, if God love thee, love thou him, if he regard thee, do
thou regard him.

The fifth Disposition.
CHAP. XII. Of Self-denial, and the necessity thereof.
IT is impossible to be perfect, if we be not God's; we cannot be God's unless
he possess us and replenish us with his spirit. To attain this happiness, we
must necessarily go out of our selves, and into a true denial of our selves;
for as much as we are emptied of our selves and the creature, so much shall we
be filled of God, from whence this maxim so remarkable in Christian piety,
Abnegation, and annihilation leads us to the fullness of God.

This virtue is almost unknown to the world, and which is to be lamented, even
those that make it their business to follow Piety, regard it not, and yet there
is no virtue more indispensable, or more necessary. Self-denial is the first
Disposition whereto the creature must put himself before the Majesty of his
Creator, it is an estate which the soul must be in, if it will turn to God. In
brief, it is the center of Christianity; for it is founded upon a true and pure
annihilation. We know the creatures before the Majesty of God, are but as a
grain of sand; The Universe is but as a drop of morning dew; Hos. 13.3.
and according to the saying of a Christian Philosopher, The whole earth is but
as a point of a point; None but God can say, I am that I am. Exodus 3.14.
All creatures ought to annihilate themselves at his word, and to account
themselves before this infinite being, as if they were not.

The first use hereof was made by the Angels, when in the revolt that was in
heaven, Saint Michael the Archangel, and all good Angels, according to their
duties, re-doubled this Protestation of annihilation, Who is like unto God?
words that made the Angels go out of themselves, and annihilate themselves
before the Majesty of God; words showing that self-denial and annihilation is
the first duty the Angels rendered to God. It is likewise the first thing that
man ought to do, and the first use of his soul is to annihilate her self before
the Majesty of God, and to protest he will go out of his being, and renounce
himself, to be what God will have him. The Reverence and Religion which men
have professed, show this annihilation of the creature before God; for from the
beginning of the World by an instinct inspired from heaven, Altars have been
erected, Sacrifices and Holocausts offered, wherein the being of the thing
sacrificed is annihilated as in protestation made by the creature, that its
being is dependant on God, and that he ought to annihilate himself at sight of
the incomprehensible and adorable Majesty of his Creator. What difficulty can
there be in a thing so evident? Can there be any creature or spirit so
ambitious, as to advance it self before God, and esteem it self something
before his infinite being? If then before God, man may not esteem himself any
thing without losing himself with Lucifer, he must necessarily annihilate
himself, his condition constrains him thereunto whether he will or not. Herein
appears the truth of what we said, that Abnegation is a disposition which no
creature, no man, neither can, or must eternally go out of: Self-denial is the
first estate wherein the soul that would turn to God, and receive the grace of
Justification, must be, the reason is manifest. Man by sin is turned and
separated from God, to turn, unite, and apply himself to the creature; To go
out of Sin, and turn himself to God, he must necessarily go out of himself,
renounce himself, and all creatures, and must separate and dis-unite himself
from himself, if he will be united to God, and be perfectly converted. This is
to be done by self-denial, whereby the soul renounceth the creature, and
annihilateth in her self all that she is. In a word, she goes out of her self,
to return unto God, which she does, assisted by grace, which draws her back,
and separates her from what diverts her from God.

Let us consider this first truth, by the principle and light of faith; Since
the fall of Adam we are not sanctified, but by, and in Jesus Christ, we cannot
be sanctfied as children of Adam, but as members of Jesus Christ, and as the
new creature in Jesus Christ. This Principle of faith granted, it follows, that
if we will take part with grace and holiness, and be sanctified in Jesus
Christ, we must necessarily renounce our selves, and cease to be to our selves,
that we may be to Jesus Christ, which cannot be but by self-denial. This was
the state of Saint Paul at his conversion, and the sense of his words, Gal.
2.20.
when he says, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Thus we must
understand these words of the Son of God, directed to all Christians: Mat.
16.24.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself; wherein appears how
necessary this virtue is to all souls that would follow Jesus Christ, and turn
to God.

Thirdly, self-denial is the center of Christianity; Let us consider it from
it is birth, and we shall find, the Son of God founded his Church, accomplished
our Redemption, and will save the World by the ways of annihilation. The whole
life of Jesus Christ, the Mysteries of the Incarnation and the Cross, the
preaching of the Apostles, the propagation of the Faith, and the Conquest of
the World, have been only effected by the debasement of the Word into our
humanity, by annihilating of Jesus Christ in all his works, and by the grace of
Christianity, which brings nothing but debasement, as shall be said elsewhere.
Whence it comes, that all Christians who would participate of this grace, who
subsist in the bosom of the Church, and desire to live in the spirit of
Christianity, must resolve to enter into this way of abnegation, and
annihilation, in regard that all the life, and all the grace they can hope is
in the life and grace flowing from Jesus Christ, of whose fullness we have all
received. If this life and grace flow from Jesus Christ, it must be consonant
to his life, it must bear his qualities and properties, as the River has no
water but that of the source, leaving the taste and qualities thereof. So all
our graces being of Jesus, as their Fountain and Principle, they must
necessarily be all conformable, and like to him. Now no man can be ignorant,
that all the graces of the Son of God, are in lowness and annihilation. The
Mystery of the Incarnation of the Word, the foundation and first principle of
christian grace, was operated in, styled by Saint Paul, The making himself of
no Reputation (exinanition:) Phil. 2.8*
The Word of God is in the silence of infancy, his strength in feebleness, the
Throne of his greatness supported on lowness. In brief, what greater
annihilation then that of the Cross? All the life of Christ, and by
consequence, all his graces are in annihilation, thence we derive all those
graces whereby we are assisted and sanctified. What then may this operate in
us? what can it require of us, but that which it self is in its source and
principle, annihilation, devesting and abnegation. In a word, it can operate
nothing else, for he that has grace and its effects, must be in abnegation and
annihilation. All the works of God in the soul, are by annihilation little or
much, according to the measure of grace and faith in the soul that receives it.
Let us ascend to the source of this Truth. Consider, that as God has created
so many and so different creatures, for the beauty of the material World, so
in the order of grace, he has made different ways to come to him, one grace
for Angels, another for man, another for his Son, who by the Mystery of the
Incarnation, became capable of grace, but of a grace proportioned to the order
and state of his incarnation; that of the Angels is not for us, that of men was
lost in Adam, there rests no other for us then that of Jesus Christ, whereby
he repaires and sanctifies us. Now as this grace is superior and nearer to
God, because made for Jesus Christ, God and man, not for men, it follows, that
they who will participate of it, must be elevated above their first capacity,
and be united to Jesus Christ, to be by him united to God. Thus the grace that
sanctifies us is by a holy Jesus, worthy and proportioned to the greatness of
Jesus, infinitely elevated above our being and capacity. If then we would
participate of this grace, we must necessarily be elevated to an union with
Jesus, forced above our own capacities, to be made capable to receive and bear
this grace. If I would arrive to this union and capacity, I must go out of my
self to be united to Jesus Christ, I must die to my self to live in Jesus. This
is the work of self-denial and annihilation, this is the effect of grace, for
one is not without the other, no more then the effect can be without the cause.

This is the point St. Paul speaks of, when he calls christians, Sacrifices, to
show that the state of christianity, Romans 12.1.
brings death and self-denial, and that the christian must be continually
before God, as a living Sacrifice holy and acceptable to him. So he speaks all
along; ye are dead, Col. 3.3.
and your life is hid with Christ in God; and elsewhere, that christians are
dead and buried with Jesus Christ, living in him and with him, Romans 6.4.
we are buried with him by Baptism, in whom also we are raised up again. In
brief, this Oracle of Truth, every where shows, that the spirit of
christianity is a spirit of death, of self-denial and annihilation. Whence we
must conclude, that he who would live according to christian grace, and acquit
himself of the Protestations and promises he made in Baptism, must be in
self-denial and annihilation.

CHAP. XIII. What Abnegation is, and the means to attain it.
THE precedent Discourse, shows the necessity of abnegation, if we will be
perfect, that it is the Center of christianity, it follows, that he who would
embrace true virtue and solid piety, and participate of christian grace, must
first exercise himself in this virtue, and practice it, without so much busying
himself in other exercises less profitable. It is hard to teach, and to
persuade many souls to this virtue, who, as the Apostle says, traffic with
piety, and seek only themselves in all they do, Tit. 1.11. Phil. 2.25.
but more hard to convince those that are drowned in worldly affairs, or buried
in their own lusts, and perhaps, what is said of this virtue, though little in
comparison of that which God merits, and requires of us, appears too high and
speculative to those who already seem to boast of perfection, and believe the
way of heaven more easy then it is. To all this, nothing can be better
opposed, then the command of Jesus Christ; Be you perfect, as your Father is
perfect: Now, if your perfection take it is aim so high, it is not so mean and
common as some think it; On the other side, if we find this annihilation new,
and think it too difficult, let us consider the words of the Son of God
pronounced with much energie and efficacy; Mat. 18.3.
Verily I say unto you, except you be converted, and become as little children,
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven. What more clear and greater
annihilation can God require, then to command the greatest and mightiest, to
become as children? St. Paul wishes those that think themselves wise, 1 Cor.
3.18, 19.
to become fools; For, the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. He
that believes, must captivate his judgment, and according to the common
saying, annihilate his reason, whereby we acknowledged that annihilation and
self-denial is a virtue recommended and necessary to all Christians, to all
that will be saved, not an indifferent annihilation, but proportioned to the
grace and glory that a man would possess. This supposed, let us examine what it
is, and the means to attain it.

The first is an efficacious desire of this virtue; we must desire it, and look
upon it as necessary for him that would be in grace, proper and convenient for
a Christian. We must often excite this desire in our heart, and form in our
soul an alienation and displeasure of too great a love born to our selves, and
of that adherence and fastening which we have for the creature. And for as much
as one of the greatest hindrances to virtue, is to think tacitly or actually
that we have virtue, we must believe that we are at a great distance from the
purity and perfection God demands of us, and are filled with our selves, the
affection of the creature, and void of God. Hence we proceed and raise in our
selves a continual hunger after God, a desire and a firm purpose to approach
unto him, to love him, to please him, and to separate our selves from our
selves,and from all creatures. We must think upon these words, Rev. 3 17.
Thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing,
and know not thou art wretched and miserable and poor, and blind, and naked.
In fine, as all Evangelick perfection practiced and preached by Jesus Christ,
consists in two points, in love of God only, and in hate of our selves; we
must study to establish and advance our selves in these two Principles, we must
vigilantly seek God, in all occurrences, in all things, at all times, and
annihilate our selves upon all occasions and objects presented to us.

The second Practice must be actual abnegation, we must study to annihilate
and go out of our selves. This may be done two ways; One, when we seek
occasions to practice self-denial, or choose some exercise upon this subject.
This is for those who have courage and a great desire to be God's, and to live
good Christians: But many belive not that they ought to renounce, and have not
sufficient courage to seek occasions to annihilate themselves. There is another
manner whereby they may profit by this exercise, which is to receive with a
spirit of self-denial whatever happens to them, and to entertain it as from
the hands of God, without which nothing can happen unto us, and to whom all the
powers of the earth are subject: Here the soul must have a care to be faithful
to God when any occasions occur to practice the interior or exterior
self-denial, to make good use of it, as God shall give him power, and
according to the objects God shall cause them to be presented to him. It is a
Lesson that all Christians ought to learn, that we are obliged, and it must be
our continual endeavor to destroy in us the old man, even in the least
things, if we will have the new Adam, Jesus Christ to live in us.

If it be demanded what self-denial is, since it concerns us so much to
practice it; I answer, to practice self-denial, is to go out of our selves,
and to sever our selves from the creature, to employ our heart, and make our
selves fit to bear God, for our heart is God's, and he created it by his power,
he consecrated it by his grace to dwell there, and be there as a Father in his
family; the Sun in the heavens, a King in his kingdom; Sin drives him from
thence, the love of our selves and the creature holds the place of God, and
has the boldness and rashness to seat it self in the Throne of God. This love
of our selves and of the creature, reigns tyrannically in us, usurps the right
of divinity, does all there that God ought to do. The duty of a Christian is to
establish God in his Throne, to re-place him in his heart, and to let him reign
in his soul. To do this we must necessarily drive away this love of our selves,
and extirpate our affection to the creature. This is the office of
self-denial, which annihilates us, and makes us go out of our selves, and
clear our heart to replace therein the fullness of God.

To practice self-denial, and for a man to go out of himself, is to have no
other desire then purely to please God, to have no other will then his, to have
nothing but God before his eyes, and to quit all considerations of the World,
only to seek the glory of God. To go out of our selves is to lose the care of
our selves, either of the soul or body, to commit our selves wholly to the will
of God, to abandon our selves wholly to his conduct, and the order he has
established from all eternity over our life. It is to think no more of that
which concerns us, and to desire no more that any love us, or esteem us, no
more to seek our own interests or satisfaction, but only the pure will of God.
So to live, is to go out of, and to annihilate our selves; for the soul by
these practices, renounces and annihilates in her self all affections, all
respects, all care of the Creature, all that is not God or of God, and so
renders her self capable to possess God.

To attain this practice of this virtue, besides the means already supposed, a
third may be added, which is, when God himself operates in the soul the
annihilation he would have there, and there are two ordinary ways that he
makes use of herein, one by christian and justifying grace, which cannot be in
the soul, till he drive thence, and annihilates what is contrary to him, and as
far as it reigns herein, and possesses the heart it proportionably annihilates
in us this love of our selves, and of the Creature so truly, that we may say,
there is as much of the one, as there is little of the other, for grace and the
love of our selves cannot reign together, one drives away the other. Besides
grace, God makes use of diverse favors and communications secret and interior,
as lights, motions and other divine and loving operations, whereby he
infallibly operates self-denial and annihilation in us. It is a true
principle, that God never operates any effects which bring not purity,
self-denial, and annihilation into the soul; where these effects meet not, it
is a certain mark that it is not the work of God, for God who is purity, cannot
operate but purely, he is always like himself. If there be an operation of
God, there is purity, and consequently annihilation, for purity annihilates
impurity. If in the operation which the soul bears, there is not the effect of
purity and annihilation, it is not an operation of God, or an effect of grace,
but an effect of proper or natural love, or else of the Devil, who can
transform himself into an Angel of light, but he cannot give the soul the
effects of light, which is to be observed thereby, to know how to discern
natural operations from those of grace.

This truth will appear most clear, if we consider the designs of God in his
divine and loving communications. We know that God does not communicate
himself, nor work in our souls, but to prepare and render them worthy and
capable to receive him; being therein received, he will possess and fill them
with his fullness. How can all this be done in the soul, if God at first by his
operations does not purify the soul, and separate it from all things? without
doubt, if God operate, you shall see all these effects, and therefore the soul
that will be perfect, must narrowly look into all this, and have an
extraordinary vigilance to become faithful and attentive to the operations of
God in her, on one side to correspond thereto, and to labor after the manner
God inspires her with, on the other to annihilate her self, not the works of
God, for if we oppose not our selves to grace and the effects thereof, if we do
not annihilate the works of God in us, God will certainly work great things in
us. But alas! the ways whereby we make use of devotion in this age, are more
capable to drive God away, then to invite him into our hearts. I shall describe
them unto you.

The soul blinded with natural love to her self, desires to be brought up in
the gifts of God, she would enjoy him, and would love what seems good and
profitable to her; she fills her self with diverse desires, she ties her self
thereto, and will continually act and attain, she puts her self into all
employments and motions, she seeks them, she pleases her self with a
satisfaction that her own love takes in things most holy, and in the very
operation of God, she seeks her self therein, she elevates her self thereto. In
this manner, she opposes her self to the spirit of Jesus Christ, and
annihilateth the work of God, who would only live in her, only occupate her
spirit, only possess her, desiring by the power of his love to annihate in her
all that is of her. Jesus Christ would take away, and this soul will add to,
God would dispossess and spoil, and she would acquire and possess. Thus she
hinders and destroys the works of God, driving God out of her, and out of her
spirit, to cause her own love to reign there, her own satisfaction and will, a
vanity ordinary to such souls as are wholly consumed in the spirit of Adam.
They therefore who tend to perfection, must go with all purity and simplicity,
they must seek nothing but God, and to please God, but above all, they must be
very circumspect and attentive to his inward operations, having a great care
and fidelity to leave the spirit to act by the grace of God in them. As all
this is very secret and interior, and often is in the very center of the soul,
so must we take heed thereto, and besides the vigilance necessary, it is good
from time to time, to practice these ensuing acts.

First, to give our selves to Jesus Christ, to live in him, and to bear the
spirit and effects of this self-denial, after the manner that pleases him.

Secondly, to renounce our selves, our secret vanity, and all that is in us
opposite to grace, and to the operations of God.

Thirdly, to be attentive to the motions and operations of God in us,
especially when he acts by self-denial and privation, as well interior as
exterior, to cooperate therewith, either by action if it be necessary, or by
consent of the soul giving her self to God, to receive what God shall operate
in her, when the soul shall feel diverse motions, or meet several occasions to
practice virtue, she shall always choose those where there shall be privation
and self-denial, as the most assured way, and the most acceptable to God, most
for the honor of Jesus Christ, and most conformable to his humane life.

Fourthly, she shall pray to Jesus Christ, to vouchsafe to operate and put into
her all that he wills, and to annihilate in her all that he requires, to
prevent in her by his light and love, the time of death and judgment, whereto
he must annihilate the thoughts and judgments of men.

The abridgement of the third Part.
CHAP. XIV. Treating of the dependence of the Soul upon God.
IT is easy to see, that amongst Christians, even those who think they have
virtue enough to fave them, many deceive, and altogether lose themselves,
taking the shadow of virtue for the substance, appearance for truth, like the
Dog in the Fable, who let go the good morsel he had hold of, to catch a
shadow, these neglect the solid virtues and principal foundations of piety to
insist on certain exterior actions, which have no substance but in the air of
imagination; they exercise themselves in moral virtues, and despise the
Christian; they compose the exterior, and form their demeanor, and neglect
the interior; they fear to displease men, and endeavor to satisfy their
kindred and friends, but care no more to please God, then they fear to
displease him; they would seem good, but care not to be so. In a word, in all
things they choose the most beautiful and best, and will have nothing but what
is good; but for their souls, that which is least best contents them; they seek
but that which is necessary, what gives them greatest liberty and satisfaction,
they embrace with all their heart.

God, who is truth, is not satisfied with these feignings, and wills, that we
serve him in spirit and truth, he detests a lie, and curses those that serve
him with the mouth only; if he love, Isa. 29.13.
he will be beloved; and as his love is most pure and perfect, he will have
ours to be such also. Whence it is easy to comprehend, that to be a perfect
Christian and friend to God, requires great qualities. He must have a golden
key that will enter into the Kings chamber; he that will come to a royal
feast, must be clothed with a wedding garment, Mat. 22.12, 13.
lest he be bound hand and foot, and cast into prison and utter darkness.

To be a perfect Christian, is not so slight a business as some think it, it
belongs to God only to make a man just, it is the work of his hand, and greater
then the creation of the world, at least in this, God shows himself more
powerful in his love, and more admirable in his mercies. Therefore, when we
speak of a good and perfect Christian, we speak of Gods handiwork, of a man
worthy to be a Saint, for to be saved, and to be Saint, is one and the same
thing. Now, what ought the soul of a Saint to be, who must one day see God,
live with God, (says St. Bernard in his Meditations) and be eternally in unity
with God; what must the perfection of a soul be, that shall become worthy so
infinite and incomprehensible a happiness, whereto all aspire that would be
saved? I leave it to their thoughts, who know how to esteem of the works of
God, and make account of the greatness of Paradise, and shall only tell those
languishing and easy spirits, with Saint Paul, Gal. 6.7, 8
Be not deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
reap also; for he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption;
but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.
Whereupon we must reflect, that Christians, who are to reap the incorruption of
the life everlasting, if they will arrive to their hope, must sow in the
spirit, as the Apostle says, and do actions worthy so great a recompense.

This is the way that this third part shows, where are deduced and advanced
those dispositions and virtues which lead us to this estate, and to make us
perfect. Indeed many other virtues might be proposed, but these contain all,
and infallibly guide to the estate God requires of us. Faith makes us know and
esteem of God, it shows us the way to God, and leads us to the knowledge of our
selves; this knowledge draws us to humility, that humbles us and disposes us to
receive God; the good desire, if it be efficacious, draws us to God; purity
makes us worthy of God; and self-denial brings to the fullness of God. He that
has God, has all, he is perfect, and he that has not God, is nothing, and
has nothing. Do what he can, though he should do miracles, (as Judas probably
did) he can do nothing that is perfect, no work worthy of heaven, for it is God
only that works in us the works of grace, and who is the principle of our
merits ( which must be well noted) therefore he that will be saved, and become
a perfect Christian must aim only at this point. All that we have proposed
serve hereunto. The first thing demanded, is to endeavor to have a good
foundation, and a sincere uncorrupted interior, to conduct us according to the
principles of Faith, and the maxims of Christianity, to regard God in all
things, to please him, or at least, not to displease him, with particular care
to annihilate the spirit of Adam, and the spirit of the world, for they are
enemies to God, they can no more dwell together, then Jacob and Esau. After all
these dispositions, the soul must depend upon God, and be wholly left to his
operations and conduct, and be very vigilant to show her self faithful to
correspond with the graces and operations of God, and not to withdraw her self
from his conduct, and the order he would take with her.

This last point is of great consequence, and deserves to be a little more
insisted upon; for it is the last touch we shall give to the Image of a perfect
Christian. We must observe, that in the order of grace, it is not as in the
order of Nature. In nature, that which is most dependant on it is cause is the
most imperfect, as the sound and voice which is so dependant on its cause, that
it ceases to be when it ceases to be produced: In nature, that is esteemed most
perfect which has the least dependence. It is otherwise in the state of grace,
that is most perfect which is nearest and the most dependant on its cause and
principle God; so that he that tends to perfection, must be in a great
dependence on God, and not act but in this disposition, and by a general
resignation of himself to God: To put and establish himself in this estate, he
must have a pure regard of God, that is, he must hold all of God, and have no
other object but God in his thoughts or actions. When he perceives any care,
desire, motion, etc. arising in him, which he believes not to be of God, he
must annihilate and renounce it, protesting to will nothing but him and the
accomplishment of his divine will. A soul that would live in resignation, and
in a true dependence on God, must live in the unity of the object, that is,
having regard only to God, herein consists the true dependence whereof we
speak, she must not go out of this disposition, to regard what she does, or
what she shall do, not so much as what may happen to her upon any manner of
occasion; she shall have all care possibly, that she enter not into these
thoughts, contradictions and afflictions wherein she is, or which may happen to
her, but she must receive all from the hand of God with gentleness and
patience, regarding him as the Author of all things, and submiting her self in
all and by all to his most amiable will, saying with a fervent spirit, What
have I in heaven, or what have I desired in the earth besides thee, my Jesus.
It is not sufficient for her to be in this interior disposition, nor that in
prayer, or her good desire she remain in this nakedness, but she must also walk
in the spirit of simplicity by an exterior conduct, abandoning and remitting
her actions and affairs. and all manner of success to the good pleasure of God,
with a perfect confidence in the love and divine providence of Jesus, not
seeking in any thing either satisfaction or profit, much less cansolation, but
desiring purely to please God, and to be wholly to him, according as he has
ordained her. To make this disposition more perfect, she must not only submit
her actions to the pure will of God, but also all her secret and smallest
motions, as well of nature as of grace, that so she may be wholly resigned to
God, and in a bare and simple dependence. It is not necessary that she regard
her progress and advantage, nor that she desire to be perfect, but only that
by esteem, respect and confiding in the love of Jesus, she abandon her self
entirely and purely to the care and prudence that he has for her.

To conclude, as the soul most purely walks in the ways wherein God will lead
her, so must she also endeavovr to follow the light of Faith, and maxims of
Jesus Christ, which shall serve her as a guide; thus shall her heart become
pure and neat, having no other intention, nor other hope, but to be to God, and
to please God, caring for nothing else; she shall fill her spirit with a great
esteem of God, and respect to his greatness and the infinite power of the
divinity, and sense of her own meanness, and in the spirit of humility abandon
her self to Jesus Christ, to be wholly to him, and to live altogether in a
dependence on his holy will and divine Ordinances. The soul living in these
dispositions, it will be easy to avoid all sorts of disquiets; she shall
remain in a holy indifferency; she shall not trouble her self with her ordinary
imperfections, neither take care to change or not to change, to converse, hold,
or be conducted by this or that. She shall be so little sensible of parents,
her friends, her desires; yea, the supernatural graces, and all things, that
her only regard being to God on whom she depends, and to whom she is wholly
abandoned, her only solace, end and contentment, shall be to please him, and to
leave her self to the perfect and pure submission of her will to the conduct of
God, and his divine wisdom.

For want of this disposition, there are many, (alas too many) who live in
disquiet, perplexity and agitations of spirit. The want of this virtue, causing
so many complaints and repinings, so many inward and outward difficulties
(among souls who follow devotion) so many cares, doubts, desires, and
propositions; which proceed not from the perfection that we possess, nor from
solid virtue, whereof we have not one grain, but from self-love, from adhering
to our own wills, from wamt of mortification, and most commonly from secret
vanity. We fall not into these evils, but because we have not sought God
purely, but our selves, and our own satisfactions; and for not endeavoring the
possession of solid and Christian virtues. The remedy of all this, you shall
find in the Image of a perfect Christian, which I here present to your view:
Consider the virtues which imbellish him; labor to attain them; see the
dispositions wherein he is, how pure and solid they are, endeavor to enter
into them, and concern your self therein, and I am confident, that you shall
find a stable peace, you shall put a Paradise into your heart, you shall find
in all that has been said, the foundation of this pourtraict, and the
interior of a perfect Christian.

THE FOURTH PART. Shows how we must guide our selves in all occurrences, and
in all estates of humane life.
CHAP. I. Of the care a Christian ought to have to perfect his exterior.
TO draw the last lines of our perfect Christian, we must present likewise his
outward appearance, for therein also consists his perfection.

The interior and the exterior are two estates so conjoined, and dependant
one upon another, that the perfection of a man cannot be entire, if those two
estates are not in all things conformable. One is the image of the other, and
as the ancient divine Philosopher said, Beauty is a flash of goodness, as all
flowers and leaves take their beauty from the root, so all that is outwardly
fair in man, is but a beam of his inward goodness, the fruits and leaves of his
perfect and virtuous actions, are but the effects of the root of inward
perfection.

Inward perfection begets the outward, one cannot be without the other. Good if
it be perfect, must be such in all parts, if one fail, this defect takes away
its virtue, and makes it vicious. Man is a whole composed of parts, neither all
soul nor all body, but consisting of both. To be good, he must be perfect in
both, in the soul the interior, in the body the exterior, in the actions of
the one, as the faculties of the other.

St. Ambrose speaking of the Mother of God, the pattern of virtue, says, that
her exterior Beauty, her demeanor, and the actions of her life, were images
of the virtues and incomparable perfections of her soul; and although Jesus
Christ by the Mystery of the Incarnation, meant to hide the greatness of his
Divinity, in the lowness of our nature, and hid himself thirty years in an
obscure life, yet it always appeared from time to time, nor could he avoid it,
but that his face, his body and actions, discovered what he was. Nor indeed
could it be otherwise, for the exterior can have no good but what it borrows
of the interior as of its root, and the interior cannot be perfect, but the
exterior will bear and manifest the effects thereof. Virtue if it be true,
has a luster like the Emerald which sparkles in the obscurest night, it can no
more be hid, then fire can be retained in the bosom of the Earth, which will
force a way to its center; or the light of the Sun be clouded by any shade so
thick, but its beams will break through. So likewise is it impossible for a man
to have a good virtuous interior, and the splendour of his virtues not appear
to the eyes of men, through the most secret of his actions. This is the
intention of God, and a sign that the virtue we have is heavenly, for it tends
always to its center. And as the needle touched by the Loadstone, is in
perpetual motion, till it has found her North: So the soul touched by the
virtue of Heaven, is always in action, seeking every where till she have found
her God.

Men light not a Candle to put it under a Bushel, God gives not virtue to
smother it; he will glorify himself in his Elect. Mat. 3.15.
If our virtue be of God, it will manifest the effects thereof, causing it self
to be honored and acknowledged.

For this reason, they who have any sense of Heaven, who love the truth, and
walk sincerely, never approve those who dissemble in the World, and appear
evil or less good, not regarding the exterior, so they have a good
intention, let the rest go as it will. (It is sufficient (they say) that God
knows them,) they always condemn those who out of reasons of state, or
private considerations outwardly appear either evil or indifferent, hide
themselves when they pray, dare not communicate in public, or do any act of
virtue, in view of their Neighbors.

We must not indeed endeavor to be seen, much less to be esteemed, or affect
the sight of men, but on the other side, we must not fear them. We are obliged
to have an exterior as well as an interior, and we must please and honor
God, as well by the exterior as by the interior. Every one will grant, that
it is not allowed any to be good, and to appear evil; it is scandalous, nay
further, it is impossible to be good, and commit evil actions, for a good Tree
cannot bring forth evil fruit. If we live in the spirit (says St. Paul) let
us also walk in the spirit; he means, our life is a life of God, Mat. 7.18.
Gal. 5.25.
for spirit with St. Paul signifies God, and if our interior be truly perfect,
according to Christian perfection, whereof we have sufficiently spoken, our
exterior actions must also be in spirit, and in a divine spirit, and must bear
the image of God, who lives in us.

This may be more clearly understood by the advice of the same St. Paul; we
walk not (says he, speaking of good Christians) after the flesh, but after the
spirit. He then that will be a good Christian, Romans 8.4.
must order his outward actions according to the spirit of God who lives in us,
not after the flesh and the World, enemies to the spirit of God. To be
virtuous, and to do acts of vice, to have light in the heart, and to do actions
of darkness, to be in the Temple of God, and to sacrifice to Baal, can neither
be comprehended by man, nor approved by reason. To desire to please the World,
and to be circumcised and worship the Moon, is to be a Samaritan. God loves
simplicity, sincerity, and curses the double heart. He then that will be a
perfect Christian, Eccles. 2.14.
must have his heart in his hands, and his hands in his heart; if he esteem God
truly in his heart, he must show it in his works; if he fear God in his soul,
why does he not testify it in his actions? what can we love thee well, O God
of our souls, yet make show to hate thee? Can we have thee in our hearts, and
thy enemy the World in our hands and mouth? No no, a Christian, if he fear God
at home in his own house, will fear him abroad in the Kings Palace. The devout
soul, who beholds God in her heart, and sees nothing but God there, beholds him
every where. She knows not that the World sees her, she only knows her God,
beholds her, and she her God; that suffices her. If a Christian love his God,
he will love him every where, and not considering men, he will say with the
spouse, my God is mine and I am his. Cant. 2.16.
The Christian Master St. Paul, gives us a good lesson upon this subject, and
in diverse places furnishes us with reasons to persuade us to the care we ought
to have of the outward man, and of the actions that appear to the eyes of men,
he says, that first we owe to God, the care of perfecting our exterior, for
God will be honored by our actions. This object we must have continually
before our eyes, this thought must never go out of our souls; Romans 14.8.
the reason that the Apostle gives is, that we are not our own but Gods,
whether we live or die, we are the Lords, says he, and consequently in all our
exterior actions, we must have a regard to God, as if I should say, whether at
Court, in public or private, in happiness or misfortune, in what estate soever
I am in of death or life, what condition soever I live in, I am Gods, and
therefore must so order my self, that in all conditions and estates, I may
honor God by my actions, that my exterior may be as agreeable to him as my
interior. Know you not, says the Apostle, that your body is the Temple of the
Holy Ghost which is in you, 1 Cor. 6.19, 201
which ye have of God, and ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price,
therefore glorify God in your Body. By the first words, he shows the dignity
of our bodies, seeing that they possess the holy spirit; by the rest, the
obligation we have to take care of our exterior, that it may give God the
honor he expects. This Doctrine stops the mouth of all the reasons, or rather
excuses of those who dissemble what they are, and (not esteeming the exterior)
content themselves with good intentions. We must, say they, live among the
living, we must accommodate our selves to men, and a thousand such nicities to
which there need no other answer then that of the Apostle, you are not for your
selves or your own Interests, nor for your friends, nor for the World; give
unto God what you owe unto God, and to Caesar what you owe unto Caesar.

If this reason be not sufficient, Saint Paul gives you another, taken from the
condition of Christians, and which they profess, holy and perfect. As a
Gentleman is obliged to live like a Gentleman, a Prince like a Prince, every
one according to his quality; so a Christian must live according to the quality
of a Christian, his exterior life must be conformable to the state of
Christianity which he professes. I have showed you, says St. Paul, and prayed
you to walk worthy of God, 1 These. 2.12.
who has called you to his Kingdom and to his glory. As the quality of a
Christian is most noble that man can be advanced unto, in which quality, he
must appear before the Tribunal of God, to receive judgment and recompense of
his actions, it is but necessary his life and actions, his government and
conversation, be conformable and worthy of so high and divine a quality,
whereto the same Apostle exhorts us, I beseech you that you walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called. This is all that is required of a Christian,
that in what estate, condition, or manner of life soever he be, he live after a
manner worthy of Christianity. Let this be his first design, the subject of his
examen; let all his care be to profess what he is by his actions. The first
thing that a Christian must regard in his actions and exterior, is not to see
if he be conformable to the rank he holds among men, and to his condition in
the World, but rather to be conformable to the state he professes before God;
herein consists the fidelity and courage of a Christian. This care of our
exterior is not an indifferent instruction, but a Law from Heaven pronounced
by Jesus Christ; Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. He will have us concerned in our
neighbors, and for love of them strive to live well, to be unto them a mirror
of virtue.

This is not therefore an advice, but an obligation to give good example, and
by our good actions, to show others what they ought to do: Example by sweetness
of attraction wins the heart, binds the will, captivates the affections, if
virtuous, it makes virtue to be deified, it constrains us to love it, and by
the rule it bears over our hearts, innsinuates and instills the virtue which it
exercises; For men (said the Moral Philosopher) give more credit to their
eyes then to their ears. From this principle is derived our obligation, to let
our light shine before men, to preserve a virtuous and exemplary exterior; 2
Cor. 2.15.
We are a sweet savor of Christ, says Saint Paul, teaching us, that our
exterior should have the odor of the virtue of Jesus Christ, and not only
have the savor, but be the very savor it self; so much God desires the
perfection of our works, words, recreation, conversation, employments, affairs.
In brief, all our actions must savor of Jesus Christ, and bear the odor of his
virtues: we must not pervert this counsel to formal affectation. True virtue
is masculine and noble, every where it rules with modesty, the spirit of God
walks with Majesty in humility; all that we require, is to profess virtue
every where, not to be ashamed to show that we are God's, that we respect his
divine Majesty, that we fear his Judgments. He that has a good interior, let
him show it by the exterior; let him dissemble nothing, but walk always in
sincerity, remembering that he is in the sight of God, Angels and men, who
behold him, and shall one day be his Judges. By the same reason that we labor
to perfect our interior, we must endeavor to perfect the exterior, for
common sense teaches us, that by our exterior, we must please God, and render
him as much honor as by the interior.

To recollect and profit by what is said, let us learn to perfect our
exterior, and have regard to God only, to conform our actions to the state
and dignity of Christianity. Let us remember, that the rule whereby God will
judge us at the hour of death, will not be that of honor, nor of men of the
world, much less that of our Interests, but of his will and his honor: we are
only in the world for his honor, to do his holy will, we are his, and for him,
and it is reason we should render to God what we owe him.

CHAP. II. That in all our Actions we must follow the conduct of God.
THe Creature, by the condition of it is being, subsisteth only in resigning it
self to the conduct and will of God; for as it belongs to God alone to give
being to all things, so is he alone the preserver and governor of them. Whence
as the creature bears God in its depth and its center, so it bears in the same
depth, a capacity, all that he operates in and by it, which capacity, the
Philosopher calls obedientiall power, whereby all that is created is left to
the power of its Creator, and resigned to his conduct.

Man must be subject to this indispensable Law, he cannot exempt himself from
this subjection whereto he is bound by the necessity of being created, a
necessity so absolute, in what estate soever he be in this world, or the other,
in time or eternity, that he must be subject to the power of his Creator,
whether in the rigor of his Justice, or in the sweetness of his Mercy; and
though his depraved nature cause him sometimes to separate himself from his
God, to live in the disorder of his own will, contrary to the order of God, yet
he cannot absolutely withdraw himself from the order of his divine providence,
nor avoid the arm of God, who comprehends all things, disposes them, and causes
them to arrive to the end that he has proposed them, for this order and power
is so general, that the malice of men cannot be exempted from it, so much is
the creature subject to the conduct of the Creator. Necessity exacts it of us,
the Laws of love and acknowledgement oblige us thereto, and that very strictly.
For God who has a particular providence, and an extraordinary care of man,
conducts him also, and loving him excessively, becomes his Father, King, and
Prince, and his All, that being all things to man, man may the more willingly
resign himself to his loving conduct, not by constraint or necessity, but
through a spirit of freedom, by an esteem of his love, by a holy and loving
election.

These truths no man can be ignorant of, yet we make no use of them, for man
despises the conduct of his God, shuts his eyes to the light of grace,
neglects his most wholesome Laws, his certain counsels, his divine motions,
withdraws himself from the disposal and conduct of God, to adhere wholly to
himself, to his own thoughts and inclinations, to the suggestion of his own
spirit, to follow the false maxims of humane prudence, the motions of his
passions, the alurement of self-love. The perfect Christian must take heed that
he do nothing inwardly or outwardly, but according to the order and conduct of
God. Man in all his actions and motions, must necessarily be either in the
conduct of God, or of himself; if he adhere to one, he is opposite to the
other; for those he conducts, are in themselves absolutely contrary. The
conduct that man takes of himself, is a turning from God, a way that separates
us from God, and quite loses us. The reason of this is, the state of man after
his fall, whose spirit is turned from God, subject to the Law of sin, bearing
the seed of all faults and errors. He is so engulfed in this state of misery,
that he cannot get out of it, though he endeavor all he can, if Jesus Christ
draw him not out of it; he cannot return to God, if the Son of God do not lead
him; No man comes unto the Father but by me. Jo. 14.6.
Now man who follows his own conduct, his own inclinations, motions and will,
withdraws himself from the conduct of Jesus Christ, and as his spirit is turned
from his God, by the law of sin, so he withdraws himself from the conduct of
Jesus Christ, by his own will and actions. How can he but turn from God, and
separate himself more and more from him, and that so powerfully, that so long
as he remains in his humane condition, he shall never be able to return to God,
nor do any thing that may lead him to God, if he do not resign himself to the
conduct of Jesus Christ to be aided by his grace and mercy? This is the meaning
of the words of Saint Paul, when he said, The carnal mind is enmity with God,
Romans 8.7.
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, and that to be
carnal minded, is death; Romans 8.6.
since he loses himself who governs himself by his own spirit, and only
follows his own conduct.

All the divine Oracles cry out to us, and experience teaches us, that the
greatest evil that can happen to man, is to be left of God, and abandoned to
humane prudence, to his own motions, natural inclinations and will. For a man
so abandoned of God, lives a dangerous life, Isa. 30.1.
and must expect a miserable fall, Woe, says God to them, when I shall be
separated from them; woe indeed, yea, a threefold woe, seeing that when God
leaves a soul to its own counsels, motions, inclinations, and will, she is at
the same instant made captive, dragged, and led in triumph to her passions and
appetite; for the passions, will, and inclinations of men, are rebellious, and
hurried by the Law of sin. Now, from the time that man is abandoned, and the
conduct of Gods grace withdrawn from him, he can be no other then rebellious,
falling into a thousand errors, and will infallibly lose himself, if God have
not pity on him, and call him home. Therefore for God to abandon us thus to our
own conduct and will, is the greatest evil that can arrive to man, the
greatest punishment whereby God can revenge himself of the sins of men. My
people would not hear my voice (says God being angry, Psalm. 81.11, 12.
) and Israel would not obey me, so I gave them up unto their own hearts lust,
and let them follow their own imaginations. And St. Paul assures us, that Gods
most rigorous punishment of the ingratitude of men, has been to leave them to
their own desires and appetites; Romans 1.24.
God gave them up, says the holy Apostle, to uncleanness, through the lusts of
their own hearts.

It imports him therefore who would be a good Christian, and make his salvation
sure, to forsake his own conduct, to annihilate his inclinations, passions,
appetites, to confound his own will, to withdraw himself from the conduct of
humane prudence, and from his own reason, to follow the conduct of grace, which
is above reason, and illuminates and guides, that he do nothing but according
to the spirit, law, and will of God.

To be guided by the spirit of God we must separate our selves, renounce the
conduct of humane prudence, and annihilate our own wills. Our prudence and
reason is faulty in every point, for in as much as it comes from us, it
separates us from God as much as it can. Humane nature and the will of man, in
the corruption of sin, regards only it self, not God its supernatural end;
the will inclines to self-love, and cannot advance it self to a true love of
God, if it be not guided and aided by grace. There is another principle of
misfortune in us, which is the love of our souls, which lives of the substance
of our souls reigning in our hearts, and commanding our actions. This love acts
for it self, not for God, it is so opposite to God, that as another Antichrist,
it labors only to destroy the works of grace in us, and to ruin his divine
love, spirit and conduct.

Hence we see what a misery it is, what danger there is in being withdrawn from
the conduct of God, to live according to our own inclinations, according to
humane conduct, which the Apostle calls the wisdom of this world. 1 Cor. 1.20.
For what must his life be, who submits himself to this sworn enemy of God?
what must his actions be, who has no other principle nor conduct then his own
will, only confident in self-love, who only follows the motions,
inclinations and thoughts of his reason? a reason depraved and dim falls
irrecoverably. I will appeal to man himself; how often his prudence, reason,
and conduct have deceived him? Into how many errors have his inclinations and
his passions precipitated him? let him but consult his own Conscience. I
beseech him to see whither he goes, and that in good time he renounce humane
wisdom and his feeble reason, as much as God requires it, to follow the
foolishness of the Cross, 1 Cor. 1.23.
the conduct of grace, for there is no other way of perfection, nor means to
arrive at God, but by the power and humility of the Cross, and by the conduct
of Jesus Christ, our way and our life.

If we would know what this conduct of God is, wherein it consists, we must
consider it two ways. The first, general and common to all, when all that a
Christian does, is according to the rule of the Law of God. Thus we say, the
actions of men are all submitted to the conduct of God, when they are done
according to the Law, and conformable to his will and the maxims of the Gospel.
So David lived, Psalm. 119.105.
when he said, Thy word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. For
the Law of God proposes the right end, the just means and measure of every
action in particular, and of all in general. The true Christian must have no
other conduct of his actions, then this divine Law given by God to be the rule
of man's life and principle of his actions, he must follow the knowledge and
maxims which Jesus Christ taught upon earth, as a watchtower and light to the
spirits of men, who being left to themselves, walk in darkness and ignorance.
Counsel is mine, equity is mine, wisdom is mine, says the spirit of God. He
then that will live according to prudence, according to equity and justice,
that will follow good counsels, must have them from God, for true prudence and
true justice belongs to God. It is true, there ought to be prudence in the
World, but it must be the prudence of God, which we cannot have but by
observing the Law of God. Lord, thou have made me wise by thy word, said David,
who had tried it. We must take counsel, for the difficulty of affairs
perplexeth all things, but this counsel must come from God, and be conformable
to his divine Laws. Psalm. 119.24.
So did David always in his affairs of greatest importance. Thy Testimonies
are my delight and my Counselors.

We ought indeed to uphold our selves, but it must be by the justice of God,
Psalm. 119.172.
not that of men, but that which concurs with the law of God, for all the
Commandments of God, are righteousness, says David. So the Christian doing all
things with this respect, and doing nothing against the Law and Maxims of Jesus
Christ, shall live in the perfect conduct of God, a happy estate whereto all
Christians ought to aspire, and wherein they ought to continue, professing even
to death, they have no other rule or conduct of their actions then the Law of
God and spirit of the Gospel; a rule wherein they must maintain themselves so
powerfully and so inseparably, that no creature friend or Interest, can make
them desire or do any thing contrary to this heavenly conduct.

There is another conduct of God, more hidden and invisible, when God
vouchsafes by the motions of his grace, his inspirations and loving
communications to conduct souls to perfection, and takes a particular care of
them. Here the soul must take a great and vigilant care, that she quench not in
her these lights, and resist not this divine and amorous conduct. This way is
for souls who give themselves to God, who are wholly out of themselves,
divested of, and severed from the Creature, who have annihilated their desires,
inclinations and passions, who are wholly abandoned to God, professing to live
no longer then under the conduct of this divine spirit.

They who are thus happy, must take great care to maintain their spirits in a
near alliance and unity with the spirit of God, to do nothing but by his
conduct; they must take heed they admit not any thing, nor receive any other
spirit which may separate them from that of God. In brief, they must annihilate
all that is of the conduct of the Creature, if they will live in a perfect
conduct, and an entire resignation to the spirit of God, which is that which is
desired in a perfect Christian, as being the means to arrive at perfection.

When we consider these truths, we shall find it hard to comprehend, and
impossible to approve the method of those who would get perfection, attain true
Christian virtues, and possess God, yet in all their conducts, study nothing
but humane wisdom, act nothing but by humane respects, speak not without
equivocation, are nothing but outward ceremonies, regard nothing but outward
formality, aim at nothing but advancement. Let them speak what they please,
humane wisdom is but foolishness before God, and the spirit of grace and of
Jesus is a spirit of truth, simplicity and sincerity. Those then that guide
themselves by the spirit of Jesus Christ, must live and act in the spirit of
truth, simplicity and sincerity. for no other conduct is the conduct of God.
Let no man abuse himself, says St. Paul, if any among you think to be wise in
this world, let him become a fool that he may be wise, for the wisdom of this
world is foolishness before God. 1 Cor. 3.18, 19.

CHAP. III. That a Christian must do all his actions for love of God, and for
God.
THe perfect Christian must not so much consider what he does, as the manner of
doing; for men consider the face, God the heart. It is a maxim in Morality,
that it suffices not to do good actions, but we must do them well, as the
Philosopher says; it is not enough to do just things, but they must be done
justly, meaning, that an action to be good and just, must be accomplished with
all these circumstances which are so necessary, that if this fail, all the rest
will be deficient; good, if it be true good, must be accomplished in every
point.

Now, our Question is not only of an action good and just, but which is more,
of a Christian action, suitable to the eminence and purity of the state of
Christianity, of an action worthy heaven and God. If it be real, it must have
circumstances only pure and perfect, and chiefly it is requisite they have a
proportionate object; for as actions are specified by their objects, so is it
necessary that the doing and denomination of a true Christian action be to
consider, what is it is object which must be proportioned to the dignity,
sanctity and purity of an action worthy God; which being supposed, this object
can be no other then God himself, and therefore we must say, that as all the
actions of Christians must be conformable to their state, all worthy of God, so
must they have God only for their object, and consequently a Christian to live
Christianly, must have respect only to God in all his actions, and to do
nothing but with intention to please him. This is the wish of Saint Paul, when
he prayed to God for the new Christians, to whom he writ, That you might walk,
says he, Col. 1.10.
worthy of the Lord, as unto all pleasing. This counsel ought to be engraven
in the memory of men; for either they think not of it, or are ignorant of it,
yet is it altogether necessary.

Let us then suppose this to our perfect Christian, that to do acts truly
Christian, and worthy of God, we must regard nothing but God, and have no other
intent then to please him. The reason is from the commandment of love, for by
the same principle that we are obliged to love God in all, and above all, we
are obliged also to please him in all, and to seek only his honor, glory, and
pleasure. He that knows how to love, will easily comprehend the truth of this
counsel; For love, if it be true, makes us quit our own Interests and
respects, to engage us in the interests and respects of the thing beloved.
Again, to love (according to the Angelical Doctor) is to wish well. Now, what
good, what interest can God have in our action, but the accomplishment of his
will and pleasure? God has no need of us, for he is all-sufficient of himself.
As by our sins we cannot diminish his glory, or pleasure, so neither can we
augment them by the virtue of our actions; and that he makes them meritorious
and worthy the possession of heaven, that he receives them as acceptable to the
eyes of his divine Majesty, it is the effect of his bounty, not the power of
necessity; it is by dignifying, not by duty or obligation; by love, not by
interest, it is because he vouchsafes to regard them, and to be pleased with
them; it is only because we do in them what his will is, we employ our selves
in his Ordinances, and accomplish his designs.

This Deduction and Principle being considered, we must say, that seeing God
receives nothing of us, or of our actions but the accomplishment of his divine
Will; it follows, that a Christian, who will love his God, cannot express this
love, but in performing the works of God in respect to God, and employing
himself in the duties that God proposes to him: Joh. 14.21.
He that has my commandments, says our Savior, and keeps them, he it is
that loves me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will
love him, and will manifest my self to him; which shows, that the duty of a
Christian consists in doing the works which God proposes and puts into his
hand, according to his condition and estate, to do it according to the good
pleasure of God, and with an intent to do the will of God. In this the
Christian shows his love to God; this is the means whereby his actions become
worthy to possess God.

To comprehend this truth, we must observe that all the creatures are nothing
in themselves; they are as but a drop of water drawn up by the Sun.

Now, if all creatures are nothing, man is yet less; and man being so small a
thing, his action can be no more; but if the creatures, if man and his actions
are any thing before God, it is only in as much as they regard God, and have
relation to him; For nothing is worthy of God, but what is of God, and for God.
Heaven, the world, the earth, are nothing, Isa. 66.1.
yet are they esteemed worthy of honor, because heaven is the throne of God,
earth is his footstool. We may say as much of man, although he be nothing in
himself, or in his actions, yet they are most worthy by this relation to God,
and regard of God. For as mean and profane things are respected, being
consecrated and dedicated to God, so our actions, though they be mean and
unworthy of God, yet being referred and dedicated to his honor, and the
accomplishment of his will, they are raised up, and become pleasing to God.
Whence we acknowledge, that all is nothing, not our actions, if they regard not
God in this purity, and though they regard God, yet they confer nothing to
God, they are only pleasing to him, because he vouchsafes to regard them, and
to take pleasure in them; he advances and sanctifies them by this relation,
such is his good pleasure. Herein appears the abuse of those who fill their
hearts, and perplex their thoughts with several intentions. By this Principle,
we see how much they separate themselves from their duty, who in their actions
and devotions, seek any thing else but to please God; for all our actions are
only worthy of God, because they are only pleasing to him, and nothing is
worthy of him, nor pleasing to his divine eyes, but what is of him, and for
him. Therefore one of the greatest faults to be observed in piety, which makes
us most unworthy of God, is want of this regard of God. Many instead of
referring all things to God, seek nothing but themselves, labor only for
themselves, and in all that they do, think only of themselves; and if they
should examine themselves as they ought, they would find that the end of their
life and actions is nothing but their own Interest, and going on in the
Labyrinth of these confusions, they will find, that seeking to do their own
will, they do what God requires not, and fail to do that which he commands. By
this abuse it appears that such souls design their own health and profit to be
their end and the object of their actions. By so doing, God is no more their
ultimate end, nor the center of their life and actions, but their own interests
and profit take the place of God, an error so manifest, that it is easy to
perceive, and necessary to condemn the same.

Let us remember a principle very common, that teaches us, if there were
neither Heaven nor Hell to recompense or punish, yet we were obliged to devote
our selves wholly to God, to fulfill his designs, and to render him honor in
every thing. This is an indispensable obligation whereto we are bound by the
condition of our being, for as such we are Gods, being Gods, we ought to refer
our selves wholly to him, and be only for him. The fruit is his to whom the
Tree belongs; if we belong wholly to God, our life and actions consequently
must be referred to his honor, and wholly employed in the accomplishment of
his Will. In effect, none can be ignorant, but that we are in the World to do
the work that God has put into our hands, according to our vocation, and
according to the manner that he proposes, and for the end that he has
ordained us.

Nothing is more evident; for what have we to do in this World, and what should
our soul aim at, but to accomplish the will of God, and to do all our actions
according to the designs, and order established by the eternal wisdom? why
are we in the World, if we please not God? How shall we please him, if we do
not his will, and live not in the order he has prescribed? To what end serves
all the rest? whereto are directed all our actions, if they are not acceptable
to God?

This is the only point of our happiness, the principal care that a Christian
ought to have, to regard God in all his Actions, and to perform them in a pure
desire to please him. Let us endeavor only to content God, and God will
provide for all the ^est, Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that
despise me, 1 Samuel 2.30.
shall be lightly esteemed; says God to Eliah. O how happy shall that soul be,
which at the hour of death shall be able to say with Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.4.
My God and my Father, I have glorified thee on the Earth, I have finished the
work, which thou gave me to do? Happy is the soul that forgets her self to
think only on God, which loses it self in all concernments, to seek only the
pleasure of God. Happy are those Christians who can say in all their actions,
we keep his Commandments, and do all things which are pleasing before him. For
in effect, the Christian has nothing else to do in the World. We are obliged
thereto by the state of Christianity. St. Paul gives us a very evident reason,
2 Cor. 5.15.
when he says, speaking of the son of God, He died for all, that they which
live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for
them and rose again, wherein is comprised all the duty of Christianity. The
Apostle saying that Christians should not live to themselves, shows the
obligation they have to live to God, that is, according to the will of God,
that in all their actions, they ought only to seek to please him, all other
thoughts are repugnant to the state of Christianity. The Son of God himself
teaching his Apostles, and in them his Church what to demand, Matthew. 6.9, 10.
proposes to us chiefly the sanctification of the name of God, the
establishment of his Kingdom, and the accomplishment of his divine will,
showing us by this lesson, which we ought to repeat daily what our thoughts,
intentions, and prayers should be, that we must chiefly desire the glory,
pleasure, and will of God. After so divine a precept, what have we to seek? why
so many exercises, so many intentions, such multiplicity of thoughts? Let us
seek to please God in all things, and take a continual vigilance, that we do
nothing disacceptable to God, or that is not conformable to the state and
vocation wherein God has placed us. How can so many complaisances,
accommodations, correspondencies, affectations of humane prudence, tend to
piety, when they are displeasing to God, who loves nothing but purity? This is
an evil that destroys the purity of all our actions, an abuse that deceives
the greatest part of Christians.

CHAP. IV. Of the complacency and self-satisfaction which draws us from the
pure regard of God, and of the purity of intentions which must be in our
actions.
IF thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light, but if thine
eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness, Mat. 6.23.
says the Son of God, of the dispositions and intentions wherewith Christians
ought to do all their actions, showing by the similitude of the eye, that the
intention must necessarily be pure, if the action permit it. For as the eye
being single, makes the body full of light, so the intention being pure, makes
the action pure; the end and object is that which advances or depresseth the
action, giving it the quality it bears. Now because the intention, to be pure
and simple, must have, as we have said, no regard but that of God the only
object of its action, a regard which seeks only to please God, to accomplish
upon the Earth and in Heaven his divine Ordinances, desiring no other estate
then a bare simple subjection to his loving conduct, this is that we call
regard of God, purity of intention.

To transgress this regard and purity of intention, is to forsake the Sun to go
into darkness, to destroy the perfection and purity which makes an action truly
Christian. We ought therefore to have continually in our heart the prayer of
David, Turn away mine eyes, Psalm. 119.34.
least they behold vanity, as if he should say, Lord withdraw my thoughts and
intentions, which are the eyes of my soul, that they may be removed from all
Creatures, which are but vanity, to be employed on thee alone who art the
Truth. We have reason to require this of God, for this purity of intention,
this pure regard of God, is the most beautiful piece, the most behovefull to a
Christian life, it is the only mark that distinguishes night from day,
darkness from light. In this point alone, the greatest part of Christians
deceive themselves, taking the shadow for the substance, vanity for verity;
this is it we must examine.

One of the greatest retardments that the soul finds in the way to perfection
in any vocation or estate, is quitting the pure regard, and going out of the
purity of intention to seek complacency and satisfaction in something out of
God. By reason of that complacency and satisfaction the soul can never taste
God, nor arrive at perfection. We need no other proofs of this, then the
difference between pleasing God and the Creature, between the glory of God and
our own satisfaction; they are two paths so contrary, that it is as impossible
for them to subsist together, as truth and falsehood, or bitter and sweet
without corrupting. The soul who seeks her own satisfaction, to please her self
in her self, or any other thing, is as far from pleasing God, as the Creature
is from God. Wherein appears the abuse of those, who make no scruple to do
their actions in regard of the Creature, and have no desire but to please
either themselves or some other.

Reason it self shows us that those complacencies and self-satisfactions, are
unworthy a heart that God has created only for his pleasure, consecrated to
his glory and honor; of a heart I say, that God will possess, and shall
possess God to all eternity. They are unworthy of God, opposite to the purity
of his love. As God is pure in his entertainments, and jealous in his love, he
never suffers such an evil, seeing it is not becoming his greatness to divide
his glory and contentment, to mingle his honor with self-satisfaction and the
complacency of the creature. The law of love forbids this division; we are
obliged to love God with all our heart, that is, perfectly, for as he that
loves well, cannot love two things; so he that will satisfy himself, and
please the creature, cannot satisfy God, or conform himself to his divine will.

The state of Christianity teaches this purity: for if we are Gods, and love
only for God, why then all these satisfactions? The soul that desires to be
saved, must only seek perfection, that is God; for true perfection consists in
the possession and seeking of God, she must have no regard, but that of God, no
other intention, but to please him. The Christian that pleases himself, and
seeks complacency in any thing besides God, does quite contrary, he turns
from the will of God, to seek that of the creature, or to satisfy himself and
loses the regard to God, (the most pure employment of his soul) to regard the
creature, to take pleasure in it, and from that very time that he suffers
himself to be transported with this imperfection he turns from God, to turn to
the creature, which is the greatest misfortune that can befall a Christian. For
turning to the creature, he makes himself unworthy the favors of heaven, and
if he continue so, it will never be possible for him to taste God, or to
possess the purity of virtue. If I yet, (says St. Paul,) pleased men, I should
not be the servant of Christ. Gal. 1.10.
The word complacency is of great extent, it comprehends all that is not God,
nor of God, and includes also the gifts of God, natural and supernatural, of
capacity and of grace, wherein it is never permitted to please our selves, or
to seek our own satisfaction. The reason is, because God dispenses not his
gifts, that we should settle our selves upon them, or make them the objects of
our love, or the subjects of our satisfaction and complacency. He gives them
only, because he loves us, and would make us worthy of his regard, love, and
favor: He gives them to make us capable to love and please him, such is the
desire of God in this his liberality, whence we may thus argue: If God gives
nothing but to obliege us to love and please him, it follows, that to use his
gifts otherwise, be they natural or supernatural, is to overthrow his
intentions, and to destroy his work; and it is a kind of Idolatry to regard the
gift more then the giver. In brief, it is to make us unworthy of his favors,
and to stop the course of his divine communications; and if we consider well,
we shall confess, that it is the chief reason that oblieges God to withdraw his
gifts and graces, and to turn away his eyes from us; whence we cannot expect
less then a miserable fall, or to be abandoned of God, either for ever, or at
least for a time. So fell Lucifer, so was the first man lost, and with him all
humane nature. By the same fault many Christians are fallen from the state and
capacity of grace, whereto God had elected them.

The world is astonished when it sees some fall into great enormities, others
into afflictions intolerable, agitations dangerous, and insupportable
desertions. We demand whence these evils proceed, who has precipitated so many
souls from the height of grace and perfection? We may say what we please, but
assuredly, this proceeds not from the ordinary course, but only because we
regard nothing but our own satisfaction, and quit the regard of God and pure
desire to please him, to regard the creature to satisfy our selves, and take
pleasure therein.

If we weigh this offense, we shall find it a great undervaluing of God, an
injury to his gifts; it is to hold unjustly the favors and graces of heaven,
it is to put God beneath himself and the creature; Hence it happens to such
souls, as at other times it happened to the wise of the world, Romans 1.21.24.
who when they knew God, glorified him not as God, neither were thankful;
wherefore God also gave them up to uncleaness through the lusts of their own
hearts. He will do the same to Christians, who after they have received so many
gifts of God, regard rather the gifts then him, that gave them, and convert
them to their own satisfaction, which is a greater crime before God then we
imagine.

If it be not permitted to delight our selves in the gifts of God, nor to seek
satisfaction therein, what shall we say of those who make use of them to enter
into an esteem of themselves, and who glorify themselves in the endowments
which God has bestowed on them? How shall we judge of those who so exceedingly
please themselves, and who glorify themselves in the capacity that God has
given them therein, in their exercises, in their vocation, in their happy
estate, who cannot entertain themselves with any thing else? What piety can
those souls have who are taken only with those that flatter and praise them,
and believe none but those that esteem them, and study to give them all manner
of satisfaction? They have all cause to fear, for assuredly, (continuing such)
they shall never taste God or possess the spirit of true piety. Saint Augustine
confesses this with tears, saying, O Lord, I was putrified whilst that I took
contentment in my self, and endeavored to please the eyes of men.

Let us profit by these truths, remedy our abuses, and establish our selves in
solid piety; let us lift up our eyes to heaven, and recollect what we have
said; Let us consider that God alone is the center and end of our souls, and
that as the inclinations of all creatures tend to their center, and the end
drives and moves us to action, and is the rest and perfection of the work; so
let us direct all our inclinations to God, and destroy all those that are
contrary to him; since he alone is our end, let him be also our chief regard,
our first intention, the only desire of our souls; Let us do all our actions
according to our estate and vocation, as God shall give us the inspiration and
means, but in doing them, let us regard nothing but God. Let us endeavor to
have no other intention, but to do the work of God, to accomplish his holy
will, to please and satisfy him in all things; Let us learn that God regards
not whether we do little or much, so that what we do be conformable to his
will, and worthy of his love. This is all can be required of those who seek
Christian perfection, and would make themselves worthy to possess God in heaven.

CHAP. V. Of the care a Christian ought to have to do all his actions according
to his vocation, and to maintain himself in the order and conduct of God.
NExt interior dispositions necessary to Christian perfection, it is
convenient to speak of the exterior, to make our perfect Christian, see how he
must comport himself to be perfect in all things. We have already spoken of the
care, we must have to appear virtuous and exemplary and to walk uprightly, as
the Apostle says, according to the truth of the Gospel. Next we have showed
how all his actions must be squared to the Law of God, Gal. 2.14.
subject to his conduct, which is the Law of his divine inspirations. Lastly,
we have proved, that to do actions worthy of God, and conformable to his
sanctity and the state of Christianity, they must regard God, and have no
intention but to please him. It remains that we show what is the foundation of
perfection, the most considerable in Christian piety, that is, how all our
actions should be done according to our vocation.

The life of man is a circle that comes forth from God, and must return to God.
God alone is the Principle of our being, of our life, and of our action, and as
he is the beginning of them, so is he the end thereof. He is the Principle does
all in us, he is our end, and recalls us unto himself, so that we have all of
God, and are recalled back to God, for the creature bears a right capacity and
inclination which can never be annihilated, which causes it to subsist, calls
it back to it is God, there to adhere as to its repose and ultimate perfection.

Herein we find two things remarkable which belong to our subject; one, that
God is the beginning of our actions, the other, that he is the end. He is the
beginning of our actions, because there is no good in us which God does not; of
him we have the motion, thought, and will to do well; he gives us the effect of
it, and not only gives us the power to do it, but himself does it in us, so
truly that he is more the Author of a good work then we our selves, and
according to the Prophet, we should say to God, Lord, thou have wrought all our
works in us. It is God, says Saint Paul, that works in us, Isa. 26.12.
both to will and to do, of his good pleasure; implying, not only that God
gives us his grace and good motions, Phil. 2.13.
which joined with our consent effect the work, but that by grace, God is in us
after a new and special manner united to our souls which adhere to him, and by
this union and adherence God fills the capacity which the soul has to good and
to virtue, and operates in her, and by her the action of virtue, but so, that
it is he who operates more then we: We operate, says Saint Augustine; but it
is God who operates in us this operation. Thus is God the Author of our
actions, and the beginning of them, whence it follows, that he is also the end
of our being and operations; the end of our being, because he is the Creator
thereof, for according to the order of nature, that which is the beginning of a
thing is also the end thereof, and by the order that God holds in his loving
operations, he cannot act, but he must be the end of his action, and as he is
the beginning of the being, action and perfection of man, so is he the end
thereof.

This Principle teaches us, that as God alone is the end of man, so he alone
gives the means, and prescribes the order that he must keep to come to God his
end. For as the Creature has not power to draw it self from nothing, so has
it not the right to propose an end to it self, nor to prescribe to it self the
order, way and means to come to this end; that appertains to God, who alone
can give the being, propose the end, and prescribe the means. And when God has
prescribed the end and ordained the means thereto, yet cannot we follow the
way, nor keep this order, if God himself does not act in us, conduct us, and
work in us what is necessary to attain our end, for he alone is the beginning
of all our actions, he performs both the will and the deed, We are his
Workmanship, says St. Paul, (speaking of God) created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has before ordained, Ephesians. 2.10.
that we should walk in them. Hereby the Apostle shows, that God has
regulated the life of man, ordained all his actions, prepared all the good
works wherein he wills that he should employ himself, that it is God who does
all in us, and that we are his workmanship, so all our safety consists in this,
that God is our end, God alone has ordained the means to arrive at our end;
God alone must conduct and operate in us works necessary to that end whereto we
are called. Herein consists all the happiness of a Christian, all the duty of
our souls, whence all the piety, all the care we must have, consists in these
three points, which contain the foundation of all the rest; to tend toward God
continually, to continue in the order and conduct of God, and to entertain all
the divine operations; to let God act, who conducts us in that order he has
established over us, and operates in us incessantly the works which he prepared
from all eternity. In these three points, consists all the perfection of the
life and actions of Christianity. Therefore we must take great care herein,
though they are unknown to us, and their use appear difficult, yet we must
endeavor to know them, and demand of God light and grace; we must follow them
with fidelity, and embrace them with vigilance in all things, even in the very
least, for in what concerns God, his glory and will, nothing is little, all is
great and inestimable. Here we must consider how we may be deceived in a
subject so important, that we may avoid the snares prepared for us on all
sides. All the evil that can befall us herein, comes either from the Devil or
from our selves, and more from our selves then from the other, for we are the
principal instruments of our own ruin. The Devil incited by his ordinary
malice, being crafty, and having a thousand subtle ways to annoy us,
continually considers the ways of God, over our souls, and by the little
knowledge he has thereof, can easily represent something of Gods Ordinance
over us, of his designs and ways to save us. Having considered these, he
goes about, he makes it his perpetual business to persecute us, and
precipitate us. The first effect of his malice is to ruin in us the works of
God, and to shut our heart against the motions of grace; he particularly
labors to divert us from the Ordinances of God, and to make us go out of the
order and conduct which he knows God has established over us. He employes a
thousand surprises to further his treachery; he makes use of our selves, of all
the Creatures, which are as the wise man says, snares for the feet of fools,
he offers us pleasure. In brief, his malice omits nothing that he can make use
of to ruin us. To those souls that have a little desire of good, some fear of
God, and who have made some progress in virtue, he redoubles his
circumventions, and concealing his aim, does not represent to them either sin,
the World or pleasure, for that would advantage him nothing, but he proposes
change, he gives them diverse desires, he inflames their hearts with fervours,
and transported Devotions, he inspires them with other actions, with other
exercises, with some other manner of living, which in appearance, carry's some
great perfection, but looked into narrowly all their motions and manners will
prove to be nothing but deceit, and that the Devil strives but to engage the
soul in a labyrinth and disorder. Those who ordinarily consent to this
temptation, we find to be rash, inconstant, and easily drawn aside to quit
their vocation, self-wil'd, adhearing much to their own judgment, disturbed in
spirit, unquiet; in brief, they are full of perpetual agitations, the marks
and effects of a malignant spirit and temptation.

By these effects, we know that the Devil with all his subtleties, only seeks
to separate the soul from God and from the peace of the spirit, and to draw it
from the order and conduct of God, that he might lead it as he would, knowing
the soul being out of the order and conduct of God, is in danger, and
altogether loses her self, or else for some long time estrangeth her self from
God. For it is a general maxim, that we are nothing but what we are in God,
and that going out of the order and conduct of God, we cannot but fall into
evident danger, and pernicious disorder. And therefore one of the greatest
cares the soul must have, is to beware of these secret crafts of the Devil to
keep her self in the conduct and order of God, in what condition or vocation
soever she be. For as the Devil labors only to separate us from God our end
and perfection, seeking continually to annihilate in us as much as may be the
works of grace, and to draw us from the order of God, so must we be very
vigilant to please God, to receive the effects of his grace, his divine
operations, and to live in the order of God, according to our vocation and
estate.

Not only the Devil deceives us, and separates us from God, but also the love
of our own selves, and our own Inclinations. This seed of sin which remains in
us, is the principal Author of our harm, and that which most violently draws
us from the order of God. The experience is but too ordinary, the reason
evident; for the order that we ought to follow, is an order of grace, that
advances us above our selves to God. Self-love depresseth man, and converts him
wholly to himself, the order of God conducts him to unity, for God is unity:
Self-love leads us into a Labyrinth; the works of God are always pure, holy,
and perfect, for God is always like to himself, he operates in us purity and
sanctity, for he has chosen us that we should be holy and without blame before
him, in love, Ephesians. 1.4.
says Saint Paul.

The love of our selves, destroys the work of God, instills nothing into us
but impurity and imperfection. By this love, Adam went out of the order of God,
and forfeited the grace which God had given him. We do the same and worse, for
by sin we are inclined to our selves and the Creature, we are brought to take
that in our selves, and in the Creature, which we ought to take only in God.
Our pleasure, repose, abundance and all other good that we are capable of,
which we ought to seek in God, and receive at his hands, we seek in our selves,
and in the Creatures, separating our selves from God, who is our end, we draw
our selves from his conduct, we annihilate in our selves all his divine
communications and operations of grace, to turn to our selves and the
Creatures. Grace and all the motions of God have no effect in our souls but to
unite us to God, to draw us from our selves, and to separate us from all the
Creatures, that we might no more love or regard them then according to God, and
as much as they are in God. And the operation of God in us, draws us so to
God, as it makes us leave and hate, as much as is needful, both our selves and
the Creatures, so that we regard them not, but as they are Gods, and use them
not but as if we had forsaken them, according to our Savior's words, If any
man come to me, Luke 14.26.
and hates not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and
Sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple.

CHAP. VI. What the Directors of souls ought to be.
FRom all that we have said, may be drawn two very considerable documents for
those that seek their salvation. The first, that we must not willingly fill the
soul with a multiplicity of desires, nor seek to do sometimes one thing,
sometimes another, for all that is well, and all that is good, is not proper to
every person, and although it seem good, yet is it not always desirable. Some
will say, we must have prudence to make choice, but we must express our selves
more christianly or clearly, and say, that when any good is presented us to
practice, we must lift up our eyes to Heaven, and demand of God, that he would
be pleased to let us know what we should do, for to speak properly, there is
not any good which is pleasing unto God, further then in that he takes pleasure
that we should do his will, and suffer him to act, and that we persevere in the
order whereto he has predestined us. The Christian therefore who would assure
his salvation, must be disposed to do all sorts of good works. His heart must
be open to God, to receive all divine operations and holy communications; but
when it is questioned to fettle him in the one exercise or the other, he must
regard that which is conformable to his vocation, and above all, consider what
is consonant to the state of Christianity, for he must more satisfy and regard
himself as a Christian, then as a Gentleman, or Merchant, etc. he must offer
himself to God, and do his will, and finally receive the motions God shall
operate in his soul, and accordingly seek always the glory of God, never
minding his own particular advantage.

And in as much as great difficulties ordinarily happen herein, we take for a
second document the necessity we have to ask counsel, and to take a Director,
for this is an affair of very great consequence, seeing it acts toward the
salvation of the soul. And the chief of this affair consists in conducting
Christians in the ways which God has established to advance them to
perfection worthy of the purity and sanctity of Christianity, and which may
render them worthy of God, and capable to enter into the glory that God has
prepared for them to all eternity.

This conduct must not be indifferent, but the same with that of God. The
Director must not guide after one manner, and God after another; for so the
poor soul were lost, or tyrannized over. He that gives counsel, must take heed
that the matter he treats of have an immediate respect to the order and designs
of God over our souls, and consider that he is upon either the ruin, or
establishment of grace and works of God, a point of great consequence, which
makes us see what they ought to be whom God has established in so high an
office, and who enter into so sacred a ministry.

He that will conduct and counsel a soul, must know the designs and conduct of
God over this soul; he must consider the order God keeps to govern it, that it
is great and hidden in God, that it is a secret to us, and that the soul cannot
without much difficulty know it. It is necessary that he who conducts and
counsels, be full of grace and light, that he strongly adhere to God, who is
the Father of lights; otherwise, what knowledge or experience soever he may
have, he will be deceived in the conduct. The more he shall be able and
experienced, the more he shall be in hazard to deceive souls; for though
knowledge and experience be necessary, yet must we not confide therein, much
less presume thereupon; for God abhors the presumptuous, and forsakes those who
are over-confident of themselves. In the conduct of souls, there must always be
new succors from heaven, and new lights. He who would conduct or counsel
another in that which concerns his conscience, must remember himself, that he
is an Instrument of God, that he must not, either counsel or act in this soul,
but what God will establish therein.

Moreover, he that conducts a soul, and who gives counsel, must consider, that
in truth and in conscience, he ought to have no other intention or desire, then
to follow the very truth, to establish the Kingdom of God in the soul, to lead
the soul to God, and to do in that soul, the work of God, according to the
intention of God, and to establish nothing therein but what God will. For which
reason he is obliged to labor much to the end that he may annihilate in the
soul of any Christian whatsoever hinders the work of God, and kingdom of grace;
and for his part, he must have a right intention and pure regard of God, not
respecting or desiring any thing but his glory, seeking neither honor nor
esteem, favor, nor advantage of those whom he conducts. And truly, if we
consider what it is to conduct a soul in the design of God, and to conserve it
in the order which God has appointed it from all eternity, we shall see that
it is no indifferent business, but the most noble and most important of all,
and that we must apply our selves thereto, with exceeding great charity, with
purity of intentions, and a zeal to Gods glory; for it is for this that
principally they who conduct shall render an account.

Hence proceed the evil which falls out when those who conduct, lead and
counsel souls negligently and with indifference, without endeavoring to find
out what God requires of them, in what state or condition soever they be, and
without troubling themselves to establish therein the Kingdom of God, and of
his grace: and we see in what danger souls are, when they conduct them
according to their own sense, or lead them by those ways, give them the same
exercises, form them by their own spirit, and which is worse, mold them to
their own humor. We must proceed quite otherwise, for souls have different
ways, and are called to diverse states of graces, as they are predestined to
diverse degrees of glory; and consequently he must conduct them according to the
designs of God, which he must endeavor to know, and according to their
vocation, and he must comport himself in the conduct of every soul in the same
manner, as if he did know from point to point the decrees which the eternal
wisdom has formed upon this soul, and all the particular ways whereby God
leads them.

To know things so secret and so hidden, it is needful to have the spirit of
God, to use much prayer, and to have a great purity of intention; I say, purity
of intention: For he who takes upon him the conduct of souls, and will counsel
and direct the consciences of men, must take heed that he follow not his own
spirit, that he think not of his own interests, that he seek not his own
satisfaction, and suffer not himself to be carried away with complacency and
natural motions and inclination. For in such a case, he may be assured, that
it is no longer God that conducts the soul nor the Spirit of God that governs
it, but it is the spirit of man, and by this manner of conduct he shall not
establish the grace or kingdom of God, but the flesh, the kingdom of sin. He
who conducts, holds the place of God, both in the soul, and in the conduct; so
that this were to do great wrong to the grace, power and Majesty of God. If we
say there is danger in the soul that conducts it self, that follows her own
spirit, self-love, inclinations, humor and will, Ephesians. 2.3.
which Saint Paul calls the desire of the flesh; we must also affirm that the
danger is greater, when he who conducts suffers himself to be carried away with
his own inclinations, and only follows his own will and spirit. And if the
Christian be obliged, as we have showed, to seek nothing in all his actions but
to please God; if he must have a particular vigilance to establish the Kingdom
of God in his soul, to cooperate with his work, and to remain in the order
wherein he conducts him; with far greater reason, he who conducts a Christian
soul in any profession or condition is obliged to have the same vigilance, the
same purity of intention, and regard of God, which he ought often to consider.

From all these truths we may easily comprehend how much they are deceived, who
are guided by their own nature, according to the inclinations and motions of
their own spirit, without considering what Jesus Christ demands of them,
without any regard of the grace that God presents unto them, yea, without
taking heed to the state whereto God has called them. As likewise their error
who can bear nothing but what is pleasing to them, nor agree with any but those
that flatter them, and suffer them to live at their own pleasure, and who best
accommodate them to their inclinations, desires, humors, and such things,
which are but too too ordinary. All this is dangerous, and an evident mark that
such souls seek not God, nor true virtue, but the satisfaction of their own
spirit. You shall find their hearts void of God, full of self-love; their
actions inconstant, their thoughts in continual changings. In fine, they are
nothing but disquiets, complaints and murmurings. Look upon their life and
actions, it is but a pastime, unprofitableness, and the vanities of the age;
and having considered it all, it will not be hard for you to know whether those
souls have the fear of God and the knowledge of virtue, yet in appearance they
make a great show, and we know not whether is to blame, those who are conducted
and directed or the Directors. But how ever it be, the Christian, who would be
saved, must labor herein seriously, and neither fear pains nor mortifications,
but seek to be conducted by the ways that God has ordained, and passing above
all considerations, and all sorts of difficulties prove constant and complyant
with the order that God has established over him, he must every day renew his
good resolutions, and pray to God to let him know and be acquainted with the
designs he has upon him, and give him grace in every point to follow them,
and with fidelity to accomplish them. And seeing that his fidelity is now in
question, and that it is altogether necessary to all Christians, it were but
necessary we made some discourse of it.

CHAP. VII. Of the fidelity of the soul, and of its necessity in the ways of
grace, and the actions of a Christian.
TO speak of Fidelity, and to see how much it is necessary to all Christians,
we must reflect upon the truths already proposed, and remember that man was
created for God who is his end, that God alone can conduct him to this end, and
that it is the same God who only operates in him all the good works which are
necessary to make him Gods, and to arrive at this end which is God. From these
principles of truth, we enter into our subject, and presently see, that we have
not any thing more important in this World, then to go to God, to cooperate
with the works which God does in us to save us, and to accomplish with
fidelity, that which he requires of us, and in the spirit and disposition that
he desires, every one applying himself faithfully to the way that God proposes,
and the works of his vocation, that the Priest live according to the perfection
of his estate, the Christian as Christian, in brief, that all men live so as at
the hour of death they may say with Jesus Christ, My Father, I have glorified
thee upon the Earth, I have finished the work thou have ordained me to do.

This fidelity which is absolutely necessary, must be in our soul from the time
we were born. Though there were neither Heaven nor Hell, we are obliged to live
according to the will of our Creator, what aversness soever the creature may
have, it shall be always subject to the order of God, either in the way of
justice or mercy. If we would be saved, it cannot be, unless we cooperate with
the works that God will do in us, unless we become faithful to his graces, and
follow the order that God has prescribed, wherein he will conduct us to
salvation, and therefore it concerns us more then we think, to take heed to the
designs that God has over us, and to the vocation whereto he has called us,
to the motions and inspirations he gives us, to make use with fidelity of the
graces he offers, least drawing our selves from the order and offer of his
mercy, we enter into that of his Justice, and one day he say to us in the
rigor of his determined Decree, as he said to his people, I will choose their
delusions, and bring their fears upon them, because when I called, none did
answer, when I spoke, they did not hear, but they did evil in my sight, and
chose that in which I delighted not. Isa. 66.4.

When we speak of the vocation and use we are to make of the graces and
benefits of God we speak of Paradise; to despise them, is to neglect salvation.
Therefore the Christian must consider what he does, as well in that which
concerns the vocation he must choose, as in the use of the graces and favors
he receives of God, seeing thereon depends all his happiness or misery; we must
take heed we choose not what God would not have us, nor despise what he would
have us to embrace.

This point is the most important of all in a Christian life, yet is it a
mystery the most secret of any in Christianity. The vocation of a soul is as
much hidden as her election, which none can know or easily discern by her
conduct. The ways of God are as much elevated above ours, as Heaven above
Earth, and yet (O wonderful!) God wills that we follow his ways, and none
shall be saved, but according to the vocation whereto God from all time has
called him. What remedy? seeing on the one side necessity constrains us, and on
the other the incertainty and obscurity deters us. O just God, God of all
bounty, who shall enlighten us in this darkness? who shall resolve us in an
affair so doubtful? who shall assure us amidst so many doubts? nothing but
thy light O God, the only refuge of our souls can conduct us, nothing but thy
spirit can teach us, but thy truth can assure us, and but thy infinite mercy
can protect us.

This lets us see in what danger they put themselves, who so long neglect the
motions, graces and favors of God, and make such ill use of his benefits. From
these truths we learn the esteem we ought to have of our vocation, and with
what circumspection we must make choice thereof, and if we will make our selves
worthy to receive of God the light and conduct necessary in an affair of so
great consequence for our salvation, it will be very profitable to enter into
these following dispositions.

First, The Christian must have a pure desire of God, and a resolution to do in
every thing his divine will, being from the bottom of his Heart wholly resigned
to his will and conduct.

Secondly, He must have a great sense of his weakness, he must be in an estate
of humility before God, not esteeming himself worthy or capable of any thing,
for the humble shall never perish, and, as Esaias says, God looks to him that
is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at his word. Esa. 66.2


Thirdly, He must renounce his own interests, and all his particular
concernments, he must not regard his own safety, that he may have no object but
the pure will of God, yet in such manner, that he who resolves to remain so
faithfully and constantly in the order and designs of God, and proposes to
make hereafter use of Gods gifts, graces and benefits, and regards not
perfection, advancement, virtue, not Heaven it self, must not content himself
with a thought to please God, (for alas, who is worthy thereof) but cleansing
and purifying his intentions, thoughts and dispositions, he must only regard
God, and have a desire to be in the accomplishment of the will of God in him,
without having other interest or intention then the good pleasure of God, In
this disposition which is pure and Christian, the soul will never fail to feel
the help of her God, for those who seek God with purity of heart shall be
worthy to possess him.

In fine, we must pray to God continually, and in an affair so important as is
fidelity to grace, and the employment of our life, we must demand of God, and
that instantly, his light to know what he would of us, his grace to accomplish
it, his mercy and particular assistance to persevere in it, for he alone, who
perseveres to the end, shall be saved, and we know that without the favor and
assistance of God, we can do nothing.

After this, the Christian who will proceed further, and live Christianly, must
be very vigilant to root up, take away, and annihilate all that may alienate
him from God, and draw him from his divine conduct. He must always have a
watchful regard of God, to make use with purity and fidelity of the graces and
gifts he receives of him. I say fidelity, not one or other, but according to
the amplitude and state of grace that God communicates to him, and with purity
of love and esteem of God. For we are obliged not only to be faithful to
grace, but also to the manner of grace, and to the extent of the operation of
God in us. So that our fidelity and cooperation must be correspondent and
proportionable to the designs of God. We may fail in fidelity, and destroy the
work of God in us three ways; in absolutely refusing the grace God offers, as
when he said, I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and
no man regarded; Prove. 1.24.
or being unfaithful, repressing all the grace we have of God like him in the
Parable, Mat. 25.18.
who hid his Masters Talent under ground; or lastly, we are unfaithful, not
running out all the race of God, but only a part, straying from him to apply
our selves to our selves or the Creature, like him who desired he might take
leave of his friends at home, Mat. 8 21.
and see them before he followed Christ. These three states of infidelities,
God severely punishes. Pro. 1.26.
He abandons the first, and leaves them to their own conduct and counsels,
protesting that he will mock them in the day of their affliction, that is, of
their death. From the second, he takes away the Talent, and throws them from
before his face, Mat 25.28.
confines them to that place of darkness, v. 30.
whereof the holy Scripture makes mention, a place full of horror and
lamentation. Of the third, Christ says, no man having put his hand to the
Plough, and looking back is fit for the Kingdom of God. Luke 9.62.
Whence we may learn, how much the Christian must suffer, who leads a life
which we call common, who endeavors only to recreate himself, to deceive the
time, and has no care or leisure to consider what he does, or what may befall
him for the small esteem he makes of God and his graces. He is assured that
such souls must apprehend some great evil, Mat. 13.12.
for whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance,
but whosoever has not, from him, shall be taken away even that he has. These
words show the wrath of God to Christians, who make so little account of his
Love, and receive his graces so indifferently, who, as the Apostle says, count
the blood of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified, Heb 10.29.
an unholy thing, and have done despite unto the spirit of grace; words that
show the need we have to be faithful to God, and what a high crime it is to
injure in us the spirit of God, to destroy his works, to annihilate his graces,
and to profane his gifts and benefits.

CHAP. VIII. Of Infidelity to grace, and how a man ought to live in his
Vocation.
THe consideration of this great evil, which draws along with it the peril of
our souls, obliges us to find out by what way, and after what manner we come to
ruin, and extinguish the operations of God in us, and what the principal
subject or object is that causes us to refuse his grace, and despise his love,
who loves us more then his own life, seeing that Infidelity to the graces of
God, is the only evil of our soul; this must be a point of which we ought to
advise: hereunto we must apply the greatest vigilance of our life. To
understand so necessary a Doctrine, we are only to consider grace in it is
essence, and regard what God intends to do in us by his gifts and operations:
we have spoken of it elsewhere, but we will briefly repeat it upon the present
subject.

God by his love, operations, and grace gives himself to us, and possesses us;
he wills that we be wholly his as he is ours, he is in us, and lives in us,
that we may live in him, and by an excessive bounty, elevates us to the
participation of his divine essence, and associates us to all his divine
greatness. For this he created us, and has given us the capacity to love him,
and in loving him, to possess him; and all that he does in us, all the graces
that he gives, are to no other end, but to accomplish all this in us. This
therefore being granted, we shall find, that all the motions of grace and
operations of God must produce two things in us; one to draw us from our
selves, and separate us from the creature; the other, to draw us to God, to
give us to God, and to make us one with him.

Behold in few words, the being of grace, and designs of God. This being
considered, it will be easy for us to see and know that we annihilate the
graces of God and his works, when we remain to our selves, and adhere to our
selves, and embrace the creature; for in this doctrine of piety, we must say,
that as grace separates us from our selves and the creatures, and unites us
only to God, so we separate our selves from God, and destroy his work when we
are our selves, and adhere to the creature, and consequently we are less Gods,
the more we are our own; so that to ruin the work of God, and annihilate his
grace, is nothing else, but to be our selves, to adhere to the creature, to
follow our own inclinations; in a word, to love our selves. This is a powerful
truth, which should beget in our hearts hate and horror of our selves, and
detestation of all creatures, seeing the only cause of our loss and love of our
selves is the only Instrument of our ruin. This truth we should have always
before our eye, to put us in mind of the danger it is to follow our own
appetites, inclinations and wills, to adhere to the complacency, esteem, and
love of the creature. For it is certain, the more we love our selves, the more
we are divided from God; the more we follow our own wills and inclinations, and
adhere to the creature, the more we destroy in us the works of God, and
annihilate his gifts and graces. This is an evil that cannot be sufficiently
deplored, since that for the regard of the creature, we lose the regard of God,
to love a thing of nothing, we ruin in us the love of God, and for a wretched
and miserable thing like our selves, the brood of sin, and the food of death,
we destroy in us the works of God, and the effects of his love. Briefly, to
adhere to our own wills, inclinanations and sentiments (Oh who can speak it
without a torrent of tears?) we separate our selves from God, and draw our
selves from the order and designs of the eternal wisdom. Truly we ought to
weep, and weep tears of blood, when we consider the weak condition of man.
What? this Man, who is capable of God, who has right to possess God and to be
by grace what God is by nature, immortal, eternal, perfect, and to possess an
entire and eternal rest, and a fullness of all good, a true solid and permanent
good, for him I say, (O misfortune of humane nature, and weakness of our
spirits!) to renounce all his happiness, and lose his God, and in him all
things, to follow his own disordered inclinations, to do his own corrupt will,
and to please and adhere to the creature, which is nothing but vanity, to enjoy
a fleeting transitory good. He must neither have heart nor faith, that cannot
grieve at this our blindness, nor apprehend an evil so common and deplorable;
he must be more obstinate then Pharao, that would not draw his soul out of this
darkness, and deliver it out of this captivity, to set it at liberty, to go to
serve and adore the true God, and quit the Leeks and Onions of Egypt: Psalm.
55.6.
O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away, and be at rest; lo,
then would I get me away afar off, and remain in the wilderness. O Jesus, who
art our Deliverer, break these bonds that bind us, and permit not the weakness
of our wills, and malice of our spirits, to oppose the power of thy grace. My
Jesus, the only light of our souls, who came into the world to enlighten
those that walk in the shadow of death, come and defer no longer to give life
and liberty to those whom thou have chosen to be thy children.

But let us put a stop to our zeal and not be transported with the motions and
resentments of this just grief. Let us rather remedy the evil, and see what we
must do to be faithful to God, and to do that which he would have us. First,
the Christian must take his vocation of God, and not of men; for as we have
formerly said, God only has power to ordain all things, and it is the greatest
mark of his Omnipotency for himself to choose and ordain the lives and actions
of all men, and principally to give to his Elect, and to propose to them the
way and light whereby he will perfect them in the state of grace, and conduct
them to the enjoyment of the glory he has prepared for them. So said Jesus
Christ to his Apostles and Disciples, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you, Jo. 15.16.
and ordained you that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
should remain; showing it is he alone that calls us, and employs us in the
actions for which we were created.

When therefore the Christan is at the point to make choice of his vocation, he
must ask it of God, and regard only God in his desire, and to render him
capable of so important a grace, he must make an entire and true resignation
and annihilation of his will, and of the use of his liberty, and neither have
choice of liberty or will in any thing that concerns him, as having no will but
that of God, leaving to God alone the power and care to choose, ordain and
establish all according to his holy will, considering nothing therein but the
pure glory of God, and reserving a desire to accomplish what God by his good
pleasure has ordained him, proposing to do all that he should know to be the
will of God.

Secondly, when the Christian is in a settled estate and profession, then he
must live according to the spirit and grace of his estate and vocation, and
apply himself wholly to God in the use and ways proportioned to his estate,
wherein consists the ground of the souls fidelity. To comprehend this advice,
we must know that in the life of every one, there are considerable two estates;
one general, which is common to all the state of Christianity; the other
particular, which consists in the condition he professes in the world. The
perfect Christian, who would be faithful to God, must first have a care to
agree with the state and grace of Christianity, the most noble of all
professions of men, and the ground whereon we must of necessity raise the whole
edifice of Perfection, in what condition soever a man be. For what is a man the
better for being a perfect and an accomplished Gentleman, and a wicked
Christian? to what end serves it to be excellent in some condition and estate?
to seem good in some vocation? to be esteemed of men, and to satisfy ones own
conscience, if in truth, and before God he be not perfect in the state of
Christianity? He must then be a perfect Christian before he seek or think to be
perfect in any other condition or estate. And therefore the first thing he
ought to do, who would be faithful to God, must be to live, according to the
Laws, maxims, and according to the grace of Christianity, in such a manner,
that he may strive to accomplish and become faithful in all that is taught and
required in this estate, with such purity and sincerity, that he neglect
nothing, but make account of all that is in Christianity. For, as we say, there
is nothing little in Religion, but all in it is great, all is here to be
esteemed, and all is here of importance to him who will live perfectly in such
an estate: so in the state of Christiany, we must esteem all; and he that will
be a perfect Christian, must make account of all that is proposed in
Christianity, when he is in this estate, he must study to perfect himself in
the particular profession he takes upon himself, be it in the world, or out of
the condition of seculars.

Thirdly, the soul seeing her self in a profession and vocation, must wholly
apply her self thereto, so as if there were no other, and although she esteem
of all other vocations, of all the ways whereby God guides his Church and
Christians, yet must she only apply her self to her vocation, and step only
in the way and conduct of God, being without taste and voluntary knowledge of
all others, as not being willing to make use of any way, but this that God has
ordained for her, whereto she is called. By this practice, the soul remains in
her unity of application, and begins to be in the perfect adherence of the
Spirit of God. To live faithfully in those ways wherein she believes God will
conduct her, she will be careful to employ all her power to destroy and
annihilate her self into God in those ways wherein he governs her, without
thinking of any other, resigning her self wholly to God, that he by his divine
power, secretly and intimately operate in her a true annihilation, which
separating her from her self, and all things, shall perfect her, and put her
into a capacity of God, that is, shall render her worthy and capable to bear
God, and be filled with him, who from thenceforth will be all in all in her by
grace and love, (which is the condition of the Saints in the state of glory)
yet after a manner proportioned to the baseness of earth. The Christian living
in this faithful application, shall not want the favor of God, and motions to
draw him more and more to God, and to make him perfect. Let us now see how he
must comport himself in the exterior use of all things.

CHAP. IX. How the Christian ought to comport himself in the exterior use of
all things.
IT is a point of great consequence in the life of a Christian, to take heed to
the use and seeking after of exterior things, for besides that he must shun as
Hell whatsoever is of sin, and abstain from all that displeases God, it is also
necessary to see how he comports himself in exterior things, though lawful.
Every employment out of God diverts us from him, if we be not ready and formed
in the exercise of true piety, and conducted by the spirit of truth. 1 Cor.
10.23.
All things are lawful, but all things are not expedient, says St. Paul,
signifying that all that is lawful is not always good to do, and that for
diverse circumstances, a man must retain and deprive himself of that which is
permitted.

In the use and acquisition of exterior things, even of those that appear
lawful, we may fail in diverse manners, for the employment diverts us from God,
the use and possession brings care upon us, and the adhering to them divides us
from our selves, and makes us divide them with God, and as it is in the Parable
many refuse to go to the Marriage, Matthew. 22.
and to the heavenly Banquet whereto they are invited, that is, they refuse the
graces and Heaven it self, because they turn themselves to the Creature. Some,
says Jesus Christ, go to their possessions and farms, Luke 14.18.
others employ themselves in their affairs, some to buy, others to sell, and
busying themselves in these occupations, think no more of Heaven, or, if they
have thoughts or desires of it, they are stifled in the confusion of affairs.
So that if God offer them graces, and cause them to feel good motions, either
they refuse them, or think not seriously of them. Thus they extinguish in
themselves the resentments of their salvation, the esteem of God, and by little
and little, make themselves insensible of the graces and favors of Heaven.
This evil is whereinto they fall in employing themselves too much in things
which appear lawful, and whereof they have not any fear. But the Son of God
adds these dreadful and menacing words, that none of those men which were
bidden, v. 24.
shall taste of my Supper; words worthy to be weighed, and examined by
Christians, which make us to know sufficiently, what circumspection we must
have in the use and exercise of exterior things, seeing they are capable to
make us lose, and neglect his graces and vocation.

There is no example more clearer to demonstrate this truth, then the fall of
Lucifer and Adam, who fell from the height of perfection and grace, to turn to
themselves and the Creature; and because they had a will to contemplate and
employ themselves in their own perfection, they were withdrawn from beholding
God, and lost themselves in searching into themselves, and in the Creature,
that which they ought to lay hold of, and seek in God alone. And to this day,
sin is committed only, because the soul is diverted from God, and converted to
the Creature, and seeks in the Creature for her own particular interest and
satisfaction, what she ought to seek only in God and for God.

Hence we may easily conjecture the hazards which happen, and the failings
which they commit, in the use and research of the Creatures, and for as much as
it is the snare wherein all souls are intrapped, it is necessary to beware of
it, and cause all men to see it. See then in particulars, how a man ought to
comport himself.

First, The Christian who will live perfectly in any estate or profession, must
have a care above all things, to do nothing that may displease God, for this
motive is the touchstone of true perfection, the foundation and principle of
solid virtue, and consequently, absolutely necessary for a Christian. For if,
as we have elsewhere said, he must do all for the good pleasure of God, he must
also by the same consequence, take need of doing any thing against the pleasure
of God. In this advice, there are two things to be considered, very important
to Christian Piety, one when it is said we must have a care to do nothing, sin
nor any thing which displeases God; in these words, we must learn, that this
care is absolutely necessary, so necessary, that it is the only care wherein a
Christian ought to live. For the soul which must do nothing to displease God,
and detests all that may displease him, shall never fail to be acceptable to
his divine eyes, who contemplating her in this purity, will love her, loving
her will possess her, possessing her will enrich her with his gifts and graces,
according to his divine will and designs. Therefore in the acquisition of true
and solid piety, we must not study so much to do as to take away, nor labor so
much to acquire and act, as to divest our selves, and do nothing displeasing to
God.

The other point is, when we say that we must do nothing to displease God; by
this advice, we show what the duty of the soul is, that will live in Christian
purity, which consists in that she is obliged to regard God, and the good
pleasure of God in all her actions. The reason of this duty is grounded in that
we are not for our selves, neither our life nor actions, but we are for God, by
consequence we must employ our life, actions, and selves for God. For this
reason, God demands an account, even to the least moment of our time, unto the
least thought of our heart, the slightest word of our tongue, and to the
smallest action of our life. In brief, he will demand an account of our selves
from our selves, because that we being not our own but Gods, we must employ our
selves all for God, for his good pleasure and glory. He that will examine the
precept of love, will ingeniously confess that which we say, for we cannot love
God with all our heart, with all our soul, and withal our strength, but in
seeking to please him in all things, even the least, much more in those which
we call indifferent, though in truth they are not so, as we shall show
hereafter.

Secondly, The Christian must avoid in his actions, the multiplicity and
confusion which occurs ordinarily in affairs, even in those which are good and
appear charitable, and above all, he must exempt himself from that which
concerns him not, and is not of his office, nor suitable to his profession and
vocation, and especially those which are above his capacity and power. This
advice is to be weighed and cleared, for the most serious may be deceived, and
the most zealous may lose themselves in their occupations; by this way the
Devil withdrawes away many souls from virtue and the purity of their vocation.
It is easy for us to be lost in this snare, if we have not a pure regard of
God, and a continual vigilance, we fall ordinarily into this evil. Sometimes
a false zeal of charity transports us, sometimes we are seduced by complacency,
sometimes by curiosity and our own inclination, which is much given to change
and variety, and takes pleasure in all that it employes it self in, busies it
self therein with much content, fastens it self thereto, insomuch, that the
soul becomes at last so disordered that she finds no more repose in her spirit,
no more attention in her self, but feels her self wholly estranged from God,
even in the most holy exercises of her vocation. Being in this condition, she
is disquieted, and this disquiet causes a distaste and alienation from virtue,
whereupon losing the reins, she more and more abandons her self to exterior
things, and infallibly loses her self, if she have not a care to withdraw her
self in good time, and if God preserve her not, and behold her with the eye of
mercy. The soul therefore that seeks perfection, and the inward peace of the
heart, must be vigilant herein, and not suffer her self to be inconsiderately
transported under any pretense whatsoever, for it concerns her salvation.

The state of true love and grace, always withdrawes the soul from all
multiplicity, and separates her from all things; for so much as she has of
love and grace, so far is she separated and estranged from the Creature, and
the more she is to God, the more she flies and detests all things else; the
more grace raigns in her, the more it separates her from her self and the
world. Self-love draws us to the Creature, and involves us in a multiplicity;
on the contrary, the love of God separates us from the Creature, and puts us
into unity. This most true principle, may serve us as a plummet to sound the
depth and interior of the soul, He who is subject to grace, and has but any
pure love, needs not to be persuaded to this, because the love of God and
grace, makes him hate, fly, and detest both the World and the affairs of it,
and assuredly, he will show it by the effects, for he cannot do otherwise.
Whence it will be hard to approve the opinion of those, who would be truly
devout, and persuade themselves they have true Christian piety, yet charge
themselves with cares, with affairs and trouble perplexing themselves in
thoughts, desire, and bringing about diverse designs. To convince and enlighten
them if they be capable, we must resume our principle, and only say to them,
that the love of God speaks unity, and the love of our selves multiplicity.

Thirdly, There are many actions necessary in many affairs wherewith we cannot
dispense for that they are necessary, and wherein our nature and spirit may be
satisfied and content. But we must renounce this pleasure and content, for God
must have all our actions, and to do Christianly and purely, we must do it
only for his good pleasure, so that if we mingle with it other pretenses or
contentments, it is not purely for God, but we share with God, and we rob him
of all that part that we take therein. But if the actions we do be natural, as
to eat, sleep, and the like, we must not fulfill them by the instinct and
appetite of nature, which forces us to satisfy both her necessity and
pleasure, but we must perform them out of a pure desire to do the will of God,
which obliges us to this necessity; this desire must be exclusive, as to any
other instinct and will. For in actions natural and necessary, there is great
difference between the rule and end of the action* The rule is humane and
natural, the end must always be supernatural, as for example. We do some
necessary act, as to eat, sleep, or the like, the necessity is the rule, but
God must be the end of this action, for he is the end of all the actions of
man, both free and necessary, and we are obliged to direct all our actions to
their supernatural ends, it is the advice of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, let all be done to the glory of
God. This truth is most evident, for if God were not the end of such actions,
it must necessarily be, that man himself is the end thereof, which would be a
kind of Idolatry and error to affirm. We must then conclude and say with the
Apostle, Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, Col. 3.17.
do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by
him. In all lawful actions, therefore we must regard the rule and the end of
necessity, which must be no other then the good pleasure and pure will of God.
But if in these actions there should happen some displeasure, as if they should
be contrary to our Honor, or if they be full of bitterness, then we must
courageously embrace them, and with an affection and love ready for the
displeasure which might happen, offering our selves to God to be filled with
bitterness, as often and as long as it shall please his divine Majesty; So in
all the actions of man wherein he may take pleasure or displeasure, in what
manner soever they are, we may frame three acts. The first is an act of
obedience, making such an action very natural and necessary by submission and
obedience to the pure will of God, who has ordained all things after the best
manner that best pleases him. The second is of abnegation, renouncing the
pleasure, or accepting the displeasure which may be therein. The third of
resignation, giving our selves up to the will of God, to be in a continual
suffering of displeasure, if it shall so happen, and that for as long, and in
what manner it shall please God; For the soul must have no will but to accept
the will of God.

Fourthly, we may fail, yet in the use and research of things, not only
lawful, but also virtuous, by adherence and inclination thereto. It is a fault
ordinary enough, and which we must avoid, because our soul must be free and not
tied but to God only and to his pure will. For as we ought to do nothing but
for God, and by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, which is the true and only spirit
of Christianity; so we must not act by our own inclinations or passions. Whence
they are deceived, who employ themselves in those actions which they are most
inclined to, and shun those they fear, and embrace most willingly the
occupations and exercises whereto their inclination carrries them. Thus we see
some have an inclination to exterior penitence, others to compassion, and some
to penance; one is prone to the love of things regulated, another is pleased
with solitude, and the like. And we know that ordinarily, every man follows the
motions, and most willingly chooses the manner to live according to his
inclination. It is a great advantage and gift of God, to have received a good
soul, as the Wise man says; but to embrace the good, and do it is actions,
because the inclination or passion carries us thereto, though they be good,
this is not to act Christianly; on the contrary, this is to live bruitishly,
for beasts follow their passions; or at best, to act but humanely, when the
inclination is conformable to reason. He therefore that will do a Christian
action, must take a supernatural principle, which is grace, and never do his
actions, because passions and his inclinations carry him thereto, but only
because it is the will and order of God upon him, and because such actions are
acceptable to God.

Thus he that will live Christianly, must never undertake any thing which he
believes is not the will of God; if he do any good action, he must do it for
God; if he choose a manner of life, he shall regard God only, and strive to do
only what is most perfect in him, most conformable to the life and actions of
Jesus Christ, and most contrary to his own inclinations and natural
affections. But if he find himself in doubt, or perplexity, and if he desire to
judge his actions, his resentments, and intentions, to know if they be good,
and truly Christian, then shall he have recourse to Jesus Christ, who is the
chief truth and rule of our lives and actions; he shall demand light of him,
and taking Jesus Christ for the object of his life, and the truth for his rule,
he shall consider whether his intentions and actions be conformable to the
truth, whether they be like to those of the Son of God, whether he act in the
perfection and purity that God demands of him according to his vocation, and
conformable to the sanctity of the estate of Christianity. The Christian living
in this manner shall become acceptable to God, shall arrive at the perfection
which God requires of him, and shall do all his actions with the purity he
ought, which is the Principal point of a Christian life.

CHAP. X. Of Sufferings, and the esteem we ought to have of them.
TO act, and to suffer, are the two estates of the life of man, and like two
Pillars, sustain him. He that will live perfectly, must know the use of the one
as well as the other; as he must act Christianly, so must he suffer
Christianly, that is, holily, and in a manner, worthy the estate of
Christianity. This is that which we have left to examine, and is the last
draught of the Picture of a perfect Christian. We have already spoken of his
foundation, of his interior, of the purity of his actions; it remains that we
treat now of his sufferings. This is a point which we must look upon as the
most essential in Christianity; for suffering is the first state which a
Christian must expect, and wherein he is to continue. We are born in
sufferings, we live in solitude among temptations, and shall die in pain. It is
the portion of humane life, the most ordinary food of our souls. It behooves us
therefore to know how to make use and profit thereof. He has made a great
progress in perfection who can suffer, and bear courageously all that can
befall him, such a one God owns as a friend. Fire tries gold and silver, but
men are tried in the Furnace of humiliation. Here the fidelity of our soul
appears; for the Christian ought to follow Christ as willingly to mount
Calvary, as to mount Thabor. In brief, here the purity of our actions and
intentions do best appear what we do of our selves, be it in penitence, good
works, or otherwise, is for the most part full of our own spirit, and evil, it
follows our inclinations, it is in regard of our selves, and our own Interests
proportioned to self-love, and for the most part concerns our selves. But in
all that happens to us, we shall find nothing but God, if we know how to lay
hold of him, when he puts forth his hand unto us.

To learn so good and profitable a Doctrine, we must propose these truths for a
foundation. First, if we consider God, as soon as his wife providence embraced
all the world, his divine eyes surveigh'd all things, his infinite wisdom
ordained the whole; and his wisdom, says the Wise man, stays in his force
from one end to the other, and sweetly disposes all things, Wisd. 8.1.
and he not only ordains and disposes all, but he makes all the good and the
evil, life and death, poverty and riches come from God. Now, the works of God
are holy, his will is just, his decrces equitable, his ordinances amiable, and
above all things we must adore and seek his good pleasure. What remains then,
but that we receive all things from the fatherly and loving hand of God, that
we kiss the hand that strikes, since it is the hand of God, that we bear with
an humble and quiet submission all events, be they painful or easy, good or
bad, prejudicial or profitable? and we must entertain them not only with an
equality of spirit, and inward peace, but with respect and essence, as coming
from God, nothing being done but by his order. It is just we should esteem this
conduct as the conduct of God, and subject our selves to it, not only with
patience, but with respect and honor, for all that comes from God, must be
highly esteemed. Souls that live enlightened by faith, and walk with the spirit
of truth, hold it a great honor, and much esteem sufferings, as being the work
of God, and the effects of his will, which we ought to honor and esteem, as
well in sufferings as in quiet, in privation, as well as fruition, in evil, as
in good; for in all, it is the will of God, a will adorable, to be esteemed
above all the world, a will more worthy then the life and salvation of all
mankind. We must not regard the evils and sufferings in themselves, but we must
consider them in the will of God; There we shall see what they are, and the
esteem that God makes of them. Jesus Christ wills his Apostles, speaking to
them of sufferings, to receive them without fear, and with esteem, and wills,
that they be unto them sweet and pleasing; Luke 12.4
Because, says he, the hairs of your head are numbered, and not one of them
shall fall to the ground without the will of your Father: He said, that God is
our Father, to engrave in our hearts a respect, confidence, and love; He says,
that our hairs are numbered, and that he keeps an account of them to persuade
us, that Gods care of us is great, and that he has a care of us, even to the
least things. In brief, he says, that a hair shall not fall to the ground
without his order, to show that all the losses, privations, sufferings, all
events, loss of goods, of honor, of life, happen not but by the order of God
who is our Father.

What greater reason to esteem sufferings, and to conduct our souls to peace
and repose amidst the perplexities of the world, then the assurance of Jesus
Christ? It is enough for a Christian (if he be a Christian) when Jesus Christ
says to him, Fear not, for a hair shall not fall to the ground without your
Father; how full of love and consolation are the words of Saint Paul to the
Ephesians; Ephesians. 4.1.
I beseech you that you walk worthy the vocation wherewith ye are called: The
Reason he adds; There is but one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. These words
are sufficient to establish us christianly in the spirit of suffering, and to
make us to bear all with sweetness, peace and tranquillity of spirit, even with
esteem and respect. We need no other object for our eyes, nor other thought in
our heart, but there is but one Lord, this Lord is God, this God is our Father,
this Father is above all. In these words we shall learn in what respect,
subjection and esteem we ought to be in all the contrarieties and sufferings of
humane life.

Secondly, We may look upon the state of Christianity, and examine what is the
essence of the true spirit of piety; we shall find that sufferings is the
principal, its life, and its continuance, and its maintenance. My Son, says
the wise man, Eccles. 2.1.
going to the service of God, keep thy self just and in fear, and prepare thy
soul to temptation, adding, Take all that shall be imposed on thee, suffer pain
with patience and humility. St. Paul more clearly describes this, when speaking
of the persecutions he had suffered, 2 Timothy 3.12.
he adds, And all those also, who will live godly in Jesus Christ, shall suffer
persecution, which must be understood of all sorts of sufferings, both inward
and outward. For the life of a Christian, is no other then the life of Jesus
Christ, the spirit of Christianity. This is the spirit of Jesus, or in the
common phrase, the spirit of grace. Jesus was always in humiliation, and
sufferings; he loved from all eternity, seeing that from all eternity he was
resolved to be man; he is reinvested therein becoming man, humiliation and
sufferings were the center of his life. It is enough to honor pains,
humiliation and sufferings, to say that Jesus Christ has born them; and as the
Christian must be the image of Jesus Christ, so must he bear with Jesus Christ
all sorts of commotions, pains, humiliations and sufferings. 1 Cor. 15.49.
As we have born the earthly Image of the earthly Adam, let us also bear the
image of the heavenly, says the Apostle, meaning that we must reinvest us with
his Virtues, that our life may be an express image of his life, which appearing
always in desertions, lowness and sufferings, so ours must be but the same
state of sufferings. What honor is it to a Christian to wear the Livery of
Jesus Christ? what happiness to follow his steps? we are his members, he is our
Head; were it not a shame to see the body decked with flowers, bathed in
delights, and the head crowned with Thorns? we are his Brethren, and must
possess one heritage with him; is it not reason then that we should be like
him, and imitate his conflicts, if we would participate of his Triumphs? We are
co-heires with Jesus Christ, Rom 8.17.
says the Apostle, if we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with
him. Whatsoever it be, the Son of God has so ordered it in Christianity,
that he that will follow him, must renounce himself, and take up his Cross.
They are deceived, who think to attain true piety with delights, who refuse all
sorts of pains and mortifications, who take care for peace, repose and health,
who only study to frame to themselves an easy life; and seek for ease in
their labors, and quiet in their spirits, and think thereby to make a great
progress in perfection. No no! virtue walks only amongst the thorns; and
amidst the travails of the spirit of flesh, and the vices of the world. She
must tame her self by watchings and mortifications; and the happiness of a
Christian is only in the Cross. It is the Livery of the Children of God, the
mark of their election, the Plummet of their fidelity, and the only way of
Heaven; for says St. Paul, We must enter into the Kingdom of God through many
tribulations. Acts 14.22.


The third reason is, that the grace of Christianity can operate no other
effect then annihilation and suffering, for to be in grace, is to be subject to
graces, and to be in the Kingdom of grace, that is to be in the Cross. For so
much as the soul has of grace, so much she must have of the Cross. The
Fathers of the Church call the life of a perfect Christian, a hidden Martyrdom,
which is easy to conceive, if we consider that the spirit of Christianity
consists in a crucifying love, a love like that of the spouse, Cant. 5.8.
who cries, I charge you O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my beloved,
that you tell him, that I am sick of love, love which pierces the soul, which
transports and transforms it into its object Jesus; love which combats
sufferings, and triumphs over death. Behold this combat of love. God loves us,
gives us his love, makes us suffer to prove the faithfulness of our love; the
soul that suffers because she loves, willingly throws her self into
sufferings, and defies all labors, that in her sufferings she may express her
love. Jesus did so at the evening of his death, when he went to sacrifice
himself upon the Altar of the Cross, when he said to his Apostles, Joh. 14.31.
To the end, the World may know that I love my Father, and do as he has
commanded me, arise and let us go hence, whence he went to the Garden of
Olives, to deliver himself willingly into the hands of his enemies: where he
showed that love was the cause of his sufferings, his sufferings the marks of
his love. Howsoever it be, to be a Christian, and not to love God, cannot stand
together, and to love God, and not to suffer is impossible.

The spirit, and the proper grace of the state of Christianity, puts us into
this necessity; for the first and most inseparable effect of the grace of
Christianity, is to destroy in us the old man, and to crucify him, there to
make the new man to live, who according to the Doctrine of the Apostle, is no
other then Jesus Christ, and we know that grace must necessarily destroy our
evil inclinations, and Jesus Christ will purify and consume, after the manner
that he pleases, and as much as he will, the being and life of Adam, who is in
us, there to establish a being and a life of God. Now this cannot be but by
sufferings, by subversions, and by a long and painful death, and therefore the
Master of Christians said to the Galatians, Those that are of Jesus Christ have
crucified the flesh, Gal. 5.24.
the sins, the passions and concupiscenses, showing that those who are Gods,
and in the Kingdom of grace, are crucified, and must necessarily be in the
state of sufferings and subversions. And immediately after, he tells us, that
we are Christians and Children of God, not only to live in this estate, but
withal, by a necessity so absolute, that we may say, that those who are
belonging to Jesus Christ, are known to be such, because they have crucified
and mortified their flesh and passions, more then those who have not
mortification, and who avoid and neglect it, and therefore belong long not to
Jesus Christ. The conclusion is manifest in St. Paul, who said, If any of you
have not the spirit of Jesus Christ, Romans 8.9.
he is none of his. Now this spirit is no other then the spirit of sufferings,
subversions, contrarieties, oppositions and the Cross, and therefore he that
will be Jesus Christ, must resolve to suffer, and though he be not obliged to
demand it of God, yet he must embrace it with esteem, and receive it with love
and courage, when it befalls him, for that it is necessary to establish him in
virtue.

Hence we may see what deceit is crept into Christians, who making profession
of some piety, instead of profiting by sufferings, and receiving them with
esteem have no greater care then to exempt themselves from them, seeking
nothing but their own inward and outward content, and laboring to live in a
satisfaction and repose of spirit, they fly all sorts of pains, and remove
themselves as much as they can from all trouble, be it never so little, and
renounce and avoid all occupations and occasions that may mortify them, and if
they cannot help themselves, nor find any remedy, then there is nothing but
vexation of spirit, murmuring in their hearts, impatient in their words, and
excessive in their plaints, suffering themselves to fall into a dullness and
weakness, unworthy a Christian. To live so as to become incapable of any solid
virtues is the mark of a heart which is not Gods, and of a soul which loves but
it self. Let us then hearken to the decree of Jesus Christ, Joh. 12.25.
He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that hates his life in this
world, shall keep it unto life eternal.

CHAP. XI. How the fear of suffering draws us from the way of perfection.
HAving in describing the way to perfection, showed the obstacles therein, it
will not be necessary to speak farther of it, were it not that the subject of
sufferings obliges us thereto. Hitherto we have seen how all that is of Adam,
and of the life of Adam, hinders us from pleasing God, for man as the Child of
Adam is the child of wrath, the object of divine Justice, degraded from all
favors; his fall is so deplorable, that he is incapable of raising himself up
to God his supernatural end, if not aided by grace, and if he were not
engrafted in Jesus Christ, as the stock into the vine, and lived not his life,
which is a life of grace, a life that the Apostle calls the life of the spirit,
Romans 8.8.
for they that are in the flesh, cannot please God, and the works of the flesh
are called in the Scripture, Heb. 6.1.
dead works. Now if we contemplate this world in the curse of sin, we shall
find that all creatures have conspired against us, that the air is full of our
enemies, that all things may be the instruments of our ruin, wherefore our
obstructions in the way of perfection are infinite, but the greatest are in us,
and of our selves.

One of the greatest is, a fear to suffer pains, an apprehension of shame and
confusion. For commonly, we stand in fear of crosses and travails, self-love
causing us to shun all that humbles us, making us to fly what ever is low, and
hindering us from embracing any thing that is difficult. This fear is a great
obstacle to virtue, which cannot be attained but by travel, nor preserved but
by viglancy, nor perfected but in humility and privation; it is the common
resentment of all men. We see also by experience, that he who fears labor and
suffering, often fails of goodness, and willingly renounces it, when he finds
any trouble to conserve it. He easily quits the rudder when he sees the least
storm of temptation, or opposite action arise, and rather then suffer
humiliation, he will quit virtue, and if there be occasion, renounce his
portion of Paradise, rather then the pleasure and content he takes in doing his
own will, rather then his own quiet and repose. We see the greatest part of
Christians dare not enter into consideration of their lives past, nor reflect
seriously on their sins, nor think of death, or future estate of the soul,
merely by reason of fear to suffer sorrow for their sins. That they may not be
sensible of the apprehension they ought to have of God's Judgments, they will
not so much as think thereon. Hereupon they persevere in their malice, and
remain finally obstinate in their sins, living in ignorance of things necessary
to salvation; so true it is that the least fear of pains withdraws them from
virtue.

To see how much this fear is prejudicial, let us consider that to the
acquisition and conservation of virtues two things are necessary which require
both travel and pain. First, we must destroy ill habits, next, we must acquire
virtuous habits; We cannot ruin the evil without mortification, and
consequently pains and sufferings; we cannot root them out without privation
and resignation, wherein is both travel and the cross. But if we will obtain
good habits, and practice Christian virtues, and all in grace, then we must
have a great care, vigilance and strength of courage to resist all oppositions,
that nature, inclinations, or occasions present unto us. And although virtue be
beautiful, sweet, and acceptable, yet she finds contrarieties, and then she
needs resolution to use violence, Matthew 5.29, 30.
and to come to the point whereof Jesus Christ spoke, when he said, If thy
right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it behind thee; if thy right hand
offend thee, cut if off; words which show the pain and travel a Christian is
obliged to undergo to root out of his heart, and tear from his soul, all that
is contrary to the Law of God and virtue, words which condemn our delicates,
and all that fear labor and sufferings, excusing themselves by their weakness
of nature. To comprehend the importance of this advice; Let us lift up our eyes
to the contemplation of the truth and spirit of Christianity; there we shall
learn of the Son of God, that the Kingdom of heaven is gained by violence, that
the grace of Christianity is grounded upon suffering, that the perfection is in
love, in love crucifying; that all the ways of God, and the operations of his
spirit, consist in privation and resignation, and consequently in the cross.
Whence it necessarily follows, that they who fly sufferings and humiliation,
seeking only a sweet pleasant life, fearing pains and travel, do by this fear,
make themselves unworthy of God, who reigns on the cross, and is only found
in the thorns of the fiery bush. They withdraw themselves from the Kingdom of
grace, which agrees with annihilation; they shut their heart against love, and
which is more to be lamented, go out of the order of God, and from the
conformity, they ought to have with Jesus Christ crucified, who is the object,
the way, and the life of perfect Christians, and of Jesus Christ, who cannot
conduct our selves, but in the way of annihilating, of suffering and
humiliation, which is the way of Jesus Christ, his life and essence. Here may
these delicate persons see how their faint-heartedness deceives them. Let us
then take heed, and seriously consider the sentence that Jesus Christ
pronounces against them: He that takes not up his cross and follows me, Mat.
10.38.
is not worthy of me. To fear sufferings to fly humiliation, to refuse the
communication of God, is to make our selves unworthy and incapable of all his
divine operations of grace; for God cannot communicate himself to the soul in
the ways of grace, but he will cause therein annihilation and humility. All
the operations of grace can have no effects in our souls, but those of
humility, abnegation and death. Grace must operate in the souls, that which
death does in the body. This is so known a truth, that all that speak of grace,
unless that it is proper and principal effect, is to give us to God, to make
God live in us, and to place therein his love and favor. It is impossible for
God to operate all that in us, without annihilations, subversions, humiliations
and death; unless he pluck the love of our selves and the Creatures from our
hearts, he cannot plant his own therein. If he kill not in us the old Adam,
never will Jesus Christ live in us. God cannot dwell in us, if he do not
annihilate and consume the impurities and malice of our souls. Thus Christian
grace, to produce its effects in us, requires an estate of submission and
death. They therefore deceive themselves, who think they are in grace, yet bear
no mark at all of this grace, for if it be in a soul, it will infallibly
produce the effects proper to it, if it produce nothing, it is a sign it is not
there.

Herein also appears the wrong that the fear of suffering causes to
Christians, How much do souls separate themselves from God, who seek no other
consolation, satisfaction and enjoyment but their own, and labor only to put
themselves into a certain repose, thinking that perfection consists in this
false rest, and never to suffer any cross, affliction or temptation. No no,
Earth is the place of combat; Christian life is the death of man; perfect
love, like the Phoenix, seeks death, and finds life in the same flames; the
Cross gave grace, grace now gives the cross, the sacred spouse says, she is
fair but brown, Cant. 1.5.
scorched with the burning beauty of divine love. He that cannot suffer, cannot
love, he that cannot love, is not worthy of God, or the name of a Christian. It
is love that triumphed over Jesus Christ, annihilated him to the condition of
our mortality, it is love that humbled him, even to our lowness and
infirmities, it is love that crucified him; Christianity has no other love or
grace.

If then the Christian will love, if he will be subject to the Kingdom of
grace, he must defy all sufferings, and courageously embrace all that shall
befall him, for love overthrowes all, and triumphs over the soul. If she
flatter, it is to hurt, if it hurt it is to kill, so they who seek true and
solid piety, must not behold God but in the Cross, nor consider grace but in
humility and sufferings. My well-beloved, says the spouse in the Canticles,
Cant. 1.13.
is a bundle of myrrh; she confesses she fainted and dyed in the
communications of love, she received from her God. For when the spouse had
given her his love, and ordained charity in her, she instantly adds, stay me
with flaggons, Cant. 2.5.
comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. The greatness of God, the
infinity of his being, his divine spirit are so powerful, that if he never so
little communicate himself to the soul by the purity of love and grace, He is
able to annihilate and consume her. For if he apply himself to the Creature,
without proportioning himself to its capacity, he cannot be supported, for he
overwhelms and ruins the created, being by this power infinite, and infinitely
predominating over a being so small, so subjected to his power. In fine, it
would swallow up and consume it, if he did not proportion his operation to our
weakness, and if he gave us not a capacity and force to bear it. But whatsoever
he does, if he communicate himself, he always annihilates, if he gives grace,
he changes the man, if he gives light, he humbles him, if he make him to bear
his love he wounds him. Thus the soul that will love God, must love sufferings;
he that will love the life of grace, must lose himself, and annihilate himself
to receive divine operations. He that will bear the light of truth, must
humble himself, seeing God does not manifest himself but to the humble of
spirit, and that all the works of God bear his Cross in humility. Hence we
learn, that it is necessary we esteem the Cross and sufferings, and embrace
them with joy and fervor of spirit, but we must further observe that
sufferings, subversions, losses and humiliations, and other misfortunes of
humane life, are necessary to a Christian, to keep him steadfast amidst the
deceits and blandishments of the World, the subtleties and surprises of the
Devil. By these ways which we call rigorous, God severs us from the world,
and takes us from kindness to the creatures; he makes use of these losses and
subversions as of gall and bitterness to mingle with the sweets that the
creatures present to us. He uses humiliation and affliction to abate our pride;
and if he do leave us for a time, it is to humble us, and in all this, he is
most merciful to us, whereof they are unworthy, who fear sufferings, and for
love of themselves, oppose the love that God bears them, and destroy what God
would do for their good.

Moreover by these losses and eversions, by sufferings and humiliations,
privations and abnegations, God delivers us from the nets and snares of the
Devil. This enemy of our salvation seldom tempts us but in the Principles of
nature, and our own inclinations, he makes use of the love of our selves
against our selves. Now he is unable to do us evil, and is deceived in his
malice. When God vouchsafes to annihilate us, and put us into the ways of
suffering, of desertion, of humiliations; or when of our selves we give our
selves to the study of mortifications, to exercises of humility and to the
practice of the spirit, of repentance; for through these mortifications, we
destroy in us whatsoever is evil, and pluck from our selves that which serves
as an instrument of the Devil to loose us and deceive us.

In fine, by sufferings and humiliations, we put our selves out of hazard, and
are shielded from the dangerous darts, and most forcible temptations of the
Devil, because it is a thing so noble and so worthy to suffer, and to suffer in
the spirit of grace, that it is above nature, and the common order. Whence it
comes to pass, that the Devil, who cannot tempt, but according to the order of
nature, knows not how to take the soul that lives in the spirit of sufferance,
and of the cross. But if he will assault her, (as he will not fail to do) it
will be against her sufferings, endeavoring to destroy in the soul the spirit
of the cross, suggesting to her temptations of impatience, of envy, of
vexation, giving her occasion to make ill use thereof. For he knows that the
soul is in assurance, and out of danger so long as she shall remain faithful
to her sufferings, to her eversions and humiliations, and to the state of the
cross, in as much as this evangelicall spirit is a wall of fire which
invironeth the soul, a cloud that covers her, a huckler that protects her, and
humility is the foundation that upholds her.

Reflecting upon what we have said, we see it is a great impediment to the way
of perfection to decline sufferings, and not to care to make advantage of all
that happens to us, to receive it, and to bear all according to the spirit of
the grace of Christianity. And by these Principles, we shall know how far
pusillanimous and fearful souls stray from solid virtue, who fear all things,
who seek nothing but delight, consolation and satisfaction. To remedy these
abuses, let us see with what dispositions we must receive all the emergencies
of humane life, and in what spirit we must bear them.

CHAP. XII. Of the Dispositions wherewith we must bear sufferings, and all the
adversities of humane life.
WHat way sover we look upon man, we shall find him condemned to a thousand
disturbances and evils; his life is a perpetual warfare, his dwelling, in the
land of his enemies, his estate consists in the adversities of the world, which
like a sea, full of rocks and storms, tosseth him perpetually up and down, and
holds him in continual fear. Dangers threaten him, miseries, sickness, and
death are the portion of his life, sadness and sighs his ordinary
entertainment; in his greatest pleasures, he finds a bitter sweet, some
misfurtune is always present, or some apprehension seizes him, which mingles
the sweet of his pleasure with the gall of some misfortune, it is common to all
men, none are exempt, not Kings by their power, nor the Learned by their
prudence; it was said by a King in his greatest and most just resentments,
Psalm. 39.6.
Truly, every man living is altogether vanity: But if he be a Christian, he is
yet more subject to sufferings, though in another respect, as a member of Jesus
Christ, he must, like his head, bear thorns, and the cross, being by the state
of Christianity, and the grace flowing from the cross, associated to the
conditions, crosses, and sufferings of Jesus Christ, he is united to him, and
partakes of his spirit and life. In this sense is it, that Saint Chrysostom
expounds that passage of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 1.6
God is faithful, by whom you have been called to the fellowship of his son
Jesus Christ our Lord. The holy Apostle teaches us that a Christian is
associated to Jesus Christ, and as such, he must have no other portion in the
world, but temptations, sufferings, and desertions. Let no man (says Saint
Paul, to his new convert) be moved by these afflictions, 1 These. 3.3.
for your selves know that we are appointed thereunto.

Temptations, adversities, humiliations, and eversions are the gifts of God to
his elect, tokens of his love and favor, to which purpose Saint Mark furnishes
us with a pertinent Text, Mark 10.29, 30.
where the Son of God promising Apostles, and all those that would follow him,
rewards worthy of God, and proportionable to his Love, reckons up many, adding,
that he will give them crosses and persecutions, as an additionall of his love
and favor. This is the way that God takes to lead us to heaven, the means he
uses to establish our salvation, and makes us agreeable to his divine Majesty.

The Wise man speaking of the just, says, he has tried them like gold in the
furnace, Wisd. 3.6.
and has received them as a burnt-offering, and pleasant victims sacrificed to
the supreme Essence of God by crosses and humiliations. God operates our
sanctification, conserves us, confirms us, in his divine mercies. There needs
no other witness then the Angel Raphael, when he said to Tobit, Because thou
art pleasing to God, Tob. 12.13.
it was necessary that temptation should try thee. This is evident, that the
state of sufferings is necessary, and how much it imports us to esteem of them,
to hear them with affection, and make use of them with profit, for God has
greater designs over souls by sufferings, then by all other ways of grace
that we could represent, it is the state that most purely and holily honors
his divine being; it is the spirit of Christianity; in brief, it is the life of
man, and therefore he must know how to drink of the cup of blessing, he must
learn to ascend the ladder that reaches from earth to the arms of God. And to
apply our selves thereto with method and facility, we will divide this matter
into three dispositions which accompany our sufferings, and the state of the
soul in her crosses.

First, We may suffer according to divine ways.

Secondly, By the spirit of Christianity.

Thirdly, In the zeal of Justice against sin. In these three Dispositions we
shall find all the rest. To suffer according to divine ways belongs only to
souls who are truly Gods, who adhere to him, and are dissolved in his love. To
suffer this way is wholly divine, he must be wholly God's, love nothing but
God, and be in the pure regard of God. To have this Disposition perfect, the
soul in its sufferings, eversions and humiliation, and in all the contrarieties
of humane life, must have no other thought nor interior state, but to suffer,
because it is the pleasure of God she should suffer. This I call a pure regard
of God, she suffers only to praise God, only because God has delight to see
her suffer, and wills that she should suffer. This Dispositition is the state
that the Wise man calls the Sacrifice of the Holocaust, Wisd. 3.6.
a sacrifice killed and laid whole on the Altar; as the holocaust is all
consumed and annihilated to the glory, content, and honor of God alone,
without the Creatures having any part therein; so the soul suffering in this
pure regard of God, sacrifices her self wholly to God, and is wholly consumed
in the good pleasure of God, without her bringing or receiving any other
intention thought or state wherein her happiness does consist. For God seeing
the soul suffer only for his content and good pleasure, gives her a
sufficiency and capacity to suffer with so much liberty and amplitude, that she
no longer regards what she suffers, nor thinks more of sufferings, but only
thinks to do the good pleasure of God. So that she undergoes not sufferings
with pain, but with love, and with a disposition that bears in it more of love
then of sufferance in the suffering it self, resigning her self wholly to God,
and to all the effects of his spirit and grace, how vigorous soever they may
be, thinking no more of sufferings, but believing and loving; and in this
disposition, love is the life of sufferings, and sufferings are the object of
love, of a love pure and perfect.

To suffer according to divine ways, may yet be understood in another manner,
when in sufferings, mortifications and humiliations, the soul is such to God,
and so firmly united, that all things in the World are painful to her, all is
unsupportable to her, and her own body causes her to sigh and lament, saying
with the Apostle, Romans 8.23
We groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption
of our body. Every where she finds contrariety, and the more she lives in
Jesus Christ, the more she feels the weight of the Creature; all her repose is
to be Gods, she seeks not, nor finds any thing but pain and contrariety, for
she finds all her pleasure, all her repose and content to be in the good
pleasure of God.

In this disposition the soul must be really lost in God, for she no more
bears all the adversities of humane life, but according to the spirit of God
with a divine patience, that is in the same manner that God bears them, or if
you will in the spirit wherewith Jesus Christ suffered our nature, our sins and
the Worlds, a patience which we must adore and imitate in Jesus Christ, for he
did not only bear them, but also (which is admirable in the excess of his
love) gave his life, a divine life for our sins, and by the same patience,
bearing the contrariety that his divine and infinite essence has to all impure
and limited creatures, he acted with the creature, labored and died for it.

This patience of Jesus Christ, is the beginning and cause of our happiness,
this patience is the cause that all the just and holy that ever were in the
Church militant, have born all adversities with peace and meekness; this
patience must always make us to suffer all the rigours of this life, but after
a manner so much more perfect and divine as the soul has received of grace,
and is advanced in the way of perfection, according to the measure that the
soul is possessed of the life of Jesus Christ, to the same measure the spirit
of sufferance, must be pure in her, and she must remain more resigned to the
designs of God, more divided from all Creatures. In this point consists the
principal subject to be examined, whereby to know the fidelity of the soul. He
that would know the way to make use of this divine spirit, must learn it of
Jesus Christ, who is the rule and example of our life and actions, all that he
did, all that he suffered, had relation to the glory of his Father, to the
exaltation of his name, to the establishment of the Kingdom of God in our
souls. In a word, he lived in the World, and dyed upon the Cross, only to do
the good pleasure and will of his Father. My meat (said he to his Apostles) is
to do the will of him that sent me: Jo. 4.34.
This was the end of his coming and of his incarnation. Let us do the same, and
remember, that as we must have purity of intention in all our actions, so must
we in all our suffering, have a pure regard to the will and good pleasure of
God. When we shall suffer (whatsoever it be) let us suffer it, because God
permits it, or so appoints it, or because he will show his power over us, and
will be glorified in our subjection. Let us not regard our own interest, but
undervalue all things in respect of the glory of God. Let us endure them only
in regard of God, since it is his will, since he takes pleasure to see us in
sufferings and in the Cross, and that he will show his power in our
submission. Let us reduce all our intentions hither, they may be good, but this
includes all the rest. In this disposition, Jesus Christ prepared himself for
the Cross, and presented himself to his Father, to be the offering and the
sacrifice of the holocaust, Mar. 26.43.
a propitiation for our sins. Thy will be done, said he, and no more; let us
say the same in all events, let us settle the foundation of our soul in this
estate and disposition.

To this we must add a remarkable admonition for those who will profit by
sufferings, humiliations, and other adversities of humane life, and bear them
with faithfulness. And that is this, that in all conditions of life, in all
that may happen to us, we must endeavor to find out, if it be possible, the
designs which God has over us, in all that he does or permits to be done; and
we are to be very careful to receive them, and cooperate faithfully with
them. For as God in all he does or permits, has always some design worthy of
his greatness and goodness, so is it the duty of the soul to submit her self
thereto, to subject her self according to all her capacity, that with an entire
consent, she may act with God, if need be, and receive with fidelity all things
according to the designs and intentions of God: as for instance. There happens
losses and ruins, we are to see if God by these losses, would separate and
sever us from the Creatures. If it be so, we must accept them with this
disposition, and make it our endeavor to sever and deprive our selves of the
love of all things created, because that by the losses and disgraces which
befall us, we see that this is the design of God. Or else if by humiliations,
and interior or exterior eversions, God will annihilate us, let us consent to
this annihilation, and applying our selves thereto, cooperate with the work of
God, with all the extent and power of our soul, and so let us do in all, and
according to the diversity of the objects.

This advice is not contrary to the pure regard of God which we must have in
all sufferings, for in the works of God, and in all that he permits, we must
consider the end for which God does it, and the cause that moves him either to
permit it or do it. The end of the works of God is his honor and glory, but
the cause that moves him in his operations, and divine permissions, is the
salvation of our souls, the establishment and communication of his spirit, his
graces, and his virtues. We must here do as before, we must suffer, having no
end but the pure regard of God, and of his glory. But because God requires
fidelity, and will establish his Kingdom and power in our souls, it is also our
duty to cooperate with his intentions, and to receive all things not only
because such is his good pleasure, but also in the manner that he will, and to
make use thereof according to his pleasure.

The perfection therefore of the spirit of sufferance, consists not in
receiving all things indifferently; a soul is not perfect, though it be
insensible of all accidents, be they never so sad and miserable. Perfection
consists not in a Stoicall apathy, but if there be a perfection and purity in
suffering, it is when we receive all things in the spirit, and in the holy and
divine dispositions of Jesus, and that we bear them after that manner that God
wills, and according to the designs and intentions of God. And herein consists
the first and noblest Disposition, which must accompany our sufferings. We come
now to the second.

CHAP. XIII. How we ought to suffer in the spirit of Christianity.
1 Pet. 2.20, 21.
IF when you do well, and suffer for it, you take it patiently, it is
acceptable to God, for hereunto were you called, because Christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. In these words
full of efficacy and truth, the Prince of the Apostles proposes the motives
which obliege us to suffer patiently all adversities and afflictions which
occur in all conditions of this life. He says, that we are called thereto, and
that by consequence, the proper condition and quality of a Christian, binds us
to the Cross. It is not necessary to allege proofs of this, seeing we have
said enough already. For the spirit, grace, and conduct of God, whereby he uses
to save us, is no other then that of annihilations and humiliations, and
afflictions. God has tried them, and found them worthy of him.

The Cross and sufferings is then the lot of Christians, it is their portion,
and they must make such use of it, as to bear it Christianly. But the most
powerful motive the Apostle makes use of to teach us patience is, when he
says, that Jesus Christ suffered for us, and that we must imitate him, and
follow his steps, after this we cannot in reason find any thing hard. If Jesus
Christ from his birth to his death, has espoused the sufferings and embraced
the Cross, wherefore should we refuse being his Children to live and dye as he
did? we know that the Son of God came from Heaven to Earth, to suffer the
humiliations and pains due to sins and sinners, and that He would by this low
estate, honor his Father; but withal, he left upon the Earth the same spirit
to honor God; that as in Heaven God is honored by exaltation, he might be
honored upon Earth by humiliation. In pursuance of this design of Jesus
Christ, we must as Christians honor God by our lowness and annihilation. On
the other side, seeing the Son of God dyed for us, we must dye for him; if he
be the example of our life, as the Apostle says, we must imitate him, and if
he be born our head, according to St. Paul, we must, as his members, bear his
spirit, and follow his motions. In a word, if we reign with Jesus Christ, we
must suffer with him, There remains then no more, then to know the spirit and
dispositions, where with we must receive and bear sufferings.

We have said, that the 2d. Disposition necessary to a perfect Christian, to
live faithfully in the adversities of humane life, is to bear them in a
Christian way, and according to the spirit of Christianity. Now we suffer in
Christan ways, when we suffer what befalls us as an order of God, and as an
estate prepared for Christians, and by which God will conduct us to the
heritage of Christians; so that according to this Disposition, we make no
reflection at all on our sufferings, nor upon the estates and overturnings
wherein we are, our spirit only remains settled and fastened upon the thought
of this truth, I am a Christian, and as such, I belong to Jesus Christ, who
puts me into what estate he pleases; and because I am obliged to do his good
pleasure, I will have no other thought then to resign my self to Jesus Christ,
to do with me according to his good pleasure. By adhering to this truth, by
this Disposition and interior estate, the soul is united to Jesus Christ, as
the members are to their head, and she remains subject to his conduct, without
further care or thought, then that she is God's because God wills it. Herein
consists the spirit of Christianity, and the duty of a perfect Christian.

This Disposition is pure and simple, and produces in the soul a perfect
peace, calm and repose; the reason of it consists in that the sufferings,
humiliations and contempts are the center of the Christian soul, as things
created have no repose but in their center, so the perfect Christian cannot
have the true repose of the soul but in sufferings; and in this Disposition,
they are the center of Christianity, because the eternal Word was pleased to
place his estate and whole life in humiliation. He was born in poverty, he
lived in contempt, he died upon the cross, all the passages of his wayfaring
life were in continual sufferings and lowness; and also when he was in Heaven,
in the bosom of the Father, in the throne of the greatness of the Divinity, he
entertained thoughts of the cross, he consents to death, and prepares himself
for sufferings, when that from all eternity he resolved to be made man, and to
invest himself with the infirmities of our nature; so true is it, that all the
conditions of the Son of God were in sufferings and lowness. This also the
center, repose and life of a perfect Christian ought to be in the estate and
life of Jesus Christ, and as the life of Jesus Christ and his estates are
contained in adversities, in lowness, and in the thoughts of the cross, it
consequently follows, that the center, the repose of a Christian cannot be but
in this estate of sufferings, and in the same condition of suffering that Jesus
Christ was here upon earth.

When we say that the center and spirit of Christianity is no other then the
cross, annihilations and adversities, we must conceive it in the highest, and
consider that the Son of God came into the World for the glory of his Father,
to satisfy his divine Justice, and for the sanctification of our souls. These
were his designs, desires, and thoughts. Now, the thoughts and intentions of
the Son of God are eternal and permanent, for they are divine, and it is the
property of the essence and of divine actions to be immutable and permanent.
Seeing then that the Son of God has chosen the cross from all eternity, and
lived upon earth in the spirit of sufferance, he remains always in the
thoughts of the cross, in the desires of humiliation and the rigor of death,
the zeal of the glory of his Father goes not from his heart, but he preserves
this spirit, and offers himself to his Father, to bear it eternally, and to
suffer the effects of it, if it be his good pleasure. This zeal ought not to be
unfruitful; this offer is not to be refused, and yet the estate of his
greatness, and the condition of his glory cannot permit it. What remedy? Love,
always wise and inventive, has found out a means to satisfy the equity of
his desires, and divine affection, and the Majesty of his glory, for the
eternal Father has given his Son a mystical body, which is his Church, he
has appointed him Head over all his Church, which is his body, and all
Christians are members of this body, Ephesians. 5.30.
true members, as the body is a true body, though a mystical body. We are,
says the Apostle, members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Now to
this body, and these members, the spirit and zeal of Jesus Christ, communicates
it self by the design and special counsel of the blessed Trinity; In pursuit
of this divine counsel, the Son of God pours into his Church, and upon
Christians, the zeal of the glory of God, the spirit of the cross, and the love
of justice; he pours, it out as he pleases, distributing his gifts according to
his holy will. To some he communicates his spirit of sufferance and crosses, to
others that of death; and to speak more generally, he communicates his estates
and spirit to whom he pleases, and as he pleases. Col. 1.24.
So Saint Paul, I fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in
my flesh; Reflecting on this truth, we shall clearly see, that the spirit of
Christianity is no other then the spirit of Jesus, which he communicates to his
Church, being the head, and to Christians his members. And as this spirit is no
other then a desire of the glory of God, love of the cross, and zeal of
justice, it follows, they who will be good Christians, must necessarily bear
this spirit, and be in this estate of annihilation and the cross, and embrace
all adversities that they meet with, yea, embrace them courageously as an order
of God established upon them, and as an estate, which is singularly proper for
them: In this Disposition they shall find the center and repose of their souls,
and in this subjection to the cross, they shall obtain the peace that Jesus
Christ has acquired for us by his cross.

We may also say, that to suffer Christianly, is to bear all things with
cheerfulness of spirit, doing like the Apostles, who departed, rejoicing that
they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for his Names sake; Acts 5.41.
and like the first Christians, Heb. 10.34.
who took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, defied torments, and the
cruelty of beasts, like Saint Ignatius; the burning of fire, as Saint Lawrence;
the violence of torments, as Saint Agnes, and in the Churches first beginning
their zeal to suffer, was so great, that it made the Apostle Saint James to
say, James 1.2
Count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations. This advice will seem
hard, for the rigours of the cross and pains of this life are too piercing, but
if we love, all will be easy; for where love is, says Saint Bernard, there is
nothing but sweetness, and nothing is difficult to him that loves; though
thorns guard and encompass the Rose, we gather it notwithstanding, and enjoy
its beauty and odor. Genesis 29.20.
Jacob says, he served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed unto him but a
few days, because he loved her so much, that he was insensible of the travail.
He also that will suffer Christianly must love, for he that cannot love, cannot
suffer, and he that can neither suffer nor love, is no Christian, seeing that
love is the spirit of Christianity, and sufferance the spirit of love.

This principle considered, no rigours that we find in humane life, can appear
difficult, and misfortunes and pains are only irk some to us for want of love.
Let us then but love, and they will all be easy; by love, the sufferings of
Christians are distinguished from those of others. For it is common to all men
to suffer, it is the condition of their being, and portion of their life, and
the more they think themselves secure, the more they are surprised with
misfortunes, but it belongs only to Christians to suffer with love. The sinner
is drawn by the neck like a slave, to do the will of God; the good man
willingly follows him, and finds no pain in any thing; but on the contrary,
he finds comfort in travail, and repose in displeasure. In this sense the
Apostle cries out upon sight of the wounds and scarrs he endured for Jesus
Christ; Gal. 6.17.
Henceforth let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord
Jesus. And elsewhere, I will glory willingly in my infirmities, 2 Cor. 12.9.
that the power of Jesus Christ may dwell in me. To suffer in this disposition,
is to suffer Christianly, or else let us say, that to suffer Christianly, is to
suffer with an esteem of sufferings. There are diverse reasons why we should
take and well esteem them, but the principal consists, in that Jesus Christ
has chosen this manner of life as a way that honors more divinely the
Majesty of God then any other estate, and he has chosen this way from all
eternity, and by consequence from all eternity he bears the thoughts and love
of the Cross. He has chosen the Cross, says St. Paul, he has embraced it
from the first moment of his incarnation, and by an excess of love, he began to
suffer as soon as he was born. And that which is to be observed, is that by the
election of his divine wisdom which never fails, he has made choice of
confusion and contempt, rather then greatness and contentment. So says the
Apostle of him, and we find it in his divine Mysteries. And from hence comes
the esteem that we ought to have thereof, and the reverence we should bear to
this estate, for the Son of God having chosen the Cross and sufferings, and
having united to his divine person by his incarnation, meanness, and
infirmities, and adversities of humane life, he has made them divine, and
ennobled them. So that we must regard them much more for the dignity which they
receive from Jesus Christ, and to speak properly, they are the sufferings of
Jesus Christ, for we are united to him, we are members of his body, flesh of
his flesh, bone of his bone, and by reason of this unity, they are no more our
sufferings then the sufferings of Jesus, seeing they are more to Jesus then to
our selves. Whence Saint Paul says, 2 Cor. 1.5.
as the sufferings of Christ abound in you, so our consolation abounds by Jesus
Christ. The Apostle highly advancing the sufferings of Christianity, calls them
the sufferings of Jesus. St. Peter speaks in the same manner; Rejoice in as
much as you are partakers of Christ's sufferings. 1 Pet. 4.13.
And therefore when we see all that is in this World, all the adversities and
vicissitudes, we must not pass them over indifferently, or as men without
grace and virtue, stop at our own resentments, and loose our selves in our
weakness and natural passions, but we must lift up our eyes and thoughts, to
the consideration of Catholic truths, and making use of the light of Faith,
endeavor to use all things according to the manner God requires, and to the
power he has given us. If we suffer, let us not suffer as slaves and
criminalls, but as the Children and true Servants of God. Let us suffer with
esteem, and in the spirit of Christianity, a spirit holy and divine, a spirit
powerful and courageous, and which only belongs to the chosen of God, and to
his greatest friends. Hence the Apostle summing up the graces that the new
Christians had received of God, puts sufferings in the first place, and
accounts them as a singular favor. He has given you, Phil. 1.29.
says he, not only to believe on him, but to suffer for him, thereby showing,
that it is a benefit of God to be called to the state of sufferings, and to
know how to make use thereof.

In the view of these truths, let us beg of the Son of God, part of his
spirit of the Cross and sufferings, and his grace to support us under them,
that we may bear them with the spirit, with joy, and the grace of Christianity,
let us say with Saint Paul, and often repeat this Prayer in our heart, That the
Lord would prepare our hearts to the love of God, 2 These. 3.5
and to the patience of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XIV. That we must suffer out of a zeal to the Justice of God.
WE suffer in the ways of sinners and for the zeal of Justice (which is the
third Disposition that we have proposed) when we enter into the zeal of God,
which brings him to do justice upon sin, and that in all things we exercise
upon our selves, the judgment that God exercises therein, in bearing in our
hearts a true desire and an effectual will to submit to the justice of God,
before whom we are sinners, before whom we have offended so many ways. By this
Disposition, the perfect Christian must undergo all sorts of pains and
sufferings, and regard the adversities and inconveniences of humane life, as
effects of God's Justice on him as a sinner, whereby he would destroy sin in
him, and root out imperfections. With this spirit and Disposition he must
endure all natural incommodities, as cold, heat, poverty, sickness,
afflictions, and such accidents, which are the attendants of our life,
regarding and bearing them with this zeal to the Justice of God upon sin. This
thought, if it be solid and well settled in the soul of a perfect Christian,
will make all pain sweet and easy. For what can we suffer, but we deserve much
more, if we weigh our afflictions, our sufferings, travails and adversities,
with the number of our sins? Who will not see the deformity and weight of our
sins, and how much they surpass the rigor and weight of our sufferings? If we
consider the hate God bears to sin, and to sinners, by reason of sin, who will
not confess, that our crimes are much greater then our pains; that amongst our
afflictions and sufferings, even the greatest and most insupportable, the mercy
of God appears more then his justice? What more manifest example of Gods hatred
against a sinner, then the rigor wherewith the divine justice, which is
always equitable, punished sin in Jesus Christ? And if the eternal Father, as
the Prophet says, so rigorously chastised his Son, Isa. 53.5.
for the sins of his people, what should he not do to us? If the Son of God who
is holiness it self, sanctity, uncreated and incarnate, becoming a pledge and
offering for our sins, was subjected not only to our miseries and natural
infirmities, which are great, but to adversities, afflictions, poverty,
contempt, accusations, ignominy, even to the rigor of the cross, what ought we
to suffer, who are sinners and objects of the hatred and justice of God? Luke
23.31.
If this be done to the green wood, what will be done to the dry? If the Son
of God, who is the eternal and true wisdom, chose this estate, voluntarily
subjected himself to all miseries, incited by zeal to the glory of his Father,
and to satisfy divine Justice, what ought not we to do? what pains and
rigours, should not we embrace who are the guilty, to appease this angry God,
to satisfy and allay his provoked wrath, to restore to glory what we have
ravished from him?

Let us enter into this disposition and zeal of submitting our selves to the
stroke of Gods Justice, and we shall see all things will be easy to endure, we
shall not complain whatever befalls us, whatsoever is done unto us, we shall
not take it as a wrong, nothing will appear harsh unto us, nothing
insupportable, the quality of sinners, and multitude of our offenses will tell
us that we deserve more, we shall bless God for the favor he does us, in
giving us the means to honor him by our sufferings. The Christian therefore
must have a care to bear all adversities, all changes of this life, all sorts
of afflictions, losses and misfortunes, yea all incommodities, and natural
vexations of humane life, with an intention to glorify God to submit to divine
Justice against sin. O how great must be the courage of a Christian, how
invincible his constancy in all changes and misfortunes, if he professes this
zeal of God, if he be animated with the hatred God bears to sin! How easy
would all things appear, if in them we had no intent but to act and suffer
only to please God, with a full resignation of our selves, in all things to
his divine conduct.

To facilitate this disposition, and make it more general, we must remember
that the Wisdom of God rules all this great World, and has a general and
particular superintendency over all things. Nothing happens by chance to God,
all is foreseen by his praescience, and ruled by his providence. In this wise
conduct he is Sovereign, and means to show his power, and subject men to his
will, and as Sovereign he disposes all, and as wise, he ordains all, it belongs
to him to ruin or build up, to advance or debase, and to us to entertain. So
that in disgraces and misfortunes, we must regard God as our Sovereign and
Master, and therefore must receive them with the greatest submission and zeal
of Justice, which will that God dispose of all as he pleases, and that we
receive all according to his dispensation. This is the zeal and submission that
God requires of us, whereby the most just and holy embrace all manner of
accidents, acknowledging the Sovereignty of God, and confessing their
dependence. I call this disposition, zeal to Justice, because it is just that
God should do in us, and with us, all that he pleases, and that we should be
content in all things.

This is so essential to man, so just in the disposal of the Universe, that
we shall easily see in the works of God, that that Sovereign Majesty will be
acknowledged, and adored in afflictions with so much necessity, that he never
stops the course of his Justice, nor withholds sufferings and other pains, till
the soul submit and freely render her self to God, and until she do so submit
her self, she will still be under the rod. So said Daniel, threatening the great
Nebuchadnezar, God will humble thee, Dan. 4.25.
till thou know that the most high rules in the Kingdom of men. The impious
Antiochus, made a public confession, which the chastisement of God as a Rack
extorted from his guilty mouth, That truly it was a just thing to submit
himself to God. The first disposition then wherein a Christian ought to be in
all sufferings and adversities, in all sorts of estates and chances, is to
subject himself to God, because he is God. Upon this subjection, he must ground
his desire and zeal, to abandon himself wholly to the divine justice, seeing
all that is miserable and painful in this World, is an effect of his justice,
and the reward of sin, and we see that all the chances that happen in this
World are the effects of his power and conduct.

This being supposed we are obliged to bear them, and receive them with a zeal
and desire to appease that Justice which requires that we be subject to God,
and suffer for our sins. Herein consists the disposition we speak of. If we
would practice this disposition, it is thus. First the Christian must accept of
all adversities and afflictions, which are or may be in the life of man, as a
mark of the will of God, and an effect of his Justice upon him; he must them
embrace, and bear them in this sense, and with a desire to please God, and
submit to his divine Justice, who vouchsafes to manifest himself in these
painful and laborious ways; he must regard them as natural and necessary,
not considering whence they come, and who is the immediate cause thereof, but
shutting his eyes to all considerations, he must look up toward God, and
accept them of his fatherly hands. If there happen any motion contrary to the
disposition, he must say with the penitent and afflicted King, Righteous art
thou O Lord, and upright are thy Judgments. Psalm. 119.137.
Nor must he content himself with this; but passing farther, he must offer
himself to God, to bear all his chastisements after the manner that God wills,
and as long as shall please him. And since the true Christian always distrusts
his own strength, he must beg grace of the Son of God, to sustain them
according to the intention of God, and fidelity to make such use of them as he
requires. For as it suffices not a perfect Christian to conform himself to the
will of God, and to do what God wills, but he must accomplish it after the
manner that God wills, and according to the vocation and grace wherein God has
established him, so in suffering, which is an estate more noble and certain, it
is not sufficient to suffer patiently, (for Philosophy and generosity can
produce this effect, and make the greatest rigours embraceable) but we must
suffer Christianly, after the manner that God wills, according to his designs,
conformable to the grace the soul receives of him, which ought to be seriously
considered by those who are most advanced in the ways of grace, and who owe a
great fidelity to God. And since to discern this is difficult, and that the
soul may commit in it great impurities, and much infidelity, it suffices, to be
exempted of the miscarriages which may happen, that he who seriously looks
after Christian perfection, and endeavors to please God above all things, be
careful to preserve himself in an absolute resignation of himself to the power
and will of God; in which estate if it be firmly settled, there is nothing to be
feared, but all these will prove easy, in regard that patience in suffering
and purity, ought to be proportionable to the state of grace wherein the soul
is, and it must needs be of a great purity, when the grace is singular and
transcendent.

CHAP. XV. The continuance of the precedent Chapter, and of the spirit of
repentance.
TO suffer all things out of zeal to God's justice, is not only a Disposition,
but a spirit of penitence, necessary to all, since all have sinned, and need
the grace of God, as profitable to a Christian, as repentance is necessary.
True penitence has no end but God, no regard but to satisfy God. To repent,
is to enter into a regard of our selves in zeal to God's justice, who will
punish sin in us. We must take heed that the true spirit of repentance operate
in us a resentment of the state whereto we are reduced by sin, a state which
displeases God, and draws us from the amity, presence, and grace of God, a
state whereinto we put our selves through our own fault, to satisfy our own
inclinations and passions. The soul seeing her self so estranged from God, and
being sensible of this misfortune, is grieved extremely, and enters into a
desire to be revenged of her self, and to please God, whom she has offended,
she does protest to love him above all things; for if she could not love him,
she could not desire to please him. This love elevates her into an esteem, by
this esteem and love, she finds it easy to bear all pains, rigours, or
difficulties whatsoever; she overcomes them courageously; she only minds to
please God, whom she has offended; so that by this zeal to his justice, all
things are easy to her; the contrarieties of this present life, and the
unexpected rigours and disgrace are light. In brief, animated with this zeal,
she willingly embraces all that may happen unto her, and receives it as a
special favor. The reason is, because such a soul loves God, loving God, she
esteems him; esteeming him, she will not displease him, and as much as she has
displeased him by her offenses, she desires to glorify him; and this desire
bears her to a zeal of Gods justice; and finally, this zeal animates her to
support all things patiently, and to embrace them freely.

Hence we learn, that the true spirit of Repentance consists not only in
sorrow for sins committed, and a hatred of all sins, but also it contains a
desire to glorify God; for we can no more enter into Paradise without this,
then without repentance; Herein they must have a care, who perform indeed some
acts of mortification, and suffer many things, but with certain dissemblings,
or out of some private considerations or concernments, and many times out of
curiosity. Let them take heed they build not with straw; for true repentance
has no eyes but for God; no other regard but to content God, and to glorify
his divine justice. The more love the soul has, the more ardent is her zeal,
so that if she love much, she desires to sorrow much, and believes she has
never done enough, for true love is never satisfied. Such a soul esteems all
pains sweet, injuries, truth, contempt, honor, and labors the enjoyments of
her spirit. O how good it is to suffer thus, for who knows how to love, knows
how to suffer, and transported with the love of sufferings, cries out with the
penitent King, Lord, prove me and try me, Psalm. 26.2.
search my reins and heart.

To be thoroughly acquainted with true repentance, we must further consider the
effects of it; for if it be true, the effects of it shall be as certain, and
will be great and true. True repentance, annihilates us, and destroys sin in
us, and the fountains of sin; as also our evil inclinations and vicious habits;
it roots out of our hearts all that divides us from God, all that displeases
him; it converts us to God, it draws us near to him, it gives us God, and
separates us from the creatures, and our selves. For the true penitent is
crucified in all things, and dead to himself, of a death to sin, which gives
him life in God, and makes him lead a new life, altered in himself and in his
actions. This is the true meaning of Saint Paul, where he says, As you have
yielded your members servants to uncleanness,, Romans 6.19
and to iniquity even so now yield your members servants to righteousness, unto
holiness. Which shows the great change and conversion which repentance must
operate in us, seeing our members, which have been servants to sin, must now be
only servants to righteousness, and to serve God, after a manner which
operates in us sanctification, and serves as an instrument to our glory.

Further, true repentance unites us to God, and puts us into a new and
particular relation to Jesus Christ. He acquires a new right over us, when we
participate of his mercies, and applies to us the merits of his death and
sufferings, pardoning our sin. He acquires a new right over us, because he
applies to us the price of his blood, by the merits of his death. He withdraws
us from the empire of sin, whereto we had subjected and sold our selves; he
delivers us from the captivity and slavery of vice, to put us into the liberty
of his children, into the possession of his spirit; so that from the time that
he delivered us from the tyranny of sin, we belong unto him, and are his
children, his captives, his heritage; we are so many times his, as he pardons
our sins, as many sins as he pardons, so many times he offers himself to his
eternal Father, to pay the price of our misdeeds, and offers him the merit
and satisfaction of his death for the redemption of offenses. Thus he
purchases us anew as often as he pardons our sins.

Repentance, if it be true, gives the Son of God a new right in us, and draws
us from the right we have of our selves, to put us into new propriety as to
him, whence it follows, that the sins which separated us from God by our own
default, serve by the bands of repentance, to unite us to God by the new right
Jesus Christ has to us, by the band of love which we have to him. Many sins
are forgiven her, Luke 7.47.
for she loved much, and he to whom less is pardoned loved less, says Jesus
Christ. True repentance produces two admirable effects, one in relation to
Jesus Christ, which comprehends an abnegation from the creature and our selves
to be God's and Jesus Christ's, to whom we must be the more united, the more he
has pardoned us. The Father is an effect of love, which issues from this union
and adherence. He that is most united, loves most, and the more he loves, the
faster he ties himself. Mary Magdalen is an example hereof, who was no sooner
converted, but she fastened her self to Jesus Christ, to crucify her self in
his love, and to live no longer then with him, and for him. If we will examine
what has been said, it will be easy to see, that many persons deceive
themselves in this business of so great concernment, I mean, Repentance, who go
so negligently, and indifferently to this Sacrament, that being they are
sensible neither of the effect nor advantage of it, and it is much to be
feared, lest they find at the hour of death, rather the penitence of a
perfidious Judas, of an impious Antiochus, of a sensual Esau, then of a Saint
Peter, or a Mary Magdalen. However, if be, let him apprehend the menaces of the
Son of God, If ye do not repent, Luke 13.3.
ye shall likewise perish. He speaks of the true repentance, which cannot be
true, if it have not the true effects, else it is not repentance. Herein the
Christian must take heed, as the most important thing of his salvation. If we
apply these principles of truth, we shall find that it has been no digression
to speak of Repentance, but that by the same principles which oblige us to bear
the spirit of true penitence, we have the grace and faculty to live patiently
and Christianly, amidst all contrarieties and disturbances of this life, and in
pursuit of that, we may make use, with profit, of all accidents we meet with in
the world. He that lives in the spirit of repentance, as a perfect Christian,
ought not only to suffer with ease and cheerfulness, but also to subject
himself to the divine will and honor of God, wherein consists the spirit of
repentance. In brief, he makes his profit of all as a faithful steward of
God's gifts, I say, he makes profit, knowing it is a favor received of Jesus
Christ, that all sufferings and adversities in this world are profitable to us,
being sanctified by the precious sufferings of the Son of God, and may serve to
satisfy the justice of God, which must be looked upon as a particular mercy
and favor which Jesus the Son of God has obtained for us by his incarnation
and death. For if we consider naturally the sufferings and afflictions of man's
life, they can no way profit us, because as men and sinners, and the children
of Adam, we are subject to all the miseries of nature, we are condemned to eat
our bread in the sweat of our brows, and undergo all the maledictions of God;
and we know, that all the evils incident to nature, and that happen to us in
the course of our life, are but the guerdon of our crimes, the portion of man,
and the effect of sin, wherein we are born.

So that these evils deserve not that God should regard them of themselves, as
being incapable to satisfy God's Justice, were it not that the Son of God
making himself man, and charging himself with our nature, with all our
infirmities, has sanctified them in his person, and in his use of them. So
that bearing them in his spirit, we bear them with blessing and happiness,
since that, when he was made a sacrifice for our sins, and became a
propitiation to appease the wrath of God for our offenses, he suffered the pain
of death due to sin, whereby it was blessed and sanctified, and by an effect
worthy his bounty, he would that the sufferings of men, which were but the
effects and punishments of sin, should merit grace, and find acceptance, when
we support them in his spirit, and in his divine dispositions. 2 Cor. 8.9.
This St. Paul teaches, saying, Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that you through his
poverty might be made rich. For the Son of God making himself man, is subject
to our necessities and labors, that in our labors and necessities, we might
be made rich in good works, in patience, and in the spirit of Repentance.

When therefore we consider the sufferrings of this life, and all the
humiliations and disgraces that may befall us, we must look upon them two ways.

First, As an effect and punishment of sin.

Secondly, As the spirit of Jesus, and as sanctified and made divine in his
sacred person. The first are not profitable, nor are they proper, but for the
wicked who are in chastisements and sufferings by way of Justice, suffering
what they have merited. But the second are full of blessedness and happiness,
for it is in them and by them that Jesus Christ sanctifies us, that he dwells
in us, and establishes in our souls the works of grace. If ye be reproached for
the name of Christ, 1 Pet. 4.14
happy are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God rests on you. Words which
tell us, the spirit of Jesus Christ, his grace and glory inhabit in souls who
suffer for love of him. The Christian therefore that suffers, must take heed to
this virtue, that he suffer not as a criminal, that is by necessity and force,
but as a Christian, and in necessary dispositions. For since God has given a
blessing to sufferings, and by a mercy spring from these sufferings of Jesus
Christ, we may profit by the disadvantages of this World, we must not
unprofitably let slip the occasions, nor indifferently pass over the
necessity, pains, and several estates of this life, but make profit thereof,
seeing God will have it so, and that he gives us power to do so. For this
reason must we endeavor to bear them in the spirit and in the blessing that
Jesus Christ has given them, and according to the use he would have us to make
of them. The Christian that lives in this care and vigilance, may hope for the
recompense of Heaven, and having gone through the combat of this life, 2 Timothy
4.7
which to the good is but a continual Martyrdom, may say with Saint Paul, I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day.

In fine, the most assured mark we have of the perfection of a soul, is
sufferings, which are continual and abundant to the just, and if it be lawful
to take any Argument of our salvation, or any sign of our election, it is in
sufferings, and in the manner of bearing them. Mat. 5.10.
So the Son of God calls those happy that suffer for his sake, and for his
glory, and we may say of such souls as Saul said of David, when seeing him so
patient in the greatest violence of his afflictions, 1 Samuel 24.20.
he cried out with tears, Now I know for certain, that thou shall be surely
King, and that the Kingdom of Israel shall be established in thy hand. We may
say the same of a patient Christian, but let us leave him in this hope, and
propose to him some entertainments of Piety.

CHAP. XVI. The Abridgement of the fourth part, teaching of Christian grace.
CHrist says, we are all ingraffed in him, as the scien is in the Vine-stock,
Joh. 15.5.
we are bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh, as the Apostle says; Ephesians. 5 30.
for we are his body, we are in him, and with him. This truth alone shows how
much we are obliged to live holily and perfectly, to be regulated in our
actions, in our exterior, modest and holy, being united to Jesus Christ, our
life must be an expression of the life of Jesus, and as Jesus, being the Son of
God, by nature is the Image of his Father; so a Christian being the child of
God by grace must be the Image of the same, Jesus Christ, an Image so perfect
and divine, as cannot be fully expressed: For on the one side the life of a
perfect Christian, is a life hid from the eyes of man, spiritual and
invisible, and therefore infinitely removed from the capacity of the children
of Adam, who are material, and, as the Apostle says, carnal and animal. On
the other side, this life is a life of grace, a divine life, a life of God in
man, a life full of secrets, operated by God in the depth of the soul. Our weak
nature has not terms proportionable to the greatness and Majesty of divine
things, and therefore all that we can say of the state of Christianity, of
grace, and of the life of a perfect Christian, does but derogate from, and
deface the value of this work which cannot appear in its luster, but to their
eyes who have the true light of Heaven, nor can be conceived or comprehended
but by souls that are chosen of God. We must notwithstanding, draw the last
lines of our Christian image, and lightly passing over what has been said to
sweeten that which appears either too high or too harsh, that so we may
benefit those who will see things in perspective and superficially, we must
also fix our eyes and thoughts upon Christian grace, which will make us
apprehend the truth of what has been proposed, and, if we can understand it,
will cause us to admire the indulgence and communications of God, who out of
the excess of his love, the more advances men and sinners, the more they were
debased by the greatness of their ingratitude, that grace might superabound
where sin had abounded, that love might triumph over us. Let us then descend to
the particularities of grace, and examine the properties and effects thereof.

The grace which we receive and sanctifies us, is the grace of Jesus Christ,
which flows from his fullness, and communicates to our souls grace, which is
not only supernatural, but was made for Jesus, and is proportioned to his
Sovereignty and infinite dignity, whence we are called Christians. It has all
its being, dignity, and residence in Jesus, it is above our nature, and in the
rank of supernatural things, in an order sovereign and particular, worthy of
the sovereignty of Jesus, and proportioned to his Filiation, order and grace,
very different from the original Justice, which was given to the first man.
For though the grace of Adam were supernatural, yet was it an order very
inferior to Christian grace, being proportioned to his nature and
inclinations, in the state of innocence. All men as well as Adam, had been
sanctified in the order, and according to the order of nature, and in the
natural uses thereof. But it is not so in Christian grace, for that is not
proportioned to the nature of man, but above it, wholly in Jesus, wholly for
him, it issues out of him, and, by an effect proper and particular to it,
draws us from our selves, to unite us to him, as members to the head, and
being united, sanctifies us in Him, in such a manner as that we are no more in
the quality of men, and Children of Adam, but as Children of God, and members
of the Son of God, and by a grace proper to the Son of God; of whose
fullness we have all received.

Whence we infer, that he who would be sanctified, and partake of Christian
grace, must be united to Jesus Christ, as the branch to the Tree, the graft to
the stock, the members to the head, and if united, must also be one with him,
as the head and members make up but one body, and consequently by reason of
that unity, must not only partake of his grace, but also his spirit and life
in the same manner as we say, the members move not themselves nor live, but by
the life of their head. This being considered, we see that to live Christianly,
it is not enough to say that we must be in grace, but we must live in the
spirit and life of Jesus, for grace produces this effect, for as much as by
the same principle, whereby we are united to Jesus, as members to their head,
we must live his life, and be guided by his spirit. And as it is the property
of Christian grace, to unite us to the Son of God, so is it the effect of the
same grace, to rule us by his spirit, and to make us live his life, wherein
appears how perfect the life of a Christian in grace should be, how exemplary
and holy his actions must be, how regular his motions, and how pure his
intentions, seeing it is a life of grace which unites us to the Son of God,
which making us one with him, causes us to live in his spirit and life.

Let us enter further into the consideration of grace, and we shall see, that
according to the Apostle, Grace is a participation of the divine nature. 2 Pet.
1.4.
These words contain the excellency of Christianity, and describe all that can
be said of grace. The Apostle implies, that we are accidentally what God is
substantially, and that which agrees with God, and is proper to him according
to his divine nature is appropriated to us, and may be convenient for us,
according to the spirit of grace: so that by grace we are elevated from our own
baseness to the fellowship of Jesus Christ, and we are put out of our selves,
to receive a new being in God. Can any thing be said more admirable or great?
If we reflect on this truth, we must needs confess, that to live according to
Christian grace, and bear it is effects in our souls, we must go out of our
selves, and be no more our own, nor in our selves. When we say, we must go out
of our selves, we would intimate, that the Christian, to live like a perfect
Christian, must regard nothing but God, mind no Interest but that of the glory
of God, please none but God, have no desire, but to accomplish the will of God.
In brief, he must renounce himself, and the love of all things to love none but
God. To live so, as to go out of ones self, is in two words, all that we have
proposed in the fourth Part.

This is a Point may be thought hard, and too high, yet the practice thereof is
necessary, according to those words of the Son of God, He that will follow me,
let him deny himself; Luke 9 23.
where we see how much a Christian is obliged to renounce all, and to go out of
himself after the manner we have declared, which will appear more clear, if we
consider the essence of the Precept of love, for the love of Christianity is a
love, says Dionysius the Areopagite, extatick, that is to say, it raises us to
a contempt of our selves, and all things, to unite us to God, who is
essentially love and charity; so that by the perfection of Christianity, which
is in the love of God, we are drawn from the love of our selves and the
creature, to be only God's, and not to enjoy our selves in any thing but in
God.

Thus, which way soever we consider Christianity, we find, that both love and
Christian grace, causes us to go out of our selves, to unite us to God, and
make us partakers of his divine Nature.

The SEQUEL.
FRom the Principle of Truth, last explained, we learn the great difference
between the state of Innocence in Adam, and the Christian righteousness in
Jesus Christ; for Adam had a power over all things, it was permitted him to
enjoy the whole world, and to rejoice therein. Original righteousness, and the
grace of the first man, was in that, and in the lawful use of all things, but
Christian grace is quite contrary; for God wills not any more that man rejoice
and content himself in any thing but in him, that he live not but for him; that
he alone be his possession and heritage. Besides, the state of Adam was in
exaltation, in the possession, in the satisfaction and pleasure, that he might
lawfully take in the creatures that were subjected to him, during the time that
he remained in obedience to God. But the state of Christianity is wholly
opposite, it consists altogether in privations, in humiliations, in dejections,
and in sum, it devests man of all power, even that which he has of himself,
that he may be wholly Jesus Christ's, that separating himself from the
creatures, and from himself, Jesus Christ might be his All, and his Fullness,
that by Christian grace he might enter into society with Jesus Christ, and by
him, with his Father, according to what the beloved Apostle promised us, when
he said, 1 John 1.3.
That your fellowship be with the Father and Jesus Christ his Son.

Thus all the fruition, satisfaction, pleasure, and exaltation that man took in
the creature by original righteousness he takes in God, making a happy change
and possessing the Creator for the creature, wherein is verified the word of
Saint Paul, Romans 5.20
where sin did abound, grace did superabound. By Christian grace, we are drawn
from the creature, and from our selves, to be in Jesus Christ, to possess God,
and to take no content or satisfaction, but in God. The Christian by this
grace, takes all in God, lives not but for God, and lives the life of Jesus the
Son of God. In this sense, the Apostle, filled with this grace, says, I live,
but it is no more I that live, Gal. 2.20.
but Jesus Christ who lives in me. We should all say the same, for Christian
grace makes us to live of the life of Jesus, which is so true, that we see the
life of a Christian has for it is sole conservation and food, the very body and
blood of Jesus Christ; for, if according to the ordinary maxims of things
natural, we say that every thing draws it is nutriment, from whence it draws
its being, since the food of a Christian is no other then Jesus Christ, it
follows by a necessary consequence, that his being and life must be the same
Jesus Christ. A truth great and admirable, which shows us the excellencies of
the state of Christianity, and teaches us how holy and perfect the life of a
Christian ought to be. If we further consider the same grace, we shall discover
a new secret in Christian life; for having said that grace makes us live the
life of Jesus, we ought to know what his life is. The life of Jesus is
divinely-humane, and humanely-divine; He is God and man, and therefore lives a
life divine, and a life humane. As God he lives the life of God in the bosom of
his Father, a life of Glory, Power and Majesty; as man he lives the life of
man, in lowness, humiliation, in impotence, in sufferings. So that at the same
time, he is living in the bosom of his Father, and dying on the Arms of the
Cross. There he raigns and governs, and judges all the World; here he is
accused, condemned, and crucified. At the same instant, he is in the exaltation
and greatness of his Majesty, and in the lowness and humiliation of our
humanity. Such also ought the Christian life to be; on the one side it is
great, seeing grace makes us the Children of God, elevates and unites us to
God, makes us partakers of the proprieties and qualities of God, in a word,
deifies us, and makes us as little gods. On the other side, the same life is
obscured, dejected, wholly in the spirit of humiliation and privation; for
grace cannot reign in the soul without operating therein annihilation, death
and humility. Moreover, the life of a Christian is exposed to temptations,
derided by men, condemned by the world, and in the greatest cherishing of God,
it is agitated by the cross of love. God enlightens the soul by grace, it is
granted, but it is in annihilation, he upholds her, but it is in confounding
her, he unites her to him, but it is in separating her; and the love it self
which she enjoys, unites her to God; she remains separated from God, as long as
she remains upon earth, While we are in the body, we are absent from the Lord;
2 Cor. 5.6.
so is she at once united and separated.

This is the conduct of God over his Church, nay, if we reflect upon the
highest works, we shall find, he puts not the ornament of grace, and the
foundation of her estate, but in lowness; his grace, his gifts, his spirit, and
his communication, we are but in humiliation, when he established the
Sacraments, which are conduit pipes whereby he conveighs his graces to his
Church, and into our souls. He has chosen bread, water, and such things as are
mean, little, or nothing esteemed among men. In the birth of the Church, he
took the cross for the throne of his Empire, a Calvary for his seat-royall; he
rejected an estate by poverty, sufferings, and martyrdom, and at this day he
does the same in the regency of his Church. It is true that this littleness is
not now known, this martyrdom is within, all this holiness is hidden, it
appears no more to the eyes of the world, as it did of old by the triumphs of
Saints, who became victorious and glorious in the effusion of their blood, and
yet notwithwanding, she cannot be exempted from undergoing her humiliations,
her heresies and persecutions.

According to the proceedings of God in the conduct of his Church, is likewise
his carriage in the sanctification and government of our souls, he leads them
by the cross, he retires from them, he hides himself, he leaves them in
privations, he humbles them, annihilates them, smites them, overthrows them.
The perfect Christian must resolve to fight with, and bear his sufferings in
such manner as we have said, but sufferings that are hidden to men, are known
to God, which do glorify him only in the sight of Angels. Wherein is discovered
how they are deceived who in their devotions and exercises seek resentment,
enjoyments, content and satisfaction, and would know and feel the excellency
and elevations of grace. I call it a deceit, for Christian grace consists,
chiefly in privations, in lowness, in rigours, and that is it they stand most
in fear of and avoid. Now, as the life of Jesus begun in poverty, and ended on
the cross, so a perfect Christian, who would live a life of grace, must resolve
to walk amongst thorns, to bear privations and sustain desertions; for the
cross and thorns are things proper to Christian grace, and to the love of
Jesus.

To abridge therefore the life of a Christian, and all that has been proposed,
let us say, that the Christian to live and walk worthily, according to the
vocation whereto he is called, must go out of himself to live in Jesus Christ,
his center must be the bosom of God, his life, a hidden martyrdom, and all his
actions and sufferings must be pure, and referred to the glory of God; his
intentions must look only upon God, his desires must be only to please God,
his care only to follow God, his contentment wholly in God. In brief, his
thoughts, his designs, his works must bear the Image of Jesus Christ, the
foundation of his being must be only of God, all to God, and all for God, that
he may say with the Master of Christians, Phil. 1.21.
To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.

THE FIFTH PART. Treating of true Piety, and the more particular Duties of a
Christian toward Jesus Christ our Lord.
CHAP. I. What Devotion is, and wherein true Piety consists.
SAINT Paul proposes to his young Timothy, diverse admonitions to be used in the
particular conduct of himself and government of his Church. The first which he
most recommends is piety, saying, 1 Timothy 4.7.
Exercise thy self unto godliness, as if he should say, Truly all virtues are
good, and suitable to the state of a perfect Christian, the practice thereof
profitable, the acquisition useful and necessary, but his chief care and
exercise must be piety, v. 8.
for he adds, godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

The advice which the Apostle gives his Disciple, we must here propose to our
perfect Christian, having already spoken of virtues, the most profitable and
necessary to the state of Christianity. There remains then no more to commend
unto him, but a true and solid Christian Piety, for this Piety is the Ornament
or Mistress of all other virtues. I mean the Christian virtues dispose us,
assist us, and put us into a capacity agreeable to God, and to honor him, they
are necessary for us to make us worthy of God, they show us the way to God, but
Piety leads us to God, and makes use of all virtues to conduct us thither, and
having no object but God, teaches us the worship and honor that we must render
to him, and like a good Mistress, puts us into a ready and easy practice of
true virtues, and entertains us in the exercise of actions that honor God, and
are acceptable to him: In brief, she enables us to pay God what we owe him.

This Piety is the first use, and exercise of a soul; as the first motion, the
first instinct, the first light we have from nature to know God, so the first
exercise she inspires us with, is to honor the same God, to render him that
worship and service which the Creature owes its Creator. This Piety teaches, to
this she incites us, this she produces in us: Whence we may apprehend, how
necessary it is to know wherein this true piety consists, and to establish
our selves therein. For above all that we have said already, which is very
considerable, it is evident, that this true piety is one of the principal
foundations whereby Christian perfection is supported. In the conduct of men
all actions and exercises of their life, are ruled according to piety, and as
we commonly say, according to the devotion they have. If then their piety be
not founded upon a solid foundation, the rest of the Christian life will be
unconstant, and its exercises very uncertain, superficial, and perhaps, wholly
unprofitable, 2 Timothy 3.5
as we see in the devotions of many which is only in the exterior, who as the
Apostle says, having the form of godliness, despise the power thereof. In such
souls we see nothing solid, nothing but inconstancy in their lives,
imperfection in their actions, disquiet, disturbance, and adherence to several
Creatures in their spirits, a small blast of adversities overturns them. If we
consider all their life, it is nothing but an appearance and shadow of piety,
counterfeit Pearls, that make a fair glittering show, but are fully only of
wind. Some fall into this evil by ignorance, others by default, it is our duty
to direct both into the truth.

It concerns us therefore, to examine wherein piety and true Christian devotion
consists. Several persons speak of it severally, every one adds to it, and
appropriates it to his own inclinations, humor, and particular affections. But
according to Catholic truth, the foundation of solid and true Christian piety,
consists in the soul's being Jesus Christ's, and belonging to him, by a
relation of love and charity. True piety consists in the knowledge, esteem,
adherence, and subjection of our souls to Jesus Chrst, from which esteem,
adherence and subjection, all our exercises, actions of devotion and piety,
must proceed as heat from the fire, the effect from the cause.

This description of Piety may seem new, but it will appear manifest, if we
weigh with patience the deduction thereof, and consider that Jesus Christ is
our Savior, our Mediator, by whom we have access to God, by whom we honor
God, render our duties to him, and have a relation to the most high and most
adorable Trinity, and refer our life actions, and our selves thereto. Herein
consists true piety, for by Jesus Christ, we are acceptable to him, by him
God, who is all sufficient in himself, vouchsafes to accept our wills, to
sanctify our actions, and recompense our good works. St. Paul teaches this,
when he says that Jesus Christ is all our glory. Sess. 14. cap. 8.
It is by Jesus Christ, and in him that we live, in him we merit, and satisfy
by fruits worthy repentance, it is in him that they are meritorious, it is he
that offers them to his Father (consider these words) and his Father accepts
them, and they are acceptable to him for his sake. What more clear or more to
our purpose? Hence we conclude, that devotion and Christian piety cannot be in
a soul, if that soul be not Jesus Christ's, if it adhere not to him, and be
subject to his spirit. For if we live not, if we merit not, nor can satisfy
God but by Jesus Christ, it necessarily follows, we cannot live, if we are not
Jesus Christ's. He therefore says Saint John, 1 John 5.12.
who has not the Son has not life, implying, he has nothing, and
consequently, he has no capacity to honor and serve God, wherein consists
true piety. Whence we may conclude that to acquire true devotion, we must begin
with this esteem of Jesus, and by an adherence and subjection to his spirit and
conduct.

Let us more particularly explain wherein this true piety consists. To know it,
we must not stop at exterior things, or at actions which have nothing but
appearance, but we must enter into the bottom of the soul, and regard true
devotion only in the center of the heart* The proper office and principal
duty of true piety, is to cause us to regard God, to induce us to render to God
what we owe him. It is necessary that we enter into the knowledge of God, not
by speculation or sublime knowledge, but by the light of Faith. This knowledge
leads us to esteem God, by this esteem we enter into a propriety and a true and
absolute subjection to his greatness and will, all which is necessary to true
devotion, for as much as we cannot render to God the honor, love, and service
we owe him, but in as much as we esteem him, and are subject to him. Seeing
then Piety consists in rendering to God the honor, love, and service we owe
him, and that we cannot otherwise honor or serve him then as we esteem him,
and depend of him and his divine will; it follows that to be truly devout, we
must act according to the truths of faith, and follow this supernatural light,
we must conceive a great esteem of God, and live in great subjection to his Law
and divine conduct, and so to live, is to live in the true spirit of piety, and
to be truly devout.

But this is not all, we must proceed further. The Christian being in the
bottom of his soul and heart, disposed after the manner we mention, feels a
spiritual vivacity, an easiness and promptitude which drives him to the
practice of all virtues, and incites him to show outwardly, in all sorts of
actions, the worship, reverence, and love interior, which he bears his God.
This motion is so powerful, this vivacity so efficacious, that he cannot but
outwardly express what he carries in the center of his heart and soul, as fire
that cannot be hid, but will break forth in flames. This inward true piety
cannot be concealed, but will appear by its effects, by the exercises of
devotion, and by several actions of virtue, according as occasion and time
permits. We must observe that these exercises of devotion are the more pure
sincere and perfect, the more the soul esteems God; her virtues are the more
solid and Christian, the more she is subject to the sovereignty of God, and
submits her self to his divine will, as much as she increases in the light of
faith, and esteem of her God, and establishes her self in this submission and
subjection to the will of God, so much does she receive capacity, motion, and
facility to all sorts of exercises of piety, and the practice of all virtues.
The more this inward estate is augmented and perfected in her, the more her
inward and outward actions are pure, holy, and perfect, not that she believes
Devotion to be in outward things; on the contrary, she esteems them nothing,
but feels her self driven to these exercises, and believes that she owes all
that to God, to render him the honor and service whereto she is obliged; she
regards not what she does, it is impossible for her to consider or esteem of
it, she only regards God whom she ought to honor and love with all her
strength, and serve as much as she can with purity and infinite perfection.
This advice is much to be considered, for it is in this case, that we can
easily discover by what spirit the soul is guided in her devotions: by this a
man may truly judge of his state, and of the progress he makes in Christian
perfection.

To sum what has been said, we see that in true piety there are two things
to be considered, one the interior and bottom of the soul, the other, the
exterior, which consists in its actions. The interior we look upon as the
principalll root and cause of true piety; the exterior is but as the blossom
and fruit; as the actions of devotion which appear to men, are but the mark of
piety, and makes show of it, but true piety consists in the interior, as we
have said. They therefore who study only the exterior, and have no care but
to produce actions fair in appearance, have the image and shadow of piety, and
are able to deceive our eyes, and to delude the judgments of men, who see but
the outside, and perhaps, before the eyes of that divine spirit which
penetrates the center of our souls, they are neither devout, nor acceptable to
him, for all their great performances; unless these actions of piety, which
appear outwardly proceed from the very bottom, from a good foundation, from
an interior such as we have described. A Christian who would be devout, to
acquire a solid and Christian piety, must before all things bear an esteem of
God; and if he truly esteem God, he will make account of all that is of God, he
will honor all that is in the Church of God, and in any condition or estate
will accept all the effects of the providence and conduct of God, he will
resign himself to his divine will, and above all, endeavor to enter into an
indissoluble relation to God, and having obtained this interior, he easily
practices virtue, and feels a promptitude to embrace all sorts of exercises of
devotion. By this we know true piety.

When all these qualifications we have mentioned do not meet in the soul, she
is then far from devotion. For what piety can there be in a soul which is not
God's? what resentment of devotion can be found in a Christian who lives in a
state unworthy of God, and displeasing to his goodness? shall we call them
devout, who flatter, happily glorify themselves in their fair appearances, and
only study the exterior, despising all the rest? who honor God with their
hands in some exercises whereto they oblige themselves, praising him with the
mouth by selected prayers, and often affected, and yet dishonor him in their
life, and blaspheme him in their hearts? God may say of most Christians, Isa.
29.13.
and of his Israel, what he once said of the Jews; This people draw nigh unto
me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from
me. For which reason we must fear what Christ immediately adds, saying, but in
vain do they worship me; Mark 7.7.
for God vouchsafes not to look upon these devotions, and cannot but detest
these Christians, who like the Samaritans will on the one side adore vanity,
and idolatrize their own lusts; and on the other side, profess the worship of
the true God, Mat. 23.27.
who appear like sepulchers, painted without, but have nothing within but ashes
and rottenness. These Christ severely reprehends, these we advise by this
Discourse, out of a desire to propose the remedy, and show them the truth.

CHAP. II. The necessity we have to be Jesus Christ's, if we would attain true
devotion.
NO man comes to the Father, says Jesus Christ, but by me; to show us that no
man has access to God, Joh. 14.6.
but by his inttercession. By these words, he shows us the need we have of him,
and the impotence wherein we all are. The impotence appears, in that we can do
nothing without him, and cannot return to God but by him; For sin has not
only separated us from God, but also taken from us the power and right to
return to God, and in effect, we would never have access to his Majesty justly
provoked by our sins, if the Son of God by his divine mercy did not conduct and
bring us, to receive grace and favor. The eternal Father receives us not,
accepts not of our actions, is not pleased with our devotions and homage,
otherwise then by his Son, in him, and by him, God triumphs over us. By him we
speak to God, by him, we see God, by him, we offer our selves to God; so true
is it, that without him we can do nothing, we cannot have access to the throne
of divine mercy, nor be acceptable to God, but by him. Hence we must confess,
that the Christian who would acquire true virtue, and desires to live in the
perfection of his estate, as he is obliged, must necessarily be Jesus Christ's.
He must adhere to him, appertain to him, be subjected to his spirit and
conduct, and much more particularly, if he would have true devotion; For seeing
true piety consists principally in being God's, and rendering to his most
sacred and sovereign Majesty, the worship, honor, and service due to him, and
that otherwise we are unworthy and incapable to do all that, without Jesus
Christ, by whom, as we have said, we are God's, without whom we can neither
honor God, nor be acceptable to him; It follows, that the foundation of true
piety consists in Jesus Christ, that is, in the adherence and relation of our
souls to Jesus Christ, and in the submission of our being and life to the
conduct of his spirit and grace; for by that adhering to him, and being
subjected to him, we are pleasing to God, and receive in him, and by him the
capacity of honoring and serving God, which is the proper effect, and chief
duty of piety and devotion.

The truth would need no proof, but that few persons think thereof, and that
many are ignorant of it, therefore it seems to be to purpose, to speak thereof
more at large in the Principles of Christianity. Without out going any further,
let us consider, that to be a Christian, we must put off the old man, with his
deeds, Col 3 9.10.
and put on the new man, Jesus Christ; it is the Doctrine of the Apostle
whereon we must found our Discourse. If to be a Christian, we must crucify and
put off the old man, to put on the new, with much more reason, to be a good and
devout Christian we must crucify and put off the first, to invest us with the
second. When we say that we must be clothed with Jesus Christ, it is to show we
must be united to him, adhere to him, and as a garment adheres to the body, and
is united to it; so must we be Jesus Christ's, but much more perfectly then
this comparison expresses.

Reason and Faith will easily convince us of this truth, if we doubt of it; for
faith teaches us, that it belongs to Jesus Christ to give us grace and
strength, to put off the old man, that is, to draw us from our imperfections,
to deliver us from our sins, and annihilate our evil inclinations. It is the
same that Jesus Christ invests us with the new, gives us his spirit, grace and
virtue; for and according to Saint Paul, Jesus Christ has been to us wisdom,
and righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
sanctification, and redemption; In a word, Jesus Christ is all in all to us.
Now, that the Son of God may operate in us all that we have said, it is
necessary that we be united to him, adhere to him, and be subjected to his
designs, his will and divine operations. Who can deny so manifest a truth? If
Jesus annihilate our evil inclinations, and root sin out of our hearts, ought
not we to be subject to his conduct and spirit, and so receive his operations
of mercy? If we participate of his grace and virtue, and live according to his
Commandments, is it not necessary we should be united to him? And how should
we be united to him, but by a true relation and faithful adherence to him? This
deduction is easy, and clearly shows how true it is that the foundation of
true piety consists in unity, and in the adherence and dependence of the soul
on Jesus Christ; it is acknowledged by all that devotion cannot be true, if we
be not exempted from our vices and imperfections, and filled with the spirit of
Jesus Christ, and assisted with his grace, to make us worthy to honor and
serve God. We cannot perceive in that devotion, nor practice the exercises
thereof, if the same Jesus Christ be not operating in us the will, and
perfecting according to his will.

This Jesus Christ said to his Apostles, and in them to all Christians, Joh.
15.4, 5.
Abide in me and I in you; as the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it
abide in the vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me, adding, he that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, for without me
ye can do nothing. O words of love! words spoken the eve of his death, to show
us the excess of his love that proceeded from his heart, wholly divine, and
full of tenderness, whereby being moved, he further said unto them, Abide in my
love. So infinitely was he desirous to possess our hearts, and to triumph over
us by his love, whence he often repeats the same words, to engrave and imprint
this care in our souls, and by the proceedings of his love, oblige us to love
him again. This indeed is a thing we ought to have continually in our thoughts,
for all the happiness of a Christian, consists in this relation, and this
amorous dwelling of our souls in Jesus. All our good is in this union, since
that by it, and the adherence we have to Jesus, we become his, and by him we
receive a power and capacity to bear the fruits of good works, to practice
virtue, and to pass our life in the exercises of true piety and Christian
devotion, which make us hope for the reward which God promises to those that
serve him. Without this relation and union, we shall continue in our weakness
and incapacity, our life is unprofitable, barren, unfruitful, Joh. 15.6.
and in evident peril. If any man abide not in me, says Jesus Christ, he is
cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them and cast them into
the fire.

If we will come to the experience of what we have said, let us examine God's
conduct of such souls as he will save, and we shall find that the first
knowledge he gives them, is that of Jesus Christ, proposing to them his Cross,
or some Mystery of his life; the first motions, the first thoughts of piety
that he inspires them with, are those of a certain compassion and sympathy with
his Cross and sufferings, or those of love and tenderness in consideration of
his benefits. If on the other side we intentively consider souls, even the most
ignorant, we shall easily know they have a secret resentment, and an
inclination to Jesus Christ, though they know him not. But God always begins
these divine Communications and effects of his mercy by this first grace. The
reason is manifest in Divinity, which teaches us, that the eternal Father does
nothing but by Jesus Christ, operates nothing in our souls, nor in the state of
grace, no more then in nature, but by his Son. The first favor therefore the
elect soul chooses to receive of God, is that the eternal Father has given it
to his Son, and there Jesus Christ accepts of it, and appropriates it to
himself. Now as God demands our cooperation, which yet we cannot give without
his grace, and therefore inspires the soul with a resentment of Jesus Christ,
gently insinuating into it a certain attraction which sweetly draws it to a
knowledge and piety toward Jesus Christ; so our soul begins to be Jesus
Christ's, perfecting her self in the state of christianity, according to the
measure that he advances in this affection, and in this relation to Jesus
Christ.

The Son of God speaking to the Jews, obstinate in their errors, says,
None can come unto me, if the Father who has sent me does not draw him. And to
show the manner that the eternal Father uses to lead our souls to his Son,
Joh. 6.44.
he adds, Every man that has heard of the Father comes unto me. v. 45.
These words include the secrets of grace, and are full of Mystery. They teach
us, that the eternal Father by his grace, draws us and guides us to his
Son, he speaks to us by his inspirations in the interior of our souls; he
shows us that we are Jesus Christ's. Is not this to say all that we have
proposed? That the design of God to save us, is no other then to give us his
Son, to unite us to him by the powerful attractions of his grace, and to
cause us to adhere to him by love and the exercises of a life truly christian;
herein does true piety consist. We must therefore continually elevate our
hearts and spirits to this Jesus, the only happiness of our souls; we must
entreat him to accomplish in us the designs of his Father, and to take an
absolute power over us. We must so offer our selves to him, as to have no other
intention, will, nor conduct but his, that we may by a true relation, verify
what Saint Paul said, Joh. 6.44. v. 45.
All is yours, you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Let us so think of him, and
so do, that from henceforth our hearts and mouths may neither speak nor think,
but of him, that all things else may be of no savor to us, that nothing enter
our spirit, which resenteth not the spirit and odor of Jesus Christ, and
respires not his honor and glory. In a word, let us adhere to him, and, by an
indissoluble and eternal union, dwell in him, that he may dwell in us, that we
may eternally bear the effect of his holy word. He that is joined unto the Lord
is the one spirit. 1 Cor. 6.17.
O how happy is the soul that is called to this happiness, and that is truly in
the power of Jesus, in the possession of his spirit, and direction of his
grace. This is the state whereto Christian perfection must arrive, the
foundation of piety and true devotion. But because many think not of it, and
many know it not, we must treat of it more at large, and propose the motives
that most oblige us to this Devotion.

CHAP. III. Of Piety to Jesus Christ and its principal effects.
WHAT we have already said of the Son of God, is sufficient to make us know
what we owe unto him, but the importance of this subject, requires that for our
better information, we explain particularly the principles of this piety, and
the means necessary to attain it. But before we enter into this subject, we
must consider that devotion to the Son of God, (wherein we are to imitate all
Christians) is not so to limit our souls, as to withdraw them from what they
owe to God, but on the contrary, the exercise of this piety is necessary to
conduct us more worthily, and holily to God, because by piety to the Son of
God, we attain a capacity and power to honor God. Jesus Christ is our way, by
him alone we go to God; he is our life, by him we live the life of grace, a
life which only makes us worthy to honor God. He is our Truth, in him alone,
as the spirit of truth, we know God, we adore him and serve him in truth;
according to the Apostle, he is our All, in him and by him we have all things:
by the Son the Father gives us all, and by the Son, we render all to the
Father. This is the gift we receive of God, and the gift we give to God, for
all is operated and subsists in the unity of Jesus Christ. The Church offers
nothing to, demands nothing of the blessed Trinity, but by Jesus Christ. We
must imitate the Church in pious customs.

Piety to Jesus Christ requires not so much exterior exercises, as interior
and permanent estate does in our souls, nor demands it any novelty of
affection, but a newness of spirit, a new disposition, enclining our souls to
employ themselves in the thought of Jesus Christ, to regard him, to love him,
to honor him as the object and end of our life, actions, and devotions. It
requires that the actions of the religious should be devout, those of the
ordinary Christians virtuous, those of a private person, familiar in this
object, without changing his spirit, but directing his intentions and
dispositions to the pure regard of the Son of God. For example, let us do all
that we do by the spirit of honor, and love to Jesus Christ; if we suffer, let
it be to imitate and render honor to his sufferings; what ever happens to us,
let us receive it by a dependence on, and submission to his power and conduct.
If we will insist upon any good thoughts, let it be of Jesus Christ, to
consider his greatness, the mysteries of his life, his virtues, his benefits,
and the power he has over us. By these sweet entertainments, by these regards
of honor and love, the perfect Christian advances himself, is confirmed in the
piety we speak of. To know what this piety is, and how we must apply our selves
thereto, let us consider, that Jesus Christ is the principle, the center, the
end of all Christian souls; for as faith teaches us, he is the cause of all the
good that is in us, the spring of all the graces we possess, Author of the life
which we live in Christianity, and being the principle, he is also consequently
the end thereof. For according to the order established in nature, that which
is the principle of a thing is also its end, and nature follows invariably the
order God has prefixed, and by his well ordered motions, gently leads, and if
not diverted, infallibly conducts all things to the principle whence she draws
them: Eccles. 1.7.
So the waters, says the Wise man, return to the ocean, as to their mothers
womb; and according to the mysteries of faith, we say all things return to God,
because they all came out of God. It is the same in the estate of grace: If
then Jesus Christ be the principle of the being, life, and state of
Christianity, he must be also the end; so that our being, life, and estate
regard the same Jesus Christ, and are referred to him as the end, and if the
end, the center also of a Christian life. In him our souls find their repose
and perfection; Romans 11.36.
in him, by him, and of him are all things, says Saint Paul.

This Principle alone considered, shows us that Jesus Christ has full power
over us, that we are his, not only in respect of his divine greatness, and
supreme power over all as God, Savior and Redeemer, as purchaser of us with
his most precious blood, and his of life-giving death, but also, because he is
the principle, center and end of the life and state of Christianity. In this
relation he has sovereign power over us, having given us being and grace,
consecrated us to his glory and honor, in such absolute manner, that the
Christian cannot make use either of himself or any other thing, without abuse
of the gifts of God, if not for Jesus Christ, and according to his design and
intentions. This is St. Paul's meaning, when he says, 1 Cor. 6.19.
You are not your own; and again, you have no power on your selves. This power
obliges us to refer our selves wholly to Jesus Christ, the first thought and
thing to be done in Christian piety, being, to believe we have no right to our
selves, but are wholly Christ's, and, having conceived in the depth of our
souls this belief, to have a vigilant care, that in our life and actions we
draw not our selves from the power of the Son of God to make use of our selves
and the creatures to our own content and particular interests. For according to
the principle of Christianity, we have no right to appropriate any thing to our
selves. This belief is the ground of true piety to Jesus Christ, which Saint
Paul teaches, saying, 2 Cor. 5.15.
The Son of God died, that those that live might live no longer to themselves,
but to him who died for them.

On this truth, we ought often to reflect. For as the foundation of it
consists in a true dependence and love to Jesus Christ, in respect of his
sovereign power over us; so the principal care of him who seeks true piety,
must be to continue in this dependence, to live with such fidelity, that he
appropriate nothing to himself, either as to his life or actions, or yet of the
creatures, and assuredly, he must make great account of this care and fidelity.
But whereto serves it? To bear in his heart a sensible desire to belong to the
Son of God, and every day to renew his resolutions and good purposes. What does
it profit our soul, to have the knowledge of so high a truth, if in the actions
of humane life and exercises of piety, we withdraw our selves from this
dependence on the Son of God, to apply us to our selves, and seek in our own
business and exercises our content and satisfaction. This were, by our own
actions to belie the resentments of our soul, to profess piety, and follow
impiety, to bear a double heart, to have virtue only in the mouth. For if we
are truly devout, we can not but be Jesus Christ's, and if we are his, our
principal care will certainly be to continue our dependence on him, not only
in that which concerns our condition, but in all the dispositions, intentions,
actions, and circumstances of our life.

The same Principle operates in our souls a second effect of piety in that our
life and actions, belonging properly to the Son of God, as their beginning and
end, ought accordingly to be submitted to his divine conduct, to be ordered
after what manner he pleases, according to the power of his spirit, and the
light of his loving communications. It is but reason that all good depend on
him from whom it proceeds, and that we be ruled, not according to our own
wills, which are blind, and transported with affection and self-love, but
according to the intentions of Jesus Christ, who is the cause, and ought
necessarily to be the rule thereof.

Thus the second interior estate whereto the Christian, who seeks true piety
must arrive, is a Resignation of himself, to the conduct and direction of the
grace and spirit of Jesus Christ, that being so subjected, he may perform all
his actions in a pure regard to the Son of God, according to his divine
intentions. This Resignation, if true, makes us bear with patience and inward
peace, all estates we may possibly arrive to; it gives us liberty of spirit,
capacity and strength to follow and embrace that only which is of God, and
according to God; it puts us into a great fidelity to the motions of grace, in
such manner, that according to the measure of our increase in this resignation,
we advance in Christian piety, and live with greater liberty and fidelity of
soul.

This indeed appears something difficult, and many believing it an estate only
for the most perfect, pass by it as a thing impossible for them. But if we
consider well, we shall find it easy, and acknowledge it common to all souls,
who live in grace. To do an action of piety, we must be aided by the grace of
Jesus Christ, which encourages and assists us in all good works so necessary,
that without this grace, we can neither think, nor act any good.

He then that will be devout, and live in the exercise of true piety, must have
this grace, whence it follows he must cooperate with it, and give himself up to
be conducted by the spirit of Jesus Christ, who will operate that good wo^k in
him, otherwise it will be impossible for him to live well, since that without
grace we can do no good.

1 Cor. 12.3.
No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, says Saint
Paul, for it is grace that does all in all, and therefore we say, he that will
live according to true piety, must take care to resign himself to the conduct
of this grace, and with great circumspection become faithful therein. The
Principle of devotion consists in being faithful to the graces and motions
that Jesus offers and inspires us with. Herein we must take great care every
one according to his state and vocation. Whence we easily learn, that true and
essential piety to Jesus Christ, does not consist barely in actions of homage,
and honor, or in giving our selves to him by certain practices, and employing
us in several exercises, though in it self all be profitable, but the true
essence and ground of this devotion consists in the dependence of our soul on
Jesus Christ, and in a true subjecting of our life to his conduct by a
faithful cooperation with his grace and motions: this is the ground and state
of true piety, to comprehend which, we must consider that all we do is
acceptable to Jesus Christ, only because we are his, all our actions and
exercises as good, being derived from his grace, inspired and conducted by his
spirit. We may do a thing two ways, according to natural motions and
inclinations of the old man, or according to the motions and holy inclinations
of the new man, Jesus Christ; if what we do, though it seem good, be according
to the motions and inclinations, of the old man, it is but of little value,
being at the most but natural and humane actions. But if it issue from motions
of grace, then is it truly Christian. Hence we say, the foundation of true
piety consists in the subjection of the soul to grace and the conduct of Jesus
Christ; for if Jesus Christ do not conduct the soul by grace, nor direct her by
his spirit, she can do nothing considerable.

Hence it is, that many deceive and flatter themselves in their imperfections,
passing their lives in the practice of many exercises, neglecting the
principal, and thinking they do wonders, when they do nothing, because all
their actions are rather effects of their own inclinations, humors, or
self-love then of grace. The Christian therefore, if he seek perfection, must
take heed hereto, and in all things observe as a maxim in Catholic virtues,
that Christian virtue and true piety, consist not in being conformable to
reason, and to a humane spirit, but to the spirit and intention of Jesus
Christ, who is the infallible rule of our actions. This advice is of
importance; We shall speak of it elsewhere, when we have convinced the more
difficult spirits, and made them see the right Jesus Christ has to us.

CHAP. IV. The right which the Son of God has to us; Motives obliging us to
be his, and to adhere to him by true piety.
WHich way soever we consider our selves, we belong unto the Son of God, this
is our happiness. We belong unto him after a singular manner; in the state of
nature he has a right to us, all things being, as the Evangelist says, made
by him. In the being of grace, we belong to him; in the being of glory, we are
his; by him all are raised to glory; by a grace springing from the Mystery of
the Incarnation and proper to the state of Christianity, he is our Head, we his
Members, he is the Father, we his Children, he our spouse, we his heart and
delight, he our Doctor, we his Disciples, he our Pastor, we his sheep, he our
Redeemer, we his Captives, he our King, we his subjects, he the Sacrificer, we
his sacrifices; in a word, he is our All, the way, the life, and the salvation
of the World, and as St. Paul says, Ephesians. 1.23.
he is our fullness, and we are his by the price of his blood and possession of
his spirit. We are so much the Son's, that we cannot be God's, without being
first Iesus's, who refers us to his Father. If the Father accept us, and behold
us with the eyes of mercy, it is in the Son, in as much as we are his
Members, and united unto him.

This union, whereby we belong to the Son of God, is so necessary, that as
the eternal Father loves us not but for his Sonne's sake, nor regards us but
in him, so cannot our actions be acceptable to him, nor all our exercises of
piety please him, if they be not done by the conduct of the spirit of his
Son, and by adherence and union to Jesus, though they may otherwise seem good
and perfect. He that is not with me, Luke 11.23.
says Christ, is against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters.
This property is grounded upon the principles of Faith, which teach us, that
the Son of God only became man, not the Father nor the holy Ghost, he alone
performs the office of Mediator, in the redemption of humane nature; he alone
is our Redeemer, our Mediator, and our Head. In this quality we are his
Captives and Members; he is the Father of the Ages to come, and we are his
children, for he alone begot us by his blood and death, and as a Pelican, he
gives us life by the effusion of his blood, and animates us by the spirit of
his Cross; in the Cross he begot us, by his death he gives us that life we
lost by the envy of the Serpent.

Thus in all the Mysteries of Faith, we adore the Son of God, being of the
divine persons the only incarnate, living and dying for us, he only redeeming
us from the captivity of our sins, being God, became man, that men might become
Gods, all the Mysteries of his life accomplished upon Earth, were only to
sanctify us, his dying upon the cross, makes him the only victime and
holocaust of our propitiation. Are not these motives sufficient to show us that
we are his in a singular manner, belonging to him by extraordinary relations?
Is it not reason we should acknowledge him, and by a particular fidelity,
profess our selves his, and carefully endeavor to adhere to him, and by true
piety, to render him the honor, love, and service, that his benefits obliege
us to.

This the greatest part of Christians think not of; as being, by reason of
their impiety, ignorant of their benefactor, as the Ancients were through their
Idolatry of their Creator. It is a strange ingratitude, that man should be so
blind in these days, as not know his Jesus, and passing his life away
carelessly, neglect to acknowledge him in his greatness, to adore him in his
works, and to honor him in his humane divine life. Our business then must be
to reform this ignorance, and therefore we will propose the principal rights
which he has to us, that we may learn with what piety and devotion we ought to
follow and serve him, and that those souls who neglect or despise this piety,
may re-enter into themselves, and endeavor from henceforth, to render to Jesus
Christ the honor, love and service, whereto they are by so many just relations
obliged.

The first right that Jesus Christ has to man, is derived from his Quality of
being God-man, for such is the Son of God, not only in regard of his
Divinity, but also according to his humanity. In this quality, Jesus Christ by
a power of excellency, ought to rule and command all that is and shall be
created, a power that the eternal Father gave him at the first minute of his
Incarnation; besides that, by this Mystery, the Son changing his condition for
the glory of his Father, and abasing himself to honor him, the Father also
will needs honor him, constituting him from thenceforward, the principle of
life, grace and glory, proclaiming him Sovereign of the universe, and
replenishing his humane nature with all the effects of the Divinity, and all
the states of glory possibly communicable to him as God and man, that as the
Son honored his Father in debasing himself, so did the Father honor the
Son, in exalting him. For this cause he makes him his equal in power,
greatness and Majesty, and invests him from this first moment for evermore,
with all the power that he has over his creatures. This the beloved Apostle
teaches, Joh. 3.35.
when he says, The Father has given him all things into his hand: and St.
Paul beginning to write the greatness of Jesus, says expressly, speaking of his
mission, That the eternal Father appointed him Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2.
by whom also he made the World. Thus by this first Right, and by the Mystery
of the Incarnation, Jesus has the same power over souls, that the Creator has
over his creatures, and in relation to this power, we give him all that we owe
to God, and consequently, acknowledge in this Mystery, Jesus to have a double
power over us as God and man. This consideration obliges us to adore and serve
him, acknowledging this power must doubly subject us to his conduct, and divine
will. Heaven and Earth pay this duty and fidelity to this Jesus God and Man.
Let us hear with a resentment of love, how St. John describes the triumphs of
our Jesus; he tells us that he heard the Angels crying aloud, The Lamb who has
been slain, is worthy to receive power and riches, and wisdom and strength, and
honor and glory, and blessing. The Earth and all the creatures of the Universe
do the like, and present themselves before Jesus, declare him their Sovereign,
and protest obedience and service to him. Rev. 5.13.
I heard says Saint John, every creature which is in Heaven and on the Earth,
and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing,
honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb for ever and ever. Let us do the same, and from the bottom of our hearts
say Amen; let us adore Jesus Christ in his greatness, and acknowledging his
Sovereignty, live in true subjection to his divine conduct.

The Continuation.
CHAP. V. Of the Motives which oblige us to belong to Jesus, and to serve him
by true piety.
OF all the Mysteries of our salvation, that which ought most humbly to subject
us to the will and power of Jesus Christ, is the work of our Redemption; for in
this Mystery of love and mercy, Jesus is our Redeemer, we are his Purchase, and
have no longer Right either to our selves or to any creature; Ye are not your
own, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
says St. Paul, for ye are bought with a price, meaning, we are Christ's who
has bought us with his most ineffably precious blood. But the better to
understand this sublime mystery, let us derive it from its very source.

We are then to consider, that by the sin of our first parents, we should all
have perished in him, as guilty with him, all nature should have been extinct
by his sin; for, from his first offense he ought to bear the execution of the
Decree pronounced against him by the mouth of God, in these words, In the day
that thou shall eat thereof, thou shall surely die; And doubtless divine
Justice had annihilated him, Genesis 2.17.
and in him humane nature, and all creatures had perished with the Sinner, if
the eternal Father beholding his Son designed for the reparation of this
offense had not repressed the rigor of his Justice. The Father out of the love
he bore his Son, suspended the execution of this Decree, he saved the offender,
mercy triumphed over justice, he granted this sinful man life, and the world to
live in; and consequently humane nature, and the world it self, which for this
sin should have been destroyed, were preserved, only in consideration of Jesus
Christ, for his sake the eternal Father took compassion on us. From this first
Consideration, is easily inferred, that we owe unto the Son of God all that we
are, and all that we have; and therefore we are as often his as there are
moments in our life, and as often as we receive any benefit from this
bountiful hand of God; and therefore all these rights which are innumerable,
ought to be so many ties to unite us indissolubly to Jesus Christ.

But if we dive further into the contemplation of these truths, we shall find,
that by sin we belong to the Devil, we have granted him that right, which God
by Creation gave us over the creatures; we have, as it were, by sin made over
our selves to him. Thus by voluntary offense, Man, who should have commanded
the World, becomes a slave to the Devil, and sels himself to sin. I am
carnal, sold under sin, says St. Paul, Romans 7.14
in the name of all sinners. In this quality the Devil has all manner of
right and power over us, and assuredly would exercise his malice against us, if
the divine goodness did not restrain him. He would make us even now feel the
same rigours which he exercises over the damned, and dispose of us at his
pleasure, as he does of souls eternally cursed of God, were it not that Jesus
Christ by his death, has forced us out of this captivity, and divested the
Devil of all right and power over us. He has blotted out the handwriting of
Ordinances against us, Col. 2.14.
says St. Paul, and taken it out of the way, nailing it to the Cross. Thus
the Son of God delivering us from this captivity, makes us his Captives,
acquiring by his blood and death, a new right and power over us, which he will
use not with rigor and justice, but with love and mercy, the state of grace
and spirit of piety, having nothing but sweetness and indulgence. He has
delivered us, says the Apostle, from the power of darkness, and translated us
into the Kingdom of his dear Son. Col. 1.13.
For the power of Jesus is all in love, and dissolves it self into dearness.
What Christian seeing so much sweetness, will not resign himself to the excess
of this goodness, to the power of this love?

To conceive more fully the effects of the grace of the Son of God, and his
rights to us by redemption, observe, that, by the conduct of God, and according
to the merit of our offenses, so soon as man is in sin, and withdrawes himself
from the order and end that God has prefixed and proposed to him, he is
nothing but the object of divine justice, unworthy of any favor from Heaven.
Heaven, Earth and Hell bandy against him, God is obliged only to promote the
punishment of sin by malediction, blasphemy, damnation and hell. If God stay
the stroke of his Justice, if he has yet some reserve of mercy for this
miserable sinner, if he suffer him to live, and preserve him, out of an
expectation of his penitence, that so he may escape hell, it is by Jesus
Christ, and only for his sake. We must then acknowledge that a sinner owes to
Jesus Christ all the motions of his life, all the happiness of his soul, all
the good which may befall him in Heaven or Earth. O how many obligations have
we then! even as many as there are moments, as many as we have thoughts, as
many as we have received benefits from time to time, so many rights has Jesus
Christ to our souls, so many times do we belong to him. Who can number these
wonders? Can there be any thing in nature able to break these bonds, and
separate us from Jesus?

Let us dive yet a little further into this consideration, by an examination of
particulars, let us see how by daily sins we separate our selves from God, and,
shaking off the obedience we owe him, become slaves to sin. He that sins is a
slave to sin, Joh. 8.34.
says Jesus Christ, so that the sinner by a deplorable blindness, withdrawing
himself from the sweetness of the Kingdom of the Son of God, subjects himself
to the power of sin, which would infallibly exercise its rigor and Tyranny
over him, if Jesus Christ by his mercy did not suppress its malignity. For as
sin ruling over the rebellious Angels, subjected them to its malice and rigor,
causing those Angels of light to be to all eternity Angels of darkness and
malediction; So the sinner, from the time he offended, should be abandoned to
the same Tyranny, and left to the fury of sin, which would precipitate him
into all manner of violence, abomination and misery, had not Jesus Christ
sustained the yoke of sin, and stayed the power of its malevolence. So that we
are as many times Christ's, as he has preserved us by his divine mercy from
several sins and abominations. If on the other side we consider our actual
sins, we must acknowledge that they also serve to bind us to I. Christ, for as
many sins as we commit, so many times do we deprive our souls of the favors
and grace which we have received of God, by the only merit of Ie. Christ, and
when Ie. Christ shows mercy to us, or washes us with his blood, and withdrawes
us from our sins, to restore us the graces which we have lost, at the same time
he takes a new power, and acquires as many new rights over us, as he pardons
sins in us. By this means the sins which God pardons in us, oblige and bring
us to Jesus Christ. Thus on what side soever we look on our selves, we wholly
belong to Jesus, and consequently are obliged to live in a total dependence,
and perpetual subjection to the conduct, spirit, and power of Jesus Christ.

But if now to what we have said, should be added the merits of the Son of
God, we should find our selves infinitely obliged to be united, and to
appertain to the same Jesus Christ. For his merits being infinite in dignity
acquire to him, infinite rights over us; nay, if we consider them particularly,
we must needs nevertheless acknowledge, that Jesus Christ acquires as many
rights over us, as there are moments in his life, since in Jesus all is of
infinite merit. We are his by his Incarnation, by his birth, by his tears, by
his sufferings, by his Cross, in a word, we are as many times his, as he lived
moments upon earth, as often as he did actions in the world during his life
here. But if we lift up our eyes to behold him in his glory, we shall see him
incessantly, offering up himself for us to his Father, Heb. 9.24.
he is entered into Heaven, now to appear in the presence of God for us, as
Saint Paul says, where he by continual benefits shed upon us, forces our
acknowledgements, that there are so many rights and obligations to appropriate
and unite us to him, as there are moments in Eternity.

What remains then, but that we consider by what means we may satisfy so many
obligations to the Son of God. It is a decree pronounced by him, Luke 12.48.
That of him to whom much has been given, much shall be required. All our life
then must be employed in true piety, a piety which shall establish us in a
supreme honor, in a most powerful love, and an entire and absolute dependence
on Jesus Christ. We must continually beg, that as the Son of God changed his
condition, and became man to testify his love to us, and to deliver us from
the captivity of sin, and put us into the state of salvation, so we may
change our condition and disposition, to be happily converted into a pure
regard of honor and of imitation of his life, who is all love, all goodness.

If you would desire some practices upon this occasion, I would advise the
perfect Christian,

1. To adore the power of Jesus Christ, and all his rights to us, accept them
by a voluntary subjection, and rejoice therein praising the Son of God in
that he has vouchsafed to assume those powers and rights over us.

2. To offer himself to Jesus Christ, to bear the effects of this power over
us, submitting our selves by a true resignation to all that it shall please him
to operate in us and by us, for his will and glory.

3. To pray to Jesus Christ, to use his right and power over us, and over all
that which is ours, notwithstanding the opposition that we may have thereto, as
well by the inclinations and imperfections of our nature, as by the effects of
our proper malice.

4. Being transported by a desire to be Christ's, often and continually to
implore, if it may be done, the power of his spirit to annihilate in us, and to
root out of our souls, and from the bottom of our being, whatever opposes his
right over us, and may hinder the effects of his divine will. In fine, if we
have not a sense of the power of Jesus Christ, let us at least have in our
hearts a violent desire to be his, a firm purpose never to be separated from
him, and a vigilance to receive with faithfulness, what he shall vouchsafe to
operate by the influence of his infinite mercy. All this reaches no further
then the beginnings of piety to Jesus Christ; we now proceed to the use and
practice of it.

CHAP. VI. Of the state of Subjection to Jesus Christ considered as the
principle of Christian piety.
IF we make application of what has been said, we shall find, that as the Son
of God has infinite rights to us, so we are infinitely his, we depend on him,
we have infinite obligations to him, which the shortness of our days will not
give us leave sufficiently to admire, nor the weakness of our spirits to
comprehend. Yet speaking suitably to our meanness, we may reduce them to two
principles, the foundation and prop of all exercises of piety interior and
exterior.

The first is an acknowledgement of the sovereignty of Jesus over all
creatures, and over us in particular, confessing that he is our King and
Sovereign. The first use of piety to Jesus, is to acknowledge and adore his
supreme authority; it is life and happiness to know and to serve Jesus Christ.
Therefore the Apostle desires that the Ephesians should know the love of Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 3.19
which passes all knowledge, to the end that they might be filled with all the
fullness of God, teaching how profitable and necessary this knowledge is. The
other foundation of piety, is a continuation of the first, the Christian
acknowledging the sovereignty of Jesus Christ enters into a state of relation
to, and a dependence on him, and adoring his sovereignty, submits to his power,
not out of constraint or necessity, as Rebels, but out of choice, love and
fidelity, which he renders to him as his Prince and Jesus. This dependence must
not be indifferent, but the lowest and most submiss that is possible; so that a
Christian in this state, looks upon himself only as a servant to Jesus, and
acts in all things, only in the spirit of subjection and humility. This
subjection is an effect of our knowledge of Jesus, and that knowledge a fruit
of the light of faith, and a gift of grace.

This state of service, is proper and essential to the creature, in regard of
God; the creature is essentially dependant and subject to the Creator. It is an
indispensable estate, the creature may as soon cease to be, as cease to depend
on the Creator. It is a primitive estate in grace and essential to all
Christians the first step of our entry into the Church and into faith, the
first operation of grace in our souls, is to become servants to Jesus Christ.
This service is the first estate of Christianity, the first promise that we
make to God by a solemn public profession in the Church by Baptism. There we
devote our selves to Jesus Christ, to belong to him, to depend on him, and at
the same time we receive and aknowledge him as our Sovereign, we adore and
reverence him as our Redeemer, we are united to him as to our Head. Thus this
state of service brings grace; yea, singular grace, which is the first thing
that God gives in his Church by Baptism, a grace which he gives with a mark
and impression of his power, so deeply imprinted in our souls, that nothing can
deface it, not Hell it self. Whence we see, that at the same time that Jesus
Christ conceives us by Baptism, and receives us into his Church as his
children, we enter into the state of servants, and vow our selves to Jesus
Christ, as such. So that by one and the same Sacrament, we are made children of
God, and received his servants, and consequently we are in the House of God,
both as sons and servants, yet so, as that we are his children by grace, his
servants by nature. Now as we say, that the state of subjection is essential
to the creature, and to the Christian, so the same state is essential to the
piety of Christians, and therefore they who would establish themselves in
piety, must begin their establishment in this subjection; for we must bear a
relation of love and inclinations to Jesus Christ, as we do of purchase and
necessity.

To be convinced of this truth, we are to observe that this state of subjection
consists in taking Jesus Christ for the end and object of our actions, we
serve him, we contemplate him as our Sovereign and Redeemer, we do all things
by a spirit of love, honor, and dependence on him; So that this state of
dependence and service is a general Disposition wherein we perform all our
actions. By this Disposition they are truly Christian, accomplished in the
spirit of true piety; and though there appear nothing outwardly, either new or
extraordinary in our life, yet by this disposition and state of service, we are
more nearly Christ's, who looks on us as his own, raising and uniting us to
himself by a real dependence, wherein consists the true spirit of piety. For
by the state of service we acknowledge Christ our Sovereign and King, and our
selves his vassals; we adore him as our Redeemer, and confess our selves his
servants. In this quality we adhere inviolably to all his will; In a word, we
see that he is our Head, and we united to him as his members. In this union we
live by his spirit, and follow his motions, in which three points consists
solid piety, and the perfection of Christianity. So that we are so much the
more God's, and consequently the more perfect, by how much we are the more
abased and divested of our selves, entirely depending, and faithfully operating
under the power and will of him who makes himself ours, that we may be his, and
has purchased us to himself at an inestimable rate. For this cause, they who
exercise themselves seriously in piety, begin at the same time to look upon the
Son of God as the object of their life, and resign themselves up to him. Hence
springs the daily practice of certain acts of interior devotion, which is
ordinarily proposed to them that seek true piety, recommended to them, because
they are profitable and necessary, drawing the soul from it self, to elevate
and unite it to Jesus Christ. We shall further explain it in the ensuing
Chapter.

But before we enter into that Discourse, we are to know, that we must not
conceive these acts of interior devotion, to be actions merely transcient, or
a simple operation of our spirit, for that would be little in comparison of
what God requires. But we must pass further, and bear in the bottom of our
hearts the state wherein we propose these interior acts, that must be our
principal end and intention. For though God only has power and authority to
put us into this estate, when, and how he pleases, yet, because in the ways of
grace, God does ordinarily expect our consent and cooperation; it is for that
very reason that the soul exercises her self in this practice of devotion, and
it is upon this account that she forms to her self these interior Acts,
whereby she resignes and offers up to God her heart and will. So that in this
exercise, the christian must not content himself to form this Act, and to
pronounce the words, but he must demand of God the grace to bear a permanent
estate thereof, and for his part, must do his utmost endeavor to attain it. In
the next Chapter you have them particularly explained.

CHAP. VII. Containing certain interior acts for those souls who are desirous
to be established and confirmed in true piety.
THE first act of interior piety to Jesus Christ, which we are to practice
frequently every day, is an act of honor and adoration. This I place first,
because it is the first employment of our soul, and the first duty of the
creature, who is obliged to honor and adore its God with so much necessity,
that the very Devils and damned are forced to do it; it is the first act that
christian Religion proposes. To form this act, we must acknowledge Jesus
Christ Son of God, both God and man, we must regard him as our Sovereign Lord
and Redeemer, as cause and principle of all our happiness. We must annihilate
our selves before him, and humble our selves even to the bottom of our soul,
willingly submitting to all that he is. This is called an act of adoration. It
contains two effects of the powers of the soul, one of the understanding
employed in considering and acknowledging Jesus Christ in his greatness and
Sovereignty, looking on him as the principle of all good, and of all the being
of nature and grace, and esteeming and honoring him as such. Then follows an
effect of the will, which humbles it self before him, receives and accepts him
as her God, King, and all, and with all its strength, submits, wholly to his
power and greatness, in an act of adoration.

Hence we may perceive, that adoration consists not only in an esteem of God,
be it never so highly elevated, but requires also a voluntary submission of the
soul, with expressions of honor interior and exterior. He therefore who
practices as he ought, an act of adoration, desires always to show his
respect by the effects. As the Son of God is infinitely adorable, he who
would adore him, strives daily to increase in adoration, and consequently
endeavors with great fidelity, to subject himself more and more in will and
deed, to the greatness and Sovereignty of Jesus Christ. I say in will and deed,
for it would avail but little, to say it only with the mouth, and to have in
thought the name and ineffable greatness of Jesus Christ, if all our actions be
full of our own will; and it were to little purpose to subject our selves by
words to the Sovereignty of Jesus Christ, to the conduct of his spirit and
motions, if in the management of our life, we follow the spirit of the World,
living in a continual desire to satisfy our selves and our own inclinations.
This were to say much, and do nothing. This we must be careful in, since many
deceive themselves in this kind of piety, which they so easily profess,
contenting themselves with the superficies, and neglecting the rest. Remember
that he, who says we must adore God in spirit, Joh. 4.24.
said also, we must adore him in Truth.

The second act of this piety, is an act of Oblation, whereby the soul offers
her self wholly to Jesus Christ, and renouncing her self, resignes into his
hand all that she is, all the power that she has over her self, over all her
actions, over all things, and to make her self the more a servant to Jesus, in
a perfect condition, she renounces her own liberty, and all the use she can
make thereof, giving it up into the hands of the Son of God, of whom she
received it, granting him all the right that she had to dispose thereof, to
order it as he pleases, that being so resigned to Jesus, she may not have any
thing more, nor be any thing more, but that he may be all, have all, and
operate all in her. This Obligation thus conceived, is of great importance. For
if it be done after the manner it ought, if the Son of God vouchsafe to accept
it, it puts us in the perfection of Christianity, in as much as it draws the
soul from her self and all creatures, to be Christ's, to adhere to him, to
depend on him in all things, wherein consists true perfection.

Moreover, this Obligation is an effect of the esteem and belief we have of
Jesus Christ, and contains the spirit of Christian subjection. For, as
according to Law, the slave is no more his own, nor has any right over any
thing, but is wholly left to the power and pleasure of his Master; so by this
Obligation, the Christian puts himself as nothing before Jesus Christ; he gives
place to all his rights of nature and grace, to be only the subject of his
power and divine will. And though we are all servants to Jesus Christ by right
and purchase, as we said elsewhere, yet we will be such also out of good will
and affection, giving him by this Oblation, a new power over us, that we may be
the Captives to his love, as well as to his power, and submit to the designs of
the eternal Father, who has delivered us from the power of darkness, Col.
1.13.
and translated us to the Kingdom of his dear Son.

Thus examining this Oblation, we find that it is necessary for all those who
seek true piety, as containing the essence and grounds of devotion; it puts the
soul into a perfect denudation, and makes her entirely dependant and resigned
to Jesus Christ, to be led according to his will. They therefore who in their
exercises of piety make ordinary use of this principle of devotion, must weigh
well what they say, and consider with what sincerity and faithfulness they
proceed with the Son of God. For seeing they leave themselves wholly to him in
the quality of servants, and make profession (mark the word) to have nothing
which is not his, and of him, and that by this Oblation, they yield up all to
him, even to the use of their own life and natural liberty, what have they
more to think of, but sincerely and faithfully to accomplish what they profess?
What have they more to do, but to take care that their life be conformable to
what they say, otherwise they shall be constrained to condemn themselves, and
to confess that they have no devotion any further then the mouth, that they
deal not sincerely with God and their own consciences? It concerns them to take
heed that that is not justly to be attributed to them which the Prophet said,
Cursed are they that do the work of the Lord negligently. Jer. 48.10.


To these Exercises of interior piety we may add a third act: Purity of
Intention. By this intention, the Christian, who offers himself to God in the
manner we have described, begins to refer himself actually to him and to his
glory, protesting that in all things, even to the least, and in all his
actions, he will have no other intention then the will of the Son of God, and
live no longer, nor act any thing but according to the intention of Jesus
Christ. Having made this protestation, he demands of him participation of his
holy spirit, and prays him to inspire him with holy and pure dispositions,
whereby he may accomplish his actions.

This practice of piety is little known, and perhaps little understood, yet it
is necessary for a perfect Christian. To conceive and affect it, he is to
remember, that, (as we have said) true piety contains a resignation of the soul
to the conduct of grace, and to the spirit of Jesus; and that this resignation
is more then a bare simple resignation, for it includes annihilation and unity;
annihilation of our own spirit and conduct, and unity with the spirit and
conduct of Jesus Christ, to which we resign our selves. By this act of
intention, the Christian annihilates all his desires and intentions to unite
and subject himself only to the intentions and desires of Jesus Christ, in
such sort, as to admit no other.

Hence it may be inferred, how necessary this intention is to all those souls
that thirst after true piety; but to make a fuller discovery thereof, we are to
reflect on our own infirmity and incapacity, which is so great, that we know
not what is lawful for us to desire, and are ignorant of what we ought to
demand of God, as not understanding what designs Jesus Christ may have upon
us. We must therefore wait till he enlighten us, and inspire us. Now, that we
may be in a disposition to receive this grace, and in a capacity to submit to
the conduct of the spirit of God, we must annihilate our own desires, and
particular intentions, and give our selves up to those of Jesus, which is that
the Christian endeavors to do by the act of intention here proposed. It is the
Doctrine of the Apostle, who says, Romans 8.26, 27
We know not how to pray as we ought, but the spirit makes intercession for us
by groans that cannot be uttered. He who searches the heart, knows what is the
desire of the spirit; he sueth for the Saints according to the will of God.
Here we are taught this practice, which shows us that our prayers, desires, and
intentions must be inspired by the spirit of Jesus Christ, who knows what God
demands of us.

Moreover, there is not any thing so certain, as that the Son of God has
those intentions and designs upon the life, actions, and heart of man, which
are great and worthy himself, as being a creature, he has consecrated by his
precious blood, and redeemed by his death and Cross. If there are intentions
and designs upon us, as we must not doubt but there are, and such as are of
great importance, yet unknown to us, is it not reason we follow them, and
consequently, are we not obliged to annihilate all our own desires and
intentions, to bind and subject our selves solely to the desires and intentions
of the Son of God, who vouchsafes to think of us and entertain himself in
forming designs upon us, our actions, and all the motions of our life? This is
it we endeavor to satisfy, when we form this act of purity, or unity of
intention.

This also shows how unprofitable, and superfluous their employment is, who
fill their hearts with variety of intentions, and perplex themselves with
multiplicity of thoughts, who conceive desires, and form designs sometimes one
way, sometimes another, (though upon occasions, in appearance, good and
profitable) since they do only what pleases themselves. But according to the
Principles of Christianity, it were better they kept themselves to this unity,
and annihilated all that is of themselves, to be only in the intentions and
designs of Jesus Christ. The Christian therefore ought often to renew this
purity of intention, he ought to adore all the designs of Jesus Christ upon
him, and all his divine intentions; he must resign himself thereto, and protest
never to follow any other, holding it for a maxim, that we shall not arrive at
perfection, nor go to God by the strength of humane reason, or following our
own desires and inclinations, but by submitting our spirit to the conduct of
Jesus, by a faithful and sincere adherence to his designs and loving
dispositions. This considered, we shall know more and more, the truth of what
was proposed from the beginning, that true piety consists in adherence to,
and a resignation of the soul to Jesus. But we are now to examine the effects
of this adherence.

CHAP. VIII. That an adherence to Jesus Christ by true Piety, makes us
partakers of the several conditions of his life.
THe adherence and dependence of Christians upon the Son of God by the first
grounds and principles of Christianity, and by the first duty which they
profess in the state of grace, obliges them to a holy and pure life, since
that, as the Apostle says, He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor.
6.17.
that is to say, he must be of the same spirit with God, and doubtless, if they
oppose not the designs of Jesus Christ upon them, this adherence will advance
them to a solid and permanent estate of perfect piety, and establish them in a
true Christian perfection. This may be reduced to three heads.

The first is a subjection of the soul, to the designs, spirit, and operations
of Jesus Christ, a subjection that amounts to a capacity and amplitude, and
such as makes the soul capable to receive the communications of God, to bear
the effects of his grace, and to enter into a participation of the Estates and
Mysteries of the life of Jesus Christ.

The second effect puts the soul into a purity of regard and love, which makes
her vigilant and faithful to do and desire nothing but the honor of Jesus
Christ; to regard nothing but his pleasure and glory, so as to have no eyes but
for Jesus, no more life, but what is consecrated to the honor of his
Sovereignty and divine actions. This adherence to, and dependence on the Son
of God, raises in a Christian a true imitation of his life, and divine virtues
to such a degree of perfection, that he becomes a lively representation and
image of Jesus. Of these three effects, we must speak particularly, for herein
consists the perfection of true and Christian piety. We begin with the first.

The subjection which by this adherence to the Son of God, is begotten in us,
represents two things; the power he has over us, and the capacity we are in to
bear the effects of his power. The power which Jesus Christ has over us, is a
particular power, which he acquires by the mystery of the Incarnation, and by
all the states and moments of his life; a power that gives him a double right
to do in us, and with us, what ever he pleases, a power from which he imprints
in the center of our souls, the time that we were first made Christians, an
eternal and indispensable power. In a word, it is a power which he established
by the Sacraments, and left to the Church; For if we consider them, we shall
find, that besides the graces which they communicate to us, they have other
extraordinary effects expressing the power Christ assumes over us: For
instance; Baptism gives us grace, and blots out all sin in us, but withal,
put us into a condition of service to the Son of God, and imprints in our souls
a character of subjection to the divine power, a character never to be defaced,
in honor of the estate of subjection and service which the Son of God
underwent by the incarnation, becoming man, and a servant, subjecting himself
to the Father, he was always, and shall be for ever, equal and coeternal with
the Father, and in honor of the gift which the eternal Father makes us of his
Son, by the incarnation and union of the Word with humanity, and the life of
God in man, and of man in God. The same Son of God instituted the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, wherein he gives and unites himself to us, that he may live in
us, and we in him. By this way of love and union, he takes power over us to
live and operate in us all that he pleases, and shows the power that he has
over our souls, to establish therein continually his designs, to glorify
himself thereby, and please himself in them.

In pursuit of this power, he puts us into an estate of subjection, yet such as
gives us a capacity to rceive and to bear in us the force of his love, and of
all the effects of the life, grace, and mysteries of Jesus Christ, and to
receive them according to what manner and time he shall please to communicate
them. The Son of God desires nothing so much as to communicate to us liberally
his graces, and the many favors he has obtained for us, and merited by his
life and sufferings, his principal design being to advance us to a
participation of the several estates of his life. All he did on earth, all his
operations in the world were for our sakes; referring also to our good and
advancement, all the greatness of his being, the power of his spirit, and
merits of his life, so good is he, and so full of mercy. Now, if the goodness
and designs of the Son of God toward Christians be such, is it not reason they
continue in this subjection, and be faithful and vigilant to receive and bear
the effects and estates of the life of Jesus, after what manner he pleases?
This is a principal point of Christian piety.

The very mysteries of our faith acquaint us with this truth, and discover unto
us the designs whereby the Son of God would advance us to a participation of
his Mysteries, and the several estates of his life. The Son of God becoming
man by incarnation takes possession of the nature of man, of our bodies, and of
our souls, by which he acquires a right to his nature to advance and
appropriate it to himself after what manner he pleases; as by this work of love
he took humane nature upon him, assuming body and soul, which he appropriated
to himself, and elevated to all the greatness of the divinity, communicating to
it for ever the person, being, life and nature of God. In like manner, in the
works of grace, whereby his divine mysteries are honored, Jesus chooses such
souls as he may dwell in by love, or after what manner he pleases otherwise,
he appropriates them to himself by his grace, he advances them to adherence and
union of spirit with him, and by a particular indulgence, establishes them in
a communication of his greatness. To this end he applies and employes his
power, to which a Christian ought to be most vigilant and attentive, that he
may always continue in the subjection he owes to Jesus Christ, to accept,
receive, and bear the effects of his power.

This Principle of truth and piety, is grounded upon the common doctrine, 2
Cor. 8, 9.
that all that Jesus Christ did, he did for us, and all that he is, he is for
us. He, says the Apostle, became poor for our sakes, although he were rich,
that by his poverty we might be made rich; meaning, that Jesus, being God,
became man, and took upon him our meanness, infirmities, sufferings, death, the
several conditions of our life, to withdraw us from our meanness, enrich us
with his divine graces, and advance us to a participation of the several
estates of his life, blessedness, sanctification and salvation. Hence we may
take occasion to consider the greatness of Jesus; Ephesians. 1.10.
he is our fullness, in his annihilation, in his poverty he suffices all; for
God gathers together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven,
and which are on earth. It is the greatness of his mysteries, that they are
capable of communication to us, and can admit the sanctification of our souls,
as it is our glory and happiness to be able to participate of the grace,
estate, and mysteries of the life of Jesus Christ.

This is the first design God has upon us, when the Son of God living an
immortal and eternal life in the bosom of his Father, took a new and mortal
life in the womb of the Virgin his Mother. He desired nothing so much as to
give us his immortal life, and to abase himself to our estate, to elevate us
to a participation of his greatness, and the rather, because as he honored his
Father by the several estates of his new life, his hidden life, his suffering,
poverty, death, cross, obedience, subjection in all the estates and mysteries
of his life; so he will have us to honor him in participating of the estate,
spirit, and grace of the same mysteries. For this reason in his Church, and of
all qualities and vocations, he chooses souls, and calls them to an
establishment in the participation of his spirit, and a communication of his
new life, a life of grace, such as is wholly, singular, and proportioned to the
eminence, dignity, and sanctity of a Christian calling. All this is an effect
of his divine mercies, the fruit of his sufferings; it is our glory to be
called and elevated to this happiness, as it is our duty to keep our selves in
a disposition and capacity to receive and bear them according to the designs
and intentions of the Son of God* All those then who are desirous to live
according to Christian piety, must make it their main business to continue
faithful and humble in this subjection, that they may be ready to go when they
are called, and to receive when they shall be rewarded. We come now to the
Dispositions whereby this estate may be att^ined.

CHAP. IX. Certain dispositions necessary for the devout soul that would
participate of the grace and estates of the life of Jesus Christ.
THis estate of interior piety, which puts the soul into a subjection to the
power of Jesus Christ, and a capacity to receive and bear the graces and
estates of the life of Jesus, is altogether suitable and necessary for those
who seek perfection, as being proportioned and conformable to the designs and
order that God has established in his creatures. In the creation of the
visible World adorned and embellished with so many several creatures, God has
created Angels and man, to contemplate so perfect a work, to admire the
excellencies, and to honor the Author of such miraculous productions. He has
done the like in the creation of the new World, that is the establishment of
his Church, wherein Jesus Christ chooses souls, and forms spirits, who are
employed in considering the works of love, operated by him upon the Earth, for
the salvation of mankind, and honoring the Author of so many Graces. As God
has created a great number of Angels different in perfection and order, and as
some conceive in species also, to whom he has given several gifts and graces,
as well as several ranks in Heaven, that they may honor by these diversities
of estates and perfections, the divine qualities and several perfections of
God, for the Seraphims, as Thomas Aquinas affirms, adore by estate and by
grace, and contemplate by the light of glory, the uncreated love of God; the
Cherubims his wisdom, the Thrones his Stability, and so of the rest.

The eternal Word having accomplished the ineffable and adorable work of his
Incarnation, having finished that of our Redemption, and created in this
natural World a new World (that is the Church) puts souls into it, who by the
conduct of grace, are employed in consideration of the works which Jesus Christ
operated on Earth. And amongst the rest, he has chosen many, who by their
several estates and perfections continually honor the several estates of his
life, and adore his actions and perfections, humanely-divine, and
divinely-humane. This must needs be an undeniable truth; for if the Angels and
the Church triumphant are continually and eternally employed in admiring and
adoring the life, estates, and Mysteries of Jesus Christ, shall not her Sister
in the Church Militant, have the same rights, employments, and duties? It is
not to be doubted; and certainly, seeing that love has obliged the Son of
God to these lownesses, and makes him ours for ever, (for he shall be man
eternally, and eternally our Jesus, our head and our All) it is but reason that
we be always his, and render him perpetual honor and homage. This is he that
operates in our souls, this is the estate whereto many are called. It is only
expected, that Christians dispose themselves to participate of this happiness,
and, being called thereto, endeavor to correspond faithfully therewith. God
does the same in the regency of his Church, the Son of God making use of his
power, has established therein several estates, orders, and societies
separated from the common, and from one another, which he consecrates and
appropriates to the several estates and Mysteries of his life. Some honor his
solitude and hidden life, others his penance, others his poverty, others his
obedience; all adorn and beautify the body of his Church, and in the diversity
of their functions and estates, honor, adore, and imitate the several
operations and Mysteries of the life of Jesus Christ, who distributes his
spirit and the grace of his Mysteries to all, according to what manner he
pleases. He does the same in the particular Government of souls, he causes and
calls them to elevate and establish them in such estate as pleases him,
sometimes by sufferings, sometimes by privations, one while by love, another by
simplicity and infancy. In a word, he estates them as he pleases, 1 Cor. 12.11.
to be honored by them, one and the same spirit, according to St. Paul,
working all things, dividing to every one severally, as it pleases him. The
same Apostle represents this truth, ^. 12, etc.
under the similitude of a humane body, all are members of the same body
animated, enlivened with the same spirit, and yet they have all their several
offices and functions particular and different. The case is the same, says
this holy Apostle in the Government of the Church, which is the body of Jesus
Christ, whereof all christians are members, though all make up but one body,
and are the animated only by the spirit of Jesus; yet are they called and
employed to particular estates, and in all there is a difference of gifts and
operations, but it is but one spirit, and one God who does all in all; they are
different effects of one and the same principal cause. It is the same Jesus
who chooses the souls to communicate to them the graces, and diverse estates of
his life. How happy is that christian, who is called to this happiness! Herein
consists the perfection of the soul; as in things natural we say, that the
Creature is most perfect, when it most participates of the being, life, and
perfections of God, so in the state of graces, that soul is most perfect, which
participates most of the graces, of the diverse estates and qualities of the
Son of God.

This grace and favor, is not for every one, and far above the ordinary. The
Son of God does not call all souls to a participation of his life, nor
always communicates to them the spirit and graces of his Mysteries. Yet the
christian who would live in a solid piety and adherence to Jesus Christ, and
would feel the effects of his divine communications, must desire this favor,
and earnestly demand it. He must often reverence and adore the life, thoughts,
designs, Mysteries, and estates of the life of Jesus. He must offer himself
with all his heart, to the power, spirit, and grace, enclosed in those divine
Mysteries. In a word, he must carefully remove from his soul, all hindrances
and inclinations opposite to the designs and operations of the Son of God.
But above all, he must continue constant in subjecting his soul to the power
and will of the Son of God. He that will practice all this, must make these
uses following.

The first is, that the soul always resign her self to the power of the Son of
God, than he may make in her, and by her, all that he will for his glory. This
resignation to be perfect, must be grounded upon a freedom of spirit, a freedom
which is the true spirit of the children of God, and consists in an estate of
indifferency and independency, as to all things as well in the order of nature
as of grace, and being subject to God only by this freedom, all things in the
world are indifferent, the soul remaining in a pure capacity of submitting to
whatsoever the Son of God will operate in her and by her, giving her self up
wholly to his divine power. This liberty of spirit is the principal estate and
first ground of Christianity; for all Christians belong to the Son of God, and
are left to his power. One died for all, says Saint Paul, that they who live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, 2 Cor. 5.15.
but unto him who died for them; Teaching us, that as the Son of God gave his
life for us, and by his excessive charity delivered himself to the ignominious
death of the cross, to do the will of his Father; so he has right and power to
choose and consecrate us by his grace, and to offer us an Holocaust of
sweetness and honor to the glory of his Father, that as he has been the
victim of our sins we may be the victims of his love. Hence it is evident that
the Son of God has power and right to put our souls into what estate it shall
please him, for his glory, be it an estate of life or death, of privation or
abundance, of confusion or honor, and may choose out souls, and advance them
to the participation of the mysteries of his life, to render to him particular
homage and service. We must then resign our selves wholly in all things to
Jesus Christ. To establish us in this disposition, the liberty of spirit
whereof we speak, is absolutely necessary. For when it has separated us from
all things, nay, even from our selves, it puts us into an amplitude and
capacity to be all that God will have us to be, and to bear the effects of his
grace and power. And therefore the Christian who seeks to establish himself in
true piety, and live with fidelity, must endeavor to conform himself in this
liberty of spirit, for it is difficult, nay, impossible to adhere to Jesus
Christ, to depend on him, and faithfully to receive the operation of his grace;
if we are not in this liberty of spirit, that is an independency as to all
things. This is the spirit and disposition that God requires in a Christian,
according to the Apostle, Romans 8.15.
That the spirit we have received be not a spirit of bondage, but of liberty
and adoption.

This first disposition leads us farther, and advances us in the ways of
piety, and puts us into a second disposition, by which we accept with humility
and submission, all the estates and effects that the spirit of the grace of
Jesus Christ shall operate in us, and bear with patience and obedience
whatsoever rigor and difficulty we meet with. Having so received them, we are
also bound by this disposition, to act according to the quality and extent of
grace communicated to us, and to live conformably to the estate whereinto the
Son of God puts us. We must remain firm in that subjection and liberty of
spirit we speak of. In this use consists the peace and liberty of the soul:
For example, If God put us into an estate of suffering, we must accept it, and
continue therein with patience and submission of spirit, not struggling with
the good will and pleasure of God; but act therein and persist with courage and
fidelity. We must do the same in privation, barrenness, and all other estates,
wherein the Son of God shall please to put us; which if we do, we shall remain
in a true adherence and union with Jesus Christ, depending upon him with
fidelity, which is all that piety aims at.

CHAP. X. That Christian piety obliges us to submit our life and actions to the
honor of Christ.
THere cannot any be ignorant that true piety consists in rendering honor to
God, it is our first exercise, the duties of Religion and Love, are of such a
nature, that they must necessarily be referred to God, but that of piety
obliges us to honor God, and to referr our selves to him, and consequently to
the Son of God; Jo. 9.23.
For he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father; but by an
obligation more particular, greater and more special, in as much as by the
grace of Christianity and Principles of true piety we are united to the Son of
God, and adhere to him as members to the Head. This adherence does not only
put us into a subjection to the power of Jesus, but also produces in our souls
a regard of love and honor, a regard that purifies and directs our intentions
and actions, not to love or honor any thing but Jesus the Son of God, by him
to love, honor and serve the Father. Thus the first estate of piety, which
consists in this adherence, obliges us to referr all to him, and to honur him
in all things.

This truly is clear, in what manner soever we consider it, whether in the
Economy of our salvation, or in the regency of the Church, all things invite
and oblige us to honor the Son of God. The first thing that the eternal Father
requires of us in giving his Son to the world; the first design he has upon
his creature, is, to oblige them to render to his Son the same honor which we
render to his infinite supreme Majesty. This Obligation is so strict, that even
at his birth he would have the Angels acknowledge and adore him; he sent them
from Heaven to Bethlehem to reverence him, Heb. 1.6.
not only in the greatness of his divinity, but in the lowness of our
humanity, when concealed in a stable, and laid in a manger. He called thither
the Shepherds and the Kings, that it might be as David says, All kings shall
fall before him, and all nations shall serve him. Psalm. 72.11.
He was no sooner born in the world, but the kings of the world came from the
East, to do him homage, to lay their Crowns and Scepters at his feet,
confessing that all the greatness of the earth ought to serve and honor him.
The eternal Father sent Angels and men to render honor to his Son, to adore
his divinity humanized, and his humanity deify'd. All nations of the world
shall assemble, and all men shall come to judgment, that all may honor the
Son, as they honor the Father.

This the Son demands of the Father as part of that fruit he expects of his
labors; it is one of the richest Jewels of that Crown which he received upon
his triumph by the cross over the world, sin, and death. Many think it was the
meaning of that Prayer to his Father in the day of his sufferings: Joh. 17.5.
Father, glorify thy Son, to the end that thy Son may glorify thee. We owe him
this honor; for if he humbled himself to our infirmities, and the shame and
ignominy due to our offenses, is it not reason that we render him the honor
whereof he deprives himself for our sakes, and that we serve and honor him in
a manner wholly particular, seeing he only of the persons of the most holy
Trinity, suffered our contempts and confusions? This exercise of piety, which
we here propose as the first obligation we have in the estate of Christianity
holds forth one of the noblest and most eminent virtues of the Catholic
Religion, and one of the highest actions of our soul. For, if according to
Thomas Aquinas, we are obliged, as soon as we arrive to the use of Reason, to
some acknowledgements of God, and a submission to him, as the Author of our
nature, and our good, with much more reason ought we to say, that the first
thought we ought to have of the Son of God, in relation to piety, is to referr
our selves to him as the principle of our being in the state of grace. And if
we would make use as we ought of the spirit of Christianity, and of the gifts
we receive of the Son of God, we must employ them wholly to his honor and
service, in such sort, that as Jesus is the Author of our being, life and
actions, he may also be their object and end.

This is an inseparable obligation, and an indispensable duty. For if the
Christian and all that is in him, proceed from the Son of God, and is
consecrated to him by his death, it follows, that he can neither make use of
himself or any thing else, but the Son of God; otherwise he might refer his
actions to some other then him to whom they are due, and for whom they are
consecrated, which were to profane the most holy things, and to enjoy the
gifts of Jesus Christ against his intentions, which is a sacrilegious treason
against the divine Majesty. For as amongst men he is guilty of theft, and
deserves death, who converts the treasure of his Prince to his private use, to
pass away his life in vanities and sports; so is that Christian criminal, who
abuses the gifts of the Son of God, and is prodigal of the Treasures of his
bounty. That we receive all from the Son of God no man can doubt, for of him
and for him life is given us, as also motions, sense, reason, repose, health,
and sleep, and, in a word, the use of all things.

These are the Treasures of his Court, for he has by his travels and
sufferings, acquired, and by the price of his blood and life, purchased our
lives, our actions, our thoughts, nay even the time which we enjoy. Which
having done, his intention is, that we acknowledging his love and liberality
therein, should love him, serve him, and in all things mind his honor and
glory. This being so, what have we to do but to follow his intentions, to refer
our selves wholly to him, to honor him in all things, since we have all from
him, and that for this end, he gives us also his special graces. In what
therefore ought we to employ our time, our life, our health, our repose, and
all that we have, but for the honor of the Son of God, of whom we have
received them, and who continues them for that very purpose.

This manner of rendering honor and homage to the Son of God, is an exercise
of piety that we ought to persuade all Christians to, and is grounded upon the
principles of Christianity, which teach us, that all the effects of grace, be
it of God toward men, or of men toward God, relate to Jesus as their
principal support, prop and foundation, for it is by him that the eternal
Father gives us all, in as much as he has chosen the holy humanity of his
only Son, as an instrument conjoined to the Divinity, to operate his works
of grace in Heaven and upon Earth. By him he receives the homage and adorations
of his people, and of all men in Heaven and Earth. Hence it may be inferred,
that all is grounded upon Jesus, all subsists by him, that all may be united to
him, and by him, to the Father. Jesus must be the only object of our thoughts,
resentments and obligations.

Upon this truth, we ought to make often reflections, for God has subjected
the World to our use, and given us his Son; the Son I say, out of an excess
of incomparable love, becomes wholly ours, that by a mutual right we may be
wholly his, and by him the Father's, that we may say to him in piety, as he
said to his Father in love, All that is mine is thine, and all that is thine is
mine. Yea my Jesus, thou art mine, by thy Incarnation thou art mine, by the
Mysteries of thy life mine, thou gave me thy spirit in Baptism, thy body in
the Eucharist, thy glory I shall have in Paradise, and thou may say truly,
that what is thine is mine. So order it then, that I may say to thee with as
much truth and fidelity as thou have expressed affection in giving thy self to
me, that whatever is mine, is also thine, my being, my life, my actions, my
love, all thine, but much more truly then my own, for it is in me but by thee,
and for thee. I will then from this present, and to all eternity, be wholly
thine, and my being, my life and my actions, all that I am shall be ever
referred to thy glory.

Hence we are to conclude, that the first design and intention we are to have
in our devotions, is to refer all our actions to the glory and honor of the
Son of God, to remember him before we think of our selves, to seek his glory
before we look upon our own Interests or necessities. Herein the greatest part
of Christians at this day are deceived, not only those who in the exercises of
piety, seek the honor and esteem of men, and aspire only to vanity and a
fleshly spirit, but even those who seem to follow the exercises of piety with
most love and purity. For they believe they do much in seeking the occasions of
merit, and employing themselves in what promotes their spiritual advancement,
and taking some relish and enjoyment therein, whenever there is occasion, they
make it their only business, their principal employment, it takes up their
chiefest thoughts, and what is worse, they often place their end therein, and
are persuaded that they have attained a high and perfect degree of piety,
imagining themselves rich in merits, and far advanced in the ways of
perfection, and that they may serve God with delight. He is blind who sees not
the danger those are in, who live thus, for while they think they serve God,
they principally mind their own profit, and if the business be well examined,
you will find they change the glory of God into their own particular
satisfaction, the end of their exercises, being their own content and
interests, of whom we may say with the Apostle, They love and seek themselves,
Phil. 2.21.
and make a gain of Piety.

To reform this universal and dangerous abuse, we must consider, that as the
esteem and spirit of true piety, consists in loving, honoring, and serving
of God, in order to an adherence to him, and a dependence on his divine will;
so the motive, object and end, we are to have in our devotions, must only be
the honor, love, and service of God, and a compliance with his amorous
conduct. The Christian therefore who would live in the exercise of true piety,
must first by a voluntary subjection, adhere to the power and conduct of the
Son of God, as we have already showed, and further refer himself wholly to
the honor and glory of Jesus, in as much as we are his, and by him, God's, and
render to God the honor and service we owe him. According to this advice, the
perfect Christian must have a continual and vigilant care so to order it, that
his life and actions may be accounted worthy of Jesus Christ, as being such as
shall contribute to his glory after the manner he would have it; which is to be
done thus.

CHAP. XI. The Use and Practice of what has been proposed.
WE have elsewhere taught, what was to be done to render our actions worthy of
Jesus Christ, it is not necessary to speak any further of it. We are therefore
only to remember, that all our actions must be Christian, to be worthy of the
Son of God, and consequently must be holy; and to be holy, they must be
accomplished in the spirit, and by the principle of grace, the Holy Ghost, the
spirit of Jesus; our actions to be Christian, must be done in the spirit and
dispositions of Jesus. It remains only that we see how we may honor him by
our life, by our actions, and in all things; whereof we propose two ways. One
is in regard of our selves, when we live and act in a disposition of will
wholly submitted and directed toward God, and by right and pure intention,
refer our selves, and all our actions to the Son of God, offering our selves
so to him, as not to live or act any thing but for his honor and glory. The
other is, in regard of the Son of God, when he vouchsafes to apply and honor
himself in us, after what manner he pleases, causing us to live and act in the
power of his spirit, making us to bear the effects of divine will, in
continuing the designs he has over us, to take in us his pleasure and glory.
According to this later way, the soul acts not, but accepts and keeps her
self in the regard of the Son of God, as the subject of his divine operations,
and therefore must only be attentive and faithful to that which he does in
her, and by her, obliging her self by a submissive acquiescence to all he does,
be it enjoyment or privation, rest or pain, change or destruction, accepting
his conduct, and consenting to all the effects of his works in her, out of a
confidence that he will establish all in her for his glory. This advice, to
souls who endeavor to live in the grace of God, and seek Christian perfection,
is of so great consequence, that to fail in this point, is to fail in all. God
is in us by grace, he is there to operate, not only by himself, but by us; for
he is the common principle of life, and operation in us, it is he that operates
there incessantly things great and worthy of himself.

This granted, it follows, that the Christian who desires to live in the grace
of God, must on the one side shun all manner of sin, especially such as may
ruin this grace in him; on the other, become very attentive and faithful to
receive the effects of his grace and the operations of the Son of God, that so
he may cooperate therewith according to his intentions, otherwise it is to be
feared, he may lose it, or at least hinder it is effects, and so destroy the
honor of God, and all that the Son of God has established in his soul.

This is grounded upon the very principles of faith; For we can do nothing of
our selves, as of our selves, but Jesus Christ does all in us, acting and
referring all our actions to the glory of his Father. We must then let him act,
and, as we know not his divine intentions and designs over us, neither know
the grace or degree of grace whereto he would elevate us for his greater glory,
(for it belongs to him to do all, when and how he pleases.) It remains then,
that we oppose not our selves to his intentions, and destroy not his works. The
Christian therefore, who desires to be God's, and to live in true piety, must
not amuse himself in these unprofitable and superficial things, nor regard so
much these exercises, but purify himself, and make himself worthy of the grace
of God, taking great care to preserve himself therein, and have a continual
attention to all that the spirit of grace operates in him, for the glory of
God, that he destroy it not by a contrary application and want of cooperation.
Hereby we shall see how many false devotions there are, and how many deceive
themselves in the exercise of virtues and piety.

These two ways of honoring the Son of God, may be understood after two
manners, whereby we may honor Jesus Christ, and he may honor himself in us
two ways, one by action, the other by estate. The action is transient, and is
but for a little time, and perhaps is but in one part of the soul, but estate
is a thing permanent which dwells in the whole capacity of the creature, and is
imprinted in the bottom of its being, having no dependence on the actions of
the understanding and will. We may act well in the first manner, and it is
good, but we must also endeavor to establish our selves in an estate which
perfectly honors the Son of God, as the Son of God. For as the Son of
God himself has not only honored his Father by the actions of his transitory
life, but has been pleased to become man, and take upon him a nature which
essentially is in a condition of servitude, and remain perpetually and
inviolably therein, in regard of his Divinity: so we must endeavor to honor
the Son of God, not only by transitory actions, but also by a permanent
estate and condition, such as may render him honor and perpetual homage. This
we are obliged to do for our part, to the utmost of our power, as being one of
the most essential exercises of piety. But our attempts are feeble, and all we
can do is little, in comparison of what we owe God. The Son of God therefore
who is our supplyer, does it sometimes himself by his grace; by his divine and
amorous attractions, he calls us, and puts us into the estate which he himself
operates in us, by which he satisfies his Father to his honor and glory. It is
a singular happiness, a favor, to obtain which all we can do, is to continue
disposed, attentive to whatever the Son of God operates in us, and carefully
to take heed thereto, and to cooperate faithfully therein, and with the best
disposition, may be proposed. The meaning hereof is, to keep our selves in a
simple submission of our spirit to that of the Son of God, and this
submission consists in not resisting it, but, leaving our selves wholly to
the power of, and a dependence on his holy spirit and conduct, giving up,
offering and disposing our selves to the work and designs which he has in and
upon us, renouncing all our own contrary inclinations. The soul that lives in
this submission, is capable to bear effectually the effects of grace, and to
honor God in all things.

Now when it is said, that we ought to refer all our actions to the glory of
the Son of God, we mean not only the good and virtuous, but even the common
and natural actions, even to a moment of time, for all belongs to God, and
must be referred to his honor and glory. This truth we learn of the Church our
Mother, who in her rites and ceremonies, does not only represent the Mysteries
and actions of the Son of God, but honors them in representing them, and as
such is her intention, whence it may be observed, that in all her ceremonies,
even to the least, she intends to honor and acknowledge him. Jesus Christ
himself may be also an example to us in this exercise of piety, for in that he
has taken the nature of man upon him, he has honored his Father in all
things, and by all the concernments of humane nature, doing to that end and
intention, not only those actions which we call Religious and virtuous, but
even those which are natural and purely humane, and referring to his honor,
all the moments of his life. We must carry our selves in the same manner, what
he did being done by him, as a Master for our imitation. The devout Christian
therefore must refer all his exercises and actions, both natural and common,
little and great, to the honor and glory of Jesus Christ. By this relation,
our actions are ennobled, for what he has sanctified, is neither common nor
inconsiderable; whatsoever is consecrated and referred by his honor, cannot
but be great, when his honor is so great.

There are a many that judge this practice of Piety to be too difficult,
whereas they will indifferently receive some others. But if we consider it, we
shall find that it is an Obligation proper to the state of Christianity, which
cannot by any means be dispensed with. For if the life of a Christian be a
lively Image of the life of Jesus Christ, and a life derived and flowing from
his, it must of necessity follow, that, as all things are sanctified, and made
divine in Jesus Christ, so are they such in us by the same spirit of Jesus,
which is given us, which dwells in us, and operates in us. From which reason we
may infer, that, as in Jesus there is nothing mean or vile, but all in him is
elevated and referred to the glory of his Father, so in Christian souls, there
ought to be no actions mean and object, no, not indifferent, seeing they all
belong to the Son of God, who has sanctified them in his spirit, and in the
conduct and direction of him it is, that we are to operate and accomplish them.
Besides, we cannot doubt at all, but that the Son of God has his great
designs and intentions worthy himself over our actions, even to the smalled,
nay, over all the moments of our life. Which if it be so, how we can say, that
our actions are indifferent? On the contrary, they belong all to Jesus Christ,
they must proceed from his spirit; God will be honored in all that is of man.
We shall render an account as well of the least as the greatest things; and
assuredly, God will exercise his judgment as well for a moment of time, and
the least of our actions, as for all the rest of our life.

We must therefore acknowledge there is nothing little, nothing to be neglected
in the state of Christianity, but all therein ought to be worthy the blood and
cross of the Son of God; we must make use of all things conformably to the
designs and spirit of Jesus, who, as he is always great, even in the least
things, so also must we have great intentions, even in the meanest of our
actions, and our first and principal must be to referr those to the glory and
honor of the Son of God. Jesus Christ in the time of his life upon earth, did
so; living among us as one of us, he made use of all things with a zeal to the
honor of his Father, and referred them to him as to his Father, his principal
being and life. Let us do the like, and by a zeal to the honor of Jesus, out
of a respect and homage to his greatness, let us offer to him all our actions,
and accomplish them all even to the least, with a desire that they may be
referred to him as to the principle of our being and life in the state of
grace. This he taught us by his death, this disposition he inspires us with by
grace, this spirit he infuseth into us by the Sacraments which he has left to
his Church, as himself said, As the living Father has sent me, and I live by
the Father; Joh. 6.17.
so he that eats me, even he shall live by me; which include in two words all
that we would persuade that Christian to, who seeks true piety.

CHAP. XII. How the Christian that seeks true piety, is obliged to imitate
Jesus Christ.
AS we are obliged to honor Jesus Christ by our life, and all our actions, so
with much more reason are we obliged to imitate him as far as lies in our
power. The greatest honor we can give him, is to conform our selves to his
life and intentions. This is the third effect which produces adherence to Jesus
Christ; and as this adherence is the first estate whereinto we are put when we
are made Christians, and the first foundation we must lay to acquire true
piety; so from this adherence as its center and general principle must be
derived all the effects of grace which we bear in our souls. Now, that which
remains to be treated of, is this Imitation: for our life ought to be a lively
Image of the life of Jesus Christ, and the first use a Christian is to make, is
to look upon the Son of God as the Prototype and exemplar of his life and
actions, not only to imitate, but to express and represent him, as it were, to
the life. As the Son of God is the Image and resemblance of his Father, so must
the Christian be of the Son. Hence the Apostle assures us, that none shall be
saved, or received into heaven in the number of the elect, if he be not
conformed to the Image of Jesus Christ. He predestined them, Romans 8.29.
says he, to be made conformable to the Image of his Son. In a word, we must be
by grace what Jesus is by nature. It is a maxim in Christian piety, that the
Son of God is the true life, and true model of our life; it is the example
showed us in the mountain, as well as to Moses, according to which we are
commanded to operate. Our interior and exterior life then must imitate and
regard the exercises of the soul of Jesus Christ; and the occupations of his
sacred life. For this reason the eternal Father gives us his Son in the
mystery of the incarnation, for giving his Son a new life in the mystery of
love, and giving it to be communicated to us, he makes him thereby the
principle of a new life in us, and wills, that, as he is the principle of the
life of his Son in eternal generation, so his Son should be the principle of
our life in the new temporal generation of our souls by Baptism and Grace.
Saint Paul also teaches this, when speaking of the reformation of Adam, he
says, As we have born the image of the earthly, 1 Cor. 15.49.
so shall we also bear the image of the heavenly; as if exhorting us to an
imitation of the Son of God, he should advise us, that as we have born the
image of Adam, imitating him by sin, and following him by our own inclinations,
we should also bear the image of Jesus Christ, imitating his life and actions.

This Doctrine is wholly conformable to the Principles of Christianity. The
life of a Christian, honors and regards God, and imitates his life, Mat. 5.48.
Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, says Jesus Christ; or to
say better, it is the life of God himself who lives in us by his Son. Whence it
follows, that as the Father lives in the Son, and the Son in the Father, so we
live in Jesus, and Jesus in us, according to that Prayer of the same Son of God
to his Father full of love and affection. I am in them, Jo. 17.23.
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. But how can we be one
with the Son of God? How can we adhere to him, and be incorporated with him?
How can we conceive this reciprocal life of Jesus in us, but in imitating him,
and not only imitating him, but expressing and perfectly representing him,
since he lives in us, and we in him, in the mystery of the incarnation? For the
eternal Father giving us his Son to be man, and to live with men a life common
and conformable to the nature and condition of men, he gives us in him a law,
rule, and form of life, and shows us in him the manner of conversation that we
must follow, to live Christianly, that is, to live a new life, which the
eternal Father gives us in his Son, and by his Son, a life singularly proper
to the estate and perfection of Christianity. We are then to look on the Son of
God as our Law, imitate and follow him as our rule, which is, to speak
properly, as the sacred Oracles foretold, when, speaking of the Messiah, and
the time of his coming, they said, that God will make a Word abbridged upon the
earth. This Word is the Son of God, who descending to the vile and mean estate
of humane nature, gives us his words and actions a model for ours.

This also Saint Paul explains, where he says that God spoke to the world four
thousand years, Heb. 1.1, 2
and conducted and taught men after diverse manners, and sent Angels, he gave a
Law writ with his own hand, he prescribed many Ceremonies, and in all ages
caused Prophets to speak. But in the Law of Grace, he speaks to us by his
Son, who teaches us supernatural truths, till then unknown to the World,
and reserved for the Excellency of the state of Christianity. The Angels now
guide us no more, but attend us, the written Law does not oblige us, the
Ceremonies are now limited, and the Prophets speak no longer. It is Jesus, the
Word, and the Son of the eternal Father, who becoming man, and conversing
among men, speaks to us, and teaches us. He is our Angel to inlighten us, our
Law to direct us, our Prophet to speak to us, and our Master to teach us. He is
the abridg'd word, and by the condition that he has made with his Father, he
conducts us by his spirit, he illuminates us by his grace, he directs us by his
providence, and he is the word of the Father, so he teaches us not only by his
words, but also by the holy and adorable actions of his life, the rule, the Law
and model of our life.

Now if Jesus be the rule and law of our life, it is manifest that we ought to
imitate him, if we would live Christianly, and if, by the exercises of a solid
piety, we desire to attain a perfection suitable to the vocation and estate we
profess, we must choose none but those which imitate the Son of God, holding
it a maxim in all kinds of exercises, that the Christian is so much the more
devout and perfect, the more conformable his life and actions are to those of
Jesus Christ, and that he is neither devout nor perfect, but as far as he
imitates the life and actions of Jesus Christ, for true piety and Christian
perfection, if rightly understood, consists only in this point.

This Principle and Precept, we have also from Jesus Christ, where he says, If
any man serve me, Joh. 12.26.
let him follow me, and where I am there my servant shall be also; the servant
of God must imitate Jesus Christ. To serve is nothing else but to follow, to
follow, according to St. Austine, is to imitate; so that the devotion whereby
we should serve God, is not devotion but illusion, if it be not in the
exercises which cause us to follow and imitate the life of Jesus Christ.

Here we may see how much they are deceived, who dare call him rash, and accuse
him of presumption, that would imitate Jesus Christ; who say it is to soar too
high, and that it is impossible man should imitate his God, and blinded with
this ignorance, are content to employ themselves in some good moral exercises.
The Apostle condemns this error, saying, Jesus Christ suffered for us, leaving
us an example that we should follow his steps. 1 Pet 2.21.
St. Paul confesses, that his study and principal care was to imitate Jesus
Christ; to which end, 1 Cor. 11.1.
he writ to the Corinthians; Be ye followers of me, as I am of Jesus Christ. In
a word, we are not made Christians, nor participate of the graces of the Son
of God, but to be put into a capacity and obligation to imitate him. This is
his intention when he says, Mat. 10.38
who does not follow him, is not worthy of him. To say the contrary, is to
oppose the opinions of the Fathers, a truth more manifest then day.

By these Principles, we discover another blindness greater then the other, a
deceit more dangerous in many Christians, who only study to perfect their
reason, and think they do much to follow that in every point, wherein they are
much deceived. For they believe it sufficient to live reasonably and
Christianly, and in this belief, forget or neglect the rest, thinking they are
arrived to an estate perfect enough. But is quite contrary, for by the use of
reason only, we live as perfect men, or at most, but as good Philosophers; but
if we would live and operate as good Christians and Children of God, we must
advance our selves above Reason to live, not a humane, but a divine life, that
is the life that the Son of God lived upon Earth, and communicated to true
Christians, the life of the new man. To live this life, we make use not of
reason but of grace, which is far above reason, and must be the principle of
Christian actions. For only grace can bring us to God, and render us worthy of
God, that is of God, considered as the object of our Faith and Religion.

The foundation of all consists in this, that a humane spirit and reason is
not our conduct, nor the rule of our life as Christians; Jesus Christ is the
only rule, law, and principle thereof, wherefore in our exercises of piety, we
must have this continually before our eyes, if we would be devout, viz. we must
follow him if we would be saved, and we must imitate him if we will follow him.
Which we are now to consider, how it is to be done.

CHAP. XIII. The Practice of what has been proposed in the imitation of Jesus
Christ.
WHen we speak of imitating the Son of God, we mean not doing of miracles as
he did; we are not commanded to walk upon the Sea, to raise up the dead to
life, and to give sight to the blind. We mean not the being elevated to an
intuitive knowledge of the secrets of the Divinity; this is only for Jesus,
these are the effects of his almighty power, and the marks of his Mission. We
are not called to come into competition with him, but, as he was humbled to our
meanness, and was clothed with our nature, becoming man, and taking a new
being and estate; so he takes also a new manner of life, conformable to ours,
which we ought to imitate, after which we are to form the interior of our
Consciences, and the procedure of our actions. He annihilated himself in the
Incarnation, says the Apostle; he humbled himself in all the Mysteries of his
life; Phil. 2.8.
he made himself poor in all his estates; he was obedient even to the Cross,
he suffered even to death, he has showed his love in all his works. In a word,
he practiced all manner of virtues in the progress of his life. Let us do the
like; he was born for our sakes, and all that he did was only that he might
imitate him as the model of our life. For this reason he chose a kind of life
full of various estates, and practiced several actions, that all sorts of
persons in all manner of estates, should find in him the Idaea of their
actions, and the prototype of their life.

Thus to imitate Jesus Christ, is an Obligation belonging to the state of
Christianity. When we receive Baptism, we are incorporated into him as
members; this incorporation does not only bind us to adhere to him as members
to their head, but to be like him, and to have as much conformity in our
actions to those of Jesus, as there is between the head and the members of the
same body. So that this imitation must not be indifferent, but most holy and
perfect. All as many of you, says the Apostle, as are baptized into Ie.
Christ, Gal. 3.27.
have put on Christ, that is, ye bear his Livery, and, as the Doctors interpret
it, ye are made like unto him, ye imitate his virtues, and are followers of his
life and actions. For it is but reason, that where the head is, there the
members should also be, and that there be a resemblance and conformity of the
one to the other.

To imitate then the Son of God, implies two things; the one is, that we do
what he has done, the other, that we do it with the same spirit and
dispositions wherewith he did it. He was humbled for us, he showed his love and
clemency toward us: Let us also learn of him to be gentle and humble of heart.
He was obedient even to death, the death of the Cross; let us imitate his
obedience, preferring the accomplishment of his divine Ordinances and holy
will, before all things, even our own life. He was born in a stable, laid in a
manger, he took poverty for the companion of his life, he condemned the World,
and despised its pride, showing us, that all is vanity, and a mere nothing in
the eyes of God. Let us do the same, and, though we are in the World, condemn
its vanity, in a word, so use it, that all our life interior and exterior,
may be a continual imitation of the life of Jesus. This is the true piety that
a Christian must exercise, the only means to be perfect. In this imitation
and resemblance, consists the perfection of the soul, as well in the state of
grace, as of glory. We know that when we appear we shall be like him, we shall
see him as he is, says Saint John. If then we shall be like him in glory, we
must also be like him in grace; for glory is nothing but grace consummated,
grace glory commenced.

But we must not rest here, it is not enough to do barely what the Son of God
has done, we may deceive our selves herein, believing we do much, when we do
nothing of value, because Jesus Christ being man as we are, and conversing
amongst us; no doubt but we may find some conformity and resemblance to him,
even among the wicked in the common states of men; many suffer and are
oppressed, many poor and humbled, many sequester themselves from the pomp of
the Court, and live in the obscurity of a solitary life; many fast and pray,
and do almost all the exterior actions, that the Son of God exercised upon
earth. He was man as we are, we are men as he was, but this does not perfect
us, this is no imitation of him, the reason is because it is not enough to do
as he did, but we must do it with the spirit, in the dispositions, and by the
principle that he operates, which few persons mind. It is not enough to do, but
we must do it by a principle of grace, not of general grace, comprised under
the common and general name we give to all the gifts of God, which is an
usual way of speaking, but of grace which gives us Jesus Christ,
communicates to us his spirit, and puts us into the holy dispositions of his
soul. So that doing all things by this principle, we perfectly imitate the Son
of God, so far, that our natural common actions are withdrawn from their
meanness, and elevated and united to those of the Son of God, after a
particular manner, as being operated by the same principle, and with the same
dispositions. This manner of acting is peculiar to the state of Christianity,
and in all circumstances, conformable to the state of grace; for by Christian
grace, we are new creatures, creatures in Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19.
as the Apostle says, and consequently we have a new being and life. Which if
we have, we must also have new inclinations, another goodness, and all our
actions must be conformable to this new estate, seeing that according to the
ordinary maxims, the work is according to the being. Now, as the being we have
by Christian grace is wholly divine, elevated, and entirely in Jesus Christ, it
follows, that all our actions must be elevated and done in Jesus. For this the
Son of God humbled himself to all practices and exercises, to ennoble and
sanctify them; for according to the Fathers, Jesus entering into the waters in
the day of his Baptism, by his touching them, he sanctifies the waters of our
Baptism, and as Saint Augustine says, he sanctified the world, and blessed it
by his conversation. So by the use he has made of humane nature, wherewith he
has clothed himself, and of all the exercises and functions proper thereto, he
sanctified ours, showing that we may imitate him, seeing he became man to be
the rule, law and model of our actions, and not only imitate him, but express
and represent him to the life, and be so many Christ's, as members of the Son
of God. We must be one with him, and consequently must not operate but with
him, and in his person, not in our own. For this cause he gives us his spirit
whereby we act; or, to say better, he acts all in us; It follows, that they are
not so much our virtues, as those of Jesus in us.

Herein appears the great difference between Christian virtues and moral, or
humane. For instance, The love God requires of a Christian, must not be that of
a Pagan, who loves them that love him, nor that of a Politician, who loves
according to his humor, or interest, much less that of a Jew, who loves not,
but out of an hope of reward promised, or a fear of Judgments. The love of a
Christian must be the same with that of Jesus, that is, he must love with the
same love wherewith Jesus loves, he must love with the love of Jesus, as he
must live the life of Jesus. Ephesians. 5.2.
Walk in charity, says Saint Paul, as Jesus Christ has loved you. Joh. 13.34
The Son of God himself in the Eve of his passion, speaks thus to his Apostles,
I give you a new Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you. To
love is no new Commandment, this law was imprinted in our hearts from the
beginning of the world, but the manner of loving is new; we must love by the
same love wherewith Jesus loved us, his love must be in us. O, how great is
this love, how pure, how free from self-interest! how strong and powerful,
Col. 1.21, 22.
since, according to the Apostle, it is the same love, which made Jesus to be
born, and die for us, even then, when we were his enemies, and sin reigning in
us. The Son of God gives us a clear testimony of this truth, Jo. 17.26.
speaking to his Father, I have declared to them thy Name, and will declare it,
that the love wherewith thou lovedst me may be in them, and I in them. Expound
as you please these words, you shall always find it most true, that Christian
love, must be the same love with that of Jesus Christ; and that what we say
here of love, we must judge the like of all other Christian virtues; for, as we
have always said, Jesus is our virtue, our strength, our life, and our All.

To possess this virtue in an eminent degree, as Christianity obliges us, we
must acknowledge that this favor is not for all, and that it is not enough to
have grace in the manner we commonly speak, but we must have Jesus Christ in
us, we must have his spirit, and holy dispositions, that we may imitate
Christianity, and express his virtues and life. The Christian therefore who
would acquire true devotion, and do the exercises thereof, must first of all
purify his heart, and conserve it in that purity, and subject the motions and
thoughts of his soul, that Jesus may dwell and act in him. To dispose him to
this favor, he must often elevate his thoughts and heart, to the Son of God,
and demand of him part of his spirit, and holy dispositions, to accomplish
Christianly and perfectly all things. And because the actions of the Son of God
are so many springs and principles of grace, a grace which he merited and
communicates to us, we must bind our selves to this grace, we must adore it,
we must desire it, and demand it of him in all things, and in all our
exercises, that our actions may be done in him, by him, and for him, according
to his designs. This advice is further to be observed, that in the practice of
virtues, that we desire them not principally and only for the love of them,
nor acquire them because they are conformable to Reason; or because they bring
some excellency or benefit to the soul. For though virtue be seemly and
profitable, and of it self much to be desired, yet it it not enough to desire
to be virtuous upon these grounds and principles, since this seems to savor of
the covetousness of Adam, and to live in his spirit, which only aimed at
elevation, and to make himself a little god, or to fall into the corruption of
self-love, which follows only it is own interests, profit and satisfaction. To
act purely, and live in the exercise of Christian piety, all must be done in
the regard of God, for love, of him, and for his honor. We must seek and
practice every virtue, and exercise of devotion, chiefly, to render our selves
conformable to the Son of God, to imitate and please him. And as the first
grace that God gives us in the Church by Baptism, is to make us his children,
to incorporate us in Jesus Christ, as members, and to put us into an adherence
to him; so the first and principal care of a Christian must be, to conserve
and perfect himself in his adherence, and to submit to the effects thereof.
Herein consists the happiness of our souls, and essence of true piety, which is
all we have to propose in this subject. But as all things have their
contraries, and man is in a land of hostility, so he must expect to meet with
great opposition in the way of virtue, and encounter enemies on all sides, and
dangers at every step, we shall direct how to defend himself against them.

CHAP. XIV. Of Temptations and Oppositions happening in the way to perfection,
and the exercises of Piety.
WE belong unto God by the power of his divine essence; we are obliged to him
by reason of our indigence, we depend on him by the condition of our being, his
omnipotency gives him an absolute power over us, and the immensity of his
divine essence, makes him present in us more intimately then light in
transparent bodies, which it penetrates and illuminates, more then the soul is
in the body which it animates and governs. Our wants oblige us to a dependence
on him, and union with him, because we cannot be without his continual
influence, and consequently we must more absolutely depend on his conduct, then
the beam does on the Sun, from whom, if it be but a moment separated, it loses
it is being. So is our estate inseparable from God, Acts 17.28.
it must he always dependant on, always adhering to him, according to Saint
Paul, In him we live, move, and have our being, which words represent our
intimate union with God.

In the like manner, in the estate of grace, we are obliged to be God's, and
depend on him; we cannot operate any work of salvation but by him, and unless
he be united to our souls by grace, that is, unless his holy spirit dwell in
us, operating in us all the good works which may contribute to our salvation.
Without grace we can do nothing, by Christian grace God dwells in us according
to the promise of the Son of God, Rev 3.20.
we come to him, and make our dwelling with him. By grace God enforces himself
into the soul, working an immediate union with her, and dwelling in her as his
sanctuary and empire, whence he diffuseth amorous effects, and operates in her
according to his divine will, with so much bounty, as if the infinite love of
Jesus had no other thing to do, but to procure and further our salvation by
infinite ways.

But besides this of grace, there is yet another union whereby we are united to
God, and incorporated into Jesus Christ, and by him have a relation to God,
namely, that which is wrought by the Sacraments, in which he preserves us by
his love, and by the power of his spirit. For this reason he gave his life, and
shed his blood on the cross, to give us a new generation in Baptism, he
bestows on us his body in the Eucharist, that by so many favors and
obligations this union might remain perfect and solid, and we by so powerful
and legitimate a Title might be his in an indispensable, unalterable manner.
For when we are by so many graces, and such divine and effectual means united
to God, it should seem impossible that any thing could be strong enough to
break so many ties, and divide that which the power and love of God had joined
together. But, O deplorable condition! the creatures and the Devil are strong
enough to separate us from Jesus Christ, and to extinguish in us his holy
spirit and grace; and which is worse, the malice and depraved will of man is of
it self strong enough to obstruct the influences of this liberal love, to
frustrate it is works, to make us retire from our dependence on this conduct.
The perfect Christian must therefore have a vigilant eye, and not suffer
himself to be deceived in an affair that concerns his eternal salvation, which
that he may do, we will discover the snares laid for him, that he may avoid
them.

There are four things which continually separate us from the Son of God, and
force us to ruin, if his grace prevent us not. The first is our own nature,
prone to evil, being taken out of nothing, it has an inclination to that
nothing, whence it came, to re-enter thereinto, and would infallibly return
thereto, if the arm of God, who created it, did not withhold and sustain it.
Nay, this evil inclination of our being would not only return to nothing, but
to a nothing that is rebellious against God, that is, to sin, which has no
other Original, but (if we may so express it) the meanness of our being, which
annihilateth all that God puts into us. The creature being drawn from nothing
inclines to evil, if grace stay him not, says St. Gregory. This is evident in
the fall of Angels and the first man, which can only be attributed to this
nothing whence they were drawn, and which by a secret power, attracts them to
it self. For before sin, there was not in these two natures any perverse
inclination. But if this were in two natures so perfectly accomplished, what
ought not we to fear who are not only in this nothing, but after a manner much
more miserable, without light, without grace, in a depraved nature; by the
evil inclinations of our being, we have in us the source of all evils. The
senses and thoughts of the heart of man, as the holy Text says, Genesis 6.5.
are inclined to evil continually, which ought continually to humble us at the
feet of the Son of God, calling upon him to sustain and preserve us, and
never to suffer us to be separated from him.

The inclinations, and evil habits that are in us, the effects and estates of
original sin, which are fixed to our nature, and self-love therein are the
second enemies which continually endeavor our ruin and separation from God.
The reason is, that our own inclinations and nature are easily fixed on created
things, as being of the same order and condition. These applications are
defective, and divide us from God, but the greatest evil proceeds from this,
that our nature is subject to the Law of sin and tyrannical concupiscence, as
long as we live upon earth; it is subject to the curse and power of sin, as
being the nature of Adam, a cursed rebellious nature, wholly opposite to Jesus
Christ. What therefore proceeds from so bad a beginning, which of itself can
produce no good, is not only to be suspected such, but, partaking of the
quality of its fountain, separates us from God, so that those who follow the
motions and inclinations of the flesh, are immediately divided from God. Rom
8.8.
Those that are in the flesh, says St. Paul, cannot please God, and doubtless,
the more they follow their own inclinations and desires, the more they are
separated.

The Christian therefore who would be perfect, and begins to live in the
exercises of true Christian piety, must oppose and annihilate his motions and
inclinations, or at least not follow them, for they are the inclinations of the
man Adam, but must comply with the inclinations of Jesus Christ, that is,
resign himself to his divine conduct, who rules us by his providence, assists
us with his grace, and acts in us by his spirit. Where, the best remedy against
this danger, is to preserve our selves in an adherence and dependence upon
Jesus Christ, who by the mercy and power of his spirit, can suppress the
tyranny of sin, and preserve us from the dominion it usurpeth over us, as over
a nature it has a right unto. Hence the holy Scriptures call the Son of God,
him, that easily takes off the yoke of sin; he alone by his grace, fortifies
our souls, making them able to resist, without being engaged therein, the power
of sin, to defend them from its violence. By this it appears, how much it
concerns those who exercise themselves in true Christian actions, to acquire
solid piety, that they may depend on and adhere to Jesus Christ, seeing that if
they do not, they are the slaves of sin, and chained to their own inclinations,
which separate them from God.

The third of our enemies is the World which conspires our ruin, and, by the
hate it bears to Jesus Christ, continually endeavors to separate us from him,
either deceiving us by its allurements, or discouraging us by derision and
opposition, or forcing us from our duties by persecution; for hating Jesus
Christ, it consequently persecutes all his. Ioh. 7.7.
The World hates me, says the Son of God, because I testify of it, that the
works thereof are evil. And if the World hate him with an irreconcilable
hatred, it can do nothing less then separate us from him, and dissuade us from
all that may be pleasing to him. The Apostle assures us, that all who will live
godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.12.
must suffer persecution. This they must all look for, who desire to serve God,
and exercise themselves in true piety; assuredly, the World will arm it self
against them, using all manner of insinuations, allurements and importunities
that may be, and practicing all the artifices it can to separate them from
Jesus Christ. This persecution can never cease, for the hate shall endure for
ever, which should engage the Christian to look upon himself in this World, as
exposed to the malice and surprises of his mortal enemies. He must therefore
prepare himself for danger, wherever he is or shall be while he lives, Mat.
26.41.
and following the Counsel of the Son of God, he must watch and pray, least he
be overcome by these assaults, and surprised by those many dangerous
temptations.

When we speak of the World, we include all the creatures whereof it consists;
they all separate us from Jesus Christ, not only by the ill use we may make of
them, but in some manner by the lawful. This is manifest, for the more the
soul is united to, and employed in the Creature, the greater distance is there
between her and her Creator. The creature has an attractive power to withdraw
us, and we have an inclination which carries us thereto, whence we may easily
be deceived by it, even in the lawful use thereof, either by adherence or
engagement, by complacency or satisfaction, and a thousand other ways. Besides
that, every Creature being subject to change and vanity (they are the words of
the Apostle himself) it must necessarily imprint in our souls inconstancy and
vanity, Romans 8, 20.
which is much to be considered, especially by those who seek perfection. We
must therefore hold it a certain Maxim, that the more commerce we have with
the World and the Creatures, the more we are separated from Jesus Christ; the
more we are taken up with the creatures and our selves, the less we are with
Jesus Christ. Which if it be so, may we not justly say, the Earth is covered
with our enemies, and that we are in a place of combat and temptations, and
that every where is danger? It concerns us then to walk with great vigilance,
and continual humility, for on every side we see nothing but ambushes to
surprise us, every where snares to entrap us. Adam was tempted even by an
Apple; we have all objects of temptation, his was only exterior, ours
interior, the source of all our sins, is in the bottom of our cursed and
rebellious nature. Wherefore let us live in fear, and have continual recourse
to him who can perfect us, Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of our souls, who exposed
himself to temptations, Heb. 2.18.
says the Apostle, that he might succor those that are tempted.

Our fourth enemy is the Devil, who endeavors nothing so much, as to separate
us from God and Jesus Christ; he makes use of all creatures, even our selves to
ruin us. The hate he bears to God, the envy to our happiness, and his
obstinate malice, makes him watch continually about us, to make us sharers in
his misery and torments, and to separate us for ever from our only felicity,
Jesus Christ. The more we seek virtue, and endeavor to do well, the more he
strives to divert us. When we are employed in good exercises, he either
withdraws us from them, or disturbs us in them, and incessantly makes use of
all things, even virtue if self to make us lose virtue. Sometimes, as Saint
Peter says, he goes about like a roaring Lion to devour us; sometimes he comes
like a Fox to surprise us. 1 Pet. 5.8.
He follows us every where, and with a malicious subtilty, strives to vomit
forth his poison to infect our purest actions. In fine, he gives not over, till
he has gained or overthrown us by his violence, or enslaved us by deceit, or
at the least wearied us out by continual importunities. In a word, there is no
Artifice he makes not use of, no place or employment that he finds not out, no
sin or action where he is not present with us, to ruin or torment us. What
shall we do then in the midst of so many perplexities? Where shall we find a
sanctuary and secure refuge? How shall we avoid such manifest dangers, and
defend our selves from the cruelties of so powerful an enemy? This we must
needs know, and therefore must not forsake our perfect Christian, till we have
given him directions how to behave himself in such a condition.

CHAP. XV. In what Disposition the Christian ought to be, that he yield not to
such temptations as occur in the exercises of piety.
THey are deceived, who think piety grows among Lilies, that the way to
perfection is strewn with flowers, who imagine nothing but sweetness, and that
a good inclination, or an easy nature can bring us thither; that devotion is a
land flowing with milk and honey, and consequently, that there is nothing
difficult; which yet they are the sooner peswaded to, in regard that in all
their exercises, they only seek certain self-satisfaction, using no violence,
but fastening only upon this, That it is sufficient for a man to do what he
can. There are others on the contrary, who look on the exercises, of piety, as
so rigorous, painful and strict, that they will hardly hear them spoken of,
but say of devotion, as the sensual Jews did of the land of promise, it is an
ill country, inhabited with giants, that devour strangers. See here two
different sentiments, in extremes, and consequently faulty, both deceive
themselves. To remedy this, we may say, that Devotion is indeed a Lily, but
growing among Thorns; Piety has it is thorns, they prick, it may be hurt us,
but these thorns are laden with Roses. As Moses found God in the burning bush
of thorns, Exodus 32.
so the Christian finds God and piety in travells and conflicts; as it is the
life of Jesus, so it is the life of our souls, to believe otherwise, were to
flatter our selves. Devotion has great privileges, piety has a power to bring
us near to God, to honor and serve him, but it is with labor. Sin sets us at
so great a distance from God, that we cannot return to him without much pain.
And yet it is certain, there is much content in this travel, for the grace and
help of God is always present, which will never fail us, as lang as we dispose
our selves to recive it. In this respect devotion is all sweetness, seeing we
are able to do all in him who comforts us. St. Paul saw all this, and knew the
travels we must undergo, and the hazard whereto we are exposed, when he
discovered to the Ephesians their enemies, and arms them on every part to
defend themselves: Ephesians. 6.12.
Ye strive not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God,
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day. It is to us he speaks, the
life of a Christian is a perpetual warfare; this world is a land of perpetual
hostility, wherein we cannot be secure, for Heaven it self was not free from
contention in the fall of the Angels, nor the Son of God when he dwelt in the
wilderness. Now, to understand the dangers we are in on all sides, let us
reflect on what was said in the precedent Chapter, and we shall find how we
ought to stand in fear, and are obliged to have a great vigilance to foresee
the designs, and discover the sleights of the Devil, and to shun the deceit of
self-love. In a word, to overcome the difficulties and temptation which we
continually meet with in all exercises of this life; in few words thus:

Humility is the foundation of all virtues, the sanctuary of the devout soul,
in all the hazards and difficulties of this world. The first Disposition
whereinto we must enter for covert in all dangerous encounters, is to keep our
selves in profound humility, looking on our selves as subject unto all kinds of
misery which separate us so powerfully and so continually from God. To continue
in this disposition of humility, we are to consider on the one side, the
infirmity and inconstancy of our nature, on the other, the inclination we have
to evil. This consideration is enough to annihilate us. This disposition to of
humility keeps us in fear; this fear puts us into a vigilance, that we may have
an eye open to all things, lest we should do any thing that might separate us
from God, or displease him, and by humility we attract the protection of God
(for the truly humble cannot perish) and obtain his grace and light, which
makes us know, and avoid the temptations and subtilties of our enemies, as
Saint Paul says, Take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand the deceits of the Devil.

This Disposition obtained, which must be continual in our souls we must
demand of God that he would be pleased to annihilate in us the evil
inclinations which separate us from him, and place in their room a powerful
inclination toward him, the center of our being, the life and perfection of
our souls: for our inclinations proceeding from the old man, who is contrary
and rebellious toward God, can have no power to lead us to God; nothing can
bring us to him, but he himself. Now since that by the exercises of piety, we
must honor God, and refer our life and actions to him, it must necessarily be
by a principle of God, and by supernatural inclinations. For this reason we
say that the Christian, who seeks true piety, must quit his own inclinations,
and, quitting them, demand those of the Son of God, that we may act by their
motion and principle. Otherwise it is to be feared, that all these exercises of
piety, are rather natural and humane, then supernatural and christian, which
makes many deceive themselves in their daily devotions. But for as much as it
is very interior and insensible, and that reason and sense can nothing assure
us therein, it is very requisite that the devout Christian should establish
himself in grace, and live in a great dependence on, and true adherence to Ie.
Christ, after the manner formerly insisted upon. For all our goodness, all the
grounds of true piety and perfect Christianity, consist in our being God's, and
depending on him.

But we must show more particularly, the uses and practices we are to make use
of in the temptations which ordinarily accompany a Christian life, and the
exercises of piety; for to be tempted is the way and conduct of God over his
Church, and over all souls, and was a part of the life of the Son of God. It
must also be part of the life of a devout soul, and we must not doubt but God
has great designs upon them whom he puts into this estate. Wherefore it
concerns us to know how to make use of it, and to learn how to gather strength
in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9.
and perfect our selves in temptation, since virtue, according to the Apostle,
is made perfect by weakness. Thence she receives luster, God purifies us by
contradictions and subversions, he confirms and assures us by temptations. Let
us see how we may pass through this fire without burning.

CHAP. XVI. Of temptations, and the advantages a Christian ought to make of
them.
THE first advice to be given in this point is, not to be over-confident of our
selves, but to believe that we may be easily tempted; while we are mortal and
subject to the Law of sin, and tyranny of concupiscence, we shall always have
something to fight with. There are a many who think they are in no danger of
temptation, who yet are very deep in it; for either they are guided by their
own natural inclinations and motions, and yet believe they do nothing but by
the motions of grace and conduct of God, or they are seduced by self-love, and
persuaded they are full of the love of God, or happily, are deceived by false
apprehensions, thinking themselves well advanced in the sight and truths of
God. These are great temptations which yet have the appearance of solid virtue,
when indeed the estate of such is very dangerous.

The greatest part of Christians think themselves free from temptations, when
they feel not the violence of them; it is not that they are not tempted, but
the temptation has feiz'd on them, and raigns in them. Whence they say they
are in peace when they are most tyrannized over, and most enslaved by
temptation; the evil is the more dangerous, the less it is known. For this
reason we say, the Christian must always take heed to himself in temptation,
and easily believe it, that he may the better stand upon his guard, for our
nature is corrupt and infirm, our inclinations stray from God, the spirit of
the world is opposite to Jesus Christ, and our enemies subtle and powerful,
watching always for our ruin. This consideration should not perplex us, but
keep us in humility and continual vigilance. The sight of the danger wherein
we are should cause us every moment to cry out and require help of the Son of
God, our protector and refuge in tribulations and anguishes of soul. When we
find our selves in temptations, we are presently obliged to get out of them; it
is not sufficient not to consent thereto, and to be willing to submit to the
effects of the evil spirit: but we should endeavor to destroy the temptation
as far as we can, if it arise from within us, and issue from our own nature, we
must curb it as St. Paul did, 1 Cor. 9.27.
I keep under my body says he, and bring it into subjection. For in such
temptations which must often make use of fasting, watching, prayers and
austerities, we must oppose our selves, fight against our inclinations, destroy
our evil habits, curb our lusts and affections, forcing them from all objects
as much as possible. In brief, we must use violence against our selves,
delicacies are indeed the effects of self-love, and the fuel of temptations. If
we would free our selves from temptation, we must take away the cause, for when
there is a correspondence between our nature and our enemies, our souls will at
last be yielded up unto them.

Let men commend these serenities of devotion as they will, and preach up the
goodness of God, yet if it be true that virtue must be bought, that we must
crucify the old man, and destroy him, not sooth and cherish him; if according
to divine and humane Laws, 1 Cor. 9.25.
he that will overcome and gain the Crown, must fight; if wrastlers, as St.
Paul says, to gain a transitory honor, and fading crown, deprive themselves,
and abstain from all things, what we do, who ( as Christians) hope for a crown
must of glory and immortality? We must fight, oppose, and subdue our selves, if
we will triumph over temptation which is bred in us. But if the temptation be
from the Devil, we must then oppose it the more courageously with a Christian
generosity. For if he find us remiss, he will strike home, and overcome us. To
a faithful confident soul, he is no more then a Fly, to a feeble and cowardly,
fierce as a Lion. Resist the Devil, Iam. 4.7.
and he will fly you, says St. James.

As to discover, so to vanquish and destroy temptations, we must live in great
humility, and above all, take heed we trust not too much to our own courage, or
good resolutions; on the contrary, we must distrust our selves, and confide
only in God; for we should be overcome in any (ever so small) temptation, if
God by his grace, did not assist us, if he gave us not his light, we should not
so much as know them. Mat. 8.24.
Wherefore we must always say with the Disciples, Save us, O Lord, or we
perish. We must often call upon the spirit of Jesus, and the grace of his
mysteries, to give us strength in our weakness, and light in the darkness of
our spirit, who was himself tempted, that he might overcome us, that in the
temptation of Jesus, we might find strength and grace, sufficient to preserve
and save us in all manner of temptations. This Saint Paul meant, when he said,
Take unto you the armor of God, Ephesians. 6.13.
that ye may resist in the evil day. It belongs to the Son of God to give us
the armor, that is, to give us strength, and grace to resist. To obtain this
favor, the Apostle particularly recommends Prayer to us, saying, Pray always,
v. 18.
with all prayer and supplication, in the spirit, and watch with all
perseverance. These words are to show with what importunity, devotion and
fervor we are to pray. And truly we have need, when the perils are so great,
our enemies so powerful, and our forces so small. In the time of temptation,
it is not requisite to fight hand to hand, much less to dispute with it, to
reason with, or examine it, or to force it away by violence; this were to
attribute too much to our selves; for many times to examine it, is to entertain
it, and to strive to oppose it too nearly, is to become fastened to it; and by
disputing with it, we are overcome. It is more to purpose, that as soon as we
see the temptation, we turn our thought some other way, and look upon it with
contempt and derision. We must neither hearken to the Devil, nor speak to him;
nothing puts him into greater fury, then to see himself slighted; nothing
pleases him more, then to heed and regard him, for so we give him access, and
in a manner, enter into acquaintance with him. This is one of his ordinary
subtilties whereby he deceives even the most wary, yet we take no heed of it.
The devils intention in all this, is to amuse and entertain us; the objects he
lays before us, are not always evil; it is sufficient for him, if he but see us
hearken to him, that he may by little and little enter into discourse with us,
which once done, he will soon instill his poison into us. Which way sover it
is, his drift is to turn us from God, that he may have the disposal of our
hearts and spirits; that is enough to deceive even those who make profession of
solid piety, and much faithfulness in the ways of God. It is no small evil to
turn away from God, to regard and examine a suggestion and conference, that the
devil would have with our spirits, although we should do it to a good end, with
an intent to drive him away. For it is to heed the devil, to hearken to him,
and by a strict examination of his suggestions, to confer with him; it is to
withdraw our hearts and thoughts from God, to employ them in what the devil
proposes.

To avoid all these impurities, and to keep our selves from danger, we must
bear the temptation without enclining to it; we must spit at the devil, slight
all his assaults, and above all, withdraw our eyes and thoughts from all he
proposes. This is the shortest and most easy way in all kinds of temptations;
For we shall find, that temptations stay in us, because we entertain them under
pretense of driving them away, and examining them; It is enough we be
watchful, and as soon as we have discovered the temptation or suggestion of
the devil, to renounce and despise it. But there are some temptations that
arise from objects or occasions, in which case we must only avoid them, and
from all that may divide us from God. There are others that are urgent, and
make lively impressions upon our spirits, upon diverse matters, which would be
long to explain. In these cases we must not regard the temptation, but God in
it, as Job did, when he was most tempted, and afflicted: The Lord gives, and
the Lord takes away; Job 1.21.
so we, when pressed, must cast our selves at the feet of Jesus Christ, and
offer our selves to him, that he may annihilate the temptation in us, if it be
for his glory, or keep us from consenting thereto. We must implore his mercy,
for there are such pressing temptatirns that there is need of the greatest
mercy of God to deliver us from them. We must therefore cry out with humility,
and, as much as we can, enter into some conference and application of spirit
with the Son of God, acording to the state and strength of our soul.

CHAP. XVII. Of Resignations in Temptation.
BUT if we have not the power to elevate our selves to God, if the soul be so
bound by his secret conduct, that we are sensible of our being forsaken to a
general impotency, we must cast our selves upon God, and having done what we
can, (though ever so little) employ the rest of our forces in offering our
selves to the designs of God over us, resigning our selves absolutely to his
conduct, and with a spirit of confidence be content to bear, and patiently
suffer the estate wherein we are. Or if our soul can apply her self to any
object, she shall honor the weaknesses and temptations that the Son of God
vouchsafed to sustain upon earth, and shall implore his spirit and grace, that
she do nothing in this estate of weakness and temptation, that may displease
him. But if our souls be reduced to an absolute impotency, she must remain
therein with dependence and humility of spirit: there is nothing else required,
then to take care that we never regard the temptation, but bear it with
humility and patience. Observe that it must be born with humility; for though
we consent not to the evil or temptation, though assisted by the grace of God,
we bear it with much patience, and with a spirit of sufferance, yet we ought to
annihilate and humble our selves; because the evil is in us, and we are joined
to the temptation. This point is the more to be considered, because herein the
Devil deceives many, and by a malicious dangerous deceit, runs them out of
patience, and brings them into much evil, whence they cannot withdraw
themselves without a particular mercy of God. To comprehend this secret, we
must note that the spirit of sufferance and temptation, is an Evangelicall and
Divine Estate, and we say ordinarily, that it is a mark of God's Elect, an
effect of the residence of Jesus Christ in us, an infallible fruit of love, the
last draught of Christian perfection. Hence the soul that is arrived at this
estate, is looked on as a chief work of Grace. Now the Devil who watches us
every where, and circumvents even the best, fails not to spit his poison here,
if he can, and will, (if such souls do not annihilate themselves by profound
humility) infallibly deceive them. He makes them easily enter into an esteem of
the estate wherein they are, and insinuates a vain confidence thereof, he
applies them to a regard of themselves, makes them believe they are well
advanced in Virtue, and much in Gods favor* since he numbers them among his
friends, and treats them as those he loves best. Thus by degrees he brings
them into an esteem of themselves and their virtue, and having infused this
poison into the heart, and put the soul into this belief, it is easy for him
to ruin it, to do what he will with it, to deceive it as he pleases.

The Devil has another slight more dangerous and less known, which is, when
he changes himself into an Angel of comfort, and spirit of consolation; even he
who gives temptations, and oppresses us with subversions, gives us at the same
time strength and address to defend our selves; he suffers himself to be
vanquished. He who suggested the evil thought and deed, inspires patience, and
an extraordinary resignation, making us feel a courage and a desire to suffer.
Not that those effects are solid and permanent, nor that he desires we should
do well therein, but to deceive us, and put us into an esteem of our selves,
and our virtue, and into a dangerous confidence* that so God may leave us. He
knows no estate is more hateful to God, or more opposite to his grace and
conduct, then the esteem of our self. It is therefore expressly recommended to
the Christian who would be saved from the subtilties of the Devil, that he be
always in fear, a filial fear, and that in the temptation it self, in his
greatest patience and resignation he hides himself in his nothing, and keep
himself in a profound humility, for that is the Sanctuary of the soul, the
Christians Buckler to quench as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 6.16.
the subtle and fiery darts of the Devil.

But what if after all this the temptation remain, is it not lawful to
endeavor to get out of it, and to beseech God to deliver us from it? The most
perfect will never do so, they having given up themselves wholly to God's
divine conduct, will here also leave themselves in the hands of God; without
saying any thing, for they think of nothing but suffering, seeing it is Gods
pleasure and their practice, to annihilate and humble themselves, being assured
he will never forsake those that are his in temptation. The devout Christian
who walks steadfastly in the way of virtue, seeks no support or repose in any
thing, or troubles himself about it, or omitteth the least of his exercises, or
loses the peace of his soul, or serenity of his look. On the contrary, he is
animated in this combat, he defies his enemy, and derides him and all his
works, addressing himself wholly to God who is his love and trust. He renders
him thanks, and absolutely resignes himself up to him, to bear as long as, and
in what manner he pleases the temptation and suffering he is in. There is a way
to make a further progress in this estate. Some souls there are (which will
happily seem incredible) who have neither desire nor thought of imploring Gods
assistance, not but that they know the need they have thereof, but they are so
devoted to God, so perfectly resigned to his divine will, that if God would
destroy them, they would be content, so great a thirst have they for the glory
of God, so great a desire to suffer, that they are so far from receiving, that
they do not so much as think of demanding help, their regard being barely and
simply in God. Besides they know the love and infallibility of God, faithful in
his promises, never forsaking those that are his. By this truth they are
possessed and excited. On the other side, they so purely and absolutely resign
themselves to the will of God, that they never mind whether they suffer or are
in danger, it is enough for them that they do nothing to displease God, and
know that they are Gods, and God wholly theirs.

But this resignation is only in some few; we will not say, but it is
permitted sometimes to demand help of God and man, not to be absolutely freed,
(that were happily to go beyond the conduct and designs of God) but for strength
and direction in Temptation. For example. If a Christian through want of light,
courage and strength, find himself fail, it will be very requisite that he
speak with his director, demanding his advice in an Affair of so great
consequence, and so much danger. In these anguishes he must elevate his heart
to God, call upon him, and earnestly implore his assistance; this is not
forbidden. On the contrary, it is necessary, so it be with this condition, that
the will of God be accomplished in him, and his good pleasure fulfilled, and
that his recourse to God be not forced by any secret impatience, or
irresignation of his soul. In that case it were to yield to the temptation, to
commit an extraordinary impurity, and prejudicial infidelity. But to run unto
God to demand strength and conduct, with resignation and patience, is that
which is promised to all Christians.

CHAP. XVIII. Diverse Uses that may be made of Temptation.
WE must observe well what has been said upon this occasion. The Christian who
would live in the exercises of true piety, must greatly esteem this way of
combat and temptation, for it is noble, and works great effects in the soul,
which she may meet with in all the exercises of humane life, since in all we
are to fight against the imperfections, failings, impurities and malignities,
which secretly insinuate themselves into her. But we must chiefly esteem
thereof, because the Son of God has great designs upon our souls, and
operates great things in them by these ways of temptation, desertions, and
resignations. Wherefore it concerns us to know how to make use thereof, that we
cooperate with the designs of God, and receive, as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor.
10.13.
Cum tentatione proventum. For the Son of God, who is faithful, and permits us
not to be tempted beyond our strength, gives ordinarily with the temptation,
particular graces, and communicates himself, though in a hidden manner, yet
truly to the soul that receives them as she ought, it being most certain, that
in the ways of piety, God communicates himself, more ordinarily by these then
any other ways, as we formerly said when we treated of sufferings.

The chief use we are to make of temptation, is to receive it, and look on it
as the conduct of God over us; we must accept it with a profound humility, with
a subjection and dependence of soul, upon the conduct of God in the temptation
it self. I say, with humility, because the soul which follows the spirit of
true Devotion, must desire thoroughly to be humbled, and embrace with readiness
of spirit, all the ways of humiliation, and all the occasions which present
themselves therein. It is a maxim in all estates and exercises of Devotion,
that the principal use we are to make of all the ways of God over us, is
humility, and therefore, as temptation is a way of God, a way of rigor and
danger, so must we humble our selves much therein, the more we are tempted and
abandoned; For, in effect, the best and most profitable disposition that we can
be in, is to annihilate our selves before God; and like Job, place our selves,
if it be requisite, upon a dunghill, to attend and receive what punishment
soever the hand of God shall vouchsafe to inflict upon us. Is it not reason it
should be so? If God be so pleased, as to annihilate us by pains and
temptations, what have we to say against it? To what purpose so much fear, so
much reluctance? If God will punish us in this fire, we must hold our selves
content; if he will humble us, we must annihilate our selves; if by temptation
he will use his justice, and punish us, why should we be troubled thereat? Yea,
though he should leave us to be swallowed up by the temptation (which can never
fall out but through our own fault) let us accept of his judgments, and adore
his justice, saying with Eli, when he heard from the mouth of little Samuel,
the decree of Gods justice against him, 1 Samuel 3.18.
Dominus est, quod bonus est in oculis suis faciat. Let us say the same, let us
receive all from the hand of God, with great humility. This is the first use we
are to make of temptation.

Another is, to receive it with subjection of soul to the Will of God.
Temptation is the conduct of God over us. We must not therefore consider him
that tempts us, nor yet the temptation we groan under, but the order of God,
and the designs he has upon us in that temptation. Nothing can happen to us,
but by his permission, though the Devil make it his constant business, to hurt,
molest, and destroy us, if he could, yet he has no power but what he receives
from God, all his power is limited. We must not therefore regard the Devil that
tempts us, nor the temptation or malice of our enemies, but the will and
order of God in the temptation.

To comprehend this well, we must remember that temptation, is not only a
permission of God, but one of his ordinary ways of proceeding over us, to
conduct us to him. Whence it follows, that it is not enough to suffer, and to
submit to temptations, but we must do it purely, and holily. For seeing
temptations and afflictions are the ordinary ways of God to conduct us to him,
we must not in temptation make any pause, or think it sufficient to bear them
patiently, or to fight against them, but we must pass further, and go even to
God, to whom they will conduct us, if we make such use of them as we ought.
Thus in temptation, we must rather regard God then the temptation, that binds
us to God. It is true, we may fear to be overcome, but if we be left to God, he
will not fail us in our necessity; he promised to be with us in our agonies and
temptations. Let us be but faithful in our duties and actions, and without
doubt, he will be faithful in his promises.

A third use of temptations, is, to refer them to the glory of God, and to
offer to him the state that we bear, and all that passes in us. This is
grounded both upon our duties, and the designs of God, who wills, that we
referr to him all the estates of our soul, and all the actions and moments of
our life, that is, all that is in us, and all that we are. This use is also
grounded on the condition of all things which are opposite to honor, and pay
homage to God, but principally, the Christian, who is called to the state of
Christianity, only to serve and honor God; and particularly, such as make
profession of piety; since true devotion requires much fidelity, and wills us
to make use of all things to unite us to God, and to render to him the honors
and homages due to his divine and supreme Majesty.

If we reflect upon all that has been said from the beginning to this instant,
we shall see that we end where we began, and that we have done nothing, but
shown the Christian, who would be perfect, that true piety consists in
purifying the heart, and making it worthy to bear and possess God; that he is
truly devout, who lives according to the spirit and grace of Christianity; that
to arrive at this happiness, we must adhere to Jesus Christ, our way and means
to bring us to God; that the principal care we ought to have in these
exercises, is, to preserve our selves therein, which, indeed, brings us to an
adherence to the Son of God, and to live with great fidelity and vigilance,
subject to the conduct of Jesus, and dependant upon his holy Ordinances. These
are the foundations we must lay, if we would acquire true piety; and when we
come to the Consideration of Works, and to express the external worship, love,
and service, which we would render to God, we have said, that it is not enough
to do good things, but we must accomplish them by the conduct of his holy
spirit, according to his intentions, and in holy dispositions. We have already
proposed the method; it suffices to know, that therein consists the essence and
nature of a Christian, for which we render to God the honor and service due to
him. This is all we mean to show in this Discourse, which we will conclude with
the words and prayer of Saint Paul, The God of peace make you perfect in every
good work, Heb. 13.20.21.
to do his will, working in you that which is acceptable in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Tho. Dring, and are to be sold at the George in
Fleet Street, near Saint Dunstans Church.
THe Pleader, containing perfect precedents and forms of Declarations,
pleadings, issues, judgments, and proceedings in all kind of actions, both
real and personal, by Mr. Brownlow, Mr. Moyle, Mr. Gulston, and Mr. Conye,
published by John Herne Gent. in folio. The Law of Conveyances, showing the
nature, kinds, and effects of all manner of Assurances: also directions to
issue out and prosecute all manner of Writs; a Warrant to summon a Court of
Survey, and the Articles to be given in charge, and inquired of in that Court,
by John Herne* in octavo. The Reports of that Reverend and Learned Judge Sir
Richard Hutton, in folio. The twelfth Part of the Reports of Sir Edward Coke,
in folio, the second impression. The Reports of the Reverend and Learned Judge
Owen, in folio. The Reading upon the Statute of the thirteenth of Elizabeth.
Chapt. 7. touching Bankrupts, by John Stove of Gray's Inn, Esquire. An
Abridgement of the Common Law, with the Cases thereof; drawn out of the old and
new books of Law for the benefit of all Practisers and Students by William
Hughs of Gray-Inn, Esquire. in quarto An excellent Abridgement of all the Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament, from 1640. to 1647. by William Hughs Esquire. in quarto.
The Reports of Sergeant Bridgeman, in folio. The ground of the Laws of England,
extracted out of the fountains of all Learning, and fitted for all Students and
Practitioners, in large octavo. An exact Abridgement of that excellent Book,
called Doctor and Student, in octavo. A profitable Book of Mr. John Perkins,
treating of the Laws of England, in octavo. The Interpreter, or Book containing
the signification of all the words of the Law, by Joh. Cowel, in folio. The
Maxims of Reasons, or the Rule of the Common Law, by Edmond Wingate, Esquire. in
folio. An exact Abridgment of all the Statutes in force and use, upon the
fourth of Jan. in the year 1641.1643. faithfully extracted out of the said
Statutes; from Magna Charta, to the said time, by Edmond Wingate, Esquire.
Artamenes, or the grand Cyrus, an excellent new Romance, in five volumes, in
folio, Written by the famous Wit of France, Mounsier De Scudery, in English by
F. G. Esquire. Clelia, an excellent new Romance in four volumes in folio, by
Mounsier De Scudery. The illustrious Bassa, a complete Romance, in fol. by
Mounsier De Scudery. Astrea, an excellent and complete Romance, in three
volumes, in fol. translated by a person of Honor. The History of Polinder and
Flostela, a Romance in verse, by James Harrington, Esquire. The third Edition,
revised, and much enlarged. The History of the lives of the Philosophers, with
their Figures, in two volumes in fol. by Thomas Stanley, Esquire. The History
of the Wars between Swedeland and Poland, which occasioned the expulsion of
Sigismundus the third, King of those Kingdoms, with his heirs for ever from the
Swedish Crown; with a continuation of those Wars, utill the trace, An. 1619.
Also a Narration of the daily passages at the last and great Treaty of
pacification between these two Kingdoms, concluded at Stumbsdorf in Prussia,
An. 2635. concluding with a brief commemoration of the life and death of Sir
George Duglas, Knight. Ambassador extraordary from the late King of Great Britain,
by John Fowler, Secratary to his Lordship for that Embassy, in folio. An
Historical Discourse of the City of London, with the History of Westminster,
and the Courts of Justice, Antiquities, and new buildings thereunto belonging,
by James Howel, in fol. The History of the Goths, Swedes and Vandals, by the
Bishop of Upfall, in fol. The History of Masiniello, The second part, with a
continuation of that tumult, and the end of it, in octavo, by J. A. Esquire.
The natural and experimental History of Winds, written in Latin by the Right
Honorable, the Lord Bacon, in English by R. G. in 12. printed 1653. The life
and death of Freeman Sands, Esquire, by R. Boremon, in quarto. Things New and
Old: or, a Storehouse of above two thousand Similies, and Sentences,
Allegories, Apophthegmes, Adigies, Apologues, Divine and Moral, political and
Historical* with proper applications; a Book that will furnish the Reader with
rarities for the adornment of his Discourse, upon any subject whatsoever in
large folio. Anti-Socinianism, or ae Confutation of Socinian Heresy, with a
Description of their lives and deaths of the chief Authors of that Sect, and
when it was brought into England: by N. Chewny, M. A. in Quarto. The
Arraignment of the Anabaptists, wherein the Antiquity, universality, and
succession of Infant Baptism, since the Apostles days is maintained, and
Necessity of Dipping refuted by J. Cragge M. A. the last Edition, in Octavo. A
Sermon preached at the Assizes at Huntington, by J. Gaul. M. Sands Paraphrase
upon the Psalms, in large Octavo. Good thoughts for every day of the month, by
M. D. S. in twenty four. Gods House, with the nature and use thereof, as it
ought to be understood and respected by Christians under the Gospel: by Simon
Gunton, M. A. in twelves. Eight Sermons of Mr. Craggs, with a Treatise of the
lawfulness of Tithes, and the lawfulness of Marriage by the Minister, in
Octavo. An Exhortation for Desperate sinners, written by the Right Honorable
the Lord Grandison, Prisoner in the Isle of White, in twelves. Sapientia
Justificata, a Vindication of the fifth Chapter of the Romans, or an answer to
Dr. Jeremy Taylor's Deus Justificatus, by John Gaul, M. A. in twelves. The
Soliloquies of St. Bonaventure, containing his four mental exercises, and also
his Treatise called the Bundle of Myrrh. Concerning the passion of our Savior,
with thirteen spiritual exercises of the said Bonaventure, in twenty four. A
Catalogue of the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen that have compounded for their
estates, with the sums that paid their Compositions; in Octavo. A Panagyrick of
the Queen of Swedeland in Octavo. Letters of affairs, Love, and Courtship,
written to several persons of Honor and Quality by the exquisite Pen of
Mounsieur de Voyture, A member of the famous French Academy established at
Paris, by Cardinal de Richlieu, in Octavo. A Trance of News from Hell, or
Mercurius Acheronticus, by James Howel Esquire, in Quarto, Modern Policy, taken
from Machiavel and Borgia, by an eyewitness a most incomparable piece, in
twelves, the seventh Edition. The Accomplished Courtier; Consisting of
Institutions and Examples, by which Courtiers and Officers of state, may square
their Transactions prudently, and in good order and method, by H.W. Gentleman,
in Octavo. The Minister of State, wherein is shown the true use of Modern
Policy, by Monsieur de Sithon. Rendered into English by Sir Henry Harbert
Knight, in folio. An Apology for Paris, for rejecting of Juno, and giving of
her Golden Ball to Venus, by R. Barron, Gentleman, in Octavo. Pocula
Castaliana, or Castalian Cups, by Robert Barron, in Octavo. Mirza (a Tragedy
really acted in Persia, by R. B. Gentleman, in Octavo. Choice Poems, being
Amorous, Moral, Lusory, etc. by Edward Sherburn Esquire, in Octavo Five Plays
by Richard Brom, in Octavo. Select Poems, by William Hammond, in large Octavo.
The Romans of Monsieur de Balzack, or his last Letters written to several
grand and eminent persons in France; whereunto are annexed the Familiar Letters
of Monsieur de Balzack, to his Friend Monsieur Chaplin, never before in
English, in Octavo. 1658. Wit Restored, being Select Poems never before in
Octavo. The Learned man defended and reformed, by the happy Pen of R. Daniel
Bartolus. Arnaldo, or the injured Lover, an excellent new Romance now extant.
FINIS.

