

Pictor adumbravit Vultum ^uem cernimus a^t hic
Non valet egregias (...) mentis Opes
Has si seire cupis, sua consu^c Carmina ^n ^^lis
Dotes percipies pectoris eximias
What here we see is but a Graven face
Only the shadow of that brittle case
Wherein were treasured up those Gemms, which he
Has left behind him to Posterity. A^^ (...)
^culp:
Judgment and Mercy for afflicted souls by Fra: Quarles 1646.



JUDGMENT and MERCY FOR AFFLICTED SOULS. OR Meditations. Soliloquies, And
Prayers.

BY FRA. QVARLES.

LONDON, Printed by Ric. Cotes, for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane,
1646.

TO MY MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN KING CHARLES.
SIR,
I Believe you to be such a Patron of Virtue, that if this Treatise had the
least probability of cherishing Vice, my countenance durst not admit a thought
of this dedication to your Majesty.

But my own reason (seconded by better approbations) assures me, these
Disquisitions and Prayers are like to beget grace in those where it was not,
and confirm it where it was.

And being so useful, I dare not doubt your patronage of this Child, which
survives a Father whose utmost abilities were (till death darkened that great
light in his soul) sacrificed to your service.

But, if I could question your willing protection of it, I might strengthen my
petition for it, by an unquestionable commendation of the Authors published
meditations, in most of which (even those of Poetry begun in his youth) there
are such tinctures of Piety, and Pictures of devout passions, as gained him
much love, and many Noble friends.

One of that number (which is not to be numbered) was the Religious, Learned,
Peaceable, humble Bishop of Armagh; whom I beseech God to bless, and make your
Majesty and him, in these bad, sad times, instruments of good to this
distracted, distempered Church and State.

This is my unfeigned prayer: and I doubt not but all that wish well to Sion
will seal it with their Amen.

Your Majesty's poor and most faithful Subject, RICHARD ROYSTON.

The Preface.
Reader,
IT is thought fit to say this little, and but this little, of the Author and
his book.

He was (for I speak to those that are strangers to his extraction and
breeding) a branch of a deserving family, and the son of a worthy father: his
education was in the Universities, and Innes of Court, but his inclination was
rather to Divine studies then the Law.

This appears in most of his published books, (which are many) but I think in
none more then this, which was finished with his life.

Wherein the Reader may behold (according to the arguments undertaken by the
Author) what passions, and in what degrees those passions have possessed his
soul, and whether grace have yet allayed, or expelled them, (those that are
inconsistible with virtue) from the str^ng hold of his affections.

Such this Treatise is, and being such, I commend it to the Reader, and this
wish with it, that th^se many (too many) writers who mistake malice for zeal,
and (being transported) speak evil of government, and ^eddle with things they
understand not, Jude 8, 10. forgetting there is such sins as ^edition and
heresy, (sins which Saint Paul, Gal. 5. 20. 21^ parallels with murder and
witchcraft) would change their disputes into devout meditations, such as these
be; in which, the pious man shall see virtue adorned with beautiful language,
and vice so presented, as it is not like to infect the mind, nor corrupt the
conscience.

The method, the arguments, the style, all speak Mr. Quarles the Author of the
book, and the book speaks his commendations so much, that I need not commend
it; but I do thee to God.

Farewell.
The Table.
Meditation I.
The Sensual man's Solace. Page 1. His Sentence. 2 His Proofs. 3 His
Soliloqui^. 4 His Prayer. 5
Meditation II.
The Vainglorious man's Vaunt, etc. 7
Meditation III.
The Oppressors Plea, etc. 13
Meditation IV.
The Drunkards Iubile, etc. 19
Meditation V.
The Swearers Apology, etc. 25
Meditation VI.
The Pr^^rastinators Remora's, etc. 31
Meditation VII.
The Hypocrites Prevarication, etc. 37
Meditation VIII.
The ignorant man's Faultering, etc. 43
Meditation IX.
The Slo^hfull man's slumber, etc. 49
Meditation X.
The proud man's Ostentation, etc. 55
Meditation XI.
The Covetous man's Care, etc. 61
Meditation XII.
The Self-lovers Self-fraud, etc. 67
Meditation XIII.
The Worldly man's Verdour, etc. 73
Meditation XIIII.
The Lascivious man's Heaven, etc. 79
Meditation XV.
The Sabbath Breakers Profa^ation, etc. 85
Meditation XVI.
The Censorious man's Crimination, etc. 91
Meditation XVII.
The Liers fallacies, etc. 97
Meditation XVIII.
The Revenge^ull man's Rage, etc. 103
Meditation XIX.
The Secure man's Triumph, etc. 109
Meditation XX.
The Presumptuous man's Felicities, etc. 115
The sensual man's Solace.
COme, let us be merry, and rejoice our souls, in frolique and in fresh
delights: Let Us skrue our pamperd hearts a pitch beyond the reach of dull-browd
sorrow: Let Us pass the slowpac'd time in melancholy charming mirth, and take
the advantage of our youthful days: Let Us banish care to the dead Sea of
Phlegmatic old age: Let a deep sigh be high Treason, and let a solemn look
be adjudg'd a Crime too great for Pardon. My serious studies shall be to draw
mirth into a Body, to analyze laughter, and to paraphrase upon the various
Texts of all (...). My recreat^ons shall be to still pleasure into a
Quintessence, to reduce Beauty to her first principles, and to extract a
perfect innocence from the milke-white Doves of Venus. Why should I spend my
precious minutes in the sullen and dejected shades of sadness? or ravell out
my short lived days in solemn and heartbreaking Care? Hours have Eagles
wings, and when their hasty flight shall put a Period to our numbered days, the
world is gone with us, and all our forgotten joys are left to be enjoyed by
the succeeding Generations, and we are snatched we know not how, we know not
whither; and wrapped in the dark bosom of eternal night. Come then my soul; be
wise, make use of that which gone, is past recalling, and lost, is past
redemption: Eat thy Bread with a merry heart, and gulp down care in frolique
cups of liberal Wine. Beguile the teadious nights with dalliance, and steep
thy stupid senses in unctious, in delightful sports. It Is all the portion that
this transitory world can give thee: Let Music, Voices, Masks and midnight
Revells, and all that melancholy wisdom censures vain, be thy delights. And
let thy care-abjuring soul cheer up and sweeten the short days of thy
consuming youth. Follow the ways of thy own heart, and take the freedom of
thy sweet desires: Leave not delight untryed, and spare no cost to heighten up
thy Lusts. Take pleasure in the choice of pleasures, and please thy curious
eyes with all varieties, to satisfy thy soul in all things which thy heart
desires. I, but my soul, when those evil days shall come wherein thy wasting
pleasures shall present their Items to thy bedrid view, when all diseases and
the evils of age shall muster up their Forces in thy crazy bones, where be thy
comforts then?

COnsider O my soul, and know that day will come, and after that, another,
wherein for all these things God will bring thee to judgment, Eccles. 11. 9.

Prove. 14. 13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that
mirth is heaviness.

Eccles. 2. 2. I said in my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth,
and therefore enjoy pleasure, and behold this also is vanity: I said of
laughter, It is mad; and of mirth, What does it?

St. James. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have
nourished your hearts as in the day of slaughter.

Eccles. 7. 4. The heart of the wise man is in the house of mourning: but the
heart of fools is in the house of mirth.

Isid. in Synonymis. Pleasure is an Inclination to the unlawful objects of a
corrupted mind, allured with a momentary sweetness.

Hugo. Sensuality is an immoderate indulgence of the flesh, a sweet payson, a
strong plague, a dangerous Potion which effeminates the body, and enerves the
soul.

Cass. Lib. 4. Ep. They are most sensible of the burden of affliction that are
most taken with the pleasures of the flesh.



What have thou now to say O my soul, why this judgment, seconded with
divine proofs, backed with the harmony of holy men, should not proceed against
thee? Dally no longer with thy own Salvation, nor flatter thy own Corruption:
Remember, the wages of flesh are sin, and the wages of sin, death: God has
threatened it, whose judgments are terrible? God has witnessed it, whose words
are truth. Consider then my soul, and let not momentary pleasures flatter thee
into eternity of torments: How many, that have trod thy steps, are now roaring
in the flames of Hell! and yet thou triflest away the time of thy Repentance. O
my poor deluded soul, presume no longer; Repent to day, left to morrow come
too late: Or could thou ravell out thy days beyond Methusalem, tell me,
alas, what will Eternity be the shorter for the deduction of a thousand
years? Be wisely provident therefore O my soul, and bid vanity the common
sorceresse of the world, farewell; life and death are yet before thee: Choose
life, and the God of life will seal thy ^boyee. Prostrate thy self before him
who delights not in the death of a sinner, and present thy Petitions to him who
can deny thee nothing in the name of a Savior.

His Prayer.
O God, in the beauty of whose holiness is the true joy of those that love
thee, the full happiness of those that fear thee, and the only rest of those
that prize thee; In respect of which the transitory pleasures of the world are
less then nothing, in comparison of which the greatest wisdom of the world is
folly, and the glory of the earth but dross, and dung; How dare my boldness
thus presume to press into thy glorious presence? What can my prayers expect
but thy just wrath and heavy indignation? O what return can the tainted breath
of my polluted lips deserve, but to be bound hand and foot, and cast into the
flames of Hell? But Lord, the merits of my Savior are greater then the
offenses of a sinner, and the sweetness of thy mercy exceeds the sharpness of
my misery: The horror of thy judgments have seized upon me, and I languish
through the sense of thy displeasure; I have forsaken thee the rest of my
distressed soul, and set my affections upon the vanity of the deceitful
world. I have taken pleasure in my foolishness, and have vaunted my self in
mine iniquity, I have flattered my soul with the honey of delights, whereby I
am made sensible of the sting of my affliction; wherefore I loath, and utterly
abhor my self, and from the bottom of my heart repent in dust and ashes.
Behold O Lord, I am impure and vile, and have wallowed in the puddle of mine
own Corruptions; The Sword of thy displeasure is drawn out against me, and
what shall I plead O thou preserver of mankind? Make me a new Creature O my
God, and destroy the old man within me. Remove my affections from the love of
transitory things, that I may run the way of the Commandments. Turn away
mine eyes from beholding vanity, and make thy Testimonies my whole delight
Give me strength to discern the emptiness of the creature, and inebriate my
heart with the fullness of thy joys. Be thou my portion O God, at whose right
hand stand pleasures for evermore. Be thou my refuge and my shield, and suffer
me not to sink under the corruptions of my heart; let not the house of mirth
beguile me, but give me a sense of the evil to come. Accept the free will
offerings of my mouth, and grant my petitions for the honor of thy Name, then
will I magnify thy mercies O God, and praise thy Name for ever and ever.

The vain^ glorious man's Vaunt.
What tell thou me of Conscience, or a pious life? They are good trades for
a leaden spirit that can stand bent at every frown, and want the brains to
make a higher Fortune, or cou^age to atchieve that honor which might glorify
their names, and write their memories in the Chronicles of Fame. It Is true,
Humility is a needful gift in those that have no Quality to exercise their
pride; and patience is a necessary Grace to keep the world in peace, and him
that has it, in a whole skin, and often proves a virtue borne of mere
nec^ssi^ie. And civil Honesty is a fair pretense for him that has not wit to
act the Knave, and makes a man capable of a little higher style then Fo^le. And
blushing modesty is a pretty innocent quality, and serves to vindicate an
easy nature from the imputation of an ill-breeding. These are inferior
Graces, that have got a good opinion in the dull wisdom of the world, and
appear like water among the Elements to moderate the body Poli^ique, and keep
it from combustion, nor do they come into the work of honor. Virtue consists
in Action, and the reward of action is Glory. Glory is the great soul of the
little world, and is the Crown of all sublime attempts, and the point whereto
the crooked ways of policy are all concentrick. Honor consults not with a
pious life. Let those that are ambitious of a religious reputation abjure all
honorable Titles, and let their dough-bak'd spirits take a pride in sufferance,
(the Anvile of all injuries) and be thankfully baffled into a quiet
pilgrimage. Rapes, mur^hers, treasons, dispossessions, riots, are venial
things to men of honor, and often co-incident in high pursuits. Had my dull
Conscience stood upon such nice points, that little honor I have won had
glorified some other arm, and left me begging Morsells at his Princely gates.
Come, come, my soul, 1d factum juvat quod (...) non licet. Fear not to do,
what crowns thee being done. Ride on with thy Honor, and create a name to
live with fair Eternity. Enjoy thy purchased Glory as the merit of thy
renowned Actions, and let thy memory entaile it to succeeding Generations. Make
thy own game, and if thy conscience check thee, correct thy saucy Conscience,
till she stand as mute as metamorphos'd Niobe. Fear not the frowns of
Princes or the imperious hand of various Fortune. Thou art too bright for the
one to obscure, and too great for the other to cry down.

BUt hark my soul, I hear a voice that thunders in mine ear I will change
their glory into shame. Hos. 4. 7

Psalm. 49. 20. Man that is borne in honor and understands not, is like the
beasts that perish.

Prove. 25. 27. It is not good to eat too much Honey, so for men to search their
own glory is not glory.

Jer. 9. 23. Thus says the Lord: Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
neither let the mighty man glory in his might, nor let the rich man glory in
his ric^es: But let him that glories glory in this, that he understands and
knows me that I am the Lord.

Gal. 5. 26. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, etc.

St. August. The vain glory of the world is a deceitful sweetness, an
unfruitful labor, a perpetual fear, a dangerous bravery, begun without
providence, and finished not without repentance.

St. Greg. He that makes transitory honor the reward of a good work, sets
eternal glory at a low rate.



Vainglory is a Froth, which blown off discovers a great want of measure:
Can thou O my soul be guilty of such an emptiness, and note be
challenged? Can thou appear in the searching eye of heaven, and not expect
to be cast away? deceive not thy self O my soul, nor flatter thy self with
thy own greatness. Search thy self to the bottom, and thou shall find
enough to humble thee: Do thou glory in the ^avour of a Prince? The frown of
a Prince determines it. Do thou glory in thy strength? A poor Ague betraies
it. Do thou glory in thy wealth? The hand of a thief extinguishes it. Do
thou glory in thy Friends? One cloud of adversity darkens it. Do thou glory
in thy parts? Thy own pride obscures it. Behold my soul, how like a Bubble
thou appearest, and with a Sigh break into sorrow: The gate of heaven is
strait; can thou hope to enter without breaking? The Bubble that would pass
the Floodgates must first dissolve; My soul melt then in tears, and empty
thy self of all thy vanity, and thou shall find divine Repletion; evaporate
in thy Devotion, and thou shall rec^ute thy greatness to eternal Glory.

His Prayer.
ANd can I choose O God but tremble at thy judgments? O^ can my stony heart
not stand amazed at thy Threatenings? It is thy voice O God, and thou have
spoken it: It is thy voice O God, and I have heard it. Had thou so dealt by
me, as thou did^^ by Babels proud King, and driven me from the sons of men,
thou had but done according to thy righteousness, and rewarded me according
to my deservings: What could thou see in me less worthy of thy vengeance
then in him, the example of thy justice? or Lord, wherein am I more incapable
of thy indignation? There is nothing in me to move thy mercy but in misery.
Thy goodness is thy self, and has no ground but what proceeds from it
self, yet have I sinned against that goodness, and have thereby heaped up
wrath against the day of wrath; that insomuch, had not thy Grace abounded with
my sin, I had long since been confounded in my sin, and swallow-lowed up in
the Gulf of thy displeasure. But Lord thou take no delight to punish, and
with thee is no respect of persons: Thou take no pleasure in the confusion of
thy creature, but rejoycest rather in the conversion of a sinner. Convert me
therefore O God, I shall be then converted: Make me sensible of my own
corruptions, that I may see the vileness of my own condition. Pull down the
pride of my ambitious heart; humble me thou O God, and I shall be humbled:
Weane me from the thirst of transitory honor, and let my whole delight be to
glory in thee: Touch thou my conscience with the fear of thy name, that in all
my actions I may fear to offend thee. Endue me O Lord with the spirit of
meekness, and teach me to overcome evil with a patient heart: moderate and
curb the exorbitances of my passion, and give me temperate use of all thy
creatures. Replenish my heart with the Graces of thy Spirit, that in all my
ways I may be acceptable in thy sight. In all conditions give me a contented
mind, and upon all occasions grant me a grateful heart, that honoring thee
here in the Church militant before men, I may be glorified hereafter in the
Church Triumphant before thee and Angels, where filled with true glory
according to the measure of Grace thou shall be pleased to give me here, I
may with Angels and Archangels praise thy Name for ever and ever.

The Oppressors Plea.
I Seek but what is my own by Law: It was his own free Act and Deed: The
execution lies for goods or body, and goods or body I will have or else my
money. What if his beggarly children pine, or his proud wife perish? They
perish at their own charge, not mine, and what is that to me? I must be paid,
or he lie by it until I have my utmost farthing, or his bones. The Law is
just and good, and being ruled by that, how can my fair proceedings be
unjust? what is thirty in the hundred to a man of Trade? Are we borne to thrum
Caps, or pick strawes? and sell our livelihood for a few tears, and a whining
face? I thank God they move me not so much as a bowling dog at midnight: I Will
give no day if heaven it self would be securit^e; I must have present money
or his bones. The Commodity was good enough, as wares went then, and had he
had but a thriving wit, with the necessary help of a good marchantable
conscience he might have gained perchance as much as now he lost; but
howsoever, gain or not gain, I must have my money. Two teadious Terms my
dearest gold has lain in his unprofitable hands. The ^oft of Suit has made
me bleed above a score of Royals, besides my Interest, travel, half pints,
and bribes; all which does but increase my beggarly defendants damages, and
sets him deeper on my score; but right's right, and I will have my money or his
bones. Fifteen shillings in the pound composition? I Will hang first. Come, tell
not me of a good conscience, a good conscience is no parcel of my trade; it
has made more Bankrupts then all the loose wives in the universal City. My
conscience is no fool. It tells me that my owne's my own, and that a well
crammed bag is no deceitful friend, but will stick close to me when all my
friends forsake me: If to gain a good estate out of nothing, and to regaine a
desperate debt which is as good as nothing, be the fruits and sign of a bad
conscience, God help the good. Come, tell not me of griping and Oppression.
The world is hard, and he that hopes to thrive must gripe as hard: What I give
I give, and what I lend I lend; If the way to heaven be to turn beggar upon
earth, let them take it that like it, I know not what ye call Oppression. The
Law is my direction; but of the two it is more profitable to oppress then to
be oppressed. If debtors would be honest and discharge, our hands were bound;
but when their failing offends my bags they touch the Apple of my eye, and I
must right them.

BUt hah! what voice is this that whispers in mine ear, The Lord will spoil
the soul of the Oppressors, Prove. 22. 23.

Prove. 21. 22. Rob not the poor because he is poor, neither oppress the
afflicted in the gates, for the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the
soul of those that have spoled him.

Ezekiel. 22. 19. The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised
Robbery, and have vexed the poors and needy; yea, they have oppressed the
stranger wrongfully. Therefore I have poured out my indignation upon them, I
have consumed them with the fire of my wrath.

Zach. 7. 9. Execute true judgment and show mercy and compassion every man to
his brother, and oppress not the widow nor the fatherless, nor the stranger,
nor the poor, and let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his
brother. But they refused to hearken; therefore came a great wrath from the
Lord of Hosts.

Bernard, p. 1691. We ought so to care for our selves, as not to neglect the
due regard of our neighbor.

Bern. ibi^^ He that is not merciful to another shall not find mercy from God;
but if thou will'st be merciful and compassionate, thou shall be a
ben^factor to thy own soul.



IS it wisdom in thee O my soul to covet a happiness, or rather to account it
so, that is sought for with a judgment, obtained with a Curse, and punished
with damnation; And to neglect that good which is assured with a promise,
purchased with a blessing, and rewarded with a Crown of Glory? Can thou hold
a full estate, a good pennyworth, which is bought with the dear price of thy
Gods displeasure? Tell me, what continuance can that Inheritance promise that
is raised upon the ruins of thy Brother? Or what mercy can thou expect from
heaven, that have denied all mercy to thy Neighbor? O my hard-hearted soul
consider, and relent: Build not an house whose posts are subject to be rotted
with a curse: Consider what the God of truth has threatened against thy
cruelty; Relent, and turn compassionate, that thou may be capable of his
compassion. If the desire of Gold has hardened thy heart, let the tears of
true Repentance mollify it; soften it with Aarons ointment, until it become
Wax to take the impression of that seal which must confirm thy Pardon.

His Prayer.
BUt will my God be now entreated? Is not my crying sin too loud for Pardon?
Am I not sunk too deep into the Jaws of Hell, for thy strong arm to rescue?
Has not the hardness of my heart made me incapable of thy compassion? O if
my tears might wash away my sin, my head should turn a living Spring: Lord
I have heard thee speak and am afraid; the word is past, and thy judgments
have found me out. Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and the
Jaws of Hell have overwhelmed me: I have oppressed thy poor, and added
affliction to the afflicted, and the voice of their misery is come before thee.
They besought me with tears, and in the anguish of their souls, but I have
stopped mine ears against the cry of their complaint. But Lord, thou walk not
the ways of man, and remembrest mercy in the midst of thy wrath, for thou
art good and gracious, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in compassion to all
that shall call upon thee. Forgive me O God my sins that are past, and
deliver me from the guilt of my Oppression: Take from me O God this heart of
stone, and create in my breast a heart of flesh: Assuage the vehemence of my
desires to the things below, and satisfy my soul with the sufficiency of thy
Grace. Inflame my affections, that I may love thee with a filial love, and
incline me to rely upon thy fatherly providence: Let me account godliness
my greatest gain, and subdue in me my lusts after filthy lucre. Preserve me
O Lord from the vanity of self-love, and plant in my affections the true love
of my neighbors: Endue my heart with the bowels of compassion, and then reward
me according to thy righteousness: Direct me O God in the ways of my life,
and let a good Conscience be my continual comfort. Give me a willing heart
to make res^itution of what I have wrongfully gotten by oppression. Grant me a
lawful use of all thy Creatures, and a thankful heart for all thy benefits.
Be merci^ull to all those that groan under the burden of their own wants,
and give them patience to expect thy deliverance: Give me a heart that may
acknowledge thy favors, and fill my tongue with praise and thanksgiving, that
living here a new life I may become a new creature, and being engraffed in thee
by the power of thy grace I may bring forth fruit to thy honor and glory.

The Drunkards Iubile.
What Complement will the severer world allow to the vacant hours of
frolique-hearted youth! How shall their free, their joviall spirits entertain
their time, their friends! What Oil shall be infused into the Lamp of dear
society, if they deny the privilege of a civil rejoicing Cup? It is the
life, the radical humor of united souls, whose love-digestive heat even
ripens and ferments the green materials of a plighted faith; without the
help whereof new married friendship falls into divorce, and joined
acquaintance soon resolves into the first Elements of strangeness. What mean
these strict Reformers thus to spend their hou^e-glasses, and bawle against our
harmless Cups? to call our meetings Riots, and brand our civil mirth with
styles of loose Intemperance? where they can sit at a fisters Feast, devour
and gurmundize beyond excess, and wipe the guilt from off their marrowed
mouths, and cloth their surfeits in the long fustain Robes of a tedious Grace:
Is it not much better in a fair friendly Round (since youth must have a swing)
to steep our soule-afflicting sorrows in a chirping Cup, then hazard our
estates upon the abuse of providence in a folish cast at Dice? Or at a Cockpit
leave our doubtful fortunes to the mercy of unmercifull contention? Or spend
our wanton days in sacrificing costly presents to a fleshly Idol? was not
Wine given to exhilarate the drooping hearts, and raise the drowzie spirits of
dejected souls? Is not the liberal Cup the Sucking-bottle of the sons of
Phoebus, to solace and refresh their palats in the nights of sad Invention? Let
dry-brain'd Zelots spend their idle breaths, my cups shall be my cordialls to
restore my care-befeebled heart to the true Temper of a well-complexioned
mirth: My solid Brains are potent, and can bear enough, without the least
offense to my distempered Senses, or interruption of my boon companions: My
tongue can in the very Zenith of my Cups deliver the expressions of my composed
thoughts with better sense, then these my grave Reformers can their best
advised prayers. My Constitution is pot-proof, and strong enough to make a
fierce encounter with the most stupendous vessel that ever failed upon the
tides of Bacchus. My Reason shrinkes not; my passion burns not.

O But my soul, I hear a threatening voice that interrupts my language, We be
to them that are mighty to drink Wine, Esaias 5. 22.

Prove. 20. 1. Wine is a mocker; strong drink is raging, and whosoever is
deceived thereby is not wise.

Esaias 5. 11. Woe be to them that rise up early in the morning to follow strong
drink, that continue till night, until wine inflame them.

Prove. 23. 20. Be not amongst wine-bibbers.

1. Cor. 5. 1. Now I have written unto you, not to keep company, if any that
is called a Brother be a drunkard, with such a one, no not to eat.

Aug. in lib. pen. Whilst the drunkard swallows wine, wine swallows bim; God
disregards him, Angels despise him, Men deride him, virtue declines him, the
devil destroys him.

Aug. ad. sac. virg. Drunkenness is the mother of all evil, the matter of all
mischief, the wellspring of all vices, the trouble of the senses, the tempest
of the tongue, the shipwreck of chastity, the consumption of time, a voluntary
madness, the corruption of manners, the distemper of the body and the
destruction of the soul.



MY soul, It is the voice of God, digested into a judgment: There is no
kicking against Pricks, or arguing against a divine Truth; Pleadest thou
Custom? Custom in Sin multiplies it: Pleadest thou society? Society in
the offense, aggravates the punishment: Pleadest thou help to Invention? Woe
be to that barrenness, that wants such showers: Pleadest thou strength to
bear much Wine? Woe to those that are mighty to drink strong drink: My
soul, thou have sinned against thy Creator in abusing that creature he made to
serve thee: Thou have sinned against the creature, in turning it to the
Creators dishonor: Thou have finned against thy self, in making thy comfort
thy confusion. How many want that blessing thou have turned into a curse? How
many thirst whilst thou surfeitest? What satisfaction will thou give to the
Creator, to the creature, to thy self, against all whom thou have transgrest?
To thy self, by a sober life: To the Creature, by a right use: To thy Creator,
by a true Repentance: the way to all which, is Prayer and Thanksgiving.

His Prayer.
HOw truly then, O God, this heavy woe belongs to this my boasted sin? How
many judgments are comprised^ and abstracted in this woe^ and all for me,
even me O God, the miserable subject of thy eternal wrath; Even me O Lord,
the mark whereat the shafts of thy displeasure level? Lord, I was a sinner in
my first conception, and in sin has my mother brought me forth; I was no
sooner, but I was a slave to sin, and all my life is nothing but the practice
and the trade of high Rebellion; I have turned thy blessings into thy
dishonor, and all thy graces into wantonness: Yet have thou been my God even
from the very womb, and did sustain me when I hung upon my mothers breast:
Thou have washed me O Lord from my pollution, but like a Swine I have returned
to my mire. Thou have glaunced into my breast the blessed motions of thy holy
Spirit, but I have quenched them with the springtides of my borne corruption. I
have vomited up my filthiness before thee, and like a dog have I returned to
my vomit. Be merciful O God unto me, Have mercy on me O thou son of
David; I cannot O Lord expect the childrens bread, yet suffer me to lick the
crummes that fall beneath their table, I that have so often abused the greatest
of thy blessings am not worthy of the meanest of thy favors. Look, look upon
me according to the goodness of thy mercy, and not according to the greatness
of my offenses: Give me O God a sober heart, and a lawful moderation in the
enjoyment of thy Creatures. Reclaim my appetite from unseasonable delights,
lest I turn thy blessings into a curse; In all my dejections, be thou my
comfort, and let my rejoicing be only in thee. Propose to mine eyes the
evilnesse of my days, and make me careful to redeem my time: Weane me from
the pleasure of vain society, and let my Companions be such as fear thee;
Forgive all such as have been partners in my sin, and turn their hearts to
the obedience of thy Laws. Open their ears to the reproofs of the wise, and
make them powerful in reformation. Allay that lust which my intemperance has
inflamed, and cleanse my affections with the grace of thy good spirit; make me
thankful for the strength of my body, that I may for the time to come return
it to the advantage of thy glory.

The Swearers Apology.
WIll Boanarges never cease? And will these Plague- denouncers never leave to
thunder judgments in my trembling ear? Nothing but plagues? Nothing but
judgments? Nothing but damnation? What have I done to make my case desterate?
And what have they not done to make my soul despair? Have I set up false Gods
like the Egyptians? Or have I bowed before them like the Israelites? Have I
violated the Sabbath like the Libertines? Or like cursed Cham have I discovered
my fathers nakedness? Have I embrued my hands in blood like Barabbas? Or like
Absolon defiled my fathers Bed? Have I like Jacob supplanted my elder brother?
O like Ahab intruded into Nabott^ Vineyard? Have I borne false witness like
the wanton Elders? Or like David coveted Vriahs wife? Have I not given Tithes
of all I have? Or has my purse been hidebound to my hungry brother? Has not
my life been blameless before men? And my demeanor unreprovable before the
world? Have I not hated Vice with a perfect hatred? and countenanced virtue
with a due respect? What mean these strict observers of my life, to ransack
every Action, to carpe at every word, and with their sharp censorious tongues
to sentence every frailty with damnation? Is there no allowance to humanity?
No Grains to flesh and blood? Are we all Angels? Has mortality no
privilege, to supersede it from the utmost punishment of a little necessary
frailty? Come, come, my soul, let not these judgement-thunderers fright thee:
Let not these Qualmes of their exuberous zeal disturb thee. Thou have not
cursed like Shemei, nor railed like Rabshekah, nor lied like Anani^, nor
slandered like thy ^accusers. They that censure thy Gnats swallow their own
Camels. What if the luxuriant style of thy discourse do chance to strike upon
an obvious Oath, art thou straight hurried into the bosom of a Plague? What if
the custom of a harmless oath should captivate thy heedlesse tongue, can
nothing under sudden judgment seize upon thee? What if another diffidence
should force thy earnest lips into a hasty Oath, in confirmation of a suffering
Truth; must thou be straightwayes branded with damnation? Was Joseph marked for
everlasting death, for swearing by the life of Egypts King? Was Peter when he
so denied his master, straight damned for swearing, and for-swearing^ O flatter
not thy self my soul, nor turn thou Advocate to so high a sin: Make not
the slips of Saints a precedent for thee to fall.

IF the Rebukes of flesh may not prevail, hear then the threatening of the
Spirit which says, The Plague shall not depart from the house of the swearer.

Exodus 20. 7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord the God in vain, for
the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

Zach. 5. 3. And every one that swears shall be cut off.

Matthew. 5. 34. Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods Throne, nor
by the earth, for it is his footstool: But let your communication be Yea, yea,
Nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then these comes of evil.

Jer. 23. 10. Because of swearing the land mourns.

Aug in Ser. The murderer kills the body of his brother, but the swearer
murders his own soul.

August. in Psalm. 88. It Is well that God has forbidden man to swear, left by
custom of swearing (in as much as we are apt to mistake) we commit perjury:
there is none but God can safely swear, because there is no other but may be
deceived.

August. de Mendacio. I say unto you, Swear not at all, lest by swearing ye
come to a facility of swearing, from a facility to a custom, and from a
custom ye fall into perjury.



O What a judgment is here! How terrible! How full of Execution! The Plague?
the extract of all diseases! none so mortal; none so comfortless! It makes
our house a Prison, our friends strangers; No comfort but in the expectation of
the months end: I, but this judgment excludes that comfort too; The Plague
shall never depart from the house of the swearer: What never? Death will give
it a Period: No, but it shall be entailed upon his house, his family: O
detestable! O destructive sin! that leaves a Cross upon the doors of
Generations, and lays whole families upon the dust; A sin whereto neither
Profit incites, nor Pleasure allures, nor Necessity compells, nor Inclination
of nature persuades; a mere voluntary, begun with a malignant imitation, and
continued with an habitual presumption. Consider O my soul, every Oath has
been a nail to wound that Savior, whose blood (O mercy above expression!)
must save thee: Be sensible of thy Actions and his sufferings: Abhor thy
self in dust and ashes, and magnify his Mercy that has turned this judgment
from thee Go wash those wounds which thou have made, with tears, and humble
thy self with Prayer, and true repentance.

His Prayer.
Eternal and omnipotent God, before whose glorious name Angels, and Archangels
bow, and hide their faces, to which the blessed Spirits, and Saints of thy
triumphant Church sing forth perpetual Hallelujahs, I a poor Sprig of
disobedient Adam do here make bold to take that holy name into my
sinne-polluted lips: I have hainously sinned O God against thee, and against
it; I have disparaged it in my thoughts, dishonored it in my words, profaned
it in my actions, and I know thou art a jealous God, and a consuming fire, as
faithful in thy promises, so fearful in thy judgments; I therefore fly
from the dreadful Name of Jehovah, which I have abused, to that gracious Name
of Jesus, wherein thou art well pleased; in that most sacred Name, O God, I
fall before thee, and for his beloved sake O Lord I come unto thee. Cleanse
thou my heart O God, and then my tongue shall praise thee: Wash thou my soul,
O Lord, and then my lips shall bless thee. Work in my heart a fear of thy
displeasure, and give me an awful reverence of thy Name. Set thou a Watch
before my lips, that I offend not with my tongue: Let no respects entice me to
be an instrument of thy dishonor, and let thy attributes be precious in mine
eyes, teach me the way of thy Precepts, O Lord, and make me sensible of all my
offenses: Let not my sinful custom in sinning against thy Name take from my
guilty soul the sense of my sin: Give me a respect unto all thy
Commandments, but especially preserve me from the danger of this my bosom
sin. Mollify my heart at the rebukes of thy servants, and strike into my
inward parts a fear of thy judgments: Let all my communication be ordered as
in thy presence, and let the words of my mouth be governed by thy Spirit.
Avert those judgments from me which thy Word has threatened, and my sin
has deserved, and strengthen my resolution for the time to come; Work in me
a true godly sorrow, that it may bring forth in me a newness of life.
Sanctify my thoughts with the continual meditation of thy Commandments, and
mortify those passions which provoke me to offend thee. Let not the examples
of others induce me to this sin, nor let the frailties of my flesh seek Fig
leaves to cover it. Seal in my heart the full assurance of thy Reconciliation,
and look upon me in the bowels of compassion, that crowning my weak desires
with thy Allsufficient power, I may escape this judgment which thy justice
has threatened here, and obtain that happiness thy mercy has promised
hereafter.

The Procrastinators Remora's.
TEll me no more of fasting, prayer, and death; They fill my thoughts with
dumps of Melancholy. These are no subjects for a youthful care; no
contemplations for an active soul: Let them whom sullen Age has weaned from
aerie pleasures, whom wayward fortune has condemned to sighs and groans, whom
sad diseases have beslaved to drugs and diets; let them consume the remnant of
their wretched days in dull devotion: Let them afflict their aching souls with
the untunable discourses of mortality; Let them contemplate on evil days,
and read sharp Lectures of their own experience: For me, my bones are full
of unctious marrow, and my blood, of sprightly Youth: My fair and free estate
secures me from the fears of fortunes frown. My strength of constitution has
the power to grapple with sorrow, sickness, nay the very pangs of death, and
overcome. It Is true, God must be sought; What impious tongue dare be so basely
bold to contradict so known a Truth? And by repentance too; What strange
impiety dare deny it? Or what presumptuous lips dare disavow it? But there is a
time for all things, yet none prefixed for this, no day designed, but, At what
time soever: If my unseasonable heart should seek him now, the work would be
too serious for so green a seeker. My thoughts are yet unsettled, my fancy yet
too too gamesome, my judgment yet unsound, my Will unsanctified; To seek him
with an unprepared heart is the high way not to find him; or to find him with
unsettled resolution is the next way to lose him; and indeed it wants but little
of profaneness, to be unseasonably religious. What is once to be done is
long to be deliberated. Let the boiling pleasures of the rebellious flesh
evaporate a little, and let me drayn my boggy soul from those corrupted,
inbred humors of collapsed nature, and when the tender blossoms of my
youthful vanity shall begin to fade, my settled understanding will begin to
knot, my solid judgment will begin to ripen, my rightly guided will be
resolved, both what to seek, and when to find, and how to prize; till then my
tender youth, in her pursuit, will be disturbed with every blast of honor,
diverted with every flash of pleasure, misled by Counsel, turned back with
fear, puzzled with doubt, interupted by Passion, withdrawn with prosperity,
and discurag'd with adversity.

TAke heed my soul, when thou have lost thy self in thy journey, how will thou
find thy God at thy journeys end? Whom thou have lost by too long delay, thou will hardly find with too late ^ diligence. Take time while time shall serve,
that day may come wherein Thou shall seek the Lord, but shall not find him^
Hos. 5. 6.

Esaias 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is
near.

Heb. 12. 17. He found no place for repentance, though he sought it with
tears carefully.

Thou fool, this night will I take thy soul from thee.

Revel. 2. 21. I gave her a space to repent, but she repented not; Behold
therefore I will cast her.

Greg. lib. Mor. Seek God whilst thou can not see him, for when thou see
him thou can not find him: seek him by hope and thou shall find him by
faith; In the day of grace he is invisible, but near; in the day of judgment
he is visible, but far off.

Ber. Ser. 24. If we would not seek God in vain, let us seek him in truth,
often, and constantly; Let us not seek another thing in stead of him, nor any
other thing with him, nor for any other thing, leave him.



O My soul, thou have sought wealth, and have either not found it, or cares
with it; thou have sought for pleasure, and have found it, but no comfort in
it: Thou soughtest honor and have found it, and perchance fallen with it: Thou
soughtest friendship, and have found it false: society, and have found it
vain; And yet thy God, the fountain of all wealth, pleasure, honor,
friendship, and society, thou have slighted as a toy not worth the finding: Be
wise, my soul, and blush at thy own folly. Set thy desires on the right
obj^ct: Seek wisdom, and thou shall find knowledge, and wealth, and honor,
and length of days: Seek heaven, and earth shall seek thee; and defer not
thy Inquest, lest thou lose thy opportunity: To day thou may find him, whom
to morrow thou may seek with tears, and miss: Yesterday is too late, to
morrow is uncertain, to day is only thine: I, but my soul, I fear my too
long delay has made this day too late; fear not my soul, he that has given
thee his Grace to day will forget thy neglect of yesterday, seek him therefore
by true repentance, and thou shall find him in thy Prayer.

His Prayer.
O God, that like thy precious Word art hid to none, but who are lost, and yet
art found by all that seek thee with an upright heart, cast down thy gracious
eye upon a lost sheep of Israel, strayed through the vanity of his unbridled
youth, and wandered in the wilderness of his own invention. Lord I have too
much delighted in mine own ways, and have put the evil day too far from
me; I have wallowed i^ the pleasures of this deceitful world, which perish in
the using, and have neglected thee my God, at whose right hand are pleasures
for evermore: I have drawn on iniquity as with Cartropes, and have committed
evil with greediness: I have quenched the motions of thy good spirit, and have
delayed to seek thee by true and unfaigned repentance: In stead of seeking
thee whom I have lost, I have withdrawn my self from thy presence when thou
have sought me. It were but justice therefore in thee to stop thine ears at
my petitions, or turn my Prayers as sin into my bosom; But Lord, thou art a
gracious God, and full of pity, and unwearied compassion, and thy loving
kindness is from generation to generation: Lord, in not seeking thee I have
utterly lost my self, and if-thou find me not. I am lost for ever, and if
thou find me, thou can not but find me in my sins, and then thou find'st
me to my own destruction. How miserable O Lord is my condition! How necessary
is my confusion! that have neglected to seek thee, and therefore am afraid to
be found of thee. But Lord if thou look upon the all-sufficient merits of thy
Son, thy justice will be no loser in showing mercy upon a sinner; In his
name therefore I present my self before thee; in his merits I make my humble
approach unto thee; in his name I offer up my feeble Prayers; for his merits
grant me my petitions. Call not to mind the rebellions of my flesh, and
remember not O God the vanities of my youth: Inflame my heart with the love of
thy presence, and reli^^ my meditations with the pleasure of thy sweetness.
Let not the consideration of thy justice overwhelm me in despair, nor the
meditation o^ thy mercy persuade me to presume. Sancti^fie my will by the
wisdom of thy Spirit, tha^ I may desire thee as the chiefest good. Quicke^ my
desires with a servent zeal, that I may seek my Creator in the days of my
youth^ Teach me to seek thee according to thy will and then be found
according to thy promise that living in me here by thy grace, I may here after
reign with thee in glory.

The Hypocrites Prevarication.
THere is no such stuff to make a cloak on as Religion: nothing so
fashionable, nothing so profitable; it is a Livery, wherein a wise man may
serve two masters, God and the world, and make a gainefull service by either: I
serve b^ah, and in both, my self, in prevaricating with both. Before man none
serves his God with more severe devotion, for which among the belt of men I
work my own ends, and serve my self. In private I serve the world, not with so
strict devotion, but with more delight, where fulfilling of her servants lusts
I work my end, and serve my self: The house of Prayer who more frequents then
I? In all Christian duties who more forward then I? I fast with those that
fast, that I may eat with those that eat: I mourn with those that mourn: No
hand more open to the cause then mine, and in their families none prays longer
and with louder zeal: Thus when the opinion of a holy life has cried the
goodness of my conscience up, my trade can lack no custom, my wares can want
no price, my words can need no credit, my actions can lack no praise: If I am
covetous, it is interpreted providence; if miserable, it is counted temperance;
if m^lancholly, it is construed godly sorrow; if merry, it is voted spiritual
joy; if I be rich, it is thought the blessing of a godly life; if poor, supposed
the fruit of conscionable dealing; if I be well spoken of, it is the merit ^f
holy conversation; if ill, it is the malice of Malignants; thus I sail with
every wind, and have my end in all conditions. This Cloak in Summer keeps
me cool, in winter warm, and hides the nasty Bag of all my secret lusts:
Under this Cloak I walk in public fairly, with applause, and in private
sin securely without offense, and officiate wisely without discovery; I
compass Sea and land to make a Proselyte, and no sooner made but he makes me.
At a Fast I cry Geneva, and at a Feast I cry Rome. If I be poor, I
counterfeit abundance to save my credit; if rich, I dissemble poverty to save
charges. I most frequent Schismatic Lectures, which I find most profitable,
from whence learning to divulge and maintain new doctrines, they maintain me
in suppers thrice a week; I use the help of a lie, sometimes as a Religious
Stratagem to uphold the Gospel, and I color oppression with Gods judgment
executed upon the wicked. Charity I hold an extraordinary duty, therefore not
ordinarily to be performed. What I openly reprove abroad for my own profit,
that I secretly act at home, for my own pleasure.

BUt stay, I see a handwriting in my heart lamps my soul, it is characterd in
these sa^ words, W^e he to you Hypoerites, Match 23. 13.

Job 20. 5. The triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite
is but for a moment.

Job 15. 34. The Congregation of the hypocrites shall be desolate.

Psalm. 11. 9. An hypocrite with his mouth destroys his neighbor, but through
knowledge shall the just be delivered.

Luke 12. 1. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy.

Job 36. 13. The hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, they die in their youth,
and their life is amongst the unclean.

Salvian. de Gubern. Dei. l. 4. The hypocrites love not those things they
profess, and what they pretend in words they disclaim in practice; their
sin is the more damnable, because ushered in with pretense of piety, having
the greater guilt because it obtaines a godly repute.

Hieron. Ep. Endeavor rather to be, then to be thought holy; for what profits
it thee to be thought to be what thou art not? and that man doubles his guilt,
who is not so holy as the world thinks him, and counterseits that bolinesse
which be bath not.



HOw like a living Sepulcher did I appear! without, beautified with gold and
rich invention; within, nothing but a loathed corruption: So long as this fair
Sepulcher was closed, it past for a curious Monument of the Builders Art, but
being opened by these spiritual Keys, it is nothing but a Receptacle of
offensive putrefaction: In what a nasty dungeon have thou my soul, so long
remained unstifled? How were thou wedded to thy own corruptions, that could
endure thy unsavory filthiness? The world hated me, because I seemed good;
God hated me, because I only seemed good: I had no friend but my self, and
this friend was my bosom enemy: O my soul, is there water enough in Jordan to
cleanse thee? Has Gilead Balm enough to heal thy superannuated sores? I have
finned, I am convinced, I am convicted: Gods mercy is above Dimensions, when
sinners have not sinned beyond Repentance: Art thou my soul truly penitent for
thy (...) Thou have free Interest in his mercy: fall then my soul before his
Mercy seat, and he will crown thy Pemitence with his pardon.

His Prayer.
O God before the brightness of whose All-discerning eye the secrets of my
heart appear, before whose clear omniscience the very entralls of my soul
lie open, who art a God of righteousness, and truth, and love uprightness
in the inward parts: How can I choose but fear to thrust into thy glorious
presence, or move my sinful lips to call upon that Name which I so often have
dishonored, and made a Cloak to hide the baseness of my close transgressions?
Lord, when I look into the progress of my filthy life, my guilty conscience
calls me to so strict account, and reflects to me so large an Inventory of my
presumptuous sins, that I commit a greater sin in thinking them more
infinite then thy mercy. But Lord thy mercies have no date, nor is thy
goodness circumscribed. The gates of thy compassion are always open to a
broken heart, and promise entertainment to a contrite spirit; the burden of
my sins is grievous, and the remembrance of my hypocrisy is intolerable; I
have finned against thy Majesty with a high hand, but I repent me from the
bottom of an humble heart: As thou have therefore given me sorrow for my
sins, so crown that gift in the freeness of remission: Be fully reconciled
to me, through the all-sufficient merits of thy Son my Savior, and seal in
my afflicted heart the full assurance of thy gracious favor: Be thou exalted
O God above the heavens, and let me praise thee with a single heart; cleanse
thou my inward parts O God, and purify the closet of my polluted soul: Fix
thou my heart O thou searcher of all secrets, and keep my affections wholly to
thee. Remove from me all by and base respects that I may serve thee with an
upright spirit. Take not the word of truth out of my mouth, nor give me over
to deceitful lips; Give me an inward reverence of thy Majesty, that I might
openly confess thee in the truth of my sincerity. Be thou the only object,
and end of all my actions, and let thy honor be my great r^ward: Let not the
hopes of filthy lucre, or the praise of men incline me to thee, neither let the
pleasures of the world nor the fears of any loss entice me from thee. Keep
from me those judgments my hypocrisy has deserved, and strengthen my
resolution to abhor my former life: Give me strength O God to serve thee with
a perfect heart in the newness of life, that I may be delivered from the old
man, and the snares of death. Then shall I praise thee with my entire
affections, and glorify thy name for ever and ever^

The Ignorant man's faltering.
YOu tell me, and you tell me that I must be a good man, and serve God, and
do his will; and so I do for ought I know: I am sure I am as good as God has
made me, and I can make my self no better, so I cannot: And as for serving
God, I am sure I go to Church as well as the best in the Parish, though I be
not so fine; and I make no question, if I had better clothes, but I should do
God as much credit as another man, though I say it: And as for doing Gods will,
I beshrew me, I leave that to them that are booke-learn'd, and can do it more
wisely: I believe the Vicar of our Parish can do it, and has done it too, as
well as any within five miles of his head, and what need I trouble my self to
do what is so well done already? I hope he being so good a Churchm^n, and so
great a Schollard, and can speak Lati^e too, would not leave that to so simple
man as I. It is enough for me to know, that God is a good man; and that the
ten Commandments are the best prayers in all the book, unless it be the
Creed. And that I must love my neighbor as well as he loves me, and for all
other Quilicoms, they shall never trouble my brains, an grace a God. Let me
go a sundays and serve God, obey the King, (God bless him) do no man no
wrong, say the Lords Prayer every morning and evening, follow my work, give a
Noble to the poor at my death, and then say Lord have mercy upon me, and go
away like a Lamb, I make no question but I shall deserve heaven as well as he
that wears a gayer coat: But yet I am not so ingrant neither, nor have not
gone so often to Church, but I know Christ died for me too, as well as for any
other man: I Would be sorry else; and that, next to our Vicar, I shall go to
heaven when I am dead as soon as another; nay more, I know there be two
Sacraments, bread and wine, and but two, (though the Papists say there be six
or seven) and that I verily believe I shall be saved by those Sacraments, and
that I love God above all, or else 'twere pity of my life, and that when I am
dead and rotten, (as our Vicar told me) I shall rise again and be the same
man I was. But for that, he must excuse me, till I have better sartifaction;
for all his learning, he cannot make me such a fool, unless he show me a
better reason for it, then yet he has done.

BUt one thing he told me, now I think on it, troubles me woundly, namely that
God is my Master, all which I confess; and that I must do his will (whether I
know how to do it or nor) or else it will go ill with me; I Will read it (he
said) out of Gods Bible, and I shall remember the words so long as I have a day
to live, which are these, He that knows not his masters will and does things
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes, Luke 12. 48.

1 Cor. 14. 20. Brethren be not children in understanding, howbeit in malice
be ye children, but in understanding be men.

1 Cor. 15. 34. Awake to righteousness and sin not, for some have not ^the
knowledge of God, I speak it to your shame.

Ephesians. 4. 18. Walk not in the vanity of your minds, having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the Ignorance which is
in you, because of the blindness of your hearts.

Levit. 5. 17. And if a soul sin and commit any of these things which are
forbidden to be done by the commandments of the Lord, though he wist it not,
yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity.

2 These. 1. 7. 8. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God.

Greg. Mag. Moral. It is good to know much, and to live well; but if we cannot
attain both, it is better to desire piety then wisdom, for knowledge makes
no man happy, nor does blessedness consist in intellectuals. The only brave
thing is a religious life.

To sin against knowledge is so much the greater offense then an ignorant
trespass, by how much the crime which is capable of no excuse, is more heinous
then the fault which admits a tolerable plea. Justin, Mart. Resp. ad orthod.



HOw well it had been for thee O my soul, if I had bookelarnd; Alas I cannot
read, and what I hear, I cannot understand; I cannot profit as I should, and
therefore cannot be as good as I would, for which I am right sorry: That I
cannot serve as well as my betters, has been often a great grief to me, and
that I have been so ingran^ in good things, has been a great heartbreaking to
me: I can say no prayers for want of knowledge to read, but Our Father and the
Creed: But the comfort is, God knows my heart, but ^ trust in God Our Father,
being made by Christ himself, will be enough for me that know not how to make
a better. I endeavor to do all our Vicar bids me, and when I receive the
Communion I truly forgive all the world for a fortnight after or such a
matter, but then some old injury makes me forget my self, but I cannot help
it, an my life should lie ont. O my ingrant soul, what shall I do to be
saved? All that I can say is, Lord have mercy upon me, and all that I can do
is but to do my good will, and that I Will do with all my heart, and say my
prayers too as well as God will give me leave, an grace a God.

His Prayer.
O God the Father of heaven have mercy upon me miserable sinner; I am as I must
needs confes^e a sinful man, as my forefathers were before me: I have heard
many Sermons and have had many good lessons from the mouths of painful
Ministers, but through the dullness of my understanding, and for want of
learning I have not profited ^o much as else I should have done, spare me
therefore O God, spare me whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, and
be not angry for ever; I must confess the painfulness of my calling, and
the heaviness of my own nature has taken from me the delight of hearing thy
Word, and the ignorance of learning which I was never brought upto, has kept
me from reading it, that insomuch, in stead of growing better, I fear I have
grown worse and worse, and have been so far from doing thy will, that I do
not understand what thy will is, very well. But thou O merciful God that did
reveal thy self to poor Shepherds and Fishermen that had no more learning
then I, have mercy upon me for Jesus Christ his sake. Thou that have promised
to instruct the simple, and to lead the ignorant into thy way, be^ good and
merciful to me I beseech thee; Thou that drawest the needy out of the dust,
and the poor out of the dunghill, give me the knowledge of thy will, and teach
me how to serve thee: Take from me the drowzinesse of my heart, open mine eyes
that I may see the truth, and mine ears that I may understand thy Word, and
strengthen my memory that I may lay it up in my heart, and show it in my life
and vocation to thy glory and my comfort, and the comfort of my friends. Lord
write thy will in my heart, that when I know it I may do it willingly: O teach
me what thy pleasure is that I may do my best to perform it: Give me faith
to lay hold of Christ Jesus who died for me, that after I am dead I may ri^e
again and live with him: Give me a good heart that I may deal honestly with
all men, and do as I would be done to. Bless me in my calling, and prosper
the labor of my hands, that I may have enough to feed me and cloathe me, and
to give to the poor: Mend all that is amiss in me, and expect from me
according to the measure thou have given me. Forgive me all my sins, and make
me willing to please thee, that living a good life I may make a gracious
death, and so at last I may come to heaven and live for ever, for Jesus Christ
his sake, Amen.

The sloathfull man's slumber.
O What a world of Curses, the eating of the forbidden fruit has brought upon
mankind! and unavoydably entailed upon the sons of men! Among all which no
one appears to me more terrible and full of sorrow, and bewraying greater
wrath, then that insufferable, that horrible punishment of labor, and to
purchase Bread with so extreme a price as sweat: But O what hap, what
happiness have they, whose dying Parents have procured a quie^ fortune for
their unmolested Children, and conveyed descended Rents to their succeeding
heirs, whose easy and contented lives may sit and suck the sweetness of their
cumberlesse estates, and with their folded hands enjoy the delicates of this
toylsome world! How blessed, how delicious are those easy morsells, that can
find the way to my soft palate, and then attend upon the wanton Leisure of my
silken slumbers, without the painful practice of my bosom folded hands or
sad contrivement of my studious and contracted Brows! Why should I tire my
tender youth, and ^orture out my groaning days in ^oyle and travel? and
discompose the happy peace of my harmonious thoughts with painful grinding in
the common mill of dull mortality? Why should I rob my craving eyelids of
their delightful Rest, to cark and care, and purvey for that Bread which every
work-abhorring vagabo^d can find of Alms at every good man's door? Why should
I leave the warm protection of my carebeguiling Down, to play the droyling
drudge for daily food, when the young empty R^vens (that have no hands to
work, nor providence, but heaven) can call and be supplied? The pale faced
Lilly and the blushing Rose, neither spinnes nor s^wes, yet princely Solomon
was never robed with so much glory. And shall I then afflict my body and
beslave my heaven-borne soul to purchase, Rags to cloathe my nakedness? Is my
condition worse then Sheep, ordained for slaughter, that crop the springing
Grass, clothed warm in soft Arrayment, purchac'd without their Providence or
pains? Or shall the pampered Beast that shines with fatness, and grows
wanton through his careful Grooms indulgence find better measure at the
worlds too partial hands then I? Come, come, let those take pains that love
to leave their names enrolled in memorable monuments of Parchment; The day has
grief enough without my help; and let Tomorrow^^ shoulders bear to morrows
burdens.

BUt stay my soul, O stay thy rash resolves, take heed whilst thou avoid the
punishment of sin, labor, thou meet not the reward of idle^esse, a
judgment; The idle soul shall suffer hunger, Prove. 19. 15.

Eccles. 10. 18. By much slothfulness the building decays, and through
idleness of the hands, the house droppeth thorough.

Exodus 16. 49. Behold this was the iniquity of thy s^ster Sodom, pride,
fullness of Bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters,
neither did she strengthen the band of the poor and needy.

Prove. 6. 6, 7, 8. Go to the Pismire O sluggard, behold her ways and be wise.

For she having no guide, governor, nor ruler, prepares her meat in Summer,
and gathers her food in harvest.

Nilus in Paraenes. Idleness is the womb or fountain of all wickedness: for
it consumes and wastes the riches and vermes which we have already, and
disinables us to get those we have not.

Nilus in Paraen. Was be to the idle soul^, for he shall hunger after that
which his riot consumed.



HOw presumptuously have thou my soul, transgrest the express Commandment of
thy God! How have thou dashed thy self against his judgments! How has thy
undeserving hand usurpt thy diet and wearest on thy back the wages of the
painful soul! Art thou not condemned to Rags, to Famine, by him whose Law
commanded thee to labor? And yet thou pamper'st up thy sides with stolen
food, and yet thou deck'st thy wanton body with unearn'd ornaments? whiles they
that spend their daily strength in their commanded callings (whose labor gives
them interest in them) want Bread to feed, and Rags to cloathe them. Thou art
no young Rav^n my soul, no Lilly: Where ability to labor is, there
Providence meets action, and crowns it: He that forbids to cark for to
morrow, denies Bread to the Idleness of to day: Consider, O my soul thy own
delinquency, and let employment make thee capable of thy Gods protection: The
Bird that sits is a fair mark for the Fowler, while they that use the wing
escape the danger; follow thy calling, and heaven will follow thee with his
Blessing: What thou have formerly omitted, present repentance may redeem, and
what judgments God has threatened, early Pe^itions may avert.

His Prayer
MOst great and most glorious God, who for the sin of our first parents have
condemned our frail bodies to the punishment of labor, and have commanded
every one a Calling and a Trade of life, that hate idleness as the root of
evil, and threatnest poverty to the slothful hand; I thy poor suppliant
convicted by thy judgments and conscious of my own transgression, fly from my
self to Thee, and humbly appeal from the high Tribunal of thy Justice, and
seek for refuge in the Sanctuary of thy Mercy: Lord, I have led a life
displeasing to thee, and have been a scandal to my profession; I have slighted
those Blessings which thy goodness has promised to a conscionable calling,
and have swallowed down the Bread of idleness; I have impaired the Talent
thou gave me, and have lost the opportunity of doing much good: I have filled
my heart with idle imaginations, and have laid my felse open to the lusts of
the flesh: I have abused thy favors in the misexpending of my precious time,
and have taken no delight in thy Sabbaths; I have doted too much on the
pleasures of this world, and like a Droane have fed upon the honey of Bees. If
thou O God should be extreme to search my ways with too severe an eye,
thou could not choose but when thy indignation, and power the vialls of thy
wrath upon me; look therefore not upon my sins, O Lord, but through the
merits of my Savior, who has made a full satisfaction for all my sins: What
through my weakness I have failed to do, the fullness of his sufferings has
most exactly done: In Him O God in whom thou art well pleased, and for his sake
be gracious to my finne; Alter my heart and make it willing to please thee,
that in my life I may adorn my profession: Give me a care and a conscience in
my calling, and grant thy blessing to the lawful labors of my hand; Let the
fidelity of my vocation improve my Talent, that I may enter into my Masters
joy: Rouse up the dullness and deadness of my heart, and quench those flames
of lust within me. Assist me O God in the redemption of my time, and deliver
my soul from the evilnesse of my days; Let thy providence accompany my
moderate endeavors, and let all my employments depend upon thy providence,
that when the labors of this sinful world shall cease, I may feel and enjoy
the benefit of a good conscience, and obtain the rest of new Jerusalem in the
Eternity of glory.

The proud man's Ostentation.
I 'Le make him feel the weight of displeasure, and teach him to repent his
saucy boldness: How dare his baseness once presume to breathe so near my
person, much more to take my name into his dunghill mouth? me thinks the luster
of my sparkling eye might have had the power to astonish him into good manners,
and sent him back to cast his mind into a fair Petition, humbly presented with
his trembling hand. But thus to press into my presence, to press so near my
face, and then to sp^ake, and speak to me, as if I were his equal, is more
then sufferable: The way to be contemned is to digest contempt; but he that
would be honored by the vulgar sort must wisely keep a distance: A
countenance that is reserved, breeds fear and observation: but aff^bility and
too casie an access makes fools too bold, and reputation cheap: What price I
set upon my own deserts, instructs opinion how to prize me: That which base
ignorance miscalls thy pride, is but a conscious knowledge of thy meri^s:
dejected souls, craven'd with their own dis^rusts, are the worlds Footballs
to be kicked and spurnd, but brave and true heroic spirits that know the
strength of their own worth, shall baffold baseness, and presumption into a
reverentiall silence, and spite of envy flourish in an honorable repute. Come
then my soul, advance thy noble, thy sublimer thoughts, and prize thy self
according to those parts, which all may wonder at, few imitate, but none can
equal: Let not the insolent affronts of vassals interrupt thy Peace, nor seem
one s^ruple less then what thon art: Be thou thy self, Respect thy self,
receive thou honor from thy self; Rejoice thy self in thy self, and prize
thy self for thy self; Like Caesar admit no equal, and like Pompey,
acknowledge no superior. Be covetous of thine own Honor, and hold another
glory as thy injury. Renounce humility as an Heresy in reputation, and
meekness as the worst disease of a true-bred noble Spirit; Disparage worth in
all but in thy self, and make another infamy a foyl to magnify thy glory.
Let such as have no reason to be proud, be humbled of necessity, and let them
that have no parts to value, be despondent. But as for thee, thy Cards are
good, and having skill enough to play thy hopeful Game, vie boldly, conquer
and triumph.

BUt stay my soul, the Trump is yet unturned, boast not too soon, nor call it
a fair day till night, the turning of a hand may make such alterations, in thy
flat'ring fortunes, that all thy glorious expectations may chance to end in
loss, and unsuspected ruin. That God which thrust that Babylonian Prince from
his Imperial Throne, to graze with beasts, has said, The Lord will destroy
the house of the proud, Prove.

Prove. 11. When pride comes, then comes shame, but with the lowly is
wisdom.

Jer. 11. 15. Hear ye, and give ear, and be not proud, for the Lord has
spoken.

Esaias 2. 12. The day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is
proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought
low.

Prove. 16. 5. Every one that is proud in heart is abomination to the Lord.

St. James. God rejects the proud, and gives grace to the simple.

Isidor. Hispal. Pride m^de Satan fall from the highest heaven, therefore they
that pride themselves in their virtues, imitate the Devil; and fa^l more
dangerously, because they aspire and climb to the highest pitch, from whence
is the greatest fall.

Greg. Mor. Pride grows stronger in the root whilst it braves it self with
presumptuous advances, yet the higher it climes the lower it falls: for he that
heightens himself by his own pride, is always destroyed by the judgment of
God.



HOw were thou muffled O my soul! How were thine eyes blinded with the
corruption of thine own heart! When I beheld my self by my own light, I
seemed a glorious thing; My sanne knew no eclipse, and all my imperfections
were gilded over with vainglory: But now the dayspring from above has
shined upon my heart, and the diviner light has driven away those foggy mists;
I find my self another thing: My Diamonds are all turned Pebbles, and my
glory is turned to shame. O my deceived foul, how great a darkness was thy
light? The thing that seemed so glorious, and sparkled in the night, by day
appears but rotten wood: and that bright Gh^-worme, that in darkness
outshined the Chrysolite, is by this newfound light no better then a crawling
worm: How inseparable O my soul is pride and folly! which like Hippocrates
^winnes still live and die together? It blinds the eye, befooles the judgment,
knows no superiors, hates equals, disdaines inferiors, the wise man's scorn,
and the fools Idol; Renounce it O my soul, lest thy God renounce thee; He
that has threatened to resist the proud, has promised to give Grace to the
humble, and what true Repentance speaks, free mercy hears and crowns.

His Prayer.
O God the fountain of all true Glory, and the griver of all free grace, whose
Name is only honorable, and whose works are only glorious, that show thy
ways to be meek, and take compassion upon an humble spirit, that hate
the presence of a lofty eye, and destroyest the proud in the imaginations of
their hearts, vouchsafe, O Lord, thy gracious ear, and hear the sighing of a
contrite heart: I know O God, the quality of my sin can look for nothing but
the extremity of thy wrath: I know, the crookedness of my condition can
expect nothing but the Furnace of thy indignation; I know, the insolence of my
corrupted nature can hope for nothing but the execution of thy judgments; Yet
Lord, know withal, thou art a gracious God, of evil repenting thee, and slow
to wrath; I know thy nature and property is to show compa^^ion, apt to
conceive, but readier to forgive: I know thou take no pleasure in destruction
of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live: In confidence, and
full assurance whereof I am here prostrate on my bended knees, and with an
humble heart: Nor do I press into thy holy presence, tru^ing in my own
merits, le^t thou should deal by me, as I have dealt by others, but being
encouraged by thy gracious invitation, and heavy laden with the burden of my
sins, I come to thee O God, who art the refuge of a wounded soul, and the
Sanctuary of a broken spirit: Forgive, O God, forgive me, what is past
recalling, and make me circumspect for the time to come: Open mine eyes that I
may see how vain a thing I am, and how polluted from my very birth: Give me an
insight of my own corruptions, that I may truly know, and loath my self.
Take from me all vainglory, and self-love, and make me careless of the
worlds applause: Endue me with an humble heart, and take this haughty spirit
from me; Give me a true discovery of my own merits, that I may truly fear
and tremble at thy judgments. Let not the worlds contempt deject me, nor the
disrespects of man dismay me. Take from me O God a scornful eye, and curb
my tongue that speaks presumptuous things: Plant in my heart a brotherly love,
and cherish in me a charitable affection; Possess my soul with patience O
God, and establish my heart in the fear of thy name, that being humbled before
thee in the meekness of my spirit, I may be exalted by thee through the
freeness of thy Grace, and crowned with thee in the kingdom of glory.

The covetous man's care.
Believe me, the Times are hard and dangerous: Charity is grown cold, and
friends uncomfortable; an empty Purse is full of sorrow, and hollow Bags
make a heavy heart: Poverty is a civil Pestilence, which frights away both
friends and kindred, and leaves us to a Lord have mercy upon us: It is a
sickness very catching and infectious, and more commonly abhord then cured:
The best Antidote against it is Angelic^, and Providence, and the best Cordial
is Aurumpotabile. Gold-taking fasting is an approved sovereign. Debts are ill
humors, and turn at last to dangerous obstructions: Lending is a mere
consumption of the radical humor, and if consumed, brings a patient to
nothing. Let others trust to Courtiers promises, to friends performances, to
Princes favors; Give me a Toy called Gold, give me a thing called Money. O
blessed Mammon, how extremely sweet is thy all-commanding presence to my
thriving soul! In banishment thou art my dear companion; In captivity, thou
art my precious ransom. In trouble and vexation thou art my dainty rest. In
sickness, thou art my health; in grief, my only joy; in all extremity, my
only trust: Virtue must veil to thee; Nay Grace it self not relisht with thy
sweetness would even displease the righteous palates of the sons of men,
Come then my soul, advise, contrive, project: Go, compass Sea, and Land:
leave no exploit untryed, no path untrod, no time unspent; afford thine eyes no
sleep, thy head no re^t: Neglect thy ravenous belly, uncloathe thy back;
deceive, betray, swear and forswear to compass such a friend: If thou be
base in birth, 'twill make thee honorable; If weak in power, it will make thee
formidable: Are thy friends few? 'Twill make them numerous. Is thy cause bad?
'Twill make thee Advocates. True, wisdom is an excellent help, in case it
bend this way; and learning is a gentile Ornament, if not too chargeable: yet
by your leave, they are but estates for ^earme of life: But everlasting Gold,
if well advantaged, will not only bless thy days, but thy surviving children
from generation to generation. Come, come, let others fill their brains with
dear bought wit, turn their pence into expencefull chari^e, and store their
bosoms with unprofitable piety; let them lose all to save their imaginary
consciences, and beggar themselves at home to be thought honest abroad; Fill
thou thy baggs and barnes, and lay up for many years and take thy rest.

BUt O my soul, what follows, wounds my heart and strikes me on my knees. Thou
fool this night will I take thy so^k from thee, Luke 12. 20.

St. Matthew. 6. 24. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

Job 20. 15. He^ has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up
again: God shall cast them out of his belly.

Prove. 15. 17. He that is greedy of gain troubles his own house, but he that
hates gifts shall live.

2 Pet. 2. 3. Through covetousness they shall with feigned words make
merchandise of you, whose judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and whose
damnation slumbreth not.

Nilus in Paraenes. W^e to the covetous, for his riches forsake him, and hell
fire takes him.

S. August. O thou covetous man, why do thou treasure up such hidden
mischief? why do thou dote on the Image of the King stamped on coin, and
hate^t the Image of God that shines in men?

August. The riches which thou treasurest up are lost, those thou charitably
besto^est is truly thine.



What think thou now my soul? If the judgment of holy men may not inform
thee, let the judgments of thy angry God enforce thee: Weigh thy own carnal
affections with the sacred Oracles of heaven, and light and darkness are not
more contrary. What thou approvest, thy God condemns; What thou desire, thy
God forbids: Now my soul, if Mammon be God, follow him, if God be God, adher^
to him; Thou can not serve God and Mammon, If thy conscience feel the hook,
nibble no longer. Many sins leave thee in the way, this follows thee to thy
lives end; the root of evil, the canker of all goodness: It blinds Justice,
poisons Charity, strangles Conscience, be slaves the affections, betrays
friendship, breaks all relations: It is a root of the Devils own planting:
Pluck it up: Think not that a pleasure which God has threatened; nor that a
blessing which heaven has cursed: Devour not that which thou or thy heir
must vomit up: Be no longer posse^ with such a Devil, but cast him out: and
if he be too strong, weaken him by Fasting, and exorcise him by Prayer.

His Prayer.
O God that art the fullness of all riches and the Magazeen of all treasure, in
the enjoyment of whose favor the smallest morsel is a rich inheritance and
the coursest Pulse is a large portion; without whose blessing, the greatest
plenty enriches not, and the highest diet nourishes not; how have I (an
earthworm, and no man) fixed my whole heart upon this trasitory world, and
neglected thee the only desiderable good! I blush O Lord to confess the
baseness of my life, and am utterly ashamed of mine own foolishness: I have
placed my affections upon the nasty Rubbish of this world, and have slighted
the inestimable Pearl of my salvation; I have wallow'd in the mire of my
inordinate desires, and refused to be washed in the streams of thy compassion;
I have put my confidence into the faithfulness of my servant, and have doubted
the providence of thee my gracious Father; I have served unrighteous Mammon
with greediness, and have preferred dross and dung before the Pearly gates of
New Jerusalem; Thou have promised to be all in all to those that fear thee,
and not to fail the soul that trusts in thee; but I refused thy gracious
offer, and put my confidence in the vanity of the Creature: But gracious God to
whom Repentance never comes unseasonable, that find' ^t an ^are when sins
find a tongue, regard the con^rition of a bleeding heart, and withdraw not thy
mercy from a pensive soul. Give me new thoughts O God, and with thy holy
Spirit new mould my desires: Inform my will and sanctify my affections, that
they may relish thy sweetness with a full delight. Create in me O God a
spiritual sense, that I may take pleasure in things that are above. Give me a
contented thankfulness for what I have, that I may neither in poverty forsake
thee, nor in plenty forget thee; Arm me with a continual patience, that I
may cheerfully put my trust in thy providence. Moderate my care for momentary
things, that I may use the world as if I used it not. Let not the loss of any
earthly good too much deject me, lest I should sin with my lips and charge
thee foolishly. Give me a charitable hand O God, and fill my heart with
brotherly compassion, that I may chearefully exchange the corruptible treasure
of this world into the incorruptible riches of the world to come, and proving a
faithful steward in thy spiritual household, I may give up my account with
joy, and be made partaker of thy eternal joy in the kingdom of thy glory.

The Self-lovers Self-fraud.
GOd has required my heart and he shall have it: God has commanded truth in
the inword parts, and he shall be obeyed: My soul shall praise the Lord, and
all that is within me, and I will serve him in the strength of my desires. And
in common cases the tongues profession of his name is no less then necessary:
But when it lies upon a life, upon the saving of a livelihood, upon the flat
undoing of a reputation, the case is altered: My life is dear, my fair
possessions precious, and my reputation is the very Apple of mine eye. To save
so great a slake, me thinks equivocation is but venial, if a sin. If the
true loyalty of mine heart stands sound to my Religion and my God; my
well-informed Conscience tells me that in such extremities my frighted tongue
may take the privilege of a S^^^^ or a mental reservation, if not in the
expression of a fair compliances What? shall the real breach of a holy
Sabbath, dedicated to Gods highest glory be tolerated for the welfare of an
Ox? May that breach be set upon the score of m^rcy, and commended above
sacrifice for the savegard of an Ass? And may I not dispense with a bare lip
denial of my urged Religion for the necessary preservation of the threatened
life of a man? for the saving of the whole livelihood and subsistence of a
Christian? What? shall I perish for the want of food, and die a Mart^^ to that
foolish conscience which forbids me to rub the ears of a little standing
Corn? Iaco^ could purchase his sick fathers blessing with a downright lie,
and may I not di^semble for a life? The young man's great possessions taught his
timorous tongue to shrink from an decline his hearts profession, and who could
blame him? Come, if thou freely give thy house, can thou in conscience be
denied a hiding-roome for thy protection? The Syrian Captain (he whose heart
was fixed on his now firm resolved, and true devotion) reserved the house of
Rimm^n for his necessary attendance, and yet went in peace. Peter (upon the
rock of whose confession, the Church was grounded) to save his liberty, with a
false, nay with a perjured tongue; nay more, at such a time when as the Lord of
life (in whose behalf he drew his Sword) was questioned for his innocent
life, denied his Master; and shall I be so great an unthrist of my blood, my
life, to lose it for a mere lippe-deniall of that Religion which now is settled
and needs no blood to seal it?

BUt stay! my Conscience checks me, there is a judgment thunders. Hark; He
that denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father which is in heaven,
Match. 10. 33.

2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. Know that in the latter days perilous times shall come:

For men shall be lovers of their own selves.

Esaias 45. 23. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousn^sse, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, and
every tongue shall swear.

Romans 10. 10. Wi^h the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made to salvation.

Luke 9. 26. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my words, of him shall the
Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in Glory.

August. The love of God and the world are two different things: if the love of
this world dwell in thee, the love of God forsakes thee; renounce that, and
receive this, it is fit the more nobler love should have the best place and
acceptance.

Theoph. It is not enough only to believe with the heart, for God will have us
confess with our mouth; every one that confesses that Christ is God, shall
find Christ professing to the Father that that man is a faithful servant; but
those that deny Christ shall receive (th^^ fearful doom Nescio vos) I know
you (...).



MY soul, in such a time as this when the civil Sword is warm with
slaughter, and the wasting kingdom welters in her blood, would thou not give
thy life to ransom her from ruin? Is not the God of heaven and earth worth
many kingdoms? Is thy welfare more considerable then his glory? dare thou
deny him for thy own ends, that denied thee nothing for thy good? Is a poor
clod of earth we call Inheritance, prizable with his greatness? Or a puff of
breath we call life, valuable with his honor, in comparison of whom the very
Angels are impure? Blush O my soul at thy own guilt: He that accounted his
blood, his life not worth the keeping to ransom thee a wretch, lost by thy
own rebellion, deserves he not the abatement of a lust, to keep him from a
new crueifying? My soul, if Religion bind thee not, if judgments terrify
thee not, if natural affection in^line thee not, yet let common reason
persuade thee to love him above a trifle, that loved thee above his life: And
thou that have so often denied him, deny thy self for ever, and he will own
thee; repent and he will pardon thee, pray to him and he will hear thee.

His Prayer.
O God, whose glory is the end of my creation, and whose free mercy is the
cause of my redemption, that gave thy Son, thy only Son to die for me,
who else had perished in the common deluge of thy wrath; What shall I render
for so great a mercy? What thankfulness shall I return for so infinite a
love? Alas, the most that I can do is nothing, the best that I can present is
worse then nothing, sin: Lord, if I yield my body for a sacrifice, I offer
nothing but a lump of filth, and loathsome putrefaction; or if I give my soul
in contribution, I yield thee nothing but thy Image quite defaced and polluted
with my lusts; or if I spend the strength of the whole man, and with both heart
and tongue confess and magnify thy Name; how can the praises of my sinful
lips, that breath from such a sink, be pleasing to thee? But Lord, since thou
art pleased in thy well-pleasing Son to accept the poverty of my weak
endeavors, send down thy holy Spirit into my heart, cleanse it from the filth
of my corruptions, and make it fit to praise thee: Lord open thou my mouth, and
my lips shall show forth thy praise. Put a new song into my mouth, and I will
praise thee and confess thee all day long; I will not hide thy goodness in my
mouth, but will be showing forth thy truth, and thy salvation; Let thy praises
be ^y honor, and let thy goodness be the subject of my undaunted Song. Let
neither reputation, wealth, nor life been precious to me in comparison with
thee: Let not the worlds derision daunt me, nor examples of infirmity deject
me Give me courage and wisdom to stand for thy honor; O make me worthy,
able and willing to suffer for thy Name. Lord teach me to deny my self, and to
resist the motions of my own corruptions; create in me O God a single heart,
that I may love the Lord Jesus in sincerity; remember not O Lord the sins of
my fear, and pardon the hypocrisy of my self-love. Wash me from the stains
and guilt of this my heinous offense, and deliver me from this fearful
judgment thou have threatened in thy Word: Convince all the Arguments of my
unsanctified wit, whereby I have become an advocate to my sin. Grant that my
life may adorn my profession, and make my tongue an instrument of thy glory.
Assist me O God that I may praise thy goodness, and declare thy wonders among
the children of men: Strengthen my faith that it may trust Thee; and let my
works so shine, that men may praise thee; That my heart believing unto
righteousness, and my tongue confessing to salvation, I may be acknowledged by
thee here, and glorified by thee in the kingdom of glory.

The worldly man's Verdour.
FOr ought I see the case is even the same with him that prays, and him that
does not pray; with him that swears and him that fears an oath: I see no
difference; if any; those that they call the wicked have the advantage. Their
crops are even as fair, their flocks as numerous as theirs, that wear the
ground with their religious knees, and fast their bodies to a skelliton; nay in
the use of blessings (which only makes them so) they far exceed; they term
me reprobate, and style me unregenerate: It Is true, I ^ate my labors with a
jolly heart; drink frolic cups; sweeten my pains with time-beguiling sports,
make the best advantage of my own, pray when I think on it, swear when they
urge me, hear Sermons at my leisure; follow the lusts of my own eyes, and
take the pleasure of my own ways; and yet, God be thanked, my Barnes are
furnished, my sheep stand sound, my Cattle strong for labor, my pastures rich
and flourishing, my body healthful, and my bags are full, whilst they that
are so pure, and make such conscience of their ways, that run to Sermons,
^igge to Lectures, pray thrice a day by the hour, hold faith and troth
profane, and drinking healths a sin, do often find lean harvests, easy
flocks, and empty purses: Let them be godly that can live on Air and Faith;
and eaten up by Zeal, can whine themselves into an Hospital, or bless their
lips with charitable scrapps. If godliness have this reward, to have short
meals for long prayers; weak estates, for strong faiths, and good consciences
upon such bad conditions, let them boast of their pennyworths, and let me be
wicked^ still, and take my chance as falls. Let me have judgment to discover
a profitable Farm, and wit to take it at an easy Rent, and Gold to stock it
in a liberal manner, and skill to manage it to my best advantage, and luck to
find a good increase, and providence to husband wisely what I gain, I seek
no further, and I wish no more. Husbandry and Religion are two several
occupations, and look two several ways, and he is the only wise man can
reconcile them.

BUt stay, my soul, I fear thy reckoning fails thee; If thou have judgment
to discover; wit, to bargain; Gold, to employ; skill, to manage; providence,
to dispose; can thou command the Clouds to drop? or if a wet season meet
thy Harvest and with open sluices overwhelme thy hopes; can thou let down the
floodgates, and stop the watery Flux? Can thou command the Sun to shine?
Can thou forbid the Mildewes, or control the breath of the malignant East?
Is not this Gods sole Prerogative? And has not that God said, When the workers
of iniquity do flourish, it is the^ that shall be destroyed for ever, Psalm.
92. 12.

Job 21. 7. Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea are mighty in power?

8. Their seed is established in their sight, and their offspring before their
eyes.

9. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the wrath of God upon them.

10. Their Bull gendereth, and fails not, their Cow calveth, and casts not
her Calfe.

11. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance.

12. They take the Timbrell, and the Harp and rejoice at the sound of the Organ.

13. They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down to the
Grave.

Nil. in Paraenes. Woe be to him that pursues empty and fading pleasures:
because in a short time he fats, and pampers himself as a Calfe to the
slaughter.

Bernard. There Is no misery more true and real, then false and counterfeit
pleasure.

Hierom. It Is not only difficult, but impossible, to have heaven here and
hereafter: To live in sensual lusts, and to attain spiritual bliss; to
pass from one paradise to another, to be a mirror of felicity in both
worlds, to shine with glorious rays both in this globe of earth, and the orb
of heaven.



HOw sweet a feast is, till the reckoning come! A fair day ends often in a
cold night, and the road that is pleasant ends in Hell: If worldly pleasures had
the promise of continuance, prosperity were some comfort; but in this
necessary vieissitude of good and evil, the prolonging of adversity sharpens
it: It is no common thing, my soul, to enjoy two heavens: Dives found it in
the present, Lazarus in the future: Has thy increase met with no damage? thy
reputation, with no scandal? thy pleasure, with no cross? thy prosperity,
with no adversity? Presume not: Gods checks are symptoms of his mercy: but
his silence is the Harbinger of a judgment. Be circumspect, and provident my
soul: Have thou a fair Summer? provide for a hard Winter: The worlds River
ebbes alone; it flows not: He that goes merrily with the stream, must hale
up: Flatter thy self therefore no longer in thy prosperous sin, O my deluded
soul, but be truly sensible of thy own presumption: Look seriously into thy
approaching danger, and humble thy self with true contrition: If thou procure
sour Herbs, God will provide his Passover.

His Prayer.
HOw weak is man O God, when thou forsakest him! How foolish are his Counsels,
when he plots without thee! How wild his progress, when he wanders from
thee! How miserable till he return unto thee! How his wit fails! How his
wisdom falters! How his wealth melts! How his providence is befooled! and how
his soul beslav'd! Thou strik'st off the Chariot wheels of his Inventions,
and he is perplexed: Thou confoundest the Babel of his imaginations, and he is
troubled: Thou crossest his designs that he may fear thee, and thou stop'st
him in his ways that he may know thee. How merciful art thou O God, and in
thy very judgments Lord how gracious! Thou might have struck me into the
lowest pit as easily as on these bended knees, and yet been justified in my
confusion: But thou have threatened like a gentle father, as loath to punish thy
ungracious child. Thou know the crooked thoughts of man are vain, still
turning point to their contrivers ruin; Thou saw me wandering in the maze of
death, whilst I with violence pursued my own destruction: But thou have warned
me by thy sacred Word, and took me off that I might live to praise the^. Thou
art my confidence O God; Thou art the rock, the rock of my salvation. Thy Word
shall be my guide, for all thy paths are Mercy and Truth: Lord when I look
upon my former worldliness, I utterly abhor my conversation: strengthen me
with thy assistance, that I may lead a new life, make me more and more
sensible of my own condition, and perfect thou the good work thou have begun
in me: In all my designs be thou my Counselor, that I may prosper in my
undertakings. In all my actions be thou my guide, that I may keep the path of
thy Commandments. Let all my own devises come to naught, lest I presume upon
the Arm of flesh; let not my wealth increase without thy blessing, lest I be
fatted up against the day of slaughter; Have thou a hand in all my just
employments, then prosper thou the work of my hands, O prosper thou my
handy-worke: That little I enjoy, confirm it to me, and make it mine, who have
no interest in it till thou own me as thy Child: Then shall my soul rejoice
in thy favors, and magnify thy name for all thy mercies: Then shall my lips
proclaim thy loving kindness, and sing thy praises for ever and for ever.

The Lascivious man's Heaven.
CAn flesh and blood be so unnatural to forget the Laws of Nature? Can
blowing youth immure it self within the Icey walls of Vestall Chastity? Can
lusty diet, and mollicious rest bring forth no other fruits, but faint desires,
rigid thoughts, and Pblegmatick, conceits? should we be stock^ and stones,
and (having active souls) turn altogether passives? Must we turn Anch^rites
and spend our days in Caves, and Hermitages, and smother up our precious
hours in cloysterd folly, and recluse devotion? Can Rosy cheeks, can Ruby
lips, can snowy breasts and sparkling eyes, prescut their beauties and
perfections to the sprightly view of young mortality, and must we stand like
Statues without sense or motion? Can strict Religion impose such cruel Taskes,
and even impossible commands upon the raging thoughts of her unhappy votaries,
as to withstand and contradict the instinct, and very principles of Nature? Can
faire-pretending pictie be so barbarous to condemn us to the flames of our
affections, and make us Martyrs to our own desires? Is It not enough to conquer
the rebellious Actions of imperious flesh, but must we manacle her hands,
darken her eyes, nay worse, restrain the freedom of her very thoughts? Can
full perfection be expected here? Or can our work be perfect in this vale of
imperfection? This were a life for Angels, but a task too hard for frail, for
transitory man. Come, come, we are but men, but flesh and bl^od, and our borne
frailties cannot grapple with such potent tyranny. What nature and necessity
requires us to do, is venial, being done. Come, strive no more against so
strong a stream, but take thy fill of beauty; solace thy wanton heart with
amorous contemplations, cloathe all thy words with courtly Rhetoric, and
soften thy lips with dialects of love; surfeit thy self with pleasure, and
(...) thy passion into warm delights; Walk into Natures universal Bower,
and pick what flower does most surprise thine eye; drink of all waters, but be
tied to none. Spare neither cost nor pains, to compass thy desires. Enjoy
varieties; Emparadise thy soul in fresh delights. The change of pleasure makes
thy pleasure double. Ravish thy senses with perpetual choice, and glut thy
soul with all the delicates of love.

BUt hold! There is a voice that whispers in my troubled ear, a voice that
blanks my thoughts, and stops the course of my resolves; A voice that chills
the bosom of my soul and fills me with amazement: Hark, They which do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 21.

Exodus 20. 14. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Matthew. 5. 28. Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her has committed
Adultery with her already in his heart.

Romans 13. 13. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting, nor in
drunkenness, nor in chambering, nor in wantonness.

1 Pet. 2. 11. Abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul.

Nilus in Paraen. Woe be to the fornicator and adulterer, for his garment is
defiled and spotted, and the heavenly Bridegroom casts him out from his chaste
nuptials.

A world of presumptuous and heinous offenses do arise and spring from the
filthy fountain of adulterous lust, whereby the gate of heaven is shut, and
poor man excluded from God.

S. Gregor. Mor. Hence the flesh lives in sensual delights for a moment, but
the immortal soul perishes for ever.



LUst is a Brand of original fire, raked up in the Embers of flesh and blood;
uncovered by a natural inclination, blown by corrupt communication, quenched
with fasting and humiliation: It is raked up in the best, uncovered in the
most, and blown in thee O my lustful soul; O turn thine ear from the
pleadings of Nature, and make a Covenant with thine eyes: Let not the language
of Delilah inchant thee, left the hands of the Philis^ims surprise thee: Review
thy past pleasures, with the charge and pains thou had to compass them, and
show me, where is thy pennyworth? Foresee what punishments are prepa'rd to meet
thee, and tell me, what is thy purchase? Thou have barterd away thy God for a
lust; sold thy eternity for a trifle; If this bargain may not be recalled by
tears, dissolve thee O my soul into a Spring of waters; if not to be reversed
with price, reduce thy whole estate into a Sackcloth, and an Ashtub. Thou whose
Liver has scorch't in the flames of lust, humble thy heart in the Ashes of
repentance: And as with Esau thou have sold thy Birthright for Broth, so with
Jacob wrestle by Prayer till thou get a blessing.

His Prayer.
O God, before whose face the Angels are impure; before whose clear
omniscience all Actions appear, to whom the very secrets of the hearts are
open; I here acknowledge to thy glory and my shame, the filthiness and vile
impuritie of my Nature; Lord, I was filthy in my very conception, and in
filthiness my mothers womb enclosed me, brought forth in filthiness, and
filthy in my very innocence, filthy in the motions of my flesh, and filthy in
the apprehensions of my soul: my words all clothed with filthiness, and in
all my actions filthy and unclean, in my inclination filthy, and in the whole
course of my life nothing but a continued filthiness. Wash me O God, and make
me clean, cleanse me from the filthiness of my corruption; Purge me O Lord
with Hyssop and create a clean heart within me: Correct the vagrant motions
of my flesh, and quench the fiery darts of Satan; Let not the Law of my
corrupted members rule me; O let concupiscence have no dominion over me: Give
me courage to fight against my lusts, and give my weakness strength to
overcome; make sharp my sword against this body of sin, but most against my
Delilah, my bosom sin. Deliver me from the tyranny of temptation, or give
me power to subdue it: Confine the liberty of my wanton appetite, and give
me temperance in a sober diet; Grant me a heart to strive with thee in
Prayer, and hopeful patience to attend thy leisure; Keep me from the habit
of an idle life, and close mine ears against corrupt communication; Set thou a
watch before my lips, that all my words may savor of sobriety: Preserve me
from the vanity and pride of life, that I may walk blameless in my
conversation; Protect me from the fellowship of the unclean, and from all
such as are of evil report. Let thy Grace O God be sufficient for me, to
protect my soul from the buffetings of Satan; Make me industrious and
diligent in my calling, left the enemy get advantage over me: In all my
temptations let me have recourse to thee. Be thou my refuge when I call upon
thee; Forgive O God the sins of my youth, O pardon the multitudes of my
secret sins: Increase my hatred to my former life, and strengthen my
resolution for the time future: Hear me O God, and let the words of my mouth
be always acceptable to ^hee, O God my strength and my Redeemer.

The Sabbath Breakers profanation.
THe glittering Prince that sits upon his regal, and imperial Throne, and the
ignoble P^sant that sleeps within his sordid house of Thatch are both alike to
God: An Ivory Temple and a Church of Clay are prized alike by him: The flesh of
Bulls, and the perfumes of Merrh and Cassia smoke his Altars with an equal
pleasure: And does he make such difference of days? 'Is he that was so weary
of the New-Moones, so taken with the Sun to tie his Sabbath to that only
day? The tenth in tithes is any one in ten, and why the seventh day not any
one in seven? We sanctify the day, the day not us: But are we Jews? Are we
still bound to keep a legal Sabbath in the strictness of the Letter? Have
the Gentiles no privilege, by the virtue of Messia^s coming, or has the
Evangelicall Sabbath no immunities? The service done, the day's discharged, my
liberty restored; And if I meet my profits, or my pleasures then, I Will give
them entertainment. If business call me to account, I dare afford a careful
care. Or if my sports invite me, I Will entertain them with a cherefull heart:
I Will go to Mattens with as much devotion as my neighbor, I Will make as low
obeisance, and as just responds as any; but soon as Evensong's ended, my
Church-devotion and my Psalter shall sanctify my Pue till the next Sabbath
call; Were it no more for an old custom sake, then for the good I find in
Sabbaths, that Ceremony might as well be spared. It is a day of Rest: And
what is a Rest? A relaxation from the toil of labor: And what is labor but a
painful exercise of the frail body? But where the exercise admits no toil,
there Relaxation makes no Rest: What labor is it for the worldly man to
compass Sea and Land to accomplish his desires? What labor is it for the
impatient lover to measure Hellespont with his widened arms to hasten his
delight? What labor for the youth to number mu^ick with their sprightly paces?
Where pleasure's reconciled to labor, labor is but an active rest; Why should
the Sabbath then, a day of rest, divorce thee from those delights that make thy
Rest? Afflict their souls that please, my rest shall be what most conduces to
my hearts delight. Two hours will vent more prayers then I shall need, the
rest remains for pleasure.

COnscience, why start'st thou? A judgment strikes me from the mouth of
heaven, and says, Whosoever does any work on my Sabbath, his soul shall be
cut off, Exodus 31. 14.

Exodus 20. Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day, etc.

Exodus 31. 14. Ye shall keep my Sabbath, for it is holy unto you.

Exodus 31. 13. Verily my Sabbaths thou shall keep, for this is a sign betwixt
me and you, throughout your Generations.

Luke 23. 56. And they returned and prepared spices, and ointments, and rested
on the Sabbath day according to the Commandment.

Gregor. We ought upon the Lords day to rest from bodily labor, and wholly to
addict our selves to prayers, that what soever has been done amiss, the week
before, may upon the day of our Lords resurrection be expiated and purged by
fervent prayers.

Cyr. Alex. Sin is the storehouse of death and misery, it kindles flames for
it is dearest friends. Therefore whosoever when he should rest from sin,
busieth himself in the dead and fruitless works of wickedness, and
renouncing all piety, lusts after such things as will bring him into eternal
destruction, and everlasting flames, justly deserves to die and perish with the
damned; because when he might have enjoyed a pious rest, he labored to run
headlong to his own destruction.



MY soul, how have thou profaned that day thy God has sanctified! How have
thou encroach'd on that which heaven has set apart! If thy impatience cannot
act a Sabbath twelve hours, what happiness can thou expect in a perpetual
Sabbath? Is six days too little for thy self, and two hours too much for thy
God? O my soul, how do thou prize temporalls beyond eternalls? Is it equal
that God, who gave thee a body, and six days to provide for it, should demand
one day of thee, and be denied it? How liberal a receiver art thou, and how
miserable a Requiter! But know my soul, his Sabbaths are the Apple of his eye:
He that has power to vindicate the breach of it, has threatened judgments to
the breaker of it. The God of mercy that has mitigated the rigor of it for
charity sake, will not diminish the honor of it for profaneness sake: forget
not then my soul to remember his Sabbaths, and remember not to forget his
judgments, lest he forget to remember thee in Mercy: What thou have
neglected, bewail with contrition, and what thou have repented, forsake with
resolution, and what thou have resolved strengthen with devotion.

His Prayer.
O Eternal, just, and all-discerning Judge; in thy self, glorious; in thy
Son, gracious; who tryest without a witness, and condemnest without a Jury;
O! I confess my very actions have betrayed me, thy word has brought in
evidence against me, my own conscience has witnessed against me, and thy
judgment has past sentence against me: And what have I now to plead but
mine own misery, and whither should that misery flee but to the God of mercy?
And since O Lord the way to mercy is to leave my self, I here disclaim all
interest in my self, and utterly renounce my self: I that was created for thy
glory, have dishonored thy Name; I that was made for thy service, have profaned
thy Sabbaths; I have slighted thy Ordinances, and turned my back upon thy
Sanctuary; I have neglected thy Sacraments, abused thy Word, despised thy
Ministers and despised their ministry; I have come into thy Courts with an
unprovided heart, and have drawn near with uncircumcised lips; And Lord I
know thou art a jealous God, and most severe against all such as violate thy
^est; The glory of thy Name is precious to thee, and thine honor is as the
Apple of thine eye; But thou O God that art the God of Hosts, have published
and declared thy self the Lord of mercy; The constitution of thy Sabbath was a
work of time, but Lord thy mercy is from all eternity; I that have broke thy
Sabbaths, do here present thee with a broken heart; thy hand is not shortened
that thou can not heal, nor thy ear deafned that thou can not hear;
Stretch forth thy hand O God and heal my wounds. Bow down thine ear O Lord
and hear my Prayers; Alter the fabric of my sinful heart, and make it tender
of thy glory; Make me ambitious of thy service, and let thy Sabbaths be my
whole delight; Give me a holy reverence of thy Word, that it may prove a light
to my steps and a Lantern to my feet. Endue my heart with Charity and Faith
that I may find a comfort in thy Sacraments. Bless thou the Ministers of thy
sacred Word, and make them holy in their life's, sound in their doctrine and
laborious in their callings. Preserve the universal Church in these distracted
times; give her peace, unity, and uniformity, purge her of all Schism, error
and superstition; Let the Kings daughter be all glorious within, and let thine
eyes take pleasure in her beauty, that being honored here to be a member of
her Militant, I may be glorified with her triumphant.

The censorious man's Crimination.
I Know there is much of the seed of the Serpent in him by his very looks, if
his words betrayed him not; He has eaten the Egg of the Cockatrice, and
surely he remains in the state of perdition; He is not within the Covenant,
and abides in the Gall of bitterness; His studied Prayers show him to be a
high Malignant, and his Iesu-worship concludes him popishly affected; He comes
not to our private meetings, nor contributes a penny to the cause: He cries up
learning, and the book of Common Prayer, and takes no arms to hasten
Reformation; He fears God for his own ends, for the spirit of Antichrist is
in him. His eyes are full of Adulteries, and goes a whoring after his own
inventions: He can hear an oath from his superiors without reproof, and the
heathenish Gods named without spitting in his face: Wherefore my soul
detesteth him, and I will have no conversation with him; for what fellowship
has light with darkness, or the pure in heart with the unclean? Sometimes
he is a Publican, sometimes a Pharisee, and always an Hypocrite; He railes
against the Altar as loud as we, and yet he cringes and makes an Idol of the
name of Jesus; he is quick-sighted to the infirmities of the Saints, and in
his heart rejoices at our failings; he honors not a preaching ministry, and
too much leanes to a Church Government; he paints devotion on his face, whilst
pride is stamped within his heart: he places sanctity in the walls of a
Steeple-house, and adores the Sacrament with his popish knee; His Religion is a
Weathercock, and turns breast to every blast of wind. With the pure he seems
pure, and with the wicked he will join in fellowship; A sober language is in
his mouth, but the poison of Aspes is under his tongue: His works conduce not
to edification, nor are the motions of his heart sanctified; He adores great
ones for preferment, and speaks too partially of authority: He is a La^dicean
in his faith, a Nicolaitane in his works, a Pharisee in his disguise, a rank
Papist in his heart, and I thank my God I am not as this man.

BUt stay my soul, take heed whilst thou judge another, lest God judge thee;
how come thou so expert in another heart, being so often deceived in thy
own? A S^ul to day may prove a Paul to morrow; Take heed whilst thou would
seem religious thou appear not uncharitable; and whilst thou judge man,
thou be not judged of God, who says Judge not, lest ye be judged, Matthew. 7.
1.

John 7. 24. Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

Romans 14. 10. But why do thou judge thy brother? or why do thou set at
naught thy brother? We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.

1 Cor. 4. 5. hudge nothing before the time, until the Lord, who will both
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsel of the heart.

Romans 14. 13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an accusation to fall in his
brothers way.

Psalm. 50. 6. God is Judge himself.

St. August. Apparent and notorious iniquities ought both to be reproved and
condemned, but we should never judge such things as we understand not, nor can
certainly know whether they be done with a good or evil intent.

S. August. When thou know not apparently, judge charitably; because it is
better to think^ well of the wicked, then by frequent censuring to suspect an
innocent man guilty of an offense.

S. Aug. The unrighteous Judge shall be justly condemned.



HAs thy brother, O my soul, a beam in his eye? And ha^t thou no m^^te in
thine? Clear thine own, and thou will see the better to cleanse his: I^ a
These be in his Candle, blow it not out, le^t thou wrong, the flame, but if
thy snuffers be of Gold, snuff it: Has he offended thee? Forgive him: Has
he srespass'd against the Congregation? Reprove him: Has he sinned against
God? Pray for him. O my soul, how uncharitable have thou been? How
Pharisaically have thou judged? Being sick of the Iaundies, how have thou
censured another yellow? And with blotted fingers made his blurre the greater?
How has the pride of thy own heart blinded thee toward thy self? How
quick-sighted to another! Thy brother has slipped, but thou have fallen, and have
blancht thy own impiety with the publishing his sin: Like a Fly, thou
stingest his fores, and feed'st on his corruptions; Jesus came eating and
drinking, and was judged a glutton; John came fasting, and was challenged with
a devil; Judge not my soul, lest thou be judged; malign not thy brother,
lest God laugh at thy destruction: Would thou escape the punishment! judge
thy self: Would thou avoid the sin? humble thy self.

His Prayer.
O God that art the only searcher of the Reins, to whom the secrets of the
heart of man are only known, to whom alone the judgment of our thoughts, our
words and deeds belong, and to whose sentence we must stand or fall, I a
presumptuous sinner that have thrust into thy place and boldly have presumed to
execute thy office, do here as humbly confess the insolence of mine attempt,
and with a sorrowful heart repent me of my doings; and though my convinced
conscience can look for nothing from thy wrathful hand but the same measure
which I measured to another, yet in the confidence of that mercy which thou
have promised to all those that truly and unfeignedly believe, I am become an
humble suitor for thy gracious pardon: Lord, if thou search me but with a
favorable eye, I shall appear much more unrighteous in thy sight, then this
my uncharitably condemned brother did in mine; O look not therefore, Lord,
upon me as I am, lest thou abhor me; but through the merits of my blessed
Savior cast a gracious eye upon me; Let his humility satisfy for my
presumption, and let his meritorious sufferings answer for my vile
uncharitableness; let not the voice of my offense provoke thee with a stronger
cry, then the language of his Intercession. Remove from me O God all
spiritual pride, and make me little in my own conceit; Lord light me to my
self, that by thy light I may discern how dark I am; Lighten that darkness
by thy holy Spirit, that I may search into my own corruptions: And since O God
all gifts and graces are but nothing, and nothing can be acceptable in thy
sight without charity; quicken the dullness of my faint affections, that I may
love my brother as I ought: Soften my marble heart that it may melt at his
infirmities; Make me careful in the examination of my own ways, and most
severe against my own offenses: Pull out the beam out of mine own eye, that
I may see clearly, and reprove wisely. Take from me O Lord all grudging,
envy, and malice, that my seasonable reproves may win my brother. Preserve
my heart from all censorious thoughts, and keep my tongue from striking at his
name: Grant that I make right use of his Infirmities, and read good Lessons in
his failings, that loving him in thee, and thee in him according to thy
command, we may both be united in thee as members of thee, that thou may
receive honor from our communion here, and we eternal glory from thee
hereafter in the world to come.

The Liars Fallacies.
NAy if Religion be so strict a Law to bind my tongue to the necessity of a
truth on all occasions, at all times, and in all places, the gate ^^too strait
for me to enter: Or if the general ^^les of downeright truth will admit no few
ex^^ptions, farewell all honest mirth, farewell all trading, farewell the whole
converse betwixt man and man: If always to speak punctual truth be the true
Symptoms of a blessed soul; Tom Tell troth has a happy time, and fools and
children are the only men. If truth sit Regent, in what faithful breast shall
secrets find repose? What kingdom can be safe? What Commonwealth can be
secure? What war can be succesfull? What Stra^^^ can prosper? if bloody times
should force Religion to sh^oud it self beneath my roof; upon demand, shall
my false truth betr^y it? Or shall my brothers life, or shall my own be seized
upon through the cruel truth of my downeright confession? or rather not be
secured by a fair officious life? shall the righteous Favorite of Egypts
Tyrant, by virtue of a loud lie, sweeten out his joy and heighten up his soft
affection with the Antiperistas^s of tears, and may I not prevari^^ate with a
sullen truth to save a brothers life, from a bloodthirsty hand? Shall Jacob and
his ^^oo indulgent mother conspire in a lie to purchase a paternall blessing in
the false name, and habit of a supplanted brother, and shall I questi^^ion to
preserve the granted blessing of a life, or livelihood, with a harmless lie?
Come, come, my soul, let not thy timorous conscien^e check at such poor
things as these: So long as thy officious tongue aims at a just end, a lie is
no offense: So long as thy perjurious lips confirm not thy untruth with an
audacious b^ow, thou needst not fear: The weight of the cause releeves the
burden of the Crime: Is thy Center good? No matter how crooked the lines of
the circumference be: Policy allows it: If thy journies end be heaven, it
matters not how full of Hell thy journey be; Divinity allows it: Wi^t thou
condemn the Egyptian Midwives for saving the infant Israelites by so merciful
a lie? When Martial execution is to be done, will thou fear to kill? When
hunger drives thee to the gates of death, will thou be afraid to steal? When
civil wars divide a kingdom, will Mercuries decline a lie? No,
circumstances excuse, as well as make the lie; Had Caesar, S^ioio, or Alexander
been regulated by such strict Divinity, their names had been as silent as
their dust: A lie is but a fair put-off, the s^nctuary of a secret, the riddle
of a lover, the stragem of a Soldier, the policy of a Statesman, and a salve
for many desperate sores.

BUt, hark, my soul, there is something rounds mine ear, and calls my language
to a recantation; The Lord has spoken it, Liers shall have their part in the
lake which burns with ^ire and brimstone,

Revel. 2 1. 8. Exodus 20. Thou shall not raise a false report.

Levit. 19. 11. ^e shall not deal falsely, neither lie one to another.

Prove. 12. 22. Lying lips are abomination to the Lord; but they that deal
truly are his delight.

Prove. 19. 5. He that speaks lies shall not escape.

Ephesians. 4. 25. Put away lying, and every one speak truth with his neighbor,
for we are members one of another.

Revel. There shall in no wise enter into the new Jerusalem any thing that
works abomination, or that makes a lie.

St. August. Whosoever thinks, there is any kind of lie that is not a sin,
shamefully deceives himself, mistaking a lying or c^usening knave for a square
or honest man.

Gregor. Eschew and avoid all falsehood, though sometime certain kind of
untruths are less sinful, as to tell a lie to save a man's life; yet because
the Scripture says, The liar slays his own soul, and God will destroy them
that tell a lie; therefore, religious and honest men should always avoid even
the best sort of lies, neither ought another man's life be secured by our
falsehood or lying, lest we destroy our own soul, in laboring to secure
another man's life.



What a child O my soul has thy false bosom harbord! And what reward can
thy indulgence expect from such a father? What blessing can thou hope from
heaven, that pleadest for the son of the devil, and crucifyest the Son of
God? God is the Father of truth; To secure thy estate thou denyest the truth by
framing of a lie: To save thy brothers life thou opposest the truth in
justifying a lie: Now tell me O my soul, art thou worthy the name of a
Christian, that denyest and opposest the nature of Christ? Art thou worthy of
Christ that preferrest thy estate, or thy brothers life before him? O my
unrighteous soul, can thou hold thy brother worthy of death for giving thee
the lie, and thy self guiltless that make a lie? I, but in some cases truth
destroys thy life; a lie preserves it: My soul, was God thy Creator? then
make not the devil thy preserver: Will thou despair to trust him with thy
life that gave it, and make him thy Protector that seeks to destroy it? Reform
thee and repent thee; O my soul; hold not thy life on such conditions, but
trust thee to the hands that made thee.

His Prayer.
O God, that art the God of truth, whose word is truth, that hate lying lips,
and abominatest the deceitful tongue, that banishest thy presence all such as
love or make a lie, and love truth, and requirest uprightness in the inward
parts, I the most wretched of the sons of men, and most unworthy to be
called thy son, make bold to cast my sinful eyes to heaven; Lord I have
sinned against heaven and against truth, and have turned thy grace into a lie;
I have renounced the ways of righteousness, and have harbored much iniquity
within me, which has turned thy wrath against me; I have transgrest against
the checks of my own conscience, and have vaunted of my transgression: which
way soever I turn mine eye, I see no object but ^hame and confusion: Lord,
when I look upon my self, I find nothing there, but fuel for thy wrath, and
matter for thine indignation, and my condemnation. And when I cast mine eyes to
heaven, I there behold an angry God, and a severe revenger; But Lord at thy
right hand I see a Savior, and a sweet redeemer; I see thy wounded son
cloathd in my flesh, and bearing mine infirmities, and interceding for my
numerous transgressions; for which my soul does magnify thee O God, and my
spirit rejoices in him my Savior; Lord, when thou look upon the vast score
of my offenses, turn thine eyes upon the infinite merits of his satisfaction;
O when thy justice calls to mind my sins, let not thy mercy forget his
sufferings; Wash me, O wash me in his blood, and thou shall see me clothed
in his righteousness: Let him that is all in all to me, be all in all for me;
make him to me sanctification justification and redemption: Inspire my heart
with the spirit of thy truth, and preserve me from the deceitfulness of double
tongue: Give me an inward confidence to rely upon thy fatherly providence,
that neither fear may deter me, nor any advantage may turn me from the
ways of thy truth: Let not the specious goodness of the end encourage me to
the unlawfulness of the means, but let thy Word be the warrant to all my
actions; Guide my footsteps that I may walk uprightly, and quicken my
conscience, that it may reprove my faylings: Cause me to feel the burden of
this my habitual sin, that coming to thee by a true and serious repentance,
my sins may obtain a full and a gracious forgiveness: Give me a heart to
make a Covenant with my lips, that both my heart and and tongue being
sanctified by thy Spirit, may be both united in truth by thy mercy, and
magnify thy name for ever, and for ever.

The Revengefull man's rage.
O What a Iul^p to my scorching soul is the delicious blood of my offender!
and how it cooles the burning Fever of my boiling veins! It is the
Quintessenee of pleasures, the height of satisfaction, and the very marrow of
all delight, to bath and paddle in the blood of such, whose bold affronts have
turned my wounded patience into fury? How full of sweetness was his death, who
dying was revenged upon three thous^nd enemies? How sweetly did the younger
brothers blood allay the soule-consuming flames of the elder, who took more
pleasure in his last breath then heaven did in his first Sacrifice? Yet had not
heaven condemned his action, nature had found an Advocate for his passion: What
sturdy spirit has the power to rule his suffering thoughts, or curb the
headstrong fury of his Irascible affections? Or who but fools (that cannot
taste an injury) can moderate their highbred spirits, and stop their passion in
her full carreire? Let heavy Cynicks, they whose leaden souls are taught by
stupid reason to stand bent at every wrong, that can digest an injury more
easily then a complement, that can protest against the Laws of nature, and cry
all natural affection down, let them be Andirons for the injurious world to
work a Heat upon: let them find shoulders to receive the painful s^ripes of
peevish Mortals, and to bear the wrongs of daring insolence: Let them be
drawn like Calves prepared for slaughter, and bow their servile necks to
sharp destruction: let them submit their slavish bosoms to be trod and
trampled under foot for every pleasure: My Eagle spirit flies a higher pitch,
and like ambitious Phaeton climbes into the fiery Chariot, and drawn with
fury, scorn, revenge, and honor, rambles through all the Spheres, and brings
with it confusion and combustion; my reeking sword shall vindicate my
reputation, and rectify the injuries of my honorable name, and quench it self
in plenteous streams of blood. Come tell not me of Charity, conscience, or
transgression; My Charity reflects upon my self, begins at home, and guided by
the justice of my passion, is bound to labor for an honorable satisfaction: My
conscience is blood-proofe, and I can broach a life with my illustrious weapon
with as little reluctation, as kill a Flea that sucks my blood without
Commission, and I can drink a health in blood upon my bended knee to
reputation.

BUt hark my soul, I hear a languishing, a dying voice cry up to heaven for
vengeance; It cries aloud, and thunders in my startling ear, I tremble and my
shivering bones are filled w^^^h horror; It cries against me, and hear what
^^eaven replies, All that take up the sword shall perish by the sword, Matthew.
26. 52.

Levit. 19. 18. Thou shall not avenge, or bear any grudge, against the
Children of my people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: I am the
Lord.

Deuteronomy. 32. 35. To me belongs vengeance and recompense.

Ezekiel. 25. 12, 13. Because that Edom has dealt against the house of Judah, by
taking vengeance, and bath greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them:

Therefore thus says the Lord God, I will also stretch out mine hand upon
Edom, and will cut off man and beast from it.

Matthew. 5. 39. Resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right
cheek, turn to him the other also.

Tertull. What Is the difference between one that does an injury, and another
that out-ragiously suffers it, except that the one is first and the other
second in the offense? but both are guilty of mutual injury in the sight of
God; who forbids every sin and condemns the offender.

Tertull. How can we honor God if we revenge our selves?

Gloss. Every man is a murderer, and shall be punished as Cain was if he
do, (as Caindid) either ass^ult his brother with violence, or pursue him with
hatred.



REvenge is an Act of the Irascible affections, deliberated with malice, and
executed without mercy: How often O my soul have thou cursed thy self in the
perfectest of Prayers? How often have thou turned the spiritual b^dy of thy
Savior into thy d^mnation? Can the Sun rise to thy comfort, that has so
often set in thy wrath? So long as thy wrath is kindled against thy brother, so
long is the wrath of God burning against thee? O, would thou offer a pleasing
sacrifice to heaven? Go first and be reconciled to thy brother. I, but who
shall right thy honor then? Is thy honor wronged? Forgive, and it is
vindicated. I, but this kind of heart-swelling, can brook no Powltresse but
revenge. Take heed, my soul, the remedy is worse then the disease: If thy
intricate distemper transcend thy power, make choice of a Physician that can
purge that humor that foments thy malady: Rely upon him; submit thy will to his
directions; he has a tender heart, a skillful hand, a watchful eye, that
makes thy welfare the price of all thy pain^s, expecting no reward, no fee, but
praises, and Thanksgiving.

His Prayer.
O God, that art the God of peace, and the lover of unity and concord, that
do command all those that seek forgiveness, to forgive; that hate the
f^oward heart, but show mercy to the mecke in spirit: With what a face can I
appear before thy mercy-seate, or with what countenance can I lift up these
hands thus stained with my brothers blood? How can my ^ippes, that daily breath
revenge against my brother, presume to own thee as my father, or expect from
thee thy blessing, as thy child? If thou forgive my trespasses O God, as I
forgive my trespassers, in what a miserable estate am I, that in my very
prayers condemn my self, and do not only limit thy compassion by my
uncharitableness, but draw thy judgments on my head for my rebellion? That
heart O God which thou requirest as a holy present, is become a spring of
malice; These hands which I advance, are ready instruments of base revenge. My
thoughts, that should be sanctified, are full of blood, and how to compass
evil against my brother is my continual meditation: The course of all my life
is wilful disobedience, and my whole pleasure, Lord, is to displease thee: My
conscience has accused me, and the voice of blood has cried against me: But
Lord, the blood of Jesus cries louder then the blood of Abell, and thy mercy is
far more infinite then my sin. The blood that was shed by me cries. for
vengeance, but the blood that was shed for me sues for mercy; Lord hear the
language of this blood, and by the merits of this voice be reconciled unto me.
That time which cannot be recalled, O give me power to redeem, and in the
mean time a settled resolution to reform. Suppress the violence of my
headstrong passion, and establish a meek spirit within me. Let the sight of
my own vileness take from me the sense of all disgrace, and let the Crown of
my reputation be thy honor; Possess my heart with a desire of unity and
concord, and give me patience to endure what my impenitence has deserved:
Breath into my soul the spirit of love, and direct my affections to their
right object; turn all my anger against that sin that has provoked thee,
and give me holy revenge, that I may exercise it against my self. Grant that I
may love thee for thy self, my self in thee and my neighbor as my self;
Assist me O God, that I may subdue all evil in my self, and suffer patiently
all evil as a punishment from thee. Give me a merciful heart, O God; make it
slow to wrath, and ready to forgive; Preserve me from the act of evil, that I
may be delivered from the fear of evil; that living here in charity with men,
I may receive that sentence of, Come ye blessed, in the kingdom of glory.

The secure man's Triumph.
SO, now my soul thy happiness is entaild, and thy illustrious name shall
live in thy succeeding Generations; Thy dwelling is established in the fat of
all the land: thou have what mortal heart can wish, and want nothing but
immortality: The best of all the land is thine, and thou art planted in the
best of Lands: A land whose Constitutions make the best of Government, which
Government is strengthened with the best of ^aws, which Laws are executed by
the best of Princes, whose Prin^e, whose Laws, whose Government, whose land
makes us the happiest of all subjects, makes us the happiest of all people. A
land of strength, of plenty, and a land of peace, where every soul may sit
beneath his Vine, unfrighted at the horrid language of the hoarse Trumpet,
unstartled at the warlike summons of the roaring Cannon. A land whose beauty
has surpised the ambitious hearts of foreign Princes, and taught them by
their martial Oratory to make their vain attempts. A land whose strength
reads vanity in the deceived hopes of Conquerours, and crowns their
enterprises with a shameful overthrow. A land whose native plenty makes her
the worlds Exchange, supplying others, able to subsist without supply from
foreign kingdoms; in it self happy; and abroad, honorable. A land that has
no vanity, but what by accident proceeds and issues from the sweetest of all
blessings, peace, and plenty; that has no mi^ery but what is propagated from
that blindness which cannot see her own felicity. A land that flows with
Milk and Honey, and in brief wants nothing to deserve the title of a Paradise.
The Curb of Spain, the pride of Germany, the ^yde of Belgia, the scourge of
France, the Emperesse of the world, and Queen of Nations: She is begirt with
walls, whose builder was the hand of heaven, whereon there daily rides a Navy^
Royal, whose unconquerable power proclaims her Prince invincible, and
whispers sad despair into the fainting hearts of forraig^e Majesty: She is
compact within her self, in unity, not apt to civil discords or intestine
broils; The envy of all nations; the ambition of all Princes; the terror of
all enemies, the security of all neighboring States. Let timorous Pulpits
threaten ruin, let prophesying Churchmen dote, till I believe: How often, and
how long have these loud sons of Thunder false prophesied her desolation? and
yet she stands the glory of the world: Can Pride demolish the Towers that
defend her? Can drunkenness dry up the Sea that walls her? Can flames of lust
dissolve the Ordnance that protect her?

Be well advised my soul; there is a voy^^ from heaven roares louder then
those Ordinance, which says, Thus says the Lord, The whole land shall be
desolate, Jer. 4. 27.

Esaias 14. 7. The whole earth is at rest, and at quiet, they break forth into
singing.

Yea the Fur trees rejoice at thee, and the Cedars of Lebanon sing, etc.

Yet shall thou be brought down to hell, to the sides of the Pit.

Jer. 5. 12. They have b^lied the Lord, and said, It is not he, neither shall
evil come upon us, neither shall we see sword, or famine.

1 Cor. 10. 12. Let him that stands take heed lest he fall.

Luke 17. 26. They did eat and drink, and they married wives and were given in
marriage, until the flood came and destroyed them all.

Gregor. Mor. A man may as some build a Castle upon the rolling waves, as
ground a solid comfort upon the uncertain ebbs and fluxes of transient
pleasures.

S. August. Whilst Lot was exercised in suffering reproach and vilence, he
continued holy and pure, even in the filth of Sodom: but in the mount being in
peace and safety, he was surprised by sensual security, and defiled himself
with his own daughters.

(...) prosperous and happy state is often the occasion of more miserable
ruin, a long peace has made many men both careless and cowardly; and that is
the most fatal blow when an ^^^xpected enemy surprises us in a deep sleep of
peace and security. Greg. Mag.



Security is an improvident carelessness, casting out all fear of approaching
danger; It is like a great Calm at Sea, that foreruns a storm: How is this
verified O my sad soul in this our bleeding nation! Were thou not but now
for many years even nuzzl'd in the bosom of habitual peace? Did thou
foresee this danger? Or could thou have contrived a way to be thus
miserable? Did thou not laugh invasion to scorn? or did thou not less
fear a Civil warre^ Was not the Title of the Crown unquestionable? And was
not our mixed government unapt to fall into diseases? Did we want good Laws?
or did our Laws want execution? Did not our Prophets give lawful warning? or
were we moved at the sound of Judgments? How have thou lived O my uncarefull
soul to see these prophesies fulfilled, and to behold the vialls of thy angry
God poured forth! Since mercies O my soul could not allure thee, yet let these
judgments now at length enforce thee to a true Repentance. Quench the
Firebrand which thou have kindled; turn thy mirth to a right mourning, and thy
feasts of joy to humiliation.

His Prayer.
O God by whom Kings reign, and kingdoms flourish, that set up where none
can batter down, and pullest down where none can countermand, I a most humble
Suitor at the Throne of Grace acknowledge my self unworthy of the least of all
thy mercies, nay worthy of the greatest of all thy judgments: I have sinned
against thee the Author of my being, I have sinned against my conscience,
which thou have made my accuser, I have sinned against the peace of this
Kingdom, whereof thou have made me a member: If all should do O God as I have
done, Sodom would appear as righteous, and Gomorra^ would be a president to
thy wrat^ upon this sinful nation. But Lord thy mercy is inscrutable, or else
my misery were unspeakable, for that mercy sake be gracious to me in the free
pardoning of all my offenses. Blot them out of thy remembrance for his sake in
whom thou art well pleased: Make my head a fountain of tears to quench that
brand my sins have kind^ed toward the destruction of this flourishing
kingdom: Bless this kingdom O God; Establish it in piety, honor, peace,
and plenty. Forgive all her crying sins, and remove thy judgments far from
her. Bless her governor, thy servant, our dread Sovereign: Endue his soul
with all religious, civil and princely virtues; Preserve his royal person in
health, safety and prosperity, prolong his days in honor, peace or victory,
and crown his death with everlasting glory. Bless him in his royal Consort;
unite their hearts in love and true Religion. Bless him in his Princely issue;
Season their youth with the fear of thy Name. Direct thy Church in doctrine
and in discipline, and let her enemies be converted, or confounded; Purge her
of all superstition and heresy, and root out from her, whatsoever thy hand
has not planted: Bless the Nobility of this land, endue their hearts with
truth, loyalty, and true policy. Bless the Tribe of Levi, with piety,
learning, and humility. Bless the Magistrates of this kingdom; give them
religious and upright hearts, hating covetousness. Bless the Gentry with
sincerity, charity, and a good conscience. Bless the Commonaltie with loyal
hearts, painful hands, and plentiful increase. Bless the two great
Seminaries of this Kingdom, make them fruitful and faithful nurseries both
to the Church and Commonwealth. Bless all thy Saints every where, especially
those that have stood in the gappe betwixt this kingdom, and thy judgments,
that being all members of that Body, whereof thou Christ art head, we may all
join in humiliation for our sins, and in the propagation of thy honor here,
and be made partakers of thy glory in the kingdom of glory.

The Presumptuous man's Felicities.
TEll bauling Babes of Bugbeares, to fright them into quietness, or terrify
youth with old wives sables, to keep their wild affections in owe; Such Toys
may work upon their timorous apprehensions, when wholesome precepts fail, and
find no audience in their youthful ears: Tell not me of Hell, Devils, or of
damned souls to enforce me from those pleasures which they nickname sin:
What tell ye me of Law? My soul is sensible of Evangelicall precepts without
the needless, and uncorrected thunder of the killiug Letter, or the terrible
periphrase of roaring Boanarges, the teadiousnesse of whose language still
determines in damnation; wherein I apprehend God far more merciful then his
Ministers. It Is true, I have not led my life according to the Pharisaicall
squire of their opinions, neither have I found judgments according to their
prophecies, whereby I must conclude that God is wonderfully merciful, or they
wonderfully mistaken. How often have they thundered ^orment against my
voluptuous life: And yet I feel no pain: How bitterly have they threatened
shame against the vaunts of my vainglory? Yet find I honor. How fiercely have
they preached destruction, against my cruelty? and yet I live. What Plagues
against my swearing? yet not infected: What diseases against my drunkenness?
and yet sound; What danger against procrastination? yet how often has God been
found upon the deathbed? What damnation to Hypocrites? yet who more safe? What
stripes to the ignorant? yet who more scotfree? What poverty to the slothful?
yet themselves prosper: What falls to the proud? yet stand they surest. What
curses to the Covetous? yet who richer? What judgments to the lascivious? yet
who more pleasure? What vengeance to the profane, the censorious, the
revengefull? yet none live more unscourg'd: Who deeper branded then the Lyer^^
yet who more favored? Who more threatened then the presumptuous? yet who less
punished? Thus are we foold and kept in awe with the strict fancies of those
Pulpit-men, whose opinions have no ground but what they gain from popularitie:
Thus are we frighted from the liberty of Nature by the politic Chimeraes of
Religion; whereby we are necessitated to the observing of those Laws, whereof
we find a greater necessity of breaking.

BUt stay, my soul, there is a voice that darts into my troubled thoughts,
which says, Because thou have not kept my Laws, all the curses in this book
shall overtake thee, till thou be destraoed, Deuteronomy. 29.

Deuteronomy. 29. 27. And the anger of the Lord was kind^ed against the land, to bring
upon it all the Curses that are written in this book.

2 Chronicles. 34. 24. Thus says the Lord, Behold I will bring will upon this
place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the curses that are written
in the book.

Deuteronomy. 28. 15. But if thou will not hearken unto the v^yee of the Lord thy God
to observe and do all his Commandments, and his statutes which I command thee
this day, all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.

Bernard. It is certain thou must die, and uncertain when, how or where;
seeing death is always at thy (...) Thou must (if thou be wise) ^lwayes be
ready to die.

Bernard. To commit a sin is an humane frailty, to persist in it is a
devilish obstinacy.

Bernard. There are some who hope in the Lord, but yet in vain, because they
only smooth and flatter themselves, that God is merciful, but repent not of
their sin; such confidence is vain and foolish, and leads to destruction.



PResumption is a sin, whereby we depend upon Gods mercies without any
warrant from Gods Word: It is as great a sin, O my soul, to hope for Gods
mercy, without Repentance, as to distrust Gods mercy upon Repentance; In the
first thou wrongst his Justice; In the last, his mercy: O my presumptuous
soul; let not thy prosperity in sinning encourage thee to sin; lest,
climbing without Warrant into his mercy, thou fall without mercy into his
judgment: Be not deceived; a long Peace makes a bloody War, and the abuse of
continued mercies makes a sharp judgment: Patience, when slighted, turns to
fury, but ill-requited, starts to vengeance: Think not, that thy unpunisht
sin is hidden from the eye of heaven, or that Gods judgments will delay for
ever: The stalled Ox that wallowes in his plenty, and waxes wanton with ease,
is not far from slaughter: The Ephod O my desperate soul, is long a filling,
but once being full, the leaden cover must go on; and then, it hurries on the
wings of the wind: Advise thee then, and whilst the Lamp of thy prosperity
lasts, provide thee for the evil day, which being come repentance will be out
of date, and all thy prayers will find no ear.

His Prayer.
Gracious God, whose mercy is unsearchable and whose goodness is unspeakable,
I the unthankful object of thy continued favors, and therefore the miserable
subject of thy continual wrath, humbly present my self-made misery before thy
sacred Majesty; Lord when I look upon the horridness of my sin, shame strikes
me dumb: But when I turn mine eye upon the infiniteness of thy mercy, I am
emboldned to pour forth my soul before thee; as in the one, finding matter
for confusion; so in the other, Arguments for compassion: Lord I have sinned
grievously, but my Savior has satisfied abundantly; I have trespassed
continually, but he has suffered once for all: Thou have numbered my
transgressions by the hairs of my head, but his mercies are innumerable like
the stars of the sky: My sins in treatnesse are like the mountains of the
earth, (...) his mercy is greater then the heavens: Oh if his mercy were not
greater then my sins, my sins were impardonable; for his therefore and ^^y
mercies sake cover my sins, and pardon my transgressions; make my head a
fountain of ^^eares, and accept my contrition O thou Well-^^ring of all mercy:
strengthen my resolution, ^^at for the time to come I may detest all sin:
^^crease a holy anger in me that I may revenge my self upon my self for
displeasing so gracious a Father; Fill my heart with a fear of thy judgments,
and sweeten my thoughts with the meditation of thy mercies: Go forwards O my
God, and perfect thy own work in me, and take the glory of thy own free
goodness, furnish my mouth with the praises of thy name, and replenish my
tongue with continual thanksgiving; Thou ha^^ promised pardon to those that
repent; behold I repent; Lord quicken my Repentance. Thou might have made me
a terrible example of thy justice, and struck ^^ee into hell in the height of
my presumption; but thou have made me capable of thy mercies, and an object of
thy (...), for thou art a gracious God, of long-suffering and ^low to anger,
thy name is wonderful, and thy mercies incomprehensible: Thou art only worthy
to be praised: Let all the people praise thee O God: O let all the people
praise thee; Let Angels and Archangels praise thee, Let the Congregations of
Saints praise thee, Let thy works praise thee, Let every thing that breath's
praise thee for ever, and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

