THE QUEEN, OR THE EXCELLENCY OF HER SEX. An Excellent old Play.

Found out by a Person of Honor, and given to the Publisher, ALEXANDER GOUGHE.

(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
Hesiod lib: 1. -- Cedat jam Graia vetustas
Peltatas mirata Nurus, jam Volsca Camillas
Cedat, and Assyrias quae foemina flectit habenas
Fama tace, Majore cano --
LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Thomas Heath, in Russel Street, Near the Piazza
of Covent Garden, 1653.

TO THE VIRTUOUSLY NOBLE AND TRULY HONORABLE LADY, The Lady CATHERINE MOHUN,
Wife to the Lord Warwick Mohun, Baron of Okehampton, my highly honored LORD.
May it please your Ladyship,
MAdam, Imbolden'd by your accustomed candor and unmerited favors to things of
the like nature, though disproportioned worth: (Because this Excellency seems
to contract those perfections her Sex has been invested with, which are as
essential to your Ladyship, as light to the Sun) I presumed to secure this
innocent Orphan from the Thunder-shocks of the present blasting age, under the
safe protecting wreath of your name; which (I am confident) the virtues of none
can more justly challenge, then those of your Ladyship; who alone may seem to
quicken the lifeless Scene, and to demonstrate its possibility; reducing Fables
into Practicks; by making as great honor visible in the mirror of your daily
practice. Your pardon, Madam, for daring to offer such adulterate Metals, to so
pure a Mine; for making the Shadow a present to the Substance; the thoughts of
which was an offense, but the performance, a crime beyond the hopes of pardon.
When my Fate (...) (...) me on the first, I esteemed my self ^saso (with the
Politian) should I not attempt the latter, securing one error by so^ring at a
greater: but my duller eyes endured not the proof of so glorious a Test, and
the waxed junctune of my ill contrived feathers melt me into the fear of a
f^ll: Therefore (with the most desperate offenders) I cast my self on the mercy
of the Bench; and since I have so clement a Judge as your self, do not wholly
despair of absolution, by reason my Penetential acknowledgment attones part of
the offense; and your remission of the whole will eternally oblige,

MADAM, The humblest of your Ladyships Servants, ALEXANDER GOUGHE.

To Mr. Alexander Goughe upon his publishing The excellent Play called the
Queen; or the Excellency of her Sex.
IF Plays be looking glasses of our lives
Where dead examples quickening art revives:
By which the players dress themselves, and we
By them may form a living Imagry
To let those sullied, lie in age in dust
Or break them with pretense of fit and just.
Is a rude cruelty, as if you can
Put on the christian, and put off the man.
But must all moral handsomnes undo
And may not be divine and civil too.
What though we dare not say the Poets art
Can save while it delights, please and convert;
Or that blackfriers we hear which in this age
Fell when it was a church, not when a stage,
Or that the ^n the ori^i. n^ll it is (...).
Presbiters that once dwelt there,
Prayed and thrived though the playhouse were so ne^r.
Yet this we dare affirm there is more gain
In seeing men act vice then virtue fain;
And he less tempts a danger that delights
In professed players then close Hypocrites,
Can there no favor to the scaene be shown
Because Jack Fletcher was a Bishops son,
Or since that order is condemned do you
Think poets therefore Antichristian too;
Is it unlawful since the stage is down
To make the press act: where no ladies swoune
At the red coats intrusion: none are stripped;
No Hystriomastix has the copy whip't
No man d'on Women's clothes: the guiltles press
Wears its own innocent garments: its own dress,
Such as free nature made it: Let it come
Forth Midwife Goughe, securely; and if some
Like not the make or beauty of the play
Bear witness to 't and confidently say
Such a relict as once the stage did own,
Ingenuous Reader, merits to be known.
R. C.

For Plays.
DO you not Hawke? Why may not we have a Play?
Both are but recreations. You Will say
Diseases which have made Physicians dumb,
By healthful exercise are overcome.
And Crimes escaped all other laws, have been
Found out, and punished by the curious Scene.
Are Stages hurtful for the ill they teach,
And needless for the good? Which Pulpits preach:
Then sports are hurtful, for the time they lose,
And needless to the good, which labor does.
Permit'm both; or if you will allow
The mind no Hawke, leave yours, and go to Plough.
EDMOND ROOKWOOD.

To Mr. Goughe, upon the publication of the Play, c^ll'd, The QUEEN, or the
Excellency of her SEX.
GOUGHE, In this little Present you create
Your self a Trophee, may become a State;
For you that preserve wit, may equally
Be ranck'd with those defend our Liberty;
And though in this ill treated Scene of sense,
The general learning is but in pretense;
Or else infused like the Eastern Prophet's Dove,
To whisper us, Religion, Honor, Love;
Yet the more Generous race of men revives
This Lamp of Knowledge, and like Primitives
In Caves, fearless of Martyrdom, rehearse
The almost breathless, now, Dramatick verse.
How in the next age will our Youth lament
The loss of wit, condemned to banishment.
Wit that the duller rout despise, cause they
Miss it in what their Zealous Priests display:
For Priests in melancholy Zeal admit
Only a grave formality for wit;
And would have those that govern us comply
And cherish their fallacious tyranny.
But wherein States can no advantage gain,
They harmless mirth improperly restrain;
Since men cannot be naturally called free,
If Rulers claim more then security.
How happens then this rigor over the Stage
In this restored, free, and licentious age?
For Plays are Images of life, and cheat
Men into virtue, and in jest repeat
What they most seriously think; nor may
We fear lest Manners suffer: every day
Does higher, cunninger, more sin invent
Then any Stage did ever represent.
It may indeed show evil, and affright,
As we prize day by the ugliness of night.
But in the Theater men are easier caught,
Then by what is in clamorous pulpits taught.
T. C.

Persons of the PLAY.
QUeen of Arragon. Petruchi, a Young Lord. Bufo, a Captain. Kings Party: Pynto,
an Astronomer. Muretto. Velasco, Queens General. Lodovico, his friend.
Alphonso, afterward King. Collumello, Counselors to the Queen. Almado,
Herophil, her Woman. Salassa, widow, Mistress to Velasco. Shaparoon, her
friend. Mopas, Velasco' s man. Hangman. Messenger. Groom. Officers.
The Queen.
ACTUS PRIMUS.
Enter Petruchi with Buso, Pynto and Muretto, in poor habi^.
Petr ALL free, and all forgiven.


Omnes. Bless her Majesty.


Petr. Henceforth (my friends) take heed how you so hazard
Your lives and fortunes on the peevish motion
Of every discontent, you will not find
Mercy so rise at all times.

Muret. Gracious Sir!
Your counsel is more like an Oracle,
Then man's advice, for my part I dare speak
For one, I rather will be rackt asunder
Then e're again offend so wise a Majesty.

Petr. It Is well your lives are once more made your own;
I must attend the execution
Of your hot General each shift now for your selves.
Exit Petruchi.
Buf. Is he gone, ha, ha, ha
We have the common Capony of the clear heavens
Once more over our heads, Sirs.

Muret. We are at liberty out of the Hangmans clutches,
Now, mark, what good language and fair words
Will do, Gentlemen.

Pyn. Good language! O, let me go back and he hanged, rather then live within
the rotten infection of thy Cankred breath; the poison of a flatterers tongue
is a thousand times more deadly, then the twinges of a rope; Thou birth of an
unlucky Planet:

I abhor thee.


Muret. Fie, fie! Can you rail on your friends thus.


Pyn. Friends, my friend Captain, come from that slippery Ele, Captain.

His very cradle was in dirt and mud.

His milk the oil of serpents; his mother a mangy Mermaid, and a male Crocodile
begat him.


Muret. This needs not sweet, s^gnior Pynto.


Pyn. Sweet Signior? Sweet Cog a foyst, go hang thy self, thou would jeer the
very rags I wear off my back with thy fustians of sweet, precious, unmatchable,
rare, wise, juditious, hey do! Pox on thee; Sirrah, Sirrah, Have not thou many
a time and often devoured a whole table of mine, garnisht with plenty, nay;
variety of good wholesome fare, under the color of relling news with a roughy
complement?


Muret. Good fare of thine!


Buf. Nay, dear Gentlemen.


Pyn. Mine! I mine, Sycophant, I (^ost mark me) to supply (...) (...), (...) a
whole study of (...), (...) ri^h that they might have set up a Cor^ation of
Almanac makers; and what had I in return? But protestations, (hear thou
this maunderer) that I was, for learning, the soundest; for bounty, the
royallest; for discourse, the sententioust; for behavour, the absolutest (...)
for all endowments of m^de and body, the most accomplished that nature ever
called her workmanship: but thou dog, thou scoundres, my beggary was the fruits
of thy flattery. Stand off, Rascal, off.


Buf. This is excellent faith;


Muret. How, how! I flatter ye? What thee, thee? A poor lousy uncloakt
imposter, a deceitful, couzening, cheating, dull decoying fortune teller; Thou
pawn books; thou, patcht out of an old shepherds Calender, that discoursest in
time of the change of the weather.

And whose were thy Ephemerides? Why, Impudence, were thou ever worth Erra
Pater's Prognostication? Thou learned! In what? By filching, stealing,
borrowing, eating, collecting, and counting with as weatherwise Idiots as thy
self; once in twelve months thou were indeed delivered, (like a big ^ellied
wife) of a two penny Almanac, at Easter. A Hospital boy in a blew coat shall
transcribe as much in six hours to serve all the year.

Thou a table of meat, yes, Astronomers fare, air; or at a feast upon high holy
days, three red Sprats in a dish; that was held gultony ^oo.

I s^ter thee? Thou learned?


Pyn. Rascal, Cannibal that feedest upon man's flesh.


Buf. Nay, pray, pray heartily Gentlemen; in good earnest, and as I live, and
by this hand now --


Muret. Right thou put'st me in mind what I should call thee; Who was it the
cause of all the late insurrection for which we were all like to be hanged, and
our brave General Alphonso is this day to suffer for; who but thou, forsooth;
the influences of the Stars, the ^onjunction of the Planets, the predi^tion of
the cel^tial bodies were perempto^, that if a' would but attempt a civil
commotion, a' should (I marry should a') be strait crowned present King of
Arragon. Now your Gipsonly may in the moon, your divination has fairly mounted
him; poor Gentleman, he is sure to leave his head in pawn for giving credit to
thy prognosticating ignorance.


Pyn. I scorn thee, Parasite.


Muret. You are a stinking starved(...)-gu^ star^gazer. I^ that ^attery or no.


Buf. ^oot, What do you mean, Signior Pynto, Signior Muretto?


Pyn. I will be reveng^ and wa^ch my time, Sirrah.


Muret. Do.


Buf. This is strange my Master, to be so here the place of ex^tion and pratt^e
so (...); Come Signior Pynto; indeed ^a you shall shake hands.


Pyn. Let me alone, you are a foolish Captain. Muretto, I will display thee for a
--


Muret. Hang thy self, I care not for thee this.


Buf. Foolish Captain, foolish Captain, hark ye, Pynto, there is no such good
meaning in that word.


Pyn. A Parrat can ecoho, talk to Scholars so.


Muret. A proper Scholar, ftitcht up of waste paper.


Buf. Sneaks, if I be a fool, I Will bang out the wits of some of your nodles, or
dry bastinado your sides.

Ye Dogret, maungy sc^bbed owlaglasses,

I^ll mawle ye, so I will.


Muret. Captain, sweet Captain, nay, look, now will you put your discretion to
coxcombs?


Buf. Yes, the proudest coxcombs of 'em all, if I be provoked; foolish, f^esh
and blood cannot eudur't.


Muret. So, goodman sky walker, you have made a trim hand on it, to chase your
self into a threat cutting.


Buf. I will shred you both so small, that a very botcher shall shred Spanish
needles, with every fillet of your itchy flesh; call me foolish, ye
whelps-moyles; my father was a Corn cutter, and my mother a muscle woman, it is
known what I am, and I Will make you know what I am, If my chol^r be raised but
one inch higher.


Pyn. Well, I see Mars and Saturn, were thy Planets.

Thou art a valiant soldier, and there is no dealing with ye. For the Captains
sake, I will abate my indignation, Muretto. But --


Buf. But i'thy face, I Will have no buts, S' bores, the black guard is more
honorably sured then any of us three. Foolish, foolish, will never out of my
head while I live.


Enter Velasco and Lodovico.
Muret: Long life, eternal prosperity, the blessing o'th heavens, and honors of
the Earth, crown the glorious merits of the incomparable, Captain Don Velasco.


Pyn. The Chime goes again, Captain.


Velas. Who are these poor Creatures, Lodovico.


Lodov. My Lord, I know them now, they are some of the late mutineers, whom you
(when you, took Alphonso prisoner) presented to the rigor of the Law, but since
they are by the Queen's pardon set at liberty.


Velas. I should know yonder fellow.

Your name is Bufo, if I mistake not.


Buf. My name is my own name, Sir, and Bufo is my name, Sir, if any man shall
deny't, I dare challenge him in defense of my Godfathers that gave me that
name, Sir; and what say you to that, Sir?


Muret. A shallow, unbrain'd, weak, foolish fellow, and so forth: Your lordship
understands me;

But for our parts my good Lord --


Velas. Well, Gentlemen, I cannot tell you now,
That any poor endeavors of mine own
Can work Alphonso's peace, yet I have spoke
And kneell'd and sued for his reprieve. The Queen
Has heard, but will not grant; This is the day,
And this the time, and place, where he must render
The forfeit of his life unto the Law.
I only can be sorry.

Enter Petruchi, afrer the hangman bearing the axe before Alphonso, with
Off^cers.
Petr. Alphonso, here is the place, and this the hour;
Your doom is past, and now the sword of Law
Must cut the vein that swelled with such a frensy
Of dangerous blood against your Queen and Country.
Prepare yourself, it is now too late to hope.

Alph. Petruchi, what is done I did, my ground
Was pity of my country, not malice to it.
I sought to free wracked Arragon from ruin,
Which a fond woman's government must bring.
O had you and the nobles of this land,
A touch but of the miseries, her weakness
Must force ye of neceessity to feel,
You would with me have bent your naked swords
Against this female Mist^iss of the Crown,
And not have been such children to have fawned
Upon a girls nodd.

Petr. You are distracted;
She is our lawful Sovereign, we her Subjects.

Alph. Subjects, Petruchi, abjects, and so live;
I come to die, on to the execution.

Pyn. Here Is a high Saturnal spirit, Captain.


Buf. Pox o'spirits when they mount a man to the Hangmans mercy, I do not like
such spirits, Let me rather be a moon calf.


Velas. I come to bid farewell, and in farewell,
To excuse my much ill fortune, for believe, Sir,
I hold my victory an overthrow.
To tell you how incessantly I plied
Her Grace, for your remission, were as useless
As was my suit, I sorry for your youth.
Let Us part yet reconciled.

Alph. With all my heart;
It is my glory, that I was reduced
By the best man at arms, that ever knighthood
Has styled a Soldier -- Alas! What souls are those?
Now, now, in seeing them I die too late.

Buf. O brave General, O noble General, we are still the rags of the old
Regiment. The truth on it is, we were loath to leave thee, till thy head and
shoulders parted companies. But sweet good dear General take courage, what, we
are all mortal men, and must every one pass this way, as simple as we stand
here.


Alph. Give me thy hand, farewell; the Queen is merciful in sparing you; I have
not ought to give thee but my last thanks.


Buf. B^rto' giving, our clothes are paid for, and A day will come shall quit
us all.


Alph. Art thou, and thou there too; well, leave thy art,
And do not trust the fi^ions of the stars,
They spoke no truth by me: My Lord Velasco,
That creature, there, Muretto, is a man
Of honest heart, for my sake take him to you:
And now soft, peace to all.

Pyn. I will burn my books, forsware the liberal sciences, and that is my
resolution.


Buf. Go thy way for the arrantest General, that ever led crew of brave
Sketdreus.


Petr. Will you make ready, Sir.


Alph. Petruchi, yes, I have a debt to pay, it is natures due.
Fellow before thou ask my pardon, take it;
Be sure and speedy in thy fa^al blow.

Hangm. Never fear clean shaving, Sir.


Alph. May I have leave to meditate?


Petr. You may.


Lodov. A gallant resolution, even in death.


Enter Queen, Collummello, Almada, Herophil, and attendants.
Col. Stay execution it is her Highness pleasure;
Aphonso rise ye, and behold the Queen.

Alph. Beshrew the voice of Majesty, my thoughts
Were fixed upon an upper Region now,
And traffic not with Earth; alas great woman,
What newer tyranny, what doom, what torments
Are borrowed from the conclave of that hell.
Where legions of worse Devils, then are in hell
Keep revels, a proud woman's heart. What plagues
Are broacht from thence to kill me?

Pyn. The moon is now Lady of the ascendant, and the man will dye raving.

Aside.
Alm. Fie, Alphonso,
Will you commit another strange commotion
With your unruly tongue. And what you cannot
Perform in act, attempt to do in words?
A dying man be so uncharitable.

Alph. Cry mercy, she is Queen of Arragon,
And would with her own eyes (instead of maskes
And courtly sports) behold an act of death.
Queen, welcome, Queen, here quaff my blood like wine;
And live a brave she tyrant.

Qu. Alas, poor man.


Alph. Poor man, that looks on me, delighted to destroy me.


Buf. Good boy i faith, by this hand a' speaks just as I would do, for all that
he is so near being made puddings meat.


Qu. You are sorry For your late desperate rudeness, Are you not?


Alph. By all my miseries these taunts are cruelty.
Worse then the Hangmans ax, I am not sorry,
Nay more, will not be sorry, know from me
I hate your sex in general, not you
As you are a Queen, but as you are a woman:
Had I a term of life could last for ever,
And you could grant it, yes, and would, yet all
Or more should never reconcile my heart
To any she alive -- are ye resolved?

Qu. His spirit flies out in his daring language.
Alphonso though the law require thy head,
Yet I have mercy where I see just cause:
You Will be a new man?

Alph Oh! A woman's tongue
Is sharper then a pointed steel; Tender, Madam,
I kiss your Royal hand, and call you fair,
Assure this noble, this uncovered, presence,
That richest virtue is your bosoms tenant,
That you are absolutely great and good;
I Will flatter all the vices of your sex,
Protesting men are monsters, women Angels,
No light ones, but full weighty, natures best,
I Will proclaim lust a pity, pride a handsomness.
Deceit ripness of wit, bold scandalous scolding,
A bravery of spirit; bloody cruelty,
Masculine justice; more I will maintain
That Queens are chief for rule, you chief of Queens,
If you will but give me leave to die in peace.
Pray give me leave to die. Pray good now do,
What think ye, it is a Royal grant; henceforth
Heaven be the rest you chose, but never come at.
A kind farewell to all.

Col. Can you endure
To let a Rebel prate? off with his head,
And let him then dispute.

Petr. I should have used
The privilege of time, had I known this.
You must not talk so loud.

Qu. My Lords, a word: What if we pardoned him, I think the neerness of his
arrival to the stroke of death, Will ever be a warning to his Loyalty.


Alm. How pardon him! What means your Majesty?
What can you hope from one so wholly drowned
In melancholy and sour discontent;
That should he share the Crown, a' would imploy^
On none but Apes and Flatterers.

Velas. Spare, my Lord
Such liberal censure, rather reyn the fury
Of Justice, then so spur it on. Great Mistress,
I will not plead my services, but urge
The glories you may challenge by your mercy.
It will be a most sweet becoming act
To set you in the Chronicles of memory.

Qu. Velasco, thou art not more brave in arms
To conquer with thy valor, then thy courtesy.
Alphonso, take thy life, who took thee prisoner,
Is now become thy spokesman.

Alph. Phew, mock not
Calamity so grossly.

Velas. You are too desperate: The Queen has freely pardoned you.


Qu. And more to purchase kind opinion of thy Sex, our self will lend our
help. Lords, all your hands.


Lodov. But is the Queen in earnest?


Velas. It becomes her, Mercy is God like.


Qu. Officers be gone.
Exist Officers Such objects for a Royal presence are
Unfit, here kiss our hand, we dare conceive
That 'twas thy hight of youth, not hate of us
Drew thee to those attempts, and both we pardon.

Muret. Do not the stars run a wrong byas now, Signior Pynto?


Pyn. Venus is Lady of the Ascendant, man. I knew if once he pass the fatal
hour, the influence would work another way.


Muret. Very likely, your reasons are infallible.


Qu. What can our favors challenge.


Alph. More true service,
True faith, true Love, then I have words to utter.

Qu. Which we accept, lead on, here ends this strise,
When Law c^aves justice, mercy should grant life.
Exit all but Pynto and his fellows.
Pyn. Go thy ways for a sure sound brained piece whilst thou live; Pynto,
say I, now, now, am I an ass, now my Masters, hang your selves, 'S foot, I Will
stand to it; that man whoever he be, (better or worse, all is one) who is not
star wise, is natures fool; your Astonomer has the heavens, the whole globe of
the earth, and the vast gulf of the Sea itself, for his proper kingdom, his
see-simple, his own inheritance, who looks any higher then the top of a
steeple, or a may pool, is worthy to die in a ditch. But to know the
conjunctions of the Planets, the influences of the celestial body, the harmony
of the spheres, srost and snow, hail and tempests, rain and sunshine, nay,
life and death; here is cunning, to be deep in speculation, to be groping the
secrets of nature.


Muret. O, Sir, there, there, there.


Pyn. Let me aloue, I say it my self, I know I am a rare fellow; why, look,
look ye, we are all made, or let me be stewed in Star-shut; pish, I am
confident, and we shall all mount, believe it.


Buf. Shall we, nay, then I am resoly'd.


Muret. Friar Bacon was but a brazen head, in comparison of him.


Buf. But why should you not have said so much before, goodman Jolthead?


Muret. Nay, look ye, Captain, there is a time for all things.


Buf. For all this, what will become of us; is the sign lucky to venture the
begging of a cast suit? Let me be resolved of that once.


Muret. 'Twas wisely urged, Captain.


Pyn. Man's richest ornament is his nakedness, Gentlemen, variety of clothing is
the surquedry of fools; wise men have their proper solace in the linings of
their minds; as for fashions, it is a disease for a horse.


Muret. Never richer stuff came from man.


Buf. 'Zookes, it is a scurvy, a pocky, and a naked answer; a plague of all your
sentences; whilst I am like to starve with hunger and cold,


Enter Messenger.
Mes. By your leave, Gentlemen, the Lord Alphonso has sent you this purse of
gold, commands ye to put your selves into costly suits, and repair to Court;


All. How! To Court!


Mes. Where you may happily see him Crowned King, for that is the common report;
I was charged to urge you to be very speedy: farewell, Gen lemen.

Exit:
Pyn. What think ye now, my hearts of gold?


Muret. Hearts of gold indeed now, Signior.


Pyn. Pish, I am a coxcomb, I; Oh, the divinity of --


Buf. Bawll no more the weather's cold, I must have utensicles, follow your
leader, ho.

Exit all.
Enter Velasco and Lodovico.
Velas. Prethoe persuade me not.


Lodov. You Will loose your honor.


Velas. I Would rather loose my honor then my says: O, Lodovico, thou art witness
with me, that I have sworn, and pledged my heart, my truth to her deserving
memory, whose beauty, is through the world unfollowed.


Lodov. Here the wisdom of sword men, They deal all by strength not policy.
What exercise shall be sain'd, let me know that?


Velas. Excuse, why, Lodovico, I am sick, And I am sick indeed, sick to the
soul.


Lodov. For a decayed tilter, or a known Goward, this were tolerable now: But
to, the business; I have solicited your widow.


Velas. Will she nor speak with me?


Lodov. Young widows, and grave old Ones two, by your leave care not so much
for talking; if you come once to them you must do, and do, and do again, Again,
and again, all is two little, you will find it.


Velas. Come, friend, you mock my miseries


Lodov. It Is a fine laughing matter when the best and most approved soldier of
the world, should be so heartsick for love of a plac^et: Well I have sent your
wise servant (for fools are best to be trusted in women's things) to my cousen
Shaparoons, and by him your second letter, you shall shortly hear what news: My
cousen is excellently traded in these mo^tal businesses of flesh and blood, and
will hardly come of with two denials.


Velas. If she prevail, Lodovico.


Lodov. What then? Ply your occupation when you come to it, it is a fit season of
the year, women are honey moon if a man could jump with them at the instant, and
prick 'em in the right vain; else this Queen would never have saved a Traitor
from the block, and suddenly made him her King and Husband. But no more of
that, there is danger in it; You Are sick you say?


Velas. Pierced through with ^ery darts, much worse then death.


Lodov. Why your only present remedy is, then as soon as you can, to quench
those fires in the watery Channels of qualification: soft, no more words, behold
a prodegy.


Flourish. Enter Colonnello, Almada bare, Alphonso and the Queen Crowned,
Herophil, Petruchi with a Guard, the King and Queen take their States.
All. Long live Alphonso King of Arragon.


Alph. Then we are Sovereign.


Qu. As free, as I by birth:
I yield to you (my Lord) my Crown, my Heart,
My People, my Obedience; In exchange
What I demand is Love.

Alph. You cannot miss it;
There is but one thing that all humane power
Or malice of the Devil could set a broach,
To work on for a breach 'twixt you and me.

Qu. One thing! Why, is there one thing then, my Lord?


Alph. Yes, and it is only this; you are still a woman.


Qu. A woman! Said you so, sir.


Alph. I confess
You have deserved more service, more regard
From me, in my particular, then life
Can thank you for; and that you may conceive
My fair acknowledgment; although it is true,
I might command; yet I will make a suit,
An earnest suit to you.

Qu. It must then be granted.


Alph. That to redeem a while some serious thoughts
Which have misdeem'd your sex. You Will be content
I be a married Bachelor one sennight.
You cannot but conceive.

Col. How Is this?


Petr. Fine work.


Qu. Alas my Lord, this needs no public mention.


Alph. Nay, Madam, hear me, that our our Courts be kept
Under a several roof; that you and I
May not for such a short time, come together.

Qu. I understand you not.


Alph. Your patience, Madam,
You interrupt me, That no message pass
Of commendation, questioning our healths,
Our sleeps, our actions, or what else belongs
To common courtesy, 'twixt friend, and friend.
You must be pleased to grant it, I Will have it so.

Qu. No message of commends!


Alph. Phew, you demur,
It argues your distrust.

Qu. I am content
The King should be obeyed. Pray heaven all be well.

Alph. Velasco, thou were he did conquer me,
Did take me prisoner? were in that the means
To raise me up thus high. I thank thee for it;
I thought to honor thee in a defense
Of the Queens beauty; but we will now deferr't.
Yet hand your mistress, lead her to the Court,
We and our Lords will follow, there we will part;
A seven days absence cannot seem but short.
Ex. all.
Act II.
Enter Shaparoon and Mopas.
Shap. And as I said (nay pray my friend be covered) the business has been
soundly followed on my part. Yet again, in good sooth, I cannot abide you
should stand bare before me to so little purpose.


Mop. Manners is a Jewel (Madam) and as for standing bare, I know there is some
difference, the putting down of a man's cap, and the putting down of his
breeches before a reverend gentlewoman.


Shap. You speak very properly, there is a great deal of difference indeed. But
to come to the point; Fie, what a stir I had to make her to receive the letter,
and when she had received it, to open it, and then to read it; nay, to read it
again and again; that as I am a very woman, a man might have wrong my smock
dropping wet, with the pure sweat that came from my body. Friend, I took such
pains with her. Oh my conscience, to bea^ a child at those years would not
trouble me half so much as the delivery of that letter did.


Mop. A man-child of my age perhaps, Madam, would not.


Shap. Yet that were a sore burden for one that is not used to it, I may tell
you. O these coy girls are such wild cattle to have dealing with.


Mop. What ancient Madams cannot do one way, let them do another; she is a rank
Jade that being past the breeder, cannot kick up her heels, wince, and cry
wee-hee: good examples cannot choose from ones elders, but work much to the
purpose, being well plied, and in season.


Shap. In season? True, that is a chief thing; yes, I Will assure you my friend, I
am but entering into eight and twenty.


Mop. Wants somewhat of that too, I take it; I warrant ye your mark appears yet
to be seen for proof of your age, as plain as when you were but fifteen.


Shap. Truly, if it were well searched, I think it does.

Your name is Mopas, you told me?


Mop. Mopas my name is, and yours Madam Shaparoon I was told.


Shap. A right Madam born I can assure ye.


Mop. Your Ancestors will speak that, for the Shaparoons have ever took place
of the best French-hoods in the parish; ever since the first addition.


Shap. All this with a great deal of modesty I must confess. Ud's Pittikins,
stand by, aside a little: see where the lady coms; do not appear before you are
called, in any case: but mark how I will work her like wax.


Enter Salassa reading a letter.
Salas. Your servant in all commands Velasco. So, and I am resolved to put ye
to the test, servant, for your free fools heart, e're I give you the slip, I
warrant ye.


Shap. Your ladyship has considered the premises e're this time, at full, I
hope.


Salas. O, Shaparoon, you keep true sentinel, what? I must give certain answer;
must I not?


Shap. Nay, Madam, you may choose, it is all in your Ladyships discreet
consideration. The sum of all is, that if you show him not some favor, he is
no long lives man.


Salas. Very well; how long have you been a factress for such Merchants,
Shaparoon.


Shap. O my Religion! I a factress? I am even well enough served for my good
will; and this is my requital. Factress, quoth you?


Salas. Come, your intercession shall prevail, which is his letter carrier?


Mop. At your ladyships service.


Salas. Your Lord Velasco sent you?


Mop. Most true, sweet madam.


Salas. What place hold you about him?


Mop. I am his Drugster, Madam.


Salas. What Sir?


Mop. Being hard bound with melancholy, I give him a purge, with two or three
soluble stools of laughter.


Salas. Belike you are his fool, or his jester.


Mop. Jester if you please, but not fool, Madam; for bables belong to fools,
and they are then only fit for ladies secresies, not for Lords.


Salas. But is he indeed sick of late?


Shap. Alas good heart, I suffer ^or him.


Enter Lodovico.
Lodov. By your leave lady, without ceremony, you know me, and may guess my
errand.


Salas. Yet more trouble, nay, then I shall be hail-shot.


Lodov. To be brief. By the honors of a good name, you are a dry-skinn'd widow,
and did not my have concern the life of the noblest Gentleman in Europe, I
would as much scorn employments of this nature to you, as I do a proud woman of
your condition.


Mop. I marry here is one will thunder her widow-head into flitters: stand to it,
Signior, I am your second.


Salas. Sir you are uncivil to exclaim against a lady in her own house.


Lodov. A lady, yet a paraquitto, popingjay, your whole worth lies in your gay
out side, and your squawling tongue.

A Wagtail is a glorious fowl in respect of many of ye.

Though most of ye are in nature as very fowl as wagtayles.


Salas. Are such as you the Lord Velasco's agents in his hot affection?


Shap. Sweet cosen, Lodovico, pray now, the lady is most virtuously resolved.


Mop. Hark ye middle-ag'd countess, do not take another tale into your mouth,
I have occasion to use you in private, and can find you work enough my self, a
word in your ear.


Salas. I protest, I meant more noble answer for his satisfaction, then ever
your railing language shall force from me.


Lodov. Were I the man that doated on you, I would take a shorter course with
you, then to come humbly whining to your sweet -- pox of all such ridiculous
foppery -- I would --


Salas. Weep your self to death, and be chronicled among the regiment of kind
tender hearted souls.


Lodov. Indeed, forsooth, I would not; what, for a widow one that has jumpt
the old moyles trot, so often, that the sciatica founders her yet in both her
thighs.


Salas. You abuse me grossly.


Lodov. One that has been so often drunk with satiety of pleasure, that
fourteen husbands are but as half a draught to quench her thrust in an
afternoon.


Salas. I will no longer endure ye.


Lodov. For you, you? That are neither noble, wife, rich, fair, nor
welfavoured. For you?


Mop: You are all these, if you can keep your own counsel and let no body know,
Mistress Madam.


Shap. Nay I am so persuaded, and assure your self no body shall know.


Lodov. Yet forsooth, must you be the only precious piece the Lord Velasco
must adore, must dye for. But I vow, if he do miscarry, (as I fear he cannot
recover.)


Salas. Goodness forbid, Alas! Is he sick, sir?


Lodov. Excellent dissimulation! Yes sure, he is sick, and an everlasting
silence strike you dumb that are the cause on it. But, as I said, if he do go
the wrong way, as I love virtue, your ladyship shall be ballated through all
Christendom, and sung to sciroy tunes, and your picture drawn over every
ballad, sucking of rotten eggs among wheasels.


Salas. Pray give me leave; Is Lord Velasco sick? And lies there ought in me to
comfort, or recover him?


Lodov. Marry does there, the more Infidel he: And what of all this now?


Salas. What would you have me do?


Lodov. 'Wonders, either go and visi him, or admit him to visit you; these are
mighty favors are they not?


Salas. Why, good Sir, I will grant the later willingly; he shall be kindly
welcome.


Lodov. And laughed at while he is here: shall a not?


Salas. What would you have me say? My best entertainment shall be open to him;
I will discourse to him freely, if he requires it privately: I will be all what
in honor I should.


Lodov. Certify him so much by letter.


Salas. That cannot stand with my modesty, my word and truth shall be my gage.


Lodov. Enough, do this, and by this hand I Will ask you pardon for my rudeness,
and ever heartily honor you.


Map. I shall hear from you when my leasures serves.


Shap. Most assuredly. Good destines speed your journey.


Mop. All happiness ride ever before you, your disgraces behind you, and and
full pleasure in the midst of ye.

Exeunt.
Enter Bufo in fresh apparel, ushering: Herophil.
Her. My over kind, Captain, what would you say?


Buf. Why, Mistress, I would say, as a man might say forsooth, indeed I would
say.


Her. What, Captain?


Buf. Even whatsoever you would have me to say, forsooth.


Her. If that be all, pray say nothing.


Buf. Why look ye, Mistress, all what I say if you mark it well, is just
nothing; As for example, To tell you that you are fair, is nothing, for you
know it your self; to say you were honest, were an indignity to your beauty,
and upon the matter nothing, for honesty in a fair woman is as good as nothing.


Her. That is somewhat strange to be proved.


Buf. To a good wit, dear Mistress, nothing's impossible.


Her. Sure the Court and your new clothes have infected you: Would I were a
purse of gold, for your sake, Captain, to reward your wit.


Buf. I would you were, mistress, so you were not counterfeit metal, I should
soon try you on the too true touchstone of my affections, indeed forsooth.


Her. Well, witty Captain, for your love I must pass away in debt, but will not
fail to think on it. But now I am in have.


Buf. If you would but grant me but one poor request, before you go, I should
soon dispatch and part.


Her. Name it, Captain.


Buf. Truly, and as I live, it is a very small triffle for your part, all things
considered.


Her. But cannot you tell what it is?


Buf. That were a fine jest indeed, why, I would desire, entreat, and beseech
you.


Her. What to do?


Buf. There you have it, and thank you too.


Her. I understand you not.


Buf. Why, To do with you, forsooth, to do with you.


Her. To do what?


Buf. In plain words, I would commit with you, or as the more learned phrase
it, if you be pleased to consent, I would ravish you.


Her. Fie, fie, Captain, so un^ivil, you made me blush.


Buf. Do I say; why, I am glad I have it for you: Soldiers are hot upon
service, mistress, and a wise man's bolt is soon shot; as the proverb says:


Her. Good Captain, keep up your bolt till I am at leisure to stand fair for
your mark. If the Court Stalions prove all so rank, I will vow all to ride
henceforth upon an ass; so, Captain, I must leave you.

Exit Herophil.
Buf. Fare-wel heartily to you forsooth.

Go thy ways for as true a Mistress as ever fowled clean Napary. This same
whoreson Court diet, cost, lodging, change of clothes, and ease, have addicted
me villanously to the itch of concupiscence.


Enter Alphonso; Pynto and Muretto complementing on either side of him.
Alph. They all shall not entreat me.


Muret. Your Majesty were no King, if your own will were not your own law.


Pyn. Always, my Lord, observing the domination of the Planets: As if Mars and
Venus being in conjunction, and their influence working upon your frailty; then
in any case you must not resist the motion of the celestial bodies.


Muret. All which (most gracious Soverain) this most famous Scoller will at a
minute foretell.


Buf. All hail to the King himself, my very good Liege, Lord, and most gracious
benefactor.


Alph. What need I other counselors then these.

Shall I be forced to be a woman's slave? That may live free, and hate their
fiokle sex.


Muret. O it is a glorious virtue in so magnificent a Prince to abstain from the
sensual surfets of fleshly and wanton appetites.


Alph. I find the inclination of such follies.

Why, what are women?


Buf. Very pleasant pretty necessary toys, an't please your Majesty; I my self
could pass the time with them, as occasion migh serve, eight and forty hours
out right, one to one always provided.


Pyn. Yet of all the seven planets, there are but two women among them, and one
of them two is chaste, which is, as good as if she were a boy.


Muret. That is not to be questioned; the best of women are but troubles and
vexations, it is man that retains all true perfection, and of all men your
Majesty.


Enter Almada and Collummello.
Alph. Ye are to rude to enter on our privacies, without our license, speak,
your business Lords.


Alm. We came from your most virtuous Queen.


Alph. No more.


Col. A month is well nigh past, and yet you slack
Your love to her: What mean you, sir, so strangely
To slight a wife whose griefs grow now too high,
For womanhood to suffer.

Alm. Is It your pleasure
To admit her to your bosom?

Alph. You Are too saucy.
Return, and quickly too, and tell her thus;
If she intend to keep her in our favor,
Let us not see her.

Col. Say you so, Great Sir;
You speak it but for trial

All. Ha, ha, ha.


Col. O, Sir, remember what you are, and let not
The insinuations of these servile creatures,
Made only men by you, sooth and traduce
Your safety to a known and willful danger.
Fix in your thoughts the ruin you have s^ap't;
Who freed you; who has raised you to this height,
And you will then awake your judgments eye:
The Commons murmur, and the streets are filled
With busy whispers: Yet in time recall
Your violence.

Alph. As I am King, the tongue Forfeits his head that speaks another word.


Muretto, Talk we not now like a King?


Muret. Like one that has the whole World for his proper Monarchy, and it
becomes you Royally.


Enter Queen, Petruchi, and Herophil.
Buf. The Queen, and my Mistress; O brave, we shall have some doings hard to
hand now, I hope.


Alph. What means the woman? Ha! Is this the duty
Of a good wife, we sent not for you, did we?

Qu. The more my duty that I came unsent for;
Wherein my gracious Lord have I offended?
Wherein have I transgrest against thy laws
O sacred Marriage? To be sequestered
In the first spring and April of my joys
From you, much dearer to me, then my life?
By all the honor of a spotless bed,
Show me my fault, and I will turn away,
And be my own swift executioner.

Alph. I take that word. Know then you married me
Against my will, and that is your fault

Qu. Alas! Against your will? I dare not contradict
What you are pleased to urge. But by the love
I bare the King of Arragon, (an oath
As great as I can swear by) I conceived
Your words to be true speakers of your heart,
And I am sure they were; you swore they were.
How should I but believe, that loved so dearly?

Alph. Come then you are a trifler, for by this
I know you love me not.

Qu. Is that your fear?
Why la now, Lords, I told you that the King
Made our division but a proof of faith.
Kind husband, now I Am bold to call you so;
Was this your cunning to be jealous of me
So soon? We women are fine fools
To search men's pretty subtilties.

Muret. You Will scarce find it so

Aside.
Alph. She would persuade me strangely.


Qu. Prithee, Sweet heart,
Force not thy self to look so sadly; troth
It suits not with thy love, it is well. Was this
Your sennights respite? Yet, as I am a Queen,
I feared you had been in earnest.

Alph. Earnest: Hence
Monstrous enchantress, by the death I owe
To Nature, thou appear'st to me in this
More impudent then impudence, the tide
Of thy luxurious blood is at the full;
And cause thy raging plurisie of lust
Cannot be sated by our royal warmth,
Thou tri'st all cunning petulent charms to raise
A wanton devil up in our chaste breast.
But we are Canon-proof against the shot
Of all thy arts.

Qu. Was It you spoke that, my Lord?


Pyn. Phaeton is just over the orb of the moon, his horses are got loose, and
the heavens begin to grow into a combustion.


Alph. I Will sooner dig a dungeon in a molehill,
And hide my crown there, that both fools and children
May trample over my Royalty, then ever
Lay it beneath an antic woman's feet.
Could thou transshape thy self into a man,
And with it be more excellent then man
Can be; yet since thou were a woman once,
I would renounce thee.

Petr. Let the King remember
It is the Queen he speaks too.

Alph. Pish, I know
She would be well contented but to live
Within my presence; not for love to me,
But that she might with safety of her honor,
Mix with some hot vein'd letcher, whose prone lust
Should feed the rank impostume of desires,
And get a race of bastards, to whose birth
I should be thought the Dad. But thou, thou woman,
E're I will be the cloak to thy false play,
I Will couple with a witch, a hag; for if
Thou can live chaste, live by thy sell like me.
Or if thou would persuade me that thou love me,
See me no more, never. From this time forth
I hate thy sex; of all thy sex, thee w^rst.
Exit Alphonso, Bufo, Pynto.
Alm. Madam, dear Madam, yet
Take comfort, time will work all for the best

Qu. Where must I go?


Col. You Are in your own Kingdom, it is your birthright,
We all your Subjects; not a man of us,
But to the utmost of his life, will right
Your wrongs against this most unthankful King.

Qu. Away, ye are all Traitors to profane
His sacred merits with your bitter terms.
Why, am I not his Wife? A wife must bear
Withal what likes her Lord t'upbraid her with,
And yet it is no injustice. What was it he said?
That I no more should see him, never, never.
There I am quite divorst from all my joys,
From all my paradise of life. Not see him?
'Twas too unkind a task. But he commanded
I cannot but obey. Where Is Herophil?

Her. Here Madam.


Qu. Go hang my Chamber all with mourning black;
Seal up my windows, let no light survey,
The subtle tapers that must eye my griefs.
Get from me Lords, I will defy ye all,
You Are men, and men (O me) are all unkind.
Come hither Herophil, spread all my robes,
My jewels and apparel on the floor,
And for a Crown get me a Willow wreath:
No, no, that is not my color, buy me a veil
Ingrayn'd in ^awny. Alas, I am forsaken,
And none can pity me.

Petr. By all the faith
I ow to you my sovereign, if you please
To enjoy me any service, I will prove
Most ready and most true,

Qu. Why should the King
Despise me? I did never eross his will,
Never gainsaid his, yea; yet sure I fear
He has some ground for his displeasure.

Her. None,
Unless because you saved him from the block.

Qu. Art thou a pratler too? Peace, Herophil,
Tempt not a desperate woman. No man here
Dares do my last commends to him.

Muret. If your excellent Majesty please to repose confidence in me; I will not
only deliver him your commendations, but think my self highly dishonored, if
he return not his back to you by letter.


Petr. Off beast, made all of baseness, do not grieve
Calamity, or as I am a knigh,
I Will cut thy tongue out.

Muret. Sweet Signior, I protest --
Exit Muretto.
Petr. Madam, believe him not, he is a Parasite;
Yet one the King does dote on.

Qu. Then beshrew ye,
You had not used him gently, had I known't,
I would have kneell'd before him, and have sent
A handful of my tears unto the King.
Away, my Lords, here is no place to revel
In our discomfits. Herophil, let us have,
That thou and I may heartily like widows
Bewail my bridal mocked Virginity.

Col. Let Us follow her my lords; I fear to late
The King will yet repent these rude divisions.
Exeunt.
Enter Velasco, Lodovico, Mopas.
Lodov. Complement? It Is for Barbors shops; know your own worth, you speak to a
frail commodity; and barter't away roundly, my Lord.


Velas. She promised free discourse?


Lodov. She did: Are ye answered?


Enter Salassa, Shaparoon.
Shap. Madam, my Lord Velasco is come, use him nobly and kindly, or -- I say no
more.


Salas. To a poor widow's house my Lord is welcome.
Your lordship honors me in this favor; in what thankful entertainment I can,
I shall strive to deserve it.

Shap. Your sweet lordship is most heartily welcome, as I may say.


Mop. Instead of a letter, Madam goodface, on my Lord's behalf, I am bold to
salute you.


Lodov. Madam Salassa, not distrusting the liberty you granted, now you and my
Lord are in you own house, we will attend ye in the next room; Away, Cousen;
follow, sirrah.


Shap. It is a woman part to come behind.


Mop. But for two men to pass in before one woman, it is too much a conscience;
on reverend antiquity.
Exit Lodovico, Shaparoon, Mopas.
Salas. What is your lorships pleasure?


Velas. To rip up
A story of my sat. When by the Queen
I was employed against the late Commotioners,
(Of whom the now King was chief Leader) then
In my return you pleased to entertain me
Here in your house.

Salas. Much good may it do your lordship.


Velas. But then, what conquest gained I by that conquest,
When here mine eyes, and your commanding beauty
Made me a prisoner to the truest love,
That ever warmed a heart.

Salas. Who might that be?


Velas. You, Lady, are the deity I adore,
Have kneell'd too in my heart, have vowed my soul to,
In such a debt of service, that my life
Is tenant to your pleasure.

Salas. Phew, my Lord;
It is not nobly done to mock me thus.

Velas. Mock you? Most fair Salassa, if e're truth
Dwelt in a tongue, my words and thoughts are twins.

Salas. You wrong your honor in so mean a choice.
Can it be though, that that brave man, Va^asco,
Sole Champion of the world, should look on me?
On me, a poor lone Widow? It Is impossible.

Valas. I am poorer
In my performance now, then ever; so poor,
That vows and protestations want fit credit
With me to vow the least part of a service
That might deserve your favor.

Salas. You are serious?


Velas. Lady, I wish that for a present trial,
Against the custom of so sweet a nature,
You would be somewhat cruel i^ commands.
You dare not sist the honor of my faith
By any strange injunction, which the speed
Of my glad undertaking should not cheerfully
Attempt, or perish in the sufferance of it.

Salas. You promise Lordly.


Velas. You too much distrust
The constancy of truth.

Salas. It were unnoble,
On your part to demand a gift of bounty,
More then the freedom of a fair allowance,
Confirmed by modesty and reason's warrant
Might without blushing yield unto.

Velas. Oh, fear not,
For my affections aim at chaste contents;
Not at unruly passions of desire.
I only claim the title of your servant,
The flight of my ambitions soars no higher,
Then living in your grace, and for encouragement
To quicken my attendance now and then
A kind unravisht kiss.

Salas. That Is but a fee,
Due to a fair deserver: but admit
I grant it, and you have it; may I then
Lay a light burden on you.

Velas. What is possible
For me to venture on, by how much more
It carries danger in it; by so much more
My glorie's in the achievement.

Salas. I must trust ye.


Velas. By all the virtues of a Soldiers nane,
I vow and swear.

Salas. Enough, I take that oath: And thus my self first do confirm your
warrant.


Velas. I feel new life within me.


Salas. Now be Steward,
For your own store, my lord, and take possession
Of what you have purchased freely.

Velas. With a joy.
As willing as my wishes can arrive at.
kisses her.
Salas. So, I may claim your oath now.


Velas. I attend it.


Salas. Velasco, I do love thee, and am jealous
Of thy spirit, which is hourly apt
To catch at actions; if I must be Mistress
Of thee and my own will, thou must be subject
To my improvements.

Velas. It Is my souls delight.


Salas. You Are famed the only fighting Sir alive;
But what is thi^; if you be not safe to me.

Velas. By all --


Salas. you shall not swear, take heed of perjury.
So much I fear your safety, that I command,
For two years space, you shall not wear a sword,
A dagger, or stelletto; shall not fight
On any quarrel be it near so just.

Velas. Lady!


Salas. Hear more yet; if you be baffled, Railed at, scorned, mocked struck,
baff^'d, kicked,


Velas. (O Lady!)


Salas. Spit on, reviled, challenged, provoked by fools,
Boys, anticks, cowards.

Velas. ('It Is intolerable.)


Salas. I charge you (by your oath) not to reply
In word, deed, look: and lastly, I conjure ye
Never to show the cause to any living
By circumstance or by equivocation;
Nor till two years expire to motion love.

Velas. Why do you play the Tyrant thus?


Salas. It Is common
T'observe how love has made a Coward valiant;
But that a man as daring as Velasco,
Should to express his duty to a Mistress,
Kneel to his own disgraces, and turn Coward,
Belongs to me and to my glories only;
I Am Empress of this miracle. Your oath
Is past, if you will lose your self you may.
How do you, Sir?

Velas. Woman thou art vain and cruel.


Salas. Wilt please your lordship taste a cup of wine,
Or stay and sup, and take a hard bed here?
Your friends think we have done strange things this while.
Come let us walk like Lovers: I am pitiful,
I love no quarrels.

Velas. Triumph in my ruins.
There is no act of folly but is common
In use and practice to a scornsul woman.
Exeunt.
Act III.
Enter Alphonso, Almada, Muretto, Bufo, Pynto, and attendants.
Alph. You have prevailed, yet e're you came (my Lord)
Muretto, here this right, right, honest man
Confirmed me thoroughly, now to witness further
With what a gratitude I love the Queen.
Reach me a bowl of wine.

Alm. Your Majesty more honors me, in making me the Messenger of this most
happy concord, then addition of greatness can express.


Muret. I ever told you,
How you would his Grace, inclined at last

Pyn. The very Jove of benignity, by whose gentle aspect the whole sphere of
this Court and Kingdom are (like the lesser orbs) moved round in the harmony
of affability.


Enter one with wine.
Alph. My Lord Almado, health unto your Mistress,
A hearty health, a deep one.

Alm. upon my knee
My duty gladly answers
drinks.
Alph. Give him wine.
There Is not a man whoever in our Court
(Greater or meaner) but shall pledge this health,
In honor of our Queen, our virtuous Queen.
Commend us, and report us as you find.

Alm. Great Sir, I shall with joy.


Alph. Bufo and Pynto,
All in, and drink, drink deep, let none be spared,
Comers or goers, none.

Buf. Away my hearts.


Pyn. We Will tickle it till the welkin blussle again, and all the fixed Stars
dance the old measures.


Muret. I shall attend to wait upon your lordship to the Caraoch.

Exeunt.
Manet Alphonso.
Alph. So, so, far reaching policy, I adore thee,
Will hug thee as my dearling
Shallow fools
Dive not into the pitch of regular Statists.
Henceforth my Stratagem's of scorn and hatred
Shall kill in smiles. I will not strike and frown,
But laugh and murder.

Enter Muretto.
Alph. Welcome, are we safe?


Muret. Most free from interruption: The Lord Velasco is newly entered the
Court; I have given the watch word that they ply him mainly; the conclusion (I
know cannot but break off in hurleburly.


Alph, Good, good, I hate him mortally. 'Twas he
Slaved me to the hangmans ax: But now go on;
Petruchi is the man, you say, must stand
The Champion of her lust.

Muret. There may be yet virtuous intention even in bad actions, in lewd words,
I urge no further then likelyhoods may inform.


Alph. Phew, that is thy nobleness: But now Muretto,
The eye of luxury speaks loud in silence.

Muret. Why look ye, Sir, I must confess I observed some odd amorous glances,
some sweet familiar courteous toying smiles; a kind of officious boldness in
him, Princelike and Queenlike allowance of that boldness in him again;
sometimes I might warily overhear her whispers. But what of all this? There
might be no harm meant.


Alph. Fie, no, the grafting of my forehead, nothing else.

Grafting, grafting, Muretto, A most Gentleman-like exercise; a very mystery
belongs to it.

And now and then they walk thus, arm in arm, twist fingers: ha. Would they not
Muretto?


Muret. It Is wondrous fit a great Queen should be supported, Sir; and for the
best lady of 'em all, to discourse familiarly with her supporter, is courtly
and passing innocent.


Alph. She and Petruchi did so?


Muret. And at her passing to her private lodgings, attended only with her
lady in ordinary. Petruchi alone went in before her.


Alph. Is It true! Went in before her! Can prove that?


Muret. Your Majesty is too quick, too apprehensive of the worst: I meant he
performed the office of an Usher.


Alph. Guilty apparently: Monstrous woman! Beast!
Were these the fruits of her dissembling tears!
Her puling, and her heart sighs. But, Muretto.
I will be swift Muretto, swift and terrible.

Muret. I am such another Coxcomb; O my side too.

Yet faith, let me persuade ye; I hope your wife is virtuous.


Alph. Virtuous? The Devil she is, it is most impossible.
What kiss and toy, wink, prate, yet be virtuous?

Muret. Why not Sir? I think now a woman may lie four or five nights together
with a man, and yet be chaste; though that be very hard, yet so long as it is
possible, such a thing may be.


Alph. I have it, we will confer; let us stand aside.


Enter Bufo and another Groom with wine, both drunk; Bufo handing Velasco by
the shoulders.
Buf. Not drink more? By this hand you shall drink eleven whole healths, if
your cap be wool or beaver; and that is my resolution.


Gro. 'Sfoot, eleven score, without dishonor be it spoken to any man's person
out of this place.


Velas. Prithee, I can no more, it is a profession
I dare not practice, nay, I will not.

Buf. How will not? Not her Queenships health?
Hark ye, thy sti^king and unwholesom words --
Will not -- You will not -- You say you will not?

Velas. I say so, pray be answered.


Gro. Pox of all flinchers; if a'say a will not,
Let him choose, like an arrant dry lord as he is.

Buf. Give me the bowl, I must be valiant.
You, Sirrah, man at arms; Here Is a carouse
To the King, the Queen, and my self.

Gro. Let't come, I ll have that in faith,
Sweet, sweet, sweet, Captain.

Buf. Hold, give the lord first, drink it up lord, do, ump.


Velas. Away I say, I am not in the tune.


Buf. Tune, tune? 'Sblood, do you take us for fiddlers, scrappers, rhyme canters
by tune? By this light, I Will ^courge ye like a town top: Look ye, I am urged --
Ump -- And there is a side blow for ye, like a sober thing as ye are.


Gro. well done in faith, precious Captain.


Velas. Dare thou do this to me knowing who I am?


Buf. Yes, in the way of daring, I dare kick you thus, thus, Sir up and down.
There Is a jolt on the bum too: How do you like it?


Velas. It Is well! You use the privilege of the place.
There was a time the best of all this Court
Durst not have lift a hand against me then.
But I must bear it now.

Alph. Is not this strange Muretto?


Muret. I can scantly credit mine own eyes: The Captain follows his
instructions perfectly.


Buf. Not drink? Mahound, In^del.
I will fillip thy nose, spit in thy face,
Mungrel; brave, a Commander, ^a?

Velas. O woman-woman-woman.


Buf. That Is a lie, a slark one, it is known I nere was a woman in my life. I am
weary beating of him, and can stand no longer. Groom, kick him thou up and down
in my behalf; or by this flesh I Will swi^ge you, sirrah.


Gro. Come aloft, Jackanapes: come aloft; sirrah.
kicks, beats him.
Alph. Why sure Velasco dares not fight.


Muret. It must be some or other has bewitched him.


Enter Pynto.
Pyn. Avaunt, I saw twelve dozen of Cuckolds in the middle region of the air,
galloping on a black Jack, Eastward ho. It is certain that every dozen went for
a company, and they are now become a corporation. Aries and Taurus, the Bull
and the Ram, two head signs, shall be henceforth their recognizances, set up in
the grand hall of their politic convocations -- whirr, whirr, there, there,
just under the rainbow ambles Mercury, the thin bearded thief that stole away
the Drappers wife, while the good man was made drunk at the Stillyard, at a
beaver of Dutch bread and Renish wine, and lay all night in pure holland in's
stockings and shoes. P^sh, Talk not to me, I will maintain against the
Universities of both the Indies, that one Aldermans horse is more right
worshipful, then any six Constables, brown bills and all. Now, now, now, my
brains burn in Sulphur, and thus will I stalk about; and swim through a whole
Element of dainty, neat, brisk, rich claret, canary, or maligo. Am not I Pynto,
have not I hiren here? What art thou, a full moon, or a moon calf?


Buf. No, no, it is a dry Stock Fish, that must be beaten tender.


Velas. Was ever man so much a slave as I?


Pyn. Does Saturn wince? Down with him, let Charles his wayn run over his North
pole; it shall be justified too.


Gro. Now, Sir, having taken a little breath, have at ye once more, and I have
done.


Enter Mopas and Lodovico.
Mop. Clubs, clubs, I have been the death of two Brewers horses, and two
catch-poles, my self, and now be tried by two fools and ten knaves: O monstrous
base, horrible; is my lord past recovery?


Velas. Hold, prithee, fellow hold, I have no sword,
Or if I had, I dare not strike again.

Buf. U'ds bones, were ye an invincible Armado,
I Would pound ye all like brown paper rags.

Lodov. Let me be stricken blind! The shame of fate;
Velasco, baffled, and not dare to strike!
Dogs, drunken dogs, I Will whip ye to your kennels.

Velas. Nay good, forbear.


Mop. Bilbo come forth and show thy foxes tail.
Nay, nay, give me liquor, and I Will fight like a rorer.

Pyn. Keep standing ho; the Almanac says plainly it is no season to be let
blood, the sign is mortal. Hold!


Alph. Yes I command. Uncivil ill bred beasts.
How dares ye turn our palace to a booth?
How dare the proudest of ye all lift up
A hand against the meanest of those creatures
Whom we do own for ours? Now, now you spit
The ancient rancor of you bitter galls
Wherewith you strove to wound us heretofore.

Lodov. We are abused, My Lord.


Alph. Fellow, Thou lie.
Our Royal eyes beheld the pride and malice
Of thee Velasco; who in hate to us
Deny'st to honor our remembrance, though
But in a pledged health.

Velas. Therein I was wronged.


Alph. No, therein all thy cunning could not hide
The rage of thy malicious heart to us;
Yet know, for trial of thy love we caused
This onse^, we will justify the hight
Of thy disgraces; what they did was ours.
Hence Coward, baffled, kicked, despised and spurned.

Buf. Hang thy self; a pox on thee.
Exit Alphonso, Muretto, Pynto, Bufo, Groom.
Lodov. O you are undon: What Devil,
Hag, or Witch
Has stolen your heart away?

Velas. I cannot tell.


Lodov. Not fight it is enough to shame us all.


Velas. Happy was I, that living lived alone,
Velasco was a man then, now is none.
Exeunt.
Mop. Is It even so, no man now; then I smell how things stand: I Will lay my
life, his lady sweet heart has given him the Gleek, and he in return has
gelded himself, and so both lost his courage and his wits together.
Exit.
Enter Queen, Almado, Collumello, Petruchi and Herophil.
Qu. Speak over the words again; and good my lord
Be sure you speak the same, the very words;
Our Queen, our vetuous Queen; Was It so?

Alm. Just so;
And was withal in carriage so most kind,
So Princely, that I must do wrong to gratitude,
In wanting action to express his love.

Qu. I am the happiest she that lives. Petruchi,
Was I mistook or no? Why good my lords,
Observe it well. There is a holy league
Confirmed and ratified 'twixt Love and Fate.
This sacred Matrimonial tie of hearts,
Called marriage, has Divinity within't.
Prithee, Almado, tell me, smiled the King
When he commended to me?

Alm. Madam, yes;
And affably concluded all in this;
Commend us, and report us as you find.

Qu. For loves sakes, no man prattle of distrust.
It shall be treason whosoever says
The King's unkind. My thinks I am all air,
My soul has wings.

Petr. And we are all o'rejoy'd
In this sweet reconciliation.

Qu. We Will visit him (my Lords) in some rich mask
Of rare device, as thus; Pish, now I think on it,
The world yields not variety enough
Of cost, that is worthy of his Royal eyes,
Why Herophil?

Her. Here, Madam.


Qu. Now beshrew me
But I could weep for anger -- If 'twere possible
To get a chariot cut out of a rock,
Made all of one whole Diamond, drawn all on Pavements
Of pearls and amber, by four Ivory steeds
Of perfect Crystal; this were worth presenting.
Or some bright cloud of Saphirs -- Fie you are all
So dull, you do not love me.

Col. You Are transported
To strange impossibilities: our service
Shall wait upon your happiness.

Qu. Nay, nay,
I know you laugh at me, and well you may;
I talk I know not what. I would 'twere fit
To ask one queston of ye.

All. Madam, any thing.


Qu. You Will swear that I am Idle, yet you know
It Is not my custom; Look upon me well;
Am I as fair as Herophil?

Petr. Yes, Madam,
Or any other creature else alive.

Qu. You make me blush in troth. O would the King
Could see me with your eyes. Or would I were
Much courser then I am to all the world;
So I might only seem more fair to him.
Enter Velasco and Lodovico. See here come more. Velasco, thou art welcome.
Welcome kind Lodovico. You I know
Bring fresh supplies of comfort; do not cloud
Your news with circumstance: Say, does the King
Expect me? Yes, good man, I know he does.
Speak briefly, good my Lord, and truly.

Velas. Madam, Take all at once, he is the King;
And Kings may do their pleasures.

Qu. True, Velasco.
But I have from my heart forgot remembrance
Of former passages, the world is changed:
Is a'not justly royal?

Lodov. Would a'were, I wish it for your sake Madam, but my wishes and his
inclinations are quite opposite.


Petr. What said you, Lodovico?


Lodov. Thus Petruchi. Velasco has been by the King disgraced, by his minions
abused, baffled, they justified by the King in it. In a word; Alphonso is, and
will be the scourge of Arragon.


Qu. I Will stop my ears, they shannot let in poison,
Rank treacherous searching poison.

Alm. It Is impossible.


Qu. Yes, it is impossible; but now I see
You Are all agreed to curse me in the hight
Of my prosperities. O that at once
I could have leave to dye and shun the times.
Enter Muretto.
Muret. His excellent Majesty by me commends to your Royal hands this letter,
Madam.


Qu. Why thus I kiss,
And kiss again; Welcome, what e're it speaks.

Muret. That you may all conceive (my Lords) the Kings hearty zeal to unity and
goodness, he by me intreates your attendance on the Queen to him: To you
Signior, Petruchi, he sends this Diamond from his own finger.


Petr. You strike me into wonder.


Muret. I should excuse his highness violence to you, my lord Velasco; but he
says, that your own indiscretion deserved your late reproof: And futher,
(pardon me that I mince not the sum of his injunction) he says your cowardice
is now so vulgarly palpable, that it cannot stand with his honor to
countenance so degenerating a spirit.


Velas. I thank him; yet, if you remember well;
Both he and you proved me another man.

Qu. The sweetest letter that ever was writ:
Come we must to the King -- How! It Is my ring,
The first ring that I ever gave the King.
Petruchi, I must have it.

Petr. 'Twas the King sent it:
I mean to yield it back again.

Qu. No I will.
And in exchange take that of equal value:
But not with me, 'cause it comes from my husband.
Let Us slack no time, this day shall crown our peace.
Exit all but Velasco and Lodovico.
Lodov. You see my Lord how the world goes.
What your next course?

Velas. Would I could leave my self, I am unfit
For company of men: Art thou my friend?

Lodov. I cannot tell what I am, your patient humor indeed persuades me I am
nothing.

Ladies little puppy dogs shortly will break your shins with milke-sops, and
you dare not cry, come out cur. Faith tell me for our wonted frindships sake;
has not this Madam sweet heart of yours a share in your Meramorphosis?


Velas. You are unkind, as much as in a thought,
To wrong her virtue. Lodovico, no;
I have resolved never to fight again.

Lodov. It Is a very safe resolution: but have you resolved never to be beaten
again?


Velas. That goodly sound of gallant valiant man
Is but a breath, and dies as soon as uttered.
I Will seek my fame henceforward in the praise
Of sufferance and patience, for rash manhood
Adds only life to cruelty, yet by cruelty
Takes life away, and leaves upon our souls
Nothing but guilt, while patience if it be
Settled, does even in bondage keep us free.

Lodov. Excellent morality; but good my Lord, without more circumstance, the
cause, let me know the ground and cause on it.


Velas. My will, or if you please my cowardice,
More ask not, more, I vow, you shall not know.
Enter Mopas.
Mop. O Fie, fie, I were better be the Hangmans deputy, then my Lord Velasco's
Gentleman usher; all the streets as I pass whoot at me, and ask me if I be so
valiant as my master the coward; they swear their children carry wooden
daggers to play a prize with him, and there is no talk but of the arrant coward
Velasco.


Velas. I care not, let 'em talk.


Mop. Care not? By these hilts, I had rather then a hundred ducates, I had but
as much spirit: as to have drawn upon a couple of men in Ginger-bread, which a
hucsters crook't legged whoreson ape held up, and swore they were two taller
fellows then you are.


Lodov. Your readiest way were to get you into a cloister; for there is no going
to Court:


Mop: Yes, to have our brains rubbed out with the heel of a brown manchet.


Velas. As, you are my friend forbear to come more near me.

Exit Velasco.
Lodov. Gone so quickly? Mopas I Will find out this mystery, and thou shall be
the instrument.


Mop. Shall I? Why agre^d, let me alone for an instrument, be it a wind or
string'd instrument, I Will sound at one end or other I Will warrant ye.

Exeunt.
Enter Alphonso, Pynto, Bufo.
Alph. Are all things ready as we gave charge?


Pyn. Yes all, and the face of the heavens are passing favorable.


Alph. Bufo, Be it thy care, the watch word given,

To seize Petruchi suddenly.


Buf. If the Devil be not in him, I Will make him fast enough.


Alph. Mean time we will take our place, they are at hand.
Some sound our choicest music t'entertain
This Queen with all the seeming forms of State.
Loud Music.
Enter Queen supported by Petruchi, Herophil, Collumello, Almada, and Muretto.
All. All joy to Aragons great King.


Alph. You strive to act in words (my lords) but we our self
Endeavor rather how to speak in act.
Now is a time of peace of amity.
The Queen is present; Lady, seat you here,
As near, as if we placed you in our heart,
Where you are deep enthroned.

Qu. As you in mine,
So may I ever live in yours, my Lord.

Alph. How so? You are too charitable now,
That cover but equality in love;
A cold, a frozen love; for I must think
The streams of your affections are dried up,
Or running from their wonted channels, range
In lawless paths of secrecy and stealth;
Which makes us love you more.

Qu. I would your words
Dissented not from your resolved thoughts
For then (if I mistake not) you would feel
Extremity of passion, which indeed
Is noble jealousy.

Alph. Are you so plain?
I thank you Madam; lend me your fair hand,
What Is here? O my presages! Whence got you this ring?

Qu. This ring, my lord?


Alph. This ring, my lord!
By honors reverend crest it is time to wake.
Art thou not pale, Petruchi?

Petr. Gracious, Sir.
This is the ring you sent me by Muretto,
Which 'cause it came from you, the Queen would needs
Exchange it for another of her own.

Alph. True, 'cause it came from me, I take it so,
And grant ye, know the word. It Is won and lost.

Enter a Guard, Bufo with them seize Petruchi; Pynto the Queen.
Petr. What mean ye, Helhounds? Slaves, let go my sword.


Buf. Keep in your chaps, and leave scolding, my small friend, it is now no time
to wrangle or to rore.


Qu. Nay, nay, with what you please I am content.


Col. What means your Highness?


Alm. wrong not Majesty
With such unnoble rigor.

Alph. O, my lords,
The weight of all this shame falls heaviest here
In my afflicted bosom. Madman like
I would not credit, what mine ears had heard,
From time to time of that adulterous woman.
For this have I liy'd widowed from her bed,
Was deaf to proofs, to oaths, and ever thought
That whoredom could not suit her self so trimly
On virtues outside. But Petruchi there
Has a loud speaking conscience, can proclaim
Her lust, and my dishonor

Petr. Grant me hearing.


Alph. Away with him to prison, make him fast
On pain of all your lives.

Buf. Come, Sir, there is no playing fast and loose, which fit a ducat now.

Exit Bufo with Petruchi.
Col. But what now for the Queen?


Alph. As she deserves.


Alm. Our law requires a clear and open proof,
And a juditial trial.

Alph. Yes to subjects
It does, but who among you dares speak justice
Against your natural Sovereign? Not one.

Pyn. Your Majesty has most wisely considered that point.


Muret. I have stood silent all this while, and cannot but with astonishment
and unutterable grief bear a share of sadness in these disasters. But, Madam,
be not altogether dejected on your part: there is more mercy in this sovereign
Prince, then that you should any way distrust.


Qu. Nay, even proceed and question me no more.


Alph. I will be gentle to you, and the course
That I will take shall merit your best thanks.
If in a month a Champion shall appear,
In single opposition to maintain
Your honor; I will be the man my self
In person to avouch this accusation:
And which of us prevails, shall end this strife.
But if none come, then you shall lose your head.
Mean time your usage shall be like a Queen.

Muret. Now by the life of honor, it is a most Princely trial, and will be
worth you eternal memory.


Qu. Where must I then be led!


Alph. No where but here
In our own palace; and as I am King,
None worse then I shall be her Guardian.

Alm. Madam, Heaven is the Guardian of the just;
You cannot miss a Champion.

Qu. E're I go,
May I entreat a word?

Alph. O yes, you may.


Qu. Collumello and Almado, hear me,
I speak to you, and to your fellow Peers,
Remember both by oaths and by allegiance
You are my subjects.

Both. Madam, true, we are.


Qu. Then as you ever bore respect or truth
To me as to your Sovereign, I conjure ye
Never to levy arms against the King,
Singly or openly, and never else
To justify my right or wrong in this.
For if you do, here I proclaim ye all
Traitors to loyalty and me: for surety,
I crave your oaths a new.

Both. Since you enforce us,
We swear: and heaven protect you.

Qu. Let me be gone.


Alph. Well as they please for that: Muretto, follow.

Exit all but Almada and Collummello.
Alm. Here is fine work, my lord. What Is to be done?


Col. Stand still while this proud Tyrant cuts our throats.


Alm. She Is wronged, and this is only but a plot.
Velasco, now might bind his Country to him;
But he is grown so cowardly and base,
That boys and children beat him as they list.

Col. I have be thought me, we, with the other Peers,
Will set a proclamation our, assuring
What worthy Knight soever undertakes,
By such a day, as Champion for the Queen.
Shall have a hundred thousand ducats paid,
Withal, what honors else he shall demand.

Alm. This must be speeded, or 'twill come to late.


Col. It shall be sudden: Here our hope must stand;
Kings command Subjects; Heaven does Kings command.
Exeunt.
Act IV.
Enter Salassa and Shaparoon.
Salas. A coward? it is impossible; Velasco a coward? The brave man? The wonder
of the time? Sure, Shaparoon, it is a mere scandal raised by an enemy.


Shap. It Is most certain, most apparent; Tailors, Prentizes, nay, Bakers and
Weavers; (things that drink cannot put spirit into, they are such mighty
bread-eaters) they as I am an honest woman, fling old shoes at him, and he
dares not turn back to give an angry word.


Salas. I had been sweetly promoted to such a tame Champion.


Shap. Gallants! Out upon 'em, it is your tough clown is your only raiser up of
man or woman.


Salas. A Proclimation is sent out for certain?


Shap. Most assuredly.


Salas. The sum proposed, a hundred thousand ducats.


Shap. Present payment, without attendance.


Salas. It Is a glorious reward -- speak low, and observe.


Enter Mopas reading a Proclamation.
Mop. Whosoever, man or woman, can, or will procure any such foresaid
defendant, against the said day; let them, him, or she repair to the said lords
of the Council, and give in such sufficient assurance for such defense, and
they or any of them shall receive a hundred thousand ducats in ready cash; with
what honors may give them, him, or her content or satisfaction.

O that I durst be valiant: A hundred thousand. A hundred thousand; how it
rumbles in my chops.


Salas. Prithee, a word, my friend.


Mop. Sweet Lady, all fair weather upon ye.

As for you, Madam, time was, I recommend to your ancient remembrance, time is
past: with my service forwards and backwards, when it is time present, resting
yours in the whole Mopas.


Shap. Very courtly and pithy.


Salas. Pray let me view your paper.


Mop It Is your ladyships.


Shap. Some proclamation as I take it.


Mop. Madam Reverence, you have taken it in the right cue.


Salas. I am o'rejoy'd; there is gold for thy news. Friend. I will make thee the
happiest and most welcome messenger to thy lord, that ever received thanks from
him; without delay, wait on me for instructions.


Mop. I am at your ladyships beck.

Exeunt.
Enter Alphonso, and Muretto.
Muret. True, true, Sir, you are set high upon the stage for action. O the top
of my ambition, my hearts Idol!

What a perplexity are you twined into? And justly; so justly, that it is hard
to judge, whether your happiness were greater in the possession of an
unmatchable beauty, or your present misery, by enforcing that beauty to expose
her honor to so apparent a contempt: This is not the least, that might have
been in time prevented.


Alph. O I am lost Muretto, my sunk eyes
Are buried in their hollows: busy thoughts
Press on like legions of infernal hags
To menace my destruction: Yet my judgment
Still prompts my senses, that my Queen is fair.

Muret. Fair! Unspeakable workmanship of Heavens bounty. Were all the
skilsullest Painters that ever discerned colors, molded into one, to perfect
an Artist. Yet that Artist should sooner want fancy or imagination, for
personating a curious medal, then ever to pattern a counterfeit so exquisitely
excellent, as is the Queen by nature.


Alph. I have surveyed the wonder of her cheeks,
Compared them with the lillies and the rose
And by my life, Muretto, Roses are
Adulterate to her blush, and lilies pale,
Examined with her white; yet, blear eyed fool,
I could not see those rarities before me.

Muret. Every man is blind (my lord) in his own happiness, there is the curse of
our mortality.
She was the very tale of the world:
Her perfections busied all tongues.
She was the only wish of Europes chiefest Monarchs.
Whose full fruition you (and 'twas your capital sin) most inhumanly abandoned.

Alph. Villain, Petruchi, let me for ever curse him: Had he not been the man;
who else had durst to hazard a denial from her scorns?


Muret. See now herein you are monstrous discourteous, above excuse; why, Sir,
what has Petruchi done? Which (from any King to a Vassal) al men would not
eagerly have persued. Alas, my lord, his nobleness is eternal, by this means,
in attempting and his felicity unmatchable, in enjoying the glory of his time,
a beau so conquering, so unparalleled.


Alph. She is superlative.


Muret. Divine.


Alph. Rich, bright.


Muret. immortal.


Alph. Too too worthy for a man.


Mur. The Gods might enjoy her.


Alph. Nature never framed so sweet a creature.


Muret. She is self Nature's Nature.


Alph. Let me for ever curse the frail condition
Of our deluded faculties: Muretto,
Yet being all, as she is all, her best
Is worst considering that she is a wanton

Muret. Build you a Palace, arch it with Diamonds, roof it with Carbuncles,
pave it with Emraulds, daub it with Gold, furnish it with all what cost can lay
on, and then seal up the doors, and at best it is but a solitary nest for Owls
and Daws.

Beauty was not merely created for wonder, but for use: It Is you were in the
fault; it is you persuaded her, urged, compelled, enforced her: I know it, my
truth and plainness trumpets it out to ye: Besides, women (my lord) are all
creatures, nor Gods nor Angels.


Alph. I must confess it is true, yet by my Crown
She dies, if none defend her, I Am resolved.

Muret. It Is a ^eroical disposition, and with your honor she cannot, must not
live. Here Is the point; If she live and you receive her to favor, you will be
a noted Cuckold; which is a recognizance dishonorable to all, but to a King
fearfully infamous. On the other side, if you prevail, and she be put to death,
you do as it were deprive the Firmanent of the Sun, and your self of the
treasure of the whole earth.


Alph. Right, right, Muretto, there thou strik'st the wound
Too deeply to be cured, yet I must do it.
I would fain see her now.

Muret. Pray do, Sir; and let Petruchi come face to face to her; observe them
both, but be very mild to both: use extremity to neither.


Alph. Well ^ounsell'd; call them hither, but none with them:
We Will strive with grief; Heaven! I am plunged at full.
Never henceforward shall I slumber out
One peaceful hour; my enraged blood
Turns coward to mine houour. I could wish
My Queen might live now though I did but look
And gaze upon her cheeks, her ravishing cheeks.
But, oh, to be a Cuckold; 's death, she dies.

Enter at one door Petruchi, and the other Muretto and the Queen, they stand at
several ends of the Stage.
Muret. My gracious Lord.


Alph. Reach yond fair sight a chair, That man a stool, sit both, wee^l have it
so.


Mur. It Is Kingly done; in any case (my lord) curb now a while the violence of
your passion, and be temperate.


Qu. Sir, it is my part to kneel, for on your brow
I read sad sentence of a troubled wrath,
And that is argument enough to prove my guilt, not being worthy of your favor.

Petr. Let me kneel too, though not for pardon, yet
In duty to this presence: else I stand
As far from falsehood, as is that from truth

Muret. Nay, Madam, this not the promise on your part.

It is his pleasure you should sit.


Qu. His pleasure is my law.


Alph. Let him sit too, the man,


Petr. Sir, you are obeyed.

Both sit.
Alph. Between my comforts and my shame I stand
In equal distance; this way let me turn
To thee thou woman. Let me dull mine eyes
With surfeit on thy beauty. What art thou
Great dazeling splendour? Let me ever look
And dwell upon this presence.

Muret. Now it works.


Alph. I am distract. Say? What! Do not, do not --


Muret. My lord the King-Way, Sir? -- He is in a trance, or else metamorphis'd
to some some pillar of marble: How fixedly a' stands.

Do You hear, Sir? What do you dream on?

My lord, this is your Queen speak to her.


Alph. May I presume with my irreverent lips
To touch your sacred hand.

Qu. I am too wretched
To be thought but the subject of your mirth.

Alph. Why she can speak, Muretto? O tell me pray,
And make me ever, ever fortunate;
Are you a mortal creature? Are ye indeed
Molded of flesh and blood like other women?
Can you be pitiful? Can ye vou^hsase
To entertain fair parley? Can you love,
Or grant me leave to love you; can you, say?

Qu. You know too well, my lord, instead of granting,
I ow a duty, and must sue to you,
If I may not displease.

Alph. Now I am great,
You are my Queen, and I have wronged a merit,
More then my service in the humblest lowness
Can ever recompense. I Will rather wish
To meet whole hosts of dangers, and encounter
The flabled whips of steel, then ever part
From those sweet eyes: not time shall sue divorce
'Twixt me and this great miracle of Nature.
Muretto?

Muret. Sovereign Sir.


Alph. I Will turn away,
And mourn my former errors -- Worse then death
Look where a Ba^isk with murdering flames
Of poison, strikes me Blind. Insatiate tempter,
Pattern of lust, it is thou alone have sundred
Our lawful bride bed, planted on my crest
The horned Satyrs badge; have soyl'd a bea^ty
As glorious, as sits ^onder on her front.
Kill him, Muretto, why should he receive
The benefit of the law, that used no law
In my dishonours?

Petr. Were you more a King
Then Royalty can make you, though oppressed
By your commanding powers, yea, and ^rb'd
In bonds most falsely, yet, give me a sword
And ^ip me to my shirt, I will defend
Her spot^s virtue, and no more este^m,
In such a noble cause, an host of Kings,
Then a poor stingless swarm of buzzing flies.

Qu. Pe^uchi, in those words thou do condemn
Thy loyalty to me, I shall disclaim
All good opinion of thy worth or truth,
If thou persevere to affront my lord.

Petr. Then I have done. Here Is misery unspeakable;
Rather to yield me guilty wrongfully,
Then contradict my wrongs.

Alph. High impudence.
Could she be ten times fairer then she is,
Yet I would be revenged. You sweet, I would
Again -- Her beams quite blast me.

Muret. If you will be an Eaglet of the right aerie, you ^ust endure the Sun.
Can you choose but love her?


Alph. No by the Stars. Why would not you be honest; and know how I do door?


Q^. May I be hold
To say I am, and not offend?

Alph. Yes, yes,
Say so for heavens love, though you be as fowl
As sin can black your purity. Yet tell me
That you are white and chaste; That while you live
The span of your few days, I may rejoice
In my deluded follies; least I dye
Thro^gh ang^ish, e're I have revenged my in i^y,
And so leave you behind me for another;
Tha^ were (...).

Qu. Heaven knows, I (...) abu^'d my self or you.


Pet^. As much sw^re I, and truly.


Alph. Thou proud Devil.
Thou have a lying tongue; They are consented.
In mischief. Get ye hence sed^cing horrors.
I Will s^op mine eyes and ears till you are gone.
As you would be mo^o merciful, away,
Or as you would find mercy.

Ex. Qu^en ^etruchi con^ary ^ies.
Muret. Sir, they are gone.


Alph. And she too then let me be seen no more.
I am distracted, both ways I seel my blame;
To leave her death, to live with her is shame.
Exit.
Muret. Fare ye well King, this is admirable, I will be chronicled, all my
business ripens to my wishes. And if honest intentions thrive so succesfully
(...) I will henceforth build upon this assurance, that there can hardly be a
greater Hell or Damnation, then in being a Villane upon earth.

Exit.
Enter Lodovico, Salassa, Shaparoon.
Lodov. I am wonder stricken -- And were you in faith the she indeed, that
turned my Lords heart so handsomely, so cunningly? O how I reverence wit. Well,
lady, you are as pestilent a piece of policy, as ever made a^ ass of love.


Salas. But, Lodovico, I Will salve all again quickly.


Sha^. Yes indeed forsooth, she has the trick on it.


Lod^v. You have undertaken with the lords already, you say.


Salas. I have, and my life is at stake, but I fear not that.


Lodov. Pish, you have no need; (...) smile, or kind simper from you does all;
I warrant ye the sight of so much gold, as you are to receive, has quickened
your love infinitely.


Salas. Why, Sir, I was no^ worthy of my lords love before; I was too poor: but
now two hundred thousand ducats, is a dower sit for a lord.


Lodov. Marry is it. I applaud your consideration.

'Twas neatly thought on.


Enter Collumello and Almada.
Col. Have you prevailed yet, lady, time runs on,
You must not dally.

Salas. Good my lords, sear nothing:
Were it but two hours to it, I should be ready.

Enter Velasco very sad.
Lodov. He comes himself, it is fit we stood unseen.

Ply him soundly, lady.


Alm. Let us withdraw then.

Exeunt.
Velas. I cannot be alone, still I am hunted
With my confounding thoughts: Too late I find,
How passions at their best are but sly traitors
To ruin honor. That which we call love,
Was by the wisest power above forethought
To check our pride. Thus when men are blown up
At the highest of conceit, then they fall down
Even by the peevish follies of their frailties.

Salas. The best of my lord Velasco's wishes ever.

Crown him with all true content.


Velas. Cry ye mercy, Lady.


Salas. I come to chide you my Lord; can it be possible that ever any man could
so sincerely profess such a mightiness of affection, as you have done to me,
and forget it all so soon, and so unkindely.


Velas. Are you a true very lover, or are you bound
For penance to walk to some holy shrine
In visitation? I have seen that face.

Salas. Have you so? O you are a hot lover; a woman is in fine case to weep out
her eyes for so uncertain a friend, as your protestations urged me to conceive
you: But come I know what you will say aforehand, I know you are angry.


Velas. Pray give me leave to be my own tormentor.


Salas. Very angry, extremely angry; But as I respect perfection, it is more then
I deserve.

Little know you the misery I have endured, and all about a hasty word of
nothing, and I Will have it prove nothing e're we part.


Velas. Her pride has made her lunatic, alas!
She has quite lost her wits, those are the fruits
Of scorns and mockeries.

Salas. To witness how indearedly I prefer your merits, and love your person;
in a word, my lord, I absolve you, and set you free from the injunction I bound
you in; as I desire to thrive, I meant all but for a trial in jest.


Velas. these are no words of madness; whither tends
The extremity of your invention, Lady?
I Will swear no more.

Salas. I was too blame, but one fault (me thinks) is to be pardoned, when I am
yours and you firmly mine: I Will bear with many in you.


Velas. So, if you be in earnest; What Is the matter?


Salas. The sum of all is, that I know it suits not with the bravery of the
lord Velasco's spirit, to suffer his Queen and sovereign stand wrongfully
accused of dishonor, and dye shamefully for a fault never committed.


Velas. Why it is no fault of mine.


Salas. Nor shall it be of mine: Go be a famous subject; be a ransomer of thy
Queen from dangers, be registered thy Countries patron: Fight in defense of the
fairest and innocentest princess alive: I with my heart release you.

First conquer; that done, enjoy me ever for thy wife: Velasco, I am thine.


Velas. Pish, you release me, all their cunning strains
Of policy that set you now a work,
To treble ruin me, in life, fame, soul,
Are foolish and unable to draw down
A greater wrath upon my head; in troth
You take a wrong course lady.

Salas. Very good, Sir, it is prettily put off, and wondrous modestly. I
protest, no man has enjoined me to this task; it is only to do service to the
State, and honor to you.


Velas. No man enjoined you but your self?


Salas. None else, as I ever had truth in me.


Velas. Know then from me, you are a wicked woman,
And avarice, not love to me, has forced ye
To practice on my weakness. I could rail,
Be most uncivil; But take all in short:
I know you not.

Salas. Better and better, the man will triumph anon sure; Prithee, good
dissemble no longer; I say you shall fight, I Will have it so: I command you
fight, by this kiss you shall.


Velas. Forbear, let me in peace bid you ^orbear;
I will be henceforth still a stranger to you,
Ever a stranger, look, look up, up there
My oath is bookt, no humane power can free me.

Salas. I grant you none but I.


Velas. Be not deceived, I have
Forgot your scorns; you are lost to me,
Witness the Genius of this place, how e're
You tempt my constancy, I dare not fight.

Salas. Not dare to fight, what not for me?


Velas. No Lady.

I durst not, must not, cannot, will not fight.


Salas. O me und one.


Velas. What ails you?


Salas. Now my life
Has run it is last for I have pawned it Sir
To bring you forth as champion for the Queen.

Velas. And so should have the promised Gold.


Salas. I, I.


Velas. You have revenged my wrongs upon your self.
I cannot help you, nay alas you know
It lay not in me.

Salas. O take pity on me,
Look here, I hold my hands up, bend my knees,
Heaven can require no more.

Velas. Then kneel to heaven
I am no God, I cannot do you good.

Salas. Shall not my tears prevayle? hard-hearted Man.
Dissembler, loves dishonor, bloody butcher
Of a poor Lady, be assured my Ghost
Shall haunt thy soul when I am dead.

Velas. Your curse
Is fallen upon youur own head, herein show
A noble piety, to bear your death
With resolution, and for final answer
Lady I will not fight to gain the world.
Exit.
Salas. Gone! I have found at length my just reward,
And henceforth must prepare to welcome Death.

Velasco I begin to love thee now.
Now I perceave thou art a noble man,
Composed of Goodness, what a fool was I?
It grieves me more to loose him then to die.

Enter Almada, Columello, Lodovico, Shaproon.
Coll. Lady we have heard all that now has past,
You have deceav'd your self and us, the time
We should have spent in seeking other means.
Is lost, of which you are the cause.

Alm. And for it
The senats striekt decree craves execution,
What can you say?

Salas. My Lords I can no more but yield me to the law.


Shap. O that ever you were born, you have made a sweet hand on it, have you not.


Lodov. Here is the right recompense of a vain confidence, Mistress: But I
will not torture you being so near your end, lady say your prayers and die in
Charity, that is all the pity I can take on ye

Exit Lodovico.
Coll. Ten times the gold you should have had, now Lady cannot release you.


Alm. You alone are she
Ruins your country. Here Is the price of sin,
Ill thrift, all loose in seeking all to win.
Exit. all but shaproon.
Shap. Nay even go thy ways, it is an old proverb that leachery and coveto
usnes go together, and it is a true one too, But (...) shift for one.

If some proper squire or lustly yeoman have a mind to any thing I have about
me, a shall soon know what to trust too for I see the times are very
troublesome.


Enter Pynto.
Pyn. Now is the prosperous season when the whole round of the planets are
coupling together. Let birds and beasts observe valentines day, I am a man and
all times are with me in season, this same Court ease has set my blood on
tiptoe, I am Madder then a march hare.


Shap. Blessing on your fair face, your handsome hand, your clean foot sir, are
you a Courtien sir?


Pyn. Good stars direct me, sweet woman, I am a Courtier, if you have any
suit, what is it, what is it? be short.


Shap. Lord what a Courteous proper man 'a is, trust me, 'a has a most
eloquent heard. -- Suit Sir, Yes Sir, I am a country gentlewoman by father and
Mothers side, one that comes to see f^shions and learn news. And How I pray
sir (if I may be so bold to ask) stand things at Court Sir now a days?


Pyn. A very modest necessary and discreet Qeustion.

Indeed Mistress Countrey-Gentlewoman, things at Court stand as they were over
wont, some stiff and some slack, every thing according to the employment it
has.


Shap. Mary, the more pity sir, that they have not all good doing a like,
methinkes, they should be all and at all times ready here.


Pyn. You speak by a figure, by your leave, in that.

But because you are a stranger, I will a litte more amply inform you.

Here at our Courts of Arr^n, Scholars for the most part are the veriest
fools for that they are allways, beggarly and proud. And foolish citizens the
wisest scholars for that they never run at charges for greater learning to
cast up their reck'nings, then their Horn-bool^.

Here every old lady is cheaper then a proctor, and will as finely convey an
open act, without any danger of a consistory. Love and money sweepes all before
them, be they cut or longtayle. Do not I deserve a kiss for this discovery
Mistress.


Shap. A kiss, O my dear chastity, yes indeed forsooth, and I pray please your
self.


Pyn. Good wench by venus, but are you any thing rich?


Shap. Rich enough to serve my turn.


Pyn. I see you are reasonable fair.


Shap. I ever thought my self so.


Pyn. Will you survey my lodgings?


Shap. At your pleasure si^ being under your guard a^ I am.


Enter Mopas and ^ufo.
Buf. Sirrah Mopas, If my mistress say but the word, thou shall see what an
exploy^, I will do.


Mop. You Will undertake it you say, though your throat be cut in your own
defense, it is but manslaughter you can never be hanged for it.


Buf. Nay I am resolute in that point, here is my hand, let him shrink, that
list, I Will not flinch a hayres breadth Mopas.


Mop. What, old huddle and twang so close at it, and the dog days so near,
Hark ye, your lady is going the way of all flesh. And so is that (...) with
you methinkes, though not in the same cu^, is 'a not?


Shap. 'A has promised to tell me my fortune at his chamber, and do me some
other good for my ladies safety.


Pyn. I have spoken, the planets shall be ruled by me, Captain, you know they
shall.


Buf. Let the planets hang themselves in the elements, what careds, I have
other matters to trouble my brains.


Mop. Signior Pynto take her to you, s^ true a mettall'd blade as ever was
turned into a dudgion, hark in your ear.


Enter Lod^vico and Herophill.
Lodov. I know not how to trust you, you ar all so sickle so unconstant.


Herop. If I fail
Let me be marked a Strumpet.

Lodov. I apprehend you use him kindly still,
See where 'a is, Captain you are well met,
Wer'es one whose heart you have.

Herop. He knows he has.


Buf. Why by my truth I thank you forsooth, it is more of your courtesy then my
deserving; but I shall study to deserve it.


Herop. I hope so, and doubt it not.


Lodov. Madam Cosen Shaproon.


Shap. You are welcome sir.


Pyn. Cosen, Nay then I smell she is a gentlewoman indeed.


Mop. Yes, and as anciently descended as Flesh and blood can derive her.


Pyn. I am a made man and I will have her.


Herop. You Will walk with me sir?


Buf. Even through fire and water. sweet Mistres.


Lodov. Let Us every one to what concerns us most,
For now is the time all must be saved or lost,
Exeunt all.
Act V.
A Scassold Enter Velasco and Lodovico.
Velas. This is not kindly done, nor like a friend.


Lodov. Keep your chamber then, what should owls and barts do abroad by day
light? why, you are become so notoriously ridiculous, that a Crav^n is reputed
of nobler spirit amongst birds, then Velasco among men.


Velas. Why Lodovico do thou tempt my wrongs?
O friend, it is not an honor or a fame
Can be a gain to me, though I should dare
To entertain this Combatt, say my fate
Did crown mine arm with conquest of the King,
Put case the cause add glory to the justice
Of my prevaling sword? what can I win?
Saving a pair of lives I lose a soul,
My rich soul Lodovico, Does not yet
The heart even shrill within thee? All thy spirits
Melt into Passions, All thy manhood stagger
Like mine? Nay can thou choose but now confess
That this word Coward is a name of Dignity?

Lodov. Faint hearts and strong toungs are the tokens of many a tall prattling
Ghossipe. Yet the truth is you have half convinced me, But to what end will
you be a looker on the Tragedy of this she Beast? it will but breed your
greater vexation.


Velas. I hope not so, I look for Comfort in it.


Lodov. Mass: that may be too, It cannot but make your melancholy a little
merry, to see the woodcockes neck caught in a worse noose, then she had set
for you.


Velas. That Is but a poor revenge, I Would rather weep
On her behalf, but that I hope her courage
Will triumph over Death.

Lodov. My Lord they come.


Velas. Let me stand back unseen, Good Angels guard her.

Velasco Muffles himself.
Enter executioner before Salassa, her Hair loose, after her, Almada,
Collumello and officers.
Alm. It Is a sad welcome.
To bid you welcome to the stroke of Death.
Yet you are come to it Lady.

Coll. And a cause
Throughout the land will be your general (...),
For having bin the wilful overthrow,
First of your Countries Champion, (...) your Queen,
Your Lawful Sovereign, who this very day.
Must act a part which you must act before, but with less guilt.

Alm. Use no long speeches lady,
The danger of the time, calls us away,
We cannot listen to your farewells now.

Sal. I have few words to say, my heart is lodged
In you same upper Parliament, yet now
If ere I part, and shall be seen no more,
Some man of mercy could but truly speak
One word of pardon from the Lord Velasco,
My peace were made in earth, and I should fly
With wings of speed to Heaven.

Alm. Pish here is not any.


Salas. Not any? on then, why should I prolong
A minute more of life, that live so late,
Where most I strive for love to purchase hate,
Bear witness Lords I wish not to call back
My younger days in promise that I would
Redeem my fault and do Velasco right,
But could I but reverse the doom of time,
I would with humblest suit make prayers to heaven
For his long flourishing welfare.

Col. Dispatch, dispatch;
You should have thought on this before, pray now
For your own health, for you have need to pray.

Lodov. Madam Salassa, I am bold to take leave of ye before your long journey:
All the comfort that I can give you is, that the weather is like to hold very
fair, you need not take much care for either hood or cloak for the matter.


Salas. Are you come? Worthy Sir, then I may hope
Your noble friend has sent one gentle sigh
To grace my funeral: For virtues sake
Give me a life in death; tell me, O tell me,
If he but seal my pardon, all is well.

Lodov. Say ye so? Why then in a word, go merrily up the stayers; my lord
Velasco desires Heaven may as heartily forgive him, as he does you.


Salas. Enough, I thank his bounty, on I go
goes up the Scaffold. To smile on horror: so, so, I Am up.
Great in my lowness, and to witness further
My humbleness, here let me kneel and breath
My penitence: O women in my fall,
Remember that your beauties, youth and pride
Are but gay tempters, 'less you wisely shun
The errors of your frailties: let me ever
Be an example to all fickle dames,
That folly is no shrine for virtuous names.
Heaven pardon all my vanities, and free
The lord Velasco, what e're come of me.
Bless, bless, the lord Velasco. -- Strike.
As he is about to strike, Velasco steps out.
Velas. Villain, hold, hold! Or thou dyest, Slave.


Alm. What means that countermand?


Lodov. Hey, do! More news yet, you will not be valiant when it is too late, I
trust?


Velas. Woman, come down: Who lends me now a sword?


Lodov. Marry, that do I, Sir, I am your first man; Here, here, here, take heed
you do not hurt your fingers; 'twill cut plaguely: and what will you do with it?


Velas. Base woman, take thy life, thy cursed life,
I set thee free, and for it pawn a soul:
But that I know heaven has more store of mercy,
Then thou and all thy sex of sin and falsehood.
My Lords, I now stand Champion for the Queen:
Does that discharge her?

Col. Bravest man, it does:
Lady, you are safe; now, Officers away.
This is a blessed hour!
Ex. Officers.
Alm. You shall for ever
Bind us your servants.

Lodov. Aha: Why then, however things happen, let them fall, as they fall. God
a' mercy, my lord, at last.


Col. Ha^k how the people ring apeal of joy.
Shout within. For this good news. My lord, time steals away;
We may not linger now.

Salas. You give me life;
Take it not, Sir, away again. I see
Upon your troubled eyes such discon^tent
As frights my trembling heart; Dear Sir --

Velas. The Gold
You hazarded your life for, is your own,
You may receive it at your pleasure.

Alm. Yes,
It Is ready for you, lady.

Salas. Gold? Let gold,
And all the treasures of the earth besides
Perish like trash; I value nothing, Sir,
But your assured love.

Velas. My love! Vain woman,
Henceforth thus turn I from thee, never look
For Apish dotage, for a smile, a how do you,
A fare ye well, a thought from me: let Snakes
Live in my bosom, and with muderous stinges
Infect the vital warmth, that lends them life,
If ever I remember thee or thine.
If I prevail, my services shall crave
But one reward, which shall be, if that ever
Thou come but in my sight, the State will please
To banish thee the land; or else I vow,
My self to leave it.

Salas. My ill purchased life!


Velas. Ill purchased life, indeed, whose ransom craves
A sadder price, then price of bloodshed saves.
Go, learn bad woman, what it is, how foul,
By gaining of a life, to lose a soul.
The price of one oul does exceed as far
A life here, as the Sun in light a Star.
Here though we live some threescore years, or more,
Yet we must dye at last, and quit the score
We ow to nature. But the soul once dying,
Dies ever, ever; no repurifying;
No earnest sighs or groans; no intercession;
No tears; no penance; no too late confession
Can move the ear of justice, if it doom
A soul past cure to an infernal tomb.
Make use of this Salassa.

Lodov. Think upon that now, and take heed, you look
My lord no more in the face.

Salas. Goodness protect him! now my life so late
I strove to save, which being saved I hate.
Exeunt all.
Enter Alphonso a^med all save the head, leading the Queen, a Herald going
before, Muretto, Herophil, a Guard.
Alph. Are you resolved to dye?


Qu. When life is irksom
Death is a happiness.

Alph. Yes, if the cause
Make it not infamous: But when a beauty
So most incomparable as yours, is blemished
With the dishonorable stamp of whoredom:
When your black tainted name, which should have been
(Had you preserved it nobly) your best Chronicle,
Wherein you might have lived, when this is stained,
And justly too; then death does but heap
Affliction on the dying. Yet you see
With what a sympathy of equal grief
I mourn your ruin.

Qu. Would you could as clearly
Perceive mine innocence, as I can clearly
Protest it.

Alph. Fie to justify a sin
Is worse then to commit it, now you are faulty.

Muret. What a royal pair of excellent creatures are here both upon the
castaway. It were a saint like mercy in you (my Lord) to remitt the memory of a
past error. And in you Madam (if you be guilty of the supposed crime) to
submitt your self to the King. I dare promise, his love to you is so unfayned,
that it will relent in your humility. Pray do, good Madam do.


Qu. But how if I be free?


Muret. By any means, for your honors cause do not yield then one jot. Let not
the faint fear of Death deject you before the royalty of an erected heart.
Do You hear this my Lord, it is a doubtful case, almost impossible to be
decided, Look upon her well, as I hope to prosper, she has a most virtuous, a
most innocent countenance. Never heed it. I know my Lord your jealousy and your
affectionswrestle together within you for them astery. Mark her beauty
thoroughly. Now by all the power of Love, it is pity She should not be as fair
within as without.


Alph. Could that ^e proved, I Would give my kingdom straight
And live a slave to her, and her perfections.
Enter Almada, Columello, Attendants. Lords welcome, see thus arm in arm we pace
To the wide theater of blood and shame
My Queen and I, my Queen? had she bin still
As she was, mine, we might have lived too happ'ly,
For eithers comfort. Here on this sweet model,
This plott of wonder, this fair face, stands fixed
My whole felicity on earth. In witness
Whereof, behold (my Lords) those manly tears
Which her unkindnes and my cruel sat
Force from their quiet springs, They speak alowd
To all this open air, their public eyes,
That whither I kill or die in this attemp:
I shall in both be vanquished.

Alm. It Is strange my Lord
Your love should seem so mighty in your hatred.

Alph. Muretto go, and guard Petruchy safe.
Exit Muretto. We must be stout now, and give over whineing.
He shall confess strange things (my Lords) I warrant ye,
Comes not a champion yet?

Qu. None dares I hope.


Coll. The Queen you know, has bound us all by Oath,
We must not undertake to combat you
Although the cause should prove apparent for her.

Alph. Must not? why then you are cowards all, all base,
And fall off from your duties, but you know
Her follies are notorious, none dare's stand
To justify a sin, they see so plainly.

Coll. You are too hard a censurer.


Alph. Give me your hand, farewell, thus from my joy's
I part, I ever part, Yet good my Lords,
Place her on yonder throne, where she may sit
Just in mine eye, that so if strength should fail,
I might fetch double strength from her sweet beauty.
I Will hear no answers.

Qu. Heaven be always guard
To Noble actions
place the Queen.
Coll. Here Is a medley love
That kills in Courtesy.

Alph. Herald sound a warning to all defendants -- What comes no one forth:
How like you this my Lords? Sirrah sound again.

trumpet sounds. Second sound.
A Trumpet within Enter herald sounding, after him Velasco armed all save the
head, Lodovico and attendants.
Velasco? ha? art thou the man? although
Thy cowardice has published thee so base,
As that it is an injury to honor
To fight with one that has been baffled scorned,
Yet I will bid thee welcome.

Velas. Nobly spoken.
Past times can tell you sir, I was no coward,
And now the justice of a gallant quarrel
Shall new revive my dulnes, Yonder sits
A Queen as free from stain, of your disgrace,
As you are foul in urging it.

Alph. Thou talk courageously, I love thee for it,
And, if thou can make good what thou avouchest,
I Will kneel to thee, as to another nature

Velas. We come not here to chide, My sword shall thunder
The right for which I strike.

Qu. Traitor to loyalty,
Rash and unknown fool, what desperate lunacy
Has led thee on to draw thy treacherous sword
Against thy King, upon a ground so giddy
That thou art but a stranger in the cause
Thou would defend, By all my royal blood
If thou prevailst, thy head shall answer it.

Coll. Madam you wrong his truth, and your own fame.


Alm. You violate the liberty of arms.


Alph. Pish, listen not to her, it is I Am your man.


Qu. Why foolish Lords, unsensible and false,
Can any drop of blood be drawn from him
My Lord, your King, which is not drawn from me?
Velasco by the duty that thou ow'st me
I charge thee to lay by thy arms.

Velas. I must not,
Unles this man whom you call king, confess
That he has wronged your honor.

Qu. Will thou fight then
When I command the contrary?

Velas. I will.


Qu. Velasco. hear me once more, thou were wont
To be as pitiful as thou were valiant,
I will entreat thee gentle kind Velasco,
A weeping Queen sues to thee, Do not fight,
Velasco, every blow thou give the King,
Wounds me, did ever love? Velasco hear me.

Alph. She must not be endured.


Velas. Nor can she win me,
Blush you my Lord at this.

Qu. O let me die
Rather then see my Lord affronted thus
Queen falls into a sound.
Velas. Hold up the Queen, she swouns.


Alm. Madam Dear Madam.


Coll. Can you see her and not be touched my Lord?
Was ever woman false that loved so truly

Alph. It Is all dissimulation.


Velas. You dishonor her,
To prove it I Will fight both quarrels now.

Enter a herald sounding a^rumpett. after him Petruchi armed head and all.
Lodov. Heydo? here comes more work for metal men.


Alm. Another who should he be?


Alph. Speak what art thou?


Petr. One that am summoned from the power above
To guard the innocence of that fair Queen
Not more against the man that would accuse her
Then all the world besides.
Thou Art welcome too.

Velas. You come too late friend, I am he alone
Stand ready to defend that gracious beauty.
You may return.

Petr. There Is not a man alive:
Has interest in this quarrel but my self,
I out of mine own knowledge can avo^ch.
Her accusation to be m^erly salse,
As hell it self.

Qu. What mortal man is he,
So wilful in his confidence, can swear
More then he knows.

Petr. I swear but what I know.


Alph. Have thou a name?


Petr. Yes, help my beaver down,
Do You know me now?
Lodovico discovers him
Alph. Petruchi! death of manhood,
I am plainly bought and sold, why where is Muretto?

Enter Muretto with a sword drawn.
Muret. Here as ready to stand in defense of that Miracle of chaste women, as
any man in this presence.


Alph. Are all conspired against me? what thou too?
Now by my fathers ashes, by my life
Thou art a villain, a gross rank'rous villain.
Did not thou only first enforce my thoughts to jealousy?

Muret. It Is true I did.


Alph. Nay more,
Did not thou feed those thoughts with fresh supplies
Named every circumstance?

Muret. All this I grant.


Alph. Do grant it, Dog, slave, Helhound?


Muret. Will you hear me?


Coll. Hear him good my Lord, let us persuade ye,


Alph. What can thou say Impostor? speak and choke.


Muret. I have not deserved this my Lord, and you shall find it, it is true, I
must confess, that I was the only instrument to incense you to this
distemperature and I am proud to say it, and say it again before this noble
presence, that I was my self the only man.


Alph. Insufferable Devil!


Alm. Pray my Lord.


Muret. Wonder not my Lords, but lend me your attentions, I saw with what
violence he pursude his resolutions not more in detestation of the Queen in
particular, then of all her sex in general. That I may not weary your
patience: I bent all my Studies to devise, which way I might do service to my
country, by reclayming the distraction of his discontents. And having felt his
disposition in every pulse, I found him most addicted to this pestilence of
jealosy with a strong persuasion of which; I from time to time, ever fed him by
degrees, till I brought the Queen and the noble Petruchi into the dangers they
yet stand in. But with all (and herin I appeal to your Majesty's own
approbation) I seasoned my words with such an intermixing the praises of the
Queens bewty, that from jealosy. I drew the King into a serious examination of
her perfections.


Alph. Thus far I must acknowledge, he speaks truth.


Muret. At length having found him indeed surely affected, I perceav'd, that
nothing but the supposed blemish of her dishonor, could work a second divorce
between them.


Alph. True, truly fates own truth.


Muret. Now my Lords, to clear that imputation, I knew how easy it would be,
by the apparent certainty it self, In all which, if I have erred, it is the
error of a loyal service. Only I must ever acknowledge how justly I have
deserved a punishment, in drawing so virtuous a princesses honor into public
question; and humbly referr my self to her gracious clemency, and your noble
constructions.


Alph. But can, can this be so?


Muret. Let me ever else, be the subject of your rage, in the sufferance of any
torture.


Alph. And is she chaste Petruchi?


Petr. Chaste by virtue,
As is the new born virgin, for ought I know.

Muret. I ever whisperd so much in your ears my Lord, and told you, that it was
impossible such singular endowments by nature, should yield to the corruption
so much, as of an unworthy thought.

Did I not tell you so from time to time,


Alph. Lay by your arms, my lords, and join with me.
Let Us kneel to this (what shall I call her?) Woman?
No, she is an Angel. Glory of Creation, All kneel.
Can you forget my wickedness? Your Peers,
Your Senators, your bravest men, make suit on my behalf. Why speak ye not, my
lords?
I am I know too vile to be remitted, But she is merciful.

All. Great Sovereign Lady --


Qu. Be not so low, my lord, in your own thoughts:
You are, as you were, Sovereign of my heart;
And I must kneel to you.

Alph. But will you love me?


Qu. It Is my part to ask that: will you love me?


Alph. Ever, yours ever; let this kiss new marry us. What say?


Qu. It does; and heaven it self can tell
I never did, nor will wrong our first loves.

Alph. Speak it no more. Let Us rise, now I am King
Of two rich Kingdoms, as the world affords:
The Kingdom of thy beauty, and this land.
But what rests for Muretto?

Qu. I account my worthiest thanks his debt.


Alm. And he deserves all honor, all respect.


Col. Thus my embraces
Can witness how I truly am his friend.

Velas. And I whilst I have life.


Lodov. Nay when I am dead I, will appear again, clap thee on the shoulder and
cry, God a' mercy old Suresby.


Petr. I must ask pardon of him, still I thought
His plot had aimed all at his own behoof,
But I am sorry for that misconceit.

Muret. My lords, What I have been heretofore, I cannot altogether excuse; but
I am sure my desires were always ^onest, however my low fortune kept me down:
But now I find it is your honest man is your honest man still, howere the world
go.


Alph. Muretto, Whilst I live thou shall be near me,
As thou deservest: And noble Gentlemen
I am in all your debts: henceforth believe me,
I Will strive to be a servant to the State.

All. Long live happy both.


Alph. But where are now my brace of new-made Courtiers,
My Scholar and my Captain?

Lodov. I cry guilty, there is a large story depends upon their exploits, my
Lord; for both they thinking in such perilous times to be shifting every man
for one, have took a passing provident course to live without help hereafter.
The man in the moon, Signior Pynto, for the raising of his fortune a Planet
higher, is by this time married to a kind of loose-bodied widow, called by
Surname a Bawd; one that if he follow wholesome instructions, will maintain
him, there is no question on it, the captain for his part, is somewhat more
delicately resolved for as adventurous (though not as srail) a piece of
service. For he in hope to marry this lady, attending on the Queen, granted
Petruchi his liberty, and by this time has received a sufficient quietus est.


Alph. Are these my trusty servants? What a blindness was I led into!


Lodov. If your Highnesses both will in these days of mirth crown the Comedy;
first let me from the Queens royal gift be bold to receive Herophil for my
wife; She and I are resolved of the business already.


Qu. With all my heart, I think her well bestowed,
If she her self consents.

Her. My duty, Madam,
Shall ever speak my thankfulness, in this
I reckon all my services rewarded.

Velas. Much comfort to you friend.


All. All joy and peace.


Lodov. My duty to my Sovereigns, to all therest at once, my heartiest
heartiest thanks. Now, lady, you are mine; why so, here is short work to begin
with. If in the end we make long work, and beget a race of mad-caps, we shall
but do as our fathers and mothers did, and they must be cared for.


Enter Pynto, Bufo, Mopas with a tire upon his head, and Shaparoon:
Pyn. Follow me not bawd; my lord the King;
My love, justice, justice.

Buf. Justice to me, I was like to have been married to these black muschatoes
instead of that lady.


Pyn. I to this ugly bawd.


Both. Justice.


Alph. Hence you ridiculous fools, I banish you
For ever from my presence: Sirrah, to thee
I give the charge, that they be forth with stripped,
And put into such rags they came to Court in;
And so turned off.

Pyn. Do hear me King?


Buf. King hear me, I Am the wiser man.


Alph. No more I say.


Mop. Come away, come away for shame, you see what it is to be given to the
flesh: the itch of letchery must be cured with the whip of correction. Away,
away.

Exeunt Bufo, Pynto, Mopas and Shaparoon.
Alph. What else remains
But to conclude this day in Hymen's Feasts?
Enter Salassa her hair loose, a white rod in her hand, two or three with bags
of money. To whom; for what;
Your meaning, name, and errand?

Salas. At those feet
Lay down those sums of gold, the price of guilt,
Of shame, of horror.

Qu. What new riddle's this?

Muretto whispers the King, Collumello the Queen.
Muret. My Gracious lord.


Col. I shall inform your Highness.


Velas. Woman of impudence.


Salas. Your looks proclaim
My sentence banishment, or if you think
The word of banishment too hard to utter.
But turn away, my lord, and without accent
I Will understand my doom, I Will take my leave,
And like a penitentiary walk
Many miles hence to a religious shrine
Of some chaste sainted Nun, and wash my fin off
In tears of penance, to my last of breath.

Velas. You come to new torment me.


Salas. I am gone, my lord; I go for ever.

Going out.
Lodov. Faith be merciful, the woman will prove a wife worth the having, I Will
Pass my word.


Alph. E'ne so; stay, lady, I command you, stay.
Velasco here is occasion proffered now
For me to purchase some deserving favor
From woman; honor me in my first suit;
Remit and love that lady.

Velas. Good my lord.


Alph. Nay, nay, I must not be denied, my Queen
Shall join with me to mediate for her.

Qu. Yes, I dare undertake, she that presents
Her penance in such sorrow, heartys orrow,
Will know how to redeem the time with duty,
With love, obedience.

Lodov. Do You hear, my lord; all the ladies in Arragon, and my wife among the
rest, will bait ye like so many wild cats, if you should triumph over a poor
yielding creature, that does in a manner lie down to ye of her own accord.
Come, I know you love her with all the very veins of your heart.


Muret. There Is more hope of one woman reclaimed (my lord) then of many
conceited of their own innocence, which indeed they never have but in conceit.


Velas. To strive against the ordinance of fate,
I find is all in vain: Lady, your hand,
I must confess I love you, and I hope
Our faults shall be redeemed in being henceforth
True votaries to virtue, and the faith
Our mutual vows shall to each other ow.
Say, are you mine, resolved?

Lodov. Why that is well said.


Salas. Yours, as you please to have me:


Velas. Here then ends
All memory of any former strife:
He has enough who has a virtuous wife.

All. Long joy to both.


Alph. The money we return
Where it is due; and for Velasco's merits
Will double it. Thus after storms a calm
Is ever welcomest: Now we have past
The worst, and all I hope is well at last
Exeunt.
FINIS.

