

Pictor adumbravit Vultum guem cernimus, aft hic
Non vaset egregias pingere mentis Opes
Has siscire cupis, sua consule Carmina, in illis
Dotes percipies pectoris eximias.
What here we see is but a Graven face.
Onoly the shadow of that brittle case
Wherein were treasured up those Gemms, which he
Has left behind him to Posterity.
Al: Ross. W M Sculy:

SOLOMON'S RECANTATION, ENTITVLED ECCLESIASTES, PARAPHRASED. With a SOLILOQUIE
or Meditation upon every Chapter. Very Seasonable and Useful for these times.

By FRANCIS QUARLES.

WITH A SHORT RELATION OF His LIFE and DEATH.

The third Edition.

O curas hominum! O quantum est in rebus inane! LONDON. Printed for RICHARD
ROYSTON, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Angel in Ivy-Lane.
1648.

A SHORT RELATION Of the Life and Death of Mr. FRANCIS QUARLES, BY URSULA
QUARLES, his sorrowful Widow.
THough it be inconsistent with the duty of a Wife, to be injurious in any
respect to her Husband; yet in this my bold undertaking I fear I shall be so to
mine: which I doubt not but he would have forgiven, if he had been living, as
proceeding from love; and I hope his friends will pardon (now he is dead) as
being the last duty I can perform to a loving Husband. Those that see with what
pen his Works are written, will say his Life deserved a more skilful Artist to
set it forth: which office though many might have been procured to undertake;
and to which I doubt not, but some would voluntarily have offered themselves,
if they had known that such a thing had been intended: yet have I (with much
zeal, though small discretion) adventured upon it my self, as being fully
assured that none can be more sensible of the loss of him, then I, though
thousands might have expressed that loss to the world with more Art and better
judgment.

He was a Gentleman both by birth and desert: descended of an ancient Family,
and yet (which is rare in these last and worst times) he was an ornament to his
Ancestors. His Father was James Quarles of Rumford Esquire, Clerk of the
Green-cloth, and Purveior of the Navy to Queen Elizabeth, and younger brother
to Sir Robert Quarles. His education was suitable to his birth; first, at
school in the Country, where his School-fellows will say, he surpassed all his
equals; afterward at Christ's College in Cambridge, where how he profited, I am
not able to judge, but am fully assured by men of much learning and judgment,
that his Works in very many places do sufficiently testify more then ordinary
fruits of his University studies. Last of all, he was transplanted from thence
to Lincolns Inn, where for some years he studied the Laws of England; not so
much out of desire to benefit himself thereby, as his friends and neighbors,
(showing therein his continual inclination to peace) by composing suits and
differences amongst them.

After he came to maturity, he was not desirous to put himself into the world,
otherwise he might have had greater preferments then he had: He was neither so
unfit for Court preferment, nor so ill beloved there, but that he might have
raised his fortunes thereby, if he had had any inclination that way. But his
mind was chiefly set upon his devotion and study: yet not altogether so much,
but that he faithfully discharged the place of Cup Bearer to the Queen of
Bohemia, and the office of Secretary to the Reverend and learned Lord Primate
of Ireland, that now is; and of Chronologer to the famous City of London; which
place he held to his death, and would have given that City (and the world) a
testimony that he was their faithful servant therein, if it had pleased God to
bless him with life to perfect what he had begun. He was the Husband of one
Wife, by whom he had eighteen children; and how faithful and loving he was, my
pen and their tears are not able to express.

In all his duties to God and man, he was conscionable and orderly: He
preferred God and Religion to the first place in his thoughts, his King and
Country to the second, his Family and Studies he reserved to the last: As for
God, he was frequent in his devotions and prayers to him, and almost constant
in reading or meditating on his holy Word, as his Divine Fancies and other
parts of his Works will sufficiently testify. For his Religion, he was a true
son of the Church of England; an even Protestant, not in the least degree
biassed to this hand of superstition, or that of schism, though both those
Factions were ready to cry him down for his inclination to the contrary. His
love to his King and Country in these late unhappy times of distraction, was
manifest, in that he used his pen, and powered out his continual prayers and
tears to quench this miserable fire of dissension, while too many others added
daily fuel unto it. And for his family, his care was very great over that,
even then, when his occasions caused his absence from it. And when he was at
home his exhortations to us to continue in virtue and godly life, were so pious
and frequent; his admonitions so grave and piercing; his reprehensions so mild
and gentle, and (above all) his own example in every religious and moral duty,
so constant and manifest, that his equal may be desired, but can hardly be met
withal.

Neither was his good example of a godly life contained only with^n his own
Family: others as well as we, have (or at least might have) made good use of
it. For he was not addicted to any notorious vice whatsoever: He was courteous
and affable to all; moderate and discreet in all his actions: And though it be
too frequent a fault (as we see by experience) in Gentlemen whose dispositions
incline them to the study of Poetry, to be loose and debauched in their lives
and conversations; yet was it very far from him: Their delight could not be
greater in the Tavern, then his was in his Study; to which he devoted himself
late and early, usually by three a clock in the morning. The fruits thereof are
best tasted by those, who have most perused his Works, and therefore I shall be
silent in that particular. For though it had been necessary in another to have
spoken somewh^t of his writings; yet I hope it will not be expected from me,
seeing that neither the judgment of my Sex can be thought competent, nor (if
it were) would the nearness of my relation to him suffer me to praise that, ^
commendations whereof from others, I have often blushed.

I shall therefore rather desire le^ve to speak a word or two concerning the
blessed end of my dear Husband, which was every way answerable to his godly
life; or rather (indeed) surpassed it. For as gold is purified in the fire, so
were all his Christian virtues more refined and remarkable during the time of
his sickness.

His patience was wonderful, insomuch as he would confess no pain, even then
when ^ll his friends perceived his disease to be mortal; but still rendered
thanks to God for his special love to him, in taking him into his own hands to
chastise, while others were exposed to the fury of their enemies, the power of
pistols, and the trampling of horses.

He expressed great sorrow for his sins, and when it was told him, that his
friends conceived he did thereby much harm to himself: he answered, They were
not his friends, that would not give him leave to be penitent.

His Exhortations to his friends that came to visit him were most divine;
wishing them to have a care of the expense of their time, and every day to call
themselves to an account, that so when they come to their bed of sickness,
they might lie upon it with a rejoicing heart. And doubtless such an one was
his: Insomuch as he thanked God, that whereas he might have justly expected,
that his conscience should look him in the face like a Lion, it rather looked
upon him like a Lamb: and that God had forgiven him his sins, and that night
sealed him his pardon: And many other heavenly expressions to the like effect.
I might here add what blessed advice he gave to me in particular, still to
trust in God, whose promise is, to provide for the Widow and Fatherless, etc.
but this is already imprinted in my heart; and therefore I shall not need here
again to insert it.

His charity was extraordinary, in freely forgiving his greatest enemies, even
those who were the cause of his sickness, and by consequence of his death.
For, whereas a Petition full of unjust aspersions, was preferred against him by
eight men, (whereof he knew not any two, nor they him, save only by sight) the
first news of it struck him so to the heart, that he never recovered it, but
said plainly, it would be his death. And when his friends (to comfort him) told
him that Mr. I. S. (the chief promoter thereof) was called to an account for
it, and would go near to be punished; his answer was, God forbid, I seek not
revenge, I freely forgive him, and the rest; only I desire to be vindicated
from their unjust aspersions; especially. Vide Psalm. 31. ver. 7. and 20. I have
hated them that hold of superstitious vanities: and my trust has been in the
Lord.
[that for ought they know I may be a Papist] whereas I never spoke word to any
of them in my life. Which imputation, how slanderous it was, may e^sily be
discovered by a pass^ge in his greatest extremity, wherein his discretion may
(perhaps) be taxed by some, but his Religion cannot be questioned by any. For,
a very able Doctor of the Romish Religion, being sent unto him by a friend, he
would not take what he had prescribed, only because he was a Papist.

These were the remarkable passages in him during his sickness: Let the lying
lips be put to filence: which cruelly, disdainfully, and despitefully speak
against the righteous.
The rest of the time he spent in Contemplation of God, and meditating upon his
Word; especially upon Christ's sufferings, and what a benefit those have, that
by faith could lay hold on him, and what virtue there was in the least drop of
his precious blood: intermingling here and there many devout prayers and
ejaculations; which continued with him as long as his speech: and after, as we
could perceive by some imperfect expressions. At which time a friend of his
exhorting him to apply himself to finish his course here, and prepare himself
for the world to come; he spoke in Latin to this effect (as I am told) O dulcis
Salvator mundi, sint tua ultima verba in Cruce, mea ultima verba in luce: In
manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meum. Et quae ore meo fari non possint, ab
animo and cord sint a te te accepta. O sweet Savior of the world, let thy
last words upon the Cross, be my last words in this world: Into thy hands Lord
I commend my spirit: And what I cannot utter with my mouth, accept from my
heart and soul. Which words being uttered distinctly, to the understanding of
his friend, he fell again into his former Contemplations and Prayers; and so
quietly gave up his soul to God, the eight day of September, 1644. after he had
lived two and fifty years, and lies buried in the Parish Church of S. Foster,
London.

Thus departed that blessed soul, whose loss I have great reason to bewail,
and many others in time will be sensible of. But my particular comfort is in
his dying words, that God will be a Husband to the Widow: And that which may
comfort others as well as me, is (what a reverend Divine wrote to a friend
concerning his death) that our loss is gain to him, who could not live in a
worse age, nor die in a better time.

And here again, I humbly beg the Readers pardon. For I cannot expect but to be
censured, by some for writing thus much, and by others for writing no more. To
both which, my excuse is, my want of ability and judgment in matters of this
nature. I was more averse (indeed) from meddling with the Petition, then any
other thing I have touched upon; lest (perhaps) it should be thought to savor
a little of revenge; but God is my witness I had no such intention. My only
aim and scope was, to fulfill the desires and commands of my dying Husband. Who
wished all his friends to take notice, and make it known, that as be was
trained up and lived in the true Protestant Religion, so in that Religion he
died.

URSULA QUARLES.

A Letter from a learned Divine upon the news of the Death of Master Quarles.
My worthy friend M. Hawkins.
I Received your Letter joyfully, Postscript.
but the news (therein contained) sadly and heavily; It met me upon my return
home from Sturbridge; and did work on my self and wife, I pray God it may work
kindly on us all. We have lost a true friend; and were the loss only mine or
yours, it were the less, but thousands have a loss in him; yea, the
Generations which shall come after will lament it. But our loss is gain to
him, (who could not live in a worse age, nor die in a better time) let us
endeavor like good Gamesters to make the best we may of this throw, cast us by
the hand of Gods good Providence, that it may likewise prove gain to us; which
will be, if in case we draw nearer unto him, and take off our hearts from all
earthly hopes and comforts; using this world as if we used it not; so shall we
rejoice as if we rejoiced not in their using, and mourn as if we mourned not in
the parting with them. --

Essex. Sept. 12. 1644. Your assured friend Nehemiah Rogers.

SOLOMON'S Recantation, Entitled ECCLESIASTES.
CAP. I.
1 The Preacher shows that all humane courses are vain: 4 Because the
creatures are restless in their courses, 9 They bring forth nothing new, and
all old things are forgotten, 12 And because he has found it so in the studies
of Wisdom.

Verse. 1.
Thus says the best of Preachers and of Kings,
THus Solomon the Son of David sings.
2.
The greatest happiness that earth can prize
Is all most vain, and vainest vanities.
3.
What profit can accrue to man? what gains
Can crown his actions, or reward his pains?
Beneath the Orb of heavens surrounding Sun,
What worth his labor has his labor done?
4.
One Generation gives another way,
But earth abids in one perpetual stay:
5.
The Prince of Light puts on his morning Crown,
And in the Evening lays his glory down:
Where leaving earth to take a short repose,
He soon returns, and rises where he rose:
6.
The troubled Air provokes the southern States,
And then it blusters at the Borean gates;
It whirles about in his uncertain sphere,
And rides his unknown Circuit every where;
7.
All Rivers to the Seas their tribute yield,
And yet the Hydropick Seas are never filled,
Their sliding streams pursue their passage home,
And drive their hasty tides from whence they come.
8.
The world is all composed of change; nor can
Her vanity be Charactered by Man:
The eye's not satisfied; and what we hear,
Fills not the Concave of the insatiate ear:
9.
The thing that heretofore has been, we see
Is but the same that is, and is to be:
And what is done, is what is to be done;
There Is nothing that is new beneath the Sun.
10.
What Novelty can earth proclaim, and say,
It had no Precedent before this day?
No, no, there is nothing modern times can own,
The which precedent Ages have not known:
11.
The deeds of former days expire their date
In our collapsed Memories, and what
Times early sunshine has not ripened yet,
Succeeding Generations shall forget.
12.
I Solomon, whose choice affections own
The Churches service dearer then my Throne,
Was chosen and anointed King, and now
Wear Isreal's Crown upon my studious brow:
13.
I bent my heart, by wisdom, to descry
What are subsists beneath the spangled sky;
With such hard travel has our God thought good
To exercise the souls of flesh and blood.
14.
My thoughts have pondered all that has been done
Betwixt the solid Center and the Sun,
And lo! the object of my Contemplation
Is but mere vanity, and souls vexation.
15.
Not all this knowledge can reduce the state
Of crooked nature to a perfect straight;
Nor sum our Ignorances, which surmount
The language of Arithmeticks Account.
16.
I viewed my heart, and there found greater store
Of wisdom, then all those that lived before:
No knowledge could remain, no wisdom lie
Close from mine ear, nor clouded from mine eye.
17.
I gave my all enquiring heart to know
Not wisdom only, but even folly too:
And I perceived that all this Contemplation
Was vain, and nothing but the souls Vexation:
18.
For he that labors for much wisdom, gains
Grief in the enjoyment; in pursuit but pains:
And who improves his knowledge, strives to borrow
A fair advantage to increase his sorrow.
SOLILOQUIE I.
HOw are the vain desires of flesh and blood
Befoold in that mistaken thing called good!
How Travel seeks it! How unwearied hearts
Make it the object both of Arms and Arts!
How many certain obvious ev'lls attend
The way to this uncertain Iournies end!
We tire the night in thought, the day in toil,
Spare neither sweat nor lucubrated oil,
To seek the thing we cannot find; or found,
We cannot hold; or held, we cannot ground
So firm, as to resist the various swings
Of fickle Fortune, or the frowns of Kings.
Poor fruitless labors of deluded Man!
How vainly are ye spent? How short a span
Of seeming pleasure serves ye to requite
Long Leagues of travel? For one drops delight
Of ayry Froth, how are ye forced to borrow
Strong Gales of Hope, to sail through seas of sorrow?
Why do we thus afflict our l^b'ring souls
With dregs of wormwood, and carouse full Bowls
Of boiling anguish? To what hopeful end
Droyl we our crazy bodies, and expend
Our sorrow-wasted spirits, to acquire
A Good, not worth a breath of our desire?
A Good, whose fulsome sweetness clogs and cloyes
The soul, but neither lasts nor satisfies:
How poor an Object pleases! And how soon
That pleasure finds an end! How quickly Noon
How quickly Night! And what to day we prize
Above our souls, to morrow we despise
Beneath a Trifle: What in former Times
We owned as Virtue, now we tax as Crimes.
What is this World, but even a great Exchange
Of dear-bought pen worths, all composed of Change?
Where frothy Honor may be bought and sold
With heart-corrupting, eye-beguiling Gold:
Where sullen wealth, and friend-betraying treasure
May pass in barter for repented Pleasure:
Where painted sweetness (though a grain too light)
Shall buy a Lords Estate for one poor night:
Where unstained beauties youth shall buy an old
Breath-tainted Churl, diseased with Gouts and Gold:
Where Birthrights, Blessings, nay and souls to boot
(And yet not deemed a pen'worth under foot)
Shall pass for fond delights: where very Names
Without an Alias, (to lay after Claims
To a poor Lordship) shall be swept away
For Clods of earth, and those for one nights Play.
Tell me, my puzzled soul, what would thou buy?
Go in and cheapen: Let thy curious eye.
Make her own choice: They will present thy view
With numerous joys: Buy something that is new:
Alas! there is nothing new beneath the sky. Verse. 9

Look further; further yet: Go please thine eye,
Search, till the object and thine eye agrees:
Thine eye's not satisfied with what it sees. Verse. 8

Buy something that will last; that will remain
To after days: All Is momentary, all is vain.
I, but my soul, here is fairer Merchandise, Verse. 2

Wisdom and Knowledge: That to make thee wise;
This to instruct thee: Come, thou needst not fear Verse. 16

Too hard a bargain: Go, and purchase there:
Alas! much wisdom makes thy grief but double; Verse. 18

Increase of Knowledge brings increase of trouble.
I, but my soul, the gracious eye of heaven
Has smiled upon thee. His full hand has given
A large addition to thy thriv'n estate;
Thy barns and bags are filled; thy servants wait
Upon thy business, and their shoulders bear
Thy fruitful burdens; who like Pilots stear
Thy reeling vessel: Thou art richly' endowed
With Knowledge, Wisdom, Judgment, and allowed
Some Grains to make thee weight: Me thinks, thy heart
So armed with strong Resolves should never start
At threatening evils: Me thinks, thy daring eye
(If all the Crystal Rafters of the sky
Should make one ruin, and that ruin fall
About thine ears) should be unmoved at all.
No, no, my soul, it is neither Barn nor purse
Crammed up with coin or Corn, can balk the Curse
Entaild upon thy sin: Nor height of Blood,
Nor all that this mistaken Earth calls Good:
Not very Knowledge, no nor Wisdom can Verse. 17

Exempt thee from the Common lot of Man.
The wisest Prince that ever blessed a Nation Verse. 16

Found all things vain, and when enjoyed, Vexation.
CAP. II.
1 The vanity of humane courses in the works of pleasure. 12. Though the wise
be better then the fool, yet both have but one event. 18. The vanity of humane
labor, in leaving it they know not to whom. 24. Nothing better then joy in our
labor, but that is Gods gift.

1.
SInce knowledge then affords my soul no rest,
My roving thoughts tried mirth, and were possessed
Of all the pleasures earth could lend; yet I
Found mirth and pleasure all but vanity:
2.
I laughed at laughter as a toyish Antic;
And counted all my mirth no less then frantic:
3.
My heart (but wisely foolish) did incline
To costly fare, and frolic cups of wine,
That in these pleasures I might find some good,
To crown the short lif'd days of flesh and blood:
4.
I built magnifick Palaces, did frame
Great buildings to the glory of my name:
I planted Vineyards, whose plump clusters might
Rejoice my heart, and lend my soul delight:
5.
I made me fruitful Orchards for my pleasure,
And curious Gardens to refesh my leisure;
I stored them with trees, and these with Bowers,
And made a Paradise of fruits and flowers:
6.
I made me standing pools, to entertain
My breathless guests and all their number 'ous train:
I cut me Aquiducts, whose current flees
And water all my wilderness of trees:
7.
Armies of servants do attend my state,
Both foreiners, and born within my gate:
Herds I possessed, and flocks above all them
That reigned before me in Jerusalem:
8.
Abundant silver, gold, and precious stones
By Kings presented, my Exchequer ownes:
All sorts of Music (earths delight) had I
To feed mine ear, Beauties to please mine eye:
Such State, magnificence, and princely store
9.
Wondering Jerus'lem never saw before:
In all this pomp, my heart had not forgot
The lawful use: My wisdom failed me not:
I gave mine eyes what ere mine eyes required,
10.
Denied my hearts no mirth my heart desired:
For my poor hearts delight was all my gains,
My pleasure was the portion of my pains.
At length I cast my serious eye upon
11.
My painful works, and what my hands have done:
But lo, beneath the Sun no contentation,
All, all was vanity, and souls vexation.
With that I turned my weary thoughts again
12.
On wisdom, and the foolishness of men;
(Search they that please to search, alas the'rs none
Can search the truth more strict then Solomon)
When my impartial Judgment did compare
13.
Folly with wisdom, this does even as far
Excel the other, as Meridian light
Excels the shadows of the darkest night:
The wise man eyes are in his head; They stand
14.
Like Watchmen in the Tower, to guard the land:
But fools haunt darkness; yet my self perceive
The self-same lot both fools and wisemen have.
Ah! then (said I) if equal fortune lies
15.
For fools and me, what vantage to be wise?
What profit has my wisdom? Then thought I
The height of wisdom has her Vanity.
16.
The foolish Bauble, and the learned Bays
Are both forgotten in succeeding days:
Impartial death shall close the dying eyes
Both of the fool, and also of the wise:
17.
Therefore I hated life, for from th'events:
Of humane actions flow my discontents:
Life spent in action, or in contemplation,
Is all but vanity, and souls Vexation.
18.
I hated all that ever my hands had done
In seeking happiness beneath the Sun;
For what I did I cannot call mine own,
Another hand must reap, what mine has sown.
19.
Who knows if my successor is to be
A wise man or a fool? Howe'r it is he
Must spend with ease, what I have earned with pain
And souls Vexation; this is also vain:
20.
For which, my soul (thus fooled with vain pursuit
Of blossomed happiness that bears no fruit)
Whispered despair of all that I had done
To purchase perfect good beneath the Sun.
21.
Some men there be whose more elaborate gains
(The fruits of lawful cares, and prudent pains)
Descend to those that knew nor pains nor Art;
This is a vanity and afflicts the heart.
22.
For what reward has man of all his droyl
His evening trouble, and his morning toil,
His hearts vexation, and his griefs that run
Through all his labors underneath the Sun?
13.
His days are sorrows; tedious griefs attend
His travail, hopeless of a journies end;
His restless nights afford his closed eye
No slumbers: This is also vanity.
24.
There Is nothing sweeter then to take repast
Of meats and drinks, and now and then to cast
Griefs burden off, and gently loose the rains
By intermingling pleasures with our pains:
But this, I know, lies not in our command,
It is a blessing from the Almighties hand:
25.
For who can eat? what mortal can apply
His heart to force a pleasure more then I?
26.
Heaven gives the just man wisdom, knowledge, mirth;
To sinners, travel; to heap earth to earth;
Wherewith to enrich the righteous Generation;
This is his vanity, and souls Vexation.
SOLILOQUIE II.
BUt stay my soul! Art thou resolved, than,
T'abjure delight, and turn Capuccian?
Because thy earth has thus eclipsed the light
Of thy contentment, will thou make it night?
Were thou condemned to sorrows? were thou born
To live in languishment, and die forlorn?
Abuse not thy Creation: Thou were made
Not thus to sterve thy blossoms in the shade
Of barren melancholy; or to wast
Thy pensive hours in the boisterous blast.
Of stormy discontent: Com, com, my soul,
Hoyst up thy sails to mirth: Let others houle Verse. 1

And whine: Let such as always are at wars
With their own fortunes, curse their ill faced stars:
Pass thou thy frolique youth in Revels, sports,
And fresh delights: frequent the purple Courts
Of prosperous Princes: St^e thy heart in mirth,
And crush the child of sorrow in her birth:
O but, my soul, what profit can accrue Verse. 2

From lavish mirth? what pleasure is it, to skrue
An Antic face and grimme? or to enforce
An empty laughter in a vain discourse?
Why then my soul, Go wind the Plummets up Verse. 3

Of thy down spirits, with a chirping cup:
Redeem thee from the gripes of care, and rapes
Of grief, and drench them in the blood of grapes.
I, but perchance in that sad heart of thine
There is a wound, craves rather oil then wine.
If then thy cure prove worse then thy disease,
That grief thou dare not cure, attempt to ease:
Forget thy sorrows; or if rugged sense
Will not be wooed by language to dispense
With her provoking foe, advise with Art:
Those stubborn streams thou can not stop, divert:
And like a pain-afflicted stripling, play
With some new toy, to while thy grief away.
Go, raise great works, whose structure may impart Verse. 4

The masters wisdom, and the builders Art:
Build houses, whose magnificence may proclaim
Thy worth, as lasting Monuments of thy name.
Plant Orchards for thy pleasure: Deck thy bowers Verse. 5

With dainty fruits, and delectable flowers:
Cut Waterworks: instruct the silver tide Verse. 6

To wanton up and down: Teach her to slide
In soft Meanders, through the fluid veins
Of the green breasted stream embroydered plains;
Ravish thy soul with Music, and refresh
The wasted spirits of thy unweildy flesh
With high-bred raptures: Let harmonious Airs
Compose the discords of thy droyling cares:
Take pleasure in thy pale-enclosed grounds,
And let the Rhet'rick of thy deep-mouthed hounds
Persuade thy headstrong sorrows so to fly
Before thy Heard, as they before the Cry.
Alas, Alas, my poor deluded soul,
Think thou to quench thy fire with oil, or cool
Thy flame with Cordials? Can thy born disease
Expect a Cure from such Receipts as these?
No no, these bellows mount the blaze the higher,
Thou leap'st but from the pan into the fire.
I, but my soul, me thinks a wife forecast Verse. 12

(Though not redress the mischiefs that are past)
May claim some kind of priv'ledge to prevent
The ev'lls that future changes may present;
If not, what harm, what disconvenience lies
In being fool? what vantage to wise
Both fool and wise must pay an equal shot Verse. 13

At Natures table; have the self-same lot.
Why then, my soul, since sorrow needs must haunt Verse. 15

Thy life, condemned to labor, cease to daunt
Thy bold endeavors with the sense of care,
Cheer up thy whining heart, and take thy share
Of all thy labors, eat, and drink; and let Verse. 24

Thy sense enjoy the wages of thy sweat:
It Is all thy Portion: Take what may be had;
Bad is the best, then make the best of bad:
Sweeten thy pains; Mix pleasure with thy sorrow;
Who knows to day, what shall betide to morrow?
CAP. III.
1 By the necessary change of times, vanity is added to humane travail, 11
There is an exellency in Gods works: 16 But as for man, God shall judge his
works there, and here he shall be like a beast.

Verse. 1.
THe great creator in his wise Decree
Has pitched a time when every change shall be,
And through his watchful Providence has given
A season to each purpose under heaven;
2.
There is a time appointed for our birth,
And there is a time for earth to turn to earth:
There is a time to plant; A time wherein
To pluck those plants, thus planted, up again:
3.
There is a season when to build, even so,
There is a season to demolish too:
There is a season to inflict a wound,
And there'is another season to make sound:
4.
There is a time for tears to drown thy eye;
A time to laugh and lay thy sorrows by:
There is a time to mourn; A time to meet
The sprightly Music with thy numerours feet:
5.
There is a due appointed season, either
To scatter stones, or gather stones together:
There is a time to embrace, and there be spaces
Of time, appointed to resrain embraces:
6.
There is a time to gain, and there is ordained
An other time to loosse the things we gained;
There is a time to recollect and lay
Thy treasure up; a time to cast away:
7.
There is a time appointed when to rend;
And there is a time appointed when to mend:
A time for silence, and a time to break
Reserved silence; there is a time to speak:
8.
A time to love, and there is a time to abate
Our warm affections; there is a time to hate:
A time of war, and there is a time to cease
The Bloody Battle: There Is a time for Peace.
9.
If heavens decree thus bound the works of men,
What profit gains the fruitless worker then?
What boots our travel, or those works of ours,
If all our plots depend on heavenly powers?
10.
Nor are our actions, or their secret ends
Governed by chance; nor do our works depend
On hood winked Fortune; no, pleased heaven thinks good
To exercise the soul of flesh and blood:
11.
What ere he did, is fair, and timely done,
He gave the world for man to muse upon:
Whose eye, with admiration may discover
The motion, not the progress of the Mover.
12.
I know, that from the works of flesh and blood
As they are man's, there can arise no good;
Unless perchance to qualify with oil
The soul-afflicting vin'gre of his toil;
13.
Or if it happen that his soul may eat
And drink, and reap the harvest of his sweat
To sweeten sorrows, may we understand
It is a gift from the Almigties hand:
14.
I know that heavens Decree is sealed. and free
From alteration, a most firm Decree:
And so or dain'd, that the presumptuous Race
Of man may fear the Majesty of's face:
15.
The thing that is, has been; and what of old
Has been, succeeding ages shall behold:
The great Disposer keeps the selfsame track
And calls his timely revolutions back.
16.
I viewed the Chair of Judgment, where I saw
In stead of Righteousness, perverted Law:
I viewed the Courts of Equity, and spied
Corruption there, and Justice warped aside.
17.
O then (thought I) the Judge of heaven shall do
Right to the wicked, and the righteous too.
For there is a time true Justice shall proceed
On every Purpose, upon every Deed.
18.
Then puzzel'd in my thoughts, I thus advised,
Heaven suffers mortals to be exercised
In their own miseries, that they may see
They Are not more happy then the sensuals be.
19.
To man and beast the self-same lots befall;
Man dies, so dies the Beast: alas they all
Enjoy one breath; what Royalties remain
To Man above a Beast: For both are vain;
20.
Both travel to the self same place; Both tend
Their paces to the self-same Journies end:
The substance of their flesh is both the same,
But dust, to dust both turn from whence they came.
21.
What curious Inquisitor does know
The place whereto ascending souls do go?
Or can renowned Philosophy declare
Whither the dying spirits of beasts repair?
22.
This rightly weighed, it seems the better choice
For man to suck his labors, and rejoice:
It Is all the Portion he is like to have:
Who knows the entertainments of the Grave?
SOLILOQUIE III.
COme now my Soul, thou have with toylsome pains
Outworn the day; and, with thy dear-bought gains,
Thou have refresht thy spirits; and, at length,
With lusty diet, have redeemed thy strength;
Thou have forgot thy labors, and thy Rest
Has crowned contentment in thy peace full breast:
Art thou now pleased? what can thy heart require,
More then thou have, to fill thy vast desire?
True, if my bubble life could get a Lease
Of his small Rest, nay, if the present Peace
Were but secured from this succeeding sorrow,
Long since designed to the next neighboring morrow,
It were some happiness, and would present
A large proportion of a short content:
But Change (the Moth of transitory things Verse. 1

That Is never worse then when the seasons brings
A flash of Good) does all things so unframe
That earths content does scarce deserve the name
Of common happiness; which like the wind,
Varits, still meeting with a various mind.
Unconstant earth! what can thy treasure show,
That is not, like thy self, unconstant too?
How full of Change! How full of alteration!
Nay, fixed in nothing but thy mere foundation.
And like thy self, our natural parent, we
Constant in nothing, but in loving thee!
One while we plunge in tears; and by and by, Verse. 4

We rage in laughter, yet not knowing why:
To day, the Zeal of our affection's such,
We burn in love, to marrow, hate as much:
Sometimes we fear not when our ev'lls appear; Verse. 8

Sometimes, affrighted at no cause of fear:
One while we should and will not, will and should not;
Nay, at the self same moment, would not would not.
To day we feast, and quaffe in frolique Bowls; Verse. 4

To morrow fast, and pinch our guilty Souls:
Now Music, now a Knell saluts our ears;
at noon we swim in wine, at night in tears.
Ore night our vows are made, our joy concluded:
To day the danger's past, and heaven deluded:
The last six Months our fortune swelled with store,
And now they break, was never Job so poor:
Time was, that Peace enricht our joyful I and; Verse. 8

Time is, our martial drum beats War at hand.
Unconstant Earth! O, is it not enough
Thy days are ev'll at best; and but a puff
At longest? At the fruitfullest but vain?
But sad, at merriest; and at sweetest, pain?
Is not all this enough? enough to make
The miserable child of man forsake
The false protection of thy magic eye,
With out the addition of inconstancy?
It't not enough that we poor Farmers pay
Quit-rent to Nature at the very day,
And at our dying hour bequeath to thee
Our whole subsistence for a Legacy?
But thou must leave our frailties as a prey
To time born Change, that will permit no stay
In one estate, nor give us leave to lie
Sad Patients in a quiet misery!
O but my saul, why do thou thus contend
With thy Creators pleasure? Cease to spend
This needless breath: Shall thy disordered will Verse. ^^

Confront his Providence? or call that ill,
Which he thinks good? Tell me, my soul, shall he
That gave thee being, be prescribed by thee?
He made thee for his glory; not to spend
Thy days in slavish labor, nor to end
Thy painful travel in the shades of death: Verse. ^^

But thou have tainted that immortal breath,
Which qualif'd thy life, and made thee free
Of heav^n and earth, and joint Patentee
With smooth faced Cherubims; And too too proud
Of thy short honor, wrapped thy thoughts, and bowed
Thy straight desiers to unknown delight,
And wrapped thy glory in the clouds of night:
Lost thy freewill to good, did overthrow
Thy perfect knowledge with desire to know;
Berest of wisdom laboring to be wise,
Now peer'd with beasts, that only works and dies.
Both, born to sorrow, breathe the self same breath; Verse. 19

Live both alike, both die the self same death:
Since then, my soul, thy hopes may not aspire
To what thou would, suit thy suppressed desire
To what thou may: and let thy wisdom play
Bad cards with best advantage: what the day
Brings in by travel, let the frolique night
Consume in Mirth, and spend in full Delight:
Take thou to day let others take to morrow; Verse. 22

He earns the Solace, that endures the sorrow.
CAP. IV.
1. Vanity is increased unto men by oppression, 4. By envy, 5. By idleness, 7.
By covetousness, 9. By solitariness, 13. By wilfulness.

1.
MY soul returned and fixed her thoughts upon
The hard oppressions made beneath the Sun;
And, lo. the tears of captives in distress,
Cried loud for Comfort, yet were comfortless;
Great was the oppressors power, yet the grief
Of the oppressed was void of all relief:
2.
O, then I counted their condition blessed,
Whom death has lulld in everlasting rest;
Yea, far more blessed then those that live, to stand
Afflicted patients at the oppressors hand.
3.
Nay, far then both are they more blessed, whom
Conception never hansell'd in the womb;
Or those Abortives, whom untimely birth
Excused from all the sorrows of the earth.
4.
I mused again, and found when pains had crakt
The harder shell to some Heroic act,
Pale envy stricks the kernel with taxation;
O, this is vanity, and souls vexation.
5.
The sluggish fool that solitary stands,
With yauning lips, and bosome-folded hands,
Consumes his empty days, at last, is fed
With his own flesh, that would not move for bread:
6.
His idle tongue thus pleading for his sloth,
Better one hand be filled with rest, then both
Stretched forth in travel, to prepare full diet,
With hearts vexation, and the souls disquiet.
7.
Thus pausing Contemplation showed mine eye
A new prospect of humane vanity;
8.
There is a lonely man that has none other
To foster then himself, nor child nor brother,
Whose droyling hands think nothing can supply
The greedy wants of his insatiate eye;
He robs himself, nor knows for whose relife;
This is a vanity and wounding grief.
9.
The single state of him that lives alone
Is double grief; Two better is then One:
For two can share the sorrows that befall
To one; One's worse then not to be at all;
10.
If eithers drooping shoulders be betrayed
To a sad burden, there is a mutual aid:
Woe to the man whom danger meets alone,
For there is no arm to help him but his own:
11.
When two divide the comforts of a Bed,
If one gains kindly warmth, the others sped:
But warmth turns back to him that lies alone;
The steel will yield no sparks without the stone.
12.
If fury from a stronger arm assailes,
One falls before the foe when two prevails:
But if a third put in a timely stroke,
The Cord that is threefold, is not quickly broke.
13.
To be a poor wise child, is jud'gd a thing
More honorable then to be a King
That Is old and foolish, and whose disposition
Checks at advice, and spurns at admonition.
14.
The low and lanke estates are often known
To clime from Prisons, to the princely Throne;
And glorious Monarchs have been seen to fail,
And change their glittering Glory for a Goal.
15.
So have I seen the vulgar hearts grow cold
To withering Greatness, whilst their eyes behold
The blooming heir, to whom affections run
Like morning eyes to greet the rising Sun.
16.
Past Ages quench the fathers fading light
In the Sons hopes, and future days benight
The Son in his Succeeders expectation;
O, this is vanity and souls vexation.
SOLILOQUIE IV.
MY soul, to what a strange disguised Good
Art thou bewitched! O how has flesh and Blood
Betrayed thee to a happiness that brings
No comfort but from transitory things!
How is thy freedom curbed! How art thou clogged
With dull mortality, bestowed and bogg'd
In thine own frailty! How art thou reposed
In sin. polluted dust! embraced, enclosed
In the foul arms of thy own base Corruptions!
How is thy will disturbed with the inturruptions
Of cross desires? desires, not knowing where
To find a Center, rambling here and there;
Which, like their objects, alterable, rome
Like idle vagrants without pass, or home.
Review thy self my soul; Cast up thy days,
They are but few; Thy life is but a blaze:
Go take an inventory of those Joys
Which thy false earth allows: I hey are but toys,
To mock the frailty of thy flattered Sense,
Attended with a thousand discontents:
Has Heaven inricht thy pains with thriving drift's
Of mighty Gold? endowed thy mind with gifts
Of sacred Art? Or glorified thy name
With honor posted on the wings of Fame?
What is there then, that lies in earths election
To raise thy hap'nesse to more higb perfection?
I, but my soul, what great, what higher hand
Shall stop the mouth of Envy? Or command Verse. 4

Her snake devouring fangs to keep the peace
Upon thy worried Name? To every Lease
Of earths best granted happiness, belongs
The sharp Proviso of malicious tongues:
They, they shall blast thy fortunes; leave a tang
Upon thy new broch'd Honor: They shall hang
Like Burres, upon thy welfare, and destroy,
Like the Easternworm, the gourd of all thy joy.
Or if thou chance to escape the whispering tongue
Of secret Envy, Force, and bold-fac'd Wrong, Verse. 1

May hap to roar upon thy full mouthed Sails,
And rude Opression with her Harpy nails,
may gripe thy fair Prosperity, and great
Upon the vastness of thy great estate.
Or if those foraign dangers should forbear
To make; assault, or made, prove less severe;
From out thy very bosom may arise
Intestine Foes, to make thy peace, their prize:
If that Dull worm, that clothes the mossy land Verse. 5

Withrags, but kissethy bosome-folded hand,
It eats thy treasure with a secret rust,
And lays thy bedridden houour in the dust.
Or if thy droiling hand should once beslave Verse. 8

Thy glorious freedom with a thirst to have,
And take thee prisner to thy loose desirets,
Thy happiness, even whilst enjoyed, expires.
Or if a liberal Content should crown
Thy Gould with Rest, and make thine own, thine own;
Perchance, thou want a Partner, that may share Verse. 9

In all thy fortunes: or (if sped) an heir,
Whose worth, and hopeful merrits may revive
Thy houor'd Dust, and keep thy name alive.
Or if the pleased hand of heaven subscribe
To those desires, a self-conceit may bribe
Thy passion guided Will to take up Arms Verse. 13

Against sovereign Reason, at whose bold Alarm's
Thy false affections may riseup, and shake
Thy fancy-baffled Judgment, and so make
A Gap for mischief, which may reccommend
Thy reeling Fortunes to aruinous End
Now tell me, O my soul! wherein can earth
Deserve thy pains, or gratify thy birth,
In framing equal happiness; nay, in freeing
Thy partial heart from unrepented Being?
O, is it not better, not to thirst at all,
Then thirst in vain, or quench thy thirst with gall?
Are not the Cloisters of the Barren Womb, Verse. 2

Far more desiderable, then to come
Into the wild, into the common Hall
Of troubled Natures factious Court, where all
Move in their Orbs of Care, and several ways,
Fulfill their Revolutions of sad days?
Are not the shady Bowers of death more sweet Verse. 3

Then the bold Sunshine, where we hourly meet
Fresh ev'lls, like Atoms, whose deluding breath
Tickles our fancies till we laugh to death?
Our day of birth leads in our days of Trouble;
My soul prize not this earth; this Toy; this Bubble.
CAP. V.
1 Vanities in divine service, 8 in murmuring against oppression, 9 and in
riches. 18 Joy in riches is the gift of God.

1.
ATtend thy footsteps when thou drawest near
The house of God; and be more apt to hear,
Then give the sacrifice of fools, which know
Not in their sacrifice what ev'll they do:
2.
Let not thy tongue be rash; Commit no wast
Of words before thy God by over have;
Since he from heaven beholds thy actions here,
All lavish babbling let thy lips forbear:
3.
As dreams and rest-disturbing fancies flow
From floods of business which by day we do;
So multitude of words are daily sprung
From the idle fountain of a foolish tongue.
4.
When thou have bound thee to thy God by vow
Defer not payment, but perform it thou:
Discharge thy bonds, for heaven takes no delight
In fools, that violate the faith they plight;
5.
Far safer it is thy vows vere never made,
Then heaven promised payment, never pai'd.
6.
Let not thy lips ensnare thee; plead not thou
Before thy Angel, 'Twas too rash a vow:
O why should thou provoke thy God, and dare
His curse upon thy practice, and thy prayer?
7.
Dreams often are vain, and folly'is mixed among
The language of a multiloquious tongue;
But let the wisdom of thy lips appear
Before thy God with reverentiall fear.
8.
See thou perverred Justice in the land,
And poor men gripped beneath the oppressors hand
Stand not amazed: The Almighty views their way,
And there be powers at hand more high then they.
9.
The fruitful surface of the pregnant soil,
Enriched by the laborious ploughmans toil,
Brings forth to all; nay, very Kings do build
Their whole subsistence from the fertile field:
10.
It Is not full heaps of eye-rejoycing Gold
Can feed, or screen thy nakedness from cold:
Nor can the piles of treasured wealth sustain
Thy drooping spirits: this is also vain.
11.
As goods increase. even so their number, who
Must share the goods increase, increases too.
What has the owner more then they, but this,
What they consume, his eyes behold as his?
12.
How sweetly pleasant is the sleep of such
As labor, eat they little, or eat much?
When as the wealth of idle Owners, keep
Their heart from quiet, and their eyes from sleep:
13.
There is an ev'll that happens now and then
Beneath the Sun, among the sons of men.
Often have I seen increasing riches grow
To be their great made Owners overthrow;
And vex their souls with care and then repay
Unprosp'rous pains with grief, and melt away.
14.
His wealth is fled, and when he should transfer it
Upon his heir, there is nothing to inherrit.
15.
Look how he came into the world, the same
He shall go out, as naked as he came;
Of what his laboring arm has brought about,
His dying hand shall carry nothing out:
16.
This is a wounding Grief, that as he came,
In every point, he shall return the same,
What profit can his souls affliction find,
That toyls for air, and travels but for wind?
17.
The pilgrimage of his laborious days,
Is sordid and obscure, and all his ways
Are blockt with troubles, and his souls disquiet,
To gain his very life-sustaining diet.
18.
I hold it therefore the most happy lot,
To eat and drink, and reap what pains has got,
To crown those days which his Creator gave;
It Is all the portion he is like to have:
19.
All such to whom the bounteous hand of heaven
Gives wealth, and license to enjoy it given,
To sweeten labor, may they understand,
It is a favor from the Almighties hand:
20.
Such, doubtless, in their labor, shall forget
Their painful sorrows, and their toylsome sweat;
For heaven, has crowned their fair desires, and sent
A peaceful conscience, and a pleased content.
SOLILOQUIE. V.
BUt hark, my soul, the morning Bells invite
Thy early paces to a new delight:
Away, away; the holy Saints-bell rings,
Put on thy robes, and oil thy sacred wings:
Call home thy heart, and bid thy Thoughts surcease
To be thy Thoughts; Go, bind them to the peace;
Take good security, or if such fail,
Commit them to the all-commanding Iail
Of thy crammed bags, there to lie close and fast
Until thy heaven atoning vows be past:
Confine thy rambling pleasures to the trust
Of vacant hours: And let thy wisdom thrust
Indulgent Hagar, and her base born child
From thy sad Gates; Let them be both exiled
From thy soft b^some; Let not Ishmael share
Whith holy Isa'c; Isa'c must be heir:
Nor let thy sorrow melted heart bemone
Thy banished bondslave, nor her thirsty son:
Take thou no care for them; Heaven will supply
Their craving thirst with bottles from thine eye:
Leave all thy servill Fancies in the vale,
Mount thou the sacred Hill, and there, bewail
Thy dying Isa'c, whose free gift may be
A living pledge betwixt thy God and thee.
Here may thou feast thy soul, and fill thy breast
With heavenly Raptures, and with holy Rest.
Here shall thy Piety sweeten all thy pains,
And Grace shall here replieve what Grief distrains:
Here may thou shroud thee from those ev'lls that wait
Upon the frailty of thy frail estate.
Here may thy Griefs unbosome all their groans,
And find redress from the high Throne of Thrones.
Have then; O hie thee to that sacred place:
Why stay'st thou? See, the widened Arms of Grace
Invite thy presence, and with open breast
Promise fair welcome to so fair a Guest!
O but my Zeal-transported soul, take heed;
Too rash a haste brings often too dear a Speed:
Observe thy steps; Thy feet are apt to slide, Verse. 1

If thy misguided paces swerve aside;
Death waits at either hand, to make a prize
Of wavering footsteps, and miswandring eyes:
Near the best blessings neighboring dangers dwell,
The very Suburbs of blessed Heaven, is Hell.
Thus when thy awful presence shall draw near
These Hallalujous Courts, advise, and fear;
Put off thy shoes; It Is holy ground thou tread'st:
Be not too bold; thou dy'st unless thou dread'st.
Now, may thy holy boldness safely venture
To pass these delectable Ports, and enter.
Now cloth thy heart with Reverence; Be filled
With secret Raptures; Let thy fancy build
No Castles here; Beware thou banish hence
The sinful objects of invited Sense:
Make heavens command (and let thy Zealous motion
Subscribe to that) the cause of thy devotion;
Let heavens direction be thy form, and bend
Thy endfull heart to make heavens glory the end:
Worship that is molded in Traditious Schools,
Is but the Sensual Sacrifice of fools.
Be wisely careful what thy lips impart; Verse. 2

Bring thy soft tongue acquainted with thy heart:
Be slow to speak, and be as quick to hear;
Heaven loves a single tongue, a double care:
Make haste to pay what thy vowed promise owes; Verse. 4

Destruction dwells in unperformed Vows.
Thus may thou break the heart-corroding Fangs
Of griping Care, and escape the dying Pangs
Of living death: Here, here, thou may control
Earths power, and imparadise thy soul
In soft and sacred Rest beyond the extent
Of whining grief, and murmuring discontent.
I, but my soul, gross vanity even dwells
In thy devotion, whose rank offering smells
So strong of earth, that very heavens deride
Our very Altars, and abhor the Pride
Of our disguised humility, which brings
A secret curse upon our holiest things:
Hence, hence, my soul, proceed those boisterous waves
That plunge our frailties: This, O this enslaves
Our ^raven'd Spirits so, that we even fail
Or shrink before the Combat, and turn tail
To every slight affliction: this unlevells
Thy even-way'd Peace, with indigested evils:
This sowers all thy sweets, sads all thy Rest,
Nay dispossesses thee, even whilst possessed
Of thy Imperious Treasure. --
O then my soul, where shall thy wounds obtain
That sovereign balsome? who shall ease thy pain?
In what blessed ear will thy complaints find place?
What holy Altar shall thy arms embrace?
If here be no protection for oppressed
And laboring souls, where shall poor souls have Rest?
Earths Joys are vain, and they that shall commit
Trust in vain earth, are far more vain then it,
CAP: VI.
2 The vanity of riches without use. 3. Of children, 6 and old age without
riches. 9. The vanity of sight and wandering desires. 11. The conclusion of
vanities.

Verse. 1.
THere is an Ev'll, which my observing eye
Has taken notice of beneath the sky;
It is an ev'll frequents the troubled breast
Of wretched man, and robs him of his rest.
2.
To see where God has multiplied and given
What wealth and honor earth can beg of heaven,
And yet no power to use it, but descends
To very strangers: O, this grief transcends!
3.
Who multiply their loins and years, yet have
Souls unsuffic'd with good, and soil the grave
With blemished and dishonored names, I say
Abortive births are better far then they:
4.
For he can hardly own a being, whom
Nature casts forth from the untimely womb:
Darkness infolds him in her secret shades,
His nam's forgotten, and his memory fades.
5.
The worlds surveighing Lamp does not affright
The pleasing slumbers of his peaceful night:
There be no ears, no eyes, to hear, to see,
The living soul has not such rest as he:
6.
Yea though he live a thousand years twice told,
What worth his eyes, can his sad eyes behold?
Do they not both arrive, not both resort
To the dull portals of the selfsame Port?
7.
The best reward of man's laborious sweat
Is but a morsel of quotidian meat:
This may suffice his body, but the will
Of his insatiate soul what hand can fill?
8.
What is it then the wisemans labor gains
More then the painful fool by all his pains?
What wants the poor man that by prudent labor
Knows how to live, more then his wealthy neighbor?
9.
Better enjoy a competence, and crave not
More wealth, then still desire the wealth we have not
To wish, what if enjoyed brings molestation,
Is but mere vanity, and souls vexation.
10.
The worldly confluence of treasure can
Exempt no mortal from the lot of man,
Nor can his wealth instruct him to withstand
The angry strokes of the Almighties hand:
11.
Since the increase of wealth procured by pain,
Preserved with fear, with sorrow lost again,
Increases grief in the possessors breast,
What vantage then has man to be possessed?
12.
Who knows, what is good for man in his dull blaze
Of life, his swift, his shadow flying days?
Or who can tell, when his short hour is run,
The event of all his toil beneath the Sun?
SOLILOQUIE. VI.
WHat meant that great creating Power to frame
This spacious Universe? Was not his name
Glorious enough without a Witness? Why
Did that corrected Twilight of his eye
Un-muzle darkness, and with morning light
Redeem the day from new baptized night?
What meant that sacred Power to command
Divorce betwixt united Sea and Land?
Why wrapped he earth (as yet untoucht with showers)
In a green Robe embroid red all with flowers?
What meant the Beams of his refulgent eyes
To print their Image in the crystal skies?
What princely guests with all their numerous train
Did he expect? was he to entertain?
That his magnificent, his bounteous hand
Made such Provision both by sea and land?
What royal State's at hand? what Potentate?
On whom must all these Royal armies wait?
Who worthy of so great a preparation,
Is the object of such royal expectation,
What Prince is to be borne? What glorious birth
Is to be celebrated?
Groaning earth
Brought forth a lump not much above a span,
A little, naked, puling thing, called Man.
Man, a poor shiftlesse transitory thing,
Born without sword or shield, not having wing
To fly from threatening danger, not an arm
To grapple with these numerous ev'lls that swarm
About his newborn frailty, warpt aside
From fair obedience to rebellious Pride.
Man, in whose frame the great Three-One advised,
And with a studied hand epitomized
The large, voluminous, and perfect story
Of all his works; The Manual of his Glory:
Man, in whose soul, the all- Eternal drew
The Image of himself, for earth to view
With fear and wonder, in whose Sovereign eye
He breathed the flames of dreadful Majesty,
Filled him with power, entrusted to his hand
Earths Empire, and the lower worlds command;
Crow'nd him with glory, made him little lower
Then heav'n-bred Angls that excel in power.
O but my soul, how is that hand ashamed
Of his own work! How is this frame unfram'd!
How is this Manual blotted? Every word
How interlin'd? How is this Image blurred?
How are those sparks of Majesty, that were
So bright, now baffled with degen'rous fear?
How is that power that was bred and borne
The earth Commander, now become the scorn
Of dunghill passion, shipwrackt with the Gust
Of every fatuous and inferior Lust!
How is the Sunbright Honor of his Name
Eclipst! How is his Glory clothed with shame!
Reflect upon thy self, my soul: Enquire
Into the vastness of thy vain desire:
What would thou have, which being had) may fill
The unfathomed Gulf of thy insatiate will?
Thou level'st at? a Good: Whrrein consists
The Good Thou level'st at To what strange Lists
Is her concealed Omnipotence confinde?
Where is this will-commanding Saint enshrined?
Is not her royal person gone to view
The Mines of Ophir, to the rich Peru?
Or is she gone to oil the wings of Time Verse. ^

With unctious pleasures in some forain Clime?
Or is she mounted on the slippery Throne
Of staggering Honor, there disguised, unknown?
Alas, my soul, if heaven should suit thy store
With thy desire, then would desire yet more:
Or if spring tides of Gold shonld a degree Verse. 2

Transcend thy wish, perchance it would want thee:
What if a numerous Offspring should proclaim Verse. 3

A perpetuity to the lasting Name;
Or if the even-spun Twine should be extended
Till thou could number Nations all descended
From thine own loins; yet, if the sparing hand
Of wayward Providence should chance to brand
Thy days with poverty, the abortive birth Verse. 5

Is more indebted to the gracious earth
Then thou, Whose shadow-grasping hand even tires
Upon the vanity of the vast desires:
Nay, if both beav'n and earth should undertake
TO extract the best from all Mankind to make
One perfect happy man, and thou were He;
Thy finite fortunes still would disagree
With thy insatiate soul: Some Q^almes of earth, Verse. 7

Hereditary to thy humane birth,
Would print thy pampered soul with such a fresh
And lively Character of feeble flesh,
That all thy joys (do Fortune what she can)
May not exempt thee from the Lot of Man.
CAP. VII.
1 Remedies against vanity, are a good name. 2 Mortification 7 Patience. 11
Wisdom. 23. The difficulty of wisdom.

1.
A Good reputed Name is sweeter far
Then breaths of Aromatic Ointments are:
And that sad day when first we drew our breath
Is not so happy as the day of death.
2.
Better it is to be a fun'rall gust,
Then find the welcomes of a frolic feast:
There may thou view thy end, and take occasion
TO enrich thy thoughts with friutful contemplation.
3.
Better to cloud thy face with grief, then show
The lavish wrinkles of a laughing brow;
For by the sad demeanor of thine eyes
The heart's instructed, and becomes more wise
4.
The wise man's sober heart is always turning
His wary footsteps to the house of mourning;
But fools consume, and revell out the night
In dalliance, and the day in loose delight.
5.
The virtue of a wise man's fair reproof,
Brings greater benefit to a man's behoof,
Then all those eare-bewitching sweets that can
Belch from the language of a foolish Man.
6.
Look how the crackling thorns under the pot
Blaze for a season, but continue not;
Even so do foolish flatt'ries entertain
Our souls with joy; but all that joy is vain.
7.
When wisemen turn oppressors, they have cracked
Their understandings in the very act;
And the acceptance of a Bribe destroys
The grounds of judgment, and it blinds her eyes.
8.
In all attempts the onset does not lend
So sweet a satisfaction, as the end:
And he whose gentle spirit is endowed
With meekness, is far better then the proud.
9.
Let not thy hot-mouth'd, spirit entertain
Too sudden passion with too slack a Rain;
For rash and unadvised anger rests
Embosom'd, and abides in foolish breasts.
10.
Let not thy murmuring tongue desire to know
Why former days were not so bad as now;
Where heaven declares a will. no wise man's eye
Should search a Cause, or lips enquire a why.
11.
Wisdom is profitable to advance
Man's welfare, joined with inheritance;
By this conjunction profit does arise
To those that toil beneath the sweltring skies.
12.
Wisdome's a Guard; and treasure, a defense
To supersede our wants, relieved from thence.
13.
Wisdom's the extract of knowledge, and convayes
To the possessor everlasting days.
O let thy thoughts enquire and understand
The well-weigh'd works of the Almighties hand.
What he has settled in a crooked state,
No industry of man can make it straight.
14.
In thy good day take pleasure, and be wise;
In thy bad day have patience, and advice;
For heaven gives both by turns, to let man see
How alterable earthly pleasures be.
15.
Much have I seen in this my short-lived day;
Among the rest, the just man snatched away
In his just works, whilst wicked find success,
And prosper in their long-lived wickedness.
16.
Since then the upright man's recompense is such,
Be not too wise, nor righteous over much;
Why should they too much righteousness betray
Thy danger'd life, and make thy life a prey?
17.
Nor let the flesh suggest thee, or advise
Thy thoughts to be too wicked, too unwise.
Why should thy folly captivate thy breath,
And make thee prisner to untimely death?
18.
In all thy courses threfore it is best
To lodge uprightness in thy constant breast.
For he that fears the Almighty, shall
Outwear his ev'll, or find no ev'll at all:
19.
Wisdom affords more strength, more fortifies
The undejected courage of the wise,
Then all the twisted power of those that are
The Guides of Cities, or their men of war;
20.
Yet is there none beneath the crystal skies
So just in action, or in word so wise;
That does always good, or has not bin
Sometimes polluted with the stains of sin.
21.
At passions language stop thy gentle ear,
Least if thy servant curse thee thou should hear.
22.
For often times thy heart will let thee see
That others like wise have been cursed by thee.
23.
This wisdom by my travel I attained
And in my thoughts conceived that I had gained
No common height, but on a strict revise
I found my wisdom came far short of wise.
24.
Objects far distant, secrets too profound
What eye can entertain; what heart can sound?
25.
I bent my studies heart to search and pry
Into the bosom of Philosophy;
I gave my self to understand the Art
Of folly, and the madness of the heart:
26.
I found the harlots ways more bitter are
Then death, whose arms are Ginnes, whose heart's a snare
Whom heaven does favor shall decline her Gates,
But sinners shall be taken by her baits.
27.
Lo this I have observed, (the Preacher says)
By strict enquest into their several ways:
28.
Whereof my restless, my laborious mind
Would make discov'ry, but dispairs to find;
Among a thousand men perchance that one
May be traced out, but among women, none.
29.
Lo here the fruits of all my disquisition,
Only to know the devious condition
Of poor degen'rous man, whose first estate
Heaven copied from himself, upright, and straight.
SOLILOQUIE VII.
SInce then my Soul, the frail and false Estate
Of fading happiness cannot create
The least contentment in thy various mind,
Whose fancy-guided motion cannot find
The point of Rest, but like the boiling waves
Tossed in the storms of Earth, sometimes outbraves
The threatening Firmament, then at a breath
Darts down, and dashes at the doors of death;
Since waxen-winged Honor is not void
Of danger, whether aimed at, or enjoyed;
Since heart enchaunting Profit has not fruit,
But care, both in fruition, and pursuit;
Since Pleasure like a wanton itch does breed
In the Rank flesh, but scratcht until it bleed;
Since laughter is but madness, and high diet
The officious Pander of our own disquiet;
Since glorious Buildings, and magnifique Towers,
Fructiferous Orchards, oderiferous Bowers;
Full clusterd Vineyards, Beauties, and the choice
Of Music both by instrument and voice,
Can lend thy heart no full content, nor still
The various clamours of the insatiate will;
Since humane wisdom is but humane trouble,
And double Knowledge makes our sorrow double;
Since what we have but lights our wish to more,
And in the height of plenty makes us poor;
And what we have not, too too apt to crave,
Even dispossesses us of what we have;
Nay since the very act of our devotion
Can bring no Rest, nor qualify the motion
Of our unbounded thoughts, to sweeten out
This span of frailty, plungd, and orb'd about
With floods of Bitterness: Since none of these,
Nor all can crown our labors, nor appease
Our raging hearts, O my deceivd soul,
Where will thou purchase Peace? Who shall control,
Who shall suppress those Passions that contest
Within the kingdom of thy troubled breast?
Whither? to what strange Region will thou fly
To find content, and baulk that vanity
Which haunts this bubble earth, and makes thee still
A slave to thy infatuated will?
Call home thy self: Inspect thy self a new,
And take thy Birthright to a fresh review:
Thou art immortal; art divine by birth,
A spark of heaven; Thou art not borne of earth;
Earth is the foot stool of thy heavenly Throne;
Made for thy baser parts to trample on.
Look not so low, my soul, There Is nothing there:
Fit for thy sacred view; It is no Sphere
For thee to move in: No, let worms and beasts
And salvage brutes trade there, and lay their Gests
Of progress, to surround with weary paces
The base Confines of those inferior Places.
I, but my soul, the Alliance of my flesh
Claims kindred there, takes pleasure to refresh
Her wasted body there: Earth is her mother,
The worm her sister, and the beast her brother.
It Is true, she is thy spouse, Heaven tied the knot
For none to loose but Heaven: I know her lot
Is mortal, frail, and being born of earth,
Corrupt, and wears the Badges of her birth.
If she transgress, it is thou must bear the blame,
And all her deeds reflect upon thy name;
O then beware, and if she needs must go
To visit earth, first, let her frailty know,
How apt she is to fall, and eke how prone
To blurre, and strain thy honor and her own.
A name unblemisht with the sinful soil Verse. 1

Of sordid earth, is as a precious oil,
Which like a sovereign Antidote prevents
That plague of vanity which earth presents.
Then tell her, tell her, that her mother earth
Must give her burial as she gave her birth:
Tell her, O tell her, Every gasp of breath
Are minutes moving to the hour of death:
And let her know, The house of mourning brings Verse. 2

More profit then the Palaces of Kings:
Tell her, Lessereall happiness does dwell
In a full Banquet, then a Passing Bell. Verse. 3

Arm her with patience apt to entertain Verse. 8

Thy wisereproofs: but if her passion reign,
Correct it wisely: Teach her sober eye
A willing ignorance in things too high Verse. 10

If liberal earth should chance to crown her store,
Let her wise modesty receive no more Verse. 11

Then she can manage; Pilots that are wise
Proportion out their Canvase to the skies.
Let not her knowledge with the Eagle fly,
Ilulesse her wisdom have an Eagles eye.
Wisdom digests what Knowledge did devour, Verse. 12

Things sweet in taste, are indigested sour.
In prosperous fortunes let her joy be such, Verse. 14

That in hard times she may not grieve too much.
Let her count Wisdom as her chiefest good, Verse. 25

And the price easy, whether sweat or blood:
And let the perclose of her thoughts be this, Verse. 29

To study what Man was, and what Man is.
So now my soul, thy will instructed flesh
May visit earth, and with her sweets refresh,
Thy wasted spirit, secure from all those ills
Which threaten ruin to distempered wills:
Now may thou eat and drink, and make supplies
For after days, and close thy peaceful eyes
In calm content, and escape those hidden snares
That lurk in pleasures, and increase our cares.
He only takes advantage of his Lot,
That uses earth, as if he used it not.
CAP. VIII.
1 Kings are greatly to be respected, 6 Divine providence is to be observed. 12
It is better with the Godly in adversity, then with the wicked in prosperity.
16 The work of God is unsearchable,

1.
Who Is equal to the Wiseman? who but he
can judge of things, or what their naturs be:
Wisdom adornes the Cheek with lovely grace;
And plants courageous boldness in the face.
2.
Let me advise the Subjects heart to stand
Devoted always to the Kings command:
For having sworn Allegiance to him, both
Heaven and thy Conscience do attest thy oath.
3.
Let not thy discontented haste incite
Abrupt departure from his awful sight:
If thou have erred, continue not in ill,
For Princes Acts are guided by their will:
4.
The potent Majesty of a Princes word
Is backed and made authentic by the sword:
What venurous tongue dare question or demand
The least account from his illustrious hand?
5.
Whose loyal breasts observe the Laws of Kings,
Shall never know the grief Rebellion brings:
The wisemans heart knows times, and judgment too,
Not only when to speak, but what to do.
6.
For there is to every purpose among men
A judgment how to do, a season when,
Which if mistaken, or not understood,
Brings so much misery upon flesh and blood.
7.
For man is ignorant of what may fall,
And who is he can tell him when it shall.
8.
No man has power to prolong his breath,
Or make him shot-free in the day of death:
There Is no retreat in that sad war, nor can
Man's wickedness preserve the wicked man.
9.
All this have I observed, and have given
My heart to note each action under Heaven:
There was a time when the oppressors arm
Oppressed his brother to the oppressors harm.
10.
So have I seen grave Judges (but unjust)
That sat in judgment, honored to the dust
Which hid their crimes; these seemed to obtain
Some happiness: This happiness is vain.
11.
Because a present sentence is not past
Upon the wicked, their dull hearts at last
Grow quite obdure; resolved, and fully bent.
To act what evll's their greedy lusts present.
12.
Put case the sinner multiply his Crime,
And his long days, even rust the Sith of Time:
Yet well I know they only shall be blessed,
That sear the Almighty with a filial breast.
13.
I, but the wicked shall not escape secure,
Though he live long, he shall not long endure,
But like a shadow shall his days appear,
Because he feared not whom he ought to fear.
14.
There is a vanity raigns here below,
I see the wise man reap what sinners sow,
And sinners share when just men sow the seed;
This Grief (said I) all other Griefs exceed.
15.
Then praised I mirth, and held it the best choice
Beneath the sun, to eat, and to rejoice:
For this is all the good, this all the gains
Is like to cheer our days, and crown our pains.
16.
But when I set my busy heart to know
Wisdom, and heavens strange working here below:
(For day and night my studyes did deny
Sleep to mine eyelids, slumbers to mine eye)
17.
O then I found his works beneath the sun
Past finding out; my fruitless thoughts did run
This heavenly maze, till they at length concluded,
Man's wit stoops here; here wisdom stands deluded.
SOLILOQUIE VIII.
BUt stay, my soul! What language does appear?
Am I deceived? Or did I seem to hear?
Which Tenet shall I baulk? And which, embrace?
Has Truth like Janus, got a double face?
Did not that voice, Chap. 1. 18
that voted Wisdom vain
But very now, Chap. 8. 1.
now cry it up again?
Shall what was late condemned as a disease,
Now prove a Remedy? Such slips as these
Are brands of humane frailty, which belong
To us and ours; It well be seems our tongue
To contradict and jangle: Error's known
By many faces; Truth admits but one:
How haps it then, that wisdom, whose increase
Adds to our Grief, yet crowns our days with peace?
Be not deceived, my soul; Let not one Name
Confound two Natures, and make two the same:
Shall Names give Natures? Dare thy tongue profess
An equal privilege to Curse and Bless
For one Names sake? No, my deluded soul,
Sooner may Light and Darknese, Fair and Foul,
Sooner may Good and Evil; nay, Heaven and Hell
May sooner startle from their Parallel,
And turn Joynt-tenants in one perfect Line,
Then these two Wisdoms, Humane and Divine.
That breeds a Tumor in the flatuous breast;
This lays it: That brings trouble, and This rest:
That kindles fires, and those fires increase
To self-contention; This concludes a Peace:
That duls the thoughts, suppressed with low desires;
This mounts thy soul with more heroic fires:
That cannot brook the transitory frown
Of Fortunes brow; This makes a Cross a Crown:
That fills thy hopes with froth, and blurs thy youth
With black-mouthed Error; This directs to Truth:
That scorns advice, and like an own-selfe Lover
Befools thee; But this honors the Reprover:
That fears, and flees, or falls at every breath
Of discontent: This triumphs, even in death;
That breaks Relations, and for private ends,
Dissolves Allegiance, and disbands true friends;
This loves society, calls not Mine, but Ours,
Yields due obedience to superior Powers:
That pricked by Passion rushes into crimes;
This backed with Reason councels with the Times:
That gives the name of Power; This the thing:
That makes a Tyrant; This creates a King:
That lights thy Honor, fading like a blaze;
This crowns thy Name with everlasting days:
That breeds a Serpent; This brings forth a Dove:
That works a servil fear; This filial love:
That deads thy spirit; This makes thee wisely bold:
That scowres thy Brass; But this refines thy Gold:
That fills thy Feast with Cares; with fears, thy Breast;
This makes thy morsel a perpetual Feast:
That cools thy Palate, but inflames thy fire;
This slakes thy Thirst, and satiates thy desire.
O then, my soul, correct that flesh and blood
That blinds thee so; and, like a gloomy Cloud,
Thus interposes, and obscurely flies,
Betwixt the sacred object, and thine eyes:
Clear up, my soul, and like the eye of day,
Chastise that peccant darkness, and display
Those mists of earth, which like false Glasses show
Fanatic figures, and present thy view
With specious objects, precious in esteem,
(Alas) but nothing less, then what they seem.
Then shall the wisdom of that scarlet Whore
And all her bald-pate Panders, painted over
With counterfaited Holiness, appear
In her true colors, so that every ear
That hears her base Impostures, and the fame
Of her lewd Piety, shall abhor the Name
Of bloody Rome: Then shall the spotted Beast
Put off her golden Trappings; and undrest
Of all her glory, be turned out to graze
In uncouth deserts, and consume her days
With Dragons, Tigers, and those salvage things,
Now pampered with the blood of Saints and Kings.
O then the crooked Paths of Error, fraud,
And Candlelight devotion, trimmed and straw'd
With sweet-lipt Roses, shall appear as plain,
As tide-forsaken Rocks along the Main.
Then shall true wisdom, like fair Sheba's Queen,
Begin her royal Progress, and now seen
In perfect Beauty, shall erect her Throne
In every breast, and every Solomon
Shall court her Glory, and intranc'd in pleasure,
Shall smell her spices, and divide her treasure.
CAP. IX.
1 Like things happen to good and bad. 4. There is a necessity of death unto
men. 7 Comfort is all their portion in this Iife. 11 Gods providence rules
over all. 13 Wisdom is better then strength.

Verse. 1.
ALL this I pondered, and at length I found
All actions, whether just or wise are crowned
By secret providence: And no man knows,
Gods love or hate, by blessings or by blows.
2.
All haps alike to all; The same things do
Befall the righteous and the unrighteous too.
The unclean, and clean, have here the self-same pay;
And he that prays, and he that does not pray:
Alike befalls to good and bad, and both
To him that swears, and him that fears an oath:
3.
It is a grief that grates beneath the Sun,
That like events betide to every one;
Which makes the desperate hearts of men to rave
With mischief, till they drop into the Grave.
4.
For the ambition of their hopes extend
But to this life, and with this life they end:
Better to be a living dog (they plead)
Then to be known a Lion that is dead:
5.
For they that live know well that they shall die,
And therefore take their time; But they that lie
Raked up in deaths cold Embers, they know not
Or good or ill; Their names are quite forgot:
6.
They have no friends to love, no foes to hate;
They know no virtue to spit venom at;
They sell no sweat for gains, nor do they buy
Pleasure with pains, or trade beneath the sky:
7.
Go then, rejoice, and eat: Let a full boul
Casheire thy cares, and cheer thy frolic soul;
What heaven has lent thee with a liberal hand,
To serve, and cheer thy frailty up, command.
8.
Indulge thy careful flesh with new supply,
And change of garments of the purest die;
Refresh thy limbs, annoyed with sweat and toil,
With costly bathes, thy head with precious oil.
9.
Delight thy self in thy delicious wife
All the vain days of thy vain wasting life;
Of all the works thy painful hand has done,
This, this is all the price beneath the Sun.
10.
What ere thy hand endavours, that may gain
Contentment, spare not either cost or pain;
For there is no hand to work, no power to have,
No wisdom to contrive within the grave.
11.
I find the swift not always win the prize,
Nor strength of arm the battle, nor the wise
Grow rich in fortunes, nor the men of skill
In favor; all as time and fortune will.
12.
Man knows not his time; As Fishes are
Snared in the net, Birds tangled in the snare,
So be the sons of men surpised with snares,
When mischief falls upon them unawares.
13.
This wisdom have I seen beneath the sky,
Which wisely weighed, deserves a wise man's eye.
14.
There was a little City poorly manned,
Against which a Potent King brought up a band
Of Martial strength, besieged it, and withal
Built mighty Bulwarks against her slender wall;
15.
In this half conquered City there was found
A poor wise man, whose wisdom did confound
Both the^ and all the works their strength could plant;
Yet no reward relieved this poor man's want.
16.
O then (thought I) poor wisdom will at length
Discover greater worth then golden strength;
Yet is the poor man's wisdom poorly prized,
His word's not heard, or being heard, despised:
17.
The whispering wise man's tongue prevails more,
Then when the lips of foolish Rulers roar:
18.
Prudent advise is more transcendent far,
Then strength of Arm, or Instruments of war:
But rash attempts of a misguided hand
Defeat themselves, and ruin all the land.
SOLILOQUIE IX.
BUt ah, my soul, what boots it to be wise? Verse. 2

Or what Advantage? what great profit lies
In a fair Iourny? to be well supplied
With all Accoutrements, a knowing Guide,
A metled Steed, a sweet and temperate sky,
Short miles, and way-beguiling Company;
When armed death stands ready to attend
Thy parting Stirrup at thy Iournies end?
Thy wisdom cannot save thee; has no power
To keep thee shotfree, or to quit that hour.
Dull Nabals Howreglasse runs as slow a pace
As active Solomon's: An equal space
Divides their minutes; Deaths impartial hand
Wounds all alike, and death will give no sand.
What then my soul? If wisdom should entaile
Our happiness on this life, or fill our Sail
In this wild Ocean with perpetual breath,
When should we find a Hav'n? If partial death
Should favor wisdom, and not exercise
Her office there, 'twere misery to be wise:
The prudent Pilot, whose marinall skill
Makes the proud winds obedient to his will,
And ploughs the Billows with less fear then wrong,
Takes no delight to make his voyage long;
But with his wise endeavors seeks to guide
His slender Pinnace, and to curb the pride
Of the rebellious waves, and does address
His care to crown his voyage with success:
Our life's the voyage, and this world the Ocean;
Our cares are waves tossed in continual motion;
Our thoughts are busy winds, that often blow
Too strong a Gale, and tosses to and fro
Our crazie Vessels: Every soul does bear
The office of a Pilot, now to stear,
Now to advise; and still to lay commands
Upon the Affection-Saylors, whose rude hands
Are always active, ready to fulfill
The wise directions of the Pilots will.
It matters not, my soul, how long or short
Thy voyage be, if safe; they gain the Port
With best advantage, that in peace arrive
With ribs unshook; and all their men alive.
It lies not in the skillful Pilots power
To Avoid tempestuous Seas, but to endure;
It Is wisdom to endure, as well as do;
Who bravely suffers, is victorious too.
Then cheer, my soul; Let not the frowns of earth
Disturb thy peace, or interrupt thy mirth:
Let not that rude, that Apogean storm
Of flesh and blood dismay thee, or deform
The beauty of thy thoughts, or cast thy mind
Into a base despondence: Let the wind
Blow were it please, a well-prepared breast
Will give thee shelter, and afford thee rest.
When worldly crosses tempt thee, understand
Heaven tryes thy temper then; If then thou stand
Upright in Court, and of unshaken mind,
The Test approves thee, and thou art refined.
Then cheer, my soul; Let not the rubs of earth
Disturb thy peace, or interrupt thy mirth;
If heaven has crowned thy labors with success,
Enjoy it freely; Eat and drink, and bless
The gracious giver; Let thy soul rejoice
And take a cheerful pleasure in the choice
Of all delights; and what his bounty gave
With a free hand, fear not thou to receive
With a free heart: Refresh thy fainting head
With precious Oils, and change thy careful bread Verse. 8

To feasts of Joy; Or if a cross should greet
Thy frolique soul, march bravely on, and meet
Adversity half way; and with a heart
Too great for earth to wrong, shake hands and part.
Cheer then my soul; Let not the rubs of earth
Disturb thy peace, or interrupt thy mirth:
Go, sweeten up thy labors and thy life
With fresh delights: Rejoice thee in the wife Verse. 9

And partner of thy bosom; Let her breast
Suffice thee as the Center of thy rest:
Deny thy heart no pleasure, that may lie
Within the lawful limits of thine eye.
Take time while time shall serve; To morrow may
Be none of ours; Come, come, be wise to day; Verse. 10

And teach thy labors to bestow their sorrow
On those that practice to be fools to morrow.
CAP. X.
1 Observations of wisdom and folly. 16 Of Riot, 18 Slothfulness, 19 and
money. 20 Men's thoughs of Kings ought to be reverenced.

Verse. 1.
LOok how dead flies (thoughfew in number) soil,
Corrupt and putrefy the purest Oil:
Even so a little folly stains his fame
Whom fair Repute for wisdom lends a name.
2.
A wise man's heart is placed at his right hand,
His plots and councels are of strong command;
But hearts of fools are weak and rash, bereft
Of sage advice; their hearts are at their left.
3.
Nay, if their steps but measure out the way,
Their Garb, their Looks, their Language do betray
Their folly, read by whomsoere they meet;
Themselves proclaim their selves in every street.
4.
If thy Superior happen to incense
His jealous wrath at thy supposed offense,
Do thou thy part and yield, for yiedling slakes
The raging flame, that great transgression makes.
5.
I see an ev'll beneath the Sun that springs
From error, reigning in the breasts of Kings:
6.
Fools are made Statesmen, and command at Court,
And men of parts are made the lower sort.
7.
So have I seen proud servants mounted high
On Lordly Steeds, and Lords to lackey by.
8.
He that shall dig a pit, that shall prepare
A snare, shall be ensnared in his own snare.
And he that tramples down a hedge shall meet
A Serpent to salute his trampling feet.
9.
He that shall shake a stone-compacted wall,
Shall undergo the danger of the fall:
Who undertakes to cleave the knotty Oak,
Shall be a painful partner in the stroke:
10.
But if the unwhetted edge be blunt, the arm
Must give more strength, and so receive more harm;
But if he challenge wisdom for his guide,
Wisdom will do, what painful strength denied.
11.
The rash reproving mouth of fools are armed
Like unenchaunted serpents, if not charmed.
12.
The wise man's words are gracious, where they go,
But foolish language does themselves overthrow.
13.
Folly brings in the Prologue with his tongue,
Whose Epilogue is Rage and open wrong.
14.
The fool abounds in tongue, there is none can know
What his words mean, or what he means to do.
15.
The tedious actions of a fool does try
The patience of the weary stander by;
Because his weakness knows not how to lay
His actions posture in a Civil way.
16.
Woe to the Land, whose Princes wisdom swayes
The Scepter, in the nonage of her days;
And whose grave Rulers, that should haunt the seat
Of sacred Justice, rise betime to eat.
17.
Blessed art thou o Land, when as thy King
Derives his royal blood from the ancient spring
Of Majesty, and Rulers timely diet
Serves to maintain their strength, and not their riot.
18.
By too much slothfulness the building falls
Into decay, and ruin strikes her walls,
And through the sluggish posture of his hand
The weather-beaten house forgets to stand:
19.
Who eats and drinks and frolicks, uncontrol'd,
Maintaining riot with his wanton gold.
20.
Curse not the King, nor them that bear the sword,
No, not in thought, tho thought express no word;
The fowls of heaven shall vent such hideous things,
And swift Report shall fly with secret wings.
SOLILOQUIE X.
BUt ah, my soul! How closely folly cleaves
To slesh and blood! How mungrell nature weaves
Wisdom and folly in the self-same Loome,
Like web and woof, whereby they both become
One perfect web to cloth our imperfections
With Linsy-woolsy, and our mixed affections
With foolish wisdom! O how full of earth
Was our first Ore, which at our sinful birth
Was taken from the Womb; Now purified
In sacred Fires, and more then seven times tried
In sharp afflictions furnace; yet how base
Our Bullion is! not worthy of the Face
That makes us current; O how apt and prone
Is flesh and blood to fall, if let alone
But one poor Minute! Most in danger then
To be surpised and foiled with Folly, when
Our bold Presumption tempts our thoughts to prise
Our wisdoms overmuch, and seem too wise.
How one rash action; O how one dead Fly Verse. 1

Embalmed in thy sweet Oil does putrefie
Thy Box of Spikenard! How it casts a shame
Upon the beauty of thy honored Name!
O then, my soul, take heed to keep thy heart
At thy right hand; There, there she will impart
Continual secrets, and direct thy ways Verse. 2

In sacred Ethics, sweetning out thy days
With seasoned Knowledge, knowledge past the reach
Of black-mouthed Error, shall instruct and teach
Thy tongue wise silence; Wisdom when to break
Thy closed lips, and Judgment how to speak:
She Will teach thee Christian Policy, and how
To keep thee safe when as thy Princes brow Verse. 4

Shall threaten death, even when the flame shall fly
Like horrid Lightning from his wrathful Eye.
I, but the rage of Princes oftentimes
Darts Lightning at the Person, not his Crimes;
And their misguided will often times demands
Obedience there, where Conscience countermands.
Take heed, my soul; Thou tread'st upon the Ice,
Be not too venurous here, nor too too nice:
Rush not too bold; thou may as soon convince
An Error in thy Conscience, as thy Prince.
To lay commands upon ind^fferent things,
Is a sole Royalty belongs to Kings.
If here thy conscience doubt, the Book of Life
Must cast the balance, and decide the strife:
If this way, thy enforced obedience then
Must stoop; If that, Please rather God then men.
If th'Embers of his rage should chance to lie
Raked up, or furnace from his angry eye,
Quit not thy duty: It Is thy part to assuage Verse. 4

The jealous flames of his consuming rage.
What, if through Error or misguided will
He leaves the way to Good, and cleaves to Ill;
Lend him thy Prayers; Lament, advise, persuade,
Lift not thy hand, nor let thy tongue upbraid
His sacred Person; He Is by heaven appointed
To be thy Prince; O touch not heavens Anointed.
What, if he lend the fullness of his power
To those imperious Spirits that devour
Subjects like bread, and drink the loyal blood
Of men like water; men, not once allowed
To plead for life; but silently subscribe
To those that cannot judge without a Bribe?
What, if his power pleases to commit
His past'rall staff to such as are more fit
To kill and eat, or recommend his flocks
To such dum dogs, of whom nor wolf nor fox
Will stand in awe, or show their fears by flight,
That have not tongues to bark, nor teeth to bite?
Rebel not thou, nor in a hostile way
Accoast thy Prince; Or suffer or obey.
What if the Common Favorite of the times
(The Courtly Fool, grown great with countenance climes)
Up to a Lordship, when the Man of merit Verse. 6

Broke on the wheel of Fortune must inherit
Nothing but scorn and want; and a poor name
Betrayed to pity, and to empty Fame?
Be thou thy self, let not thine eye be evil:
To a wise heart both hills and dales are level.
How happy is that land, how blessed the Nation
Whose Prince directs by Power, not by Passion? Verse. 17

Whose sacred wisdom knows how great a price
True virtue bears, and how to punish Vice;
Whose royal Majesty, and princely love
Can both incorporate, and jointly move
In a self glorious Orb, and from one Sphere
Breathe such rare influence of love, and fear
Into the hearts of Men, that all the land
Shall cry a Solomon, and sweetly stand
Rapt with sweet Peace, and sacred admiration:
How happy is that land, how blessed the Nation!
CAP. II.
1 Directions for Charity. 7 Death in life, 9 and the day of judgment in the
days of youth, are to be thought on.

Verse. 1.
Upon the waters let thy bread be cast,
And thou shall find it when some days are past.
2.
Give lib'rall Alms, for it is unknown to thee
How full of wants thy after days shall be.
3.
If clouds be full, will they deny to power
Their fruitful blessings in a lib'rall shower?
Or North, or South, or wheresoere the Tree
Shall fall, no question it shall fall to thee.
4.
He that observes the wind shall never sow:
Who marks the clouds shall never reap nor mow.
5.
Like as the Embryo's growth within their wombs,
Is strange to thee, and how the soul becomes
The bodies inmate, even so all the rest
Of Heavens high works are strangers to thy breast.
6.
Cast thou thy morning seed upon the land,
And at the evening hold not back thy hand;
For who is he can tell thee which of these
Shall prosper best, or bring the best increase?
7.
It Is true, the light is sweet, and every one
Takes pleasure in the world-rejoycing Sun:
8.
But who lives many joyful years, if he
But count how long his after shades shall be
In earths dark bosom, how can he refrain
To think these short-lived flattering pleasures vain?
9.
Rejoice, o young man in thy youthful ways;
Let thy heart cheer thee in thy youthful days,
Delight thine eyes, thy heart, and take thy way;
But know that heavens account will find a day.
10.
Then banish fals-ey'd mirth: Be dispossessed
Of those lewd fires that so inflame thy breast;
For childhood, youth, and all their joys remain
But for a season, and they all are vain.
SOLILOQUIE XI.
SO now my soul, thy wisdome-season'd breast
May eat and drink, and labor, and digest
Thy careful morsels, and with holy mirth
Disperse the clouds of melancholy earth:
Now may thou sit beneath thy clustred Vine,
And press thy Grapes, and drink thy frolic wine
In soft and plenteous Peace, and leave tomorrow
To bear the burden of her selfe-borne sorrow:
Now may thou walk secure from all those threats
Of peevish Fortune, and the sly deceits
Of flattering pleasure: Plenty cannot drown
Thine eyes in mirth, nor misery cast thee down:
If the blew Rafters of the falling skies
Should leave their spangled Mansion, and surprise
Thy feeble strength, well may their ruins smite thee;
And grind thy clod to dust, but not affright thee.
What want thou then, my soul, that may augment
The real happiness of a true content?
What virtue's wanting now, whose absence may
Encourage bold-fac'd vanity to betray
Thy even-spunne days to sorrow; or occasion
Thy fair-contriv'd designs to taste vexation?
Would thou have Honor? thou enjoy'st it: Treasure?
Thou have it: would thou gain the greater pleasure
Of a true noble Spouse; whose life may show
Virtues rare quintessence? Thou have that too:
Would thou have hopeful Sons to crown thy Last
With Peace and Honor? Such rare Sons thou have:
Thy Princes favor? Or thy peoples love?
All this thou have; Wisdom in things above?
Thou have it: Knowledge in these Toys beneath?
Thou have it: Skill in the Arts? or curious breath
Of whispering State? All this thou have: Where, then,
Shall thy new wishes ^ix, Rare Man of men?
I, but my soul, one good is wanting still
To sum a full perfection, and to fill
Thy Cruise with happiness: which if possessed,
Thou have a Diadem, crowns all the rest:
Had thou the tongues of men, and could thou break
Thy lips in Oracles; Or could thou speak
The dialects of Angels when they sing
Their sacred Canzons to their Sovereign King,
A tinkling Cymball, or the hideous sounds
Of discomposed discords, or the Rounds
Of frolic midnight madness would requite
Thy wild attention with as much delight,
And breathe as sweetly in the Almighties ear
If heart-rejoycing Charity be not there:
Had thou what strength the Parnassean Muse
Can bless thy fancy with, or heaven infuse;
Had thou a Faith to make the mountains fly
In the vast Orb, like Atoms in thine eye;
Less then those Atoms would thy faith appear,
If faith-confirming Charity be not there:
Should thou, to purchase heaven, renounce thy Right
Of all thy goods, and turn an Anchorite;
Or should thy courage, to deserve the name
Of Martyr, give thy body to the flame,
When that blood pleads, heaven will not lend an ear
If heav'n-engaging Charity be not there.
Since then, my soul, both Faith and Works lie dead
If Charity fail, be wise, and cast thy bread
Upon the Waters; As the Waters run Verse. 1

Deal thou thy dole, until thy dole be done.
Man is Gods Husbandry; If then the Plough
Of careful want has struck the furrowed Brow,
And make it fit for seed; Hold not thy hand;
He robs himself that faintly sows the Land:
Stay not for showers; The soil, if overflowne, Verse. 6

Will drown thy seed-corn, and return thee none:
Let not some weeds discourage thee to sow,
The Plough will root them up; or if they grow
Too sturdy for the Coulters point to kill,
Fear not thy harvest; A hard Winter will.
Cast not lank grain upon too lean a ground,
Fair Crops from off all Corn are rarely found.
Sow closely what thou sow'st, and least in sight,
The eyes of Doves will make thy harvest light:
But stay! Thou may surcharge as well as sterve
The soil; But wise men know what seed will serve:
Thy work thus wisely done; what, then, remains?
Give Heaven the glory, and expect the Gains.
CAP. XII.
1 The Creator is to be remembered in due time. 8 The Preachers care to edify.
13 The fear of God is the chief Antidote of vanity.

REmember thy Creator in thy prime
Of present youth, before the black-mouthed time
Of sullen age approach; before the day
Thy dying pleasures find a dull decay;
2.
Before the Sun, and Moon, and Stars appear
Dark in thy Microcosmall Hemisphear;
3.
Before the Clouds of sorrows multitiply,
And hide the Crystal of the gloomy sky;
Before the Keepers of thy crazy Tower
Be palsie-striken, and thy men of power
Sink as they march, and grinders cease to grind
Distasteful bread, and windows are grown blind.
4.
Then shall the Castles two-leafd gates be barred
When as the Milstones language is not heard;
The horn-mouth Belman shall affright thy slu^bers,
Thy untuned ear shall loath harmonious numbers:
5.
Each obvious molehill shall increase thy fears,
And careful snow shall blanch thy falling hairs;
A fly shall load thy shoulders: Thy desire
And all thy bedridden passions shall expire.
Pale death's at hand, and mourners come to meet
Thy tear-bedabled fun'rals in the street.
6.
Then shall the sinews silver cord be los'd,
Thy brains gold bowl be broke: The undispos'd
And idle liver's fountain dried;
The bloods Meandring Cisterns unsuppli'd.
7.
Then shall the dust her dust to dust deliver,
Whose spirit shall return to God the Giver.
8.
Whereto the Ecclesiastic thus replies,
All, all is vain, and vainest vanities.
9.
Because his true repentant soul was wise,
He read this wisdome-lecture, did advise
And search the Fountain, whence he did convay
The fruitful streams in a Proverbiall way.
10.
He sought and found such words, which had the might
To entermingle profit with delight;
And what his spirit-prompted pen did write
Was truth it self, and most exact upright.
11.
The wise man's words are like to Goads, that do
Stir up the drowzy, and spur up the slow:
And like to nails to be made fast and driven
By hands to the hearts of men sent down from heaven.
12.
Make use, my Son, of what this hand has penned,
There is no end of Pamphlets to no end;
These tire the flesh, and after age is spent,
They breathe some knowledge, but no true content.
13.
Mark then the ground where the main building stands,
Fear thou thy God, Observe his just commands.
Within the limits of this sacred Ground
Man's duty lies; true Happiness is found:
14.
No work shall pass untri'd: No hand has done
What shall not plead at heavens Tribunal Throne:
All secrets good and bad attend his Eye;
His Eyes behold where day could never prye.
Deus his quoque finem.
SOLILOQUIE XII.
NOw launch, my soul, into this Sea of Tears;
Fear storms and Rocks, yet smile upon thy fears;
Weigh Anchor; Hoist thy weather-beaten Sails;
The Tides run smooth; The wind breaths prosperous Gales.
Tridented Neptune now has struck a peace
With full-mouthed Aeolus, and the wars surcease:
They sound a parley, and begin to treat,
And Seagreen Triton sounds a shrill Retreat.
March now, my soul, through Hadadrimmons Vale
Without a tear; or if thou must bewail,
Mourn for vain Earth, and drop in alms one tear
For him that finds no happiness but there.
Now may thou trample on the Asp, and tread
On the young Lion, and the old Dragons head;
Wisdom shall guide thee, Love shall circumclose thee,
That fraud shall not beguile, or force oppose thee.
Thy Prince shall honor thee, thy Peers embrace thee;
No Crime shall shame thee, and no tongue disgrace thee;
The rich shall reverence thee, the poor shall bless thee;
Wrath shall not overruled, nor pride oppress thee;
Thy want shall not afflict, nor wealth betray thee,
This shall not puff thee up, nor chat dismay thee:
Pleasure shall not ensnare, nor pains torment thee,
This shall not make thee sad, nor that repent thee.
Blessed shall thy labors be, and sweet thy Rest;
Blessed shall thy thoughts be, and thy Actions blessed;
Blessed in thy peace, and blessed in thy promotion;
Blessed in thy sports, and blessed in thy devotion;
Blessed in thy losses, blessed in thy increases;
Blessed in thy health, and blessed in thy diseases;
Blessed in thy Knowledge, blessed in thy Corrections;
Blessed in thy Soul, and blessed in thy Affections.
O then, my soul, let thy Affections flow
In streams of love to Him that loved thee so;
Let not His high-priz'd benefits depart
From thy remembrance, grave them in thy heart
With Tools of Adamant, that they may last
To aftertimes, that when thy days be past,
Thy well-instructed children may emblaze
Thy Makers goodness to the last of days.
Bless thou the Lord, my soul; Let thy whole frame,
And all within thee magnify that name
That blessed thee so; Bless thou the Lord, my soul,
Report his precious favors, and enroll
His numerous mercies in thy grateful breast:
Remember thy Creator; O protest
His praises to the world, and let thy tongue Verse. 6

Make him the subject of thy youthful song;
Give him the firstlings of thy strength, even than
When fading Childehood seeks to ripen man
Upon the downy cheeks; when vigor trains
The sparkling blood through thy Meandring veins;
Before thy flowing marrow shall foment
Thy lust full fires; before the false content
Of frothy pleasures shall begin t'invite
Thy fond Affections to a vain delight.
Then, then, my soul, whilst thy supplies are fresh
And strong, wage war with thy rebellious flesh;
Gird up thy loins, and march, spare neither sweat
Nor blood, take courage, strike, subdue, defeat:
Sing a triumphant song, sing Io Paean;
Adorn thy brows with Palm, and again sing Io Paean.
Take time while time shall serve; it is thine to day,
But secret danger still attends delay.
Do while thou may; To day has eagle wings,
And who can tell what change to morrow brings?
Advantage wastes, and strength of body wears,
Life has no lease; and Youth, no Term for years:
When creeping Age shall quench thy sprightly fires,
And breathe cold Winter on thy chill desires, Verse. 3

What fire shall burn thy Offerings? O what praise
Can issue forth from cold decrepit days?
When ebbing bloods neap-tides shall strike thy lims Verse. 2

With trembling Palsies; When dry Age bedims
The optic sunshine of thy bedridden days,
What boots thy cold, thy Paralytick praise?
When secret Ulcers shall attaint thy breath
With fumes more noisome then the sinks of death,
What pleasure shall thy great Creator raise
From thy breath tainted, and unsav'ry praise?
Come then, my soul, Rouse up thy dull desire,
And quicken thy faint coals of sacred fire,
That lie raked up in the Embers of thy flesh;
Fetch breath from heaven, and with that breath refresh
Thy glim'ring sharks: Brook not the least delay,
Embers grow cold, and sparks will soon decay.
THE END.
In obitum viri clarissimi, atque ingeniosissimi Poetae, Francisci Quarles,
(...)
I Cygne felix, ocyus avola,
Cantator ales, cum neque jam vada
Ripis supersint, nec quietae
Purus aquae fluat (ecce!) rivus;
Fontes nec ipsi: Sanguine, sanguine
(Heu! cuncta manant; quod mare civicae
Non decoloravere caedes?
Ipsa, vides, rubet Hippocrene.
Et quis poetis jam locus aut latex?
Quae lympha Musis? cum cruor undique.
Hinc, hinc migrandum, ni bibemus
Purpureas Heliconis undas.
At o Camaenarum and dolor and decus;
Tu si recedas, quis tua funera
Cantabit, o divine vates?
Quo moritur moriente Phoebus.
Quisquamne fundet jam querulum melos?
(Falsum nec omen nominis hoc tui;)
Moestumve panget carmen art^,
Melpomenes cithara canorus?
Quis sertacoelojam dabit? aut pium
Emblema texet floribus ingeni?
Quis symbolorum voce picta
Vna oculos animumque, pascet?
Quis melle puro jam, calami potens,
Condita promet dia poemata?
Aut funditabit, grande, sacro
Enthea metra calens furore?
Quis sanctitatem nectare carminis
Tinctam propinans, digna Deo canet?
Coelumque, versu claudet omni,
Atque fidem fidibus sonabit?
Tu nempe litem, si pote, publicam
Compescuisses dulcisonis modis,
Ni laeva nobis men's, and orbi
Harmoniam reducem dedisses.
Mollisse magnos tu poter as duces,
Fer as ut Orpheus flexanimis sonis;
Pacemque pulsam, jusque mundo, a^
Eurydicen retulisse cantu.
Per te coissent dissita pectora,
Per te coissent diruta moenia:
Tu solus Amphion peri^us
Vel lapides sociare plectro.
Postquam hoc negatum; ponere nover as
Emblema saltem flebile seculi,
Bellique: nostris sed nec ullum
Par Hieroglyphicum ruinis.
Quando ergo te nec terra capit, tuis
Nec digna Musis; I, pete coelites,
Interque coetus Angelorum
Perpetuum modulare carmen.
Jacobus Duport, Graecae Linguae Professor Cantab.

An Elegle upon the famous Poet FRANCIS QUARLES.
IS Quarles dead? his active spirit flown
And none to lend a tear, a sigh, a groan,
For the worlds loss? me thinks at least all eyes
(Since tongues can not) should weep large Elegies.
Expect no Muses; for they at his death
Compassionate, lost their Poetique breath.
Expect no marble Tomb; he is above fate;
His name (if Learning live) shall know no date:
His issue shall survive posterity,
This age and the next, and so t'eternity.
Peruse his Phansies, and his Emblems wrapped;
And see S. Paul into the third heavens rapt:
Or else some Cherubim sent down from thence
T'unfold heavens Mysteries in heavens Eloquence.
A Poet-saint he was, in him each line
Speaks out at large rare Poet, choice Divine.
His message done, he flies unto his Maker,
Of what he told us here, to be partaker.
His imprisoned soul was so harmonious here;
Now loose, what Music, think you, makes she there!
She wept, then sung; now sung, 'gaine wept in rhyme:
Her Rests now know no stop, her joy no time.
Her Phansy Vision is, she now does live
With Angels food, knowledge intuitive.
By Emblems dark to spell the Deity
She taught before, now sees Divinity.
But stay my Muse: the clouds do interpose
Twixt thee and her; it is better for thee close,
Then pierce, or peep too far. Phoebus is set;
Thou Have paid thy tribute light, thy tribute heat,
Sigh out the rest: or would thou to him go,
Thy Love, thy Life? Go be entombed too.
R. Stable.

FINIS.

