DIVINE MEDITATIONS UPON Several Subjects. Whereunto is annexed GODS LOVE, AND
Man's Unworthiness. WITH SEVERAL Divine Ejaculations.

Written by JOHN QUARLES.

LONDON, Printed by T. J. for Peter Parker, and are to be sold at the first
shop in Pope's Head Alley on the right hand next Cornhil, 1671.

To my Esteemed Friend, JAMES HOBARTE of Hales, in the County of Norfolk,
Esquire.
SIR.
IF I am bold, it is in fulfilling your desires: I am confident you well
remember when we were Prisoners together, that your self gave me the several
subjects of these short Meditations; I confess I have no cause to blush at the
subjects, but I fear you will find cause to blush at the bad performance of
your desires; however, I have done my endeavor; and if you please to own it
worth your acceptance, I shall own your acceptance worth my labor, and ever
remain

Affectionately yours, JOHN QUARLES.

TO THE READER.
Kind Reader,
LEt me lay this Injunction upon thee before thou permittest thy eye to survey
this little Volume, that thou will resolve to pardon, I will not say for what,
for fear thou should be scrupulous and not read; The subject is Divine, and
I confess too good to be so badly handled; however, I have done my endeavor,
and Alexander did no more when he conquered Kingdoms: But Reader, because I
will not detain thine eye too long in one place, I bid thee

Farewell.
To my Muse.
TEll we presumptuous Muse, how dare thou treat
Upon a Subject so sublime, so great!
Alas how dare thy infancy aspire
So high as Heaven, where the Celestial Quire
Of Soul-enchanting Angels, hourly sing,
Anthems of joy to their mellifluous King!
This is a task that invocates the best
And loftiest quills; Heavens love must not b'exprest
With wanton language: he that shall presume
To labor in this work, must first perfume
His Soul with true Divinity, and breathe
Celestial ayrs, that Readers may perceive
Their Author labors with a serious heart
T'embalm his actions with divinest art;
This is a field whose spacious bounds extend
Themselves to infinite; who strives to end
Shall still begin, and having once b^gun
This pleasing progress, must not cease to run
Until he stops in Heaven, there lies the gain,
Who runs with Faith is certain to obtain.
If then my Muse, thou can divinely mount
This sacred Stage, thou needst not feart' account
Thy actions prosperous, strive thou to stand
Guarded with Faith, and Heaven will lend a hand
To prop thee up, his power will infuse
Sufficient matter for an active Muse
To work upon, his wisdom will direct
Thy painful hand, his Mercies will correct
Thy rambling thoughts, and teach thee to proclaim
The unsumm'd up glories of his Royal Name;
Abandon Earth, and bid vain thoughts adieu,
Thou can not serve thy God and Mammon too;
Rouse then, and let thy well-prun'd Eagles wings
Mount thee aloft, let not terrestial things
Disturb thy resolutions, let them all
Evade thy mind; thy thoughts must grow too tall
For such low toys: stir up thy zealous fire,
And what thou can not well express, admire.
DIVINE MEDITATIONS Upon several subjects.
I.
GRoans, midnight groans, usurp the Commonwealth,
Oh my infringed Soul! I know no health,
Nor feel no pleasure, all my joys are fled
I know not where, and I am worse than dead.
Heaven shouldring Atlas, if compared to me
Bears nothing, mine is a weighty misery.
II.
Ah me, can nothing cure me, is my grief
So much insanable, that no relief
Can flow from Gilead? do my sins obstruct
Those tides of grace which usually conduct
Refreshments to me? Oh most dismal fate!
He feels a plague too soon, that grieves too late.
III.
Cimmerian mists, alas! and what are they?
(Compared to me) less than a glorious day.
The sense of my own blindness makes me know
The blindness of my senses. Can a woe
Be more exub'rous? here is a grief refined,
A seeing Body, and a Soul that is blind.
IV.
The sight-deprived wretch, whose darkened fate
Makes day and night (as 'twere) incorporate,
And knows no difference, but still gropes about,
And finds his Day within, his Night without:
But I, sad I, being muffled up in sin,
Find Day without, alas! but Night within.
V.
Saddest of thoughts! Oh that I could espy
One gracious Sunbeam, that my willing eye,
Might, like the dawning of the Infant-day,
Grow by degrees, and at the last display
Some glorious rays to my endarkened heart*
I Would hug that light, and never let it part.
VI.
But I, unhappy I, whose former days
Consumed in ill, have quite expelled the rays
Of future happiness; and now I see
All evil is epitomized in me.
Too late I grieve, for what I feel too soon;
The Sun lets fall his fiercest rays at noon.
VII.
Though foggy vapors oftentimes ascend,
Being exhaled by a Solar friend,
From Earths chill breast, and for a season shroud
Themselves within an entertaining cloud.
Yet at the last, (unwilling to remain)
Discloud themselves, and fall to Earth again.
VIII.
But ah! my sin-exhaling soul is filled
With noisome fogs that cannot be distilled;
They keep a forced possession, and increase
Within me, nay, and riot out my peace.
Needs must the Empire of a troubled brain
Feel store of torments where such Neroes reign.
IX.
Corporeal griefs, compartivelay, merit
The name of Pleasures to a troubled spirit:
Martyrs have taught, that temporary pains
(If well improved) swell into future gains.
Grief's banished quite from him that dies forgiven;
A Storm on Earth portends a Calm in Heaven.
X.
As woe and trouble commonly await
Upon the frailty of a humane state;
So Grace and Mercy evermore are found
Attending, where Divinity sits crowned.
Ah! would it not be undiscreetly done,
To sit in darkness to avoid the Sun?
XI.
If Heaven should please to banish from our sight
His glorious Lamp, whose most diffusive light
Gives life to nature, all things would retire
Into a Chaos, and the world expire.
The Soul's a World-divine, and Christ's the Sun,
Who shining not, the World is changed, not done.
XII.
We may observe, when happiness concludes,
How soon the sad and fatal interludes
Of Misery appear: for Grief and Joy
Are Initiators. When our sins destroy
The happiness we had, Ah then appears
Mischief attended with an host of fears.
XIII.
Adam (unhappy man!) with what a grace
Could he present himself before the face
Of his well-pleased Creator, till the heat
Of his own lust compelled him to retreat
From Gods commands. Ah then, his new-bred fear
Made him afraid to see, as well as hear.
XIV.
Let but the apples of the tender eye
Receive a sudden touch, and by and by
The sympathizing part will quickly be
Frighted (as 'twere) into a mutiny,
So when the Sin: touched soul begins to smart,
The sentiate faculties must bear a part.
XV.
Courage in Sin, is but a Sin enlarged;
Which like a deep-mouthed Cannon over-charg'd
Recoyles or breaks. Had Peter found no vent
For his denying-sins, his soul had rent
It self in pieces. Blessed is he and wise,
That can discharge his sorrow at his eyes.
XVI.
Sins that do float in tears, are often drowned
In their own floods; When real sighs abound,
They raise a tempest, and our sins are tossed
Against the rocks of Mercy, till they are lost.
When sins beleaguer us with hostile fears,
There Is no Artillery like David's tears.
XVII.
Cursed (like the Fig Tree) is that barren eye
That in a flood of Sins is always dry.
Tears are the choicest Jewels which are set
Like Orient Pearls in Heaven's rich Cabinet.
When Faith implores, the Almighty One that lent
A vent for tears, will send us tears to vent.
XVIII.
Faith is the Souls best Orator; it is known,
There is no Music like a faithful groan.
A Whispering faith will find a ready ear,
When a loud-thundring faithless voice must steer
From whence it came, no audience will be given,
A soft tongued Faith on Earth speaks loud in Heaven.
XIX.
Faith feeds the hungry, and it safe-guards those,
That fear the danger of incensed Foes.
It Is Heavens proof-armor, he that wears this shield
May safely meet Goliath in the Field.
It Is heavenly mirth to hear a David sing;
'Twas Faith that killed Goliath, not a sling.
XX.
The precious balsom of a sound belief,
Expels the poison of a raging grief.
The woman's bloody issue could not be
Cured, but by Faiths Divine Surgery.
When grief assailes, the patient must be sure
T'apply warm prayers, and Faith will end the cure.
XXI.
Reason and Faith are Combatants, the One
Demands a (why) the other will be known
Without a reason, for the powerful hand
Of Faith can fight, where reason cannot stand.
He that believes what is possible, can strain
His Faith no higher than a humane brain.
XXII.
Faith is the minds establisher, should we
Believe but what we understand, and see,
We should prove Infidels: had Abraham tried
His Faith by humane sense, his Faith had died.
But barren Sarah, when her time was run,
Blessed aged Abraham with a smiling Son.
XXIII.
When our estranged ashes, shall lie hid
In their corruptions, reason will forbid
Their re-uniting, but a faithful eye
Sees them inclining to their unity.
If we observe, we shall be sure to find
T hat Faith sees best, when humane reason's blind.
XXIV.
A well-deserving eye, shall always find
Faith and Theology, as close combined
As Marth' and Mary were; who strive to smother
The one, must needs extirpate the other.
Accursed be they that separate such friends:
Destroy the consort, and the music ends.
XXV.
The inflamed Lamp shines in a darksome night,
And fills each corner with a trembling light;
But when extinguished our benighted eye,
Leaves every object in obscurity.
So shining Faith (snuft out by sin) expires
And leaves us muffl'd in our dark desires.
XXVI.
Faith's a Monoculist, and can descry
The Sun of Glory with a single eye.
It comprehends all things, every place
Where she aboads, is beautified with grace.
He Is like a pregnant Land that knows no dearth,
But brings forth many offsprings at one birth.
XXVII.
Faith can unnaturalize a Lion, and
Make him lie subject to a strict command,
Or Daniel had not lived, his Lamb had power,
To make the Lions tremble, not devour:
Be pleased Oh Lord, to look upon our Sion,
And send this Lamb to chase away our Lion.
XXVIII.
When once despised Faith is laid aside,
Needs must the Fabric of Religion slide.
An unpropt-house, with danger is enjoyed,
And Palaces prove rubbish when destroyed.
Oh how unblest is that declining Nation,
Where Faith's quite lost, Religion's out of fashion.
XXIX.
Faith and Religion like the Turtle-dove,
Having lost her first, admits no second love.
The troubled Ocean is not easily stilled,
It Is far more easy to destroy than build.
When Faction thrives, Religion starves at nurse,
Who sins with Egypt, must have Aegypts curse.
XXX.
Sure sad Religion, cannot choose but groan
Under deformity, when every one
Shall dress her at his pleasure: is it good
To cancel that, which Martyrs sealed with blood?
Sure no it is not, blessings are despised,
When pure Religion's so much Proteuniz'd.
XXXI.
I Would rather want a blessing, than abuse
The blessing that I have, the apostate Jews
Can evidence this truth, for whilst they stood
To save the evil, they destoy'd the good.
Did it not add to Pilates sin, who cried,
I find no fault, and yet our Savior died?
XXXII.
Had Judas known the blessings he possessed,
In being private to our Saviors breast,
Sure then his most inordinate desires,
Had found no fuel to maintain his fires.
Best things in their corruption prove the worst,
Truth speaks aloud, for Judas was accursed.
XXXIII.
Alas how fondly did our thoughts despise
These sacred joys, which now we chiefly prize
Because we want them, and we sadly prove
The want of blessings tutors us to love
The blessings that we had, if I transgress,
Let David witness what my thoughts express.
XXXIV.
The unfathomed gulf of man's unsatiate mind
Proves most outrageous, when it is most confined,
I could persuade my self, if 'twere a sin
Not to be sinful, Man would soon begin
To practice goodness, for the flesh would be
Oppugnant to the Spirits faculty.
XXXV.
The raging fire, the more it is deprest
The more it burns, our Parent Eve transgrest
Because she was forbid, although she knew
What unavoided danger would accrue.
Yet her unsatisfi'd desires were such,
She could not choose but taste as well as touch.
XXXVI.
Faction's the worst of Evils, it is a sin
Beyond addition; when we once begin
To fall to Heresy, we know not how
Nor what to act, alas we can allow
A firm respect to nothing, for to day,
We hug what we to morrow cast away.
XXXVII.
If we observe, it may be quickly seen
How great a disproportion is between
The Schools of God, and Nature, we conceive
In Natures Schools, before we can believe;
But in the Schools of God we must aspire,
First to believe, conceive, and then admire.
XXXVIII.
Affliction is the Christians badge, who knows
Earths greatest pleasure, find her greatest wees,
Alas what are the enjoyments of this life,
But fleeting shadows which denote a strife?
If David's troubles sojourn in my breast,
Lord give me David's heart, and I am blessed.
XXXIX.
He that endures Affliction, must abide
The harsh directions of his knowing Guide:
For they that travel in this world must take
Affliction by the hand, or else they will make
A fruitless journey. He Is a senseless slave,
That dances with Earth's Music to his grave.
XL.
Affliction is sins Nursery, and they
That kill the Brat, must take the Nurse away;
If not, they must expect what is much more worse,
For sin is known to be the Devils Nurse.
Then may they cry with lamentable breath,
No wages will content the Nurse, but death.
XLI.
Would thou prevent affliction? then draw near,
I Will tell thee how, when sin begins t'appear,
Drown it in tears, tears of a heavenly race,
He that includes a sin, excludes a Grace.
Sin often grows too aged for relief:
There is no danger like a non-ag'd grief.
XXLII.
The wise man grieves not, that he undergoes
Affliction, but because he fully knows
His many sins deserved as many more,
If ten times doubled, than he did before.
Patience in things adverse, like Stars, shine bright,
And most transparent in the darkest night.
XLIII.
It Is good to be afflicted, or else he
That spoke it took delight in Misery.
If David's sins infect thee, let thy heart
Be bathed in David's tears, and then thou art
Indeared unto Heaven: for he that lent
Much time to sin, must borrow to repent.
XLIV.
Repentance leaps to Heaven, if we expect
A future blessing, we must not neglect
This present business, which if we delay,
We Will want to morrow, what we lost to day:
But let us consider e're our time be spent,
How soon we sin, and yet how late repent.
XLV.
He that delays Repentance, makes great haste
To his own ruin, and commits a waste
Upon his Soul, for every hour we spend
And not repent, we wilfully befriend
Our Adversary, Hell, whose Gins being set,
He lies and watches, when to draw the Net.
XLVI.
The Net being drawn, well may we run about,
And make our selves more fast, attempting out.
Then our betrayed Souls may sadly say
Had we repented, when 'twas said, to day,
This Net has not ensnared us, nor we cry,
We that did ever sin, must ever dye.
Gods Love, AND Man's Unworthiness.
GOD! how that word has thunder-clapt my Soul
Into a ravishment; I must condole
My forward weakness; Ah, where shall I find
Sufficient Metaphors to express my mind?
Thou heart-amusing word, how have thou filld
My Soul with Halelujahs, and distilled
Wonders into me! Oh, that I could break
My heart in pieces, and divinely speak
My mind in Raptures, that the frantique Earth
May bath it self in these sweet streams of mirth.
Then rouse my Soul, and practice how to turn
Thy wonders into language; do not burn
Thy sacr^d fuel in a place where none
Can have the benefit but thee alone
Hoist up thy Sails, and let thy speedy motion
Hurry thee hence into the boundless Ocean:
Observe thy Compass, keep a constant pace,
And Heaven will steer thee to the Port of Grace.
It Is strange to think, how the Almighty can
(That is so pure) love such a thing as Man,
Whose primitive corruption makes him worse
Than nothing, whose Rebellion claims a Curse,
More than affection: How can Heaven endure
A thing that can be nothing but impure?
Man (like a word that is void of reason) sounds
In every ear, his very name expounds
A misery; at best, he needs must be
But vain; And how can Heaven love vanity?
Man (like a shadow) flies before the Sun
Of his Afflictions, and is still undone
By his own doing, he is his own pursuer;
And how can Heaven love such a self-undoer?
Man (like a naked worm) is often found
Digging himself into the loathsome ground
Of ruin, he is a Traitor to his Bliss;
And how can Heaven love such a worm as this?
Man (like a flash of lightning) courts the world
With lavish flames, and by and by is hurled
Into that Nothing, whence at first he came;
Then how can God love such a short-lived flame?
Man (like a Reed) is evermore inclined
To shake, and totter with each blast of wind;
He Is always running to the ground with speed:
And how can Heaven love such an earthly Reed?
Man (like the dust) is always blown, and tossed
From place to place, and flies, till it has lost
Its Center; never resting in one place:
Then how can Heaven love that which flies in's face?
Man (like a Fly) still buzzes up and down
From cup to cup, and sips on, till he drown
Himself in pleasure; fears no stander by:
And how can Heaven love such a drunken Fly?
Man (like a Rainbow) oftentimes appears
Clothed in colors, but can claim no years,
No days, nay hardly hours, but must decay;
And how can heaven love that which loves no stay?
Man (like a bubble) floats upon the waves
Of his desires, whilst every blast enslaves
His brittle substance, filled with windy troubles;
And how can heaven love such unconstant bubbles?
Man (like the froth) spewed from the Oceans breast
Is tyded up and down, but knows no rest,
Nor Perpetuity; and can betroth
It self to nothing: Heaven loves no such froth.
Man (like the wind) is every moment flying
To every place, and hares to be complying
Or resting any where; how can it be?
That Heaven can love so much inconstancy?
Man (like a Swallow) loves the fragrant spring
Of earths delights, but with a spreading wing
Flies from the Winters more congealed Breast;
And how can Heaven love such a Summer Guest?
Man (like a smoke) presumptuously aspires
Into the air, and by and by retires
Himself to nothing, nothing's his conclusion;
And how can Heaven love such a base confusion?
Man (like a fire) whose green and scragged fuel
Denies to burn until it fights a duel
With the encountering Bellows, which at last
Obtains the conquest, then it burns as fast,
And seems as 'twere, ambitious to expire;
Then how can Heaven love such a raging fire?
Man (like an Arrow) being once let go
Out from the Archers well commanded Bow,
Affronts the Clouds; at last, having spent the store
Of his small strength, sals down, and seems to adore
The inferior Earth, which, with a welcome, hides
His down-cast head within her wounded sides,
Where he remains, and scorns to be withstood:
Man can be anything, but what is good.
And cannot Man be good? strange kind of tone!
What? has he wept himself into a stone,
Like Niobie? no sure; I fear his eyes
Were never loaded with such large supplies:
Ah, could he weep a Flood, Heaven that prepares
His ears to hear, would bottle up his tears
In his remembrance; every drop should shine
Like Pearls absconded in a golden Mine:
His sins command a Deluge; could his head
Be turned into a fountain, could he shed
An Ocean at a drop, it could not cover
His sins (which are mountainous) from the Lover
Of real drops, for he would soon descry
Those sand excelling crimes, where ere they lie:
Yet would his Soul so much compassionate
The flowing sorrows of his watery state,
That with a calming hand he would remove
His rocky sins, and hide them with his Love;
He would have pity, and with speed consent
TO express his love, when all our tears are spent.
Should Heaven, who justly may, for every sin
Drop down a Plague, and make it live within
Man's guilty Soul, the world would quickly be
Transformed, and changed into a leprosy.
Let none despair, for Heavens known mercies can
Out infinite the greatest sins of man.
Oh love beyond degree! Shall Heaven indulge
Himself to Man? and shall not Man divulge
A gratefulness to him, whose hand prepares
To wipe away his sin-poluted cares?
Ungrateful Miscreant, how can thou view
Thy former Miseries, and not renew
Thy thanks to him whose Power set thee free,
And brought thee back from thy Captivity?
Have thou abandoned Love? will thou imprint
Thy Soul with baseness? Ah, what obvious flint
Has turned Affections edge? what, art thou bent
To shoot at him, that labors to prevent
The Arrows of thy ruin, which will fly
Into thy breast, except he puts them by?
Have thou transformed thy heart into a rock
That will not move? Shall mercy call and knock,
And thou not hear? What? have thou armed thy heart
With senseless marble, that no flaming dart
Of love can enter? Have thou vowed to stand
In opposition? Cannot Gods Command
Force thee to bow? Art thou resolved to sport
With thy destruction, and not yield the Fort?
Oh yield betimes; do not resolve to be
Too much a slave to Infidelity:
For know (frail wretch) thy strength consists in clay
When Mercy's lost, then Judgment finds the way.
Rally thy thoughts together, and throw down
Thy brazen walls, thy yielding yields a Crown:
For it is in vain to oppose an arm that can
Out-grasp the measure of so small a span.
Alas, Alas! it may be quickly seen
What a large disproportion is between
Thy God, and thee: Consider, he is all,
And thou art nothing; what can be more small?
Or what more great? for he is infinite,
And thou art finite: He is full of light,
And thou of darkness; He is filled with love,
And thou art stuffed with baseness; He Is a Dove,
And thou a Worm: Thus, thus thou may descry
His firmness, and thine own infirmity.
Then be not obstinate, but strike the Sails
Of thy desires to him that never fails;
And know, it is easy in an inch of time
To take a worm ingarrison'd with slime;
For such a thing thou art, and all thy power
Must yield to Heavens assaults; thy April shower
Has no continuance: therefore do not strive
Against a God, whose wisdom can contrive
What pleases him: Alas! thy state is grounded
Upon contingencies, thou art compounded
Of nothing but uncertainties; thy Arm
Assumes no power, except it be to harm
Thy wilful self: Then why will thou contend
With him that importunes to be thy friend?
Thy friend, (soul-saving word) what higher bliss
Can crown a heart, than such a friend as this?
Oh life of Ravishment! how can it be
A God, a worm, and yet a Sympathy?
Strange condescension! was the like e're known
Or fpoke by any mouth, except his own?
Hie balmy breath declares, that he will save
And succor those that faithfully do crave
His blessed assistance: Hark, and hear him say,
Ye that are heavy loaded, come away,
Oh come to me, I am content to bear
Your burdens, and extenuate your care.
What higher note of love was ever strained
To any ear? Oh how has man obtained
So great a friendship! It Is a happy lot,
Nay, and a wonder not to be forgot.
And yet it is not strange, that he should prove
So true a Lover, that is composed of Love,
And can do nothing else: If he correct,
It Is for thy crimes: he only has the effect
Of anger: for his grieved spirit moans
To punish Sinners, and to hear their groans:
His Soul takes no delight to crush to death
The offending prisoners of the inferior Earth:
He is the rich Exchequer of all good,
And is by nothing (except man) withstood.
All things perform what they were made to do,
But only man, that strives to prove untrue
To his Creator: nothing can be found
Within thy breast, but that which is unsound.
How sad it is to hear the Almighty say,
I Have nourished children, that are gone astray,
And scorn to own me! Oh rebellious dust!
That hate my paths, because my ways are just.
The Ox will know his Owner, and the Ass
His Masters crib; but Israel, alas,
Will not acknowledge me, but have destroyed
Themselves, and made their understanding void:
Has not my fury then just cause to swell,
Because they can do nothing but rebel?
Nefandous Creature, how can thou endure
Thy wretched self? Ah, why will thou procure
Thine own destructions? shall all creatures be
Obedient to their owners, only thee?
And will thou not acknowledge him that gave
Large blessings to thee, and desires to save
Thy Soul from torments, if thou would incline
Thy will to his, whose thoughts are all divine?
Forget obduracy, and learn the Art
Of loving him, that loves an upright heart:
Go ruminate upon thy base estate,
And be unto thy self, compassionate.
Yield to thy Maker with a cheerful brow?
First know what it is to love, and after, how*
Love is the Laws fulfiller; he that will
Love God aright, must practice how to fill
His Soul with true affection; for the ways
Of Heaven are paved with Love: Immortal praise
Attend his Courts; he that forgets to love
Forgets his God: They that desire to prove
Heavens amatorious Guests, must first admire
How such a spark as man came to aspire
To such a flame, and how he came to be,
Not only Earths, but Heavens, Epitomie:
Be serious then, and let thy thoughts reflect
Upon Heavens goodness, and thy disrespect.
God out of Nothing (except Love) compiled
This spacious World, as if some princely child
Were to be born: His providential care
Was (as it were) ambitious to prepare
The quintessence of pleasures to invite
Some stately Guest to banquet with delight.
First he extracted from a darksom Cell
A glorious Light, whose beauty pleased him well;
Then he prepared a Canopy, inlayd
With glittring Pearl, whose twinkling luster made
A Heav*nly show; and afterward his hand
Dashed back the waters from the naked Land:
Then he commanded, that the Earth, being come
Out from the Oceans new delivered womb,
Should be adorned with an imbroidered Gown,
That so her new-warm'd bowels might abound
With several fruits. --
-- Thus having played his part
Upon this Theater, this life of Art,
He ushered in a thing, which pleased him best,
( He made the Feast, and after made the Guest;)
Called by the name of Man, a naked, small.
And dusty, shiftless Creature* this was all,
And all this nothing, but a lump of death,
Until inspired by Heavens all-quickning breath.
Vain, simple wretch; ah, how could thou behave
Thy self before a Judge so great, so grave?
Had thou but seen thy self, thou would have cried
Thy self to death, and with a blush, defied
Thy base estate, to think that thou should be
Natures most base and rude Anatomy.
Could thou expect that Heaven would entertain
A thing so poor? so weak? so vile? so vain?
Which like a spark blown from a new-made fire,
Can only show it self, and then expire,
Was it for this the All-Creator made
Such large provision? Was It for this he laid
Such rich Foundations? Was It for this his Power
Decked this well-pleasing odoriferous Bower?
Was it for this (this little world) he formed
A world so great? was it for this he warmed
The Earths chill bosom? was it for this he spent
His six days Labor? was it for this intent
He made a Paradise? where Flora spread
Her fragrant offspring, and made Earth a Bed
Of rare compounded pleasures, where he placed
This new-come Guest, whose very looks disgraced
The Face of Beauty, to whose thriftless hand
He gave that Government, with this Command:
Of all the Trees that here thou do behold,
Thy lips being authorized, thou may be bold
To taste with freedom, only one, which I
Conjure thee from, therefore restrain thine eye
From lusting after it; if not, thy breath
Shall glut it self in everlasting death:
Forget not my Commands, but let thy breast
Be always faithful, and thou shall be blessed.
Thus the Recorder having spoke at large
This well-deliver'd (although ill-kept) Charge,
He after said;
It is not good that man should be alone
Without a help, I Will therefore make him one.
Oh sacred prudence! Here we may discern
A sweet conjunction; here our Souls may learn
Wisdom and Love, both which, if not enjoyd,
Pleasures prove vanities, and blessings void.
Heaven, whose unidle art-full hand had set
Man, as a Jewel, in his Cabinet,
Thought it unfit, that those delights which he
Had made by his most powerful Love, should be
Monopoliz'd by one, he therefore laid
Adam asleep, and having done, he made
Out of a crooked Rib (strange kind of Art)
A woman, fair, complete, in every part;
Nay, and a helper too: for in conclusion
She helped poor Adam to his own confusion.
Oh most detested deed! Unconstant wife,
To prove a Traitor to thy Husbands life
As soon as made: Fond wretch could nothing suit
With thy nice palate, but forbidden fruit?
Ah, could thy longing lie no longer hid?
What? did thou long, because thou were forbid?
Was there no tree that could content thy eye,
But only that which was forbidden? Fie,
Oh shame to think thou should so quickly waste
Thine hours of pleasure for a minutes taste:
Could thou not like, or fall in love with any
But that? Heaven had but one, and thou had many
Wherewith to please thine appetite; and yet
Would thou prove so ambitious, as to sit
Upon the highest twigg? Ah, could the advice
Of Satan tempt thee to this avarice
With so much ease, and make thee rashly do
So foul a deed, and tempt thy Adam too?
Preposterous wretch, how have thou spread a cloud
Over thy head? what? did thou think to shroud
Thy self from vengeance? Having eat thy death,
Could thou expect to live? Oh no, thy breath
Offended Heaven: but ah, had thou but thought
(Before thy heart had entertained a fault
So great as this) what 'twas to die, thy mind
Had made thee more abstemious, and confined
Thy base inordinate desires; thy meat
Had proved delightful, and thy comforts great:
But now, unhahpy now, thy crimes have made
Thy Soul Deaths Debtor, and thou art betrayed
By thine own self; therefore prepare to meet
Thy wrathful Judge: it is said stolen goods are sweet,
But thine proved sour, the fruits which thou have stole
Sugared thy mouth, but wormwoodiz'd thy soul:
When thou had eaten, Ah! why did thou not
Tremble to death, to think thou had forgot
Thy Gods Commands, and that his Judgments must
Follow thy Soul, and blow thee into dust?
Thus Eve, thus Adam, having vilipended
Their Gods Commands, their happiness soon ended
Their joys were turned to mourning, and their light
Was turned to darkness, and their day to night;
Both being too much conscious, fled with speed
To hide themselves from God, but not the deed.
Even as some poor distressed wretch desires
To hide himself from the enraged fires
Of his incensed Foe, runs up and down
To shun the rage of a condemned frown;
At last observing his enquiring Foe
Approach the place, lies still, and dares not blow,
For fear the wordless Echo of his breath
Should soon betray him to a sudden death:
Being at last descried, his throbbing heart
Gives an Alarm to each trembling part;
Fear, like an Earthquake, then begins to shake
His loosened joints, he knows not how to make
A ready answer to his foes demands;
But, as a sad convicted man, he stands
Subjected to his will, that can dispense
With nothing, but with death, to calm the offense.
Even so Guilt-loaded Adam having done
A deed so foul, prepares himself to run
To some close shelter where he might immure
His naked body, and repose secure:
But ah, in vain, in vain he strove to hide
Himself from God, that need implore no guide
To teach him where his sad offender lay;
He needs must find when sin has chalked the way;
But when Heavens shril-enquiring voice surrounded
The ears of Adam, Adam was confounded
With deep distress, his heart began to call
His quivering Senses to a Funeral:
Fear, like a powerful fire, began to thaw
His frozen thoughts, and keep his Soul in awe;
He breathed in a Dilemma, and could find
No Sanctuary for a perjured mind:
At last the Language of the Eternal God
Stormed his Sin-armed Soul, and like a Rod
Whipped him from his security, and cried,
Adam, where art thou? Adam thus replied,
I heard thee walking in the pleasing shade
Of the cool evening, and I was afraid,
And hid my self, because I must confess,
I blushed to see my shameful nakedness.
GOD. Tell me, thou trembling wretch, how do thou know
That thou art naked? say, who told thee so?
What? has thy lips usurped the fruit which I
Conjured thee not to touch? if so, reply.

Adam. The woman which thou gav'st me, gave to me,
And I did eat of the forbidden tree.

GOD. Unconstant woman! Ah, why have thou run
Beyond thy bounds? what is this that thou have done?

Woman. The Serpents flowing language swelled too great
For my low banks: he tempted, and I eat.

Gods Curse against the Serpent.
Because thou have thus subtilty deluded
The lustful woman, thou shall be excluded
From future good; more shall thy curses yield
Than all the Beasts and Cattle in the field:
Thy belly shall (because thou have done this)
Give to the earth a life-remaining kiss;
Thou shall not taste of any thing that is good,
Dust shall supply the place of wholesome food.
Cursed be thy ways, thou shall no more be seen
By me: I will put enmity between
Thy seed and hers; hereafter thou shall feel
A bruised head, and she a bruised heel.
Gods Curse against the Woman.
And as for thee, oh Woman, I Will enlarge
Thy grief and thy conception; I Will discharge
Thy joys, and load thee with a weighty grief;
Thy pains in childbed shall find no relief;
Thou shall desire thy Husband, and his hand
Shall overruled thee with a strict command.
Adams Curse.
Rebellious Adam, unto thee I Will give
A Life as bad as Death, for thou shall live
To see thy sorrows more and more abound,
And for thy sake I Will curse the loathed ground;
For thou have hark'ned to the conquering voice
Of thy frail wife, and made my fruit thy choice,
And sepulchred my words within the grave
Of thy false heart; begone, thou self-made slave:
The thorny ground shall give a large increase
To thy laborious hand; the name of Peace
Shall prove a stranger to thy ears, and thou
Shall eat thy bread with a sweat-dropping brow*
I Will murder all thy joys; thy breast shall burn
With flaming care, until thy corpse return
Into the bowels of the inclusive earth;
From whence thou had thy substance, and thy birth:
For base thou art, and therefore thou shall be
A food for gnawing worms, and not for me:
As thou art dust, to dust thou shall retire;
Hereafter let not dust presume to aspire.
Strange* alteration! Oh pernicious fate,
Too quickly bred in such an Infant- state!
He that but even now enjoyed a life
Balanced with pleasures, now is filled with strife:
He, whose Majestic Soul was lately crowned
With blessed content, is now ingulf'd, and drowned
In sorrows Ocean; He, which was before
Enriched with happiness, is now as poor
As poverty can make him; He, which had
The countenance of Heaven to make him glad*
Is now eclipst; he knows not where to run,
Sin having interposed between the Sun
And his dark Soul, the Center of whose rest
Is now removed, and he survives unblest:
He, which but even now had leave to dwell
And revel in Heavens eye, desires a Cell
To entertain him! he which lived in Peace,
Is now thrown down, and forfeited his Lease:
Great was his Crime, great was his sudden Fall,
Great was his Tenement, his Rent but small:
Poor Adam's taken by his own decoys;
Sin is the Sequestrator of all j is.
Sad Pilgrim of the world, where will thou find
(In the unpathed earth) a place so kind
To entertain thee? Ah, where will thou keep
(Thus tumbled from a Precipice so steep)
The sad unpeopl'd rendezvous? Oh where
Will thou procure a hand that will unsnare
Th'intangled Soul? Alas thy wearied life
Has two most sad companions; first a Wife,
Than a bad Conscience, what two greater crosses
Can hang upon a breast, whose cares* whose losses,
Are grown so infinite, that no relief,
But what distills from Heaven, can ease their grief?
Thou were the first of men that entertained
So grand a sorrow, thou the first that stained
So pure a color, thou the first that dwelt
In Edens garden, thou the first that felt
The scourge of fury; had thou not transgrest,
Vengeance had found no hand, nor grief a breast.
Ah, had thou not offended, sin had found
No habitation, nor thy Soul a wound:
Had not thy hand so wilfully unlocked
The door of Death, Destruction had not knocked
At thine impenetrable gates, or ventured
TO approach so near, but being opened, entered
Bold Customer of fate, that sought about
To come within, and turn poor Adam out;
Thy strength out strength'd his strength, and made him weak,
A vessel cracked, how can it choose but leak?
Sin proved Deaths father, and man's heart the womb
That brought it forth; this Deatb shall find a tomb
When the Determiner of time has hurled
A finis to the volume of the world;
Till then, man (mortaliz'd by sin) must be
A subject unto Deaths Soveraigntie.
Poor man, in what a wilderness of sorrow
Do thou now ramble in: where will thou borrow
A minutes rest? On what inclining ear
Will thou expend thy groans? what can thou hear
But dialects of misery to vex (hear
Thy bankrupt thoughts? The fatal disrespects
Of Heaven will blow and toss thee up and down
From place to place, his still renewed frown
Will follow thee; therefore provide to endure
The hot pursutes of such a fierce Pursuer:
Can thou expect that this thy grand abuse
(Which runs beyond the limits of excuse)
Can be forgotten; do thou think t'out-live
Thy long-lived crimes, or hope for power to give
Due satisfaction to thy God, whose rage*
Thy heart cannot endure, much less assuage?
Most lachrymable state! What can thou do,
Oh man, that may ingratiate or renew
Thy former love? Alas, thy base condition
Makes thee incapable of a Petition.
Prepare thy self, see if thou can invade
His Soul with prayers, see if thou can persuade
His Heart to yield unto thy sad request,
And re-inthrone thee with thy former rest;
Dissect thy Soul with groans, anatomize
Thy Heart with sighs, and let thy winged cries
Fly through the Angles of his sacred ear,
And breed a harmony within the Sphere
Of his blessed Soul; be circumspect, and lay
The best foundation; hear what Heaven will say.
Adams Petition to God.
Incensed Father of eternal light,
Permit a darkened Soul to approach the sight
Of thine incomparble eye; unmask
Thy Anger-clouded Soul, and let me ask
Forgiveness for those loading Crimes which press
My stagg'ring Soul; I know not whom t'address
My apostate self unto, but only thee,
Whom I offended; Please to pity me:
I have no pleasing sacrifice to atone
Thy wrathful Breast, except a hearty groan
That Is quadrupl'd with grief; Oh deign to look
Upon the lines of my all-blotted book:
Although I Am full of most detested spots,
Yet Lord, I know that thou can read my blots;
Oh read them then, and let thy mercies run
With thy progressive eye; I am undone,
If not forgiven; Lord I thee implore
To show some mercy to me, thou have store,
Decipher all my sins, and let them not
Bear record in thy Rouls, but rest forgot;
Revoke this Act of death, that I may sing
The admired mercies of so blessed a King.
Oh lift me up, that now am thrown below;
Make not my Soul the Custom-house of woe.
Oh hear these bitter groans that I have spent,
And send some comfort from thy Parliament.
Gods Reply.
Thou Skelleton of baseness, hie thee hence,
Disturb me not; return, I say, from whence
Thou came at first; thou shall as soon remove
A mountain, as my mind: I cannot love,
No nor I will not, nothing shall entreat
My resolutions, for my fury's great.
Begone, proud Rebel, do not think thy prayers,
Thy vows, thy groans, thy sighs, thy sobs, thy tears
Shall make my breast their receptacle; No:
How can I be a friend to such a foe?
Surcease thy importunities, let fall
Thy high desires, I will not hear thee call,
Thy Sins have bart'd my ears; I Will not be won
With thy base airy words, for thou have spun
The thread of thy destruction, therefore wear
What thou have labored for, and so forbear
T'intrench upon my patience; it is in vain
To seek for that which thou shall not obtain.
And is it thus, that Heaven will not regard
My cries? Ah me! and must my groans be heard
With disrespect by him, whose tongue affords
Nothing, but grief, involved with bitter words?
Alas, alas! what greater woe can crowd
Into a breast than to be disavow'd
By Gods high voice, whose most enraged breath
Darts forth the Arrows of eternal death?
What shall I do? Oh, whither shall I run
To hide my self, until the glorious Sun
Of his affections usher in the day
Of welcome Joy? Oh, whither shall I stray?
If I am silent, then my, silence turns
My thoughts to fire; If speak, my speech returns
Trebl'd with woe, into the brazen Tower
Of my sad heart, my language has no power
To work upon his ears, my words (like balls
Banded, and thrown against the obdurate walls
Unyielding breast) bounds back again, and breaks
Into my heart, and every sorrow speaks
A volume at a word; yet, yet must I
Return unheard; it is misery to dye,
And pain to live; thus in despair I draw
The loathsome air: Destruction knows no Law.
Grief rains a flood of doubt into my Soul;
Ah me! I can do nothing but condole:
I am despised; and if I bend the force
Of my desires to him, he will divorce
All thoughts of pity, and with rage re-double
Th'unsum'd up sums of my infringing trouble.
I sail into the Straits, both wind and tide
Prevail against me, and I have no guide
To Pilot me unto the longed-for Port
Of pleasing happiness; I am a sport
To threatening Ruin, whose presumptuous waves
Out-dares my Soul, whilst every blast enslaves
My reeling Pinnace: If I strive to go
Toward Scylla, Scylla will contemn my woe,
Alas in vain I can expect relief,
Scylla will bark at my unbridled grief;
Or if my headlong vessel chance to hit
Against Charybdis, I am torn and split
Into ten thousand pieces; Oh hard hap!
Thus am I tossed in Destructions lap.
Where shall I find a heart that will advise
My friendless Soul, and audiate my cries?
I will not thus desist, I must implore,
He that is lost once, sure can be lost no more.
Adams Petition to God.
Once more, thou Metropolitan of all
The spacious world, I here presume to call
Upon thy mercy; Oh let me inherit
The pleasing fruit of thy re-pleased Spirit:
I am thy fabric, Oh some pity take,
Preserve the building for the Builders sake.
Cloth not thy brow with frowns, but let thine eye
(That rests inshrin'd with glorious Majesty)
Reflect upon my sorrows; Oh incline
Thy willing ears to hear this grief of mine:
Oh do not say I shall as soon remove
A mountain as thy heart, thou can not love;
Let not such harsh embittered language flow
Out of a mouth so sweet; I know, I know,
Thou art as good as great; oh therefore bow
Thy sacred ears to hear, oh hear me now:
Bestow some scraps on me, that have deserved
Nothing but stripes; for I have fondly swerved
From thy commands and have committed treason
Against thy Majesty: Great God of Reason,
View my en-humbled Soul, see how it lies
Before thy sight, a weeping Sacrifice,
I know thou know I am a heinous sinner,
Yet pity me, that am a young beginner
In this rich art of begging: Do not slight
My real prayers; I know thou take delight
In being merciful; Oh let me not
Return unanswered, or my prayers forgot:
Oh hear the sorrows of my bleeding state,
Let my complaints make thee compassionate.
And let the fervor of my language turn
Thy thoughts to pity; quench these flames that burn
My wasting Soul; speak peace to me that find
A civil war in my uncivil mind:
Oh I have tasted of thy hot displeasure
Too much, Ah shall thy vengeance know no measure?
Say it is enough; though ( Lord) I must confess
I have deserved more, yet give me less.
Thus with a melting heart I end my Suit,
Ah me! how bitter is forbidden fruit!
Gods Reply.
Thou bold-fac'd Orator, how dare thou come
Before me, or be otherwise than dumb?
Tell me, how dare thou interrupt my breast?
I hate to see thee, or hear thy Request.
Audacious wretch, What, has my Judgment made
Thy heart grow peremptory? Have I laid
Too small a burden on thee? If I have,
I Will lay a greater, thou apostate slave:
I will not note thee, nor I will not hear
Thy words, which have usurped my deafned ear:
Love thee, for what? be it known, sad wretch, I scorn
To love a thing so base, so vile, forlorn;
And if I cannot love, how can it be,
That I can pity such a worm as thee?
I Will neither love, nor pity, for my heart
Is Adamantine; thou shall feel the smart
Of my displeasure; Go, my Soul disdains
To look upon thee; thou art so filled with stains,
And smel'st too much of Fruit to find respect,
Thou art the subject of my great neglect:
Thou art a barren Soil, nothing will grow
Upon thy heart, except the seeds of woe.
Tell me, from what conceit thou do derive
Thy working confidence, that thou dare drive
Thy language to my ears, and be so bold
TO approach my sight, and wilt not be controlled?
Art thou resolved to make (what do thou mean)
My ears thy stage, and every word a scean?
Sum up thy small, thy weak deserts, and see
What large respects thou have deserved from me,
I placed thee in a Garden, not to eat
The fruit for bidden, but to keep it neat:
Had not the violation of my Laws
Moved me to anger, thou had had no cause
TO have felt the burden of my weighty stroke,
Or live thus much subjected to the yoke
Of thine owns sins; most shameful is that Loss
That Is crowned with negligence, and great the cross
That Is made with a self-hand; and they that clime
Above their strengths impropriate a crime
To their own Souls; Destruction is the end
Of all Rebellion: Ruin knows no friend.
Suppose I should invest and entertain
Your Soul with Love, and call thee back again,
The Tree is still the same, the fruit as sweet,
Thy appetite as great, and thou may meet
A Serpent too, whose oratorious skill
May soon entreat thee to enact his will:
He has a voice to tempt, and thou an ear
Will reassume the privilege to hear:
He has a hand to give, and thou another
Freely to take: thus would thou smother
Thy new delights; therefore I will not trust
A heart that can be nothing but unjust.
Thou great Mugul of baseness, cease to plead,
Thy tongue's a canker, and thy words are lead;
Thy sins have made thee not deserve the air
Thou entertain'st; had thou employed thy care
To serve me, when I loved thee, thou had had
My heart-delighting joys to make thee glad;
But now expect no favor, for no Art
Of thine shall ever captivate my heart.
Hie thee unto the shades of grief, bewail
Thy sequestrated happiness, no bail
Of thy procuring will I take to set
Thy Soul at liberty; I will not let
The vision of a comfort creep within
Thy rambling thoughts, thou art a slave to sin:
Had thou but loved or feared me at the first,
Thou Had been as happy, as thou art now accursed:
If now thou love me, I shall quickly prove
It is for fear alone, and not for love.
Thy heart is steeled with wickedness, thy faults
Are sparks enlivened by thy flinty thoughts.
Breath out thy groans unto a senseless rock,
And let thy sighs (like hammers) beat and knock
Against her scragged sides, thou shall as soon
Have her consent, as mine, to grant thy boon:
It Is therefore vain to multiply thy words,
For ah, my breast, my hardened breast, affords.
Thy Soul no pity: and the more thy cry
Attempts my ear, the less I will reply,
Alas! thy guilt-o're-burth'ned words renew
Fresh thoughts of rage, I cannot hear thee sue
Without impatiency; for ah, the longer
Thou crav'st, thou make my sury grow the stronger.
Avoid my presence, for I will no more
Give audience to thy voice, then cease t'implore.
Adams Lamentation.
Undone, undone! what mountain now will hide
My loathed body from the swelling tide
Of raging Vengeance? Whither shall I fly
T'involve my Soul with true security?
Stretch, stretch my lungs, and roar unto the deep
TO entertain me: Oh that I might sleep
Within her wavy bowels, till the blast
Of Heavens all-shaking thundering Voice were past.
Oh that some Rock would hear my sad request,
And give me burial in her frigid breast!
Oh that my grief-extended voice could cleave
The solid Earth, and make her to receive
My wretched limbs! Oh that some ranging beast
Would prove so courteous to devour, and feast
Upon my corpse! Oh that I could contrive
A way to live, and yet not be alive!
Ah, thus my sorrow-shaken fancy flies,
And envies at impossibilities.
I fain would dye, but that I have no heart
To kill my self, and yet I feel a smart
Transcending death; I see I cannot shun
The wrath of Heaven: Ah, thus I am undone
By my own doing, this it is to eat
Forbidden fruit: Oh most pernicious meat!
I was too rash, and rashly have I taken
A deadly fall, and falling, am forsaken:
I Am bruised to death, and yet I cannot dye;
Ah, what can be so much unblest as I?
I am inflamed, and I daily drench
My Soul with tears, and yet I cannot quench
My raging fires; the more I strive to assuage
And mitigate my pains, the more they rage.
What shall I do, or whither shall I go,
To hide me from this Labyrinth of woe?
I am composed of sorrow, and my veins,
In stead of blood, are filled with griping pains.
Cursed be these eyes of mine, which have let in
The lawless tyrant of imperious Sin:
Cursed be these lips of mine, which at the suit
Of my fond wife received forbidden fruit:
Cursed be these ears, that entertained the Charms
Of that Inchantress, which procured my harms:
Cursed be these hands of mine, which took, and fed
My greedy Soul, and struck my Conscience dead:
And now my lips, my ears, my hands my eyes,
Must see, hear, taste, and feel, my miseries.
Oh sad condition! Since there is no relief,
I must be subject to perpetual grief.
Here we will leave poor Adam in the state
Of woe, and thus begin to ruminate.
Are there not many in this toilsom age
That meditate themselves into a rage,
And wonder how a Serpent could express
Himself, and reason with such readiness;
Being by nature brute, nay and the worst
Of living creatures, that he should at first
Persuade and conquer, and instruct his will.
How to determine both of good and ill?
It would seem strange, if Reason were without
Her wings, and could fly above this doubt:
We may (and yet not stain the truth) declare
It was the work of Satan to ensnare
Frail Eve; although he was not named at all
By Moses in the History of the Fall,
It may not trouble us, for we must know,
The bending Serpent was the Devils bow,
By which he shot the arrows of his spire,
Which did [Oh grief to speak it!] fly too right:
And he that dares so high a Crime to act
(Though by another) needs must own the fact:
And this our tongues may never cease to tell,
The Serpent was the Intrument of Hell,
Tuned to the Devils voice: thus we may see
His fraud, his malice, and his subtlety.
First when he saw he could not over-turn
The great Creator, he begun to burn
With flames of envy, laboring to invade,
And to disturb that order God had made
In the Creation, and to change the features
Of his own Image in the best of Creatures,
That so he may by his too sooth delusion
Make Man run headlong to his own confusion:
Thus having laid the platform of his work,
He then begun to agitate, and lurk
For opportunity, which was effected
As soon, nay if not sooner, than expected;
He gave the blow, and by that blow he found
The weakest Vessel had the weakest sound;
But yet it strongly echoed to the voice
Of his desires, and made him love his choice.
Even as some bold-fac'd General, that dares
To storm a well-man'd Town; at first prepares
A potent Army, which he soon sets down
Before the Walls of the alarmed Town;
He after views the ruine-threatning-Fort,
Which speaks defiance, and begins to sport
Their several shots, and with a sad delight
Engage each other in a bloody fight;
Then if the fierce Besiegers once perceive
Themselves out-strength'd, they think it fit to leave
So hot a work, and for a little space
Desist, and fall upon a weaker place,
Where finding smaller opposition, venture
With greater Courage, and at last they enter
The yielding Town, and cruelly begin
To take revenge of them which are within.
Even so the grim looked, malice-armed Devil,
The base-resolved General of Evil,
Perceiving that he could by no means take
The sublime Fort of Heaven, plots how to make
A fresh attempt, upon a weaker part,
And so prepares to storm the flexive heart
Of unresisting Eve; that could not grapple
With such a Foe, but yielded for an Apple
To those most false alarums which surrounded
Her, much obedient, and soon confounded
Her inward parts, and gave her Soul a wound,
Which cannot be by time or art made sound,
Except the grand Physician please to slake
His swelling fury, and some pity take.
Thus are our conquered parents sadly left
In a deplored condition, and bereft
Of all their comforts; they which have enjoyed
The life of happiness, are now destroyed;
And man (his wretched offspring) must be made
Sorrows sad heir, and Peace must not be said
T'inhabit in him. Adams actual sin
Made ours original; for we begin,
As soon as made, to entertain the guests
Of sin, and lodge them in our infant-brests.
Now may our weak and despicable eyes
Behold in them, our ample miseries:
Now we may glut the air with this sad cry,
The root being dead, the branches needs must dye;
For Adam's gone beyond all humane call:
Rebellion never ends without a Fall.
But stay my Muse, here let us rest a while;
Our Journey's long, and it is not good to toil
Too much at first, for Reason says it is best
To pause a time, and take a little rest:
Know then (kind Reader) that my Muse shall meet
Thy serious eyes within another sheet.
The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF GODS LOVE, AND Man's Unworthiness.
ARe all hopes fled? and is there no relief?
Must man still wander in the shades of grief?
Will not the eye of Heaven be pleased to shine
Upon his Soul, but leave him in the brine
Of his own Sins? Is there no warbling voice
Can charm his ears, and woo him to rejoice
In being pitiful? Will nothing move
The much incensed Soul of Heaven to love?
Man [Map of Misery] who can prevail
In thy requests? Or who can cut off the entail
Of thy distress? It Is not a Writ of Error
Can satisfy, or guard thee from the terror
Of thine own Conscience, which will always stare
Upon thy face, and load thee with despair:
It Is not a Habeas Corpus will remove
The body of thy sin, none can disprove
The Will of God, what he resolves to do
Must neither be withstood, nor dived into:
It lies beyond thy power to persuade
Thy God to pity, whom thy Sins have made
A wrathful Judge; what he intends, must be,
Derived from himself, and not from thee;
For thou have nothing in thee worth the name
Of good, because thy glory's turned to shame:
Thou art corrupt and vile in every part,
And who can know the evil of thy heart;
Which like the Ocean, that no art nor eye
Can search her bottom, or her banks descry:
Therefore til heaven shall please to change the state
Of thy condition, Reason bids thee wait;
For be assured, the promised seed will spread
It self abroad, and bruise the Serpents head.
Even as the Fountain, whose exuberous breast
Is always fluent, and admits no rest;
But with a cheerful willingness she sends
Her Crystal tokens to her smaller friends.
Even so our God d^stilleth from above
The healing streams of his refreshing love;
For ah the luster of his Sun-bright eye
Is drowned in tears, when our sad Souls prove dry!
Oh admiration! that a God so just
Should rain down floods upon a heap of dust!
Oh Mercy! that so much incensed a God
Should send forth Mercy, and keep in his Rod!
His Soul is filled with pity, and his eyes
Begin to view the unsariate miseries
Of Adams down-cast offspring: Though his ear
Seems unto us resolved not to hear
Their bitter cries, nor note the sad Devotions
Of their contristed hearts; yet by the Motions
Of his blessed Soul, he sends his Son and Heir
Into this wretched world, that he might bear
The Cross of our Transgressions, and expel
The clouds of Sin, and conquer Death and Hell:
Thus by his death we lived, and by his grief
Our new-calm'd Souls were furnished with relief.
Oh sudden change! That wind which did before
Drive wretched man upon the threatening shore
Of unavoiding ruin, fills the sails
Of his desires with mild and prosperous gales;
The Boreas of his sin does now surcease
His full-mouthed blasts, and Zephyrus speaks peace
Unto his ship wracked Soul, and now he rides
Upon the new-tam'd backs of pleasing Tides.
Oh that my tongue were able to rehearse
The love of God with an Angelike Verse!
Oh that some Heavenly Deity would fill
The black mouthed concave of my wandering quil
With pure celestial Ink, that I might write
In heavenly characters, and learn to indite
Jehovahs praises in a style as high
As my desires, and make the lofty Sky
Echo with Hallelujahs, that the Earth
May (like a Mid wife) hug the joyful birth
Of every word, and make each corner ring
(With peals of joy) the Glories of our King:
Is man delivered from the painful womb
Of his foul sin, and raised from the tomb
Of everlasting death? and shall not we
Applaud that hand which set such prisoners free?
What, shall we be afraid to crack and break
The chains of silence, and attempt to speak
The dialects of Angels? No; let us call
Upon his name, that raised us from a Fall.
Let Us stretch our lungs, and with a warbling breath
Sing to the life, how we were raised from death:
And when our tongues are wearied, let us express
By heavenly signs our real thankfulness.
But stay, where runs my quill? what, have I lost
My self in raptures? or else am I tossed
Into the Air of pleasure by the wind
Of true delight? If passion proves so kind,
I am content, Oh may I always rest
Adorned and crowned with a heaven ravished breast!
O love ineffable! Must wretched Man,
The spawn of baseness, and the unmeasured span
Of everlasting infancy, be made
Loves object? Must the Almighty's love be said
To dwell in Man, whose tongue cannot deliver
The least of thanks unto so great a Giver?
Will the Sun-gazing Eagle, that soars high,
Descend to assist the web-infolded Fly?
Will he that hearkens with a willing ear
To pleasing music, turn away to hear
Confounding discords? or will any woo
A perjured enemy to come and go
Into his Courts? will any hand forbear
To strike at him that labors to impair
His worth, and contumeliously upbraid
His upright deeds? Will he that is betrayed
Affect the Trayor, and with patience sue
For reconcilement, when as death is due?
All this blessed Heaven will do, that he might place
Vain man within the Covenant of Grace.
Consider man, how often has this Mirror
Of pure affection wooed thee from thine error?
Thou inconsiderate dust, which every wind
Can puff away, how can thou prove unkind
To such a Lover, that delights to spin
His bowels out, to nourish thee within
His milky bosom? Shall his bounty crave
Thy base acceptance? Shall he be a slave
To his own slaves? Ah, shall thy God implore,
And beg of beggars to receive his store?
Does he, whom Heaven and Earth cannot contain,
No nor the Heaven of Heavens, stoop down to gain
Thy dull respects? And ah, will thou not raise
Thy stupid Soul an inch to give him praise?
Thy fervent Prayers he always will admit,
Then how can thou remember to forget
A God so mindful? How can thou forbear
To numerate his love without a tear?
How can thine eyes (when thou observ'st the Sun)
Refuse to weep, to see him daily run
His painful Progress, and rejoice to greet.
The Earth with luster to direct thy feet,
Thy sinful feet, which every moment slide
Into Rebellion, loaded with thy pride;
How can thou choose, when thou behol'dst the ground
Whereon thou tread'st, but voluntary drowned
Thy self in briny floods, to think what care
Indulgent Heaven has taken to prepare
For thee, before thou were, and how his hand
Has for thy profit, fertiliz'd the Land?
How can thy rocky heart refuse to vent
A stream of blood, when thou beholdst the extent
Of the unbounded Ocean, how it hides
Within the bosom of her swelling Tides,
Diversities of Fish, which live to seed
Thy gulf of gluttony at time of need?
Uncloud thy thoughts ( O Man) and thou shall set
He who ordained all these things for thee,
Created thee for him, that thou may give
The praise to him, that lends thee leave to live.
Be serious Man, consider how thou have
Converted all these blessings into waste:
Know that the great Edificer of things
Furnished thy Soul with Reason, gave thee wings
To fly above all mortals, and has crowned
Thy head with heaps of Honor, and has bound
Inferior creatures, prentice to thy will;
And this he did, because thou should fulfill
Thy Gods Commands; but thou that were the best,
Have made thy self more loathsome than the rest,
And by thy most derested deviation
Abused thy glory, of thy free Creation:
Though the Majestic Eagles will despise
To be assistant to the entangled Flies;
Yet Heaven will from his lofty Throne descend
And with a speedy cheerfulness defend
The sons of men, who daily are betrayed
By those insidious snares which Satan laid
TO entrap their Souls: Alas, how void of care
Is heedless man! How subject to a snare!
But he, whose more than superficial love
Is always active, laboring to improve
Our hearts with thankfulness, denies to let
Our Souls be taken in the eternal net
Of unconceived misery, and live
In lasting death, not having power to give
The least of drops unto our howling tongues,
But suck the Flames, until our sulphurous lungs
Crackle, and belch forth brimstone, till we tire
Our Carbonado'd members in a fire
That Is inextinct; the more we strive to turn
Our parched Souls, still more and more they burn.
Resolve these things within thy serious mind;
Oh Man! let Love instruct thee to be kind
To him that is loving; do no disrespect
A God, whose Soul so dearly can affect:
Pour out thy thoughts, and practice to relent,
And let thy thoughts induce thee to repent:
Grasp opportunity, Time's always flying;
God's always living, and thou always dying:
Dye then, before thou dy'st, redeem the time,
Because thy days are evil; learn to clime
Jacobs erected ladder; thou shall see
Thou Had better clime a Ladder, than a Tree,
As Judas did: Be wise, and do not fan
Thy Soul with air; remember what a span
Thou art; remember whose inspired breath
Made thee a Soul; forget not whose sad death
Made thee alive; be mindful that thou art
The Epitomy of Heaven; inure thy heart
To love the best of loves, so shall thy breast
Be filled with comfort, and thy Soul with rest:
Prepare and know, the very fowls delight
To prune their wings before they take their flight.
Although terrestial Kings will not permit
A Traitor to his Courts, nor let him sit
Before his presence, though they will not hear
A Malefactors prayers; yet Heavens blessed ear
Is always open, and his tongue invites
Repentant sinners, for his eye delights
To view them in his Courts when they appear;
For muddy waters, may at last prove clear;
It Is not unlike; ill scented dunghils may,
At last bear flowers; that which is foul to day,
To morrow may prove fair; the thing that cost
Millions of silver, may as well be lost,
As things of smaller value; Heaven can spy
A mi^e, as well as mountains; for his eye
Is lodged in every cranny of man's heart,
And he knows all, that searches every part.
Where breathes that Mortal that can comprehend
The ways and thoughts of God, who knows the end
Of his beginning? --
He that can break a rocky heart in twain,
And reunite it (if he please) again;
He that can part the boiling waves, and stand
Upon the Seas, as on the dryest Land;
He whose celestial power can make the graves
To open, and command their slumbering slaves
To rise; nay more, to stand; nay more, to walk;
Nay more (if more than this may be) to talk:
He that can make a Whale to entertain
A Jonah, and to spue him out again;
He whose almighty power can unlock
The flinty bowels, of a scragged Rock,
And make her headlong-gushing streams abound
To wash the bosom of the thirsty ground;
He that can transmutate by power divine
The poorest water into richest wine;
He that can curb rude Boreas, and assuage
The lawless passion of the Oceans rage;
He that can rain down Manna to supply.
The craving stomachs of mortality;
He that can, like an all-commanding God,
Make Almonds flourish from a sapless rod;
He that can make the Sun and Moon stand still,
Or run according to his sacred Will;
He that saved a Daniel from the paws
Of Lions, and can muzzle up their jaws;
He that can make the greedy Raven carry
Food to his Servants like a Commissary;
He that can, with an unresisted hand,
Dash fire into Ice, and counter-mand
The wanton flames, and charm them, that they dare
But burn his Servants cords, and not their hair;
He that can cause ten thousand to be fed
With two small fishes, and five loaves of bread;
He that can cloth himself with fire, and name
Himself, I AM, and make a bush to flame
Without consuming; He that can convert
A Rod into a Serpent, and not hurt;
He that can make his visage shine so bright,
That not a Moses can behold the light;
He that can strike a hand with leprosy,
And cure it in the twinkling of an eye;
He that can in a moment cut and break
Tongue-tying cords, and make the dumb to speak;
He that can out of unregarded stones
Raise unto Abraham many little ones;
He that can heal the Cripple with a touch,
And free him from the thraldom of his Crouch;
He that can cure the deaf, and can expel
A thousand Devils in despite of Hell;
He that can perfect what he first begun,
Expects that man should say, Thy Will be done.
Consider man, and thou shall find it true,
Heaven can do all, but what he will not do:
Think not because thou art of low estate,
That he will scorn to love, and love to hate:
Remember Dives, whose unsumm'd up store
Improved so much, until he proved as poor
As ever Job was: Job! unhappy I
To speak it, he was rich in poverty;
Heaven made poor Job so rich, that Satan's wealth
Could purchase nothing from him, but his health,
And that corporeal too; he could not boast
His bargain, for 'twas Job that purchased most.
" Happy is he that can at last inherit
" Riches obtained by an impov'rish'd spirit:
" We'd better lick with Lazarus the crumbs,
" Than gripe with Dives for Soul-damning sums.
Wealth cannot bribe the flames, yet scraps may feed
The hungry wretch; he that has wealth* may need
The Crumbs of comfort: David did condole
The abundant famine of his hungry Soul:
Gods Love's not mercenary, to be sold
For brain-distracting, heart-confounding gold.
Have thou not heard ( O Man) the heavenly cry
Of him that says, Ye that are poor, come buy,
Come buy of me; your pen'worth shall be such,
That for a little you shall purchase much.
Here Is Love that is spun unto the smallest thread,
Though thou want money, yet thou may have bread
Do thou but ask, thou shall not fail to have
For God's more free to give, than thou to crave:
Fear not to ask of him, whose ready ear,
Before thy tongue can ask, is apt to hear.
Heaven loves the language of a broken heart,
And he will harken, and with joy impart
His love into thee, and his milk and wine,
Without the price of money shall be thine.
The ingrated Prisoner, whose dull tongue is whet
With sharp'ned hunger, will not fear, to let
His language fly to every ear that comes
Within his audience; and he always sums
The totals of his grief in hungry words,
Whilst thousands pass along, but few affords
The blessing of an Alms; perhaps they will grieve,
And seem to pity, but will not relieve:
Yet will he not desist, but hourly cry,
Bread, bread, for Heavens sake bread, or else I die.
Hard hearted Man, why will thou not relent
To hear thy Brother, almost hunger-spent,
Craving thy succor? Where Is thy love become?
Because thou art deaf, ah! wu'dst thou have him dumb
Or do thou think, because thy panch is filled,
He cannot hunger? He that first distilled
Those mercies on thy head, expects that thou
Should feed thy Brother with a cheerful brow;
Say not thou can not give, thy treasure's light:
But let thy heart record the widows mite,
So Heaven will fill thy Cisterns to the brim,
And feed thy Soul, because thou have sed him.
Should the Grandfather of true Charity
Pass by the gates, and hear thee beg and cry,
And not relieve thee; should he slight thy prayers
And scorn to take a survey of thy tears;
Would thou not grieve, and pine thy self to dust
And almost say thy God was much unjust
To turn away his ears from thy complaint,
And disrespect thy prayers, and let thee faint
For want of food? Ah, whither would thou fly
To feed thy famished Soul, should Heaven deny?
But ah he cannot, for his melting Soul
Is always free, and willing to condole
The sad conditions of distressed Man,
Who only strives to do, but what he can
To contradict him; yet he will hear our grief:
In multitudes of mercies lies relief.
When our impris'ned Souls peep throw the grates
Of this corrupting Earth, our God dilates
Himself unto us, and he sends us meat
From the rich storehouse of his lofty seat;
He hears; and hearing pities; pitying, sends;
And sending, blesses; and with blessing ends.
Even as the Sun, which every day surrounds
The sublime Globe, and pries into the bounds
Of this dark Center; let his Beams reflect
Upon a Molehil with as much respect
As on a Mountain; for his glorious Beams
Shine always with equivalent extremes,
Even so the great and powerful Three in One,
That sits upon his all-inlight'ning Throne,
Does not deny to let his mercy crown
The poorest Peasant with as much renown
As the most stateliest Emperor; though he
Invests his body with more dignity,
Yet he is but earth, and must at last decay,
For Prince and Peasant go the self same way;
Their earth must turn to earth, their Souls return
To him that gave them, or for ever burn;
There Is no distinction, one infused breath
Made them alike, and both must live in death
Or everlasting life; both must commence
Divines in Heaven; there is no pre-eminence,
But all equality, all must express,
With equal Joy, their equal Happiness.
Rouse up dull man, and let thy wak'ned Soul
Be vigilant; oh let thy thoughts enroul
The love of God, engrave it in thy breast,
That his resounding tongue may read thee blessed.
O let thy sighs, like Pens, and let thy tears
Like Ink, transcribe the Love, the indulgent cares
Of thy Creator, that himself may find
(Within the unblotted volume of thy mind)
Himself recorded, so will he embrace
Thy spotless Soul, and fill thee with his grace.
Incline thine ears, and let the heart rejoice
To hear the strains of his harmonious voice:
Harken, and thou shall hear his Prophets sing
The admired Mercies of the glorious King.
Thus says the great, and ever-living One, Isa.

That rules the heavens, and governs earth alone, 43.
Lord, that takes delight to dwell
Amongst his Saints, that formed Israel,
Created Jacob, let thy sorrows flee
Out of thy breast, I have redeemed thee:
'Twas I that made thy clouded visage shine,
And called thee by my Name, for thou art mine.

Through the waters; I will be thy aid;
I Will make thee walk through Rivers, and the waves
Shall prove ambitious to become thy slaves:
And when thou walk through the raging fire,
The unruly flames shall not presume to aspire

The Lord thy God, and Isreal's holy One,
And thy dear Savior, that was always true,
Gave Aegppt, Seba, and Ethiopia too,
To ransom thee; for thou were my delight,

Honors were heapt upon thee, and thou were
The tender love of my affecting heart;
Therefore even I, that am well pleased, will give
People for thy dear sake, that thou may live.

In thy defense, and my all-grasping hand
Shall bring thy seed from the remotest places,
And fill thee with my satisfying graces.
6. My tongue shall call unto the North, and say
Unto the South, Give, and they shall obey;
Bring from a far my Sons and Daughters all,
Hear my loud voice, be active when I call.
7 I have created them, and I proclaim
They shall be called and honored by my Name.
I Will usher forth the blind, and make them see
The splendent Glories of my Majesty:
I le cure the deaf, and make their hearts rejoice
To hear the Echoes of my warbling voice.
Thus has our God untied the tongues, and broke
His Prophets lips; thus have his Prophets spoke:
And will thou be (O man) so much obdure,
As not to credit him that will assure
Perpetual happiness? Thou can not ask
That which he cannot give; do but unmask
Thy shamefaced Soul, that so thou may discry
Jehovahs mercies with a faithful eye:
Descant upon his promises, advise
With thy own thoughts, let reason make thee wise;
Inspect thy self, weigh well thy own condition,
And thou shall find thou want a good Physician
To cure thy maculated Soul: Alas!
Thou art like water stopped up in a glass,
So weakly fortified, and fenced about,
That one weak knock soon lets the Prisoner out.
Vain lump of vanity, what can this Earth
Afford thy thoughts more than a short-lived mirth?
A mirth that fills thee with deluding toys,
And like a Tyrant afterward destroys.
Dot'st thou on Earth? For what? because her pleasure
Can guild thy wanton eye? because her treasure
Can cram thy bags? because her Sirens song
Can ravish thee? because her power can throng
Thy Soul with luxury? because her charms
Can court thee with delight? because her arms
Can pleasingly embrace thee, and impost
Thy heart with gold, and lull thee, when thou have lost
Thy self in sleep? Is this the little All
That this great World can boast of? Must we call
These things our pleasures? No, they will prove our
Our golden Fetters, and our silken Snares:
These are the Joys we love, these are the things cares
That make us fly with our Icarian wings
Up to Ambitions Court, and there presume
To gaze so long, until our waxen plume
Dissolve with heat, and like presumptuous slaves
Tumble our selves into the raging waves
Of speedy Ruin; Ruine's all that we
Must hope to obtain from Earths base treasury.
Let Us scorn her wealth, and say, O Earth, thou art
A painted Mistress with a rotten heart:
Let Us hate to love, that we may love to hate
Th'unconstant glory of her fickle state.
Even as the subtle Crocodile prepares
Her flattering heart, and eye-commanding, tears
To woo her Prey to come within the power
Of her command, that so she may devour
With more facility, and make her jaws
To execute by her tyrannike Laws:
Even so this World, those Crocodile-like eyes
Are always flowing, wanting no supplies
Of gliding tears to wash the rugged faces
Of her designs with falsifying graces,
That so she may by her too smooth delusion
Make Man the Author of his own confusion.
Frail flesh and blood, how can thou take delight
To love this World, that cannot give a mite
Of comfort to thee but will still entrap,
And daily lull thee in her lustful lap.
She Will rock thy Soul to ruin, and she will spawn
Baseness into thee; she will deceive, and fawn
Upon the heart, and with her gilded baits
She Will hook thy Soul unto the worst of fates:
There Is nothing in her that deserves the name
Of Constancy; her glory is her shame.
Smile at her tears, for every drop she vents
Harbors ten thousand thousand discontents:
Believe her not; but when she speaks the best,
Believe the worst; and if she promise rest,
Assure thy self of trouble; if she chance
To promise Treasure, let thy thoughts advance
Above her promises, contemn her dross,
For what thou gain'st from her will be thy loss:
Let not her wealthy Donatives persuade
Thy heart to accept; when once thou art betrayed
There Is no resistance: They that well advise
Before they act, deserve the name of wise:
But they that study in her frantic Schools
May prove her wise men; but Heavens outcast fools
Ask her the way to Bliss: try if her skill
Can give directions, ask her if she will
Fill thee with blessed Eternity, conjure
Her helpless aid, see if she can assure
A safety to thee, ask her if she can
Prescribe a cure for a despairing Man;
Tell her thy Soul is sick, thou can not live
A minure longer; see if she can give
A Cordial to thee, see if she can heal
A broken heart; see if she can reveal
Celestial Joys unto thee, and impart
A heavenly comfort to thy grieved heart:
If so, cheer up, and prosecute thy mirth,
And say there is no other Heaven but Earth,
Do thus (fond Man) and thou shall quickly see
A baffled World that cannot answer thee,
But must be silent, for she cannot plead
For her own self; she knows she cannot lead
The way to Heaven, she is but a bad Director,
A base Believer, and a worse Protector.
Thus shall thou make her envy swell and burst,
And, like the Basilisk, discovered first,
She needs must dye; but if she should discover
Thee first, farewell, thou art murdered by thy Lover:
Then shall thou hear the Soul-amazing tone
Of him that sits on his immortal Throne,
Pronounce against thee at the dreadful day
Of thy accounts; thus shall thou hear him say:
Depart, ye cursed offsprings of a Father
As cursed as you, avoid my sight, go gather
The fruits of your deserts; you have forgot
The God that made you, and I know ye not:
See if the World, within whose folding arms
You always slept, can quit thee from the harms
That must ensue; see if her flattering power
Can shelter thee, from the ore-flowing shower
Of my fast-dropping rage; see if her breast
Can entertain thee with eternal rest.
Be gone, be gone, my fury hates to see
Such Miscreants; had you remembered me,
I now had known you; had you made me eat
When I was forced to importune for meat,
I now would bless you with celestial diet,
And crown your Souls with everlasting quiet:
Had you but quenched my raging thirst, or gave
A single drop, that very drop should save
Your death-adjudged Souls, and you should sup
Abundant comforts from my streaming Cup:
Had you (sad sons of vengeance) but supplied
My nakedness with Garments, when I cried
And called upon your charity to send
Relief unto me, I had been your friend;
Or had your (more than marble) hearts relieved
M'impris ned body, now ye had not grieved:
Had you, your world-affined Souls addressed
Your selves unto me when I was oppressed
With lingrging sickness, then I would have fed
Your Souls (which now are starved) with heavenly bread;
But since you have not done it unto those
Which I esteemed, you have proved your selves my foes
Therefore be gone, let darkness be your lot,
Learn to remember that ye have forgot
My mercies; go, and let my judgments dwell
Within your guilty hearts; let black-mouthed Hell
Plague you with torments, let him always lash
Your hearts with flames, until ye howl, and gnash
Your teeth together; Go, depart my sight,
And taste the fruit of everlasting night.
But as for you whose better deeds have found
Acceptance in my heart, ye shall be crowned
With unremoved happiness, because
Ye have obsequiously performed my Laws;
You fed my craving stomach, and you clothed
My naked body, and you have not loathed
To visit me; and when I was a stranger,
Ye took me in, and guarded me from danger:
Go then my Lambs, and let your Oratory
Proclaim the greatness of your Fathers glory:
Go revel in my Courts; no discontent
Shall breed a faction in my Parliament:
I Will pass an Act of Peace, and it shall be
Signed by the hand of my Eternity.
My tongue shall style you blessed, and my voice
Shall raise your Souls, and teach you to rejoice:
Your unexcised pleasures shall abound
To infinite; your ravished hearts shall sound
The depth of my delights; all things shall move
Within the sphere of uncontrouled Love:
Be well assured, your pleasures shall be great;
Then fly from Judgment to my Mercy-seat,
And there rejoice with a tryumphant mirth;
My Love shall live with them that hated Earth.
Obdurate Man, here, here thou may descry
Judgment and Mercy, one to terrify,
The other to persuade; and yet will thou
Prove adamantine, and refuse to bow
To thy Redeemer? Can thou ruminate
Upon his Love, and yet wilt not dilate
Thy Soul unto him? Is thy brazen heart
Impenetrable? Will no flaming dart
Of true affection enter? Have thou vowed
To stop thy ears? Shall mercy call aloud,
And thou not hear? Shall thundering Judgments rattle
About thy ears, and yet will thou imbattle
Against the Lord of Hosts? will thou invoke
Perpetual vengeance to entail a stroke
Upon thy stubborn heart? What, do thou think
Hell's void of flames, or that thy God will wink
At thine enormities? Go, rally all
Thy thoughts together, and discreetly sall
Into a serious study. --
-- Let thy mind
Be absolute, and really inclined
To meditation; contradict the rage
Of thine own passion: labor to assuage
The fire of lust, that so thou may behold
With more serenity, how manifold
His mercies are, that every day prevents
The sad incursions of depraved events.
Think but in what a most defamed condition
The Soul was in, before the grand Physician
Of Heaven and Earth spontaniously set down
A balm from his own Gilead to crown
The sons of grief: think what we did endure,
Before his wounds had perfected thy cure.
Remember how undauntedly he stood,
And sweat himself into a crimson flood
To ransom thee; remember how his woes
Were asperared by his raging foes;
Remember how his sacred temples wore
A spiny Crown, remember how it tore
His sublime Front; remember how they broached
His breast with Spears, and shamefully reproached
His spotless fame; remember how they nailed
His spreading hands, remember how they scaled
His Ivory Walls, remember how they spawl'd
Upon his face, remember how they bawled
And banded at his Agony, whilst he
Proved patient Martyr to their tyranny;
Remember when he came unto the brink
Of death, they gave him vinegar to drink:
Nay more (because they vowed to empty all
Their poys'ned malice out) they gave him Gall.
Oh bitter deed! Oh most abhorred Crimes!
(Too nearly paralleled in these our times.)
Thus having put a period to their plots,
They thought it good to cast their hellish lots
For his (I dare not say mean) clothes; I know
They were our Saviors, to whose worth we owe
Perpetual thanks; 'twas his well finished breath
Redeemed our Souls from everlasting death.
Here Is Love (O man) that does as far transcend
Thy thoughts as thy deserts, that heaven should send
His Son and Heir to be incarnated,
And suffer death for thee, that were as dead
As sin could make thee; 'twas for thy offense
He died; Ah, how, how can thou recompense
Such high-bred Favors! Favors unexpected
Deserve to be embraced, and not neglected.
Do not (rash Soul) like Cleopatra nurse
Imbosom'd Vipers; blessings prove a curse,
If once abused; Ingratitude cuts off
Th'intail of Love; it is a shame to scoff
At Benefactors; after thou art fed,
Will thou contemn the hand that gave thee bread?
Would thou not love that friend that should bestow
A super anuated crust, and show
Respect unto thee, when the ebbing tide
Of Fortune runs so low, that thou may ride
Upon the sands of Poverty? Fond Man,
Strive to be grateful, study how to scan
The mercies of thy God; remember how
He feeds thy Soul with Manna; learn to bow
The unruly thoughts; (with admiration) think
How often, and how much embittered drink
Thy Savior drank; with what a doleful cry
He begged of God to let that cup pass by;
But knowing that his pleasure must be done,
He proved himself his most obedient Son.
And will thou not (copy wretch) drink one poor sup
Of bitter drink for him, that drank a cup
To sweeten thine? thou need'st not fear nor scorn
To taste, because Heavens sacred Unicorn
Has purged the wa'ers, and they must be sweet
Except they 're reimpoys'ned by thy feet:
If so, what will thou do? where will thou find
An Antidote for an envenomed mind?
It is reported, if the Spider chance
To meet the obvious Toad, they will both advance
Their inward force, and mutually proclaim
An open War; brave Combatants of fame!
And having fummon'd their imbowel'd might,
March boldly on, and both incensed, they fight:
The Toad being heavy loaded, cannot go,
Or wheel about, like his encountering foe,
But keeps his ground, and makes a small resistance:
The Spider scorning to be kept at distance,
Falls in upon him, and with nimble rage
Assaults his foe, who now begins to assuage
His former fury, and would fain retreat
From his small Foe, whose strength is grown too great
For opposition; being thus distressed
He crawls away, and with a crop-sick breast
Seeks for relief, and by and by discries
A Plantain leaf, within whose veins there lies
A secret Antidote, which did at length
Expel his poison, and renew his strength:
Having disgorg'd himself, he soon returns
Into the Camp, where for a time he burns
To be in action, and at last he sees
The crafty Spider creeping by degrees
To seize upon him, then his courage fails,
He knows not what to do, his foe assails
With all his might, constraining him to yield
The conquest, and with shame to quit the field:
Then he begins to seek, and hunt about,
To find the sovereign healing Plantain out,
Which had before relieved him, and supplied
His wants; but that being gone, he burst, and died
Even so, if Hells black Spider chance to crawl
From his infernal Web into the Hall
Of this all-dusty World, he soon prepares
Himself to sight, and suddenly declares,
That he, the grim-look'd General of Hell,
Dares to encounter any Souls that dwell
Within the limits of the spacious Earth,
And in a moment qualify their mirth;
Thus Satan boasts, and if he chance to meet
A single Soul, he will thus begin to greet.
A DIALOGUE Between the Soul and Satan.
Sat. SOul, thou art well met. Soul. It Is true, for I am well.

Sat. Say, whither art thou going? Soul. Not to Hell.

Sa. Pish, talk no more of that, but tell me whither
Thou go, st.; come, prithee let us go both together.

Soul. A pretty motion; when I want a guide
I Will send for thee, till then thou art denied
To be my Usher.

Sat. Prithee tell me why
Thou art so obstinate, as to deny
So free a courtesy as I have shown;
Mischance often falls to them that walk alone;
Be not so much a verse as to neglect
This opportunity; I can protect
Thy feet from sliding; dangers still attend
Those that despise the favors of a friend.

Sou. A friend! how can thou prove that title?

Sat. How?
As thus; because I Am willing to allow
The best assistance of my ready arm
To guide, nay and protect thee from all harm;
Therefore a friend. So. What you pretend to show
Is but external; he that can bestow
Internal friendship on a Soul distressed
Is a true friend; no matter for the rest.
If Heaven will guide my Soul I shall not stray,
Or fear the evils of a dangerous way:
But as for you, I needs must borrow leave
To say, your friendship's only to deceive;
Con^^^ion paths your ways, and if I run
By your advise, Ineeds must be undone.
God bids me fly from sin if I refuse
Obedience to his will, I shall abuse
His just commands; then will my sorrows cry,
When Mercy stops, Judgment begins to fly.

Sat. Desist (fond Soul) and labor to divorce
Thy lips from this too fabulous discourse;
Guild not thy words with vanity, persuade
These thoughts (which are erroneous) to evade
Thy serious mind; advise and thou shall see
My ways are best, be principl'd by me;
Let not the swing of passion strike thee down,
But follow me, it is I must give a Crown
To thy deserts, it is I that can advance
Thy down-cast Soul above the reach of chance;
It Is I (mistaken Soul) it is I alone
That must conduct thee to the sublime throne
Of true Salvation; it is my hand must bring
Thy trembling Soul before th'all-judging King
Of Heaven and Earth; it is my power can fill
Thy heart with joy; believe me, and I will.
Trust not the babbling languages of those
That seem thy friends, but are thy greatest foes;
They Are great to thy destruction, they will connive stories
And fawn, nay almost bury thee alive;
They Will talk of Heaven and Hell, they will tell thee
Of endless, boundless, unconceived glories;
They Will tell thee of Eternity, and woo
Thy Soul out of thy ears, if thou 'lt bestow
Thy pains to hear them; they will infuse, and brew
Their own designs, and tell thee all is true
That they declare; they will tell thee that they are sent
As Messengers from Heavens high Parliament.
Believe me Soul, it is I that can display
The Gospels Colors better far than they;
There Is nothing in that Volume so abstruse,
But I can wind and twist it to my use:
And there is nothing in this world can be
Styled worth a Work, but can be done by me:
I can do all, it lies within my power
To make thee poor or rich in half an hour:
I can command whole Legions to attend
Upon my honor: Say, what nobler friend
Can thou embrace? I Will be a friend to all
That will give audience to my faithful call;
I Will make them swell with riches, they shall have
As much, nay if not more, than they can crave:
Am I not rare, and rich, and high, and great,
Incomprehensible? Is not my seat
The throne of happiness? Yet cannot I
Invite thee to my sweet eternity?
Come gentle Soul, into my twining arms,
I Will hug thee, I Will delight thee with my charms,
I Will show thee all my Joys, nothing shall lie
Hid from the view of thy all gazing eye:
Happy, beyond expression. Soul. Satan, slay
The Progress of thy tongue, and give me way,
That I may vent my thoughts, for you have spoke
At large already; and is this the stroke
Which you intend shall wound me? Be assured,
The blow's but small, and well may be endured.

Sat. What, moved to passion! Is thy mind disturbed
With foul mistrust? pray let those thoughts be curbed;
What, do thou think I am perfidious? Fie;
It Is folly to condemn before you try.
Alas, alas! what profit can accrue
To me by wronging such a Soul as you?
What I express is only for your good,
But what is more than grave advice withstood?
I doubt these weak, these empty thoughts presage
A tempest, guarded with a storm of rage:
Well then, storm on, and when thy storm is spent,
Sit down and meditate, and then repent.
Soul. Repent, Oh happy word! although expressed
By a foul mouth; those that repent are blessed.
How dare thy hellish lips usurp a word
Filled with divinity, but will afford
No rest, no comfort, to thy horrid Soul?
Be gone, be gone; and if thou can condole
Thy self, thou art (if Logic prove but true)
Cursed in the Major, and the Minor too.
Bless me, o heaven: what blustering stormy weather
Drove such a vile prodigious Monster hither?
Touchstone of baseness, do thou come to prove
Whether I Am gold, or dross? thou may remove
Thy forward hopes, because I hope to be
Metal at last for Heaven, and not for thee.
Be gone, fallacious wretch, I cannot brook
Thy golden baits, I have descried thy hook:
Father of Lies, thy policy is built
Upon the sands, and plastered over with guilt:
Thy tongue foretells a storm; if so, be sure
Thy sand-built policy shall not endure:
Flattery's the life of baseness, and that Art
Is well imprinted in thy subtle heart:
Do thou believe that I can entertain
Belief from thee? Or do thou think to reign
Within my breast? No, no; thy cloudy powers
Are at the best but falsifying showers:
Be satisfi*d, I cannot give the least
Of credit to thee, nor I dare not feast
My thoughts with such uncertainties; I know
Thy diet must and will corrupt to woe.
Thou bidst me not condemn, before I make
Some trial of thy trust; If I should take
Such green advice, I quickly should undo
My wretched self; and in condemning you
What profit could I have; or what relief
Could I epect to mitigate my grief,
My accusations would be blown as dust
Before the wind; I Will neither try, nor trust.

Sat. Nor try, nor trust? Art thou resolved to cross
My real motions? Do, and see whose loss
Will prove most weighty; if I lose the heat
Of thy weak love, my loss will not be great,
But if I should withdraw my love from thee,
How like a Map of well-drawn misery
Would thou appear? be wise, corect thy thoughts
Neglected favors prove the greatest faults.
Take my instructions, for it is I must bring
Content unto thee; it is a glorious thing
To be immortal: prithee Soul decline
Thy former ways; say shall I call thee mine?
Mine, mine thou art; I Will load thee with renown;
Let me but conquer, thou shall wear the Crown.
How pleasing are my joys! how full of peace
Are all my ways! my glories still increase:
I Am great and good, I take delight to win
Distressed Souls, and lead them from their sin;
I cannot choose but pity those that lie
Upon the beds of sensuality;
My melting Soul is always free to give
Comfort to them that study how to live.
Alas, the care and trouble that I take
Is more for their content, than my own sake:
My gates are always open, they that venture
To come to me shall (with a welcome) enter;
And when they call, and cry, I will appear
My self unto them, and rejoice to hear
Their sad complaints; I will not hide my face
From them that seek the glory of my grace:
I cannot be unconstant; I must grieve
To hear their sorrows, and I will relieve.
I will be pitiful to them that trust
In me alone, I cannot be unjust;
I cannot, no I cannot; Earth shall move
Sooner than I will falsify my love:
I am eternal; they that will endeavor
To gain my love, shall have my heart for ever.

Soul. It Is not your empty words shall make my breast
Stoop to the flattery of thy vain request;
Though I have ears to hear, I have a mind
That will not shake at the hard-breathing wind
Of your discourse; what you pretend for reason
Is nothing but the froth of private treason:
It Is not your multiloquious tongue can turn
The Biass of my Soul, or make me spurn
At Holy Writ; it is not your fond conceit
Of being good, shall make me to retreat
From Heavens Commands; it is not your promised joys
Can make me cheerful; or your painted toys
Can lure me to your fist; it is not the dart
Of your vain love can penetrate my heart;
It Is not your seeming clemency can make
My Soul to love you, for your Pities sake;
It Is not your always-open gates that shall
Entice my steps to your large Gilded Hall;
It Is not your self-appearance shall invite
My well-composed thoughts to your delight;
It Is not your greatness that shall make me yield
To your desires; Religion is my shield:
I Will neither fear nor love your rash evasions,
Nor give attendance to your smooth persuasions:
'Nis difficult to serve two Masters well;
Who strays from Heaven, must needs approach to Hell.
I am advised to shun the broad-path'd ways
That lead to ruin; what the Scripture says
I must believe; it is dangerous to fly
Without the wings of true Divinity:
The Scriptures are my way, my light, my guide,
And they that go without them needs must slide:
The paths are strait in which I ought to run
The course of grace, until my days are done;
And they that change a Virtue for a Vice,
Deserve no fruit from Heavens blessed Paradise.

Sat. Surcease those fond conceits, thou do but spin
Thine own destruction, and connive at sin:
Urge not the Scriptures, for I dare maintain
My paths are best, and other ways are vain:
Thy Scripture- conscience will at last confound
The amazed thoughts, and give thy Soul a wound
That hates a cure, then shall thou prove unblest,
Whilst others find the plainest Road's the best.
Suppose thou were (I speak it for thy sake)
Moved by occasions, forced to undertake
A long-way'd journey, would thou not enquire
The readiest way, but run into the mire?
If thou should act a crime so foully bad,
Folly would style thee fool, and Wisdom mad.
Stray not into the Wilderness of grief,
But come to me, take courage and be brief
In thy designs; persuade thy self, that I
Am both thy light, thy way, and best supply
In time of need; I am thy prop, thy stay;
Therefore resolve, and trifle not away
Thy thriftless Soul; be not thy self destroyer;
I Will be thy Love, and thou my Loves enjoyer:
Know that my real breast contrives no end,
But what may merit so divine a friend
As thine own self: folly and wisdom lies
Before thy face; be either fool, or wise:
Protract no time, but make a speedy choice,
Thy welfare shall instruct me to rejoice;
Observe my actions, pry it to my parts,
Let Us know each other by exchange of hearts;
I Will give thee mine, and for my love restore
Thine unto me; grant this, I Will ask no more.
Be free to give, as I am free to crave;
Thou Had better live my friend, than die my slave:
For if thou shall deny what I desire,
I Will make my bellows to advance the fire
Of thy distress, and sorrows shall corrode
Thy stubborn heart, and care shall make abode
Within thy breast; perpetuated grief
Shall find a voice, but ramble from relief.
I Will gripe thee, till I make thee understand
The fiery language of my furious hand:
Sighings, and groanings, sobs, and rears, and cries
Shall be thy sad Concomitants; thine eyes
Shall stare upon (well may I call them new
And horrid) Lights, such Lights as shall renew
Thy growing torments; every thing shall be
Thy fellow-slaves in servile misery:
I Will yoke thee with distress, nay, and I Will chain
Thy struggling Soul with everlasting pain;
I Will crow'd thee full of sorrows, and I Will double
Thy unconceived, uncontrouled trouble,
Whilst I, triumphing I, will sit aloft,
And be adored, and scoff to see thee scoft:
Pity shall be a stranger to my breast;
My care shall be to make thy Soul unblest;
The tides of woe shall overflow thy thoughts,
And be equivalent unto thy faults;
Be sure, that what extremity can be
Thought worth the using, shall be used on thee:
Now I have spoke, if thou will not repent,
I Will cease to speak, and study to torment.

Sou. How full of poyson's every word that flows
Out of thy mouth? what trust can I repose
In such a flatterrer? I dare not try,
Or throw my self upon thy courtesy:
I know thou can not answer my request;
There is no truth in a self-praising breast.
If I should dive into the deep abyss
Of thy black thoughts, what glory, or what bliss
Should I discern? Or if I should deliver
My heart to thee, thou would disrespect the giver;
Though at the first perhaps thou would express
A seeming-unbeseeming thankfulness,
Yet at the last I know thou would decline
Thy promised ways, and style me to be thine.
Fair words find eafie passage, they proceed
But from the tongue, the event still crowns the deed
Three things denote a friend; first to conceal
A secret speech; the next is to reveal
A private good; the ^ast, is to advise
The safest way to obtain an enterprise
And he that can do this, as you pretend,
Deserves the title of a real friend:
But my Religion tutors me to say,
(Nay and affirm,) You neither can, nor may;
I Am sure it is (if reason dare prove true)
One thing to speak, another thing to do.
Your words are ayry messengers, which fly
Into my ears, and there enroul a Lie;
Many untruths have broken the common Goal
Of thy foul mouth; thou say thon can prevail
To make me glorious, and thou can increase
My joys, and crown me with eternal peace:
Thou say thou art good and great, and that thy paths
Lead to Salvation; thou declar'st thy Laws
To be most just; if all these things be true,
I needs must call the Scriptures false, or you;
Truth bids me tell thee boldly, when thou cry'st
Thou Art great, and good, and rich, and rare, thou list:
If thou art good, and great, pray tell me why
Thou will behold so vile a wretch as I?
These things bespeak thee humble, unto which
Thou plead'st not guilty; and if thou art rich,
How can it be, that thou will condescend
To feed my wants, that am so poor a friend?
Strange is that charity, which seems to shine
From such a diabolick breast as thine.
If my belief could keep an equal pace
With my swift tongue, how full of Faith and Grace
Should I appear? Such Faith as would devast
My wanton Soul, and make me weep as fast
It is impossible to find a Sion
That has no Governor, except a Lion.

The Souls Petition to God.
Oh Heaven, I crave that thou would keep me still
From this most vile Progenitor of Ill:
Suffer him not t'infold me in his arms,
Or overcome me with his wanton charms;
Oh make my heart obdure that he may knock
Upon my Soul, as on a marble Rock;
Be thou my Fort, and then I shall endure
His furious On sets, and repose secure;
Give me thy Grace, that I may be content;
Make me as strong, as he is impudent.
Now let the spring-tyde of thy fierce desires
Flow to the height, thou shall not quench my fires
Know Satan, know, my heart reserves no place
For thy abode, I scorn thee to thy face;
The well-dy'd colors of my Soul declares
Defiance to thee, and my breast prepares
To give thee battle; strike, I rear thee not;
Who Is armed with Faith, needs fear no Cannon sho
Sat. What impious tongue is that which dares defy
My power with so much boldness?

So. Wretch, it is I;
It Is I (infernal Traitor) that will spend
My strength to prove thou art flattering feind.

Sat. Move me to anger, do, and thou shall find
A courteous friend at last may prove unkind:
Have I not wooed thee almost night and day
To go to Heaven?

Sou. The quite contrary way.

Sat. Have I not labored like a watchful father
To nourish thee?

Sou. Or like a Devil rather.

Sat. Have I not always taken great delight?

Sou. To take away good gold, and give me light.

Sat. How much nocturnal and diurnal care
Have I sustained for thee?

Sou. True, t'insnare.

Sat. Have I not been assiduous to await
Upon thy pleasure?

Sou. and corrupt my state.

Sat. Have I not proffered all that can be given
To a sick Soul?

Sou. To drive my Soul from Heaven

San. Did I not promise to be true and just?

Sou. Did I not say, I Would neither try nor trust?

Sat. Did I not promise that I Would make thee wise?

Sou. Did I not say thou were composed of lies?

Sat. Did I not promise to increase thy store?

So. Did I not say such wealth would make me poor

Sat. Did I not promise to advance thy fame?

Sou. Did I not say thy honors were thy shame?

Sat. Did I not promise to uphold thy peace?

Sou. Did I not say such wars would never cease?

Sat. Did I not promise thee a Crown of life?

Sou. Did I not say that Crown would Crown my

Sat. Did I not promise thee eternal glory? (strife?

Sou. Did I not say that promise was a story?

Sat. Did I not promise I would give thee all?

Sou. Did I not say such promises were small?

Sat Did I not tell thee I was great and good?

Sou. Did I not answer 'twas in shedding blood?

Sat. Did I not tell thee that my ways were best?

Sou. Did I not answer that they were unblest?

Sat. Did I not tell thee that thou should have joy?

Sou. Did I not answer such as would destroy?

Sat. Did I not tell thee that I did lament?

Sou. Did I not answer that I was content?

Sat. Did I not tell thee what a friend I Would prove?

Sou. Did I not answer that I could not love?

Sat. Thus by fair terms I labored to obtain,

Sou. Thus in foul terms I told thee 'twas in vain.

Sat. Then I began to threaten thee with grief,

Sou. And then I fled to Heaven, and found relief.

Sat. I threatened to afflict thee with large pains,

Sou. I told thee such afflictions were my gains.

Sat. I told thee more than now I will express,

Sou. My answers made thee wish I had spoke less.

Sat. But now I see my real words can find
No rest within the Center of thy mind;
For it is in vain to sow the seeds of life
In a dead heart that is manured with strife:
I Will therefore cease my importuning love,
I Will show my Serpent, and keep close my Dove.
Do, do thy worst, vile wretch, I Will make thee know
Griefs abstract, and the quintessence of woe;
I Will load thee with extremities, thy breast
Shall always crave, but find no place of rest:
Had but my grave advice received a place
Within thy heart, thou had been filled with grace;
But now the inundations of thy trouble
Shall overflow thee, and I will redouble
My new-contrived plagues; I Will make thee feel
My melting heart is now transformed to steel:
Thy tongue shall (like a bolt of thunder) roll
And roar within thy mouth; thy sulphurous Soul
Shall flash forth lightning, and thy blood-red eyes
Shall blaze like Comets in the troubled Skies:
Thy teeth shall gnash, as if they scorned to be
Concomitants in so much misery;
Oh how I Will carbonado every part,
And fill thy body with increasing smart;
Thy Soul shall lure for death, but that shall hate
To pierch upon thee, and contemn thy state:
Life shall be still incroaching, but thy breath
Shall scorn that life, and hate it unto death;
Thy flesh shall drop forth brimston, and thy bones
Shall court each other in their crackling tones;
Horror shall be thy watchman, curses shall
Possess thy rongue, one torment still shall call
Upon another; when thy voice shall cry
But for a drop; Confusion shall reply,
No, no, thou shall not, if a golden Mine
Could buy a drop, that drop should not be thine:
Then shall thou say, if thou had been at first
Advised by me, thou had not been accursed:
Thus in this sad Dilemma shall thou roar,
And crave my succor, but I Will not deplore
Thy woeful state, because thou were averse
To goodness, after folly comes a curse:
Then shall thou know and find I will exile
All thoughts of pity, and I Will rather smile
Than grieve at thy distress; ah know it is bard
To force an entrance where the gates are barred:
Fond Soul, be serious, let thy thoughts reflect
On my indulgency, and give respect
Unto my clemency; believe I will
Be good to thee, do but forsake thy ill;
Forsake, forsake that evil which will turn
To thy destruction; do not, do not burn
The precious fuel of thy chaste desires
In idle, wanton, all-consuming fires,
The post of time is swift, and knows no stay;
It Is time to go when Reason calls away:
Protraction's dangerous; it is not good
To strive with that which scorns to be withstood.
Then do not thou procrastinate, but take
This opportunity, do but forsake
Thy former ways, and readily incline
Thy self to me, and I will make thee shine
With so much luster, that all eyes shall gaze
Upon thy brightness, and admire with praise:
Oh may my language reach thee too believe,
That so my torments may not make thee grieve
In utter darkness, that thou may embrace
Those glories, which adorn my peaceful place:
Repent, (dear Soul) repent what thou have done,
Then call me Father, and I Will love my son:
Thus having told thee all, I Will here desist;
Be thou more apt to yield than to resist.

Sou. I find, I find you first in flict a wound,
And then with balsome strive to make it sound:
You make me smile at first, but after groan;
One hand incloses bread, the other stone;
I fain would take the bread, but that I stand
In fear and danger of the stony hand:
Therefore, to shun all danger, I Will despise
Your fond advice, and practice to be wise:
If all should prove, that you have told me, true,
I know the best and worst that thou can do;
As for your threatenings, they shall not disturb
My peaceful thoughts, my faith shall be their curb:
Urge me no mote, but let me rest in quiet,
Strong is that stomach can digest thy diet.

Sat. And is it so? will no persuasions work
Upon thy thoughts? Those pregnant crimes that lurk
Within thy breast, will, like to Scorpions, gnaw
Thy groaning heart; such sorrow knows no Law;
But since thou will not be advised, expect
To find reward, as I have found neglect.
Ah, why fond wretch, why do thou thus provide
Thy feeble self to strive against the tide?
Alas, alas! why art thou lulled asleep
In follies Lap? Rouse up for shame, and weep
For thine infirmities; be not thus cross
To him that would preserve thee from a Loss:
It Is time to cast away the works of night,
And cloth thee with the shining robes of light.

Sou. If your strong Oratory had the skill
To make me yield to your unsatiate will,
It were enough; what more could you desire,
Than a bad period to your bad desire?
But stay (bold friend) I Will meditate and see
What fruit will spring from thine infernal tree.
Sat. What, must I stay (vile wretch) till you dispute
And prove the goodness of my pleasing fruit?
Must I be always waiting on the train
Of your desires, and spend my time in vain?
No, no, I will not: for it is unfit
I should attend, if you will not submit;
The incensed fury of my spirits burn
To be in action, I will not adjourn
A minute longer; go, and hug thy vice,
Thou love the bargain, but abhor'st the price:
Urge me no more, away, I have forgot
All thoughts of friendship, and I know thee not:
And here I leave thee to the Lawless power
Of thine own passion; Cursed be that hour
That brought thee forth; if all this will not do,
May all men curse thee, and I Will curse thee too.

Sou. And can the spring of thy affections find
So soon an Autumn? Can thou be unkind
With so much ease? and can your real breast
(As you so called) be so soon dispossessed
Of Love and Patience? Oh how bad and strange
Is the effect of such a sudden change!
It Is disputable, for I know not whether
Anger, or' policy, or both together,
Wharst thee to these extremes: well then pursue
Thine own desires, and I will bid adieu
To all thy follies; yet my heart begun
TO expand it self before the glim'ring Sun
Of thy persuasions; if thy sharp'ned rage
Had not so soon exploded me the stage,
I fear, I fear, I had before this hour
Been prostituted to thy tameless power:
Be gone, be gone; but stay, hark Satan, hark,
Go boast you shot, but fairly missed the mark.

Sat. Why do thou bid me go? I m sure you speak
(As I have done) in jest, thou will not break
The bonds of friendship; though thou have expressed
Thy self in anger, yet thou ar^ in jest:
Those good conceits that live in the inner places
Of my close heart, tells me thou art filled with graces:
But there is none that can proclaim and cry
They Are free from rage, no not so much as I:
When I am angry, then my heart is pleased,
Because I Am satisfied; my mind is eased
Of a most pressing load, which seems to tire
And waste me with a brest-consuming fire.
" A wise man's ear must always entertain
" Things spoke in passion to be void and vain:
" The tongue's a restless member, and oft-times
" Out-runs the wit, and then it flies and climbs
Above all sense: " When Reason finds divorce,
" The tongue proves subject to a headlong course.
What I have spoke observe, and thou shall find
Proceeded from my passion, not my mind:
The misconstruction of a word may make
The dearest friends to vary, and forsake
The plains of friendship, though their hearts are free
From the cursed evils of inconstancy:
Therefore mistake me not, nor do not thou
Construe my words with an incensed brow;
Smile on me then, and cheerfully impart
The loving childings of a friendly heart;
Then shall thou see with what a willing arm
I will conduct and guide thee from all harm;
Believe me Soul, I am not come to scatter
Uncertain stories, but a real matter;
What I hold forth unto thee, is the stem
Of a pure heart, thou art the only Jem
Shall grow upon it; come, and let us combine,
I shall rejoice to see thee prove divine.

Sou. The Biass of thy Love runs now so strong,
That I much fear 'twill not continue long;
I find, I find thou have the art to sail
With any wind; thou labour'st to prevail,
But it is in vain, for know, I trust thee not,
My zealous heart is fearful of a plot;
I cannot be so foolish as to trust
Without assurance that thou will be just:
Will thou be true? Speak with a real breath.

Sat. I will be just (believe me) unto death;
I will, I will; oh may I never be
True to my self, it I am false to thee.

Sou. If thou art just and constant, tell me where
Thy seat is placed, and who is Prince of the air;
Be true in this, and thou shall find that I,
According to thy answer, will reply.

Sat. I Will tell thee then (because I Will now fulfill
The vast desires of thy enquiring will)
Where my refulgent Seat is placed; prepare
Thy ears to hear, I Will speedily declare.
The large extent of my unbounded grace
Cannot be comprehended in one place,
Because I am immortal, unconfined
To time or place; I live in every mind
That Is truly real, and not disagreeing
To my known Laws; I have no local Being:
The World's a spacious Body, I the Soul
Which lives in every part complete and whole:
Thus this dispute is easily decided,
For what is immortal cannot be divided.
Nay more, because I Will fill thee with content,
I say I Am Prince of every Element,
Therefore of air: Now if thou can enquire
Any thing more, I Will answer thy desire.

Sou. Before I suffer my swist thoughts to slide
Into more questions, I Will be satisfied
In what is past: If so it be, you have
No local Being, how then will you save
Those Hosts of Souls which you intend shall be
Sealed with the Signet of Eternity?
Did you not tell me, that your peaceful Seat
Was rich, sublime, (and without measure) great?
If thus it be, as it is expressed by you,
It Is more than strange that it is not local too;
Clear but this doubt, and thou shall quickly find
Those duties that attend an honest mind
Flow from my breast, till then I Will rest in peace,
As you perform, so shall my Love increase.

Sat. Ambiguous Soul, why do thou thus connive
At thine own follies? Why do thou deprive
Thy self of comfort, comforts that will heal
Th'exulcerous sores of thy distempered weal?
Why art thou thus inquisitive? the thing
That thou desir'st to know (if known) will bring
Small satisfaction to thy dubious breast;
He Is wise enough that knows he shall be blessed;
If you enquire in such a doubtful case,
You Will loose your rest in seeking out the place:
Surcease thy thoughts, and do not proudly knock
Thy self in pieces, now thou know the rock;
Pry not too sarl et secret things alone,
My Zodiac has more signs than must be known;
It Is not the Heaven of Heaven's that can contain
Me, the Creator, and my glorious train;
I am even what I please and what I will be
Even where I will.

So. Where Is that?

Sa. what is that to thee
The knowledge of my seat does no way tend
To thy salvation, therefore cease to spend
Such fruitless thoughts, cast by this needless care,
Learn to know what I am, no matter where.

Sou. I must confess, it is not good to pry
In things that suit not the capacity;
But seeing 'twas your pleasure to express
So much of friendship, I made bold to address
My self unto you; pardon then my crimes,
You know that wisest men may doubt sometimes:
Your weights are light, or else your courage fails,
You have not strength enough to turn the scales
Of my affections, yet you had almost
Droven my ill manned ship upon your Coast,
The winds of your persuasions rage and roar
Within my breast, I cannot find a shore
For my desires; I Am tossed from wave to wave,
And am become a most distracted slave;
Those heavenly thoughts which formerly frequenred
The closet of my breast are now prevented
By base bred fancies, fancies that arise
From a soul brain, and makes me to despise
Almost my self; I know not what to do,
I dare not, oh I dare not yield to you;
And yet I hardly can believe thou will
Burden thy conscience with so foul a guilt
As to betray me, sure thou art morekind
Than to abuse a well-affected mind;
But yet I dare not trust a Soul pursuer,
Because thou kil'st when thou pretend'st to cure.
I reel, I reel (if not sustained) I shall
Receive a sudden and a deadly fall;
What shall I do in this deplored condition?
I fear, I fear I Have lost my best Physician:
Try Satan, try, and see what may be done
For a sick Soul, that foolishly has run
Beyond it self; oh see what thou can do
To give me ease, and then I Will call the true.

Sat. Now Soul I love thee; rouse, bid grief depart
Thou have the symptoms of an honest heart:
Me thinks I could, with much content, afford
To say thou speak a Christian at a word;
Cheer up, and know that many troubles wait
Upon the changes of an ancient State;
The work of Reformation always brings
Trouble at first, but afterward it sings
Anthems of Peace, whose fortunate event
Will more than countervail thy discontent.
He that has spent the treasure of his days
Under one Roof, has reason to dispraise
The troubles of removing; yet at last
(When his defatigating cares are past)
He may declare himself to be a debtor
To fortune, and confess that Life the better.
Even so may thou (dear Soul) hereafter say,
Blessed be that hand which led thee from the way
And paths of Ignorance, although at first
['Tis often known, beginnings are the worst]
Thou feel'st a private nakedness within,
Because thou have unclothed thy self of sin:
Although, I must confess there cannot be
A vacuum in Nature, yet in thee
There is an emptiness, and must be still,
For what is empty, craves a time to fill:
If he whose stomach has sustained the rage
Of sharp'ning hunger, should at first assuage
His appetite with fullness, would it not
Produce a surfeit, and impose a blot
Upon his wisdom, raising such a strife
Within his Microcosmus, that his life
Would be endangered; therefore learn by rote,
That moderation is the chiefest note;
In all my Gammut, none can sing so high
A note as moderation, only I.
If I should let thee make too large a meal
Of my rich joys at first, I should reveal
Too much of folly; for it thou should take
A surfeit at the first, it needs must make
Thee fear, nay hate, to entertain my diet;
It Is better far to spare at first than riot:
Moreover, should I let thee taste thy fill
At first, I know the reins of thy fierce will
Would scorn a hand, it is dangerous to trust;
Presumptions spur can never want for rust:
Come Soul, let reason rule thee, do not stain
Thy well-dy'd judgment, it is a greater pain
To fear, than sufler; come, I long to see
Thee wanton with me in Eternity;
Then doubt no more, resolve, and let us away,
There is no greater grief than to delay
A happiness; be well informed of this,
Procrastination is a foe to Bliss.

Sou. Thy words imposthumate my heart, I feel
A greater pain than ever Ixions wheel
Knew how t'inflict, extremities still crowd
Into my thoughts; my sorrows call aloud,
And none will hear; what shall I do; for I
Unworthy am to live, unfit to dye;
Except the all ruling power above will please
T'inspect my Soul, and furnish me with ease,
To whose blessed ears I Will recommend my suit,
My sorrows will not let my tongue be mute.
Great Auditor of groans, oh let my cries,
My sighs, my tears, invite thy ears, thine eyes
To hear, and view me; for I must confess,
My crimes are great, and I am nothing less
Than what is least; alas! and nothing better
Than what is worst, oh pardon me thy debtor:
I Am roast with grief, and know not where to fleer
My shipwrack'd self, but still my fins appear
Before my face, whose looks almost affright,
And make me start into eternal night:
What shall I do? or whether shall I flee,
That am an alien (Lord) except to thee?
From thee I cannot, and I am too vile
To come unto thee, having made a spoil
Of those most sacred mercies, which thy hand
Conferred upon me; there is no command
But I have broke; yet gracious Lord, I know
That thy abounding mercies can overflow
My sand excelling sins, which cannot lie
Absconded from thine all-surveying eye.
With shame I must confess the subtle art
Of Satan has impoysoned my heart;
Oh I am sick to death, I swell, I burst,
Never was any Soul so much accursed.
There Is none but thee, thou sacred Antidote
Can cure my grief, be therefore pleased to note
My sad condition, let my sorrows lie
Before thy face, oh hear me when I cry;
Grant me the shield of Faith, that I may stand
In opposition to the powerful hand
Of active Satan, weaken ( Lord) his power
And add unto my strength; let every hour
Afford new mercies, mercies that may sail
Into my breast, ah should my Foe prevail,
Oh, then I perish, shorten ( Lord) his chain
And lengthen out my patience, oh make vain
His fierce attempts, that he my feel, and see
When he is strongest, I Am as strong as he,
Then shall my lips extol thee, and proclaim
The greatness of thy glory, and his shame.
Give but thy grace unto me ( Lord) and then
Say what thou will, my tongue shall say Amen.
Let everlasting plagues and horror dwell
Within so fit a soul, let black-mouthed Hell
Remove his situation, and take
An everlasting Lease, oh let him make
A Ten'ment of thee; do thou think that I
Will hear thy prayers? oh no, I scorn thee, fie
Away, begone --

Sou. What voice is this, that makes this bold intrusion
Into my ears and grumbles out confusion?
Me thinks I see a storm-portending cloud,
Bowel'd with thunder, and I hear a loud
And horrid noise, a noise that will confound
A wel-prepared ear, to hear the sound;
Who would not quake at such a voice as this
That roars forth Malice with an Emphasis?
My thoughts are interrupted, and amazement,
Flashes like Lightning through the brittle casement
Of my ill glased-brest; it cannot be
The voice of Heaven, a God so pure as he
Hates to be envious, malice cannot spring
From such a good and (Love-composed) King:
Although his voice (made terrible) oft-times
By the addition of man's daily crimes
Thunders against a sinner, yet his breath
Can take no pleasure in a sinners death.
Hereafter (Lord) when malice finds a voice
To speak, my understanding shall rejoice,
In knowing who it is, this heart of mine
Shall never quake at any voice but thine;
Then let hels deep-mouthed blood-hound, roar and thunder
I Will neither fear, nor love, nor quake, nor wonder.
For it is not strange to hear a Lion roar
That wants his prey, the more he has, the more
He seeks for more, employing still his power
In seeking how, and whom he may devour:
Know therefore Satan, that I am prepared
To meet thee, and I will not be out-dar'd;
It Is not thy false malicious tongue shall tempt
My heart to love, no, nor thy rage exempt
My thoughts from heaven, although thy craft still
For opportunity to stop good works;
When I compose my self, and strive to pray, lurks
Thou seek'st to turn my thoughts another way.
Thou great corrupter of Diviner parts,
Thou watchful thief that steal'st into the hearts
Of silly mortals, think not to devour
My armed heart, with thy pursuing power.

Sat. Will nothing move thee? will thou still mistrust
If fair means will not move thee, foul means must.
What do thou think, my arm is grown so short
It cannot reach thee? do thou think to sport
With my commands? say, thou imperious mite
Who gave thee being, who created light,
Who made the Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, reply
Audacious wretch, speak, was it thee, or I?
Thou vain contender, do thou think to gain
By striving with me, any thing but pain,
Oh no, thou shall not, for I Will still renew
Thy pinching sorrows: therefore bid adieu
To all thy comforts, for thou shall no more
Enjoy those blessings thou injoy'dst before,
Oh how thy horrid tongue shall roar and cry
With Dives for a drop, but no supply
Shall dare t'appear; the more thou crav'st, the less
Thou shall be heard, for nothing shall express
The least of pleasure to thy per-boyl'd heart,
Thy chiefest food shall be perpetual smart.
Be well assured that thy ears, thy eyes
Shall hear, nor see, naught but extremities,
Be gone, be gone, my fury hates delay,
Hell, and Damnation be thy lot, away.

Sou. Experience makes me understand thou art
A lively actor, of a deadly part,
I find the greatness of your swelling rage;
Your Prologue speaks 'twould be a bloody stage
If you might act as King, but Heaven prevent
The cursed plots of your accursed intent;
I fear thee not, because I know thy power
Is limited, and thou can nor devour
Without commission, therefore do thy worst,
And let thy envy swell until it burst
And fall to nothing, my Creator gives
Me faith to say that my Redeemer lives,
And will protect me from the rage of those
That are my known and secret deadly Foes.
Thy thundering words shall not make me complying
For he is unwise that dies for fear of dying;
Thus being guarded with the shield of grace
I Will spit defyance in thine impious face.
Thou art a Lion, and thou seek'st for blood
How bad's that soul that dares to think thee good;
Urge me no more, cashiere thy fruitless trouble,
The more thou strivst, the more I Will strive to double
My resolutions, for I dare not venture
To rest my heart on such a bloody center,
Oh no I dare not; he that shall let go,
A certain friend, for a most certain foe,
Justly deserves, to have no other same,
But what reproach can build upon his name;
Should I permit my rambling thoughts to glance
Upon thy love, the Plea of Ignorance
Could not be prevalent, because it is known
Unto the blest-united three in one
That I (by his assistance) have descried
Thy real flattery, and thy humble pride;
I dare affirm no greater pride can be
Than that that is acted with humility,
But here I Will stop, and leave thee to inherit
The effects of a diabolique spirit.

Sat. Accursed Caitiffe, do thou think to escape
The fury of my hand, or make a rape
Upon my goodness? no, the Sun and Moon
Shall stop their usual progresses as soon
As I will change my mind; Vengeance is mine
And I Will repay it, on that Soul of thine.
Be gone, be gone, expect thy sudden doom,
It is thy sins give punishment a room:
Let everlasting Plagues, and horror dwell
Within so fit a Soul; let black-mouthed Hell
Remove his situation, and so take
A still continuing Lease, on her him make
A ten'ment of thee, do thou think that I
Will hear thy prayers? oh no I scorn thee, fie
Away, begone --

Sou. If words could kill, I had been ere this time
Worded to death, but now I hope to clime
Above the reach of words in thy despite,
Where thou may grumble at me, but not bite.
Even as the surly blood-desiring Dog
Tied with a chain, or loaded with a clog
Grows fiercer with restraint, and stands in awe
Of nothing but his Master, to whose Law
He must submit and keep within his list;
For fear will not permit him to resist:
But if some wandering passenger should chance
To walk along, he quickly would advance
His watchful head, and running to and fro
From place to place, he tuggs but cannot go
Beyond his bounds, but labors still in vain
(With fruitless bring of his senseless chain)
To free himself, but when he finds his strength
Is not sufficient to out-go the length
Of his well-fastned chain, he soon divides
His sharp fang'd jaws, and bauls until his sides
And lungs are weary, then he runs the round
Until he lays himself upon the ground:
Where he remains much displeased and vexed,
Seeming to threaten ruin to the next.
So thou (hels ty'd-dog) if thou could but strain
And quit thy self from heavens fast-holding chain
What Soul should escape thy jaws, or be possessed
Of lasting peace, or comfortable rest?
How sad, how miserable had it been
For patient Job, had but thy power been seen
Upon his heart; but Heaven that will control
In spite of malice, chained thee from his soul:
Alas, alas! Thy chain is not so long,
To reach a soul, not is thy power so strong
To break it at thy pleasure, thou may baul
And bark forth envy, but not hurt at all;
If thou art God [as thou pretendest] why,
Why do thou suffer such a thing as I
T'expostulate so long, and do not show
Thy Judgments in my speedy overthrow?
Sat. It is my goodness, and not thy desert
That breeds forbearance in my tender heart,
Alas, alas, what honor would accrue
To me in conquering such a thing as you,
I could within a moments time assuage,
(But that my clemency out-vies my rage)
Thy swelling fury, for I could discharge
Vollies of wrath, and easily enlarge
They restless torments, I could make thee run
(Like morning mists before the rising Sun)
Out of my presence, If I should but say
The word be gone, alas thou could not stay,
But ah, I cannot, for I hate to harm,
Love guids my strength, and that strength guids my arm.
Even as the Shepherd with bedewed locks
Watches the feeding of his harmless flocks
For fear the bold-fac'd Wolf should chance to peep
Into the coasts of his beloved sheep,
And like a lawless Tyrant, soon commence
(Against those Emblems, of pure innocence)
A bloody action, which would soon incite
The Shepherds grief, to see so sad a sight,
So I the eternal Shepherd daily watch
My wel-fed lambs, for fear Hels wolf should catch
Or fright (not being fearful to be bold)
My gentle flocks from their delightful fold;
I am beloved, and mine own, will own
My sacred Name, my voice is not unknown
Unto my sheep, they always will be all
Firmly obedient to my cheerful call,
For which obedience they shall find reward
Nay such a one, as always shall accord
To their desires, thrice happy shall they be
In truly calling, and in owning me
To be their Shepherd, nothing can more please
M'indulgent soul, than such dear flocks as these,
I will preserve them, and no wolf shall dare
To seize upon them, or presume to tear
Their downy fleeces, nothing shall be nearer
Unto my heart, and nothing shall be dearer
In my affections, for I will affect
Even where, and when I find a true respect.
Sou. What strange contusions has thy language bred
Within my serious thoughts? how have thou fed
My ears with flatteries, but it is in vain;
Because my heart has vowed not to retain
Thy sain'd expressions, nothing shall remove
My Love from God, nor nothing make me love
Thy wretched self; then be content, and cease
To urge my mind, or interrupt my Peace.
Go, do thy worst, and when that worst is done
Sit down as wisely, as thou have begun.

Sat. Art thou resolved? Well then, let vengeance
Upon thy cursed head, be gone, thou mite
(Nay less) of goodness, go, make haste t'inherit light
Those plagues that wait upon so damned a spirit.

Sou. May this be call*d a farewell, if it be,
The self same farewell must attend on thee;
I hate, nay, scorn to bid farewell to you,
It Is charity enough to bid, adieu.

The Souls Thankfulness, and Request to God.
MOst gracious God, I having lately felt
The fervor of thy mercies, needs must melt
Into a thankfulness, Ah should I be
Ungrateful to so blessed a God as thee
'Twere pity, ah 'twere pity, that the air
Should give me breath, or thy fierce hand forbear
To through me headlong to the deep abyss
Of speedy ruin, where no comfort is:
Oh glorious Lord, be pleased to inflame
My heart with raptures, to extol thy Name;
Alas I Am weak, and if thou should deny
Thy aid, nothing could be more weak than I.
If thou will help me, I shall be so strong
That nothing can prevail to do me wrong.
Lord, I am blind, oh therefore let thy light
Expel those clouds, that thus eclipse my sight;
Be thou my guide, my strength, my sight, my way,
Or else (being weak) I shall, or fall, or stray;
Oh leave me not, but as thou have begun
To show me mercy, let thy mercy run
With my desires, and grant that I may be
A true forgetter of all things, but thee:
And rather than I should forget thy call,
Oh let me have no memory at all;
Wean me, oh wean me from this nursing earth,
Make it my sorrow, and thy Throne my mirth.
Let every morning make me know, and say
Thy Laws are Just, or let me know no day;
Let every evening, make me take delight
In thy commands, or let me know no night.
Inspire my heart [O God] and make it glad
Always in thee, or make it always sad;
If thou afflict'st me, make me understand,
Thou have a storming, and a calming hand;
If Poverty oppress me, whilst I live,
Oh let thy mercy send me friends to give;
Or if thy goodness please to send me store,
Oh give me grace to think I may be poor.
It matters not, O Lord, how poor I be
Unto the World, if I am rich to thee:
If I am hungry, o be thou my meat,
If I am weary, o be thou my seat;
Or if I feast, O Lord be thou my guest;
If I am restless, Lord be thou my rest;
If I am thirsty, Lord, be thou my spring;
If I am subject, Lord, be thou my King;
If I have Virtue, make me dote upon her;
If Honorable, be thou my Honor:
And if I cannot know that which I would,
Be pleased to make me know, Lord, what I should;
Then shall my ready lips express and show
I know no more, than thou wu'dst have me know.
My untied tongue shall evermore proclaim
Th'attendant glories of thy sacred Name.
Divine Ejaculations.
1.
GReat God, whose Scepter rules the Earth,
Distill thy fear into my heart,
That being rapt with holy mirth,
I may proclaim how good thou art,
Open my lips, that I may sing,
Full praises to my God, my King.
Ejaculation 2.
Lord, make the torments we endure
The Symptoms of thy Love, not wrath;
Thou art our Chiron, we thy cure
Our Crime's, our sores, thy blood's our bath;
O we are weak, be thou as strong;
How long O Lord; O Lord, how long?
Ejaculation 3.
Just Judge of Earth, in whom we trust,
Make sharp thy sword, and bend thy bow,
Consume the wicked; save the Just,
For thou the Reins, and heart do know:
Then shall our tongues sing forth thy praise,
And praise thy justice all our days.
Ejaculat. 4.
Lord, teach us timely how to pray,
And give us patience to expect;
Thou hate sin; Oh guide our way;
Judge thou our Eoes: The Just protect:
Then shall the wicked fall with shame,
And we will sing that love thy name.
Ejaculat. 5.
Great Son of the eternal God,
To whom the world subjected lies,
Break not, but breed us with thy rod:
O we are foolish, make us wise:
And if thy wrath begin to flame,
We Will seek protection in thy Name.
Ejaculat 6.
Lord, if our enemies increase,
And we invoke, bow down thine ear;
Be thou our shield, and make our peace,
And we will scorn what worldlings fear.
Great God of health, great Lord of rest,
O make us thine, and we are blessed.
Ejaculat. 7.
Thou righteous Hearer of Requests,
Make void the counsels of the unjust;
Send peace into our trembling breasts,
And fill our hearts with fear and trust:
If thou will make thy face to shine,
Let others joy in corn and wine.
Ejaculat. 8.
Lord, thou whose equal hand allays
The poor man's grief, whose help thou art,
Incline my heart to give thee praise,
And I will praise thee with my heart:
For sake me not; for, Lord I trust,
As men are cruel, thou art just.
Ejaculat. 9.
Lord, crush my Lyon-hearted Foes,
Rout them that seek to ruin me;
Rise up, O God, forget not those
Whose wrongs refer their cause to thee:
Or if the wicked must oppress,
Be thou not far from my distress.
Ejaculat. 10.
Great God, thy Garden is defaced,
The Weeds do thrive, thy Flowers decay;
O call to mind thy promise past,
Restore thou them, cut these away:
Till then, let not the weeds have power
To starve or taint the poorest Flower.
Ejaculat. 11.
Lord, leave us not too long a space;
O view our griefs, and hear our prayer,
Clear thou our eyes, unvail thy face,
Lest Foes presume, and we despair.
Lord, make thy mercy our repose,
And we will sing amidst thy Foes.
Ejaculat 12.
Lord, teach me to renown thy Name,
Which through the World is so renowned:
Let man thy glorious works proclaim,
Whose head with glory thou have crowned.
As Beasts to men subjected be,
So Lord subject man's heart to thee.
Ejaculat. 13.
In all extremes, Lord, thou art still
The Mount whereto my hopes do flee;
O make my soul derest all Ill,
Because so much abhorred by thee,
Lord, let thy gracious trials show
That I am just, or make me so.
Ejaculat. 14.
Great God, whom Fools deny, how dare
Our lips request thy glorious eyes!
If thou but see, thou can not spare,
And what thou see thou must despise.
Lord, make us hear thy saying voice,
Then may thou see, and we rejoice.
Ejaculat. 15.
Lord, cleanse my heart, and guide my tongue,
Preserve my lips from false deceit;
Protect my hands from doing wrong,
Teach whom to love and whom to hate:
Instruct me how to take and give;
Lord, grant me this, and I shall live.
Ejaculat. 16.
Lord, teach my Reins, that in the night
My tutored Reins, may tutor me;
And keep me always in thy sight,
For in thy sight all pleasure be:
Let not my soul in darkness stray,
O thou my life, O thou my way.
Ejaculat. 17.
Behold my Right, and right my wrongs
Thou Savior of all those that trust;
O I am weak, my Foes are strong,
Lord thou art gracious, thou art just.
O make me rightly prize this life,
And let thy glory be my strife.
Ejaculat. 18.
Great God, my strength, at whose command
Whilst I serve thee all creatures serve me,
Protect me from my Foe man's hand;
O, as thou have preserved, preserve me:
With peaceful conquest crown my days,
And I will crown thy power with praise.
Ejaculat. 19.
Great God, the work of whose high hands
The glory of thy Name declare,
How perfect sweet are thy Commands!
How purely just thy Precepts are!
Cleanse all my sins, clear every spot,
Both open, secret, known, forgot.
Ejaculat. 20.
Accept, O God, my holy fires,
Lead thou our Armies, give success,
Bless our designs, grant our desires;
O hear and help in our distress:
Preserved by thee, we shall prevail,
When Chariots flee, and horses fail.
Ejaculat. 21.
O God, whose Judgments are severe,
And mercies full of sweet compassion,
Scourge thou thy Foes, save those that fear,
Ravish my Soul with thy Salvation;
And I will spend my joyful days
In Psalms of thanks, and Songs of praise.
Ejaculat. 22.
My Jesus, thou that were no less
Than God, and yet with men forlorn,
Earths Comforter, yet comfortless,
Heavens Glory, yet to men a scorn.
What thanks shall I return to thee,
That were all this, and more for me!
Ejaculation 23.
Great Shepherd of my Soul, thy hand
Both gives me food, and guides my way;
Subject my will to thy command,
And I shall never starve, nor stray.
If thou will keep me in thy sight,
Thy House shall be my whole delight.
Ejaculat. 24.
Lord, purge my heart, and cleanse my hand,
Direct my tongue, and guide my will;
For nothing that is unclean can stand
Within thy great, thy glorious Hill.
Lift up my heart, deprest with sin,
And let the King of Glory in.
Ejaculat. 25.
Lord, guide my footsteps in thy truth,
And let thy grace be my repose;
Forgive the frailties of my youth,
And free me from my causeless Foes:
Redeem thine Israel from their hand,
And bring me to thy promised Land.
Ejaculat. 26.
Lord, keep me just and judge my right,
Prove thou my reins, and try my heart;
O make thy Temple my delight,
And fix my dwelling where thou art:
Redeem my Soul, confirm my ways,
And give me power to give thee praise.
Ejaculat. 27.
My God, whose fear drives fear away,
Show me the beauty of thy House;
Preserve me in the evil day,
That I may sing and pay my vows.
Lord, grant me fear, and guard my path;
Give patience, and with patience, Faith.
Ejaculat. 28.
O God, be thou my living Rock,
Whereto my restless soul may fly:
Blessed be thy Name, when I invoke,
Thou hear'st my suit and send'st supply.
My Foes confound, or else convert
Or weaken, that they may not hurt.
Ejaculat. 29.
Shall Mountain, Desert, Beast, and Tree,
Yield to that heavenly Voice of thine,
And shall that voice not startle me,
Nor stir this stone, this heart of mine?
No, Lord; till thou new-bore mine ear
Thy Voice is lost, I cannot hear.
Ejaculat. 30.
Lord, let the evening of my grief
Be followed with a morning joy;
Hear thou my cry, and send relief,
That take no pleasure to destroy:
If thou will lengthen out my days,
Their task shall be to sing thy praise.
Ejaculat. 31.
Lord, thou' that hoord'st thy grace for those
That love and fear thy sacred Name,
Redeem me from my conquering Foes,
And vindicate my trust from shame:
Give me fair Conquest at the end,
Till then, true courage to attend.
Ejaculat. 32.
Let my confession lance my sore,
And let forgiveness cure my wound;
Lord, teach me early to implore,
For I am lost till thou art found:
Then shall my joyful Songs express
Thy praises, and my thankfulness.
Ejaculat. 33.
Great Lord of Wonders, thou by whom
My heart was framed and formed alone,
From whose high Power all powers come,
That did but say, and it was done;
Appoint the remnant of my days
To see thy Power, and sing thy praise.
Ejaculat. 34.
Lord, let the Sunshine of thy face
So clear mine eyes, so cleanse my heart,
That being seasoned with thy grace,
My soul may taste how sweet thou art.
O let thy mercy make me just,
And then my heart shall fear and trust.
Ejaculat. 35.
Lord plead my cause, and right my wrong,
And take my Snarers in their snare;
O be not from me, Lord, too long,
Lest they triumph, and I despair.
Let all my foes be clothed with shame,
Whilst I sing praises to thy Name.
Ejaculat. 36.
Fountain of Light, and living breath,
Whose mercies never fail nor fade,
Fill me with life that has no death,
Fill me with light that has no shade:
Confound the proud in their pretense,
And let thy wings be my defense.
Ejaculat. 37.
Be thou my Trust, my God, and I,
When sinners thrive, will not repine;
Or if my wants should want supply,
I will not fret, I will not whine:
What if their wealth, my wants, increase,
They shall have plagues at last, I peace.
Ejaculat. 38.
Lord, in thy wrath correct me not,
For I confess and hate my sin;
My flesh consumes, my bones do rot,
I Have pains without, and pangs within.
O thou that art the God of rest,
Release my sin, relieve my breast.
Ejaculat. 39.
Lord, curb my tongue, and make me see
How few my days, how short their length:
Incline my heart to trust in thee;
Remove thy scourge, or give me strength:
I am a Pilgrim, hear my cry,
And send some comfort e're I dye.
Ejaculat. 40.
Lord, thou whose mercies do exceed,
O fill my language with thy praise,
Stand thou my Helper at my need,
Confound the wicked in their ways:
Be thou my comfort in my grief,
And crown my patience with relief.
Ejaculat. 41.
Lord, if thy pleasure make me poor,
Thou will bless them that give me bread;
If thy sick hand has scourged me sore,
That hand that struck will make my bed.
Sustain me, Lord, be thou my store,
I shall be neither sick nor poor.
Ejaculat. 42.
My God, full tears are all the diet
That seed my sad, my drooping breast:
In my distress, in my disquiet,
Be thou my Stay, be thou my Rest:
Be thou my God in my relief,
And I will triumph in my grief.
Ejaculat. 43.
Lord, right my wrongs, and plead my right
Against all those that seek my Ill;
O let thy perfect Truth and light
Conduct me to thy holy Hill:
Then shall thy Altar make relation
Of thy due praise, and my Salvation.
Ejaculat. 44.
Lord, our forefathers found redress
In all their frights, in all their fears;
Will thou be dumb to my distress,
And not my God, as well as theirs?
Redeem my Soul whose loyal knee
Never bowed to any God, but thee,
Ejaculat. 45.
Great Bridegroom, fill thy dearest Spouse
With outward glory, inward graces;
May she forget her fathers house,
And only cling to thy embraces:
Affect her heart with Love and Duty,
And then take pleasure in her beauty.
Ejaculat. 46.
Lord, help me when my griefs do call,
In my distress O be thou near;
Then if earth change, or mountains fall,
I will not faint, I will not fear.
Show me thy wonders, and inflame
My heart to magnify thy Name.
Ejaculat. 47.
Lord, let thy Judgments fill all those
That love thy Mount with joy and mirth;
Confound and crush all Sions Foes,
Sion the glory of the Earth:
Let all that love thy Sions glory,
Recount her State, repeat her Story.
Ejaculat. 48.
Lord, teach me wisely to contemn
All goods that transitory be,
Let me not stand possessed of them,
If they be not possessed in thee.
If I be wealthy, and nor wise,
I live but like a beast that dies.
Ejaculat. 49.
Lord God of Gods, before whose Throne
Stand fire and storms, O what shall we
Return to Heaven that is our own,
When all the world belongs to thee!
We have no offering to impart,
But praises, and a wounded heart.
Ejaculat. 50.
Lord, if thy mercies purge my heart,
Conceived in lust, and born in sin,
Breath truth into my inward part,
Renew me a firm spirit within:
Then let thy goodness not detest
The ruins of a broken breast.
Ejaculat. 51.
Let others boast in gold, and prize
Ev'l more than good, and love deceit,
Thy mercies* Lord, are my supplies,
And on thy Name will I await.
Lord, let thy Mercies still inure
My breast to love the thing that is pure:
Ejaculat. 52.
Lord, if thou take away thy hand,
How all composed of fears are we!
What arm can save? what strength can stand?
When man, poor man's forsook by thee?
Lord, keep my faith in thee unshaken,
For thou forsak'st not till forsaken.
Ejaculat. 53.
Lord, let thy name secure and free
My threat'ned Soul from all my foes;
Stand thou with them that stand for me,
Support all these, suppress all those:
Then shall my Soul division run
Upon thy praise till time be done.
Ejaculat. 54.
Hearer of prayers, confound my Foes,
That bruise my tortured Soul to dust:
In man, alas, there is no repose;
Foes have no pity, friends no trust.
My trust is in thy word, which says,
They shall not live out half their days.
Ejaculat. 55.
O God, the malice of my Foes
Increases daily more and more;
But Lord, thou art my safe repose,
Thou art my strength, thou art my store:
Be thou my gracious God, and then
I will not fear the power of men.
Ejaculat. 56.
Be gracious, Lord, unto my grief,
For in thy shadow do I trust;
O send me plentiful relief,
For thou art merciful and Just;
Then shall my spirits utter forth
Twilight Hosanna's to thy worth.
Ejaculat. 57.
Lord, keep me from those hearts and tongues
That practice mischief from the womb;
Weigh right to them that weigh us wrongs,
And let confusion be their doom;
But let the just be filled with mirth,
And fear that God that rules the earth.
Ejaculat. 58.
Lord, save me from my Foes; make void
Their plots, and all their Counsels vain;
For ever let them be destroyed,
For in thy hand my hopes remain:
And I will always spend my days
In Hymns of thanks, and Songs of praise.
Ejaculat. 59.
Lord, though we feel the bitter taste
Os thy displeasure for a while;
Yet thou art gracious, and at last
Thy angry brow that frowned will smile.
Oh when that storm is over-blown,
Thou Wilt trample those that tread us down.
Ejaculat. 60.
Lord, hear my troubled voice, and bring
My Soul to that sweet Rock of Rest;
Protect all those that strive to sing
Thy praises with a cheerful breast:
Let comfort with our years increase,
That we may praise thy name in peace.
Ejaculat. 61.
Lord God, from whom all mercy springs,
Instruct my hopes to wait on thee;
Teach me what vain and fruitless things
The helps of what is earthly be.
All strength belongs to thee alone,
It Is thou, my God, must help, or none.
Ejaculat. 62.
Lord, how I long to see thy face,
That I might spend me in thy praise;
Thou art my glory in disgrace;
Sustain my steps, direct my ways:
Thou art my refuge; when oprrest
With grief, my joy; with toil, my rest.
Ejaculat. 63.
Lord, hide me from my bloody Foes
For in thy goodness do I trust;
Protect my sought-for life from those
That shoot in secret for the just.
So then shall I that fear thy Name
Have cause of glory, they of shame.
Ejaculat. 64.
Thou gracious Hearer of Requests,
Hide all my sins behind thy merits;
Shower down thy Spirit into our breasts,
And drop thy Grace into our Spirits;
That from our Faith rich works may spring,
And give us cause to shout and sing.
Ejaculat. 65.
Lord, if thy flame must needs be felt,
Let us be purged in that flame;
Let our rebellious spirits melt
Into the praises of thy Name;
That we being tutored, and kept under,
May fear with Love, and love with Wonder.
Ejaculat. 66.
Lord, let thy favor still inflame
Our light'ned hearts to walk thy ways,
That all the World may praise thy Name,
And all the Earth may sing thy praise;
So fructify our hearts, that we
May bless thy Name being blessed by thee.
Ejaculat. 67.
Lord, rise in power within mine heart,
And chase my sins, thy Foes, and mine,
Then shall I see thee as thou art,
In Glory great, in Power divine.
So I, more white than Snow, shall sing
Thy ways, and praise my God, my King.
Ejaculat. 68.
To that sweet Lamb, which did sustain
Grief above weight, Pain above measure;
Whose stripes, and scoffs, and grief, and pain,
Were only purchased by our pleasure.
Be Honor, Glory, Praises, given
By Souls on Earth, by Saints in Heaven.
Ejaculat. 69.
Let shame be their due recompense.
That seek to wound my Soul with shame;
Be thou their help and strong defense,
That seek thee, Lord, and love thy Name.
Make haste, O God, for I do waste
My Soul with grief; O God, make haste.
Ejaculat. 70.
Lord, thou that underneath thy wing
Did keep me in, and from the womb,
Assist my age, that it may sing
Thy praise in ages yet to come.
Preserve my Soul, protect my name;
Shame be to them that seek my shame
Ejaculat. 71.
Great Prince of peace, whose Kingdom brings
Justice, Redemption, power, and peace,
That bends the knees and hearts of Kings,
And fill'st all Nations with increase,
All praises, Honor, Glory, be
Ascribed alone, great Prince, to thee.
Ejaculat. 72.
O God, whose dreadful Voice, like Thunder,
Affrights the Earth, and shakes the Air,
Whose Works and Ways are full of wonder,
That hear'st my plaints, and grant'st my prayer.
Forsake me not, but when I stray,
O let thy Crook reform my way.
Ejaculat. 73.
O thou, whose mercy did begin
Before all Time, untied to Times,
As thou forgav'st our Fathers Sin,
Be likewise gracious to our Crimes:
Thou Art now a God, as well as then
And we as they no more than men.
Ejaculat. 74.
O God, the Sion of my Soul
Is wholly deso ate and waste,
Where thou should rule, my lusts control;
O Lord, relieve; O God, make haste:
Then shall my heart and tongue proclaim
Eternal praises to thy Name.
Ejaculat. 75.
Glorious Creator, once more shine
On this our poor distressed Land;
Defend, and dress thy fading Vine,
And bless the man of thy right hand:
Let thy Free Grace inflame our hearts,
And we will sing thy praise in parts.
Ejaculat. 76.
O God, our Song, our Strength, whose hand
Has broke our Bonds, and set us free,
Incline our hearts to thy Command,
And we will own no God but thee;
Conduct and feed us as thy Flock,
And give us honey from thy Psalm. 81. 16.
Rock.
Ejaculat. 77.
Direct, O God, the Judges breast,
Preserve his hand^s, his eyes upright
That he may vindicate the oppressed,
And guardhim from injurious might:
O let him know that he shall be,
As Judge of others, judged by thee.
Ejaculat. 78.
Lord, cast thine eyes upon thy Foes,
Confound their Troops, that are combined
Against thy Flock,, which thou have chose,
Make them like chaff before the wind:
Defeat their Plots with sudden shame,
That they may seek Jehovah's Name.
Ejaculat. 79.
Lord, teach mine Eyes, my Will, my Heart,
To see, to choose, and to desire
Thy beauteous Courts, wherein thou art;
O fill my thoughts with holy fire.
Be thou my Sun, whose glorious Rays
May light my Soul to sing thy praise.
Ejaculat. 80.
O God, remit thy Peoples Sin,
And show the Sunshine of thy face,
Repress thy fury, and begin,
T'inspire us with thy saving Grace;
That Righteousness and truth may meet,
And light our hearts, and lead our feet.
Ejaculat. 81.
Great Spring, from whence all mercy flows
To them that trust and love thy Name,
Give me thy strength, and then my Foes
Shall see thy greatness, and their shame:
Be thou my Way, my Truth, my Light,
So shall I live and die upright.
Ejaculat. 82.
Sim, the glory of the Earth,
And subject of my holy Passion,
May all the Well-springs of my mirth
Be founded upon thy foundation:
Of all delights I wish no other,
Than to be Son to such a Mother.
Ejaculat. 83.
Lord, let thy fury cease to burn,
Or else my Soul must cease to be;
Can praises issue from the Urn?
What thanks can ashes give to thee?
Enough, if thou but undertake me,
Let death surprise, let friends forsake me.
Ejaculat. 84.
Lord, thou whose mercy fails not those
That build their trust upon thy Name,
Protect my Soul from all my Foes,
Then shall my tongue thy worth proclaim:
So shall the remnant of my days
Be crowned in Peace, and thou with Praise.
Ejaculat. 85.
Eternal God, before whose Eyes
A thousand years seem as a day,
Direct our hearts, and make us wise
To use that time we cannot stay:
Send joy in our sad hearts, and bless
Our prosperous actions with success.
Ejaculat. 86.
Though thousands here, ten thousand there,
Do daily fall before mine eye,
I will not faint, I will not fear,
Beneath the wings of the most High:
Let me be guarded, Lord, by thee,
Then I Will not fear, nor faint, nor flee.
Ejaculat. 87.
Lord, purge my Soul, that I may learn
To read my fortunes by thy hand;
Let my instructed Soul discern,
That worldly bliss is not thy brand.
Lord, in thy Mercy make me thine,
I have enough, shower thou, or shine.
Ejaculat. 88.
Great Monarch of the World, disclose
Thy Power, and make thy Glory known;
Out-flood the floods of all my Foes,
And in my heart fix thou thy Throne:
Plant Holiness within my breast,
O Lord, my strength, O God, my rest.
Ejaculat. 89.
Just God of Vengeance, cast an eye
Upon my poor afflicted breast;
O send me help, O hear my cry,
And let thy comforts be my rest:
Suppress my Foes, and set me free,
That have no Hope, no Help but thee.
Ejaculat. 90.
Great God of Gods, Great King of Kings,
From whom, by whom we live, we be,
In whom my Soul her triumph sings,
To whom alone bows every knee:
Teach me thy way; thy Will's my Feast,
Thy Crook my Guide, thy Fold my Rest.
Ejaculat. 91.
Lord, let our Jesus, and thy Christ,
Be all the subject of our mirth,
Let Satan's power be dismissed,
And let him rule, and judge the earth:
Then, then Eternal Peace shall be
Returned to us, and praise to thee.
Ejaculat. 92.
Great King of Glory, who art dressed
In Clothes of Clouds, in Robes of Fire,
Make evil hateful to my breast,
Then shall I love thee most entire:
Then shall my bosom reap that light
Which thou have sown for the upright.
Ejaculat. 93.
Great God of Wonders, that do open
The Gate of Life to our glad days,
And found'st a help beyond all hope,
O give us mouths to give thee praise;
So guide our ways, just Judge, that we
May joyfully be judged by thee.
Ejaculat. 94.
Great God, whose promise is to hear,
Whose practice is to pardon Sin,
Let my petitions find an ear,
And cleanse my leprous Soul within.
Thou, Lord, art holy, teach my heart
To sing thy praises as thou art.
Ejaculat. 95.
Eternal Maker, grant that we
May praise thee with a cheerful heart;
Guide thou our ways, and let us be
The sheep, where thou the Shepherd art:
For, Lord, thy truth is always sure,
And thy great Mercy shall endure.
Ejaculat. 96.
Lord, teach my heart to walk upright
In public reverence, private fear;
Keep thou the humble in thy sight,
And to the proud be thou severe:
Then shall thy Saints in triumph show
Thy Mercy, and thy Justice too.
Ejaculat. 97.
O God, how poor a thing is man!
Begot in sin, and born in sorrow;
Our breath's a blast, our life a span,
But here to day, and gone to morrow.
How needfnl, Lord, is thy support!
Our days are bad, our times are short.
Ejaculat. 98.
O thou, within whose tender breast
Full streams of sweet compassion flow,
Whose Mercies cannnot be expressed
By Saints above, or Men below;
My Soul shall praise, my heart shall bless
That goodness, tongues cannot express.
Ejaculat. 99.
Lord, every creature writes a story.
Of thy full Majesty and Might,
The contemplation of whose Glory
Shall always be my hearts delight:
Accept that praise my Soul can give,
And it shall praise thee while I live.
Ejaculat. 100.
Dear God, the Pharaoh of our Souls
Afflicts the Israel of our hearts;
Where thou shoulds govern, he controuls;
What thou command'st his power thwarts:
Confound his strength, and let thy hand
Conduct us to the promised land.
Ejaculat. 101.
Lord, should thou punish every sin,
Or strike as often as we offend,
How quickly would our plagues begin!
How soon this sinful world would end!
But Lord, thy tender Mercies stand
Within the gap, and hold thy hand.
Ejaculat. 102.
Lord let thy wonders, and thy ways,
Inflame my heart, my tongue, my pen,
That pen, and tongue, and heart may praise
Thy Name before the Sons of men.
Look where I list, high, low, or under,
I see to learn, and learn to wonder.
Ejaculat. 103.
O Lord whose mercies, and whose paths
Transcend the expressions of my tongue
Instruct my heart to keep thy laws
And I will praise thee in my Song.
Lend me thy power, or strengthen mine,
And I will crush my Foes, and thine.
Ejaculat. 104.
O thou that sit'st in Heaven, and see
My deeds without, my thoughts within,
Be thou my Prince, be thou my Priest,
Command my Soul, and cure my sin:
How bitter my afflictions be,
I care not, so I rise in thee.
Ejaculat. 105.
Lord, teach my humble eyes the art
To see aright, and hands to do,
Then will I praise thee with my heart
In public, and in private too:
Set thou thy fear in all my ways
To make me wise, to give thee praise.
Ejaculat. 106.
Lord, plant thy fear before mine eyes,
For in thy fear my Soul is blessed;
Thy Fear's that Spring, from whence arise
My Crown, my Treasure, and my Rest.
What fear I, fearing thee? and what
Not fearing thee, Lord, fear I not?
Ejaculat. 107.
Highest of Highests, that do raise
The poor and needy from the dung,
Advance my thoughts to give thee praise,
And Lord, unty my stam'ring tongue:
So shall my heart and tongue proclaim
Rare Halelujahs to thy Name.
Ejaculat. 108.
O God, the Mountains and the Seas
Confess thee, Lord of Sea and Land,
They quake and tremble, if thou please
To show the power of thy hand:
So shall my heart, when thou think good,
To turn my flint into a flood.
Ejaculat. 109.
Lord, teach our loyal hearts to build
Their constant hopes upon thy hand;
Thou art our Help, thou art our Shield,
Wherein our hopes of safety stand:
Send down thy blessings, and then we
Will send all praises up to thee.
Ejaculat. 110.
My God, thy mercies so abound,
That every minute speaks their story;
They have no limits, have no bound;
Ours are the comforts, thine the glory:
And what thy mercy more displays,
Thou art contented with our praise.
Ejaculat. 111.
Surpassing Lord, whose mercies have surpast
The limits of the worlds expression,
Whose truth continues firm and fast
To thy elect, and their succession.
To thee perpetual praise be given
By Saints on Earth, and Souls in Heaven.
Ejaculat. 112.
Good God! thy mercy and thy might
What heart conceives? What tongue can tell?
Thou fillest my darkness with thy light,
And have redeemed my Soul from Hell.
Thou art my God, thou only art
The strength, and music of my heart.
Ejaculat. 113.
O God thy Law's a field, in which
The fruitful seed of life is sown;
No seed so rare, no soil so rich;
It renders infinite for one.
O God, how fair these fields appear!
O God, what pearls are buried he re!
Ejaculat. 114.
Great God, whose ever-wakeful eye
Does never slumber, never close,
Teach all my dangers to rely
Upon thy help, their safe repose:
Be thou my shade, be thou my stay,
I will not fear by night, by day.
Ejaculat. 115.
Lord let the fire of my true zeal
Unto thy house for ever flame,
Where let my thanks, and praise reveal
The hidden honor of thy Name.
Let Sions glory still increase,
And bless her walls with plenteous peace.
Ejaculat. 116.
O God to whom thy thoughts direct
Their constant hopes, and hopeful cries,
Let not my Soul in vain expect
For mercy, from such gracious eyes:
Maintain thine honor; It Is not me
The proud contemn, Great God, but thee.
Ejaculat. 117.
Lord give me a believing heart,
Though wanting strength I fear not man,
If thou be pleased to take my part,
Let malice do the worst it can.
Although ensnared I will not fear,
For thou art stronger than a snare.
Ejaculat. 118.
Give me the heart, O God to trust,
And lead my Footsteps in thy ways;
Quell thou the power of the unjust,
That righteous hearts may give thee praise.
Do good to good men, and increase
Their number, plenty, and their peace.
Ejaculat. 119.
Lord, we are Captives, and we bow
To Satan's burden every hour,
We sow in tears, oh when will thou
With joy requite the weary sower?
So bless my labors that I may,
With comfort long to see that day.
Ejaculat. 120.
What I possess, or what I crave
Brings no content great God, to me,
If what I would, or what I crave
Be not possessed, and blessed in thee.
What I enjoy, oh make it mine
In making me, that have it, Thine.
Ejaculat. 121.
Lord, plant thy fears within my breast,
That I may walk thy perfect ways;
Then shall I prosper and be blessed
In all my deeds, in all my days:
Then shall I see the fair increase,
Of Sions glory, Isreal's peace.
Ejaculat. 122.
Lord since there must be always Foes
TO afflict the Souls of flesh and blood,
Let mine be such as do oppose
Thy Churches peace, thy Sions good:
Then let that righteous arm of thine,
Confound, or cure thy foes, and mine.
Ejaculat. 123.
Hearer of prayers, O whom should I
Implore, but thee, in my distress,
For mercy harbors in thine eye,
And thou art filled with righteousness.
To thee, O God, my hopes shall flee,
My Soul expects no help but thee.
Ejaculat. 124.
Lord if mine eyes should look too high,
Or ranc'rous heart begin to swell,
Break thou the tumor, curb mine eye,
Lest one grow fierce, the other fell.
So shall my Soul grow wise, and flee
From her own strength, and trust in thee.
Ejaculat. 125.
Lord let mine eyes not sleep until
I build thy Temple in my breast,
Take pleasure then, and make it still
The chosen Palace of thy rest:
Let all her foes be trodden down,
And let thy Glory be her Crown.
Ejaculat. 126.
Lord we are several members joined
To make one whole, whose head thou art,
Let all our thoughts but make one mind,
And give one body, but one heart.
United Souls of Saints appear
The sweetest music in thine ear.
Ejaculat. 127.
Light thou the Lamps, great God, that they
Light'ned by thee may give us light,
Let their bright luster drive away
All darkness from thy Courts by night;
Bless us and them, that they: and we
May bless thy name, first blessed by thee.
Ejaculat. 128.
Let every wonder that I see
In Heaven, and Earth, and in the Seas,
Advance some honor, Lord, to thee
That did, and can do, what thou please,
Let others worship wood and stone,
My Soul shall bless thee, Lord, alone.
Ejaculat. 129.
Good God, where e're I cast mine eye,
On Earth beneath, or Heaven above,
I see thy goodness, and I spy
Perpetual pledges of thy love.
Thy favors through the world extend,
And of thy mercy is no end.
Ejaculat. 130.
Lord, if my tongue, and busy quill
Be not in Sions praise employed,
Then let my hand forget her skill
And be my tongue for ever tied;
Thy praise shall be my chief delight
Whilst tongue can speak, or hand can write.
Ejaculat. 131.
Kindle O Lord, my love with zeal,
Light my affections with thy flame;
Give my tongue courage to reveal
The secret glory of thy name.
Be thou my God, in all distress,
And let thy hand be my redress.
Ejaculat. 132.
Lord, thou that made me, and do pry
Into the secrets of my heart,
From whose all presence none can fly
Nor hide them there, but where thou art,
Inform my Soul, inflame my breast,
And lead me to eternal Rest.
Ejaculat. 133.
Lord keep me from my self that am
The greatest Foe, I need to fear;
O cover thou my face with shame
And give my sins no dwelling here.
Subdue my flesh; and then my spirit,
Shall sing the praises of thy merit.
Ejaculat. 134.
Lord when my grief shall find a tongue
To cry for help, find thou an ear,
Whilst others seek to do me wrong,
Make thou O God my conscience clear.
In those self-snares they have prepared
Let my insnarers be ensnared.
Ejaculat. 135.
When winter fortunes cloud the brows
Of summer friends; when eyes grow strange,
When plighted faith forget their vows,
When Earth, and all things in it change,
O Lord thy mercies fail me never,
Where once thou love, thou love for ever.
Ejaculat. 136.
Judge not my actions by the Laws,
For then my sorrows are but just,
But let thy mercies plead my ^^^se,
For in thy mercy is my trust.
Those that oppose my Soul, oppose;
I am thy servant, they thy foes.
Ejaculat. 137.
What is there, Lord, what is in me
To hope for safety from thy power?
What help can I expect from thee,
That merit vengeance every hour?
How great so e're my sins have bin,
Thy mercy's greater than my sin.
Ejaculat. 138.
Great God, whose Kingdom has no end,
Into whose secrets none can dive,
Whose mercy none can apprehend,
Whose Justice none can feel, and live,
What my dull heart cannot aspire
To know, Lord, teach me to admire.
Ejaculat. 139.
O Lord my Judgment's dark, and blind,
It cannot judge 'twixt good, and ill,
My will is captived and confined,
It wants a freedom how to will,
Great Lord of power, great God of might
Release my bands, restore my sight.
Ejaculat. 140.
Great God whose goodness does repleat,
And fill our Coasts with full increase,
That feed'st us with the fat of wheat,
And glad'st thy Sion with thy peace.
How more than others are our days
Extremely bound to give thee praise.
Ejaculat. 141.
Shall frost and snow give praise to thee,
And shall my Soul not bear a part?
Lord frost and snow appear to be
Not half so cold as is my heart.
Shine glorious Sun, thy beams but felt,
My frost will thaw, my snow will melt.
Ejaculat. 142.
Great God to whom all praise belongs
Whom Sion fings, and Israel fears,
O stop those lusts that stop our tongues
And fright thy glory from our ears.
Do thou enlarge what flesh retains,
And bind those Kings, our lusts, in chains.
Ejaculat. 143.
Lord season my unsavory sprite
And bridle my too headstrong will,
That I may always take delight
In acting good, and shunning ill.
O give me grace to understand,
My life is always in thy hand.
Ejaculat. 144.
Direct my steps, Lord, be my way,
And make thy paths my sole delight,
That like a traveller I may
Not fail to rest with thee at night,
O me, how happy, and how blessed,
(Lord) should I be in such a Rest!
Ejaculat. 145.
Lord, let the morning of my grief,
Find out a night of lasting pleasure,
Thou art the God of my relief,
In poverty, thou art my treasure.
I care not, Lord, how poor I be
Unto the world, if rich to thee.
Ejaculat. 146.
Lord let thy sacred fire thaw
The Ice of my hard-frozen zeal,
And let thy will be my known Law,
So shall my heart, thy worth reveal,
And with a halalujous Song
My tongue shall praise thee all day long.
Ejaculat. 147.
Great King of Peace, be pleased to send
Thy peace to our distempered Land,
O we are bad, reach us to amend,
And let not ruin be our brand,
Then shall our lavish lips deliver.
Our thanks in Peace, to our Peace-giver.
Ejaculat. 148.
If it be so that we must fight,
Lord make our crimes to prove our Foes,
For thou (our God) do take delight,
To see such pleasant Wars as those.
O may such wars as these increase,
Until our conquests end in Peace.
Ejaculat. 149.
Lord let the praises of thy Power,
Advance the power of thy praises,
Let every day, let every hour,
Praise thee till hours fail, and days.
To thee all power and praise be given,
By Saints on Earth, by Souls in Heaven.
THE END.

