The Quakers Ballad: OR, An Hymn of Triumph and Exultation for their Victories,
at the two late great Disputes by them held with the Baptists; the first in
Barbican, on the 9th. the second in VVheeler-street, on the 16 th. of the Eight
Month, 1674.
To an excellent new Tune, called, The Zealous Atheist.
holy. holy

holy. holy



YE she-friends and he-friends whoever inherit
Infallible light in dark-lanthorn of Spirit,
Come prick up your ears, for behold! I will fit ye
with an Hymn that is called by the wicked, a Ditty
In the Scuffle we late have had with the Baptists
Wherein both our honor and intrest wrapped is,
Though our logic perhaps be too weak to dispute um
We hope by a Ballad at least to confute um.
For though Fiddle and Organs are both Babilonish
Where with the profane delighted alone is;
Yet in such a case inspiration may haunt
Even us which are perfect to warble a Chaunt.
Then let us a while our tremblings lay by,
And quit our still Meetings to set up a cry,
Lets challenge, and rant, talk loud and be bold,
For the Spirit at present does move us to scold.
It Is time to exclaim, as receiving the wrong,
And take up that carnal weapon the tongue,
For if we delay our whole party must sink,
And our long-boasted light go out in a stink.
Our juglings so plain will appear that each eye,
Through the mask of our holy pretenses will spy,
And see that a Quaker, when stripped of his paint,
Is nearer of kin to an Athiest, than Saint.
Then let us equivocate neatly and lay
A plausible meaning on all that we say,
And the very same art that serves to excuse us,
At once shall condemn all those that accuse us.
This being done, we point time and place,
And come full prepared to bandy the case,
In the Barbican first we gave them a meeting,
And never was seen such a Bear-garden greeting
A Rabble thrust in from each end of the Town,
And before half an agreement could be laid down
In less time than a man can a pot of Ale swallow,
'twas confirmed with a hoop, and denied with a hallow
The place like an Hot-house appeared, and by hap
Some Friends might be cured here of a clap;
And if it were so I cannot but say,
It Was the best effect of our meeting that day.
The second part,
to the same Tune.


But once more have at um, for without doubt
If we cannot confute, we must tire them out
and therefore sent word they were cowardly lubbars,
If they would not in Spittle-fields venture a rubbers
Four hours and more we dispute in and out,
To know what it was we should dispute about,
Which yet at the last was never agreed,
But no matter for that we resolved to proceed.
'Twould have made puss laugh, or child in the crisomes,
To hear us chop logic, and talk sylogismes,
That spiritual cantings of Nailor and s brood,
Should Apostatize thus into figure and mood.
To see holy seed so grand a designer,
As to turn yea and nay into major and minor,
Use language of beast Concedo or Pergo,
And tickle their tobies at last with an Ergo.
At first they came on like huffing Philistians,
And needs would atempt to prove us no Christians
When most by our wranglings, already thought much
To believe that in truth either of us were such.
All Dialogues we cried down as profane,
Though diverse of us had written in that strain;
But that by a figure must be understood,
Making things bad in others, in us to be good.
But let friends take notice how basely they wrong us
By suggesting a Papist God bless us, amongst us;
For there was no need of that I must tell ye,
Since each of us carries his Pope in his belly.
Our selves to be Christians we loudly declare,
But avoid the contest to prove that we were;
For we find that our intrest does better agree,
To be counted Christians, than true(...)y to be.
Yet inveagled at last by a kind of a wyle,
We were draw^ into what we had shunned all this while*
But still we we(...)e safe, though shrewdly put to it,
For when all sh(...)fts fail inspiration can do it.
To this then we fly though certain it be,
Did Mahomet h(...)d as much claim to it as we;
However it ser(...)es to ward off a blow,
For who shall re(...)ute what no man can know.
For if folks wou(...)d have wonders or miracles done
We confess we can instance at present but one.
That so many sh(...)uld Scripture and reason forsake
And in our redic(...)lous whimses partake.
but though in go(...)d form we would argue no more
We went on wi(...)h bawling as high as before,
For we knew th(...)t the crowd would the glory afford
To him that spo(...)e loudest, and h^d the last word.
To prove that w(...) did our Antagonist beat,
It Is enough for t(...) say that we made them retreat
And charged them bravely when we had done,
In the Rear with an echo, they run friends, they run.
And to show that (...)ur Ammunition of Lungs,
Was yet not all s(...)ent, nor weary our tongues,
After this we beg(...)n another new qu^^^^
And fell all a Pre(...)ching in Rank and in File.
Thus in brief a str(...)nge clutter we kept, and a stir
But what good ca(...)e on it, if I know I Am a cur,
Only people went (...)ome, some sick, and some lame,
But all of them ju(...)t as wise as they came.
London, Printed for James Naylor.


