HELL REFORMED OR A GLASS FOR FAVORITS. Their Falls and complaints Also the
Complaints of Princes against their Favorits.

With the dangerous mischiefs of State Politics, Flatterers, Suborners,
Secret Accusers, False witnesses, etc.

Also the Reasons of a Devil, why he had rather continue in hell; then return
and live again on earth.

With the acclamations of a Testator, for making his will before he dyed: And
his advice to others therein.

Also the decree of Lucifer, for Reformation. With many other notable passages,
worthy observation.

Discovered in a vision, By D: F: Q: V: A Spanish Knight, of the Order of Saint
James, and Lord of Ivan-Abad.

Published by E: M: Gent.

LONDON, Printed by E: Griffin for Simon Burton, and are to be sold at his Shop
next the Miter Tavern within Algate. 1641.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, HENRY JERMYN Esquire, Master of the Horse, to the QVEENES
Most Excellent Majesty.
SIR,
I Hold it no Sacrilege, after the Example of our Forefathers of the Old
Testament, (whom the Law enjoined to offer their Firstborn unto the LORD.) to
present you, as my Rightful Lord with the Premises and First Fruits of the
spare Hours, J lately spent in the Translation of the ensuing Discourse: For,
J know none, after the King, and the Right Honorable Your Father, unto whom I
owe this due, but Your Self: Since, His Majesty has set so great a Value on
Your Merit, Virtue, and Birth, as to design You to the Government of that
Isle, where J took my first Breath, and where the Right Honorable Your
Father, makes the Inhabitants to live in a Golden Age: whereby they are bound
to lift up their joint Votes unto Heaven, for His Majesty's Long and
Flourishing Reign in Health and Happiness; who does afford them, so Good and
Wise Governors, and those continued in a most Noble Line; so as I acknowledge
myself diverse ways obliged to dedicate unto You this small Labor: First, as
to my Rightful Lord, being confident, that in imitation of the Right
Honorable Your Father, You will cause the said Jnhabitants, to enjoy the like
Peace and Plenty, under Your Government: next, as Holding my small Patrimony
and Fee, immediately from You, whilst You represent the Kings Majesty there:
whereunto may also be added, the infinite Obligations J owe You in particular;
whereby J reap this further advantage, that slaunderers cannot justly say,
that J have any further end herein, but only to render You most humble
thanks, for the benefits have already received, from Your Generosity. Besides,
I am confident, that Your Name appearing in the Frontispice of this Book, will
serve to Protect it, from the malice of those, who would disallow the Author
for being a Spaniard, which J assure my self, will be no less acceptable in
this Court in the English habit (being countenanced by You, who seem to be the
Moecenas of Strangers) then he has been in France, clad according to the
fashion there; where he has passed the Press, without other, then Universal
Patronage: For, seeing his chief aim, is, to suppress Vice, and to open a
path to Virtue, (though in a Satyricall way,) his design and mine cannot but
take effect. Since, detesting Vice, You possess Virtue it self, and are no
way like unto those Courtiers, of whom he speaks in this Treatise: otherwise,
that Great Queen (whose Life may much rather be Admired, then Imitated) had
not elected You, for the discharge of one of the Most Honorable Places in Her
Service. Finally, as You are borne to be Happy on Earth, that You may likewise
be so in Heaven, shall be the constant Prayer of him who is,

SIR, Yours most obliged, most obedient, and most honoring Servant, EDWARD
MESSERVY.

A PREFACE FROM THE TRANSLATOR TO THE JUDICIOUS READER.
GEntle Reader, It follows of necessity, that you will have something to say
against me, because I put to light this seventh Vision, making no mention of
the six first, that ought to precede, to the end, that the order and intention
of that Noble Knight, DonFrancisco de Quevedo, Author of the Visions, should
not be perverted, who is held amongst men of judgment, one of the ripest wits
of this age, his writings being filled with rich conceptions, and a thousand
good conceits, (whereof you shall see a delectable pattern in this Vision)
which Ieaves much satisfaction and content to the Judicious Reader; besides his
intention, which is to be esteemed, since it tends to a good and holy
reformation of life, representing Vice unto us, to the end we should abhor
it, also he does not speak to the virtuous, but to the wicked who are past
correction, and doubtless, there will be none but the last that will disprove
it, and by that means they will make it appear, that they have a mind I
should be their Harbinger to appoint their lodgings in the Empire of Pluto,
destined to the vicious and obstinate. I have also exactly translated in our
Tongue, the said six first Visions; and have clad this Spanish Knight, after
this Country fashion, at the request of my friends, and for the Public good,
(which may be moved to a good and holy reformation;) rather then for my own
satisfaction; And for some reasons best known to my self, I have made a
demurre of presenting them unto you until you have seen this, hoping that you
will make the esteem of it, that the reputation of this Author merits, who
has been admired in all Tongues and Countries, where he has been received
with great applause, and also amongst Nations more gross, and every way
inferior unto us. I also desire you (most dear Reader) to pass by the faults
of this Book, in case there be any, and to correct them your self; Assuring
you if there be any, it is against my will, and shall be a mere defect in the
impression. Also, know that I am not in the humor to in sert an Errata,
because I hold it not decent; and am sure that those who shall read my Book,
if they are men of understanding finding of them will have charity enough to
correct them; but if they are others, care not. Farewell.

THE TABLE OF HELL REFORMED.
A
ABdolominus. p. 19 Accusation Against the Merchants evil Angel. p. 52
Against the Thiefes ^vill Angel. p. 86
Secret Accusers. p. 2, 6, 52 Achillas. p. 13 Adonis. p. 63 Advocats. p. 3
Alexanders contestation against Clitus his Favorite. p. 16 Aminta. p. 20
Generals of Armies. p. 16 Arms. p. 37 Augustus. p. 41
B
Belizarus Justinians Favorite. p. 34 Brutus. p. 9 Busy-body. p. 4
C
I. Caesar. p. 9 Calisthenes. p. 20 Cassius. p. 9 Clitus. p. 16 Complaint Of
Caesar against Brutus and Cassius. p. 9 Of Belizarius Justinians Favorite. p.
34 Of Plantianus against Severus. p. 32 of Sejanus against Tiberius. p. 28 of
Seneca against Nero. p. 21 of Solon against Tyrants. p. 39 of Suetonius. p. 51
The evil Angel of Consequence. p. 95 The evil Angel of Cuckolds. p. 97
D
Darius. p. 19 Decree of Lucifer. p. 103 Decrepitude and its misery. p. 66 The
devils justification. p. 88 Dionysius his reply. p. 41 Domitians revenge upon
Suetonius p. 47 Douegna. p. 2, 6, 76 Invective against a Douegna. p. 76
E
Effects of Prosperity. p. 104 Emperors. p. 8, 16 Envious. p. 59
F
False witness. p. 7 Fathers without Children. p. 54 Favorits. p. 17, 21, 26
Flatterers. p. 3, 110 Fosterers of envy. p. 22
G
Generals of Armies. p. 16
H
Habakkuk Prophet. p. 35. Half Hermit or Hypocrite. p. 4 Hypocrites. p. 5, 78
I
Idleness the mother of Vice. p. 107 Infancy and its misery. p. 6 Inter-meddlers
of others affairs. p. 111 Invective against a Douegna. p. 76 Iulians reply. p.
41 Julius Caesar. p. 9 Jupiter. p. 19 Justification of a Senator against
Caesar. p. 13 The devils Justification. p. 88 Belizarius Justinians Favorit.
p. 34
L
Lawyers. p. 3 Love in old people troublesome p. 66 Lucanus p. 24, 46 Lucifer.
p. 5 The Luxurious Evil Angel. p. 99 Touching the Luxurious. p. 108
M
Magistrates. p. 16 A Merchant. p. 53 The Merchants Evil Angel accused p. 52
Touching certain Merchants. p. 109 Miseries. of the Infancy. p. 61 of Life in
general. p. 67 of Manly age. p. 64 of Man being decrepit. p. 66 of Old age. p.
65 of Youth. p. 63
Money is one of the greatest Devils. p. 107
N
Nero. p. 41 Nero, and Senecas complaint against him. p. 21 Neros reply against
Seneca. p. 25 Numa. p. 41 The Nuns evil Angel. p. 100
O
Obstinate pernicious. p. 81 Against old people being in love. p. 66 Old women
painted. p. 79
P
Parmenio. p. 20 Patres patrae. p. 11 Pernicious obstinate. p. 81 Philotas p.
20 Physicians. p. 3 Photinus. p. 45 Piso. p. 24 Plantianus against Severus. p.
32 Pompey. p. 46 Poor. p. 106 Presumptuous. p. 59 Princes Favorites. p. 33
Profit is a Devil. p. 107 Prophet Habakkuk. p. 35 Prosperity and its effects.
p. 104 Ptolomeus. p. 46
R
Rebels against their Prince. p. 9 A Repentant because he had made his Will. p.
69 Dionysius Reply. p. 41 Iulians Reply. ibid. Reporters of others secrets. p.
110 Revengefull. p. 59 Domitians revenge upon Suetonius. p. 47
S.
Sardanapalus. p. 41 Sciences. p. 37 Secret Accusers. p. 2, 6 Sejanus against
Tiberius. p. 28 Senators. p. 11 Seneca's complaint against Nero. p. 21
Plantianus against Severus. p. 32 Solon against Tyrants. p. 39 Sponge and its
Emblem. p. 21 Suborner and his evil Angel. p. 2, 94 Suetonius his complaint.
p. 51
T
Tarquin. p. 41 A Testator. p. 69 The Thiefes evil Angel. p. 86 Sejanus
against Tiberius. p. 28 Tobacco and its evil Angel. p. 92 Trajan. p. 41
Tyrants. p. 3, 19, 20, 39 Solon against Tyrants. p. 39
V
Usurers. p. 5
W
Wills, and how they ought to be made. p. 72
Y
Youth and its miseries. p. 63
HELL REFORMED.
THough Hell be the eternal Mansion of despair and confusion, nevertheless,
there happened lately such a horrible noise, and so extraordinary and dreadful a
disorder there, that the most Ancient inhabitants of that place, acknowledging
that they had never seen the like, thought that their Commonwealth was going
to be destroyed and overthrown up-side down. They knew not one another: the
Devils believed they were the Damned, and the Damned, the Devils: some usurped
the torments belonging to others, and did run here and there, pell mell, as
if they had been frantic: to be short, 'twas a general revolt, all was in
division and quarrel. It was a good while before it could be guest who had
stirred this tempest: but at last 'twas found out, Secret Accuser. Suborner.
that a Secret Accuser, a Suborner, and a It signifies an aged widow which
serves in great houses, as those who are called Governesses.
Douegna had caused it, who had found the invention to break loose from their
fetters. Consider a little I pray, Reader, of what kind of spirit could those
three be, since they were able to augment Confusion and Trouble in Hell.

Lucifer roaring like one Possessed, cried out, that Chains, Fetters, and
Manicles should be brought, and did run every where, to quarter again every
one in his Den, when he dash't against the Secret Accuser, and having both
stayed a moment, to face one another, the Secret Accuser took the word: My
Prince, said he, I give you intelligence that there are Slothful Devils in
your Empire, who remain with their arms and legs a cross, as being lazy
and sluggish, unwilling to do any thing: and also, that many of those, which
you have sent in the world, do not come back, to give an account of their
Commissions, although the time of them be expired. And the Douegna, which went
kindling discord, from ear to ear, coming by chance to pass, that way,
stopped: Look to your self, said she, to Lucifer, there is a great conspiracy to
dispossess you of your Diabolical Scepter: Here are two Tyrants who come,
Tyrants.
three Flatterers, many Physicians, Flatterers. Physicians. Lawyers. Advocats.
and a great number of men of learning, as Lawyers and Advocates: and further I
give you notice, said she, in his ear, that amongst all those, there is a
certain man, who is a halfe-Hermit, Halfe-Hermit, or Hypocrite.
which does affirm you shall not want work.

At this word of Halfe-Hermit, Lucifer lost his color, and remaining
immovable as a statue, testified a great fear he had to lose his Scepter: and
having stood a while without speech, staring as if he had been mad: A
Halfe-Hermit, do you say; Physicians, Advocats, and Tyrants? there is a
Confection, so poisonous and venomous, that only an ounce thereof, would be
able to burst the Belly, and cast out all the tripes of Hell. And as he was
going to make a review, in the avenewes and frontiers of his Kingdom, he saw
the Or Busiebody.
Suborner coming, who seemed to be full of employment. I needed but this
encounter, said he, to portend misfortune. Well, what is the matter? And then
the Suborner, with a thousand inventions, devices, false tales, vain trifles,
toys and fables, told him there were many who plotted to fly from Hell, and
others also who would introduce Usurers and Hypocrites, Usurers. Hypocrites.
by means of which, the World took a familiar access with the Devils: and
told him besides many other tales, so full of deceits, and with such
Mountebank-like flatteries, that he had been dizied with them, if he would
have held him chat. Lucifer seeing the strange tumult in his Dominion, Lucifer.
and having intelligence of the danger which threatened him, followed his
design of making a general Review, and that with his Guard, and ordinary
Train.

Then, he begins the Visit of his lurking and secret Holds, Dens and
Dungeons of his Prisoners and Jailors. Secret Accuser.
The Secret Accuser, kindler of dissentions, went fore-most venting and blowing
a certain kind of air which did put the brands together and inflame them
only, without producing light; The Douegna followed next, Douegna.
sowing tares of discord every where. The Cunning Suborner came after, Suborner.
learing with the corner of his eye on every side, not turning his head, and
passed not before any of the Ghosts, but he made a cringe, or some other
gesture faining some good will. To the one he made a courtesy, he kissed the
others hands: unto this, he said, I am your servant; unto that, make use of
me. But at every word of his Complements, the poor Ghosts cried out, Alas!
but much more outragiously then at those flashes of flames which tormented
them. Oh traitor! said one: Oh the fire is much more pleasant! said the other.
There Is the redoubling of our pain! said this. There Is the accumulating of our
torments! said that.

Amongst a great Rascally Company, and in an eminent place, there was a
Notorious False witness, False witness
who as most expert in that profession, made a lecture of lying, to that
Worshipful company, which was about him: he made them swear, that they had
seen those things, which were unknown unto them. And when that Doctor
perceaved the Suborner: What? said he, much frighted, is that Devil in this
Country: But how? I made choice to come to Hell, rather then to be in any
place where I might see him: assuredly, If I had thought that he had been to
come hither, it had been enough, not only to have procured my salvation, but
also to have gone some whither where else I could never have entered.

Thereupon, we heard a great noise of Voices, Arms, Blows, and Cries
intermix't with Reproaches and Complaints. They took hold one of another, and
did strike and fulminate each other, with their own persons, but with such
cruelty, that it is impossible to represent so furious a battle. Amongst all
those, was one who seemed to be an Emperor, for he had a Crown of Laurel on
his Head, and was environed with Counselors, who with their tongues whetted
with the Text of Laws and statutes, endeavored to defend themselves, from the
enraged fury and choler, whereof this Emperor tormented them. Lucifer drew
near him, and with a thunder-like voice, which caused all Hell to tremble: Who
art thou (said he) Ghost, who art here so lofty and stately? I am (answered he)
Great Julius Caesar who in the general sedition of your Realm, Complaint and
revenge of Caesar against Brutus and Cassius.
came upon Brutus and Cassius, to take Revenge of the bloody outrage, which
they did, when they took away my life, under pretext of the liberty of the
Country, though it was but to quench their particular envy and covetousnes.
Nota. Rebels against their Prince.
Those infamous Villains hated not the Empire; but only the Emperor: they
murthred me, because I had established the Monarchy: but yet they abolish't it
not, contrariwise, they, sooner and with more ease, made sure the preservation
thereof: they did more harm taking away my life, then I did when I took away
from the Senators, the Government of the Commonwealth, since, I died
Emperor, and my Homicides procured to themselves, the Title of Traitors during
their life: I was adored of the people, and they punished for killing of me.
Cursed blood-shedders! said that Great Ghost of Julius Caesar, turning toward
them, was the Government of the Commonwealth better in the Hands of Senators,
who could not keep it, then under the conduct of a Warrior who purchass't it
by his merit? He that is experienced in cavilling, and learned in forging of a
False accusation, is he worthier of a Crown, then a great Captain, who fills
his Country with Glory, and gives Terror to his enemies? He that knows the
laws, is he fitter for an Empire, then he who maintains them? No, No, it is
unto this, to establish them, and to the others to study'em. Poor Roman
Commonwealth! calls thou Liberty; the obeying to the discord of Many: and
Bondage; to respect the Power and Might only of One? Many men full of
Covetousness and Ambition ought they to be called The Fathers of their
Country, Patres Patriae.
and the generosity of One held for Tyranny? Oh how much more glorious had it
been for the Romans to have maintained a Son, who made Rome Mistress of the
World, then Fathers who by an infinite number of Civil wars, made her the
Stepmother of her own Children. Ye barbarous and cruel, consider a little
what was the Government of the Senators; since, the people having tasted of the
Monarchy; had rather be commanded by Nero, Tiberius, Caligula, and
Heliogabalus, then by Laws and Senators.

Then Brutus, with a trembling voice, and a face covered with shame began to
say, crying out: Oh Senators! Senators.
do you not understand Caesar? do you add a new crime, to that which you
have heretofore done? and having been the Authors of the Parricide, do you
suffer him who believed you, to be thus accused? Speak, answer, Counselors:
Caesar speaks to you as well as to me: you were so cunning in your
persuasions, that Cassius and I were the traitorous executioners, taking no
regard to your unsatiable Ambition, and not observing that your Gravity, your
beards and long gowns will always assume command, draw obedience unto them,
and put all the danger upon the Prince. In effect, you do so exalt your
Offices, and authorize your vanity so powerfully, that it is more dangerous for
the Monarke not to obey you, then to the Subject to disobey the Monarke. To
what tended the execution of your perfidiousnesse and treason? Answer to
Caesar; for as for our parts, we are chastised by our infamy and confusion.

At these words, one of the Senators who was all covered with burning coals,
rose up, Justification of a Senator against Caesar.
and with a severe brow, grimme behavior, and feeble voice: Prince, said he to
Caesar, whereat do thou complain, if for thy sake Ptolomey, who was King,
killed Great Pompey so cowardly, of whom he held the Kingdom which he
possessed; what outrage and what trespass did the Connsellors commit to kill
thee, to recover those Kingdoms that thou had ravished unto us? Is It an
action of impiety to acquit thee toward Pompey? Let the Devils be the Judges.
Achilles, Achilles.
who was one of that Valiant Warriors murderers, and who brought to pass the
execution thereof, by Ptolomeys command, was but a Robber who lived but with
his trespasses, but thou were far more infamous then he: seeing Pompeys Head,
thou weptst, but thy tears were more traitorous, then the weapon which
murdered him: 'twas a compassion accompanied with cruelty; thy pity was
revenge, and thou were more arrogant looking on him being dead, then thou were
in the conflicts which thou had against him during his life.

How can it be possible, that hypocritical eyes could find place in the first
Head of the world? It cannot be denied, but that taking away thy life we gave
it again to our Commonwealth. It was neither we, nor the people who called
Nero to the Empire, but he was borne out of thy blood: thy Head being cut off,
was the Hydra of the Empire; whence twelve more came forth.

They had begun their first skirmish again thereupon, if Lucifer had not with
an absolute power, commanded unto Caesar, to reenter in the pain and
punishments of his presumption, which caused him to despise the advices, that
were given him touching his disaster: and to Brutus and Cassius, to be for ever
the scandal and reproach of Politic Souls. The Senators were sent with
Minos and Rhadamantus, to be the Devils Associates.

That done, there was a great rumor of Voices heard which were something
remote, as if many being in choler had disputed together: some moderate replies
were also heard, mixed with reproaches and outrages, there were some so
transported with fury, that words and blows went together, and the more the
Visit came near, the more the noise redoubled: which was the cause, that they
advanced with speed, but notwithstanding all the diligence which was made
before the Visit came to them, they were found already engaged in a bloody
Combat. The Persons were of different qualities, but nevertheless of the best
rank, for there were Emperors, Emperors. Magistrates Generals of Armies.
Magistrates, and Generals of Armies: The Imperious voice of the Prince of
Darkness, causes a truce of their debates, and all turned toward him,
testifying they suffered a cruel torture in the stopping of the execution of
their hatred and revenge. The first who took the word, was a man remarkable
by many great wounds, who raising his voice: I am, Clitus.
said he, Clitus: Hold thy peace, said another, who was beside him, dares thou
speak before me? Prince of the Devils, said he, harken unto Alexander son of
Jupiter, Alexanders contestation against Clitus his Favorite.
Lord of the Worlds, the terror of Nations, the Most Great Emperor. He was
going to make an Iliad of Titles, Qualities, and Lordships after the Spanish
fashion, if the Attorney General had not impoled Him silence: Speak, said He,
to Clitus, and he, who had a great desire thereof, said thus:

Lucifer, I was the first of this Emperors Favorits, who was Lord of all the
known Land, who bore the title of King of Kings, who said himself to be the
Son of Jupiter Ammon, and nevertheless though he commanded to so many Worlds,
his natural passions (which may serve for an example to take away humane
presumption) had a great Dominion over him: Cruelty made him exceeding rash,
and uncapeable to receive the wholesome Counsels of his trusty servants. I was
during my life, of the most sincere amongst those; but it was not so much my
diligent obedience that procured me the name of Favorite, Favorite.
as the opinion he had that I should increase the number of his Flatterers: but
I had too much integrity in my soul, to be partaker of his follies, the sorrow
I had of his defects, imboldned me to try if I could repress them gently. One
day seeing him speak with contempt, of the glorious exploits of Philip his
Father, and black the splendour of the generosity of a Prince, which had given
him the being, and who had taken such a care for his education: I showed him
his ingratitude, I told him of the abuse of that imaginary Divinity whereof his
Flatterers cogg'd with him, and speaking with all manner of freedom unto him,
I represented unto him that he should not thus wither and snatch his Fathers
Palms from him. But see a little to what degree of felony, this Prince was
transported, since at the rehearsal of his Fathers praises, and his
magnanimous acts, he did rise with choler, and slew me with his own hand.
After that, show me where was his Divinity. When he gave the Kingdom of
Sidonia to Abdolominus who then was a Clenser of Iakes, 'twas not, as it was
believed to honor the Virtue of that Captain, but shamefully to take down
the Pride, and affront the Great ones of Persia, after the death of Darius. And
having found him here, I have asked him, in what place Jupiter his Father had
forsaken him, and what offense he had committed toward him to cast him into
Hell, and if he was not disabused from his Flatterers, who adored and offered
unto him incense, making him believe, that he was Son to the Greatest of the
Gods, and that in a direct line, he was the only heir of Thunder, and of the
Celestial Throne of Jupiter: 'twas therefore that we were fallen together by
the ears, when you arrived. But leaving aside these invectives judge I pray
you, if it was not the action of a Tyrant, to make it a trespass worthy of
death, the recital of his Fathers virtues and magnanimities? What barbarous
cruelty used he not toward Parmenio, Parmenio. Philotas. Calisthenes.
Philotas, His Son, and Calisthenes who was also one of his Favorits, yea
toward Aminta his Cosen, Aminta.
his Mother in Law, and his Brother? Oh Lucifer! you see that there is no
necessity, to be Good, or Wicked, to make a criminal, but only to be Favorite
to a Tyrant, and that it is as in the course of life, wherein every one dies
because he is Mortal, and not by reason of the sickness, for it serves, but
as a pretext to Death.

Then now thou know, said Satan, Tyrants.
that Tyrants know how to give the foil, to cause those whom they please to
stumble and fall down: for they hate all, the virtuous; because, he is not
wicked; and the wicked, for very spite that he is not worse. What Favorits have
they made, which they have not thrown down headlong? Do not thou remember
the emblem of the Sponge? Now learn that all Favorits are the Princes
Spunges, Favorits.
they let them drink in and suck all their full, and afterward they crush
them, and get out the substance for their profit.

As he ended this last word, there was a Lamentable outcry of many people
heard, and at the same time, a Grave Old man, of as pale a color as if he had
had no blood in his veins, who drew near unto Lucifer: It seems, said he,
that the Similitude of the Sponge whereof you speak, is made for me, by reason
of the great treasures which I have possessed. I am that renouned Seneca, A
Complaint of Seneca, against Nero
a Spaniard by Nation, Neros Tutor and Favorite. He exercised the excess of
his liberalities upon me: he gave me without asking; I was never Covetous, but
only Obedient. It Is ordinarily a Princes delight, to show himself liberal
toward a Favorite, and to heap honors and goods upon him, and whosoever would
refuse, and not accept them, until he had deserved them, he should offend his
Prince, and it would seem that the Subject, would rather have his Modesty and
Temperance to be admired, then the Magnanimity of the Master who gives.
Insomuch that the most devout hommage, that a Vassal can do to his Lord, it is
to contribute, as much as in him lies, to the Glory, and splendour of his
Virtue. Nero gave me all what could be given by such a Prince as he was; But
notwithstanding all the Modesty and discreet carriage that I could use in the
enjoying of such Gratifications: Yet the Fosterers of Envy did murmr, and
invented false Accusations and detractions against me, publishing that I
persuaded the contempt of riches to others, to the end, that the hunger of my
unsatiable Covetousness, should have fewer Competitors: And seeing that by
little and little the Vigor of my good reputation and prosperity did diminish,
I took a resolution to put my Soul out of trouble, and to be no more the
Object of the hatred of so many. I went to Nero, and restored unto him, all
what he had given me, with all the duty and respect that I could testify. I
had such a passion to love and serve him, that the threats of his (to be
redoubted) humor whereat some would terrify me; never took away my boldness
to exhort him to virtue; nor his unruly actions, hindered me not from making
those remonstrances unto him to which my loyalty obliged me: And when he
caused murders and homicides to be committed, 'twas then, that with more
vehemence, I represented unto him the wounds which he made to his Conscience.
He caused his Mother to be slain: he fired Rome, and reduced it to ashes, he
did depopulate the whole Empire of Honest People, Piso.
whence Piso's conspiracy followed: which was very well propounded, but very
ill executed: for, having been discovered, those who were to execute it, were
put to Death. Those are accidents of the Divine Providence, thus to preserve
the life of a Prince, from those abominable accidents, to the end they may know
themselves and amend their lives: But what? Nero could prevent this conspiracy,
and nevertheless he amended not his defects, nor left his vices: at the same
time, he took away Lucanus his life, Lucanus.
because he was a better Poet then he. And if he gave me the choice, of what
kind of Death I would die, 'twas not by any feeling of Pity, but rather of
Cruelty: he intended to give me many Deaths in lieu of one, for the pain of
death was reiterated during the time of the choice which I was to make;
besides, he propounded to himself, that suffering effectually that whereof I
was to make choice, so also I should suffer all the rest in the Terror and
Fear which made me to refuse them: I put my self in a Bath, and causing my
Veins to be cut, I made expedition of my own dispatches my self, to come
hither with speed; where, to augment my misfortunes, I have found this
infamous Prince, exercising yet his Cruelties, and teaching unto the Devils new
torments aagainst the Poor Ghosts.

Then Nero advances, Nero's replies against Seneca.
and with a stern Visage and shrill Voice, It is needful, said he, that the
Favorit and Tutor, should have more learning then the Prince, but also it is
requisite, that he should govern himself with respect; for to become
presumptuous, because he has some advantage of doctrine above him, it is a
Crime; and therefore the Subject that will make it appear, that he is abler
then his Sovereign, and that he knows more then he, ought to be punished as
being Presumptuous and Insolent. Seneca, whilst thou did teach me, I
preferred thee to all those which were about me, and the esteem that I made of
thy Wisdom was one of the principal praises of my Reign: But as soon as
thou would have all men to know, that thou were more expert and better able
then I, (a thing which thou should have dissembled more Iudicially,) thou
made me a General scandal through-out all the World: and from that time, my
hatred and Indignation began to kindle against thee: That was so displeasing
unto me, that I had rather a thousand times, suffer the torments which are
here: then to see a Favorit beside me who should make Glory of my shame, and
get Honor, out of my Contempt. I call to witness all these Princes who are
here: Speak; Kings, draw near: Say, have you suffered your Favorits to
become so presumptuous, as to make it appear that the capacity of their
understanding did exceed yours, without correcting them for their Temerity? No,
no, answered they all with one voice, it shall never be endured, as long as the
World will be a World; our Successors have promised unto us, to remedy that
disorder. It is true, that as long as the Favorite is wise and skillful, and
can persuade unto the people, that the Prince does possess the Talent of
governing discreetly, and that he works by himself, he ought to be
Maintained, Honored and Esteemed by his Master: But at that instant, that
Vanity, will lead him, to cause the contrary to be known; Farewell all
Privacy, he deserves to be degraded.

That Decree has no relation to me, Complaint of Sejanus against Tiberius.
then said Sejanus, though I had a better Wit then Tiberius, for I carried my
self with so much Industry, that all was published as done and ordained by his
own Judgment. Therefore he acknowledged to be so much obliged, to my good
services, that he made me Peer and Co-partner of his Empire, and erected
Statues, to which he granted Sacred Privileges. My Name was the acclamation of
the Roman People, my Felicity, the Mirth and Joy of the Empire, and all Nations
made common Vows and Prayers for the preservation of my Health. But when I
believed, that I was the Favorit who had the greatest share in his Lords
affections, Tiberius caused me to be taken, and to be torn in pieces, and
forsook me to the Rage and Fury of the mutineer'd people, who held it for an
Honor, to carry away a piece of my flesh, upon the point of their Javelins,
they dragd me along the streets: Yet their incom parable Cruelty went beyond
the Bounds of my Sepulcher: it went to my Children, and caused them to die
ignominiously; and a Daughter that I had which by reason of the privilege of
Virginity could not be put to death, by Justice, was barbarously condemned
first to be ravished by the Hangman, (Oh prodigious!) and then to be beheaded,
as it was executed. It is true that my ruin began the very day that I would
prevent the Destinies, oppose my self to the Power of Fortune, and despise
Heavenly Providence. Then, more Sacrilegious then Wise, I endeavored to
fortify my self, against the craft of men, causing some to be put to death,
and others banished, Insomuch that I caused Heaven to declare it self my
Enemy. Not contented with that, I took access with the Wicked, I made use of
the Physician for Poisons, of the Bloody for Revenge, of False Witnesses, of
Unjust and Corrupted Magistrates. But nevertheless, I might say, that those
outrages, were not committed according to my own will, but by virtue of the
necessity wherein I was raised, and as I propounded unto my self, that in my
fall and undoing, I should be forsaken of the Virtuous, and and also of the
Wicked, I made use of these as of people fit for my ends, and I fled from the
righteous as from my accusers: Nevertheless even such as I was, if Tiberius
has exercised tyranny, it has not been through my counsels, I never induced
him to it, much less (approving of him, as a Flatterer) I have left the
effects much more cruel, then the condemned have done by the torments of
imprisonment and tortures: and if I am accused to have persuaded him to
cruelty, to alienate from him the affections of the people, and raise my
fortune, who shall be named for the author, of that which he used toward me? O
Lucifer, you must know that Tyrants do discharge themselves of the faults which
they commit, upon those which they have employed in such actions, for they do
expose and sacrifice us very freely to death, for to satisfy the peoples
outrage when they murmr against them, and by that means we suffer the pain
for their faults. The Histories which recite our disgraces, make always use of
these words: There Is the ordinary end of those who approach too near the
Princes favors: insomuch that in every Chronicle, our misfortune serves as an
advertisement for an ill passage. The exalting of a Favorit testifies also the
greatness of the Prince which does it; to maintain him near him, and in his
Honors, It is so much the more to make his good Judgment to appear in the
Choice which he has made: contrariwise when he destroys him, it is to show
the lightness and inconstancy of his Spirit, and to side with his Adversaries.

At the same time Plantianus, A Complaint of Plantianus Severus his Favorit.
Severus his Favorit approached, who^ he had caused to be thrown out of a
Window to be a spectacle unto the people. During my life, said he, I might
well have been compared to a Fiery Racket, which in an instant was elevated in
the air, fair, flaming and cracking: Whiles I held the first rank, I spark
led like a Star in the eyes of the World, but that lasted very little, I fell
presently to the ground, and was converted into smoke and ashes.

After this many other Favorits appeared in a Troop, Princes Favorites.
namely Faustus Favorite unto Pirrhus King of the Epirotes; Pyrenus and
Cleander, Commodus his Favorites; Cincinatus, Favorite unto Britilus, Emperor;
Rusfus, unto Domitian, and Ampronisius, that of Adrian, who were all attentive,
to the trembling and complaining voice of Belizarius, Iuslinians Favorite, who
being blind as he was, had already struck twice with his staff, and shak'd
his head, showing that he demanded audience: and when silence was made, he said
thus:

It is much more shame for you, Complaint of Bellizarius Justinians Favorite.
ye Princes; to be the executioners of those whom you have promoted, then unto
us Favorites to undergo the cruel effects of your inconstancy. For my part, I
served a Wise Prince, and Just, who taught the means to administer Justice:
and though he was bound to my Valor, for the Greatness of his Empire, his
Victories and Triumphs; he caused my eyes to be plucked out, and left me
forsaken in an extreme misery, even to be reduced to beg my bread in the
corner of the Streets. And this name of Belizarius, which was wont to be
proferred for the animating of the Squadrons, and to fright the Enemies; this
name, I say, whereof the sound and power was worth an Army, has seen himself
encamped upon the pavement, and from door to door begging alms, not knowing
of whom.

The Favor of Princes is like Quicksilver, it cannot stay, it is in a
perpetual motion, it flies away betwixt your fingers: if you will force it,
'twill convert into vapor: when one would make it more sublime, it becomes more
venomous, if you handle it, it penetrates to the very bones: he that
communicates often with it, and who works to get it, remains all his life
trembling until death.

As he ended these words, a great cry was heard of frightfull Groans, and of
Helas, pronounced by all those who had any feeling of the Quicksilver of
Favor, which began all to tremble as Aspin leaves, and at that instant a
Spirit spoke these words of the Prophet Habakkuk, Prophet Habakkuk.
speaking to those Princes who are negligent of their duty.

Wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, Cap. 1. v. 13.
and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more
righteous then h^?

And make men as the fishes of the Sea, verse 14.
as the creeping things that have no ruler over them.

Therefore the Law is slacked, verse 4.
and judgment does never go forth: for the wicked does compass about the
righteous: therefore wrong judgment proceeds.

For the stone shall cry out of the wall, Cap. 2. v. 11.
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.

Whereby is meant, that insensible things shall reproach you; I have made you a
recital of the Prophets threats, ( said the Spirit continewing) to make you
consider that God makes not so much esteem of you Great ones, that he puts
always the chastisements of your errors in the hands of the other Princes and
Potentates of the earth, or to prodigious successes, or to forces exceeding
yours; but to the most abject, vile, base; and to be despised. Admire a little,
of what Ministers God makes use of, to revenge your outrages, vanities, and
pride, he causes insensible stones to speak, walls and rotten wood from
betwixt the joints of the edifices. When God will, wormeaten wood, the least
insects, little worms, flies, and lice, are the Officers of his dreadful
Justice.

He had hardly ended his last word, when they were feign to run, to know whence
proceeded another great noise of Cries and Confused Voices, which besotted all
the Auditors: and as they came near, they saw that 'twas the Arms and
Sciences who fought together, There were persons of eminent quality, and
nevertheless of different conditions and diverse ages. Some struck with
Swords, others defended themselves with great Books, whereof they made use,
sometimes of Offensive, and sometimes of Defensive Arms: that is to say;
putting of them before their breast in stead of Targets or Plastrons, then
striking with them furious blows upon their adversaries ears. Soft, Soft
(said one of Lucifers followers) bear respect to the Prince of Darkness.
Presently the blows were suspended on either side: and then one of the
Combatants began to say: If you knew the reason we have to avenge ourselves,
it may be you should be of our side. At that instant appeared Domitianus,
Commodus, Caracalla, Phalaris, Heliogabalus, Alcetus, Andronicus, Busiris, and
many other Great Personages. Lucifer seeing such a Majesticall Company,
disposed himself to give them all manner of satisfaction which they could
desire, when a Grave Old man advanced himself, followed by many others, who
having been misused by those Princes and having had the worst, had all their
faces bloody.

I am Solon, said that Old man, Solons Complaint against Tyrants.
and those are the seven Wise men of Greece, so much renowned throughout all
the World. That same which the Tyrant Nicocreon beats, (as you see,) in a
mortar, is the Philosopher Anaxarchus: That little crooked is that excellent
wit which the world knew heretofore under the name of Aristotle: that flat
nose, is the wise Socrates; that other Old man is the Divine Plato: and those
others hid in a corner, are many other men of our profession, who have made the
same works, of which these Princes being offended, take a cruel vengeance on
us. And to inform you of the business, you must know (Prince Lucifer) that we
are the composers of Politic Books, and Laws of the good Government of
States and Empires: whereby we have taught unto Princes the Method which they
ought to observe to rule their people and to be beloved of them: how Justice
ought to be held in reverence and administered, Generous Warriers recompensed,
use to be made of Learned Men, to banish Flatterers, to have Magistrates
Prudent and full of Integrity; correct and reward according to the occurences,
that they were Jove's Stewards on earth, and that they represented The Gods.
There Is the only object of the outrages, which they do unto us, though we
name them not, and had no design to offend the^, but rather to be as a Guide
unto them in the way of Virtue and of Heaven. Oh wicked Princes! said he
turning toward them: those glorious Kings and Emperors, upon whom we took
the model, to form our Laws and Instructions, have now a far better
habitation then you. Numa. Tarquin. Augustus. Sardinapapulus. Trajan. Nero.
Dionysius his Reply.
Numa is a sparckling star, and Tarquin a smoking Firebrand: and Augustus
has left a far more Glorious memory, then Sardanapalus; and Traian, then
Nero.

Then Dionysius the Tyrant, accompanied with many of the same profession, began
to cry out: thou lie, infamous Philosopher, it is quite contrary that you
Lawgivers have done us any service, you are rather the cause of our reproaches,
of our dishonor, and of the cruel deaths whereby we have been cut off:
having lied in your writings, spoken of things whereof you had no knowledge,
and given precepts, of those of which you were ignorant, we have been
persecuted during our life, and defamed after death.

How, my Prince (said Julian the Apostata, Iulians Reply.
looking upon Satan) it is very likely, that these Schoolmasters of base
extraction, who are despised and mocked of the world, by reason of their
sluttish and slovenly kind of living, clothes, and grim looks, who make a
merit of a beggarly life, and a constancy of the scorn of others: who have
neither Theory nor Practicke of those Sciences they treat of, not knowing what
Dominion and Reign is; yet busy themselves to prescribe Precepts unto Kings,
and show them the ways how to govern their Kingdoms according to their fancy
and fantastical opinions, which they believe to be the Props of Crowns.

To your judgment, could all Hell give a greater torment and a more odious
mortification unto wordly greatness, then to oblige it, to suffer, that one of
those base fellows, scratching his head, and with a face covered with a bushy
Beard, his eyes sunk as far as the backe-side of his scull, with an
unpleasant kind of speech, shall say, that the Prince which takes care only
for himself, is a Tyrant, and that he who only thinks to be the preservation
of his people, is a true King? Oh! ignorant, how rash and unadvised art thou?
draw near, a King who cares only for the good of others, who shall have care
of his? What? thou would have us to destroy our selves, and that we should
do upon our own persons, all the harm which we could receive of our enemies?
Rascals, write night and day as much as you please, but do not go about to
speak undesired, of a profession which you understand not. How could we be
Sovereign Lords, unless we were Masters and Possessors of the goods of
others, and be absolute if we submitted unto your Advices and Counsels, ye
who are but our Vassalls? Can we have a supreme power, and cannot revenge our
offenses, satisfy unto our Covetousness, nor content our depraved spirits?
and having a mind to fulfill our passions, would it be fit to make choice of
Virtuous people to repress the Wicked? No, No, we have more need of those who
are agreeing unto our Wills, then of the others: and to speak the truth; you
are very much void of common sense, to think that we can recompense, the Merit
and Virtue of honest people, since they are our own Accusers. It Is much more
profitable to draw unto us the Deceavers, Perfidious and Wicked, by means of
Dignities, and Consulats; for our Sanctuary is in their Outrages, our quality
in their imitation; and our excuses, in their extravagances. And why then, old
Bocus Barbus, do you not write the truth? Learn, learn that Butchers fatten
their sheep for naught else but to kill them, and that the Surgeon does not
stop the veins, when he would let blood.

Remain then henceforth in a perpetual silence, and let this Orator speak,
Photinus.
who teaches us a manner of Government much more favorable then yours: Come
forth Photinus, and cause your self to be understood. Thereupon appeared a
certain Impudent fellow, of an ill favored countenance, who seemed only to be
fit, to persuade wickedness, who opening his foul mouth, and with a fearful
houling, vomited forth the venom of these Words.

Wicked persuasions from one of Ptolomy his Courtiers, Ptolomaeus.
to induce him to cause Pompey to be slain: Pompey.
taken out of Lucan, Lucan.
in the 8 Book of his Pharsalia.
Many Great Princes as thou art, Ptolomey, have often repented, to have been
too religious in the observation of Justice and equity The afflicted, which
they have assisted, and the seruple which they have made to violate faith, have
often hindered them from extending the limit of their Empire, and increasing the
splendour of their Crowns. No, No, Ptolomy, you must resolve. It Is at this
time, that you must yield unto the Destiny, and stick to the will of the Gods,
forsaking boldly, those whom they please to persecute, and dispose thy self to
take party with those whom they favor. There Is as much distance betwixt Heaven
and Earth, and difference betwixt fire and water, as between the useful and
the equitable. Insomuch, that when a Prince will keep himself within the
bounds of honesty and civility, he conspires against himself; he destroys the
greatness of his Empire, and disperses his Armies: Contrariwise, the liberty
of doing ill, and the license of trespasses fortifies, strengthens and
maintains the most odious Reign: And though there were impiety in this
action, who can bring thee in question? An other, who should be below thee,
might very well fear some punishment: but thou art above the laws, and thou
can do all things absolutely. Then defer no longer; or else, He that will
exercise piety, let him leave the Court.

As these detestable words were ending, Domitian appeared, Drmitian his revenge
upon Suetonius.
who came in choler, and dragging after him poor Suetonius Tranquillus,
saying: Amongst all these Historiographers and Chroniclers, there are none
worse, nor more dangerous, then those who after the death of Emperors dishonor
their reputation, according to the fancy of their wits. These cursed Writers,
cannot let Princes be in quiet during their life, nor yet after their death,
for they cause them to revive in their Histories to trouble them afresh, as
this rash fellow does toward me, who speaks of me in these terms.

His Treasure (says he) having been exhausted, by reason of the excessive
expenses which he had made in building of Edifices, causing Plays to be
represented, and in augmenting the Soldiers pay.

But I pray, in what can a Prince better employ his Treasure, then in making of
sumptuous buildings, in recreating of himself, and in recompencing the
Warriers.

He endeavored, (said he) to raise himself again, from the expenses which
were made in the maintenance and entertainment of the Men of War, to lessen
the number: But confidering that it was to give way unto strangers to play him
some affront, he made no scruple to ransack and pillage all manner of ways,
the goods of the living and of the dead also, which were confiscate, upon the
report of the least accuser: and to undo a man, there needed naught else, but
to go and say that he had spoken ill of the Prince.

Is it thus that one ought to speak of Princes? what can he say worse of
thieves and robbers? Is it not a brazen-faced impudence to use the same terms
for the Scepters of Kings, as for Thieves stealing hooks, and to compare them
alike?

He took possession (says he again) of those inheritances where he had
neither right nor pretext of succession, as soon as there was a False witness
found, who would say, that he had heard the deceased ( to whom Domitian had
tyrannically ravished the goods) say before his death that Caesar was his
Heir. Besides he had imposed an excessive Tribute upon the Jews, and there
were some who fained they were none to free themselves from 't: And to that
purpose, I remember that being yet a young Youth, I was present when an Old man
of fourscore and ten years old, who was thought to be a Jew, was visited by
the Emperors Deputy; also before a great assembly of Counselors, to see
whether he was circumcised yea or no.

What think you, Infernal Gentlemen, is not that an insupportable injury? How
can I help the faults and excesses of my inferior Officers? For my part, I
wonder that the Princes my successors do suffer those scandalous writings to
be published to my dishonor, I who have spent so much money in the
reestablishing of the Libraries which had been burnt.

As he uttered this word, Suetonius his Complaint.
Suetonius said with a dying voice: It is true, that was a recommendable
action, and therefore I have not forgotten to make mention thereof. But what
can thou reply, if I accuse thee to have written in a letter (which contained
a certain command) these words, witnesses of thy pride and impiety: Your Lord,
and your God commands it thus. And if I have said the truth in my writings,
whereof do thou complain? How have I spoken of the Divine Augustus, of
Great Julius Caesar, and of Trajan? What Heroical actions have they done,
which I have not published? But for thee, and thy semblable who are crowned
plagues, what fault have I committed putting before your eyes your tyrannies
which causes horror unto men and all the earth?

This discourse of Suetonius was interrupted by the Secret Accuser and Kindler
of Dissentions, Accusation against the Merchants evil Angel.
who addressing himself to Lucifer, showing him a Devil with his finger: That
Devil, said he, comes but now from the World, and it is twenty years since you
sent him thither. Presently Lucifer commanded that he should come near: he
came frowardly, and presented himself to his Prince. How (did he ask) have
thou been so bold to stay so long without coming to give an account of thy
actions? Well, thou art come, but thou have not brought along with thee, not so
much as one poor wicked soul, nor no manner of news from the other World. My
Prince, answered the Devil, do not censure me, (if you please) before you
have heard me: whosoever condemns before he hears the party, might by chance
do justice, but it would not be just. Your Divelship may be pleased to
remember that you gave me a Merchant in keeping, A Merchant
near unto whom I have employed the time whereof you asked me an account, that
is to say, I have been ten years to cause him to commit the Thefts, and ten
other years to hinder the Restitution. See a little the Diabolical excuse
which he has found, said Lucifer! Hell now a days is not worth any thing,
all is here corrupted, it is not now what it was wont to be, and the Devils are
not now worth a rush. Then turning toward his Vassal: Alas poor idiot! was
it needful to stay so long near a Merchant to make him steal, and afterward
to hinder him to restore? thou art an ignorant, thou do not yet perfectly
understand the Art of Divellishnesse. And then calling one of his Officers:
Carry away, said he, this Devil, and put him in his apprentiship to learn his
Trade: I see he is a Knave, and that he tells me but a Tale: doubtless he
hired himself to the Comedians to be an Actor in their Plays: 'twas there
that he was occupied.

At that time there came from the side of a little hillocke, Fathers without
Children.
Men who ran after Women: They cried out, help, help, succor us, and the
men; stop, stop, take them. Lucifer commanded that they should all be seized
on. What Is the matter amongst you, said he? and one of those men, who was
almost out of breath, answered him: We are the Fathers without Children, and
these Carrions. Speak more civilly and truly, said then a Devil unto him, who
as one may presume was protector of the respect due unto those Dames: he had
reason touching the truth, for it could not be possible that they should be
Fathers without Children. It is true, said that man, that we are all Fathers,
as having had Children who called us so; we were married, and men of honor
and wealth: and though we had been absent a long time, and had great
sicknesses which hindered us from child-getting; though we were de frigidis and
maleficiatis, or else that being near them, we did nothing but sleep,
nevertheless they brought us forth Children every year, which we were bound
to nourish, believing charitably that they were of our propagation, for one
poor embrace, which it may be we had once all the year long; and in this
opinion, we have engaged our Souls in a thousand Rapines, Robberies, Vsuries
and Thefts, for to leave them many goods: and now that the mothers are dead, we
have learned that those Children were forged by our servants and friends; and
also some of them have conceaved by the ears, as stoates do.

Thereupon came a little Husband a Spaniard by Nation, who seemed to be an end
of a man, who spoke like a dog that yeopes: and approaching near the company he
began to cry out: Oh infamous Woman! thou art here, it is now that thou shall
deprive me of this Title of Father having not deserved it, and yet to the Son
of my Moore: I protest unto thee, that thou shall presently restitute unto me
the Title of legitimate which I have given him. Alas! I always mistrusted
something, but I would never have thought that this disloyal woman had
committed such Black sins, there being so many fair young men about us. I
did almost attribute the fault unto certain Monckes, (whereof I am sorry with
all my heart) because this wicked woman to abuse me, went almost every day in
their Covent, saying it was to confess her self: and I who took no delight
in this excessive mortification, I (in confidence) complained unto the same
Moore: I do not know, (would I say unto him) where thy Mistress gets all those
sins which she goes daily and hourly to confess in that Covent: and the
Ribald Moore, with an Oh God Sir! what do you say! I engage with all my heart
my soul with hers. Alas! it is a Lady which does but Note, that Pies in French
signifies both pious and Meg-pies.
pious works. I was then such an Innocent, that I took this answer for a
praise and excuse in favor of my Wife: But I have perceaved since, that it was
a true confession of their joint trespass, for it was true that he engaged his
soul with hers, and begat pies together, because he was black, and she was
white.

Truly 'twould be very fine, said, (after him) all the adopted Fathers, that
a man should pass all his life time, sometimes suffering all the
discommodities that a Woman with child gives to all those that are about her,
sometimes waiting upon her being in Childbed, enduring the importunate cries
of a child, the fadles of a nurse which must be flattered, cogged withal,
well nourished, well lodged, and well paid. And though we see well enough, that
those children resemble us not, for all that, we avow them to be ours, and to
hear their adulterous Mothers say; Verily it needs not to be asked who is the
Father, he has all the lineaments of his face: he laughs and weeps as he
does: and besides all these troubles, suffered patiently, to see us at this
present in Hell both Damned and Cuckolds altogether: it is too much, it must not
be so.

Then a great rumor was heard in a very deep Dungeon, betwixt the Ghosts and
the Devils. The Visit made a stand, to know whence that proceeded. 'Twas seen
that they were the Presumptuous, Revengefull, and Envious, Presumptuous,
Revengfull and Envious.
who killed themselves with crying out. Some said, Oh, if I could be borne
again! Others, Oh if it was permitted unto me to return in the World! Oh if
one died twice! And on the other side, the Devils besotted and wearied with
these importunate Exclamations, said unto them: Ye Infamous Deceavers, will
you never leave these impertinent and unusefull wishes? You are Cheaters: for
though you could be borne and live again, not only once, but a thousand
times, It is most certain that you should yet die more wicked, and then it
would be impossible for us to drive you hence with bastonadoes. Nevertheless
to the end you should make a trial of the truth of our words, and that you
should acknowledge who you are, You have a grant to revive and return again
into the World: Up then Rascals, go, be borne again, return back, return.
The Devils saying this, yerkt those poor Souls with their Whips, and thrusted
them to cause them to go out: but rather then to consent unto their
deliverance, as soon as they heard these words: Up, be borne, and live again,
they were taken with such a great fear, that they remained still, and buried
themselves in a profound silence.

There was one of the company, who seemed to have a more reaching wit, and to
be more resolute then the rest: which began very gravely to say by way of
deliberation whether he should go out of Hell, or no.

If I am begotten a Bastard, Miseries of the Infancy.
I shall be despifed and scorned of all, by reason of my Fathers and Mothers
sin: If I shall be lawfully begotten, then I am sure the Marriage-makers
will play their part, with a thousand fables, devices, and false tales, with
other things incident unto Marriage, as many secret imperfections and
infirmities of the one or both the parties. At my very birth I shall begin to
weep, at the Miseries of Man's life: I shall live, not knowing what it is to
live, I shall begin to die, before I have learned what Death is: I shall be
envelopped with Swadlingcloathes and blankets, which represents the being
wrapped up in a Winding Sheet, and the Cradle, the Sepulcher: I shall suck the
breasts of some unholsome Nurse, which it may be will stifle me in her sleep,
which it may be will leave me a long time in my filth, who will pin a pin
about me that will prick me a whole day, my Teeth will break forth, I shall
have the Frets in my belly, by reason of the ill substance wherewith my Nurses
disorderly life will feed mine. Insomuch, that to the end I may shun all
those Miseries, I had rather remain in Hell for ever. And if by chance, I
survive this Age of Infancy, and that I escape the Small Pox and Purples, and
that I come to be sent to School, I shall be subject to catch the Itch, it
may be a Scauld Head, and Kibes at my Heels: if it be in Winter; I shall have
a Limbecke Nose distilling Snivell and Snot: I must learn my lesson, upon
pain of the Rod: If I go late to School, the Buttockes shall pay for the
sloth of the Feet. Cursed then be he, who will long, to be borne again. Again
if I come to Youth, I shall be ensnared, Miseries of Youth.
in the inticings of Women's Luxury, they will set Traps every where to catch
me, and by a thousand several Charms flatteries and Lasciviousness in their
habits and behavior they will oblige me to satisfy unto their Lustful
Appetites. For my part, I am no more of the Humor to take the garb of a
Courteous and Neat Adonis: I will not suffer again the Shoomakers Torture,
Adonis.
which causes Corns to come in ones Feet; I will Iron my hairs and Beard no
more, nor change my Swan-like color into that of a Crow: I will no longer
admire my self in my Shadow, nor go any more to play with the Balls, of mine
Eyes in assemblyes, profaning often sacred places, to see which of them has
the Fairest Looks: I will not go again to warm the Air of the Night, with
my Inflamed Sighs, nor to be an ominous bird, to be companion unto Bats and
Owls: that Passion has left me, which made me make the Zani in the corner of
a street, and the round about a Mistresses lodging, to adore her
imperfections, make chains with a fillet of her Hair, or to give all my Goods
for one of her Shoostrings Oh cursed and more then cursed is he, that would
begin again, to lead such an unhappy life. Then seeing my self a Man, Miseries
of Manly age.
to be overwhelmed with Cares, and several troubles, of Process and quarrels,
if I have goods: If I am Poor, with sorrows of my misfortune, betwixt
repentance and experience; beginning to have a feeling of the forerunners of
diseases, which Youth had purchased by little and little with its debaushes.
Thus making my Noviciat to attain unto Old age and being arrived, Of Old age.
to become Melancholy, Grimme, finding no object which can please, rail
against Years and seek out the Fountain of Youth in Shops, and the Razors
and Painting of a Barber; to say that Wrinckles, are signs and marks, brought
into the World, or else that they are caused with too much laughter, disavowing
my Years before so many Witnesses, who depose against us, as the Weakening of
strength, the Dimnesse of sight, and want of Teeth, the Gout, Megraines,
Catarras, and the stone or Gravel. And besides, what pain can be compared to
a Palsy of the members? and seeing my self as it were fall all to pieces, to
say that I am Lustier and healthier then ever I was, that I could travel
better, that my legs are younger, and a thousand other fooleries, which do
cost dear unto those Old fools, that says them. But all that is nothing, in
respect of the discommodities which Love brings; Against Old people being in
Love.
when it takes hold of a man, which is stricken in years, and principally,
when he sees himself imbark't to Court a Woman in concurrence of some
Youthful Rival: Sometimes to be constrained to blush, when they will call me
their Old Sweetheart, and will say; now the time is not as it was wont, and
many other things as troublesome to endure. And if peradventure, Life holds
out, to lead a man to Decrepitude, Miseries of man being decrepite.
and that it fashions his head like the Picture of Death, that his Flesh be
consumed and wasted away, and that there remains nothing but a Loose and
Wrinkled Skin of the color of dried Wall-nuts; that he goes with a staff
in his hand, stumbling against Sepulchers as it were to desire them to make him
Room; that he be as a dream, or like a moving Fantasma; that his Kidneyes and
Bladder, be converted into a Quarry: that he becomes an Astrologue of Urines;
that he be espied by his Heirs; that he be the Rent of Physicians, the
Occupation of Surgeons; the Swallower and Paymaster of the Apothecaries Old
Drugs, that he be called Father, and sometimes Grandfather: No, no, one Hell
is much better then two Wombes.

When I come likewise to consider the Happiness, Miseries of life in general.
Virtue and Conditions of Life: that to be Rich, one must be a Thief; to be a
Man of Honor, you must be a Flatterer, an Inventer of Subtilties, and
Inquisitor of others Affairs: that if you Marry, you put your self in danger
of being Horued: to be Valiant, be a Mutineer, Quarrelsome, Blasphemer: and
amongst all that if you are Poor, none will know you: if you be Rich, you will
know no body: if you die Young, it will be said, you were Unfortunate: if Old,
that you were good for nothing, and that 'twas no great loss: If you are
Devout, and that you frequent the Church, it will be said you are an
Hypocrite: if you do not, it will be thought you are an Heretic: if you are
of a Ioviall disposition, you shall be held for a Bouffoune: if Sad, for
Unpleasing and Irksome: if you are Courteous, you shall be called a Catcher of
Young fools: if Discourteous, Proud: Then Farewell Worldly Life, and those who
will begin it again. I would not re-enter whence I came out, for all what the
World esteems most. How now Camarades, said he unto his Companions, now you
have heard me, is there any one amongst you who has a mind to return into the
World, and to retrograde his life as far as his Mothers Belly? No, no, no,
answered they all: Hell, Hell, rather then Ma Mam: Devils rather then Mid-wives.

After that, was heard a Testator, that is to say, a man who had made his Will,
which was saying: One Repenting because he had made his Will.
Am not I a cursed man, to be the Homicide of my self? if I had made no
Testament, I should be yet in perfect health. The most dangerous disease,
after the Physician is the Will: many more have dyed, because they had made
their Wills, then by reason of any other Disease. Ye Living, Living (cried he
with an open throat) look you make no Wills, and you shall live as long as
Ravens. Unhappy that I am! I threw my self in the peril, putting my self in
the hands of Physicians, and I have signed my Sentence of Death when I signed
my Will. The Physician forsook me, when he prescribed unto me to put my
affairs in order. And I being led with wisdom and devotion, began at the
instant the prologue of my Will, in these words, IN NOMINE DOMINI, AMEN, etc.
then coming to part my goods, I spoke these words: (Oh why did I not then
become Dumb!) Item, I make my Son my General Heir. I give unto my Wife
such and such things of my movables, etc. Item, to such a one my Servant, I
give the sum of, etc. To such a one my Servant-Maid, such another sum.
Item, to such a Gentleman my Intimate Friend, (to the end he may remember me)
I bequeath all my Silver Plate. Item, if I die, it is my Will, that Liberty and
Freedom be given unto Mustafa my Slave. Item, to Master Doctor such a one, a
Physician, I give my great Diamond, in consideration of the care and diligence
whereof he has used, during my sickness. And from the very instant that I
did set my hand to those Articles, the Earth, unto which I had bequeathed my
Body, hungered after my Flesh, and asked for it to devour it: and every one of
those to whom I had given Legacies, and my Heirs, took care whether I should
die or no, and if the sickness would be long. After that, if I asked some
Potion or Julep, my Heir at the same time demanded my Goods: my Wife likewise
the Tapistry and other Movables which I had given her: my Servant, his Legacy:
my Friend the Plate: and the Physician, to recreate his sight upon my Diamond,
demanded to feel my pulse. If I asked him of what I should eat? Of all
things, would he say. If I made some Groan, my Son believed that I was
yielding up the Ghost, my Wife commanded, that the Hangings should be taken
down, and the rest of the Move ables put up: my Servant was importunat for his
Legacy: my Friend ask't how much the silver Plate which I had given him was
worth: the Slave would have his Freedom: and because nothing of all that,
could be executed until I was dead, it appeared, that even as I gave and
dispersed my goods amongst them, even so I ordained that they should all wish
for my Death. And therefore, I protest, if I came to live again, I would make
a Will altogether different, from the first. I would say, I ordeyne that
whatsoever my Son shall eat of my Goods after my death, may be converted
into Poison; that my Curse may light on his Head, and that all that which I
leave against my will, (because I cannot carry it away) as well unto him as unto
the rest, that the Devil may take possession thereof: and carry it away if he
can. That the Plague, Rage, or Despair may choke my Wife. Item, if I dye, I
ordeyne that my Slave my have so many stripes, with a stirrup lether, three
times a day: That my Wife may make herself party against my Physician,
accusing him to have been cause of my Death: for I must avow that I am not in
charity whch that Wicked Fellow: because he has not contented himself to have
tormented me being in Health, and to have made an end of killing of me being
sick, he has yet persecuted me after Death, even as he, and the most part of
his profession do, of those Poor Idiots, who abandon themselves unto them, to
go so much the sooner in the other World. For when they have dispatched us, and
that we are gone, they do accuse us of a thousand Imperfections: Gods Peace be
with him, say they, his excese of Drinking has killed him. How could we Cure
him, he was so Disorderly in his diet? he was a Mad Man, he was a Fool, he
would not obey the Physician: It was a Rotten Body, Cacochyme, a Iakes of
Infection: he lived so ill, that it was much better for him to dye; his hour
was come. Oh Thieves, Oh Murderers! it is you that is the Hour: for at the
instant that you enter, in a sick bodies chamber, one may very well say, that
he shall dye, and that, His Hour is come. Cruel, is it not enough for you, to
take away the life of a Man, and to cause your selves to be paid for his Death,
as Hangmen do, but you must excuse your Ignorance, upon the dishonor and
Infamy of the Poor Deceased? Oh ye living who creep yet upon Earth, learn
of me, how you ought to make your Wills: for if you will practice the method
which I taught you just now, the Young, will attain unto Old age; and the Old,
unto Decrepitude: you shall all dye Contented and full of days, and shall not
be cut down in the blossom of your Age, by the Doctorall Sithes of the
Physicians.

This Deceased spoke with so much vehemence, that Lucifer judged, he had spoken
the Truth: but because all Truths are not good to be said, and chiefly
amongst Devils, who hate it Mortally: and fearing lest a greater disorder
should happen, if the Physicians came to the hearing of those discourses,
spoken by the deceased to their prejudice, Lucifer ordered that he should be
gagged.

Of necessity silence was made, to give ear unto the rumor of a Damned, which
running like a furious Frantic, came and passed through the company, crying
out: Where am I? where am I? what is the meaning of this? I have been cousined:
There are Devils, who Tempt; others, who Damn, and others, who Torment: I
have runned and visited all Hell, and yet I see not one of those Devils, who
have brought me hither; where are my Devils? who has robbed me of my Devils?
let my Devils be restored unto me.

There was never such a stranger thing seen, to look out for Devils, in
Hell, where they are in swarms: and as he did run, like one out of his wits,
the Douegna took him by the arm, and stopped him. Oh unhappy Ghost! if thou
want Devils here, where do thou mean to go and look them? He opened
his eyes, and knowing her who stayed him: Oh Ensign of Beelzebub, Figure of
Satan, An Invective of one of the Damned against a Douegna.
Mediatrix for the Damned, Assembler of diverse Sexes, Heaper up of Vices, the
Sinners Guide, Seasoner and Temperer of Delights and Pleasures; Whoredoms
Harbinger, the Spend-thrifts Prologue, the Interpreter and Mediator for the
Luxurious, where have thou left the he and she Devils, who have brought me
hither? for, I am neither such a Sot nor Idiot, that I will be cheated, and
carried away by these Devils who have tails, and horns like Oxen: who are as
smoakie as Pot-hangers, who have Swines dugs, and Bats wings. Those that I
look for, are far more wicked; they are those Mothers, which wound men with
their Daughters, lanching them forth as venomed darts; those Aunts, which cause
their Neeces to fly up and down, as sparkles of fire; those Subtle and
Guilefull Lasses, who pieerce with their Eyes, which they hold as steady as a
Cavalleere does his Lance; those Flatterers, who perpetually say, yes, to all
which is desired of them; those Sowers of Quarrels and Dissentions, who are the
Worms, which Gnawes the Rest and Quiet of others: those Traders in Lies, who
report that which they have not heard, affirm that which they know not, and
swear that which they believe not. Those Slanderers, which are the carrion
Crows of the Honor and Credit, who fall and feed only on dead flesh.
Hypocrites.
Those Hypocrites, who make Profit of Mortification, as of a Rent; who seem to
be in an Extasis, when they are Glutted; who publish their Lies, for
Revelations; who make Pulpits, of Tables, and Banquetts; Deserts, of Companyes;
Miracles, of Ordinary things, who Divine all things, after they have been told
them; who raise the Living from the Dead, who counterfeit to be sick, when they
should work, and who give people unto the Devil with a Do grtias. Those were
the Devils which were cause of my Damnation: and thou shall restore them unto
me, and find them out, thou cursed Old Woman, for they are all hidden under
thy Garment.

Thereupon, he takes hold on her: there was much ado, to separate them one
from the other. This Desperate Fellow pulled and dragged a long, the poor
Douegna; insomuch that he tore the veil, wherein she was wrapped up: but
Lucifer made them hold their peace with his absolute Power.

That done, a great noise of Hinges and Gates not well oiled, was heard, with a
strange rumor of a great multitude of people: Old Women painted.
the first which appeared were Old Women Painted Presumptuous and Bablers, who
counterfeited to be joviall and frolic: they laughed and fooled together,
showing that they were not discontented. The Secret accuser disliking their
carriage, failed not but accused them presently, in that their mirth
accompanied them even in Hell, which was reputed to be a very Criminal
trespass. At the instant they were questioned why they were so merry, seeing
they were of the number of the Damned, who have for their portion nothing but
Weeping and gnashing of Teeth: And then one of the company, which resembled
Death, mounted upon Pattins of half an Ell high, according to the fashion of
the little Ladies and Dames of this age, who speaking in the name of all the
rest, advanced her self saying: Lord Lucifer; coming hither, we were very sad
and melancholy, as much as Old damned Women may be, and so Old and worn out,
that there is naught else remaining on us, but the Marks and the Excrement of
years, over the Bones: but as we saw this inscription, which is upon the Gate
of this Habitation: Here is the abode where there is weeping and gnashing of
teeth, we have all been comforted, thinking that if there was no other
torments to suffer, we should be quit at an easy rate, seeing that we are so
dry, that there is no moisture in us, which can produce any tears; and
besides, that we are all toothlesse. There may be yet some moisture in your
Eyes, and some Stumps in your mouths, said the Flatterer: therefore your
Jolity may be vain, and of little durance. They were visited and found so dry
that they were put in Hells Tinderboxes, to serve for Tinder and Matches.

After them, Pernicious obstinate.
arrived many people of all Conditions, Qualities and Offices, who began to cry
out: Gentlemen, Gentlemen said they unto the first which they perceived: which
of you is it, who keeps the Register of Recompenses? show him unto us, before
we come in, any further. Why said then one of the company, I thought we had
been in Hell: but since there are here Recompenses to be hoped for, I see that
we are not there. Good, good, good, answered all the multitude. A short Joy, a
short Joy, replies the Flatterer. Good Hell, Good Hell, therefore it is to no
end to think that there are here Registers kept, for Recompenses, where
liberality consists, naught but in Pains, and Torments. Nevertheless, we
hoped for them very much, said he who had spoken first. How could that be?
said the Flatterer: I will tell you, said the other: Certain people, being
informed of our Thesis, moved with Charity, have often endeavored by Holy
Remonstrances to make us alter the course of our Life: but being Naturallized
unto it, we answered them with these reasons: What can we do less? Should
we stay, that those things, which every one keeps so carefully, should be
brought unto us? And how would you have a Vagabond live, who has neither
Master, nor Office, and who loves to pass away his time, with Curtezans, at
Play, and Tavernes, if he had not some subtle industry? And then he that gave
us those wholesome Counsels, seeing our Obstinacy, told us; The recompense then,
will be given you in the other World.

As also, when any one of us, Courted a Friends Wife, abusing of his
Confidence, and Dishonoring his House; and, if any showed them, the Enormity
and Baseness of their fact, they excused themselves thus, What will you have
us do? shall we rather go into houses, where we are watched with a Poignard
behind a door, or with a Pistol, then in those, where the Entry is so Free
and easy, where I am invited and feasted, and where I am trusted: and then,
the party who rebuked us, seeing our hardness of Heart, left us with these
words: The recompense thereof, shall be given you in the other World. And
because we thought, we had been arrived in that other World, we ask for
those recompenses, which the Virtuous have promised unto us.

Abominable Rascals, said then an Officer of the Sovereign Justice, how many
wicked men are there amongst you, who have often abandoned their house and
family, to the discommodities of want and necessity, and to spend and bring to
naught, all their goods, to debaush and corrupt Chastity, and to commit a
thousand Whoredoms and Adulteries, and when they were admonished, to take
compassion of their Wives and Children, they insolently answered: We have
recommended them unto God, who will have care of them; as well as of Young Ravens
and other Birds. And Infamous Villains, were not you then told; that you
should receive the recompense in the other World? It Is at this time, and in
this place, that you shall receive Your Recompense. Up Cursed, come in, it is
time. Saying that, a multitude of Devils, took Firebrands, and began to give
them the Recompense promised and hoped for; which was, a liberal and ample
distribution of Blows: and whilst they complained, vomiting forth horrible
oaths, a voice was heard, which said: The Recompense shall be given you in the
other World.

After this tempest, many Evil Spirits were seen to approach, together with
Sergeants, Baylifs and Petti-foggers who hauled and dragged, bound hand and
foot, the Thiefs Evil Angel, Accusation against the Thieses evil Angel.
accusing him of a trepasse, very Criminal. The Lucifer, with a fell and
cruel look, sitting himself in a Chair, of flaming fire: with all his
Officers about him: at the instant a Reporter, (that is to say, he that has the
Office of rehearsing and informing of a business) began to say: Prince
Lucifer, here is a Devil which we bring unto you, accused to be ignorant, in
the exercise of Devillishnes; it is a shame, that he should be honored, with
the Title and Quality of Devil, for, he trades in a Function, contrary to his
Profession, seeing, that all his work, tends to no other end, but to cause men
to be saved. All the Tribunal started, at this word, SAVE, as being, awful in
that place: they did all bite their lips, to the very blood, testifying the
horror they had thereof: and then the Supreme Cursed, turning toward his
Attorney General; Is it possible, said he, that amongst my Vassalls there
should be such a perfidious Traitor? Lord Lucifer, answered the Patriarch, It
is true that this Devil has no other profession, then to induce men, to
steal and rob their Neighbor: when they are discovered, they are
imprisoned, and then hanged: but before they are led, to the execution, they
are instructed admonished and exhorted unto Repentance, and by that means,
they are saved; and, your Devil, who is none of the craftiest in the World,
thinking to have gained those Souls, when he has caused them, to commit those
Crimes, he leaves them, whereas he should tempt them to fall in Despair, and
kill themselves insomuch, that being in the hands of a good Confessor he makes
them have an earnest remorce, in their consciences, of their offenses, and by
that means they save themselves against your Devils belief, who has not yet
perceaved, that one may go to Heaven by the Gallows or Flames. Thus your
torments, have been frustrate of their due, which ought to have befallen unto
them: There needs no other accusation against him, but that, said the
President: And the poor Devil seeing that his sentence was going to be given,
began to cry out: My Lord, hearken unto me; for though it is said that the
Devil is Deaf, that is not to be understood, of your Greatness. Every one was
silent, and he said: My Lord, The Devils Instification
I grant you, that most of those who are hanged do escape me: but, if you will
make an estimate, of those which I cause to be damned, condemning others: I am
sure, I shall be found quit, on that side: how many Officers, of all sorts do I
send you? whom I cause, to take Bribes, to let some of them loose; how many
False Witnesses do I send you, who depose, according to the rate, of the money
which is given them? How many Clerks, who give unto a Process, What form the
interessed desire, so that they have wherewith to pay, for the making: How many
Iailors gives the flight, unto the Pigeons of their Dove-house, in case they
fill their purse? and how many Attorneys, who neglect or forward the
proceedings, according to the stipend, which is given them? And amongst all
these Briberies and Pillage if it happens, that they cause Justice to be made
of some Thief, it is not to destroy Thieves, but to the end, there should be
no others, then they, and that, they should remain alone, in the CommonWealth:
Insomuch, that when they punish a Theft, they do often commit many others,
which are worse then the Theeve's, whom they send to the Gallows: for they are
not inquired after: and though they were, they know the necessary Cavillations
and Crafts, to take away the knowledge thereof: so that all being well wayed
and considered, it happens, as unto him, who to drive the Rats, out of his
House, brought in, Cats: for if the Rats, did gnaw some piece of Bread, some
rine of Bacon, some Candles ends, or Parchmin; the Cats do overthrow, to day,
his Pot, to morrow eat his supper, then his Partridges, so that at last, he is
constrained to wish for his Rats, and detest his Cats.

I have made use of that craft: I willingly trucke, one Thief, for two
hundred, who Hang him; and to three thousand Old Witches, who go to the
Gallows, to look out, for some Ropes ends, and great Teeth, to work some
mischief. But whatsoever I do for the advancement of your Empire, I am very
ill recompensed: therefore I desire to rest my self, and I beseech you; to
give my place to another: as for my part, I intend to spend the rest of my old
age, by a Pretender.

He had all the content which he could desire, and a strict inhibition and
defense unto the Evil Spirits, who had abused him, to take heed that they
should not mistake in time to come, upon pain of Corporal and Spiritual
punishment. Nevertheless, he was entreated not to resign yet, his Office,
considering, that he was of reasonable years, to execute it, and to do good
Service therein, besides, that to wait upon a Pretender, 'twas an insupportable
trouble and labor, and not an ease. I will do all what you please, said he:
but I believe that with a Pretender, a Devil, remains his legs and arms
cross, and his ears open, learning Devillishnesse of him: I imagine that
there will be but passe-time and recreation for me; 'twill be, as if I went to
the Devils school: for those kind of people teach the Devils Alphabet; by
that means, there is nothing to be done about them, but to learn and to be
Silent.

Thereupon, The Tobaccos Evil Angel.
the Tobacco's Evil Angel arrived: I was much astonished with that Vision: I
had always imagined, that it was a Devil, who possessed many, but I did not
altogether believe it. I have, said he, avenged the Indies, of the outrages,
which the Spaniards had done there, for I have done more harm unto the
Spaniards by introducting Tobacco amongst them, then the King of Spain did
unto the Indians, when he sent them Colon Cortes, Alemyro and Pizarro; because
it is far more Glorious, to die amongst Shot, Swords, and Lances, then amongst
the Snot, Sneezings, Belching, Giddiness, and sometimes, the contagious
Purples, which the stinking use of Tobacco ingenders. These takers of Tobacco,
merely resemble the Possessed; when they are exercised, there goes forth from
them Vapors and Foames, at least as infections: but they always remain
Possessed with the Evil Spirit: for they are Idolators of this Tobacco, they
make a Deity of it, which ravishes them, in an Extasis, they praise and extol
it, above all things, they tempt and persecute every one, to make them use it:
If they take it in Smoke, they make in this World their Novitiat for Hell,
where they must be hardened, to endure Smoke: and if they take it in Snuff, by
their Nostrils, they accustom themselves, unto the discommodities of Old age,
whose Noses are always Snotty and Dropping, and Flegmes in their mouths.

After this, The Suborners Evil Angel.
came the Devil of Subornation: he was Fair and well proportioned; whereat I
was much astonished, having yet seen no Devils, except he, but such as were
fearfully Ugly: his visage was so familiar, that I thought I had seen him, in
a thousand other places, sometimes Vaild, and sometimes his Face Uncovered,
sometimes calling himself, Childrens Play, and sometimes, Courtship:
sometimes, took the name of It also signisies, gift.
Don, and of Present, and sometimes, of Alms, here, of Payment, and there of
Restitution, however, I never saw him called by his own name. I also remember,
to have seen him named, Inheritance, Profit, Good cheap, Retrimony, Reward
and Nothing: as also to have known him in some other place, Doctor, and in
another Licentiat; amongst all Women, he was a Batchellor; amongst the
Attorneyes, Clerks and Advocates, he was reputed and called, Law and Equity.

This Devil was well accompanied; The Evil Angel of Consequence.
he pretended to the Title of Satan's Lientenant. But the Devil of the
Consequence opposed himself mightily to his design, saying: I am the
Imbroiler, the State Politic, and he that Coggs Princes, the Pretext of the
Unworthy, and the excuse of Tyrants: I am an excellent Dyer, of evil actions;
I give them what color one will: Besides, my strength is able to turn all the
World upside down, and to put it in a general Confusion: I banish Reason; I
convert the Importunity, into Merit; the example, in necessity. I can give a
form of Law unto Successes, Authority to Infamy; and Credit to Insolence: I
can Shut, and sometimes Open the mouth unto Counselors according to my mind:
In a word, I do that, which amongst others, is esteemed, Impossible: and as
long as I shall be in the World, there will be nothing to be feared, of
Virtue, Justice, nor of good Government. And also this Devil of Subornation,
who pretends to the Lieutenancy, what had he done without me? If I did not put
a veil upon his face, how could he thrust himself in Magnificent Companies,
as he does? let him learn then to know himself, and to hold his peace, and
let him not dispute with me the quality of Lucifers Lieutenant, which ought to
be granted unto me.

And I, said another quarelsome Spirit, I am one of those, The Cuckolds Evil
Angel.
who most humbly hide themselves, behind a Door, who contents himself with
toys and fopperies, a hundred to a pound: in fine I am a Laconick Devil, and
with few words, I have but four words to speak, and then let him come next
who will. I say then, that I am a Devil Interpreter, and the exercise which I
do in the World, is that I persuade Cuckolds that it is an Honor, and a means
to be known in the World, and that there are many who should not be known, if
their subtle Wives, did not purchase that quality unto them. As also, I cause
a certain Comeliness, and Charming Handsomeness amongst Women, thereby
always to have a friend, to make use of, in case of necessity: and cause all
those, who want such dexterity, to be reputed as Silly, Sottish and to be
despised; and amongst other things, wherein I meddle, I can cunningly convert
the Theft, in an Office, and the Officers in Thieves. That being said, the
Devil was silent.

There was a little moment of silence; then another Devil was heard who said:
I am one of the least, of the Diabolical Nation: but yet, open the gate, for,
I do not come, empty handed, as the rest. What do thou bring? said then the
Secret Accuser coming near him: a Pratler and a Flatterer, which are Pieces
of Cabinet, for Kings: and for that reason I bring them, unto ours. Lucifer did
cast his eyes upon them: and at the same instant, made a face as grimme and
sower, as if he had bitten a green Crab, then he said: Although as thou
say, they are Pieces for a King, I do not love that Present.

After that another Young Devil appeared, saying: My Prince, it is six years
since, that I am after a Base Fellow, worth nothing, and so little worth, that
I do not know, how I could overcome him: for with being so Infamous, he is good
for nothing, neither for Good, nor Evil. Thou art much troubled, said the
Douegna, why did thou not make him worth some thing, and then to have placed
him in Offices and Dignities, thou had presently ensnared him.

In the mean time, The Luxurious Evil Angel.
the Secret Accuser who went every where, in the form of a ducke, searching
out the faults of others, passed by a Corner, where he found a great faggot of
Old Devils all Moldy, Musty, and full of Cob-webs: he came presently to give
notice; presently they were unbound, to be ayred: 'twas very troublesome to
wake them; then they were ask't what Devils they were, what they meddled with,
and why they did not intend their Vocation. They answered gaping, they were the
Devils for the Luxurious, but that since women had found Gold, more pleasing
and to be cherished, then their Chastity, the Luxurious needed no Diabolical
Inspirations nor subtleties, to persuade them, to yield unto their desires,
seeing, that the glistering brightness of Gold, did so dazzle their sight, that
it made them fall backward. That Gold supplied to all the defects and
imperfections of Lovers, and that the Temptation of a bag, has more
efficacy, then a thousand Devils al together, because a Woman or a Maid, will
rather fall under a Don in Spanish is the apposition to a Knight, as in English
Sir. In French it signifies Gift The Nuns Evil Angel.
Don, then under a Temptation, though it should be called Lordship, and under
a, Take this, then under a Million of Fair Words.

Next, was heard a Devil who snored: and but for that, they had trodden upon
him; but his own noise, discovered him. He was taken, and ask't, why he slept
thus, a Cuckolds sleep: It is three days since, said he, that I sleep as you
see, because I have nothing to do: I have liberty, I am the Nuns Devil: My
Ladies are now busy, to elect an Abbess: and when they are busied in that
occupation, I may play and take my rest at ease, for, there is not one at that
time, but is a very Devil. They make Parties, Bribe, they flatter this, and
persuade the other: to be short, there is such a Confusion amongst them, that my
presence would but disturb them: Also, those Ambitious Ladies, make it a point
of honor at that time, to have it seen, that they are more crafty and more
subtle then the Devils: and I give you notice, that if by chance it happened,
that Disorder, Sedition, and Mutiny, came to be wanting here, and if Peace did
hazard to enter; 'twere but to make here, an Assembly of Nuns, to elect an
Abbess, you should see such a Dreadful Disorder, that we should not know one
another.

Lucifer found this advertifement very good: and caused it to be Enrolled, in
his Registers: and to the end he might remedy all things, and also take care
for the increase of his Empire, he commanded that all the Communalties and
Cantons of his Nations, should be assembled: and then in obedience of his
Decree, there appeared almost an infinite multitude of Unhappy Spirits. At the
same time Lucifer opening a horrible and fearful mouth roared out, these
Gracious Words.

A DECREE OF LVCIFER, (...) for Reformation
DESPERATE Legions, People for ever condemned in the darkness of my Empire,
yea the Hirelings of Sin, unto whom Eternal Death is the payment: I let you
know, that two Devils have pretended to the Dignity of my Lieutenancy, and that
I would not gratify the one, nor the other thereof, considering that amongst
you is a She Devil, which merits it above all.

At these words, all the Assembly began to look one upon another, and to
discourse and murmr; Lucifer perceiving it: Do not trouble your selves, said
he, to guess who it should be: Let Good Fortune come hither, which by another
name is called, the She Devil Prosperity: and at the instant, She was seen to
come from the rear of the company, who with a Proud and Scornful look made
a stand, before the Degraded Angel, he having looked on Her, spoke after the
same tone as he had begun. I Will, Ordain, and Command, that ye honor and
respect, next after me, the Lady Prosperity here present, as the most Great,
Effects of Prosperity
Superior, and Superlative She Devil: Titles and Qualities, which I give Her,
as due unto Her merit; because she alone, has caused a hundred times more
people, to be Damned, then all of you altogether. It Is She which makes men, to
forget God, and the affection toward their neighbor: it is She, that causes
them, to establish their SVMMVM BONVM in Riches, who ingages and intangles them
in Vanity, which blinds them in the enjoying, which loades them with Treasures,
and which buries them, in their Trespasses. In what Tragedy, has She not
played Her part? what Wisdom and Prudence could stand so firm upon its Legs,
which She has not caused to Stumble? what Folly does not augment, taking
access with Her? what good Counsels, does She Receive? what Correction does
She Fear, and which, does She not Deserve? After Her, who finds out and
furnishes matter, unto Scandals; experience, unto Histories, who Foments
Cruelty unto Tyrants, and who imbrewes Hangmen with Blood? How many Souls are
there, who lived in the State of Innocence with Poverty, which coming to receive
the Favors of Prosperity, are become Wicked and Impious? Now then, Infernal
Spirits, henceforth, let as much reverence be rendered unto Her, as unto my
self, and know, that those Souls which maintain themselves Humble, to the
proof of Prosperity, are none of your Game: and therefore you must not insist
on them, for there is naught else but time to be lost. Considering, that they of
the World, who obtain and possess all what they desire, turn their backs
presently unto God, and forget him so much, that they do not remember his
name. The Poor contrariwise, The Poor.
has always God for the object of his Heart, and for Motto these words in his
mouth: LORD, I HAVE NO HOPE BUT IN THEE: MY GOD REMEMBER ME: And therefore,
said Lucifer, redoubling his cursed howlings: My Will and Pleasure is, that
from this time forth it shall be published, throughout all the extent of our
Estates and Dominions, that Calamities, Troubles, and Persecution, are mortal
Enemies unto Hell; seeing, they have been acknowledged and noted to be of the
contrary party, and to be enrolled in Gods Warfare; and further, that they are
effects of his Infinite Wisdom, and Gifts of his Almighty hand.

Item, to the end our Government should be reformed, I straightly will and
command, that my Devils should always be present in the Hearings and Tribunals
of Magistrates discharging the said Devils, of the care of Pretenders,
Pleaders, Flatterers and Envious, seeing they know the way unto this Kingdom,
and how to lead one another hither, better then the Devils can teach it them.

Item, that henceforth, Profit is a Devil.
no Devil keep company with any other confident, but with him who is called
Profit, considering that he is the Harbinger, which lodges Vice, most
largely, in the straitest Conscience.

Item, in whatsoever part a Devil be, Money one of the greatest Devils.
excepting not any; we ordain that when Money shall arrive there, that he
shall raise the siege, and with honor and reverence, yield most humbly his
place unto him, as acknowledging him a greater Devil then he, for that is most
important, to the preservation of our Empire.

Item, Idleness the mother of Vice.
we most straightly and expressly command unto all our Officers, to impeach and
hinder War, from all parts, as much as in them lies, because it exercises, the
Courageous; it does recompense, the Virtuous; imploys, the Valiant; causes God
to be remembered, and casheeres Jdlenes, which is our intimate Friend. And for
the better effecting of this present Article, we ordain unto all our Devils,
to establish a general Peace, throughout all the World in case they can
compass it, because during its Reign, all manner of debaushes, will have free
liberty: Idleness, is put in practice: Luxury, is in fashion; Gluttony, is
exercised; Detraction, is put in use, Lying, is established; Pandars are
busied, and Whores, employed, in a word, all Vices increase, and Virtue
declines.

Jtem, Touching the Luxurious.
we henceforth, exempt and dispense our Lieutenants, of the pains which they
were wont to take by intangling men, in the Lasciviousness and Voluptuousness
of Women, because we know by experience, that there is no sin, which is more
trusty and faithful unto us, then that, for as soon as Repentance his
capital enemy, has, for some time, caused him to dislodge from any place, he
is so affectionate for our service, that he reenters there presently, when it
takes a stronger root then before.

Item, Touching certain Merchants
in consideration of the Exemption aforesaid, and seeing, that there are
Notable Merchants, in many Towns and Villages of the World, who charitably
succor, many persons, and amongst the rest, the Youth of these times, commonly
called Debaush'd, which to borrow money, have recourse unto them: And the
Merchants excusing themselves, saying, their Purses are empty; offers the^,
some Wares out of their shops, which those that are in want, do accept, with
an intention to sell them again, to supply, to their excess or necessities:
and underhand those Merchants have confidents who acquaint themselves, with
those who want; and go along with them to the Merchant, which sells his
Merchandises at an excessive rate, then, when they have sold it very cheap,
and accommodated themselves, the Merchant has his Wares again, and thus, he
obliges those who crave his assistance. In consideration whereof, we ordain,
unto the most Vigilant of our Devils, to assist and remain perpetually, as
Factors in the service of those Merchants, seeing, that in such a Negotiation,
they need our help and industry.

Item, our Will and Intention is, that our said Devils, keep a constant
company, unto our beloved Friends the Venerious, Revengeful, Envious, and
Pretenders to Offices or Dignities, and above all the rest unto Hypocrites,
considering, that it is the Mediator for all things, the Charm of all the
senses and powers of the Soul, who works so Curiously that its operations are
Imperceptible unto the senses therefore it is admitted, Recompensed and Adored
of many.

Item, Touching Reporters of Secrets.
We ordain that the Reporters of Secrets, and Sowers of Sedition may be
carefully maintained, because it is one of our seeds, which fructifies most.

Item, Flatterers.
We ordain that Flatterers and Kindlers of Noises, Debates, Divorces, Quarells
and Dissentions may serve in steed of Bellows, and not of Fannes, to the end
they may blow and inflame, and not temper and refresh.

Item, Inter-medlers of others affairs.
that the Inter-meddlers of others affairs be the Lice of Hell, that they may
eat to the very blood, those who nourish and entertain them.

Then Lucifer, with a stern and grimme countenance and looking side-wise upon
the Douegna, said this Proverb which is in use amongst the Spaniards; Duenas
de se las Dios a quier las desca: God give the Douegna unto whom will have her.
I am much troubled, said he afterward, what I shall do with them, I know not
where to cast them. And then the Damned who saw that he disposed himself to
rain a shower of Douegnas on them, cried out all with one voice: Do we not
suffer torments enough, without the addition of this? then every one said to
himself; Oh cursed Lucifer, cast them where thou will, so it be not near me,
and as they uttered those words, they hid their heads one amongst the other, as
Sheep do in the Fields during the scorching heat of the Summer, for fear of
this new torment whereof Lucifer threatened them. He, seeing the extreme terror
wherein he had put them, contented himself with that; Then he said: Well then,
look that henceforth, my Laws and ordinances may be punctually observed.
Alias, I swear by my Darkness, and by the Obscurity of my Crown, that, that
Devil or Damned who shall infringe them, shall be condemned to the torment of
Douegna, that is to say, that there shall be one chained with him, any
opposition or appelation whatsoever in any wise notwithstanding. And as for
them, let them be presently locked up, by themselves in that Dungeon of Iakes,
to make use of them, as we shall see cause that place and time shall require.

After this solemn Decree, Lucifer retired himself within the gulf of his
eternal night; and the Assembly frighted, with this horrible threat, disbanded:
every one went to exercise the function of his Office: all at once vanishd
away, and at the instant an Angelical voice was heard, which uttered these
words: Whosoever shall have the understanding to comprehend the Morality of
this Discourse may reap a most advantageous profit for his Soul, and may say:
SALVTEM EX INIMICIS NOSTRIS, ET DE MANV OMNIVM QVI ODERVNT NOS.

FINIS.

