King Solomon's RECANTATIONS: BEING AN EXTRACT Out of the Famous WORKS Of the
Learned FRANCIS QVARLES, Cup Bearer to the Queen of Bohemia, Sister to the
blessed Martyr King Charles the I. of venerable Memory. With an Essay, to prove
the Immortality of the Soul, by way of Symetry, or Connection.

Licensed,

July 21. 1688. Rob. Midgley.



LONDON, Printed by I. R. and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall. 1688.

Advertisements.
T'Here is lately Printed a Book, Intitule The way of Life is Pleasant: Or, t^^
Church of England is the Best Guide. Co^^taining several useful Discourses, for
every Christian to Read and Practice, for the support of their Spirits, and
comfort of the Minds: With some Evangelical Reflection upon the Apostolical
Observation of the Lent-Fast: With short and useful Prayer upon the
Church-Festivals, and most (other Emergent Occasions: With several prepa^ratory
Prayers for the Holy Sacrament, an^ Thanksgiving after Receiving. Licensed Iun
(...) the 4th. 1686. and Sold by Randal Taylo^ near Stationers Hall; I.
Harding, at the Bi^^ and Anchor in Newport-street; Rich. Sare, a Gray's Inn Gate
in Holbourn; and by most Book sellers in London and Westminster. 1686.

KIng Solomon's Experimental Observations of Himself, Time and Things; deducted
from his Recantations, by Way of Soliloquie; in a well digested Method. Sold by
Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 168^.

King Solomon's RECANTATIONS, etc.
OH! it is much better not to Thirst at all.
Than Thirst in vain, or quench thy Thir^t with Gall.
those profit can accrue to Man, what gains
^an Crown his Actions, or reward his Pains:
^^nless he trample on the Asp, and tread
(...) the young Lion, and the old Dragon's head:
Or else the Clouds of Sorrow may multiply,
^^d hide from thee the Crystal of the gloomy Sky.
^^oad not thy Shoulders by the Sin of unwise desire,
that all thy bedrid Passions may quite expire.
^^earch for, and find such Words which have the might,
(...) intermingle profit with sweet delight;
Than shall thou have hopeful worth to Crown thy last
^ith Peace and Honor; yea such rare Sons thou have, ^^nce Frolic, Midnight,
Madness, is quite expired; and thou requite
Thy wild attention with Heavenly delight:
Thy courage endeavoring to deserve the name
Of heroic Martyr, by giving thy Body to the Flame.
This will give true Life, so sweet, to every one
That takes pleasure in the Worlds redeeming Son,
From Earths pleasures, by striving to refrain,
Knowing those short-lived flattering pleasures vain:
Therefore rejoicing greatly in true Spiritual ways,
By Heavenly contentment, chearing youthful Days.
Banishing false-eyed Mirth, let it be truly disposest
Of those lewd Firs, that are apt to inflame thy Brea^^
For Earths best enjoyments are short, and vain;
But for a season rejoicing, but cannot remain,
For feeble Strength, her ruins, smite thee,
And grinds thy clod to dust, tho not afrights thee.
One Generation gives another way,
But Earth abides in one perpetual stay:
The Prince of Light put on his Morning Crown;
But in the Evening lays his Glory down;
Where leaving Earth, to take a short repose,
He soon returns, and rises where he rose.
His Wisdoms choice affections own,
His Churches good, much dearer then his Throne.
For us subduing, beneath the spangled Sky,
What ever might hurt us. That in Wisdom we may decry
All Evils, and seek all Hevenly sweet felicity:
Yet enjoying such pleasures, that Earth could len^ that I
Might find Earths Mirth and Beauty but vanity.
My thoughts yet pondering all that has been done
Betwixt the solid Center, and the glorious Son:
And yet no knowledge can reduce the state
Of crooked Nature, to a perfect straight.
For some Men's Ignorance, which surmounts
The learned Language of Arithmeticks accounts.
Oh! then thought I, how are the vain desires
Flesh and Blood
Baffled in their mistaken things, called good:
Yet travel seeks them, yea unwearied Hearts
Makes them the objects, both of Arms and Arts:
Yet many certan obvious Evils attend
Our Ways, to our uncertain Journies end.
We tire the Night in thought, the Day in toil,
Sparing neither sweet nor lucubrated Oil.
^o seek the things we cannot find, or found;
^e cannot hold; or held, we cannot ground
^o firm, as to resist the various swings
^f fickle Fortune, or the frowns of Kings;
That if his Royal Power please to commit
^^is Pastorial Staff, to such as are more fit
^o Eat and Drink, Kill, or recommend his Flocks
^o such dumb Dogs, of whom never Wof nor Fox
^^ill stand in awe; or show their fears by flight,
Not having Tongues to bark, nor Teeth to bite:
Yet, by the way, advise Obedience; then
Always he sure to please, rather God than Men.
^f the Embers of his rage should chance to lie
Raked up, or furnace from his angry Eye;
Quit not thy Duty, it is thy part to assuage,
^y due Obedience, the jealous flames of consuming rage.
Curse not the King, nor them that bears the Sword;
No, not in Thought, tho Thought express no Word:
^or secret report shall vent such hidious things,
To punish those who oppose the legal Authority of Kings:
For all that attempt thus to act, casts a shame
Upon the beauty of an honored Name.
Ah, then, my Soul, take heed to keep thy Heart
At thy right Hand; where, there she will impart
Continual secrets, and direct thy ways
^n secret Ethics, sweetning out thy Days
With seasoned Knowledge; Wisdom past the reach
Of dangerous error; and instruct and teach
Thy Heart-wise silence, Wisdom, when to beak
Thy closed Lips, and judgment how to speak,
^uch wise Men's Words are gracious where they go;
But foolish Language does themselves o're-throw:
Folly brings in the Prologue, with his Song,
Whose Epilogue is rage, and open wrong.
Yea the tedious actions of every Fool does try,
The solid patience of the weary standers by;
Because their weakness knows not how to lay
Their actions posture, in a civil way:
Yea such rude folly stains their Fame,
But fair repute for Wisdom lends a name.
Therefore our steps will measure out the way,
Our Garb, our Looks, our Language does betray,
Our Wisdom, or Follies read by all we meet,
Our selves proclaiming our Follies in every Street.
But it is a grief that grates beneath the Sun,
That like events betides to every one.
A like be false, to Good and Bad, Wise and Foo^ Yea both
To him that Swears, and him that fears an Oath.
Better to be a living Creatures, tho vild they plead,
Then to be known a wealthy Wiseman that is dead:
For they that live well, know that they shall die,
Therefore take time; but the^ that lie
Raked up in deaths cold Em^rs, they know not
Or Good, or Ill, their names are quite forgot;
No Friends they have to Love, nor Foes to Hate;
They know no Virtue to spit Venom at;
They sell no sweet for gains, nor do they buy
Pleasures with pains, or tread beneath the Sky.
But yet go thou rejoice and Eat, let a full Bowl
Cashire thy Cares, and cheer thy frolic Soul,
What Heaven has lent thee with a liberal Hand,
To serve and cheer thy frailty up, command.
Indulge thy weary Flesh with new supplies,
And change of Garments of the purest die.
Refresh thy limbs, annoyed with sweat and toil;
With costly Baths, thy Head with precious Oil.
What ever thy Hand endeavors, that may gain
Contentment, spair not either cost or pain,
For there is no Hand to work, no Power to save,
No Wisdom to contrive within the Grave.
I find the swift not always win the prize;
Nor strength of Arm the Battle; nor the Wise
Grow rich in Fortune; nor the Men of skill
In favor, all as Time and Fortune will:
^en knowing not their time, as Fishes are
^ar'd in the Net, Birds tangled in the snare.
So be the Sons of Men surpised with fears,
When mischief falls upon them unawares:
This Wisdom have I seen beneath the Sky,
Which wisely weighed, deserves the Wiseman's Eye;
^ut when I set my busy Heart to know,
^isdom and Heavens strange workings here below.
For Night and Day my studys did deny,
Sleep to my Eyelids, slumber to my Eye;
Striving to note each action under Heaven,
Endeavoring to observe and have given
My Soul to God, in due Obedience; having
Sought for true spiritual Wealth worth keeping.
But the poor fruitless labors of deluded Man,
Are vainly spent, being short as a span
Or seeming pleasures, serves to requite,
Long leagues of travel, for one drops delight
Of airy froth; how are ye forced to borrow
Strong gales of hope, to sail through Seas of Sorrow.
Why do we thus afflict our laboring Souls
With dregs of Wormwood, and carouse full Bowls
Of boiling Anguish? to what hopeful end
D^oyl we our craizy Bodies, and expend
Our sorrow wasted Spirits, to acquire
A good, not worth a breath of our desire.
A good, whose fulsome sweetness, clogs and cloys
The Soul, but never lasts nor satisfies.
How poor an Object pleases, and how soon
That pleasure finds an end; how quickly noon;
How quickly Night, and what to Day we prize
Above our Souls, to morrow we despise.
Beneath a trifle, what in former times
We owned as Virtues, now we tax as Crimes.
Tell me my Soul, What would thou buy?
Go in and Cheapen; let thy curious Eye
Make her choice: they will present thy view
With numerous Joys; buy something that is new.
The Wiseman's Eyes are in his Head; they stand
Like Watchmen in the Tower, to guard the Land.
At length I cast my serious Eyes upon
My painful Work, and what my Hands had done;
And there I find my Hearts delight was all my gains,
My pleasure was the portion of my pains.
I gave my Eyes, what e're my Heart required:
I denied my Soul no Mirth, my Spirit desired
All sorts of Music, the Spirits delights had I
To please my Spiritual Ear, was beauties to my Eyes
Yet knowledge then affords my Soul no rest;
My roving Thoughts tried Mirth, and was possessed,
Of all the pleasures Earth could lend, yet I
Found Mirth and Pleasure all but Vanity:
I laughed at laughter as a toyish antic,
And counted all Earths pleasure no less than frantic
Since Hearts that wisely, foolish do incline
To costly fare, and frolic Cups of Wine.
For in those pleasures I find but little solid good,
To Crown the short lived Days of Flesh and Blood;
Tho some build great magnifick Palaces, and fraim
Vast buildings to the glory of their name;
Planting Vineyards, whose plump clusters might
Make them fruitful Orchards for their delight.
Rejoicing their Souls with Earthly treasures,
With curious Gardens to refresh their pleasures:
Yet true Wisdom can discern but little real good,
Mistaken Earth so much admiring stood!
What profit has my Wisdom, then thought I
The height of Wisdom has her Vanity.
The foolish bauble and the learned bays,
Are both forgotten; in succeding Days
Impartial Death shall Cloth the dying Eyes,
Both of the Ignorant and also of the Wise:
Therefore I hated life, for, from the events
Of humane actions, flows many discontents.
Then slighted I, all that my Hand had done,
In seeking happiness beneath the Sun:
For what I did, I cannot call my own;
^nothers Hand must reap what mine has sown;
Who knows if my surviver is to be
A Wiseman, or a Fool? However, it is he
Must spend with ease, what I have earned with pain
And Souls vexation; this is all so vain,
For which my Soul thus fooled with vain persuits
Of blossom happiness that bears no Fruits.
Some Men there be, whose elaborate gains
The fruits of lawful cares and prudent pains
Descend to those who know not pains nor art:
This is a sore vanity, and afflicts the Heart;
For what reward has Man of all his droyl,
His Evening trouble and his Morning toil,
His Hearts vexation and his griefs, that run
Through all his labors underneath the Sun.
'I viewed the Chair of Judgment, where I saw
'Instead of righteousness, a perverted Law.
'I viewed the Courts of Equity, and spied
'Corruption there; and Justice wrapped aside.
'Oh! then, (thought I) the of Judge Heaven shall do
'Right to the Wicked, and the Righteous too.
Then puzzel'd in my Thoughts, I thus advised,
Heaven suffers mortals to be exercised
In their own miseries, that they may see
They are yet not much more happy than the Be;
They substance of Flesh, tho not the same,
Yet dust to dust, both must turn from whence they came.
Which rightly way'd, it seems the better choice,
For Man to suck his labors and rejoice,
Since flashly, troubles does all things so unframe,
That Earths Content does scarce deserve the name:
Considering this, what can we advise,
Since we berefit of Wisdom, laboring to be Wise.
Alas! is it not enough, that we poor Farmers pay
Quit-rent to Nature, at the very Day:
And at our dying Hour bequeath to thee
Our whole substance, for a Legacy:
I mused again, and found when pains had cracked
The harder shell to some heroic act.
Pale envy strikes the kernel with taxation;
Oh, this is vanity, and the Souls vexation!
Thus pausing, Contemplation showed mine Eye
A new prospect of humane vanity:
When, the droyling Hand thinks nothing can supply
The greedy wants of his insatiate Eye.
He robs himself, not knows for whose relief,
This is a vanity, and a wounding grief;
Woe to the Man whom danger meets alone,
For there is no Arm to help him but his own:
But if some help put in a timely stroke,
The Cord that is threefold is not quickly broke.
If eithers feeble Shoulders be betrayed
To a sad burden, there is a mutual aid,
To be a poor Wise Child, is judged a thing
More honorable, than to be a vain King.
My Soul, to what a strange disguised good,
Art thou bewitched? oh, how has Flesh and Blood
Betrayed thee, to a happiness that brings
No comfort, but from transitory things.
Are not the shady Bowers of Death more sweet,
Than the scorching Sunshine, where we Hourly meet
Fresh evils, like a Temes, whose deluded breath
Tickles our Fancies, till we laugh to Death?
When thou have bound thee to thy God by Vow,
Defer not payment, but perform, it thou
Discharge thy Bonds, for Heaven takes no delight
In those that violate the Faith they plight;
For better it is thy Vows were never made,
Then having promised, payment never paid.
Let not thy Lips ensnare thee, plead not thou
Before thy Angel, 'twas too rash a Vow.
It Is not the Pills of treasured wealth sustain
Thy drooping Spirits, this is all so vain.
Often have I seen increasing riches grow
To their great mad Owners overthrow:
Vexing their Souls with Care, and then repay
Unprosperous pains with grief and melts away;
His wealth is fled, and when he shall transfer it
Upon his Heir, there is nothing to Inherit.
Look how he came into the World, the same
He shall go out as naked as he came;
Of what his laboring Heart have brought about,
This dying Hand shall carry nothing out:
This is a wounding grief that as he came,
In every point, he shall return the same.
What profit can his Souls afflictions find,
That toils for Air, and travels for the Wind.
This is an evil, that happiness now and then
Beneath the Sun amongst the Kings of Men:
Then eat and drink, and reap what pains have
Got, to Crown thy Days which thy Creator gave;
It Is all the portion some will have,
Who study not for happiness in the Grave.
But hark, my Soul, the Morning Bell invites
Thy early paces to a new delight;
Away, away, the Holy Saints Bell rings,
Put on thy Robes and Oil thy secret wings;
Call home thy Heart, and bid thy Thoughts surcease,
To be thy Thoughts, go bind them to the Peace:
Take good Security, or if such fail
Commit them to the All commanding Jayl;
And thy crammed Bags there to lie close and fast,
Until thy Heavenly atoning Vows are past:
Confine thy rambling pleasures to the trust
Of vacant Hours, and let thy Wisdom thirst:
Banish all Worldly passions, with their base born Sir
From thy delectable Courts, that Wisdom may come in
Leave all thy servil Fancies in the vail,
Mount thou the secret Hill, and there bewail
Thy dying Isaac, whose free gift may be
A living Pledge 'twixt thy God and thee.
Take thou no Care, Heaven, will supply
Their craving Thirst with Bottles from thy Eye;
Better it is to be Funeral Guest,
Then find the welcoms of a frolic Feast:
For he that fears the Almighty shall
Out-wear his evils, or find no evil at all.
Wisdom affords more strength, more fortifies
The undejected courage of the Wise:
Yet is there none beneath the Crystial Skies
So just in Actions, or in words so Wise,
That does always good, or has not been
Sometimes poluted with the stains of Sins.
What God has settled in a crooked State,
No industry of Man can make it strait;
Since then the Righteous Man's recompense is such;
Be not too Wise, nor Righteous over much.
Let not thy Flesh suggest thee, or advise
Thee to be Wicked, or too Unwise.
Why should thy too much Righteousness betray,
Thy danger'd Life, and make thy Life a prey?
At passions Language stop thy gentel Ear,
Lest if thy Servant Curse thee, thou should hear:
For oftentimes thy Heart will let thee see,
That others have been likewise Cursed by thee.
This Wisdom, by my travel I attained,
And in my Thoughts conceived that I had gained.
I gave my studious Heart to watch and pry
Into the bosom of Philosophy.
I labored to give my self to fly the Art
Of falsehood, and the Madness of the Heart.
For whom Heaven favors, shall decline Sins gates;
But the Incorrigible shall be taken by her baits:
But whether shall these, to what strange Religion fly
To find Content, and baulk that hidious vanity,
Which haunts this buble Earth, and makes thee still
A slave to thy preverse infatuated Will.
All this I have (by thee) observed, and given
My Heart to not each action under Heaven.
There was a time when the oppressers Arm
Oppressed his Neighbor, to the oppressers harm,
With floods of bitterness, since none of these,
Nor, all can Crown our labors, nor appease
Our raging Hearts. Oh! my deceived Soul,
Where will thou take thy Peace? who shall control
Our unbounded Thoughts, to sweeten out
This span of frailty plunged and orb'd about
The threatening Firmements; but as a breath
Darts down, and dashes at the doors of death.
Since Waxen-wing'd Honor is not void
Of danger, whether armed or enjoyed:
Since Hearts rejoicing, profit have no fruit,
But care both in fruition, and in persuit:
Since laughter is but Madness, and high Diet
Often ruins our Health and breeds us great disquiet:
Since humane Wisdom is but humane trouble,
And double knowledge makes our sorrow double:
Since what we have, but lights our wish to more,
And in the height of plenty makes us poor;
And what we have not too, to apt to crave,
Even dispossess of what we have.
A good repute is sweeter, far,
Than breaths of Aromatic Ointments are;
And that sad Day wherein we drew our breath,
Is not so happy as the Day of death:
For here we are but quickly forgot;
Blaze for a season, but continue not.
Tho foolish flatteries entertain
Our Souls with Joy, but all that Joy is vain;
For if both Heaven and Earth should undertake,
To extract the best from Mankind, and to make
One perfect happy Man; and thou art he,
Thy finite fortunes still would disagree.
Man in whose frame the Great Three-One advised,
And with a studious Hand Epitomized
The large Volumes, and perfect Story
Of all his Works, the manuel of his (...)
With fear and wonder in whose sovereign Eye,
He breathed the flames of awful Majesty.
Man a poor shiftless transitory thing,
Born without Sword or Shield, not having wing
To fly from threatening dangers, not to arm,
Or graple with those numerous evils, that swarm
About this new born frailty, wrapped aside
From fair Obedience, to Rebellious Pride.
How is that Power, that was bred and born
The Earths Commander, now become the scorn
Of Dunghill passions, Shipwrack'd with the gust
Of every factious and inferior Lust?
How is the Sun-bright Honor of his name
Eclpis'd? how is his Glory Clothed with shame?
What means that great Creating Power, to frame
This spacious Universe? Was not his name
Glorious enough without a Witness? Why
Did that corrected twilight of his Eye
Unmuzle darkness, and with Morning light
Redeem the Day, from new baptized Night?
There is an evil, which my observing Eye
Has taken notice of beneath the Sky:
Man's wealth cannot instruct him to withstand
The augry stroke of the Almighties Hand;
Since the increase of wealth procured by pain,
Preserved with fears, with sorrow lost again,
Increases grief in the possessors Breast;
What vantage than have Man to be possessed,
Who knows what is good for Man in this dull balze
Of life is swift, his shadow flying Days:
Or who can tell when his short Hour is run,
The events of all his toil beneath the Sun?
The Worlds surviving Lamps do not affright
The pleasing slumbers of his peaceful Night.
There be no Ears, no Eyes, to hear, to see
The living Soul, have not such rest as he,
Who stands upright in Courts, with unshaken Mind;
For the Test proves him, and he is found refined.
If thy superior happen to incense
His jealous wroth at thy supposed Offense;
Do thou thy part, yield, for yielding slacks
The raging flame great transgressions makes:
He that shall dig a pit, that shall prepare
A snare, shall be ensnared in his own snare.
Happy is the Just and Holy, for who but he
Can judge of things, or what their Natures be?
For these are Heavens favorits, sent down from thence,
Unfolding secret Mysteries in Heavenly Eloquence;
Knowing there is a time, true Justice shall preceed
On every purpose, upon every deed.
With God all future Times are present.
ALL Times to Heaven are now both first and last,
God sees things present, yea future, as we see them past:
But we transgress his Laws, it is time to part,
For why? the Laws of Nature break the rules of Art.
A smiling Conscience, a contented Mind,
A sober Knowledge, with true Wisdom joined.
Sleep seasonable, moderate and secure;
Actions heroic, constant, blameless, pure:
A life as long as fair, and when expired,
A glorious Death unfear'd as undesir'd.
The World is a Book, writ by the eternal Art
Of the great Maker, Printed in Man's Heart.
It Is falsely Printed, tho Divinely Penned,
And all the Errata will appear at the End.
Believe it Christian, by how much near.
Thou get'st to Heaven, the less will Earth appear:
Call home thy dearest wishes. and recall
Thy hopes; expect the worst that can befall.
Grace gives Virtue, opinion not Glory;
For Princely favors are but transitory.
Humane Nature, curious without, corrupt within;
A glorious Monument of inglorious Sin:
Yet much our Savior have endured, yea more
To make us Kings that were but Slaves before.
He that grieves because his grief is so small,
Has a true grief, and the best Faith of all;
He vows his Faith, and the sincere perfection
Of undissembl'd and entire affection;
And such in doing well,
Shall seek for Heaven; not find the flames of Hell.
`Oh! let the Church my Mother instruct me,
Give savory Meat, Cloth and Conduct me
Into my Fathers Arms: These Hands shall never
Trust to the poorness of their own endeavor.
Bring I a Kid, but of my Mothers dressing,
'Twill please my Father, and procure a Blessing.
Most Sins, at least, please Sense, but some are Treason,
Not only against the Crown of Sense but reason.
But it is an error, as foul, to call
Our Sins too great, for Pardon, as too small.
The reason is easy to be riddled out,
One's despair, the other not doubt.
Lord weaken this Rebellious Flesh,
That Is apt to oppose Grace: Oh! quicken, and refresh:
My dull and coward Spirit, that would yield,
And make Proud Satan Master of the Field:
Because it is Grave, not Bed, that I am in;
Not a-sleep, but dead in Sin.
Serve God in Plenty, and in Affliction trust;
No thanks to serve our God when he feeds us.
Promise is a Debt, and Debt implies a Payment;
How can the Righteous then doubt Food and Raiment:
Let not my Thoughts so divided be,
But they mix again, and fix on thee.
Oh! thou who did appear in cloven Tongues o^ Fire;
Direct my Thoughts and with thy self inspire:
That I may search the Scripture, to increase
In the Diviner Knowledge of thy Peace;
That when all things shall cease that are transitory,
Thy Gifts of Grace may be Crowned with perfect Glory
The Rich Man's sum of untold descended Wealth,
Can give his Body Plenty, but no Health:
The Poor in pains and want possesses all,
The other in plenty finds no Peace at all.
It Is strange, and yet the cause is easily known;
The one's at Gods finding, the other at his own.
The formers filken Robes, his costly Diet;
Can lend a little Pleasure, but no Quiet.
The latter seldom slacks his Thirst, but from the Pump
And yet his Heart is blithe, his Visage plump.
Such Truths are Subjects, far more fit
For Holy Admiration than for Wit.
It Is said of Alexander, that he complained
And wept, because there was no other Worlds to gain
His griefs and thy complaints are not amiss;
He has grief enough that finds no World but this.
Our trust in God for Riches, never must
Exclude our Care, nor Care exceed our tru^t.
Thy Sacred Will be done, Great God,
To spend, or to suspend thy Rod;
If possible my Will's to miss it,
If otherwise to stoop and Kiss it:
However submit, we shall not be this the worse,
If Conscience Bless, what if Shimei Curse.
'Some say the Sacrament's a Supper, and it is fit
'To use the posture of a Meal to fit;
'Can thy Discretion Phares, or thy Zeal
'Give Carnal gestures to a Spiritual Meal:
'A Heavenly Supper and a Fleshy Heart;
'Thy posture has discovered what thou art.
Of those Sacraments which some call Seven,
Five were Ordained by Man and Two by Heaven,
As says the Eternal Word, whose high Decree
Admits no change, and cannot frustrate be.
What thing is Man? that Gods regard is such:
Or why, should Heaven love wretchless Man so much?
His age is Sinful, and his youth's Vain,
His life's a Punishment, his death's a Pain:
Yea, Man who ought to be a Watch-light in the Temple,
Is as a Snuffer, wants the Oil of good Example:
Can he be said to fear the Lord that flys him,
Can Word confess him, when as Deed denis him.
For this, Men should strive to have their Hearts relent;
Such Hearts which never knew what Mercy meant.
Gods Love is boundless, apt and free
To turn to Man, when Man returns to thee.
Adjourn thy Sanguine Dreams, awake, arise,
Call in thy Thoughts and let them all advise.
Before the Soul can a true comfort find,
The Body must be prostrate, and the Mind
Truly contrite and repentive within,
And loath the fawning of a bosom Sin:
But Lord, can Man deserve, or can his best
Do justice, equal right, which he transgrest.
When Dust and Ashes mortally offends,
Can Dust and Ashes make Eternal mends:
^s Heaven unjust? must not the recompense
Be full equivalent to the offense.
What mends by moral Man can then be given,
To the offended Majesty of Heaven.
O mercy, mercy, on thee my Soul relies,
^n thee we build our Faith, we bend our Eyes.
If thou will, thou can change our lot,
That we and ours may Live and perish not;
Thy Glorious Wisdom, and tender Love
Transcends thy sharper justice will remove.
'Judge not that Field because its stubble,
'Nor him that is poor and full of trouble;
'Tho the one look bare, the other thin,
'Judge not, their Treasure is within.
Injured inocency, while the Enemies Unhallowed Tongue^
Makes her a Glorious Martyr in their wro^gs.
The Devils believe, all know they do;
But their belief does make them tremble too:
Men rail at Judas, him that did betray
The Lord of Life, yet do^t Day by Day;
They Curse that Traitor Life and Limb,
Tho Curse themselves in Curfing him.
The Thief and Slanderer are almost the same,
The one steals my Goods, the other my good Name;
The one lives in Scorn, the other dies in Shame.
But from these dark some Clouds Good Lord deliver us,
Let them not interpose betwixt thy Glory and us:
For thou alone art our Creator, in whom we trust:
Some trust too much in their doing well,
In seeking Heaven they find the flames of Hell:
But the pure of Heart have Power to refuse,
Being endowed with Wisdom, the Evil and Good to choose.
He that gives Wisdom to refuse,
Inspires the Art which to choose.
'In thee, O King, my pensive Soul respires;
'Thou art the fullness of my choice desires;
'Thou art that Sacred Spring, whose Waters burst
'In streams to him, that seeks with Holy Thirst.
'Thrice happy Man, Thrice happy Thirst to bring
The fainting Soul to so sweet a Spring.
God is just, what his deep Counsel wild,
His Prophets told, and justice has fulfilled:
But Man, the Child of ruin, to avoid
Less dangers, by a greater is destroyed;
Whose Spring is like a Flower for a Days delight,
At Noon we flourish, and we fade at Night.
If Plants be cropped because their Fruits are small;
Think you to Thrive that bears no Fruit all:
But who so Fruitful is, and worthy to Drink this,
Shall be received unto Eternal Bliss;
Such cannot Dye, the Sacred Nine deny,
All Souls that merits Fame shall ever Dye.
For these must survive, for their self closed Eyes,
That now lie slumbering in the dust shall rise.
The highest Heavens have Decreed, to Bless
The Fruitful Souls, and with a fair success;
For that they built their Bliss, not on the blaze of Glory,
Nor seated their Happiness in things transitory.
O Lord, how great is the Power of thy Hand?
Glorious is thy Name in every Land,
Great God, Unlimited are thy Confines;
And assistest Man in his good Designs.
Thy Mercies like the dew of Hermon Hill:
Or, like the Ointment dropping downward still.
Thy Love is boundless, thou art apt and free
To turn to Man, when Man returns to thee.
^ Sacred Subject, of a Meditation,
Thy Works are full of Admiration:
Thy Judgments all are just, severe and sure;
They quite cut off, or else by lancing Cure.
'My Faith, not Merits, has assured thee mine;
Thy Love, not my Desert, has made me thine.
Unworthy I, whose drousie Soul rejected
Thy precious Favors, and (secure) neglected
Thy glorious Presence, how am I become
A Bride befitting, so Divine a Groom?
'It is no Merit, no Desert of mine,
Thy Love, thy Love alone, has made me thine:
Since then the bounty of thy dear Election
Have styled me thine. Oh, let the sweet reflection
'Of thy Illustrious Beams, my Soul inspire,
'And with thy Spirit inflame my hot Desire.
'Unite our Souls; oh, let thy secret rest
'Make a perpetual home within my Breast;
'Instruct me, so that I may gain the skill
'To suit my Service to thy secret Will.
Then shall my Soul that suffers through dispite
Of Error and rude Ignorance, have right:
Then shall my Soul enjoy within this Breast
A Holy Sabbath of Eternal rest;
And my dearest Spouse shall Seal me on his Heart,
So sure, that envious Earth may never part
Our joined Souls; let not the World remove
My chaste Desires, from so chaste a Love.
'All you that wish the bountiful increase
'Of dearest Pleasures and Divinest Peace;
'I charge you all, if ought my charge may move
'Your tender Hearts, not to disturb my Love;
'Vex not his gentle Spirit nor bereave
'Him of his Joys, that is so apt to grieve.
That he may teach his living Plants to thrive;
And such as are a dying, to revive.
He walks about such tender Plants
To smell their Odours, and supply their wants;
That he may leave his secret Spirit in their Breast,
As Earnest of an Everlasting rest.
To thy Creator have my Soul, and let thy Sacre^
Vows
Plight Holy Contracts with so sweet a Spouse:
His Left Hand's full of Treasure, and his Right
Of Peace and Honor, and unknown Delight.
Then shall it please our gracious Lord
To Crown, with Audience, his suppliants Word.
O Glory, chase Disloyal Thoughts, let not thi^
World allure
My chaste Desires from a Spouse so pure.
He Will endow my ardent Soul with sweetness, and inspire
With Heavenly ravishment my rapt Desires.
O let all times be prosperous, and all places
Be Witness to our undefiled embraces.
Sure is the Knot, that true Religion ties;
And Love that is rightly grounded never dies.
'If Error lead not my dull Thoughts amiss,
'My genius tells me where my true Love is:
'He's busy laboring in the flowery Banks,
'Inspiring Sweetness and receiving Thanks.
'Watering those Plants, whose tender Root are dry;
'And Pruning such, whose Crests aspire too high:
'Transplanting, Grafting, Reaping from some,
'And covering others that are newly come.
Then take from each to make one perfect Grace,
Yet would my Love outshine that borrowed Face.
So perfect are his Graces, so Divine,
So full of Heaven are those fair looks of thine.
O Sacred Symetry, O rare Connection
Of many Perfects, to make one Perfection.
O let my Lips, like a perpetual Story,
Divulge thy Graces and declare thy Glory.
Hear comes a Critic, close thy Page,
Thou art no Subject for this Age;
Thou have no Guilt that does require,
That thou should lurk, nor yet retire;
Thou have no Luster of thy own,
But what is derived from Heaven alone.
Fear not thy Heaven instructed Page
Will either please, or teach the Age:
For the Wise with ease shall riddle out,
Which is the voice of Wonder, which of Doubt;
For God sends an Angel to protect,
As well from Evil, as to Good direct.
O thou, the beginning, and the end, before whom
Things past, and present, and things to come
Are all alike; O prosper my Designs,
And let thy Spirit enrich my feeble Lines:
Rejoice, my Soul, and give my Pen the Art
Wisely to move, and me an understanding Heart.
Earthly Glories are scarce worth craving to obtain;
They are Happinesses that must be lost again:
Gasp not for Honor, wish no blazing Glory,
For these will perish in an Ages Story;
Nor yet for Power; Power may be carved
To Fools, as well as thee that have deserved.
Thirst not for Lands nor Money, wish for none:
For Wealth is neither lasting nor our own.
Riches are fair Inticements to deceive us;
They flatter while we live, and dying leave us.
What fit of Madness makes us love them thus,
We leave our lives and pleasure leaves us.
Pleasure is fleeting still and makes no stay,
It lends a smile or twain and steals away.
The pleasures of this World soon abate,
They are lively emblems of our own Estate;
Which like a Banquet at a Funeral show,
But sweeten Grief and serve to flatter Woe.
How slight a thing is Man, how frail and brittle,
How seeming great, how truly little.
We rise securely with the Morning Sun,
But unregarded Die e're Day be done:
Yet his Estate was level, and he has Free Will
To stand or fall; unforst to Good or Ill.
Such is the State Man was created in;
Within his Power, a Power not to Sin:
His life's a bubble, full of seeming Bliss,
The more it lengthens, the more short it is.
The swelling of his outward Fortune, can
Create a prosperous, not a happy Man.
'A peaceful Conscience is the true content,
'But Wealth is only her Golden Ornament.
'I care not so my Kernel relish well,
'How slender be the substance of my shell.
'My Heart being Virtuous, let my Face be wan;
'I am to God, I only seem to Man.
To him the searching of Men's Hearts belong;
Man's Judgment sinks no deeper than the Tongue.
Let shame prevent our Lips, recant and give
To the Almighty his Prerogative.
He overlooks thee, and in one space
Of Time his Eye is fixed on every place.
A Disswasive from placing our Hopes in transient Happinesses.
BUild not your Bliss upon the blaze of Glory,
Can perfect Happiness be transitory?
Nor in the use of Beauty place your end,
Nor in the enjoyment of a Courtly Friend:
These, if enjoyed, are crossed with Discontent,
If not in the pursuit, yet in the event.
Apply thy Heart to Wisdom, with good attention,
For 'twill enrich thy Soul with fair prevention;
That no foul Treason against thy Blood intended,
Thy Life, thy State, will Loyally be defended;
For Worship, Honor, and true respect
Shall be done to him, whom the Heavenly King do affect.
Peerless Honors and Princely Rights
Be done, to them in whom this King delights.
The highest Heavens will still conspire to Bless
All faithful Seed, and with a fair success
Their Enemies he will ty, they shall not make reply;
Not daring to answer nor deny.
The Heavens grown great with Age must soon decay,
^^e pondrous Earth in time shall pass away;
^^t yet his Sacred Words shall always flourish,
Though Days and Years, and Heaven and Earth do perish.
^an sees like Men, and can but comprehend
^^ings as they present are, not as they end.
Man wants the Strength to sway his strong affections;
What Power he has is from Divine direction,
Which often unseen through dullness of the Mind,
We Nickname Chance, because our selves are Blind;
And that is the cause Man's first beholding Eye
Often Loves, or Hates, and knows no reason why.
If he be Poor that wants much, how Poor
he that has too much, and yet wants more:
^^ice happy he, to whom the bounty of Heaven
^fficient, with a sparing Hand has given
^e fairest Crop of either Grass, or Grain,
^ot for use, undew'd with timely Rain.
The Wealth of Crcesus, were it to be given,
Were not Thank-worthy, if unblessed by Heaven.
(...) Riches, which fond Mort^^s so embrace,
^re not true Riches, it not enlightened with true Grace.
Wealth interposed with too too gross a Care,
^hey lie obscured and no Riches are.
Let not the fawning World to pleasure then invite,
Thy wandering Eyes; the Flesh presents delight.
^sist me in my Combat with the Flesh,
^elieve my fainting Power, and refresh
(...) feeble Spirit. I will not wish to be
Cas^t from the World, Lord, cast the World from me.
To be afraid to die, or wish for death,
Are Words and Passions of disparing Breath.
But wretched Man! were thy condition mine,
I Would not despair as thou do, not repine;
But offer up the broken Sacrifice
Of an humble Soul, before his gracious Eyes.
Whose Works are Miracles of Admiration;
He mounts the Meek amidst their desolation,
Confounds the Worldly Wise, that blindfold they
Grope all in darkness at the Noon of Day:
But guards the humble from reproach of wrong,
And stops the current of the crafty Tongue.
Thrice happy is the Man, his Hands correct;
Beware lest fury force thee to reject
The Almighties Trial; he that made thy Wound,
In Justice can, in Mercy make it sound.
^ear not, tho multiplied affliction shall
B^siege thee, he at length will rid them all.
In Famine he shall feed, in War defend thee;
Shield thee from Slander, and in Griefs attend thee.
Thy House shall thrive, replenisht with Content,
Which thou shall Rule in prosperous Government:
For Man ^^licted by the Almighties Hand,
His Faith does flourish and securely stand.
Yet the worst I Will look for, that I can project;
If better come, it is more then I expect:
If other ways I am Armed with preparation,
No Sorrows sudden to an expectation.
Lord, to thy Wisdom, I submit my Will;
I will be thankful, send me Good or Ill.
If Good, my present state will pass the sweeter,
If Ill, my Crown of Glory will be greater:
All this experience tells, when I advise
Those, who have taught many, may themselves b^ Wise
Tho rising early with the Morning Sun,
Yet unregarded die e're Day be done.
No Gold is pure from dross, tho often refined.
The strongest Ceder's shaken with the Wind.
The ^est of Men have Sins, none lives secure;
In Nature nothing's perfect, nothing pure
^^om mudded Springs, can Crystal Water come.
(...) some things all Men Sin, in all things some.
Since that my Vesture cannot want a stain,
Assist me lest the Tincture be in Grain.
To thee my great Redeemer do I fly,
It is thy Death alone can change my Dye:
Tears mingled with Blood can scowr so,
That Scarlet Sins shall be as white as Snow.
But wretched Man be not in thought too sure,
Sin steals unseen when we sleep most secure.
By Craft there are, who season error with the taste of truth,
And tempt the frailty of our tender Youth.
What pleasure is in Dainties? if the taste
Be in it self distempered, better fast.
Lord, in my Soul, a Spirit of Love create me,
And I will Love my Neighbor tho he Hate me.
I Love the World to serve my turn, and leave her;
Tho i will not say it is no Deceit to cozzen a Deceiver.
She Will not miss me, I less the World shall miss;
To loose a World of G^ief, to enjoy a Life Bliss.
By thy Mercy, Lord, to Glory receive me in,
A^though my Soul is burdened with my Sin;
For thou art Just and bent to a Wise Decree,
Which certain is, and cannot alt'red be;
It seems a Paradox beyond belief,
T^^t Men in trouble should prolong, relief.
We poor weaklings when we sleep in Sin,
Knock at onr dro^sie Hearts and never lin
Till thou (...) our sin congealed Eyes,
Lest drowned in (...) we sink and never rise.
The approaching (...) might be at once prevented,
With Pra^rs and Pains r^^^red, reattented.
We try new ways dispairing of the old;
Love quickens, Courage makes the Spirits bold.
Our God bids go, our Credit bids us stay,
Our guilty fear bids fly another way.
O Earthy Men, make not your Righteous Laws
A trick for gain, let Justice r^^e the Cause.
'O worthless Man, arise and see,
'There's not a twiny thread 'twixt Death and thee.
'This darksome Place thou measur'st may be thy Grave;
'And sudden Death rides Proud on yonder Wave.
By thoughts dive down into the Abyss of Hell,
And there in Justice does the Almighty dwell.
Death is a Calander, composed by Fate,
Concerning all Men, never out of date:
Yet cheer up, I have a message in store
Whose Comforts much, and joyful News is more.
We have yet a Friend Puissant and of Might,
Will see us take no wrong but do us right.
Lets offer up Sacrifice with one accord,
And pay our solemn Vows unto the Lord;
And with penitent Hearts implore him,
And Day and Night pour forth our Souls before him
For shall I be silent; no, I Will speak
Till Tongue be tired, and my Lungs be weak.
Proclaim to us thy Mercy, for we thurst for Grace
For thou art free of Mercy to those that Mercy will embrace.
O save us harmless from our Foe-mans Jaws,
Who art turned Orator to plead our Cause:
How are thy Mercies full of Admiration,
How sovereign sweet's their Application.
How redef^^ed are we with the Rust of Sin,
Which has abused thy Stamp and eaten in.
But yet at length if we repent,
Instead of Plagues and Direful Punishments,
We shall find Mercy, Love, and Heavens Applause;
For the Great Almighty himself will plead our Cause.
Thine Eye that views the moving Spheres above,
Ought to give Praise to him that makes them move.
Here may we see how Prayer and true Repentance
Do strive with God, prevail and turn his Sentence
From Judgment Just, and Plagues Infernal,
To boundless Mercies and to life Eternal.
All over the World how should these Mercies make a sound,
As Blessings fall, Thansgiving must abound;
^dge then did ever Record round thine Ear,
That God forsook the Heart that was fiueere.
But often have we seen that such as Plow
^^wdness and Mischief, reap the same they sow.
The Moral says, all Wisdom that is given
^o Hood-winked Mortals, first proceeds from Heaven.
Far safer it is of things unsure to doubt,
Than undertake to riddle Secrets out.
It was demanded once what God did do,
Before the World was framed: Whereunto
'Answer was made, he built a Hell for such
As were too curious, and would know too much.
at such curiosity preceds from him, who can
^^ly accuse Man to God, and God to Man;
^^no Hourly sows fresh Schisms among the Saints,
^ea, buffets them, then laughs at their Complaints.
O Chastity, the Flower of the Soul,
^ow is thy perfect fairness turned to foul:
There are thy Maiden-smiles, thy blushing Cheek,
^hy Lamb-like Countenance, so fair, so meek;
^ay not other Virtues serve, but must this Queen
(...) made the Subject of Unchaste spleen.
So young is Man, that broke with Care and Sorrow,
^e's old enough to Day to die to morrow.
^^e gives us Passage to endure great Woes,
^^ath frees us from all Temporal Foes.
^t tho secure, my Soul did never slumber,
^et do my Woes exceed both weight and number.
Both Poor and Rich, are equal in the Grave;
^rvants no Lords, and Lords no servants have.
that needs there light to him that is comfortless;
^r, Life to such as languish in distress:
^bjects of pity, are Bodies in distress,
and worthy to enjoy eternal Rest.
Lord, make Wise thy Servant; a Wise forecast
Grieves for things present, not for things are past.
Satan have Servants, who can make true boast
They gave away as much as thine have lost:
Others with Learning made to Wisely Mad,
Refuse such Fortunes as Croesus never had.
Lord, make me Champion, give me such belief,
A strong and fervent, but not crafty Faith.
I know a forced Love neeeds no such great Applause,
Since they Love Ill, that Loves not for a Cause.
I bespeak leave to Answer all this, before I knew
They want no Grief, that find such Friends as you.
Be not discontent, no, no, forbear; for I
Hate less your Censures than your Flattery:
Succor I sought and begged, but none was there
To give the Alms of one poor trickling Tear.
See how I lie devoid of Help or Friend:
O make me humble and mindful of my End.
Lord, make me Just in Image, like my Divine Creator,
Pollish and (...), yea Refine my Nature;
Let me receive all as (...) thy Hand,
With a thankful Heart as living in thy Land:
And consider the self-same Sorrow
Grieves others to Day, may make me groan to mo^ row.
Great King, be my Comfort in my highest Grief,
I will not trust to Man's, but thy relief.
I know Great God, upon my true Repentance
Thou wi^t determine to reverse thy Sentence:
Make me, tho in a blind Age Wisely to see;
And in a seeing Age, not b^ind to be.
He that would save his Life, when Honor bids hi^ die,
Steals but a Life, and lives by Robbery,
Dishonours his God, and that likens to the Pow^ Divine,
That made and placed her in her Fleshly Shrine.
The Wise and Good-like kind Physicians are,
That strive to heal us by their Care;
Their Physic and their Learning calmly use,
Although the Patient them strangely abuse:
For since the Sickness is they find,
A sad Distemper of the Mind.
The Wiseman in the midst of Woes,
May enjoy and feel a sweet repose:
Might pity all the Griefs we see,
By compassion Anoint every Malady.
While our selves are calm, our Art improve*
To rescue them and show our Love,
That we with open Eyes may see
The brightness of Gods Majesty,
And never more in Chains of Darkness lie,
(...) be secure from Bondage and all Iniquity.
That comforts Divine may fortify and raise the Soul,
To Heavenly Joys where none can control.
The World's a hurly burly, and the Court
All Tongues were filled with Wonder and Report.
The Watch is set, pursuit was made about,
To Guard the King and find the Traitors out,
To punish him according to his due,
That did not Peace nor Loyalty pursue.
Had Man been Kind, Loving, True, and always Good,
As formerly in the Golden Age they stood;
Then had we lived in all Delights and Glory full of Love,
Blessed as the Holy Angels are above.
But now we suffer for evil Deeds,
Reaping the fruit of our ill Weeds.
But thou, O Holy Jesus, who did for us Die,
And on the Altar Bleeding for all Men lie;
Bearing all Torment, Pain, Reproach and Shame,
That we by Virtue of the same,
Tho Enemies to God, might be
Redeemed and set at Liberty.
Let us likewise favor to others show,
And live in Heaven on Earth below;
Let Us prize their Souls, and let them be our gems,
Our valuable Temples and our Diadems,
Rich Spoils and Trophies, our own Joys
Compared to Souls, all else are Toys.
O let them be such unto us, as they were to thee,
Valued as Vessels of Glory and Felicity:
What would I give, that I might likewise see
The Brightness and true Glory of thy Majesty,
The Joy and fullness of that high Delight,
Whose Blessedness is Glorious, yea Infinite.
And while we feel how much our God does Love
The Peace of Sinners, how much move,
Sue, and thirst, entreat, lament, and grieve
For all the Crimes in which they live;
And wait, and seek, and call again,
And long to save them from their Pain.
My Memory's like a searce of Lawn. (Alas!)
It keeps things gross, and lets the purer pass,
Which makes me loath my self so vile; O base repute,
(...) better starve then eat such empty fruit:
Yet dear Lord, let me never Confounded be,
Since all my Hope is placed in thee.
True Joys alone contentment do inspire,
I^rich, content, and make our Courage higher;
The true fear of God, desire and love
Must in the height of all their rapture move:
For content alone's a dead and silent Stone;
The real lite of Bliss is Glory reigning on a Thro^e.
O let me in a lively manner see
Dear Jesus Eternal Joys in thee;
Enable me to Prai^e thy Majesty with all my might,
Whose Grace and Favor is Sweet, yea Infinite.
O let me Love thee, since thy Divine care
Have promised me a share in thy Kingdom fair.
'A Sea that is bounded in a Finite Shore,
'Is better far, because it is no more.
'Should Waters endlesly exceed the Skies,
They Would drown the World, and all what ever we prize.
'Had the bright Sun been Infinite, the Flame
'Had burnt the World, and quite consumed the same.
'That Flame would yield no splendour to the Sight,
' 'Twould be but Darkness, tho 'twere Infinite:
'One Star made Infinite would all exclude;
'An Earth made Infinite could never be viewed:
'But all being bounded for each others sake,
'He bounding all, did all most useful make.
'And, which is best, in profit and delight,
'Tho not in bulk he made all Infinite.
'He in his Wisdom did their use extend
'By all, to all the World from end to end;
'In all things, all things Service do to all,
'And thus a Sand is endless tho but small;
'And every thing is truly Infinite.
'In its relation deep and exquisite.
'O Lord, be thou within me to strengthen me.
'Without me to keep me.
'About me to protect me.
'Beneath me to uphold me.
'Before me to direct me.
'Behind me to reduce me.
'Round about me to defend me.
O Lord, I beseech thee, give me a longing Affection after the Pleasures of thy
Holy Spirit, because they are noble, and will advance my Soul to Eternal
Happiness; make me often Contemplate the Joys of Heaven; the hopes of which is
the Joy and Comfort of my Soul.

A short Discourse of the Mortality of the BODY, and Immortality, and
Excellency of the SOUL.
Isaiah 26. 19. Thy dead Men shall live, together with my dead Body shall they
arise: Awake, and Sing ye that dwell in Dust: For thy dew is as the dew of
Herbs, and the Earth shall cast out the dead. Glory be to God on high, and on
Earth Peace, Good will toward Men. Hallelujah.
1. FIRST, and above all, let us consider how short, and uncertain our lives
are, which are subject to a Thousand Frailties and Casualties, and to Death
every moment; insomuch that our whole life is but short and troublesome, and as
a Wind that passes away, and comes ^ot again, which is evidently declared by
the various ^nstances of the Mortality of Frail and Mortal Man: That our very
sleeping and waking, is but a kind of living and dying; nay, Morning and
Evening, is but (...) a Emb^em of the representation of Death, and the
^esurrection. For God has given every Man but a short time to be upon Earth,
so that upon the well ^enc^ing it, our well being in Eternity depends.
Where^ore Divines say, that every Hour or our Life, after ^e are capable of
receiving Laws, and knowledge ^f Good and Evil, we must give an Account how ^e
spend our Time, to the Judge of Men and Angels: Therefore we must remember we
have a great Work to do, many Enemies to Conquer, many Evils to pre^ent, many
Dangers to go through, many Necessities ^o serve, much Good to do, many Friends
to support, many Poor to relief, besides the Needs of Nature, and Relation, our
Private and Public Cares; so that God has given every Man Work enough to do,
that there is no room for Idleness; and, yet there is room for Devotion:
Wherefore he spends his Time and Wealth well, that imploys it in the Service of
God, by setting a part a great Portion of it for Religion, and the Necessity of
Men's Souls, by filling up all the spaces of his Time with Devotion; and by
taking from Sleep, to employ in this Exercise.

Secondly, Let him consider that has but little ^leasure; that he ought to set
a part some solemn Time, for the Venerable Worship of God, Thrice in the Year,
at least, tho he buy it at the rate of any Labor, and Honest Art; for the
quiting of Worldly Business, let him attend wholly to Fasting and Prayer; in
the dressing up of his Soul, by Confession, Meditation, and deep Humiliation;
that he may make up his Accounts, renew his Vows, and improve his Time, to the
Glory of God, and his own Souls good. Seeing that we know not the Day of our
Death, we ought with all Care and Diligence to prepare for it, that if it be
our Lot to die Young, we may also die Innocent, before the Sweetness of our
Souls are defloured; that we may attain this favor of God, that our Souls have
suffered a less Imprisonment, by being speedily freed form the load of the
Body: For at Death our Souls are equal to the Angels, and Heirs of Eternity.
For it is observed by some, that after the time that a Child is Conceived, he
never cease to be to all Eternity; so that if he dies Young or Old h^ has
still an Immortal Soul; and laid down his Bod^ only for a time, as that, which
was the Instrumen^ of his Trouble and Sorrow; for he will certainly have a more
noble Being after Death, than he has here Seeing these things are so, let us
endeavor to stamp Religion on our Souls, that God may deliver us from
Unrighteous dealings; may we therefore always have an Ear open, to hear the
just Complaints of the Poor and a Heart full of pity, to support them; for the
Soul must have the Prehemency over the Body, because it is more Noble, and
infinitely more to be valued than the Body; for the Body is to turn to Dust
within a little time, but in the mean while, it is nourished by sleep, which
refreshes it and revives the Spirit. Wherefore it is said of sleep, it is a kind
of Death, and whatsoever we take from sleep, we add to Life.

Thirdly, Wherefore be says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5. 14. Arise, thou sleepy Soul
call upon thy God, Jonah 1. 6. suffer it not to be drowsy or sleeppy, when it
stands upon the bri^ks of Eternity; but prefer the care of the Soul before all
the World, for it is more to be valued than Ten Thousand Worlds: Wherefore take
heed to your selves, and be Wise in time, before it is to late; for though you
know not what the Soul is, because you see it not, neither can you feel it; yet
it is a Particle which came from Heaven, and when it goes out of the Body it
goes to God, to Live for ever; it sleeps not, neither does it die, for it is
Immortal and of an Immortal Nature, and so impossible to be destroyed, for we
have our Saviors own Word for it, when he says, Ye cannot kill the Soul, St.
Luke 12. 4. and when he says, My Father is the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, St. Matt. 22. 32. whereby he plainly shows, that
the Soul which is the nobler part of Man, tho it be taken from the Body, is
alive, for says he, My Father is the God of the living, and not of the dead as
dead, but of the living that are dead. So that the Souls of all departed people
are alive, for althoug^ their Bodies are crumbled to Dust, from whence the^
were taken; their Souls are with God that gave them or in some place of Gods
appointment, according (...) their lives have been, Because God have prepared
man Mansions for us, St. John 14. 2. and as we have improved our Talent, so
shall our Station be. St. Pa^^ also says, That one Star differs from another
Star (...) Glory; and since these things are so, let us not lo^ a Minutes time,
but improve it to the Glory of Go^ and our own Souls Good, and beg of him to
gi^^ us a Heart inflamed with Love, and winged wi^^ Duty, that we may give up
our Souls totally to h^^ Adorable Majesty, that he may dwell in the Thro^^ of
our Souls for ever: And after this Life we may (...) admitted to the Vision of
Bliss, and have free Inte^course with all Holy Souls in those beauteous Regions.

Fourthly, It Is evident, that Spirits fill no roo^ tho they could see all
things, which point is ve^^ dubious and unsertain; for that Holy Souls can
beho^^ the visible Actions of Mortal Men, to us is altogeth^^ uncertain; tho we
doubt not but they do behold wha^soever is Acted in those Regions where they
dwe^ in those Infinite Dimensions, or Heavenly Habitations tho they are
enriched with Liberty, and made brig^^ by Knowledge, derived from the
Illustrous and Illum^nated Power of the Omnipotent God, who is infinit^
Communicative to be Good, and to do Good to (...) Mankind; and has made the
Soul of Man on purpo^^ that it might see him in his Kingly Country, when St.
Paul says, We shall be like him, for we shall (...) him as he is not, as we
now behold him darkly through a Vail in deep Obscurity, but Face to Face in
Unva^^ed Glory. And if the Eye of the Body that was ma^^ for the World, being
so little a Ball of Earth a^^ Water, can take in all and see the visible World,
i. e. that part of it, on which the sight of the Eye can be ^resent, much more
is the Soul able to see and be pre^ent with all that is Divine and Eternal; tho
the Soul (...) unhappily divided from God, is a weak and in^onsiderable
Creature; but when United to God, it is (...) Transcendant and Celestial Thing,
God being its Life, ^reatness, and Power; for as the Apostle says, he that is
joined to the Lord is one Spirit, for his Omni^resence and Eternity fills the
Soul, and makes it able (...) contain all hights and depths, and all things may
^e in it as it were by Thoughts and Intellections; and Magnanimous desires are
the Natural result of such (...) Magnanimous Capacity: Such a Soul then in
respect ^f its Capacity is an Immovable Sphere of Power and ^nowledge, and by
imagination is able to pass ^^rough the Center of the Earth, and through all
^xistencies; for it is most Capacious and Swift. Com^and it then by thought to
go into India, and sooner ^^en thou can bid it, it will be there; not as
passing ^^om Place to Place, but by Thought and Immagina^on, suddenly, in a
moment, as you may send it to ^eaven by the slight of a Thought, as you may at
any ^^me command it to fly, tho not by the assistance of ^ings in a Bodyly
manner, but after the manner that ^ouls pass from Place to Place, not locally,
but after ^e manner of Spirits: For the Soul of Man is said to (...) an
Immutable Essence, his Power of Reasoning is ^ive, even when it is quiet, and
the Body unactive. ^is one and the same for Nature in all Men, tho not ^r
Indeuments, of it self equally inclined to Great ^ransendent Things; tho in
most Men it is misguided, ^^ffled and suppressed; but where it has the common
^ssistances that God has prepared for it, it is a Miracu^^us Creature and of
near alliance to the Divine Ma^sty. For a Man being Wise and Holy, his Soul is,
(...) it were, in the Heavenly World; and it is no trivial ^^jury can make him
contend being Liberal and Magnanimous, he is prone to do Heroical Things, and
to make himself Venerable to his very Adversary; being averse to all Wroth,
Clamor, and Anger scarcely in any thing being defective, and becomes a great
Man by contemning Danger, having an Infinite felicity in his Daily view, and
may justly strengthen himself in the hopes of Divine assistance, knowing the
Infinite value of his Soul, and believing the Blessedness that is in reserve
for it, by reason of the greatness of interior Bliss; and is therefore
environed with the bright Beams of his own enjoyments, and always beggeth of
God, that as Sin has abounded, so may Grace superabound; that all Souls may
receive the Blessed advantages of the Divine Forgiveness; that all may have the
Blessed Assistance of Grace, to lead us into all Virtues, which are themselves
our Aids to bring us to Glory: For these acquire good Habits, and infuse^
Grace, causing us to incline to the secret Study of Felicity, that we may be
even now possessed with sincere and pure delights; for Godliness is a kind of
God-likeness, a Divine Habit or Frame of Soul, that may fitly be accounted the
fullness of the Stature of the inward Man. For it is an Inclination to be like
God, to please him, and enjoy him; and he may be said to be God-like, that is
High and Serious in all his Thoughts, Humble and Condescending in all his
Actions, full of Love and good Will to all the Creatures, and bright in the
Knowledge of all their Nature, Covering all the Treasures of God, and Breaths
after the Joys of Heaven. Recollecting all his broken and scattered Thoughts,
nothing less than the Wisdom of God will please the God-like Man, for
God-likeness is the comment of Amity betwixt God and Man, Eternity and
Immensity are the Sphere of his Activity, and are often frequented and filled:
With his Thoughts he must enjoy God, or he can enjoy nothing, nor himself; for
nothing will satisfy him but the Glory of his great Creator, the great
Counselor of Nature, and the perfect Beauty of the whole Universe. And to be
exalted to this frame is a very sublime and glorious perfection; and Blessed
are all those that are thus Beautified in their Minds, and are Blessed with
such an Angelical Soul, and are thus curiously acquainted with these things: I
heartily wish, that all that shall happen to peruse these things, may be a
little higher elevated with the true inward Sense of what is here described,
and with the secret Perfection of the Decrees of God, and the Nature of his
Divine Essence, that they may be worthy to partake of his sublimity; and hereby
aspire to dwell with him for ever, and covet the Treasure of his Immensity, and
be able to expaciate therein, by being Blessed with the Wisdom of an Angel, in
being as Divine and Heavenlly, by being truly eminent in inward and outward
Worth; not being either weak or defective: For Virtue is base and not Virtue
while it is remiss, or not carried to the highest pitch it is possible, for then
it is that their Glory shall su^mount the rage of their Enemies; and their true
worth continue Immortally shining throughout all Kingdoms and Ages for ever,
Inheriting the benefits of their own Virtues, in the Peace and Tranquillity of
their own happy Condition; and this because they have been prepossed with true
gratitude and felicity; and in all their actions been Clothed with Meekness,
and a condescending behavior, having been highly kind and serviceable in their
Generation, free from the spots and blemishes of the World; having frequently
arrived to an universal Applause, and truly deserved to be exceedingly Honored
by all People; for it is a very hard matter to Hate a very excellent Person. No
Man was ever uppraided for being a Wise and Gallant Man; but it often happens
that for some Infirmity that a good Man have, he may suffer the misfortune of
being censured; but merely for being Good or Wise, it is not usual to suffer
reproach, contempt, or slander, for it would be cruel, for being Wise and Good,
Holy and Chaste, Just and Liberal, Honest and Merciful, Meek and Courageous to
be vilified: Perhaps he may be censured and ha^^ at his first setting out, but
when he have made a goo^ proficiency in Goodness, he will be sure to overcome
the rage and malice of his Enemy, because he have made himself Eminent and
Conspicuous, and therefore is admired by all that love Virtue; because he is a
Man of entire and approved Virtue, well known for a Person of Honor and Worth,
and therefore the first envies and censures abate, because he has long
exercised Virtue and Goodness, with great Activity and Courage, Prudence and
Wisdom: Thus Moses after his long Meekness and invincible Fidelity to the
Jewish Nation, was in the close of his Life most exceedingly Honored by all
People, and enjoyed a veneration of high Degree; for his Glory surmounted the
rage of his Enemies; and he will for ever continue Immortally, shining
throughout all Kingdoms and Ages. All good Men delight in his Eternal Praises;
for he is now glorified and admired for his Sanctity: He therefore is a full
and adequate Object of our early humble Imitation not in working Miracles, but
in Meekness, Love and Magnanimous Actions, enriched with Liberality, and made
bright by Knowledge, guided by Wisdom to the highest end; every action being
mixed with Gravity and Cheerfulness, for in the due use of these means we may
actually enjoy all Blessedness and Glory, Righteous^ness, Holiness and
Goodness, Love and Christian Charity are the true Lineaments and Colors of
suchy Men^ Minds; for these are the true Ornaments of every Blessed Soul, they
shine upon the Face and make him Glorious in the perfection of Beauty. This Man
is (...) Humility, and yet all enjoyment amazed at its ow^ nothingness and
vileness; yet, at the same time, ravished with wonder at the height of his
Felicity, and yet this is no Paradox, for the whole System of Religion is
Mysterious; for the lower the Man is in his ow^ Eyes, the more does the
goodness of God appear in ^im, and the more transcendently Sweet is his
Adorati^^ and Satisfaction; by his gratitude he Sacrifices himb^^ to the Deity.
Pride aims at the utmost height of Esteem and Honor, and is feed by its own
Beauty and Glory, yet Foolishly undermineth the Person it would advance, with
the greatest baseness and shame imaginable; it devours the Beauty which ought
to feed it, and destroys the Glory in which it delights. The higher the
greater, the more perfectly Glorious and Blessed the Person is that is exalted,
is the baseness and ingratitude of Pride, and is therefore the dregs of
Impiety; and forfits and renounces all delights, and blackens whatsoever might
appear auspicious, which provokes detestation in all that delight in the Truth,
for this turns the brigthness of Seraphims into the abominations of Devils.

Fifthly, Some Men imperfectly Virtuous abhor others, for being more excellent
than themselves, at ^east for being more Honorable and more Prosperous; but
this proceeds from a naughty and a vicious Heart, unacquainted with the Truth
of Goodness, and the true A^mity of real Virtue: For true Goodness is excellent
from the quality of its Object; and all that have true Goodness dwelling in
them, will undoubted^y venerate it, and all those in whom they find it; for
whosoever is so happy as to be truly Good, will with Moses, wish that all the
Lords People were Prophets, and that every Soul were a Fountain of Delights.
For it is a Beautiful thing to be exceeding Good, for there ^s an infinite and
eternal force in true Goodness, it ^ideth Luster and Beauty to all that are
Blessed therewith; for it is Beautiful thing to be exceeding Good, or every
degree hereof have exceeding Sweetness in it; and these are filled with hope
Divine, and have infinite Felicity in their Daily view, they know their Du^y,
and their Master, and the infinite value of their Souls, and have a fore taste
of interior Bliss: Being acquainted with the true Habits of Divine Grace, and
are as it were, prone to Celestial Epicurisme, (if may be premitted so to
speak) by being really engaged in the true Study of Felicity. A Pious Man has
great Treasures, high Honors, pure Pleasures, having a true taste of infinite
Delights; but is not ravished with Temporal Pleasures nor Treasures; not
melting with these nor flinching at any Temporal distresses; for neither of
these can move the fixed Mind of a true good Man, for his Thoughts Divine are
upon higher Objects, for his inward Stature is miraculous, and his Complexion
Divine; he pities poor vicious Princes, that are oppressed with Heavy Crowns of
Vanity, whether of Gold or Emralds, whose Souls ought to be endued with
Generous and Noble Principles, that they may be worthy the infinite perfections
of the great God, who gives liberally to all Men, and uppraideth not; and
would have all Men endued with Divine and deep Delights, that they may be
eminent and conspicuous in the true exercise of every Virtue, and be Clothed
with great Activity, Courage and Prudence, to overcome their Enemies, and
inherit the Benefits of their own Virtues, in the Peace and Tranquillity of a
happy Condition; by being Liberal and Kind, Humble and Cheerful, Rejoicing and
Trusting exceedingly in God; then shall their Soul^ be even now as happy, as if
they had taken Possess^on of Heaven. Having taken that City, as it were
Violence or Force, by carrying Virtue to the highe^^ pitch humane frailty could
exalt it to. God havin^ given us many Lights, to assist our Souls in the
completing more allurements, to provoke our desir^ after more of Heaven, and
its Glorious Injoyment^ so that all our Inclinations may now become Puri^^ and
Praise, that we may hereby be able to reconci^^ Men to God, who were formerly
Enemies to Gra^^ and Virtue, by putting Embroideries on Religion, (...) moving
in a Sphere of Wonder: In that his Life is ^ontinual stream of Miracles, for
such a Man carries (...). Light wherever he goes, for he is Clothed like
(...) Son in his Rays, and Reigns like a King by the sole Power of Virtue and
Goodness, in Beautifying Religion in the due exercise hereof, making himself
great by enriching others; being full of Music in the Words of his sweet and
pleasing behavior: This being conducive to his own Ease and Honor; the want
therefore of the abovementioned Virtues is pernicious and destructive, for
these Holy Works and Wise Dispositions of Soul are absolutely necessary to
qualify us for Heaven; For all the Fathers teach us. both An^ient and Modern,
that good Works are inseparable attendants upon a justifying Faith; and no
Heretic hat is either Grave or Serious, can deny this sequel: For this must
consequently follow upon the Premises, ^or good Works are absolutely necessary
to Salvation, tho ^hey can in no wise merit it; for far be it from us ^^om
decrying good Works or the due use of them, but ^he merit of them. For that
there is any real or per^onal merit in them, we do indeed d^^ry; not but that
high induments of (...) is a greater Blessing to ^^ll that are so highly (...)
by the Hand of Heaven, (...) to be in^iched by them; and good Works are
cer^^inly conditional to Life Eternal, for in the great Day ^f Mercy, 'twill be
said. Come for ye have done them; (...), God for ye have not done them. So that
tho they (...) not meritorious, yet they are undoubtedly condional to Bifs, for
the more of these any Man have a ^^ue share in, the more happy Eternally will
he un^^oubtedly be; so that what the Church of England in ^^is and in all
points do Teach, is most assuredly pure ^^d refined, and in all points
Conformable to the Pri^^^tire Times; neither is She pure in Doctrine only, ^^t
in Charity most Catholic, and in hearty Practice ^^ost refined, for She
admonishes her Children, that ^^yey may not be Strangers to any point of
Doctrine ^^at is of moment to Salvation, unless they should unhappily be Aliens
to Felicity, by being Foreigners to the Truth; but that they may in ^is Light
learn to see the true Light, that enlighten every one that comes into the
World: It Is this Beauty of Truth that makes Knowledge of such infinite value,
as to repair the Divine Image in us, in which consists the perfection of our
Nature, renews us in the Spirit of our Minds, purging our Consciences from dead
Works, securing our Minds from that restlesness and unquietness, which Minutly
attends both the Dominion and Guilt of Sin, which racks the Mind with dreadful
expectations, and fills the Consciences with dismal horror and direful
Confusion, and lays them obnoxious to the dreadfulest denunciations imaginable,
not only Temporal Improsperity, but Eternal Punishments in the dismal Shades of
the other World. But to avoid the danger of these, let us convince our
understandings, that we ought to aspire to live Angelical lives, such as
becomes a reformed Religion built upon the Doctrines of the Apostles, and have
all the Marks of a true Church; so that every one may prove and try himself,
whether he be in the right; for by trying the Spirits we may know them, if we
observe their Fruits; may we therefore persuade our Affections to stick close
to this refined Religion, that is certainly the true Path to Heaven, and
conducive to Life and Bliss: For this Church agreeable to the Holy Scriptures
directs to the Treasures of Divine Wisdom and ^uch Oracles, to which, it is
safe to resort, for saving Knowledge to rule and guide us to a Holy Life;
therefore we ought Studiously to embrace whatsoever we ^earn from her, since
She is now refined and purged from all Error and Corruption, Superstition, and
whatsoever is contrary to Divine Truth; for in her Preaching She observes the
Method of Christ, by un^ailing the very Truth to her Disciples, making Christ's
Word to us, as it is in it self, the Power of God to Salvation. So that now the
Gospel with Noon Day brightness, does cearly shine amongst us, for She gives us
cautionary Advices, and to them subjoins plain Directions, sheving us how to
detect Error and to love Truth; so that her Counsel may be of the same effect
to us, as the Oral Word was to our Progenitors, who lived their own Doctrine
and Preached their own Experience, and gave up themselves without reserve to
the guidance of Gods Word, inwardly reverencing every Paragraph of it, as an
immediate message from the Almighty: For every thing in Scripture is sublimely
Divine. Its Doctrine are most accommodate, to the refreshment and building up
of our Minds, and in all respects so ordered, that every one may draw thence
what is sufficient for him, provided he approach it with Devotion, Piety and
Religion. For the things of God are Spiritually descerned, as the secret Word
of God was first dictated by the Holy Spirit; so still it must owe its effects
and influence to its Cooperation, for by this its Power and Energy,
insinuatively persuades the Heart to be led by the Power of it; and to invoke
the Divine aid, by darting Ejaculations up to God, that we may truly understand
the sense and meaning of his Divinely Inspired Word, by ke^ping our Minds fixed
and attent upon what we either hear or read that refined Thoughts ma^^ ^^ways
poss^^^ our Minds to convince our Understanding, and persuade our Affection,
and entirely rule our Imaginations; that Divine Meditations may always
prepossess our Minds, and refresh and revive our Souls; turning out of our
^reast all distracting Phansies, lest our Chr^stianity should vapor away and
disappear, by a pi^ing to too high degrees of Speculation; and neglecting to
practice plain Truths, for the practice of (...) Truths are infinitely of more
use, then to Study curious or critical Remarks upon those Mysteries, on which
God have spread a vail. I mention this not to divert any from aspiring to the
highest degrees of Perfection, but to reprove that preposterous course many
ta(...) est weight upon those things (...) least; and have more Zeal for (...)
then for express downright Comm(...) the one to commute for the contemp(...)
For some Men are apt to scruple small thy(...) not startle at Injustice or
Oppression; which (...) to be rectified, that Men may have an equa(...) to all
the Commands of God, not letting any (...) slip their Observation: For he that
breaks the (...) command is guilty of all, not but that he that brea(...) them
all is guilty of more severe Punishments, then he that breaks but one. But the
meaning is, he that breaks one shall not go Unpunished, being deeply guilty of
Disobedience. God having required an equal regard to all his Precepts, and who
so gives him not their whole Heart, offers to him but a lame and unacceptable
Sacrifice; for any thing less than the full power of our Wills cannot please
God, who is of purer Eyes than to behold any the least Evil with approbation;
for his Wisdom being so pure a Majesty, cannot be pleased with any thing that
is impure of Heart: Necessary is it therefore, to give him the full of our
Mind, Will and Soul; or, as our Catechism expresses it, To serve him with all
our strength, in every Centure of our Lives. For the more we serve him, the
more and better shall we be regarded, honored and rewarded, by him the
searcher of all Hearts.

Of the excellent Qualification of the Soul, from its high Extraction.
ALthough Men do not know the Soul, neither can they see it, because it is like
the Eyes of our Bodies, it sees every thing but it self; but it self (...)
assuredly know that by it we (...) enabled to do actions of Piety (...)
Consciences dictates to us what is (...) done, for that is a good and faith
(...) that whenever we do amiss, we do, (...) our Souls, and stupifie our
Consciences, (...) Evil or cause others so to do. But to a (...) let us beg of
God, to give us a chaste Spi (...) is the Crown of faithful Souls: Wherefore
(...) said of Virginity, that it is the Life of Angels, (...) animal of the
Soul, the advantage of Religion, which is a mutual, a strong, and voluntary
inclination to the Worship of God; for it is empty of Cares, and ought to be
full of Prayers, which are fed with Fastings; it is very advatagious to
Devotion and Retirement, for whosoever is careful of his Time and Behavior
shall not be robbed of his reward, for his good intentions.

Secondly, Then fail not of being eminent in your Generations, for Virtue and
Piety, by being burning and shining Lights, unmingled with any manner of Evil,
that you may follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes: But above all be Humble, for
that is the Ornament of our Holy Religion, and it makes you to differ from the
Wisdom of the World. For our Learning is then best, when it teaches us
Humility, for to be proud of our Learning is the greatest Ignorance in the
World; for our Learning is so long in getting, and so very imperfect, that the
Learnedest person in the World knows not the Thousandth part of that which he
is Ignorant of; so that he cannot attain to any Maturity of Knowledge,
proportionable to that of Angels. No Man therefore has any cause to boast of
his excellency, for what thou have, thou have received from God, and art the
more Obliged to return him Thanks for it; and thou art bound to improve the
Grace that he has given thee to his Glory. Consider then that thou were
nothing before thou as Born, and what were thou in the first Regions of ^y
dwellings before thy Birth, but uncleaness. What ^^ast thou for many Years
after, but Weakness and ^^ailty? As the Psalms expresses, It even as the smoke
^at vanishes away, Ps. 102. 3. A great debtor then ^^t thou to God, to thy
Parents, to the Earth, and all ^^e Creatures. For all Men that have ever been,
were ^^ressed with Hunger, and the Frailties of human Na^re; so that the best
and wisest Persons are subject ^o the Necessity of Nature; wherefore there is
great ^^ause of Humility, for the Spirit of Man is light and ^oublesome, his
Body is brutish and sickly, he is con^ant in his Folly and Error, inconstant
in his Man^er and Good Purposes; his Labors are vain, intri^ate and endless,
his Fortune is changeable, but sel^om pleasing, his Wisdom comes not till he be
ready (...) die; or at least, till he have spent great part of his ^^me in
wast: His death is certain, always ready at ^he Door, but never far off, upon
these or the like Me^^itations. If we dwell on them, or frequently retire (...)
consider them, we shall see nothing more reasonable ^an to be Humble, and
nothing more foolish than to ^e Proud; Humility consists not in railing against
our ^^lves, or wearing mean Clothes, or going softly, or ^^bmissively; but in a
hearty and real mean Opinion ^f our selves.

Thirdly, Believe thy self then an unworthy Person, (...) heartily as thou
believe thy self to be Hungry, Poor, (...) Sick; when thou art so, love to be
concealed and (...) esteemed off. Be not troubled when thou art ^ighed and
undervalued; and when thou have done any thing worthy of praise return it to
God, who is ^^e Giver of the Gift, and Blesser of the Action; and ^^ive him
thanks for making thee the Instrument of is Glory. Secure a good Name to thy
self, by being ^irtuous, Pious and Humble; and when People have ^n occasion to
speak well of thee, take no content in ^raise when it is offered thee, but let
thy rejoicing be in Gods Gift, but let it be alay'd with Fear, lest the Good
bring thee to Evil. Pray often for Gods Grace with Humility of gesture and
passion of desire, tha^ God may be Glorified by thy Example of Humility which
may be as well in a low condition as in a ric^ Beg God (...) irri^h thy Soul
with all Graces, an^ when thou had attained them, give God thanks (...) them.
P^ide hinders the acceptance of our Prayer^ Humility pierces the Clouds, and
will not give ove^ till God accepts; neither will it depart till the mos^ high
regards: For he resists the Proud, but (...) Grace to the H^mble, St. Jam. 4
6. Then beg G^ac^ and Pardon, that it may be a remedy and relief a^gainst
Misery and Oppression, and be content in (...) conditions; beg Tranquillity of
Spirit, Patience i^ Affliction, that we may gain Love abroad and Peac^ at home.
Consider the blessed S^^iour of the World (...) who left the (...) of his
Father, the Lord of Glory (...) who took upon him the li^e of Labor, and came
t^ a State of Poverty, to a Death of Mal^f^ctou^s, to the Grave of Death, and
the intolerable Calamiti^s which we deserved: Therefore it is but reasonable,
that w^ should be as Humble in the mid^^ of our greatest Im^perfections and
(...) ^ins, as (...) was in the (...) and fulnes^ of the Spirit, great Wisdom,
perfect Life* and most admirable Virtue. Wherefore be cont^^te^ with all Things
that shall happen ^^to you, and seek^ after the Spirit of Peace, which will
make you shin^ like Angels, or the (...) above; and in so doing you will not
fear Death, (...) ^^ther fear a dishonest Action, and think Im patience far
worse than any Disease. Be ready to do Go^d to the destr^yers of your Fam^^ for
the re^ards of (...) doing is very certain, and do testify that you have a
most no^le Soul within you, which is a Particle of the Divine R^ys.

Forthly, Dress up your Souls, that they may be fit to appear before the
Majesty of Heaven; for you can die but once, and if you do not die well, you
will Perish undoubtely for ever: And yet there is no Wise or Good Man to
Perish, for God have ordained an expedient help for all Men that they should
not Perish, for he gives us Pardon for our past Offenses, and Grace to prevent
us for the future, even the due disposition of his Holy Spirit, that we may
delight in that which his Majesty delights in; that is, true Virtue and W^sdom,
which will cause us to enjoy the Blessings that God sends us, and to bear
patiently with Meekness our Calamities which our own Sins have brought upon us,
may we therefore consider this Day is only ours, for we are dead to yesterday,
and we are not Born to too morrow; these considerations will make us to bear
Poverty, with Nobleness, Patience and Meek^ess, and not blame the Providence of
God for placing us in a low F^rtune, but in all Troubles and sad Accidents, let
us take Sanctuary in Religion, and by Innocence cast Anchor for our Souls, to
keep them from Shipwreck, though they be not kept from Storms: By these means
we may fill our Cup full of pure and unmingled Joys, for no Wise M^n did ever
describe F^licity without Virtue, no Good M^n did ever think Virtue to depend
upon the Vari^ty of good or bad Fortune; it is no Evil to be Poor, but to be
Virtuous and Impatient; therefore be Patient under Affl^ctions, and beg God to
give thee a happy deli^erence out of them, and be content with Poverty, for
that adds Luster to thy Person, and may make thy Virtue more excellent if thou
improve it wisely, for there is but (...) things that we feel is so bad, as
that we fear. Many eminent Scholars have been eminently Poor; some by choice,
and more by chance and the invincible decrees of Providence; wherefore the Rich
may support the Poor, by his Wealth; and, perhaps the Poor may instruct the
Rich in Learning and Experience; for it may be observed, no Man had all
Excellency and Felicity in this one Person or Power: Therefore there is but few
Wise and Good Men that would change Conditions entirely with any Man in the
World, for though some there are that would desire the Wealth of one Man added
to himself, or the Power of another, and the Learning of a third; yet, still he
would receive these in his own Person, because he loves that best, and
therefore esteems that most, tho we desire the Wealthy to Enrich us, the
Powerful to Protect us, and the Witty to Delight us. Let us consider, that in
the Fortune of a Prince, there is not the course Robes of Beggary, but there is
infinite Cares, Fears and Dangers; therefore the State of Affliction is a
School of Virtue, wherein there is the Exercise of Wisdom, the Trial of
Patience, and the wining a Crown; for this may be said to be the Gate of Glory.

Fifthly, Therefore we may not expect to be better treated than the Apostles,
and Saints; nay, than the Son of the Eternal God, the Heir of both the Worlds.
Affliction is oftentime the occasions of Temporal advantages, as well as
Spiritual; and if we employ our Grace and Reason well it will deliver us from
extreme Necessitys, and if you will not otherwise be Cured: If you improve your
time w^ll, God will deliver you in his due time, if it be for his Glory and
your Good, for his Power can Sanctify Poverty to you, and make it become as
necessary as Riches; for tho Poverty makes a Man despised, and contemptable,
and exposed to a Thousand Insolences of evil Persons, and leaves t^em
defenseless; yet, it may make them look up to God, and trust more firmly in him
the Rock of their Strength, who will most certainly deliver them from the
cruelty of all Wicked Persons: Wherefore it is said of Poverty, that it is the
Sister of a good Mind, the Parent of sober Council, the Nurse of all Virtue;
and this is really true, a great Estate has great Croses, and a mean Fortune
has small ones; for Riches often bread a Disease in the Souls of them that long
after them, and admire them with too much egarness when they have them, for
Riches are great dangers to the S^ul, not only of them that covet them, but
al^^ to most that have them; wherefore let us trust in Christ, ^ho have
promised, that we should have sufficient for this Life, who have said, that his
Father takes care for us; and we are sure that he knows all his Fathers
Counsels and Kindnesses toward us, for if (...) Wisdom gives but a very
little, he will make it (...) a great way; for if he sends thee but course
Diet, he will (...) it and make it Healthful to thee, and can cure a^l the
Anguish of thy Poverty, by giving thee (...) and the Grace of Contentment; for
the Grace (...) God (...) you of Providence, and, yet the Grace of God feeds
and supports the Spirit even in the want (...) Providence. And if a thin Table
be apt to infeeble the Body, or Spirit of one used to feed better; yet the
cheerfulness of the Spirit that is ^^essed with dew from above, will make a
thin a Table become a delicacy: If the M^n be but as well Taught, as he is
Feed, by Learning the Duty, when he receives the Reward, Poverty is therefore
in some sense eligible, and to be preferred before Riches, but in all senses it
is very tolerable.

Sixthly, But to return to a further inquiry into the Excellency of the Soul,
let us consider the various speculations that the Soul of Man is capable of
entertaining her self withal, and we shall see that there is none of greater
moment, or closer concernment to her than this of her own Immortality, and
independance on this Terestial Body; for hereby, not only the intricacies and
perplexities of Providence are made more easy and smooth to her, and she
becomes able by unraveling this clue from end to end, to pass and repass safe
through this Labyrinth, wherein many, both anxious and careless Spirits have
lost themselves* But also which touches her own Interest more particularly,
being once raised to the Knowledge and Be^lief of Good and Evil, so weighty a
conclusion (...) may return to this most certain and most compendious way to
her own Happiness, which is to be acquired by bearing Affl^ction patiently, and
endeavoring to overcome whatever tempts her, during the time of this her
Pilgrimage, ^ith a careful preparing of her self, for her future Condition; by
such Noble Actions, and Heroic Qualifications of Mind, as shall render her
most welcome to her own Country; which belief and ^u^pose (...) in an utter in
c^pacity of e^ther (...) at nothing but what is not in the Power of M^n to
confirm upon her; with C^urage she ^ets upon the main Work, and being still
more ^aithful to her self, and to that light that asi^^s her, at lasts she
tastes the Fruits of her Future Harve^^, and does more then presage that great
Happiness that is accrewing to her, and quits her from the troubles and
anxieties of this pre^^nt World stays with it in Tranquillity and Content, (...)
at last leaves it with Joy. Therefore let us fur^^er consider, that the Soul
has Four Qualities, be^^use her Faculties are Fourfold: The First, is
Un^erstanding: The Second, is the Will: The Third, (...) the Memory: The
Fourth, is the Affections (...) Heart, which is the principle Seat of the
Rational (...). The Mind is the inward Act. The Thoughts (...) the Mind, the
Fountain of Counsel, the soul of Life: (...) understand by the Mind, and live
by the Soul. (...)

A Deceision, or a Demonstration, of the Mutual and Reciprocal Relation betwixt
the Soul and the Body.
1. THE true Love of God raises the Soul to the highest Perfection; the purest
and fullest Love shall wear always the weightiest Crown of Glory: Where this
Love is, if it meet with hard Precepts it desolves it into sweet promises, and
fills the Heart with the shining Beauty of Soul, ravishing delights by Divine
Respiration, giving it true Repose, causing the Delights and Pleasures to be as
Capacious as the Soul, that lovely Creature of God, whom his Majesty is always
pleased to fill with an Ineffable Pleasure; in perpetually extending their
Knowledge of Intellection, by Consequences and Lights always New, which they
draw from their Light and their Knowledge, always acquired, they always find
something to be discovered in the Immense Spaces of Truth, they always find
some-Shing to be enlightened with of the Perfection of the aupream Essence,
which they always see all entire, and ill exposed to their Eyes, and, which
they never knew so perfectly; but that there always remains something further
to be known and discovered, they always Drink of this Lively and Eternal
Spring, and are always a Thirst; they drein from thence every moment, by a full
and entire Knowledge of the intuitive Vision, but they always find it full and
inexhaustable to Reason and Intellection, which they always make a further
Progress into, and further still find something to be known in the Fountain of
its infinite Incomprehensibility. The Reprobate Souls do also find by the
exercise of their reasonings, a Thousand; and a Thousand New dispairs in their
State of Reprobation and Misery: The Prophets say, they always remain awake to
the End; they may always see their Misery and Woe, which does express the
exercise of the active Faculty in Unhappy Souls, which proves that all Souls
have out of the Body, the exercise of the Faculties, of Perceiving, of
Imagining, and of Recollecting, which they do not exercise here, but dependent
upon the Body: For thus we say, without difficulty, that they may compare one
thing with another, that they Conceive the Nature of Bodies by pure
Intellection, by which they form Universal Notions; from whence they draw
Consequences, and frame Ideas; but these Ideas do not cause us to Believe, that
the Body and the Soul can be united like two Liquors, or like two Metalls,
which are melted one with the other, which are made either by an Unctuous or
Viscous Humor, which binds the Parts of them together, nor by Nails, Pegs and
Joints. We may not imagine here any thing material, for we are to cut off every
thing that presents it self Corporeal to our Spirits, for we are to conceive
precisely only a mutual and necessary Dependence, in such a manner, as God has
directed and disposed; which is the way to conceive the manner how our Souls
are in our Bodies, as well as we are capable to comprehend: They are not in us
by a Local and Corporeal Circumscription, they are not there as Liquor is in a
Vessel, or as a Bird is in the Nest or Cage, or as the Body is in the Air,
which environs it; but they are in us as God is in the World, in which we must
conceive him, as says St. Augustine, Much more containing than contained; for
we may remember, that tho the Nature of the Soul is a Spiritual Nature, which
does as Essentially exclude Local extention, and by Consequence all sorts of
Ideas of Local Presence, such as we commonly conceive under Corporeal Images of
Immediation, of Preportions, and of Coextention, of Substances, as it does
Essentially include the Grounds and the Acts of the knowing Faculty. Bodies
have their proper Fashion of being within Places, and Spirits have theirs
likewise; there is nothing of likeness betwixt one and the other, for to think
otherways, were to subvert and destroy both Corporeal and Spiritual Nature; for
it is with the manner how the Soul is in the Body, as it is with the Soul it
self: We cannot comprehend it as often as we conceive it by Imagination, what
Corporeal Image so ever we make of it, or under what material Form soever we
may conceive of it; for the manner how the Soul is in the Body is altogether as
Spiritual, as is the Substance of the Soul; if it be demanded after this, in
what Part of the Body the Soul is, or whether she is in all the Body; the
Question will be difficult to resolve: However, the Learned say, that all the
Soul is in all the Body, and all of it in the Essential and Integral Parts of
it, as God is in all the World, and in all the Parts of the World; not by that
Co-extension and Local Chimerical Presence, which gross Spirits do imagine, but
by the intimate Presence of his Essence, Essentially operating in all the
World. We must say the same of the Soul, that it is in all the Body, by
relation of its dependence and activity; but this does not hinder, but that we
may say she is more properly, and more particularly in the Brain, since it is
by that Part, that the action of the Soul upon the Body immediately Commences;
and that all the actions of the Body upon the Soul termin^tes wholly in that
Part, as it sensibly appears, by that which interrupts and suspends the action
of the Soul upon the Body, and the action of the Body upon the Soul; for as
often as it happens that the action of the Body upon the Soul is interrupted,
it is because there is some relaxation, or some obstruction in some of the
Nerves, which hinders the motion from being continued in the Part affected of
the Body, as far as the Brain, which is the Seat and Organ of the Senses,
because the impression have some palpable let or hindereance, and cannot be
carried, or arrive through the exterior Senses of the Brain, which are called
Internal. But our Souls Naturally, like other-Created Spirits, ought not to
have any dependence upon our Bodies, for to have the Ideas of things, they
ought only to have immediately dependence upon God, and by Consequence ought
only to have Union with him; but this Supreme Spirit having been pleased, for
the reasons we have said, and for many others which we conceive, and for more,
yet apparently, perhaps, which we do not conceive, that our Souls should have
their Thoughts and their Sentiments, their Desires and Affections upon the
occasion of the Body, to the end, that they should be a continual Subject of
Victory, and Meritorious Exercise, by the assistance of Divine Grace, which is
of it self Victorious over the Impure delectation of Concupiscence; whereof it
invincibly suspends the Charm, by the Heavenly and inward Taste, which it gives
us of God, of our Duty, and of Eternal Happiness; for Divine Grace causes (...)
to love Order and Duty, in spite of our selves, making us sensible that we owe
to God an infinite ^^ve of Complacency, wholly disinteressed, and wholly pure;
for which we ought to love his Eternal and Sovereign Beauty, with all the
strength and motions (...) our Hearts; for this alone will convey to us true
^^^asure, for this will furnish us with Order, Truth and Justice, which will
undoubtedly prevent all Irregularity. Which Order is to be beloved by all
Spi^its, and all upright Hearts in all the Parts of the World; for this have
some affinity to the Sovereign Beauty of Nature, and of the Supreme Essence,
who ^s the Lively and Eternal Source of Order, Equity and Duty, the Eternal and
Substantial Truth, which do not discover it self but by Rays, by degrees
escaping ^ut from God, clearing the obscure Clouds of our disorderly Desires,
that we may Love and Adore our Sovereign Creator, who gives us the weak
glimmering of his Ineffable Beauty, in that Virtue and Duty which he causes us
to Love; which is as it were, the Charm of the Supreme Being. For all that we
love in the abstracted Idea of our Duties, or in the real Charms of the
Creatures, is nothing but the Splendour and the Rays, or the Shadow of that
Charm of Sovereign Beauty and Perfection, which Gloriously shines ^n the
Supreme Nature; from whose Beams it is, that Nature Commences equally in us
the love of Complacency, and the love of Union; that we may be filled with
Contentment, with Pleasure and Love, Truth, Justice and Equity, and all other
Graces and Virtues whom we love invincibly, under the Ideas, and under the
Names of Truth, of Justice, of Beauty, of Virtue, of Duty, or of Equity, which
shine in all Places of the World, and makes it self seen loved and adored
invincibly by all Hearts, in all Ages for these all preceed from the glimmering
and glances of Gods Original Beauty, which is so amicable by it self, that as
Corrupt as we are, we cannot hinder our selves from loving it, because it flows
from the Sovereign Nature of God.

2. The Soul of Man have no Power of giving i^ self, neither the Idea, nor
Knowledge, nor Sentiment of any particular thing, but it is God, who has al^
Perfections dwelling in him, that Instructs and Inlightens the Souls of Men;
for his Majesty alone is the Life of every thing that Lives, and the Light of
every thing that is Enlightened; who gives us all the Sentiments and all the
Ideas which we receive, or have from the occasion of our particular Bodies, and
from others which environ us. Tho to clear this point (...) be obscure and
difficult; and, yet is very Important and Necessary, in Order to make us
comprehend our dependence upon God, who is alone the All-knowing Being by
himself, as he is an existent Being by himself: For it is God alone who has
Essentially of himself, and by himself, his Eternal and Subsistent Idea, by
which he can distinctly see all things possible, present and to come. The
Created Spirits who are not Thinking Beings of themselves, much less Spirits
knowing by themselves, or in themselves, the things which are exterior to them;
and, therefore they have need to receive the Ideas of particular things from
God, that they may have a knowledge of them: For if they had the Idea of one
sole particular thing out of themselves, there would not be any Idea which they
might not have; neither would the Soul of Man have been Ignorant of any thing,
if she had had a Power by her self to Form and Idea of the least thing, but by
Consequence would have had the Idea of all things: But since, of her self (...)
cannot form any one Idea; by Consequence she cann^^ form many: For to imagine
she could, would be no sensical and trivial. Our poor Soul goes grop^^^ through
all the Bodies, who environs it, searching (...) a Pleasure and Contentment,
which should satisfy i^^ but no Pleasure nor Treasure can give the Soul tr^^
satisfaction, but God, who is the alone Soverei^ Pleasure, which makes the Soul
thus search after hi^^ and him allone it is we ought to regard, with all o^^
Strength, Might and Motion, seeing his Majesty r^gards our Soul by all the Rays
of his Infinite Essen^^ For his Wisdom, it is who is our Satisfaction, our
(...) and Contentment, yea, our Sovereign Felicity. O^ Bodies then are, but as
it were, our Souls burden, at best but a House upon the Road of Eternity: Whe^^
fore we ought to seek for a lively Idea of our d^pe^^dance upon this Supreme
Being, and upon all Divine Attributes, that we may the better apprehe^^ his
Sovereign Perfection whose Nature is Supreme and yet is graciously pleased to
operate continual in us, and rules over us in all our ways, and in diverse
operations. Our Souls do not make the digs^ion in us, the Circulation of the
Blood, the Natu^^ and pure^y Animal Respiration in us; the Soul bei^^
altogether Spiritual, have no Power to act this wa^ but there is nothing which
we certainly know, b^^ the Soul is the active cause and principle of it, which
she have gained the Empire, either to do not do, as she pleases; we may
therefore reflect up her Faculty, which she have of thinking, of willin^^ and
determining her self, which are the two o^ active Faculties that we know in
her, for the oth^^ passive and receptive Faculties, of which she ha^
essentially the Empire, as well as the certainty of the double Faculty, and of
all the Acts that precee^ there from; and we may see that she suspends (...)
Thoughts, and her Reasonings puts them by determ^^^ and applies them as she
pleases to new Matters, which always present themselves; and thus she is
Mistress of ^^er Will, without the motion that carries her toward God in
general. If she be not preoccupy'd and transported with some Passions or other,
but the ^oul can by no means be the formal or physical Cause of the heat which
is in our Bodies, for it is impossible to conceive that a Spirit should produce
heat; yet ^y their Virtue and Operation they make the Body move, by Empire and
by Will, and yet this the Soul is said to do out of it self; but whatsoever is
done in us Physically, is done by the act of our Body and its Life, for there
is in us a material principle of vegeta^ion, or a vegetative Life, which the
Soul does not ^ause; so there is likewise a certain kind of acts of ^eeing, of
Hearing, of Tasting, of Smelling, of ^ouching, of Self-moving, or of
Sensibility in the ^ody, in which the Soul has not any part, to which ^^e does
not Influence any thing, and to which she ^ath not so much as a Sentiment.

3. To think and know is the Life of Spirits, who ^eceives Being from the first
of Beings, or the prin^^ple of Beings, the Great Almighty, from whom ^^ery
thing that is, receives without ceasing its ^eing, by a perpetual and never
interrupted Communi^n of the Supreme Essence, by reason that he is the
^rinciple of Life, or the Essential and Original of ^ife: It must needs be that
every thing that Lives, ^eceives continually a Life from him by a like
In^^uence, and by a like Communication of Life, and by ^onsequence every thing
that thinks and knows, ^hinks and knows by him, since to think and know the
Life of Spirits. This is the solid Metaphysick ^f St. Augustine, and the
Theology of others, who ^ith, agreeeble to the Scriptures, that an Angel and
Man differ without doubt; for an Angel is a Spirit which God makes trial off
out of the Body, and those Thoughts and Affections he has not subjected to the
dispositions of a Body; and a Man is a Spirit^ which God makes trial off in the
Body, to which he subjects it before he Crowns it with Eternity: But the Soul
of Man if God had not disposed of it, after that manner, would have had no need
of a Body, wherefore the Union of Souls with Bodies is a hard and difficult
Empire, which God does exercise over them, and which if his Majesty would not
sweeten the rigo^^ and difficulty of it, by the Pleasures of agreeable
Sentiments, which he has annexed to the Acts and Operations of Souls in
Bodies. It could not be a trial, but a Misery; nay, the Fathers maintain, that
if God should not Spiritualize Bodies, that is to say, take away from Souls the
dependence which their present State gives them upon Bodies, they could not
have so firm a hope of being raised again, as now they have, because he would
not put the Just Souls, whose approved Fidelity deserves to be Crowned into
Bodies that should constrain them, and which enslaved their Thoughts; which is
what Spiritualized Bodies cannot bear, because Spiritualization of Bodies will
consist in this precisely, that they should no longer exercise an Empire over
the Souls, and that they should be no longer a Charge, an Obstacle and an
Encumbrance to them; for the Body cannot in any manner act upon the Soul, so as
to Illuminate it, or Affect it Physically, or Immediately by it self; for the
Body cannot subject the Soul to be United to it, nor can the Soul be willing to
submit to the Body, which humbles and constrains it. It is therefore God the
Author of universal Nature, that is the Immediate and Efficient Principle, and
Cause of the Union of Souls and Bodies; for his Wisdom acts as universal
Cause in the whole frame of Nature; it is evident then that none but God alone
can give the Soul the Sentiments and Ideas which she has, from the occasion of
the Impressions which are made upon the Body, for it is the Author of Nature
which enlightens us, by the Ideas which we receive upon the occasion of the
Impression, of exterior Objects; and who affectionates to the Conversation of
the Body, by the agreeable or disagreeable Sentiments which he gives us, to
make us know by way of instinct, that which is profitable or hurtful, for the
Conver^ation of our Bodies and of Humane Species. This action he joins to that,
by which he moves our Bodies, when our Thoughts and Wills require it, and is
properly the action, by the which he Unites our Bodies to our Souls, and our
Souls to our Bodies. This is the active or actual Union, which the Schools call
the Unitive action of God, which is joined to the Immutable Decree and Will* by
the which he has determined to continue it, so long as the structure of the
Body shall subsist, and makes in the Soul and* in the Body that Estate of
Union, which is called Passive and Formal Union; and this the Almighty does by
the Essential act of his Supreme Nature, for his Essence and Nature is
infinitely pleased to act thus continually, esteeming it his Pleasure and his
Glory, by which, also he is the occasional Cause of all the Eneffable Ple^sure
of Holy Souls, and so much the rather, because the Analogy of the Divine
conduct Inspires us to acknowledges an occasional Cause of all our Joy and
F^^icity. As there is an occasional Cause of the Torments of the Reprobates,
for each of these he is pleased to make trial off in the Body, by their
Obedience or Disobedience, annexed to each of which, is Felicity or Misery, for
these shall go into Life Eternal, but the Wicked into endless burnings.

4 Our Body is a Structure full of Harmony, whereby all the Parts are United to
one common Center, which is the Brain wrapped up in Membranes, and distributed
and divided into diverse Compartments, proper to receive and retain the Traces
and Impressions which the Divine Image shall in^amp upon it: We say, also that
the Soul is ^^n the Body, but we take care not to conceive it. For all that as
truly and properly contained in the Body, it is United to the Body; but we may
not conceive her as poured into, and mingled with the Body; or, as adjusted to
its extent by a co-extention and immediation of Greatness, of Figure, or of
Substance; but they have the greatest part of their Thoughts, and of their
Ideas, and of all their Sentiments of Pleasure, and of Pain, by the occasion of
their Body, because they act upon the Body by the action of the Will, which
removes them and moves them, in the manner as have been already said. The
Learned say, that they are no otherways in the Body, therefore every thing we
conceive beyond this, will be false, contradictory and extremely dubious. That
which we call good Sense and Judgment, is nothing but the Power and Faculty
which the Soul has, to Order and Regulate our Thoughts, to suspend and stay
them, that she may consider and maintain their Connection and Dependence: But
she is said, sometimes to loose this Faculty and Power, when the Motion of the
Blood, Humors, and of the Animal Spirits, or of the Fibers of the Brain, which
is the Organ of the Internal Sense, which are annexed the Species of things,
that is to say, the Impressions which remains of the Objects, are disordered
and embroiled in such sort, that the Natural Order and Connection of these
Species cannot be observed and kept, but are confusedly and tumultuously
excited and stired up, by a tumultuous and irregular agitation of the Organ, in
which they reside; from whence comes necessarily, that kind of Folly which
consists in a disorder and a fantastic Confusion of Thoughts, without Order
and Dependence, or Connection, because the Fibers of those Parts of our Bodies
ar^ scorched up, on which the Soul usually acts; and to say this may not shake
a Truth so well Establishe^^ and Proved, that it needs no further Illustration
therefore let it be our Care and Study to seek the Kingdom above, rather than
to puzle our selves in the nicities of Nature, or the manner how our Soul acts
in our Body; for better it is that the Soul and Body be free from pollution,
than to understand all the knowledge our Nature is capable of being enlightened
with; for it is not he that understands al Myst^ies or all Secrets, but he that
is Obedient and Dutiful to the Divine Laws, that shall be filled with Joy in
the Heavenly Jerusalem, that Place of spotless Purity, where no Impure thing
can dwell: Wherefore our Lord chose rather to Suffer any Indignity, than that
we should continue in the Guilt of Sin; because any pollution unquallifies us
for his Kingdom, and Robs us of the Happiness of being meet to be Citizens
thereof. For since Fruition is the end of Knowledge, it is of great moment to
us so to demean our (...) as not to be unfit for the Union of Glory; and
amongst other aspiring Knowledge, the due Knowledge of a M^^^s self is highly
conducive to attain to this Happiness, for such a Knowledge shows him the
Humility of the Frame he ought to be in, to qualify him, to be worthy to enter
into this Glorious City, where every Holy Soul will be beloved of Ang^ls, and
admired of Men: Such qualified Persons be^^g the true Friends of God, seeing
they have defined to W^^ship God in the inward Court of their Souls, as well as
in the out Court of his Sanctuary, and in the admiration of him in all his
Works of Wonder; for there is nothing of more concern to us, than to be truly
sensible of his exceeding Mercy, which ought to be deeply It graven in all ou^
Minds, so as to raise our Sons to a high pitch of Gratitude, for all the
benefits we have momently received from him, the rememberance of each of which
are reviving Comforts, and are able to cheer the Hearts of the most dejected
Penitents; for the true Sense of this assures them that they shall be for ever
Blessed, even to such a Perfection, as to be Perfect Sovereigns in his Glorious
Kingdom, where every one will be a Sovereign Prince, being Blessed with
infinite Enjoyments, such as the beholding the unvailed Vision of God, and the
sweet Society of Saints and Angels, where God Essence and Works will satisfy
all Holy desires, all Blessed wishes and eager Thirst after Purity, and every
Heavenly Enjoyment.

5. The Will which is that Invincible and Insurmountable movement, which
pusheth on all knowing Natures toward God, is without doubt, and Operates
perpetually in Just Souls, and in Reprobated Souls; but it is there, and
Operates there very diversely. The Just Souls have found the good they sought,
they are arrived to the term they have so long persued; they embrace it; they
possess it; they lose themselves; they plunge themselves; drown and ingulph
themselves in it. When they are arrived to the Place of their repose, to the
Center of their Desires, to the port of their Wishes, they have nothing more to
follow, to search after in this Fortunate State they p^ssess, because they
taste with an inexplicable Tranquillity, and an incomprehensible Satiety the
Sove^eign good, and therefore are fully satisfied, content and quiet: But this
Tranquillity and this Satiety does ^^t lull them to Sleep, nor ever cloy them
the Will ^atisfied, and arrived to its term does not cease proceeding on
always. It Operates and Sturs up it self Eternally; in a most happy repose
these Holy Souls are always satisfied, and always a Hungary, always at quiet,
and always sturred up they Will and Desire always, that which they have and
would always have more; for they are immediately United to the Sovereign good,
and to all his Joys, and are always till vehemently desirous of being more
United to ^im. Thus the Will has its Excellency and Per^ection in Holy Souls,
without any of the Imper^ections, it is at present subject to; for now it is not
^ble to balance it self betwixt True and False good, for at present it is
sotting and wavering betwixt the False Images of good, which the Immagination
and the Senses presents to it in the present State, and betwixt the true and
solid goods which Instinct and Reason, Philosophy and Religion preposses to it:
It is happily drawn in by the Presence and Enjoyments of the Sovereign good,
whose Immensity draws them and carries them by force, and fastens them to his
Sovereign Beauty and to his Soverig^ Delights; for it is his Wisdom in whom they
see the Source of good and as it were, all the true Treasure and Foundation of
Life giving Excellencies, and, therefore cannot be turned aside by any False
good; but there is a vast difference betwixt these happy Souls, and the Souls
o^ the Reprobate, as to their final State; for as to the latter of these, the
Fountain of good repulses them, and throws them back from the Vision o^ Glory,
and in the same time, wounds and transperce^ them with a Thousand deadly Darts;
they are Et^rnally thirsting after Pleasure, but have Eternally nothing but
Grief, Pain and Despair, for their Portion: So that the Will placed in them, to
be the beginning and seat of their happiness, is found to be the Eternal
principle and seat of their unhappiness and despair; for as all the agreeable
Passions will be in Holy Souls so all the Afflicting ones will be in Reprobate
Souls. The Despair of the Soul lies in the seeing and perceiving the
Impossibilities of a voiding Evil, and the not being able to attain the good
she persues, which must needs be a dejection and a discouragement, accompanied
with profound sadness, because of this crew Sentiment of Privation, and yet by
some is called truly and properly Voluntary, because the Will is tha^ Motion,
by which the Soul is driven on invincibly to^wards God, to Unite her self, and
to be United to him, which is the Love of God in general, and man be called
properly Voluntary; for when the go^ which is aspired after cannot be acquired,
Despair b^ consequence succeeds; for the resentment of the Appetite preceeds
from the dismal Thoughts, that it is impossible to acquire the good so much
wished for; for we should not be afflicted, penetrated and overwhelmed with the
Privation of good if we did not Love it, which made St. Augustine say, That the
Eternal Despair of the Reprobates in Hell, is a true Love of the Sovereign
good; but this being a nicity that concerns us not, we may not with saifty dive
into it, or amuse our selves about it; but strive to be Clothed with the true
Love of God, whereby we are sure we may be qualified to enjoy the full Bliss of
Heaven; the true hopes of which fills every Holy Soul with exceeding Joy, even
such reviving Joy as may give him some small glimmerings, even in this Life; of
what hereafter will undoubtedly be his Portion in those Glorious Regions above,
where every true Penitent will be a Favorite of that great tremendious King,
who is the searcher of every Heart and observer of every Action here, and the
Infinite rewarder of every Virtue hereafter. To him therefore be Glory and
Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion ascribed by us, and all the whole Creation,
now and for ever.

A Recapitulation of the moral consequences, drawn from what have been
established concerning our Souls, and for the Conviction of our Duties, and the
Condemnation of Disorder.
NO Man of Reason can believe that Ingratitude is an Ornament to Nature; or,
that Injustice Men's a reward, nor that Treachery is a Virtue, or an Honest and
Commendable Quality; nor on the contrary that Justice, Fidelity and Gratitude
are things Condemnable and Wicked. Men make Laws according to their Fancy, they
make themselves Obeyed, for fear of Punishment, when they have the Power in
their Hands. But it is remarkable, that Men who make Laws cannot make themselves
Obeyed, nor be Beloved or Believed, when they act things disagreeable: For
Unjust and Tyrannical Laws, People pay only an exterior Obedience to their
Commands; but the Heart and the Spirit cries out and demand^ Justice, from him
whom all Men naturally feel over their Heads, as a Protector of Justice, and an
avenge^ of Oppression and Unjust Authority. We sometime receive Unjust Laws,
but we do not believe them to be Just for all that; but, as to the natural Laws
o^ Duty and Consciences all Men receive them, and be lieve by an invincible
Determination of a Superio^ Light, which equally persuades them alike; for
Natural Light convinces us with invincible force; and this is an Infallible
Character of Natural Light. Conscience is then in us undoubtedly Natural, and
as certain as it is an Essential Companion of our Nature and a Propriety
inseparable from our Soul: From hence arises in us, by the help of Grace, all
Mora^ and Christian Virtues; because it is impossible to conceive that
Corporeal Nature can be the subject o^ Magnanimity, of Justice, of Fidelity, of
Continenc^ and of Truth; for a Corporeal Nature alone cannon have the Light of
Order, or of Duty, or the Inclination, or Determination of Duty, or the
Pleasure o^ Performance, or the Pain of the Violation of Duty for Duty, Order
and Justice have no Bodies, they ar^ things totally Spiritual and Intelligible;
and, there fore without the assistance of the Soul cannot have the Idea or the
Sentiment of them, because it is by the Soul that they are Ingrafted, and
poured into ou^ Corporeal Nature. God having assembled togethe^ both these in
one single whole, not as one; but acting by this Indubitable Method God have
prescribed, by reason of their dependence one upon another, or to say better,
the Union betwixt each other, and are all animated with one and the same
Influence of Divine Life, and marked with one and the same resemblance, and
equally Impelled by the same Love of Duty: For which reason we are obliged to
Love and to Accomplish all the extents of Justice, of Truth, of Charity, and of
Civility, and of Mutual or Reciprocal respect toward all Men, upon the
consideration that this Life is short and troublesome, and all things in it are
frail and perishable, and the noblest Pleasures in it are essentially false, as
well as empty; they leave the Heart, even during this Life, Sick and Famished,
and if not retired from before Death, they will leave the Soul Eternally,
deceived by a cruel Privation, and an insupportable desolation of regret. For
the best enjoyments of this Life are a perpetual alternativeness of real Cares
and Torments, all things here being but false shadows of Repose and lucid
Intervals of Reason, a Theater of Eternal Mutations, a Chain interlinked with
short and transitory Felicities, and long and durable Miseries, a vehement and
impetuous Whirlwind of Hurry and Ambition, which after having much tormented
and agitated the Body and Soul, having raised a Thousand snares in the Heart
and Spirit, it disappears into Air and Smoke; for so it is that this Life does
not exercise it self, but upon the false and perishable Objects of Time, and ^s
deceitful and deceiving Economy; whereas the nature Life exercises it self
upon Objects wholly True, and wholly Solid; because the future Life is ^ut, as
it were, one Day, all Uniformity; for there very Holy Soul will Eternally be
United to eversting Triumphs and Felicities, for there every Soul ^ill be
Essentially Living, infinite Happy and Joyous; no here it have been exercised
in Trouble, in the future Life it shall rest in Glory and endless Felicities,
as the Apostle says, Such as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor Heart
conceived, 2 Cor. 12. 4. Much less can the feeble Eloquence of Man express, by
any description that his Idea or Sentiment can conceive to put into Method to
declare, or so much as describe.

Our Soul is said to commence when it goes out of the Body. That which we call
time is taken either by relation to the duration of the abode of every Soul in
its Body, or by relation to the duration of the whole present Economy of the
visible World, destined to the Trial of the Souls in the Bodies; and in
whatsoever signification we take Time, in opposition to Eternity, it signifies
precisely a State of Instability, of Change and Vicissitude, i. e. a State
which ought to have an end; for these are two things which enter Essentially
into the Idea, which is called Time Vicissitude, and End; the space of the
duration that our Souls are in our Bodies, is called Time, for these two
Reasons. First, because it is to have an end. And Secondly, because in the
interim, so long as it endures, it holds us exposed to a Thousand Chainges and
Vicissitudes; and, which is to be lamented, that Vicissitude of being obnoxious
to pass from Good to Evil, from Virtue to Sin, to Crimes or Vice; but on the
contrary, Eternity is Immutable and an Interminable State and Order of things:
As much as Time includes Instability and End, so much does Eternity excludes
both; Time speaks Change^ and End, Eternity speaks the Being always the same
and never ending. Thus as our present State in the Body is Time, so our future
State out of the Bod^ is Eternity, the due consideration of which ought to
Penetrate us, and cause a General and Universa^ Change in our Ideas, that now
in time we may s^ prepare for Eternity, that we may be Eternally happy when
Time shall be no more. Now of these tw^ States, the one appears infinitely
Precious and Essential, and the other infinitely despisable: We ought therefore
earnestly to endeavor, to render our selves worthy of being rewarded by him,
to whom the secrets of all Hearts are at present unclosed; and now immediately
relate our selves to him, by our Confession of our dependence upon his
Supereminent excellency over us, and over all the World, that we may ^^el
indubitably the Pleasures and Delights which he contains; for his Goodness is
ready to discover the Charms and Beauty of his Sovereign Nature, to all ^ho
desire to be united to him, by showing Love and Charity to all their Christian
Brethren; that when God shall make up his Jewels, they may be found worthy of
^eward at the end of the present Economy, when his Majesty shall put an end to
the Vicissitudes of Time, when ^e shall fix all things in an immutable and an
eternal Or^er, when he will give a beginning to the New World, and when he will
re-establish all the Bodies, and re^nite every Soul to that Body which she
animated, ^pring this present life; this will ^e do who calls ^^mself the
Resurrection and the Life, the first born amongst the dead, the Father of Ages
to come, he (...) whom we are all raised up again, in a Mystery and ^^ a
Figure, and will undoubtedly raise us effectually (...) the last Day: For then
we shall be even in our ^odies like Angels, disfranchised from the businesses,
^d the inclinations which we have upon the occaons of the Body. St. Paul also
teaches us, that our ^odies shall be Spiritualized, and we may upon this
^^inciple decide with certainty, that the reunion of ^odies does not at all
change the Foundation of that ^^ate of the Soul out of the Body; the manner and
^^^ cumstances, whereof we have been illustrating: ^r when our Bodies shall be
Spiritualized by the ^surrection, they shall be no more a charge to the (...);
tho the Learned say, That the Nature of our ^dies shall not be chainged, so as
to become know^^ Natures, or cease to be extended Substances; but that the Body
shall be no more an obstacle, o^ hinderance in any thing to the Soul; but our
Bodies will serve to do Honor and Glory to the God of Nature Our Bodies after
they are raised, will have a perfect and sovereign agility, that is to say, an
entire indifference for all sorts of motion, which will cause them without any
resistance to be carried every where whether the Souls would have them; for
then they will have neither Levity nor Gravity, but will be a^^ light as the
Air, and as swift as a Thought; the Bodies of themselves have not either
lightness (...) weight, so as to ascend or descend; but being afters they are
raised from the Grave Spiritualized, the^ will by the Almighty Power be able to
do this, when our Bodies shall be replaced with our Souls; and ou^ whole Man
will be replaced in a much purer structure than ever it was at first, before it
was defile by Sin. From whence we may see the excellen^^ train of the Divine
System of Religion, which without doubt clear and certain, that the Univers^^
Resurrection will be a Circumstance of that Glorious Solemnity of Justice,
which God will make at the consummation of Ages, for the consecration of h^
Eternal Temple, for the overture and commenc^ment of his Immortal Reign, for
the solemn Coronation of his Royal Majesty, and for the complete Tr^^umph of
Man-God, for the justification of his Pr^vidence, and the full Declaration, and
Ma^^festatio of his Glorious Will, at the end of this prese^^ Economy of Time.
The Scripture speaks of Ho^Souls, as if they had the Pleasure of walking on the
Globes of the Heavens, and to be in the midst of the Stars, to walk upon the
Sun and the Moon after t^^ manner of Spirits; it accommodates it self to o^
ross manner of speaking, and of conceiving t^ most Spiritual things under
Corporeal forms, which may be called a clear distinct Idea of the visib^^
World, which God gives to Just Souls; they wa^ after their manner upon the
Arches of Heaven; they are capable of being at the same time at both the Poles
of the World; they are said to fill its whole extent; they are in both the
Hemispheres. Their Horizon is not at all a limited Horizon, which never permits
us to see here but a little portion of the Universe; it is not bounded. But by
the bounds of Nature, We do not at present see these Heavenly Bodies, but only
these parts of them, which reflects the light upon us: We do not see the Sun,
the Moon, the Stars, and the Terraqueous Globe of the Earth and the Seas, but
only one side of them. But the pure Souls immediately ^nlightned by God, as
they are, they see at the same ^ime the whole Globe of the Sun, all the Face of
the Moon, both the Hemispheres of the Earth; there is ^o Antipodes to them,
they all see at one view all the ^air prospects of Nature, and all the
beautiful Table of ^he visible World; for besides that, their Knowledge,
universal in this respect; so it is not at all successive, ^ut all full and
clear at once, so that they see all things, least by reflection, by which we
compare one thing with the other, to observe diversities and sin^^arities, by
which we pass on, from that we know that we do not as yet know, which may be
called ^e proper species of reasoning, which brings into the ^orld all the Arts
and Sciences as proper means to tend Knowledge, as is an effort and agitation
of ^hought; but this is to be understood of the pre^^^ Life; But what we spoke
before, we spoke of (...) future Life, i. e. of pure Souls made Glorious by
Majesty on high, who presides over all our Know^^ge, and over all our
Sentiments, and causes them us, in spite of us; and all this by the assistance
of (...) admirable and illuminating Wisdom, which are (...) Ess^ntial Character
and Attributes of that which (...) call Divinity, or Supreme Nature, so that a
re^^e and an attentive Man cannot be ignorant of (...) excellent Truths, by the
assistance of the provident Wisdom of our great Creator; for he it is that
teaches us, that the Luminous Body of the Sun with the Firmament shows
perpetually his Glory; every thing sympathysing with each other in the mistaken
Miseries, which Men call good, till their Spiritual Eyes are open, and they see
they are deluded by great mistake, when the sensation, by which one Man does
see and understand an other, is made with a confused sentiment of Pleasure, and
with a certain agreement which carries a desire of being united to him, and
which makes one Man pleased with another, that is called sympathy. And, when on
the contrary, this sensation is made with confused sentiments o^ disagreement
and straingeness, that is called antipathy. And this is the general Idea of
sensation, which are the Knowledges that we have by the determination of
present Objects, by which we are able to choose to do Acts free and voluntary,
tho there is (...) distinction to be made betwixt free Acts and volu^^tary
Acts; for every thing that is free is voluntary but every thing that is
voluntary is not free; but no thing is voluntary in us but what is made by the
determination of the Will; for this is a necessary and i^^vincible motion of
our Souls toward God, causing (...) invincibly to love Good in general, with a
full dete^mination of our Mind and Will, by the which also w^^ shun Evil, and
every thing that hurts and afflicts (...) and we pursue some times one
particular Good tha^ an other, as they more or less immediately concer^ us; for
Liberty is always accompanied with the Will Now Liberty is precisely that
Empire which we ha^ of being able to determine our selves, which to chu^^ and
which to refuse, when the Objects are present^ to the perceptive faculty of the
Soul. We m^ easily shut our Eyes, and not let that reflective Lig ^ to enter
in, from the superficies of the Object, whi^^ Ingraves it in our Retina: But,
yet we cannot hind ^ the Impression of Light, if once it be entered into (...)
Eyes, nor that ordor of savor, if they have affected those Nerves which are
proper to carry the Impression of them to the Brain. But our Soul cannot see
the Objects in those passages of the Brain, nor the species, as in Pictures as
we have endeavored to ^llustrate in our former presuppositions: This is a
thing which we know by an indubitable sentiment. We may then presuppose that it
is not all these Ta^les, whereon the Soul sees the Object; she being formally
knowing, having in her self a lively representation, or an inward sentiment of
the Objects which ^^ders themselves present by the material Impression, which
is received in the Body by the assistance of the ^ctive faculty of Thinking,
which is sometimes cal^^d the faculty of Reasoning; for by these the Ob^cts
which strike the Senses are lively represented tobe passive, or the active
faculty of the Thinking Soul, which come from the diversity of the temperament,
and from the material Structure and Harmony of the ^ody, by which the
Understanding, the Judgment, ^d the Memory, with all the other Natural Quali^^
receives advantage, to act every one its part ^hen occasion shall present in
its proper season; for ^e Soul is inclined to all great and transcendant
^^ings: The Mind is sometimes said to be the Soul, ^^erting its Power into
Heroic Actions, wherefore great Soul is Magnanimous in effect, i. e. when our
and is applied to mighty Objects; and such a one said to be the Son of Eternal
Power, and the Friend infinite Goodness, a Man whose inward State is raculous,
and his Complexion Divine, because he lights in the Celestial way of true
Bliss, he turns his ^mporeal Riches into Obligations, by wining Souls God, and
thus gaining the Affections of the ^se. For to be rich in the Hearts and
Affections Good People can be no deformity, and every such ^n is, as it were,
his own end, while he considers it (...); for nothing is more conducive to the
(...) Honor of the Holy Man, than to be bountiful and munificient; for this
proves true Riches to his own Soul, and puts a double luster upon that noble
Jewel, for this beautifies it, and makes it truly aimable and Praise worthy;
all these being shut up in Goodness. For these Men make themselves truly great
by Enriching others, for the Echo of their Works are sweet, and pleasing in
the Ears of all that are surrounded with them; and may be said to be like the
Sun in the Rays of his Glory, and Reigns like a King by the sole Power of
Virtue, and thus beautifies their Religion; for these delight in the felicity
of all that accost them, and thus puts Embroiderie on Religion by the
cheerfulness of their Spirits, and the Heroic Actions of their Souls, and thus
carries a Light wher^ever they go, and attracts the esteem^ of every Good
Person; so that these Men move in a Sphere of Wonders; their Lives are a
continua^ strem of Miracles, for they are always sacrificing their Persons and
Possessions to the benefit of the World. Benifits and Blessings are their
Lifeguard, for that they live Holy and Temperate, and strive to i^^mediate the
Wisdom of Angels, whose guardian She is never wanting to their assistance; so
that their i^ward House is a Habitation of Joy and Felicity, an^ so brightens
their outward behavior, that almost a^ their Actions yields a spectacle of
Contentment (...) every beholder: There is a generous confidence dcoursed in
all their Actions, and some glimps of He^ven in all their Behavior: Therefore
a Life beautify with Virtues is the greatest Gift that can be give to Man. For
the return of it in Holy Actions is a^ceptable to God: For when all things
shall be r^vealed, the Life of these secret Persons shall perfect appear in all
their perfections. May we therefore careful to adorn our Persons and Palaces
with the kind of Riches, seeing they are so Delectable a^ Pleasant: For these
Men have a Love within the Souls, that is willing to impart all these
incomprehensible Treasures and Glories to every Soul, for such a Mind and such
Affections must Perfume and E^rich our Sacrifices: For the Greatness and
Goodness of our Souls consists in such inlargements; for a Will enlarged with
an infinite Fancy is a prodigious depth of Goodness; for infinite Desires and
Intentions of pleasing God are real Objects to his Eye, for such a Soul being
all Love, would do Millons of things for ^ts Object: For infinite Love puts an
infinite value on the Gift, wherefore it must needs be Magnificence to give a
Gift of infinite value; and infinite valuable every Good and Pious Action, in
the Eyes of him, who have told us, that no Thought or Action shall ^emain
uncovered, but every Thought, Word and Action shall be seen clearly by all for
ever: And all shall be admired for their inward Piety and Holiness, and every
discovery of Virtue in one shall be an occasion of Joy in each other; so that
every secret Vir^e that have been long concealed, but only to those ^ho have
enjoyed the benefit of it, shall be a new ^ause of Eternal Joy to all, when in
Heaven it shall clearly discovered. For our Actions in passing, pass ot away,
but in the Sphere of our Life abides for (...); so that a Good Man's Life all
at once is a Myerious Object, interwoven with many Thoughts, ^ccurrences and
Transactions; and ought to be pre^^ted to God like a Ring, a Garland, or a
Jewel to a ^agnificent Benefactor: Therefore we had need to be ^ry choice in
the mixture of our Flowers, and cu^^ous in the enammel of so rare a Present,
that it may love to us a Royal Diadem, to adorn our Souls for (...): Therefore
to let any dirt or blemish be in it, ^ould be inconsistent to our Felicity:
Therefore ^ight and clear apprehensions, Divine, and Ardent ^ffections are
highly necessary to this Compleatment, ^eing upon the sincerity of the
affections and intenons depends the Honor of the Work, it concerns every one
therefore to cleans his Heart from all Impurity and Insincerity, that his whole
Man may be an acceptable Present to God, that his infinite Immensity may
graciously accept him, and all his Works; for his Wisdom never rejected the
sincere, but endews them with inward and outward Ornaments, such as an infinite
clesi^e and delight in Goodness, enabling them always to Love his Eternal
Majesty, with an infinite Love, and Deiight, greatly Thirsting to be fully
satisfied with him, and him only; for the Soul is to Noble a thing to be
satisfied with any thing less than his Transcendent Majesty, whose Goodness
extends to all, even to the Unthankful: But he is most the Friend of those who
delight most in him, for infinite Love and eternal Blessedness are near allied;
for all Delight springs from the satisfaction of violent desires, for which
cause, when the desire is forgotten the Delights are abated. The coming of a
Crown^ and the Joy of a Kingdom, is far more quick and powerful in the surprise
and novelty of the Glory, than the length of its continuance. The greate^ part
of our Eternal Happiness consist in a greatfu^ recognition, not only of our
Joys to come, but o^^ Benefits already received. True contentment is the full
satisfaction of a knowing Mind, i. e. a long habi^ of solid Repose, after much
Study and serious Consi^^deration, or a free and easy Mind attended with
Plea^sure, that naturally arises from ones present Cond^tion; yet to be
content without a true Cause, is t^^ fit down in our Imperfections, and to seek
all on^ Bliss in ones self alone, and, as it were, to scorn a^ other Objects,
which is in it self a high piece of Pride that renders a Man good for nothing,
but makes him Arrogant and Presumptious in the midst of his Blind^ness; whereby
he leads a living Death by shuting u^ his Soul in a Grave, in that it tramples
under Fo^^ the Essence of his Soul, which in Truth turns his F^licity to
Malevolence and Misery, or in other Word Disorder and Confusion: Therefore Man
is an unwelcome Creature to himself, till he can delight in his present
Condition, provided his Condition be such as is pleasing in the sight of God;
for this must be the Condition that can make our pleasure exquisite: For
otherways we shall be tormented with the contriety of our desires. The
happiness of a contented Spirit consists not only in the fruition of its Bliss,
but in the Fruits and Effects it produces in our Lives, which makes every
Virtuous Man truly Great within, and Glorious in his retirements, Magnanimity
and Content are very near aly'd, they spring from the same Parents, but are of
several Features. Fortitude and Patience are Kindred too, to this incomparable
Virtue, for these fill a Man with true Pleasure and great Treasure, which makes
him Magnanimous and truly Great, not in his own Thoughts but in the sight of
God: The Magnanimous Soul is always awake, the whole Globe of Earth is but a
Nut-shel in comparison of his Enjoyments; for God alone is his Sovereign
delight and Supreme complacency: So that nothing is great if compared to a
Magnanimous Soul, but the Sovereign Lord of all Worlds. But Man divided from
God is a weak and inconsiderable Creature: But every Soul united to God is a
Transcendent and Celestial thing, for God is its Life, its Greatness, and its
Power, its Blessedness and Perfection; for he that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 20. His Omnipresence and Eternity fills the Holy Soul, and
makes it able to contain all heights, and depths, and lenghts, and breadths
whatsoever. In a Word, it is the desire of every such Soul to be filled with the
fullness of God. Magnanimous desires are the Natural results of a Magnanimous
Capacity, the desire of being like God, of knowing Good and Evil. But in a
grosser sense, this was the destruction of the Old World: Not that it is
Unlawful to desire to be like God, but to aspire to the Perfection in a
forbidden way, by Disobedience and following our own Inventions, by seeking to
the Creatures in opposition to the great Creator. A Magnanimous Soul if we
respect its Capacity, is an immovable Sphere of Power and Knowledge, far
greater than all Worlds, by its Virtue and Power that it passes through all
things, the Center of the Earth, and through all existencies; and allsuch
Creatures as these he counts but Vanity and Trifles in comparison of his true
Object, the great Almighty, whose Transcendent Goodness desendeth in full
Showers upon all Men, by his communitive Goodness which is freely extended to
every Man.

The Seven last WORDS our Savior spoke upon the Cross.
I. FATHER forgive them, for they know not what they do.

O Lord, forgive me, wherein I have forgot thy Presepts, and done that which is
Evil.

To the good Thief, II. This Day shall thou be with me in Paridise.

O God, say to my Soul, in the Day when thou take it from my Body, This Day
shall thou be with me in Heaven.

III. Woman behold thy Son.

In Futurity let me behold the Vision of Bliss.

IV. Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me.

Forsake me not in my greatest Afflictions.

V. I thirst.

Grant that I may thirst for thee the Fountain of Living Waters.

VI. Father into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. Receive my Soul when it is
returning unto thee.

VII. It is finished.

Finish my Course with Joy, and grant O Jesus, that I may be worthily qualified
to receive that sweet Voice of thine, Welcome to the Kingdom prepared by my
Father.

Meditation for the Sick.
THEY that Glory in their Ancestors, in the Nobleness of their Birth and Blood,
must make their Beds in the dark, and acknowledge Corruption for their Father,
and the Worm for their Mother and Sister, they that are already Dead, and
crumble away, to make room from us that must come after them, are secluded from
Men, but live with Angels: Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, Genesis
3. 19. What Man is he that lives, and shall not see Death, Psalm. 89. 48. Our
Bodies shall return to the Earth from whence they were taken, but our Spirit
shall return to God that gave it, Eccl. 12. 7. It is appointed for all Men once
to die, Heb. 9. 26. We must needs dye, and are as Water spilt upon the Ground
that cannot be gathered up again, 2 Samuel 14 41. Then let not the place of thy
Death trouble thee, for the Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; Death
lost her Sting in the Side of our Savior: The Day of Death is the Day of
Jubilee, and frees us from all these Evils; God kisseth the Righteous in their
Deaths, and, as it were, sucks in those Souls, which he breathed into them,
Deuteronomy. 34. 15. It is certain that the Soul so soon as it is separated from the
Body, is presented to God, and receives an irrevocable Doom, either of Woe, or
Weal; Those that Honor me, I will Honor, says the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Blessed and happy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the
second Death has no Power, but they shall be Precious with God and Christ, and
shall Reign with him. The Angels which kept not their first Estate, he has
reserved in everlasting Chains of Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day,
Jude 6. The Joy of our Heart is ceased, and the Crown is fallen from our Head,
Lam. 5. 15 16. In the Days of his Flesh, when he had offered up Prayers and
Supplications, with strong Crying and Tears unto him that was able to save him
from Death, and was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5. 7. The Heavens shall be
opened, and those everlasting Doors shall be lift up that the King of Glory may
go forth with his Angels to Judge the World, and return back again with his
Saints, when he has Judged it. In the Day of Judgment a good Conscience will
stand us in more stead, than a Mint of Treasure; therefore with St. Jerome, let
us make it our business, That whether we Eat or Drink, or whatsoever we do, we
may think we hear the last Trumpet sounding in our Ears, saying, Arise ye Dead,
and come to Judgment; let us therefore appeal from the Bar of Gods Justice, to
the Bowels of his Mercy, beseeching him in that Day to deal with the Souls of
his Servants, not as a severe Judge, but as a Merciful Jesus. Amen.

Prayers for the Sick.
O Lord, look down from Heaven, behold, visit and relieve this thy Servant,
look upon him with the Eyes of Mercy, give him Comfort and sure Confidence in
thee, defend him from the Danger of the Enemy, and keep him in perpetua^^ Peace
and Safety, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

HEar us Almighty and most Merciful God and Savior, extend thy accustomed
Goodness t^ this thy Servant who is grieved with Sickness Sanctify we beseech
thee this thy Fatherly Correction to him, that the sense of his Weakness may
ad^^ Strength to his Faith, and Seriousness to his Repentance, that if it shall
be thy good Pleasure to restore him to his former Health, he may lead the
residue of his Life in thy Fear, and to thy Glory or give him Grace so to take
this thy Heavenly visi^tation, that after this painful Life ended, he may dwell
with thee in Life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Father of Mercyes, and God of all Consolation, lay no more upon him (or her)
ther^ thou will enable him to bear with Patience Courage, and Contentment;
either assuage his Pain^ or increase his Patience; bless all those means tha^
have been, or shall be used for his recovery; either shorten his Sickness, or
else give him Grace, an^ Strength to bear it; deliver him from the bitte^ Pangs
of Eternal Death, and from the Gates of Hel^ take from him the Sting of his
Consciences, and the extremity of Sickness, Anguish, or Agony, that (...)
withdraw his mind from thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

DEliver him from all Dangers and Distress, from Pain and Punishment Bodily and
Ghostly, and from all the Sins and Misdeeds, which by the Ma^ice of the Devil,
or his own Frailty he have at any time committed against thee. That it may
please thee not to lay to his Charge what in Concupiscence of the Eye, Pride of
Life, Vanity, or Superfluity, he has committed against thee. That it may
please thee not to lay to his Charge what in the Fierceness of his Wroth, or in
the eagerness of an Angry Spirit he has committed against thee. That it may
please thee not to lay to his Charge what in Vain and Idle Words, in the
Looseness and Slipperiness of the Tongue he has committed against thee. That
it may please thee to make him Partaker of all the Mercies, and Promises in
Christ Jesus. That it may please the to vouchsafe his Soul the Estate of Joy,
Bliss, and Happiness with all thy blessed Saints in thy Heavenly Kingdom. That
it may please thee to give him Peace, and a part in the blessed Resurrection of
Life and Glory; we commend his Soul into thy Hands beseeching thee that it may
be precious ^n thy sight. O let not the Blood of Christ that was ^shed for all
Men, be spilt in vain to any, but let it be effectual to the Salvation of every
Soul, for thy own Bowels and Compassion sake. Amen.

IN the midst of Life we are in Death, Of whom then may we seek for Succor, but
of thee O Lord? Who for our Sins are most justly displeased with us; yet O Lord
most Holy, O God most Mighty, O Holy and most Merciful Father, deliver us not
over to the bitter Pains of Eternal Death. Thou know Lord the Secrets of our
Hearts, O shut not up against us the Ears of thy Mercy, but spare us O Lord
most Holy, O Savior most mighty, O Immortal and mos^ Merciful Redeemour. Thou
most Worthy Judge Eternal, suffer us not in our last Hour, for any Pains of
Death to fall from thee, though he has Sinned, yet he seeks thee; and thou
Lord never failest them that seek thee. Let not the Guiltiness of a Sinne^ more
prevail to condemn, than the Gracious Goodness of a most Merciful Father, to
Aquit and to Pardon. O let not the Unrighteousness of Man make the Goodness of
God of none effect, O Lord, no not so remember not the Unkindnesess of this thy
Child so as thereby thou forgottest the Compassion and Kindness of a Father. Do
not so think on our Sins* that thou thereby forget thine own Nature and
Property, which is always to have Mercy and Forgive. Do not so remember our
Sins, that thou thereby remember not thy own Name, which is Jesus a most Loving
and Kind Savior. Lord is thy Life in our Life has not sufficiently appeared,
yet let not thy Death lose the full Power and Effecacy thereof. Suffer not, O
Lord, in both so great a price to perish, lose not that O Lord which thou have
redeemed since thou come to redeem that which was lost, that which was so
dear to thee to redeem, suffer not to be lost as a thing of no Value.

OH! Most Merciful and Blessed Savior, have Mercy upon the Soul of this thy
Servant; remember not his Ignorance, nor the Sins of his Youth; but according
to thy great Mercies remember him in the Mercies, and Glories of thy Kingdom.
Thou, O Lord, have opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers; let the
Everlasting Gates be opened, and receive his Soul; let the Angels who Rejoice
at the Conversion of a Sinner, Triumph and be Exalted in his Deliverance and
Salvation, make him partaker of the Benefits of thy Holy Incarnation, Life, and
Sanctity, Passion, and Death, Resurrection, and Assension, and of all the
Prayers of the Church, of the Joy of the Elect, and all the Fruits of the
Blessed Communion of Saints; and daily add to the number of thy beatified
Servants, such as shall be saved, that thy coming may be hastened, and the
expectation of the Saints may be fulfiled, and the Glory of thee our Lord Jesus
be advanced; all the whole Church Singing Praises to the Honor of thy Holy
Name, who Live and Reignest ever one God, World without end. Amen.

OH! Most Merciful Jesu, who did die to redeem us from Death and Damnation,
have Mercy upon this thy Servant, whom thy Hand has visited with Sickness, of
thy Goodness be pleased to forgive him all his Sins, and Seal his hopes of
Glory with the refreshments of thy Holy Spirit. Lord give him Strength and
Confidence in thee, assuage his Pain, repel the assaults of his Gostly Enemies,
by thy Mercies, and a Guard of Holy Angels preserve him in the Unity of the
Church, keep his Senses entire, his Understanding right, give him a great
measure of Contrition, true Faith, a well grounded Hope, and abundance of
Charity, give him a quiet and a joyful departure, let thy Ministering Spirits
conveigh his Soul to the Mansions of Peace and Rest, there with certainty to
expect a joyful Resurrection, to the fullness of Joy at thy right Hand, where
there is pleasure for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer for a Penitent.
O Thou who still remainest the same Richfulness in thy self, and the same
bright Glory to all the Blessed, have Mercy upon me, and all Mankind, in the
(...) and full Pardon, and forgiveness of all our Sins that ever we have
committed, from our Infancy to this present Moment; and indue us with thy
preventing and assisting Grace, that we never fall into those Sins of the which
we have Repented; but fill us with thy Holy Spirit, that we may increase in all
Goodness in the Spirit, of Might, of Wisdom, and Counsel, Knowledge, Piety, and
thy Holy Fear, that we may do all such good Works as thou have prepared for us
to walk in, by the assisting Power and Might of thy Holy Strength, which we
beseech thee constantly to afford us to our last Breath, that when we shall
breathe out our Souls, they may be received instantly to Glory: And this we
beg for thy sake, who did begin to Bleed and Suffer for our Sin, even thee O
Blessed Jesus, who tookest that Heavenly Name, thy Blessed purpose to Proclaim.
Oh! may we bow our Heart^ and Knee bright King of Names to Glorious thee who
thus beginest our Bliss, thus carriedest on our Happiness, to thee all Praise
be paid, O Great Misterious Three for ever Live, and ever be Obeyed* Beloved,
Adored by Men, and Angels all abroad* Hallelujah.

O Lord, make us eminent Examples of Perfect Christianity; and kindle in our
Hearts Zealous Emulations of thy Grace, that here immitating thy Life O Christ,
we may be constant in the Truth to our last Breath, that in our Mouths there
may not at any time be found a lie, that we may be worthy to be presented
without spot, before thy Throne O God; and thou may exalt us to thy Kingdom,
and there admit us to taste of thos^ Glorious Joys which incurcel thy Blessed
Thron^ above, to which we are Entitled by the Suffering o^ Christ our Lord.
Oh, give us true Repentance, that w^ may not fail of attaining of them, though
I have no^ been strong enough to be perfectly Innocent: Yet mak^ me Humble
enough to be truly Penitent, make m^ Heartily sorry that ever I have done
amiss, and never again dare to do that for which I am sorry; but perpetually
Watch, and Change my Thoughts, to more diligent and concerning Cares, how to
redeem my misspent Time with Sighs, and Tears, and Prayers; and prepare our
Understanding to assent to thy Truths, and our Wills to follow thy Divine
Inspirations; that thou O God may fill our Memories with innumerable
Mercies, and our whole Souls with the Glory of his adorable Atributes; that thy
Blessed Spirit may come and breathe thy spacious Odor into our Hearts, in these
dull Regions here beneath, to fill our Souls with thy sweet Grace, and Inspire
us to give all possible Glory to that secret Three, One ever Living Sovereign
Lord, as at the first still may be, Beloved Praised, Feared and Adored.
Hallelujah.

O Lord, open the Eyes of our Understanding, and show us thy clear and
supernatural Light, even (...) thou did to the Apostles, together with the
whole Army of Martyrs; that we may confidently ^ffirm to others what we know so
Infallibily cer^ain our selves: And be pleased to infuse into all ^^ens Hearts
the fullness of thine own Divine Charity, that every one may instruct his
Family; and with Courage and Patience overcome their Oppressors, that being
thus Illuminated with a pure and clear ^^ight, and inflamed with the ferver of
Grace, ^hey may mightily show forth thy Glory, and Con^ert many Souls to thee,
that thy Grace may run and be Glorious over all the World, and thy Holy spirit
be aimable in the Hearts of every Creature, that all dullness may be removed
from them, and they ^nay with swift Glances understand the sweet Will (...)
their Divine Master, that they may Daily more and ^ore increase in Virtue, and
be inebriated with thy ^eavenly Wine, and filled with an Heroic Spirit, ^^at
may keep alive in their Hearts the Primitive Grace. Grant this O God who art
still the same, and with an equal Spirit Governs the World; replenish us all we
beseech thee with the Holy Ghost, which warms without scorching, and shines
without dim^ess, and inlightens without consuming: Kindle in every one of our
Hearts this Holy Spirit of Meekness, Peace, and Unity, that all the World may
know that we belong to thee. That exercising those Virtues of Meekness, Long
Suffering, Patience, Contentedness and Charity; thou may difuse thy Holy Joy
into our Breast, that may fill our Hearts with Strength and undaunted Courage,
that may duly qualify us to ascend to those satisfing Joys above, where all our
Faculties shall be exercised in Adoring and Worshipping thee O Lord our God, who
wilt fill our Souls full of Joy, and Ravish our Hearts with overflowing
Pleasures, and make us ever give Glory to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the
undivided Three One equal Glory, one same Praise, from henceforth and for ever
be. Hallelujah.

A Prayer for the Rich and Noble.
O Lord, I beseech thee, make the Great and Honorable become Good and Just, O
suffer them never to consent, nor combine with the Counsel of the Wicked, but
teach the Rich and Noble to lear^ to wait for thy Kingdom, cause them to
im^ploy their Wealth and Power in Piety, for Religion and Charity, for the
Poor; let them not loos^ their Courage in thee O King of Kings, for any
diffi^culties they meet with in their way, but increase their Faith, and
support their Hope, that they may go o^ cheerfully in their Duty, firmly
trusting in thee with^out being removed from the Hope of a Blessed acce^^tance
and a sure Reward. O make them diligent (...) all their endeavors, by removing
all lets and hindrances of Piety, cause them Religiously to trust in thy never
failling Goodness, which will rather work a Miracle, which thy Power can do:
Then forsake or slight thy Servants which thy Goodness cannot, let the firm
assurance of this support them in every Center of their Lives, that they may
always dedicate themselves to thy Service, striving to be beneficial to the
Poor, that so at ^ength both Poor and Rich may meet together in the Kingdom of
Glory, to Praise the Eternal King for ever and ever. Amen.

A Charitable Prayer for the Conversion of all Heretics.
O Thou all-knowing Being, have Mercy upon the Church of Rome, bless her with
the choicest and ^he richest of thy Blessings, power on her a double Portion of
thy Spirit, illuminate her with thy Truth, ^urge out of her all Errors, Heresy
and Superstition, and whatsoever is contrary to Truth; make her such ^s she
once was, a Pure, Spotless, and Holy Church, ^^ee her from all those
Abominations which now she (...) involved in, illuminate her once again with
the ^right Beams of thy pure Truth, that she may see ^er Errors, and forsake
them, and cleave only to thee, (...) God, that she may become such as thou
can not ^huse but love, and be delighted with; take from her ^hatsoever
displeases thee, make her Pure, Spotless and Innocent, full of Charity and
good Fruits, free ^er from all those Superstitions and Corruptions she ^ave of
late embraced. With her, be merciful to all ^ther Churches, which differ from
the Ancient Truth, ^ake us all one Sheepfold, under one Shepherd Christ ^^sus,
that we may all give thee Honor and Praise is most justly due; complete that
Promise of giving thy Son the Heathen for his Heritage, and the utmost parts of
the Earth for his Possessions. Bless the King's Most Excellent Majesty, JAMES,
by thy Grace, of Great Britain and Ireland, Supreme Governor, bind up his Soul
in the Bundle of Life, give him a long and prosperous Reign, with abundance of
Peace and Plenty, and when, at length, it shall please thee to gather him to
his Fathers, Crown him with Immortal Glory. And with him, bless his Queen, with
Queen Dowager, their Royal Highnesses William and Mary, the Prince and
Princeses of Orange, and the Princess Anne of Denmark, make them Instruments of
much Good to the Church of England, and these Nations, and give them a Crown of
Immortal Glory in thy Heavenly Kingdom. Bless all the Nobility, the Judges, and
the Gentry, with the whole Commonalty of these Nations, give them all True
Faith and Fear to thee their God, Loyalty to our Gracious Sovereign, and
Brotherly Love and Charity one toward another; and Bless with the choicest of
thy Blessings the Clergy of this Nation, the Most Reverend the Archbishops,
and the Right Reverend the Bishops, with all Priests and Deacons: Grant, we
beseech thee, that thy Grace may illustriously appear in them, that by the
Holiness of their Lives, and the Soundness of their Doctrine, they may bring
many Souls to the Obedience of our Most Holy Faith; and because no Man's
Greatness or Wisdom can secure him from the Grave. We beg thee, bless all
Schools and Nurseries of Piety and Learning, especially the two Universities of
our Land, that from thence may proceed Men able and willing, to tell Judah of
her Sins and Israel of her Transgressions, and be mindful o^ those who suffer
Affliction with Joseph; comfort all those who in this transitory Life, are in
Trouble, Sorrow, Need, Sickness, or any other Calamity, suppor^ them under, and
give them a happy Issue out of al^ their Troubles, bind up their Souls Wounds,
and fi^^ their Spirits with Joy and Gladness; be with all those that are going
through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, let thy Holy Angels conduct them
safe to thy Eternal Kingdom, let the Blood of Jesus bespeak their Peace with
thee, appoint those blessed Spirits to bring their Souls safe into Bliss and
Glory; make us all, we pray thee, mindful of our Departure, that from
thenceforth, we may be for ever happy: Mean time, make us all truly thankful to
thee, for all Spiritual and Temporal Mercy to us, for the blessed Use of thy
Word and Sacraments, for Food and Nourishment, and for all the Blessings we
daily enjoy, Health, Peace and Liberty, for all the Conveniences of this Life,
and for the Means and Hopes of a better. O impress in our Minds, the lovely
Idea of thy Majesty, that we may seek to worship and adore thee according to
thy excellent Greatness, who art infinitely worthy of all Praise, Honor and
Glory. O enlarge our Souls to pay thee such Praises, as may be in some degree
worthy of thee, or at least, such as thou will be graciously pleased to accept.
These Mercies we beg of thee, for Jesus Christ's sake: To whom with thee, O
Father, and the Eternal Spirit, be all Honor, Glory, Power and Praise, Might,
Majesty, and Dominion, now henceforth and for ever. Hallelujah.

O Lord, I beseech thee, to magnify thy Power in my Preservation, that my
feeble Knees fains not; preserve me from all unconstancy and deceitfulness of
Heart, that I may be presented to thee, pure and unblamable: Be not wroth with
us very sore, neither remember our Iniquities for ever; but cause thy Face to
shine upon thy Sanctuary, which is in danger of being desolate. Give Ease to
those that are in Pain, Supplies to all that are in Want. Give presumptious
Sinners a deep Sense of their Sins, and a true Sight of thy Mercies to all that
are in despair, that they may ^ot cast away their Confidence in thee, nor place
it any where but in thee: Abhor them not, nor cast them away in displeasure;
but wean all our hearts from the love of this World, and dispose of us as thy
all-wise Counsel have determined, but c^use us to set our Affections above,
where thou, O King of Glory, seteth at the Right Hand of thy Father, to
interceed for us, that all our Weaknesses may be pitied, our Sins pardoned, our
Graces strengthened, and our Souls eternally saved. In all our Pains of Body,
and Agonies of Spirit, give us thy refreshing Comforts, endew us with Patience
and Courage, Fortitude, and a full measure of Faith, to bear, to undergo and to
overcome; Look, with Compassion, upon all poor Creatures that draw near the
approaches of Death, open the Gates of thy everlasting Mercy to them, and
receive them to thy Favor; cause Death to be to them a Joyful Gate of Glory,
and an Entrance into everlasting Bliss, for thine own bowels and compassion
sake. Amen.

A Prayer for a Member of the Church of England.
O Lord take not off thy afflicting hand, till I am reformed, and my Sins
consumed; suffer me never to receive the least check against, nor disaffection
to the True Religion Established in (the Church of) England: Let me return an
humble denial to all that shall propose such an unreasonable Question to me;
but if my denial will not suffice in this case, give me courage rather to part
from my Life, than to forsake my Faith; and if my case be so happy, give me
Grace, with cheerfulness, to pray for my Persecutors, though dying by their
Cruelty, that I may deeply impress constancy and true courage in the hearts of
all my Spectators, that we all may sacrifice our Wills to God before our
Bodies, and both, whenever it shall please him to require them at our hands;
assist us in the doing this, by the powerful Operations of thy Divine Grace,
which we beseech thee, always plentifully to supply us with, for thy Mercy
sake. Amen.

O Lord have Mercy upon our Parents, let the Souls be bound up in the bundle of
Life grant them Grace to live a quiet and peaceable, just and honest Life here,
that when they come t^ die they may live with thee, and thy Christ in the
Heavenly Kingdom. Look not upon their Merit but pardon their Offenses, for thy
Bowels an^ Compassions sake, to whom be all Honor and Glor^ World without end.
Amen.

A Prayer at receiving the Holy Sacrament.
O Lord and Heavenly Father, we thy humble Se^^vants beseech thy Fatherly
Goodness to loo^ down from Heaven, thy Holy Habitation, the Throne of thy
Glory, with an Eye of Pity and Compassion upon us thy Servants, let not our
Sins hinde^ our Prayers from ascending up unto thee, or preven^ thy Mercies
coming down upon us; but come we pray thee, and Sanctify these Souls and
Bodies o^ ours, and make them fit Habitations for thy Holy Spirit to dwell in;
and come Sanctify these thy Creatures, to the end, for which we receive them,
that the receiving the Blessed Sacrament may be unto us, for the Conformation
of our Faith, for the Strengthening our Hope, and for the Pardoning of all our
Sins, and for the increase of all thy Graces in us, that the Pal^ate of our
Souls may be so changed thereby, that we may relish nothing besides thee; but
Hunger and Thirst after this Bread of Life, and Cup of Salvation, till we
change this place of Misery, to enjoy thy Presence in thy Heavenly Kingdom, for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 6. for whose, read what. p. 7. l. 21. r. the Judge of. p. 24. l.
2. r. nor repine. p. 70. l. 29. (...). exclude.


