The Virgin Widow. A COMEDY.

Written by FRA: QUARLES.

CLAUDIAN. Virginis and viduae sunt rara trophaea pudicae,
Nec miranda satis spectantibus --
LONDON, Printed for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. M DC XLIX.

The Stationer to the Reader.
THis Interlude, to sweeten the brackish distempers of a deluded age, is here
(courteous Reader) to thy judicious view freely offered: having been sometimes
at Chelsie privately Acted (by a company of young Gentlemen) with good
approvement. The Author, whose Divine Works have sufficiently proclaimed his
Abilities, may give thee assurance of finding in it, wit, worth, and
well-season'd mirth. Invention to quicken Conceit; Disposition to beautify
Art.

It is confessed, that this Dramatick Poem was Mr Quarles his very first Assay in
that kind: yet shall thou collect by this Piece, that He knew as well to be
delightfully facetious, as divinely serious.

Thy Friend to serve thee, R,. R,.

The Actors Names.
EVALDUS The King. AUGUSTA The Queen. BELLARMO PALLADIUS MUSEUS The Kings
three sons. ARTESIO A Doctor of Physic. ROSIA KETTREENA MARINA Artesio's
three daughters. PERTENAX FORMIDON COMODUS Husband to Kettreena. Rosia. Marina.
LACTUSIA A Nurse. QUACK Artesio's Apothecarie. QUISQUILLA Quacks Wife. QUIBBLE
Quacks Man. PHONILLA TRIPPIT The Queens Maids. MADGE CIS Chambermaids. FRANK A
Faulkoner. ANTONY A head Drawer. GLISTERPIPE Artesio's Boy. Two Pages, and
Officers.
The Virgin Widow.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Formidon. Comodus. For. Comodus, What eye did ere till now behold
Folly and madness acted to the life?

Co. I wonder Formidon, the King could bear
Such saucy passion with so clear a brow.

For. His wisdom knew that Pertenax was far
Too mean a subject for his discontent.
And rather looked upon his crack-brain'd words
With princely eyes of pity then revenge.

Com. Such frantic terms without the privilege
Of fool or madman would have easily raised
Billows of fury in the calmest breast,
And heaved a wel-hang'd patience off her hinge.

For. Nay, to be basely rude in such a place,
Artesio's house, whose roof the King was pleased
To honor with his presence --

Com. Nay worse, at such a time when he was pleased to lend
Free reins to mirth, and to suspend those cares
That claim such interest in the Imperial brow.

For. Nay, when his fair acceptance crowned the Feast
Of glad Artesio, with his princely thanks;
Nay, when his royal hand had newly laid
The Sword upon his shoulders, and received him
Into the glorious Order of a Knight,
Then to break out into such baseness thus --

Com. What moved him to it?

For. Nay, he were wise could tell:
I saw no cause at all

Com. Unless it were
Some jealous qualme arising from a kiss
Too hardly printed on Kettreena's lip
By way of welcome to her Ladyship.

For. That might well be, for 'twas no sooner done
But he (not far to seek for passion
Or terms to vent it) brake into this fury,
And being choked with choler left the room:
Whereat his new-made Lady pale as death
(No stranger to his passion) winck'd me out
To follow him.

Com. I marked that passage well,
And reading the dumb message in her eye
Writ in pale characters, I quit the room
To feel his pulse; whom if I chance to spy
I Will read a lecture to him:

For. So will I.

Exeunt. Sir Pertenax. Pert. Were he as many Kings as he has Subjects to abuse,
I Would not endure 't. Come, the plain truth is, I don't like it, so I don't, nor
should I spare him had he been a King of Gold: What? should I stood like a fool
to be his shooing-horne to draw a pair of horns upon my head, and turn Pander
to his lickerish kisses, while he wipes my mouth with a cod-piece Knighthood?
I Will hang first. Let him bestow his honor with a vengeance upon those that
hold it a good pen'worth on such terms: For my part I like it not. Have I
lived these thrice thirty years, to be caught with Chafe? Kettreena must be a
Lady forsooth, to be more capable of his princely lust. And Pertenax must be
dubbed, and gain the glorious attribute of a right worshipful Cuckold. Come,
these are baits to catch young birds with, and honorable mists to blind
ambitious fools with. His politic Majesty has taken a wrong Sow by the ear.
I Am none of those that for a smile can play the royal Pander, nor like a
temporizing Wittold can help my wanton Prince into the Saddle, or hold his
Stirrup. Did I not mark the lustful progress of his lascivious glaunces? And
how his ugly rolling eyes shot firebrarnds at Kettreena's face? How every word
was garnished with a wanton smile, and still presented to Kettreena's ear! His
antic gestures, croutches, congies, cringes, complements, and all directed to
Kettreena! While she like a wel-disciplin'd Curtezan could counterfeit a
modesty, against her conscience, to whet his lust into an appetite; and like a
coy dissembling Bride, could sit and mince it, and inwardly rejoice to think of
future times. -- But see they come; I Will stand aside and watch.


Evaldus leading Kettreena, Artesio, Formidon, Comodus, Rosia, Marina. Evald.
Artesio, we shall study to requite
Thy bounteous entertainment, and whilst we
Possess The Imperial Crown, be confident
Thou have a friend at Court. Come Kettreena,
Cheer up: We Are pleased to set thy Husbands rudeness
Upon the score of Age the Advocate
Of all infirmity.

Kett. Most gracious Prince,
The strength of your known wisdom does appear
More eminent in his weakness.

Pert. A courtly Whore!

Kett. And his extreme defects
Are by your goodness graciously supplied.

Pert. An ignominious Whore!

Kett. For which Kettreena,
As duty binds, shall with a grateful heart
Lie prostrate at your feet.

Pert. A prostrate Whore!

Kett. And always active to discharge that score
Of your high favors.

Pert. Hey! an active Whore!

Evald. Enough Kettreena; thy fair merits give
Breath to our favors, and make virtue live.

Exeunt Manent Roscia, and Marina. Ros. I, let them go: Sister, we are too
course
For their respects.

Ma. Methinks we merely serve
Like worthless Ciphers to increase a number.

Ros. Or like odd money in a Tailors Bill
Only to be abated: Let them go.

Ma. But yet methinks it is odd, that all the Trumps
Should lie in fair Kettreena's hand, and none
In ours.

Ros. Come, kissing goes by favor; Let her go
With her fair Game.

Ma. But that which vexed me most,
The foolish King had nothing else to say
But I was like my Father, when he knows
Comparisons are odious.

Ros. Nay worse,
His Complement to me was this, That I
Bore my years well; As good h'ad called me old,
A word far more injurious then Whore.
Bear my years well? What is there in this face
To merit such a Complement?

[looks in her. Glass. Ma. I like my Father? though I say it,
I scorn't:

[looks in her Glass. Ros. My brow's not wrinkled.

Ma. These my Fathers eyes?

Ros. My teeth all sound.

Ma. My Fathers lips like these?

Ros. Cheeks plump enough.

Ma. Is this my Fathers hair?

Ros. Eyes quick and clear.

Ma. Was h'ever half so fair?

Ros. A double chin! What Symptons can he gather
Of Age?

Ma. Or what resemblance of my Father?

Ros. What secret beauty lurks there in Kettreena
That is ecclip'd in Rosia?

Ma. Or Marina?

Ros. True, She Is snout fair; yet by her favor I
Would scarce turn tables with her, though I say it.

Ma. She has a courtly tongue, to breed delight.
She has a Husband too; that is a Knight.

Ros. Had he not been the King, he should have known
That I was sensible of his affront.

Ma. King, or no King, my ready fingers itch'd
To scratch revenge on's face: I like my Father!

Ros. And yet our valiant Husbands could stand by
And hear all this, and yet make no reply.
When Pertenax impatient of disgrace
Could nose the King, and beard him to his face.

Ma. Husbands! Husbands of Clouts.

Ros. But, as for mine,
I Will ring his ears a peal of discipline:

Ma. I Will act my part; and if Marina fails,
Let me want fingers, or these fingers nails.

[Exeunt. Artesio. Quack. Art. Then let everlasting health be entayl'd upon the
sons of men, and let the curse of a strong constitution fall upon mankind, if
I dis-card thee not: Away, avoid my sight; must I thus squander out my precious
hours, and wast my wakefull night, to turn Baud to a hundred Marks, and
connive at these your avaritious Murders? Away, thine eyes are Basilisks, and
dart venom at me too strong for Antidotes to resist.


Quack. 'T was but once or twice six months, good Doctor be appeased.


Art. Appeased! My fury has no ears; my boiling gall breathes up such fumes
of bitterness into my crazy brains, that there is left no place for patience
to repose.


Quack. I thought so faithful a servant as I might have deserved one life
among so many Patients, to put me into a new Suit of apparel, against Easter,
without so much ado.


Art. Slave! shall you be first served or I? who gave you leave to send my
Patients to the shades of death without my license! How durst you be so bold to
snatch my wel-dealt Cards out of my skillful hand, whilst I was studious to
contrive and make the best advantage to my self?


Quack. He could not by nature have lived much longer, Sir, I did but save
neighboring death a labor.


Art. What tell thou me of nature? Is not the Patent mine? Have not I power
to produce the twine of frail mortality, in spite of death, or nature? Cannot
I lengthen out the groaning days of transitory flesh, or cut them short
according to my pleasure and advantage?


Quack. Good Sir, All this I know.


Art. Why, varlot, then durst you presume to stop the gainful practices which
I intended? When as the saplesse Stock could thrust no further Branches forth,
worthy our notice, you might have then by permission, done your will upon him
for your best advantage: When we had taken the first crop of his exuberous
bags, you might have then made bold to eat the Rowens; Till then your insolence
exceeded our Commission. Had he been born to swim against the stream of
fortune, or tortured in the stubborn schools of daring Resolution: Or had his
hide-bound purse preferred his sacred wealth before the lingering hopes of
costly health -- But thus, to ravish from our thriving hand a man of Fortunes,
one that desired to take up life at Interest, nay to buy his languishment at so
profuse a Rate, denies all thought of Patience. Away, Avaunt, begone,

No more Artesio's Servant now.
Bad be those Drivers that unhorse the Plough.
Exit.
Quack. Is it even so? Quack's thread is fairly spun,
Quack may go home again, his market's done.

Sir Pertenax. Formidon. Pert. Is there never a Statute throughout the Volumes
of the Law, that tolerates a man to hang himself?


For. If there were, it was repealed in the next King's Reign, for a great
inconvenience that grew upon it.


Pert. The more's the pity: To my thinking it were a very fine harmless
exercise.


For. Why? there is a custom for it, for those that will seek the Rolls, and
have such Wives as I with Cornelius his motion in her mouth.


Pert. Come, you are happy, the disease lies at that end; I would my Baggage
would speak till her heart ache so she did less.


For. Fie Pertenax, wrong not sweet innocence so much. Had but the Stars been
pleased, would our Wives had been like our Indentures made enterchangeable:
Comodus and I picked out both the vices, and left the virtue for you. Never
could any but Artesio that by art can alter his constitution as he lists, been
Father to three such different Daughters. Marma vents her spirit by the Nails,
my Rosia, hers by Tongue; and Kettreena hers by Tears: which like fluent
Orators, plead a soft heart, a sweet nature, and a high spirit qualified with a
mild discretion, and a harsh Husband.


Pert. Every one knows best where his shoe wrings him: She Is mild enough, and
that the King knows, I fear to my cost.


For. And though I say it before thy face, she is fitter for a King then such a
testy fool. But who comes here? Comodus?


Ent. Comodus with a nightcap, and a scratched face.

Com. From Harpies nails, from Furies whips,
From all sharp noses, and thin lips;
From two-legg'd Cats with thrice nine lives,
From scalding woort, from scolding Wives,
From ful-mouth'd blasts, from female blows,
From smooth-faced Sluts, from sharp-nail'd Shrowes;
From wounds t'inflict, from plagues t'inflict me,
My Genius bless, my Stars protect me.

For. Now Comodus, what means this desperation?
What Fury has possessed thee? What strange fit
Usurps thy patience, and beclouds thy brow?
What means this strange Militia in thine eyes?
Who raised this storm? Has Age or Wedlock lent thee
This sickly Nightcap? Tell us what is the cause
Of this dull change?

Com. I have a Reason for'(...)

For. I fear, I fear, some Oeconomick fire
Has late been kindled: Tell us what is the cause
Of these sad looks?

Com. I have a Reason for it.

For. Disclose it then: Come, if the Bile be ripe
It Is best to lance it: A revealed grief
Invites to cure, lies open to relief.

Com. He that can still the Thunder, or assuage
The flames of sulphrous Aetna, or command
The hideous powers of infernal Spirits
Resolve for vengeance, he, and only he
Can cure my grief: Marinas louder tongue
Out-rores the Thunder, and her flaming eyes
Out-scorches Aetna: Her impetuous rage
Out-devils the whole Academe of Hell.

Pert. Blows the wind there away?
What ails thy face?

Com. 'Twas lately harrow'd with her Harpy nails.

Pert. Why did not pare them then?
Why did not stop her viperous mouth?
Why did not drive those troops of Devils
From her stormy tongue?

Com. Bid me go snatch a daring Thunderbolt,
Or twi-forkt lightning from the hand of Jove:
Bid me go stop the flowing Tides, or stay
A singing Bullet in her middle way:
Bid me go tame a Dragon; or restrain
The Arms of Furies bent to high revenge,
This were an easy task; nay, easier far
To slack Hels flames, then quench Marina's rage.

For. Nay, then thy case is desperate, farewell.
Exit.
Com. Who finds a Shrew, need fear no other Hell.
Exit.
Pert. Such Devils (...) be tamed; But when the Ram
Begins to butt, o there is both Devil, and Dam.
Exit.
Augusta, Phonilla, Trippit. Aug. But Trippit is this certain?

Trip. Yes as sure
Madam, as fame can make it: It Is the voice
Of the whole Court, whispered from ear to ear.

Pho. Madam, let not your easy faith rely
Too much upon the voice of babbling fame;
The Court is grown so vain, that it beholds
All in extremes, and in ownes nothing good
But what it censures evil.

Aug. There Is no smoke
Without some fire: Report must have some ground.

Trip. Nay Madam, it is gone so far, that they
Stick not to style her by the name of Queen.

Aug. That Is far enough a conscience, but I hope
The fair Kettreena will be pleased to stay
Till we resign, ordie.

Pho. Madam, believe it not,
The Court is too censorious, and will tax
The innocence of a very smile:
They weigh our reputations with the scales
Of their own loose conceits, and our good Names,
Though nere so fair, must be allowed by them,
Or given for light.

Aug. But is she styled Queen?

Pho. Yes, by that frantic fool, old Pertenax
Her jealous Husband, whose malignant eye
Reads rank Adultery in a harmless smile,
And construes friendly mirth, and fair deportment
No less then Whoredom, and a crime that is fit
To suffer an Aspect more grim then death.

Trip. Such looks as his are sour enough to fright
Diana from her chastity: And who
Ere canonized Kettreena for a Saint?
Or took the King for more then flesh and blood?

Aug. There Is something in the wind, that here of late
The King is more estranged in his behavior
Then he was wont; His language more reserved;
His thoughts so various, that an easy eye
May read some alteration in his breast,
I fear, I Am wronged.

Pho. Madam, let not such thoughts
Possess your fancy, or disturb your peace:
Evaldus is a Prince too noble, and too just
To be surpised by any eyes, but yours,
The only stars whereby his fortunes fail.

Aug. But has he Knighted Pertenax?

Trip. Yes Madam,
And whispering joy in his new Ladies ear,
He feal'd it with a kiss, which Pertenax
Could not digest, but straight brake out in flames
At old Artesio's House, where he was late
Received as a self-invited Guest.

Aug. 'Twas kindly done: Evaldus has his end;
Fire will want heat when beauty lacks a friend.

Exeunt. Eval: Bellar: Pallad: Museus, Artesio, Formidon, Comodus, Kettreena.
Evald. Let Us hear no more on it.
Come, sheath up your swords,
And as ye love my quiet and your own,
Let Us hear no more on it. What? have I three sons,
And nere a wife one? Ye are both too blame
To raise such Tumults, and to sow these seeds
Of factious discords in our settled State.
Away! Each one to his Command: For you
Bellario, and Palladius, we shall find
A speedy way to let you understand
Whose is the Birthright; and since the pleased Fates
Have made so little difference betwixt you
By your twin-birth, in your Aspects and marks
Do you the like in your united hearts
Till time and our best care shall bring to light
Our true Successor in our doubtful throne
Stand both contented, And let your contentions
Find out no object, but obedience.
And you Museus, whose unrivaled thoughts
Have pitched their Territories, far more safe
Where you enjoy more happiness, more rest
Then he that wept for want of Worlds to win,
Whose boundless limits, and more vast confines
Extend from the Artick to the Antartick Pole,
And in the Closet of thy Contemplation,
Can sit and blow new Worlds like bubbles; then
Demolish and dissolve them at thy pleasure,
Advise thy factious Brothers: Let them know
That Birthright which they strive for can but make
A king at best, and fill their Arms with Air;
Their Lives with dangers, and their Crown with care.

Mus. Sir,
I Will do my best to advise.

Bell. and Pal. And we to obey.

Bell. Crowns are too great,

Pal. For breath to blow away.

Exeunt Bell. and Pal. Evald. Artesio, say, what discontents have raised
These clouds, that over-cast thy cheerful brow,
And make sad weather in Kettreena's face?

Art. My age, most gracious Sovereign can expect
Small sunshine in this world: My wasted years
Find little relish in these worldly toys.

Evald. Cheer up Artesio, If our favors can
Quicken thy joys, and make thy times more sweet
Thou shall not want them; We shall bend our care
For thy advancement, and thy Childrens good.
But say, Artesio, what disastrous evil
Has stamped thy looks with these late sad impressions?
Kettreena, tell me, for thine eye appears
An equal sharer in his silent tears?

Ket. Most ex'lent Prince, my Fathers tender care
And dear affection, looking on my merits
With multiplying Glasses, and conceiving
All happiness too little for my heart,
Thinks (though perchance without just ground) that I
Receive not those sweet comforts, that should spring
From the blessed bounty of conjugall love:
But I less conscious of my own deserts.
Complain not of my fortunes; but joy, rather
To find the sweet indulgence of a Father.

Art. O that these cursed fingers had been struck
With a dead Palsy when I tied that knot,
And these gold-blinded eyes when they surveyed
His vast possessions, had been stricken blind:
Poor Girl!

Eval. But how can Pertenax devise
To wrong such patience? On what just ground
Can he pretend to build the least distaste?

For. Upon her noted virtue, by which light
His ugly vices do appear more bright.

Com. Which then reflecting on his conscious soul
Affrights him into madness, who, enraged
Flies in the very face of all desert.

Evald. Well, good Artesio, what is not past our help
Shall be redrest, We Will paliate the disease
We cannot cure, and with our favors strive
To hide the wrinkles of cursed Fortunes brow.
In which respects, Artesio, we are pleased
To make thee our chief Doctor to attend
On our own person; likewise for the trust
Reposed in thy fidelity, we make,
And choose thee here a Counselor of State.
Thee Formidon for thy sweet Rosias sake
Artesio's Daughter, we appoint and choose
Attourney-Generall for our Royal Causes:
Thee Comodus the Master of our Mint.

Omnes, Long live Evaldus our most gracious Lord
And Master.

Exeunt. Evald. Go Museus, see them sworn.
Kettreena, stay, we have a word to exchange:
Sit down Kettreena: Here Is an empty Chair
Invites thy presence; Come, why come thou not?

Kett. Most gracious Sovereign, That Is a seat not fit
For Subjects; Sir, be pleased to lay commands
My duty may not blush to-execute.

Evald. Lay by your Complements, Kettreena, Come
Repose by us; We Will warrant our Commands.

Kett. Excuse me Sir, and let this bended knee
(A posture far more fit) attend your pleasure.

Evald. Nay, rise Kettreena: Something tells my heart
Thou art too blame: Sit here;
We Will have it so.
Sits down. So, now Kettreena, time and place conspire
To give advantage to my long desire.
Shall I not seem too curious to propound
A harmless question, to thy private ear?

Kett. In confidence, your grace will not command
Beyond my power and honor, I obey.

Evald. Then tell me sweet Kettreena, and tell true,
Had peevish Pertenax the maidenhead
Of thy Affection; did thy heart nere flame
Until his amorous Bellows blue the fire?

Kett. Sir, were it not too high presumption to enquire
The cause of your Command --

Evald. Nay, blush not Lady. It Is nor sin nor shame
To tell the secrets of so sweet a flame.
That blush has half resolved me; what remains
To clear my doubt, let thy fair words produce.

Kett. Sir, were a Sin, my Sin would not despair
That have my Sovereigne to my Confessor:
Sir, I was nere so wise above my Sex
To blast Affections blossom in her spring,
Nor yet so nicely foolish to deny
That passion which has conquered more then I.

Evald. Lived there a Soul subjected to our Crown,
So blessed in his deservings, as to find
So great a favor at Kettreenas eyes?

Kett. Sir, may your Subjects flourish with desert
To merit such a Prince, but --

Evald. But? but what? Speak on Kettreena.

Kett. Let your Grace
Excuse my blunt abruption.

Evald. Come, speak out,
Thy full perfection can no way admit
Imperfect languages. Say on; but what?

Kett. But, 'twas no subject, gracious Prince of yours
That first enthralled my heart.

Evald. What was he then?
Was he some foraine Prince in a disguise
That came to rob our land of such a prize?
Tell me Ketreena, if thou dare repose
So great a secret in Evaldus breast.
What was he for a man? Of what condition?
From whence? What were his fortunes? his Allies?

Kett. Most gracious Sovereign, what, or whence he was
I cannot well relate: So many years
Have passed since then, that my remembrance may
Well plead her frailty: Whatsoere he was,
A Pilgrims weed eclipsed him.

Evald. Could thy heart make a sad Pilgrim
The object of thy love?

Kett. Sir, I was then but young, and my affection
Could find no Tutor but her own desires
Which curbed my nonag'd reason, with a hand
Too too severe for council to withstand.

Evald. I wonder how a Pilgrim durst attempt
So strong a task! upon what hopeful grounds
Could he presume to build his vain desire?

Kett. The ground of Love is love: And the direction
Which mere affection takes, is mere affection.

Evald. How long Kettreena since thy soft desire
Relented first at thy bold Pilgrims fire?

Kett. Fates bless the token: Even that very year
Your highness first set happy footing here
To tie that blessed, that royal knot between
Your sacred self, and our as sacred Queen.

Evald. But did that Pilgrim never since appear
Discovered to thine eye?

Kett. Great Sir, mine ear
Was never since made happy with the news
That he is living, for whose sake I wear
These weeds of mourning: True, the great desire
Of my wel-being urged my Fathers heart
To match me to a wealthy discontent,
But my Obedience thwarted my Affection,
And made me prisoner to a secret vow,
Which I have kept as spotless as my name.

Evald. Has not thy Mariage-bed dissolved that vow.

Kett. Although I live sad Pertenax his Wife,
Yet shall I prove his Virgin when I die.

Evald. Tell me Kettreena, do thou know this Ring?
Why do thou start Kettreena? Do thou know it?
What means these tears?
What means this change of weather?
Tell me, Kettreena, do thou know this Ring?

Kett. Sir, too too well, And in this Ring I read
The secret story of my Pilgrims death:
Heavens rest and all my joys be with him; Sir,
He was too good to live, and wretched I
A slave to life, not good enough to die.

Evald. Come, come, Kettreena, let those precious drops
Forbear to trickle: Come, thy Pilgrim lives
And fares no worse then I: I am the man.

Kett. Abuse me not great Prince: O punish not
My rude (but yet obedient) boldness thus:
Deride not her whom fortune has deprest,
And has a loyal, though a troubled breast.

Evald. It Is I that was that Pilgrim, and disguised
Wandered this land (whose Crown I was foretold
By our Chaldean Prophet should be set
Upon my Temples) and directed to
Artesio's house; I found that very face
His Glass presented to my wandering eyes
In viewing thee, whom he mistook as Queen,
And read my Regal fortunes in thy love;
Adding this prophecy, as yet untold,
She that gives thee the first Ring
Shall crown thy head, and make thee King.
This is that Ring, which given thou drop'dst a tear,
And whispered'st thus: This Ring is Cupid s Sphere.
'Twas I, to whose safe trust thou did repose
A secret, which this tongue shall nere disclose;
These were the lips which gave thee that advise,
My judgment thought most fit, and thine approved.

Kett. I am convinced dread Sovereign, and amazed,
My trembling heart's surpised 'twixt joy and fear.

Evald. Fear not Kettreena, I am still the same,
And so art thou, excepting this alone:
Thou found'st a Croffe, and I have gained a Crown,
Which I Will renounce, and call no longer mine
When it shall cease to advance both thee and thine:
And for a Pledge, we tender on our part
Our royal hand; with it a real heart.

Kett. Your hand's enough great Prince; as for the rest
I Am not ambitious now.

Evald. Be not deceived
My sweet Kettreena, there is no dregs of lust
Defiles that bosom thou so fear to trust:
It Is fair and spotless, and contrives no end
But what may merit so divine a friend.

Kett. I question not; And for that heart, return
A heart (though far unequal, yet) shall burn
With equal fires.

Evald. And let Kettreena know
Nor time, nor fortunes shall have power to show
The shadow of a change: And mark how long
Times hower-glasse shall measure out my days.
Ent. Augusta, Phonilla, Trippit. Till then --
But hold! The Queen prevents the rest.
How now my dear Augusta? Art thou come
To give's a visit? Love, it is kindly done.

Aug. I fear my Lord the King, my blunt access
Has given the privacies of your discourse
Too quick a period.

Evald. No, no my dear,
At thy approach, all business does appear
Like pale-faced stars before the rising Sun.

Aug. Madam Kettreena, I must give you joy.

Kett. Me joy, most excellent Princess!
Pray, for what?

Aug. Nay, never blush: I say, I wish you joy.

Kett. I thank your Grace, Be pleased to say, wherein.

Aug. Of your new Ladyship: Come, now you know.
What ails my Lord the King? Are you not well?

Evald. Why? dear Augusta.

Aug. Cause ye look so pale,
Your colour's gone into Kettreenas cheeks;
But are you well indeed? I wish you joy, too.

Evald. Thanks sweet Augusta: Tell me dear of what?

Aug. Of your new Servants that you made to day.
But I transgress: My Lord, the King, Farewell.

Evald. What haste Augusta? We Will together hence.

Aug. Madam Kettreena --

Offers the place Kett. Lord! what means your Grace?

Aug. Excuse me Madam -- pray --

Kett. Your Highness now
Make me ridiculous.

Aug. You Will wrong your self --

Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Quack, reading a Bill.

Mistress Penelope Trippits Bill, April 20.
For 2 ounces of syrrop of Savin, and keeping her councels 0 -- 13s-4d Item for
one ounce and a half of surfling Water 0 -- 7 -- 6 Item for a glass of the
best Mercury-water, and a box of Pomatum -- 0 -- 6 -- 8 Item for 2 ounces of
Talk 0 -- 2 -- -2
Master Lustybloods Bill, June 9.
For a Sweating Chair 0 -- 10 -- 0. For a Purge 0-3 -- 4. Item for the same
again 0 -- 5 -- -4. Item for Turpentine Pills 0 -- 3 -- -2. Item for a Diet
drink 0 -- 10 -- 0. Item for a Serynge 0 -- 2 -- 6. Item for fluxing his body
0-12 -- 0. Item for 2 pennyworth of Diascordium 0 -- 1 -- -1.


sum. tot.

A pretty Reckoning!

As I am a virtuous 'Pothecary, I know not how to subsist. Here Is all that is
coming to me, and that is not to be expected till Christmas, if paid then.
Gentlemen, I am in a very skirvy case. Artesio has turned me out of his
service, and I must break. What shall I do? I must play the good Fellow
abroad, and then my Wife plays the Devil at home. How can the one be
maintained? or the other endured? I have pawned already her Tuftaffaty Peticote
and all her Childbed linen, besides two tiffiny Aprons, and her
bearing-cloth, for which I have had already two curtame Lectures, and a black
and blue eye. But stay! my satin Dublet had yet a good gloss, and her silk
mohaire Petticote and Wastcote will make a good show in a Country Church. Nay,
my credit will yet pass in Bucklers berry for five pounds worth of Commodity,
which with the help of a gold Nightcap, a few conjuring words and a large
conscience will go far, and set me up in a Market town, where I may pass for
a Padua Doctor: It Is but Italianating my name, garb, language, and habit, and
then Seignior Quackquinto may practice as safely, kill as ignorantly and
innocently as Artesio himself, or any Doctor in the King's Dominions. And when
my Name is once but raised upon the wings of popularity, the better sort will
hold it disparagement to their judgments not to magnify Quackquinto, and
rather not be sick at all, then to be counseled by Quackquinto; Every disease
will call upon Quackquinto. If any foolish Lord be sick of a Plurisie of Gold,
who must be sent for but the Italian Doctor, Seignior Quackquinto? If any
lovesick Lady would take a Pill to purge mellancholly, who must be sought to
but the Italian Doctor, Seignior Quackquinto? And then so honorable will the
Name of the Italian Doctor be, that he is not fashionably sick that will not
advise with Seignior Quackquinto. But the way to proceed is not to stay here.


Exit. Museus. So,
Let their ambitions clime and shake the tree,
When the fruit falls 't may chance to fall to me:
I Will stand below and watch; They seldom fall
That keep their Stations, and not clime at all:
Low fortunes find most rest, abide most sure,
When lofty Cedars shake, Shrubs stand secure:
Bellarmo will be Prince: Palladius, he
Assumes the self-same Title: Both will be
Evaldus Heirs, both Kings; both jointly scorn
The style of Subject: Both will be firstborn:
I, let them jarre; And let the golden Apple
Remain still doubtful; Let them grasp and grapple:
Museus, stand thou Neuter: Often it is known,
When two Dogs fight, the third does catch the bone.

Exit. Rosia, Marina, Quisquilla. Ros. Had I imagined Kettreenas Ladyship had
been no worse, I should have made bold to owe her this visit a day longer.


Ma. For any thing I see, she may live til all her friends be weary of her.
Quisquilla, what brought thee thither? Did her Ladyship send for thee to watch?


Quis. Truly, I heard she was very ill, and when I came, I found her very ill.


Ma. Some Qualm! May be she is breeding of a young Prince.


Ros. Or sick of an old Knight: Methought she looked very peevishly: If he would but
drop out of the way a little, she would be well enough.


Quis. Nay, indeed, they say, if Ladies, be not (as it were) sick once a
fortnight, they forfeit their Honor.


Ma. Why, then Quisquilla, thou thinks she is but a little sick of course.


Ros. In Troth then, our visit is suitable to her disease.


Ma. For my part, if her Ladyship had been sick to the heart I should ha
visited her with a better heart; But sirrah, I believe our welcome was as
hearty as our visit.


Quis. Truly, I believe you had been more welcome, if you had staid two minutes
longer.


Ros. Prithee, why Sirrah?


Quis. Nothing, but only her Maid could not find the perfuming Pan, to take
away the smell of the --


Ma. Of the what? Prithee Quis. what was the matter? I know by thy simpring,
thou have some Roguery at thy tongues end.


Ros. Prithee Quis. out with it.


Quis. Shall I? but as I live, ye must say nothing. When she first heard of
your coming, her Ladyship was heartily tugging a piece of sod Bacon, and
fearing ye would come up a little too soon, as in truth ye did, her Maid for
haste hiding it under the bed, it slipped into the chamber pot.


Ma. The best that ever I heard, She should ha thrown a few oynions after't,
and stued it for the old Knight,


Quis. 'T had been good enough for such an old miserable hound, to allow a sick
Lady so course a diet.


Ros. Sirah, we have Husbands bad enough, but not so bad.


Ma. Gramercy good Wives, that will not be such fools to endure it. Quisquilla, I
think thy Husband is no Saint neither. Is he?


Quis. Yes, of the Devils canonizing, Would I had been hanged the first hour
he saw me.


Ros. Why? what is the matter, Quis?


Quis. What? All that he gets he spends, and all he can find he pawnes:
Yesterday, he broke open my chest and pawned all my childbed linen, and to
day my Taffaty petticoat, and my best purld Gorget, and to make up the matter,
he has played such pranks that the Doctor has turned him out of his service.


Ma. Why do not discipline him?


Quis. Discipline him? If I counsel him, he stands like an Ass and casts up
his ugly gray eyes: If I ring him a peal he slights me with his silence, and
that which vexes me to the heart, stands and whistles. But if I live till to
morrow, for I know he will come in drunk to night, I Will whistle him, in faith I
will; I Will make him know what it is to whistle a Wife, the longest hour he has
to live, in faith I will.


Ros. A G^rle worth Gold.


Mar. Come, lead away, let us go.


Quis. She Is a mere fool, that sometimes is no Shrow.


Exeunt. Quack, Lactusia. Quack. As I live and hope to be a Doctor, 'twas for
nothing in the universal world but for killing a rich Patient of his a little
before his time.


Lact. That was a poor thing to turn away an old Servant for, especially a man
of your profession.


Quack. 'Twas nothing else as I am virtuous. Nay more, He was a slow Play Master
too, and took Physic upon the Ticket. Ah Madam, had he connived a little, I
had clearly gained a hundred Marks by his death.


Lact. How?


Quack. His younger Brother, a fine Gentleman, laid me a hundred Marks he would
live till our Lady Day. Alas! I did no more for a considerable sum then my
Doctor has done a hundred times for nothing; I Am sure I have been a gainful
Servant to him, and that he knows right well. But the truth is, he has no more
conscience with him then the dog has: How often have I left out the chief
Ingredient out of his Receipts to prolong the Cure for his profit? How often
dropped in a Dram of a malignant quality into his Dose to make a Cure for his
gain! Nay, as I am an honest man, out of my rank affection to him, at my own
cost and charges kept a brace of hot Creatures in Ordinary to help young
Gentlemen to their Diseases for his sweet sake: Had I been a knave, his
Daughters had wanted many a satin Petticote. And thus my honest dealing is
requited: But it is no matter, There Is more ways to the wood then one. I have
corruption enough in me to make a Country Doctor. And it is no new thing to
build up a new Physician upon the ruins of an old broken 'Pothecary.


Lact. Quack, you have a voluble tongue, and can easily work upon the ignorant
multitude, I could rather wish you to turn Mountebank, What think thou of
that Quack?


Quack. Madam, I doubt not but I could cheat the King's liege people as
plausibly as another, if the King, or any of his mad Sons would give me a
License.


Lact. As for the King, Artesio is in too great favor with him. But Prince
Bellarmo will do it if you make the means.


Quack. Your Ladyships word in my behalf will soon be heard, for which, I shall
present you with a Newyears-gift a hundred Marks thick.


Lact. I Will move his Highness in it. Go get a License drawn for him to sign.


Quack. I humbly thank your Ladyship.


Exeunt. Pertenax. So they are fat enough, And there let 'em sterve and rot,
and let their Children pick their bones. I Will not abate one single penny. Tell
me of mercy? If their Wives breasts want milk, let their Children suck blood.
Their Bonds are forfeit, and I Will have every farthing ere they quit those
Grates. Hoe, there within, Hoe, Kettreena.


[knocks. Ent. Kettreena. Ket. Sir, did you call?


Pert. O are ye come, Hussif, go fetch my Box of Obligations down, Make haste,
away. [Exit Kettreena. Compound quoth her, I Will no compounding, Though they are
beggars, they have able friends. I wonder there is no Statute to brand all
Bankrupts in the forehead with a hot iron, that men may know 'em. Nature had
been very provident if she had ordained that their flesh might have risen and
fallen with their fortunes, that we Monymasters might have traded without
broken slumbers, and have known a Rascal from a fat Dear.


Enter Kett. with a Box. Pert. O are ye come, give me, give me, quickly,
quickly?


[looks among the Papers. Kett. O that his virtues were enclosed there,
And that his honor were but half so dear!

Pert. John Havelands Bond. 300l to pay 150 the sixth of June next: Good.
What Is here? Henry Thrift, 400l to pay 200 the 23 of March next: and Good.
Humphry Rich his bond to pay the double Interest of 500l for 10 years, and
lose the principal: Good.
Quack's Bill of Sale of a Tuftaffaty Peticote, and a chest of fine linen, at
6d per Month in the pound, That Is as good as mine own already.

Kett. Ah poor Quack, Art thou come into his clutches?


Pert. O here it is, here it is, here it is, They are both come together. Thomas
Badluck, 10l to pay 5. and George ^aile 6l to pay 3. both forfeit, and fast
enough. There Is 16l good besides cost and charges, or there let 'em rot.


Kett. Dear Sir, let me be a Suitor for mercy upon these two.


Pert. Mercy! then let me never find mercy, if I show 'em any.


Kett. I prithee, be good to 'em. They have 15 Children between 'em, and 9 of
them are Motherlesse. If they remain in prison, they must all sterve.


Pert. Hey, tittle tattle, tittle tattle, tittle tattle, Pray go to your
Favorite the King; he will redeem 'em for the the other kiss, or if your kisses are
grown cheap, for a nights lodging. Now your Father's a privy Counselor you will
have a glorious Pander.


Kett. Sir, you wrong three at once, and your self that is four, and I have a
conscience that is a thousand will justify it: but I forgive ye.


Pert. Forgive me, ye Court Munkey! They say you are breeding and keep your
Chamber, and puke a mornings, and eat Caudels and Cordials in a corner to
cherish you after your journey, And my purse must pay for all, But I Will keep
you short.


Kett. Heaven and my Innocence comfort me: What I breed I fear you will justly
father; even that Child will make us both happy.


Pert. I father your Bastard! you extract of Court Impudence!

O that my hand were turned to Lions paws that I may tear thee to bits.

Kicks her and falls. Murder, murder, murder!


Kett. Sir, let my arm assist ye.


helps him up. Pert. O I am murdered! O my bonds, my bonds, my bonds! O let me
once embrace ye more my dear bonds!

taks up his Box. O my dear bonds.


Kett. Fear not, My arm shall hold you up.


Pert. O my leg, my leg! O my bonds, my bonds, my sweet bonds!


[leads him out. Exeunt Bellarmo. Quack, with a paper in his hand, at one door.
Bell. Quack, But I fear 'twill do Artesio wrong.

Quack No wrong at all, my Lord: My practice lies
Among the fools, He deals with none but wise.

Bell. I, but you promise cure to their disease.

Quack Their money loads 'em, and we give 'em ease.

Bell. Why then you rob them for your own relief.

Quack Who takes what is freely offered, is no Thief.

Bell. But they expect Recovery of their health.

Quack And we accept what is much inferior, wealth.

Bell. They heal your wants, you fail to help their grief.

Quack It Is true, our sense exceeds their dull belief.

Bell. Can then belief give help to their disease?

Quack Faith in the Doctor gives the Patient, ease.

Bell. If these be penny-worths, he is a fool that buys.

Qu. If they be fools, our pen'worths make them wise.

Bell. But Quack, I know that Mountebanks are bold, ignorant, and covetous; and
when these three qualities meet and present themselves to the vulgar, who are
naturally confident, simple, and admirers of Novelties, like Files, they will buz
about the flame till they have burnt their wings, nay sometimes scortch their
bodies too, and that must not be suffered.


Quack My Lord, we Mountebanks are in that kind very circumspect: What we
prescribe, if it do no good, we are confident can do no harm. For most of
what we give, carries the bare name of Physic, but is none.


Bell. Why do ye give it then?


Quack To cure our own diseases, and with the help of a little foolish Faith,
theirs too.


Bell. But methinks your knavery should quickly be discovered Quack, what do ye
then?


Quack Why, then we flee to the next good Town, and there we meet with fresh
fools, where if one among a hundred hap to be cured, he more cries up our
credit, then the ninety nine can disparage it. Every Prize has his Trumpet
when thousands of Blanks are swallowed up in silence, that others may be fooled
as well as they. Howsoever, they depart all satisfied, and I dare say, repent
no more of their Sixpences, then they do of their sins.


Bell. Well Quack, give me thy paper. Once for old Lactusia's sake, I Will be
accessory to a piece of knavery.


[Signes the License, and Exit. Qu. Thanks noble Lord, you are principal in my
esteem.
Now Quack, skrue up thy brains: Provide thee
A fit Man, and him a fit Habit,
And oil thy tongue; that it may neatly cosen
Poor Country-fools as they draw doves, by th'dozen.
Augusta, Lactusia, Trippit. Lactusia, I Would have it made up into a Potion, and
so conveyed to her. Canst-a make a Composition?


Lact. An't please your Grace, I Will do my best, but dare not warrant the
present working of it. I have poisoned many a Rat, but my practice lies no
further.


Aug. Art acquainted with no Pothecary, that will take an Anuity of a hundred
Mark to do the feat?


Lact. Now I think on it, I have one fit for the purpose, a man of a desperate
fortune, that will bite at such a Bait. Cornelius Quack, lately Pothecary to
Artesio, who is about to get a License to be a Mountebank.


Aug. I Will grant it him, But will he be secret? Where is he?


Lact. I met him just now.


Aug. Go find him, And if he entertain the motion, bring him hither.


Lact. I know no fitter man.

Exit.
Aug. But Trippit, In whose name shall we send it to her?


Trip. No better then in her Fathers, He being a Doctor, and the (as I hear)
at this time not well, may send it as Physic to be taken presently.


Aug. Had Quack contemned her Fathers Pothecary it would have done well, but
having left his service, it will breed suspicion.


Trip. What if it should be sent in a Bottle of Greekwine, as a token from one
of her Sisters?


Aug. I believe there is no such correspondency between 'em, And besides, Wine
of that nature will break the Glass; and make discovery. [ Ent. Lact. and
Quack whispering. What think thou of counterfeiting a kind Letter from
Evaldus, which shall intimate his notice of her sickness, and that he has
sent her one of his own Cordials, wishher for his sake; to drink it fasting?


Trip. Your Highness has hit it. And he may add, that he has drunk her
health in the same, which may the better endure her to pledge it. It will be a
way beyond all exception.


Aug. Look, here is a Letter pend to the same purpose, read softly.


Quack. Madam, teach a Miller to be a Thief; If I do not like a workman, let
my wages be thereafter.


Lact. Madam, here is the man I recommended to your Highness.


Aug. Bring him near, [kisses her hand. You are acquainted with the business?


Quack. Yes an't please your Grace, and am ready to perform it.


Aug. Let the Cordial be made of sudden execution, And convey it to her with
this Letter.


Lact. Will your Highness be pleased to sign this his License to practice
Physic and Surgery in your Majesty's Dominions.


Aug. Trippit, keep both the License and the Letter, and put us in mind to
sign the one, and seal the other, Let Us away. Fellow, be silent, sudden and
circumspect.


Quack. Your Grace will bear me out in it.


Aug. Doubt it not.


[Exeunt. manet Quack. Quack. So, now my License will have Authority enough.
A hundred Marks a year besides, and the Queens Servant?
I Will venture a hanging upon these terms at any time.

Enter Quisquilla. Quis. Come,
Art thou there? Hah!
Must my fury await your pleasure!
Must my sweet revenge attend your leisure?
Have I nothing else to do, but to fig from place, from Tavern to Tavern,
from corner to corner? Must I be still yawling, and calling, and bauling for
you whilst you are rambling, and roving, and roaming, and potting, and piping,
and driveling and snivelling! Am I born to trot after you? to wait upon your
tail? or else like a fool, sit moaping at home, with neither clothes to my
back nor meat for my belly, nor a penny in my purse?


Quack. So now the Game begins.


Quisq. Must I be thus slighted, and scorned, and contemned, and undone by a
Runnagate, a Sneap-nose, a thin-gut? Must I dance attendance after such a
shotten herring as you? be a slave to such a Sot as you? such a Bul-pated
Milk-sop as you? You a Citizen! you a Tradesman! you a Husband! you a
Companion for Gentlemen! mary, come up! You must be prankt up in your Satin
Doublet, when I have scarce a Smock to my back, nor a Shoe to my foot, nor a
Tatter to my tail, nor a hot bit to put into my belly, from Sunday to Sunday.


Quack. Heyday, heyday, heyday!


Quisq. And heyday, and heyday, and heyday too; Go heyday your base Trulls,
your three-half-peny draggle-tayl'd Queanes, that can endure your heydayes, and
your mocks, and your mowes, and your taunts for an ounce of Coventree-blue.


Quack As I went to Walsingham.


[whistles Quisq. Go, ye weasel-snouted, addle-pated, buzzleheaded,
splatter-footed Moon-calf. Go whistle your Dogs, and your flap-mouth'd Whores,
that ye carried to the Tap-house, and then ran away and left them to pay for
the Reckoning, when they followed ye, and rung ye by the ears, till they made
ye roar like your Mother, when she was delivered of such a coxcombly Booby as
you.


Quack So, is all out now?


Quisq. Go, go ye Sycophant, the dregs of the suburbs, that can murder a
Patient for the hopes of a hundred Marks, and then be turned out of service for
your pains. O how my fingers itch, to set their marks upon those meager Cheeks
of thine! But you Sir know, I have all your Villainies upon the score, [claps
here hands and at the next offense,

I Will call ye to Account, and if ye bauke me, then
I ransake ye out, and make ye understand
The sharp-nail'd language of Quisquilla's hand.
Exit
Quack It is some comfort yet
I find a warning ere I feel the fit.
Exit
Palladius, Bellarmo, Museus. Pal. I scorn your words, Bellarmo; My spirit flies
As high a pitch as yours, have every whit
As good blood in my veins as you.

Mus. Nay good Bellario.

Bell. I, to keep for wanton Ladies.

Pal. No, to spend in a just cause.

Mus. Nay good Palladius.

Bell. Come, come, ye dare not.

Pal. Provoke me not.

Bell. I dare thee to thy face.

Mus. Nay, what do you mean?

Pal. Meet me with your Horse and Sword.

Bell. I will: To morrow expect to hear from me the time and place.


Exeunt. Mus. So, now it works like wax: Whilst they prepare
To beat the bush, my hound may catch the Hare.

ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Phonilla. There Is old whispering between them. Pray heaven they be not
hatching of a Cockatrices egg. Look where they come.


Ent. Aug. Lact. Trippit, Aug. Where Is Phonilla all this day?


whispering. Pho. Here Madam.


Aug. O are ye there? My heart's much oppressed with melancholy! Come Phonilla;
Sing the Song, the King likes so well.


Song.
How blessed are they that wast their weary hours
In solemn Groves, and solitary Bowers,
Where neither eye, nor ear,
Can see, or hear,
The frantique mirth,
And false delights of frolique earth;
Where they may sit, and pant,
And breathe their pursy souls,
Where neither Grief consumes, nor griping want
Afflicts, nor sullen Care controuls.
Away false joys, ye murder where ye kiss:
There is no heaven to that; No life to this.
Aug. Truth, sweetly sung. Come let us away. Exeunt Pertenax with a Letter, and
Cup. Murder will out: A Letter, and a silver Cup! To the fair hands of the
most honorable Lady, the Lady Kettreena these. Good. So much for the preface,
Now to the business. [opens the Letter and reads. The ill Construction of our
loves, enforces me to whisper my Affection in the Sympathy of thy sufferings:
Cheer up, and let thy courage for a while bear what present time cannot
remedy. Receive this Cordial, as a dear pledge of my love, and a certain
means of thy health: It will restore thy wasted spirits, and wind up the
plum^ets of thy weakened Constitution, It will fill thy heart with mirth, and
bones with marrow, whose welfare is the studious care of Thy Evaldus. Evaldus?
So now it is out. Hah! does the Jade begin to tire? Must her Plummets be wound
up? Nay, It shall have my Blessing too, I had a dose of Arsnick [feels in's
packet But it is gone. Well, if I cannot make it fit for her, the King has made
it fit for me: Let me see [peruses the Letter 'Twill fill thy heart with mirth,
and bones with marrow. Good! Muth and Marrow, and a silver Cup, three good
Commodities! First I Will up with this. So -- Now I Will up with that [drinks. puts
up the cup in's pocket Evaldus, we thank ye. Kettreena, we thank ye, Health and
wealth's a double purchase.


Enter Kettreena. Kett. Sir, if mine eyes may not be made partakers of the
Kings Message, make my ears happy with your Relation.


Pert. Do You want Restority? Are the plummets of your soul downer? Does your
heart want mirth? or your bones marrow?


Kett. Sir, What mean ye?


Pert. Most honorable Lady, to cut your throat: Away ye Strumpet.


Kett. Sir, will you be pleased --


Pert. To slit your nose; Avoid my sight [Exit Kett. O what ayle I! In the name
of Gold what ayle my bowels thus to gripe? Oh! Her very breath's a Purge; Her
eyes are Grenades, and have set my blood on fire. I burn like Hell: My liver
scorches; My heart is in a furnace, O water, water, water! O, for a Crust of
Ice, that I may gnaw and cool my flaming tongue! Oh, my legs begin to fail,
I faint, I faint, I faint! Oh that this earth were snow that I might roll, and
roll, and roll! Where are ye o my bags, my blessed bags! help me, o help me
my dear bags. Oh, will ye suffer me to be thus tormented! What are ye deaf
now? are ye dumb? Take, take away the Witch; she comes, she comes, she comes to
pinch me with hot Irons, and fills my veins with boiling lead. O the Witch, the
Witch, the Witch, the Witch.


Languishes. dies. Enter Kettreena. Kett. What? fallen asleep! How miserable is
poor Kettreena that has no happiness but then! How well quietness becomes
him! He lies very still; He was wont to snort, that the whole house was
witness of his slumbers, I Am loath to wake him.

I Am afraid he is dead. Sir, Sir, Sir. [jogs him Oh, he is dead! He Is dead! He Is
dead! [Ent. Comodus utterly dead, dead for ever.


Com. Dear Sister, what is the matter?


Kett. O he is dead, he is dead, he is dead!


Com. Nay, sweet Sister, have patience.


Kett. Oh, woe is me, that I have lived to see this heavy hour!


Com. Pray Sister be patient, you wrong your self too much.


Kett. I care not, so long as I never wronged him. Oh my dear Husband is dead,
and I am undone, undone for ever!


Com. Come, pray Sister leave the room, and take some comfort; Your tears
cannot recall him.


Kett. No, no, I Will never leave him, I Will never leave him thus.


Com. Come, come, let me persuade ye. Nay come, good Sister.


Kett. Then let me take my last farewell: Deny me not that good Brother. kisses
him. I hope he is happier far then I.


Exeunt Ent. Quack. Quibble, at one door. Quack Conscience! What tell thou
me of Conscience? Conscience, and Commodity, are two several Trades: If thou
keep the one, the other will scarce keep thee. Conscience, quoth her? I cry my
stars mercy. There Is a word indeed! You a Mountebanks man! You a hangman as
soon. Tell me of Conscience?


Quib. I beseech you, Sir, excuse me. 'Twas but a hasty word let slip, before I
was aware.


Quack He that is my servant must forget to blush,
Must teach his ready lips to mouth an oath,
Must have a daring brow, hatched ore with brass;
Must have a smooth-faced tongue, that has the Art
To cloth a naked Lie with robes of Truth;
And learn to work upon the easy faith
Of the believing Multitude: He must be bold
And plausible, and captivate the ear
With lines of wit; And with some bugbeare words
Of seeming Art, must fright their understandings
Into an Admiration.
Which, like a nightly Lowbell, may entice
The amazed Plebeans to his Batfoule net.
Quibble, what say to this?

Quib. Sir, if you would be pleased to excuse me a little for swearing, I should do
well enough for lying. For indeed, I must confess, swearing goes a little against
my conscience.


Quack More conscience yet? Come, come, ye must not
Stand upon such Niceties: He that will thrive
Must fear to act no profitable Crime:
Almighty Gold has power to absolve
The evils of poverty: He may be bold
To sin in want, that may repent in Gold.

Quib. Well Sir, I am resolved. Conscience, farewell. And now that Blocks
removed, Quibble shall undertake your fair Instructions, and approve himself a
Scholar worthy of so sage a Master.


Quack But one thing more;
When you shall mount my Stage
Be sure, your lavish tongue reflect upon
The honor of my Name: let all your words
Aim at my merits, and inhaunce my fame,
Advance my Cures, And let thy tongue relate
The greatness of my Patients, and rewards
Of foraine Princes, and those powers above.
It Is eafier to believe, then to disprove.

Quib. It is enough: If Quibble undertake,
And fail, trust neither fool nor knave for Quibble's fake.

Exeunt, several doors. Lactusia, Trippit. Lact. The Queen's extremely
discontent, that her designs have fallen so cross.


Trip. Who can help it?


Lact. This is the fruit of Jealousy; had not that peevish fool been jealous
of Kettreena, My conscience tells me this had never been.


Trip. Nay, to see the old fool must needs run upon his own death, and not
suffer her to die, whose death he so desired!


Lact. Well, 'twas the first time that I was ere engaged in such a business,
and shall be the last.


Trip. Nay, to see the luck on it, The counterfeited Letter was found in
Pertenax his pocket, and may discover all.


Lact. But my fear is, that Quack will be examined, and then all will out.


Trip. No, Quack did wisely deliver his Message in a disguise; can he but keep
his own counsel, all may be well. In the mean while, I have given out that
Kettreena had a hand in the business, which perchance may prove an after-game,
and strengthened with report may leave her to the Law.


Exeunt Evald. Artesio, Formid: Comodus. Evald. I send a Letter and a Cordial!
I Am abused.


Art. It appears, the mischief was meant to Kettreena, Sir.


Evald. But heaven protected her: Who brought the Letter and the Potion?


For. The Messenger was a Stranger, Sir.


Evald. How habited?


Com. Sir, like a Cavalier, in a slasht Suit, a black Lock, And a gilt Rapier,
down to his heels.


Evald. We Will make a strict enquiry; Such murder will not long lie smothered.
But how does poor Kettreena take it?


Com. Exceeding heavily Sir, And the worse, that some base tongues would make
her accessory.


Evald. My soul acquits her. Artesio, let her know, we will visit her to morrow.
Bid her from me cheer up; Upon my honor I Will not rest, till she be righted.


Art. Heaven bless your Highness.


Evald. It Is certain, there is a challenge passed betwixt Bellarmo, and
Palladius: I fear the unhappy difference concerning the Birthright, will never
be composed but by the Oracle. On Wednesday is their Birthday, and most fit
for such solemnity: Formidon, let proclamation be issued forth, that all the
Court, upon the pain of our displeasure that day awaite the Oracle, where we
in person will attend it. Artesio send you warrant out in our name to the
Pythian Priests to make their Preparations.


Comodus. Museus. So now Museus, If the plot hit right
There Is but a hair 'twixt Monarchy and thee:
The Gap stands fair; If thy auspitious stars
Light thee the way, and prosperous Fortune breathe
Success upon thy high contrived designs,
Thy sole-commanding hand, shall grasp and sway
The glorious Scepter, and thy gracious Brows
Shall be encompassed with the Imperial Crown.
But stay! What if Palladius should advise
With his soft Pillow? what if pleading tears
Softly distilling from the amorous eyes
Of his fair Idol should prevail and turn
His martial flames into a lovesick fire?
What if the blaze of our Bellarmo's rage
(Not having solid Fuel to maintain
The wastfull bounty of his lavish flames)
Should slake and languish, and consume it self
To the warm ashes of a soft accord?
Here, here, Museus, thou must act thy part
With Care and Judgment, and ingenious Art.
Be circumspect; Be studious to increase
Those Fires: Their wars produce thy Peace.
Be thou the Bellows to advance their flame:
And having wisely dealt, play thus thy Game.
First bait thy hook with deep dissembled love,
Keep close thy Serpent, and show them thy Dove:
Seem Friend to both; Who ever failed his End,
That hammered treason with the hands of Friend?
Feel both their pulses: If they chance to beat
Active and sprightly, wish, advise, entreat
To Peace: Persuaded fury, and stopped streams
When most resisted, run to most extremes:
But if their tilted spirits run too low,
Urge Reputation, and the faith they owe
To sacred Honor in a Princes name:
The whet-stone of abated Valor's shame.
[Ent. Palla. softly, reading 2. letters. But see, how pat Palladius presence
gives
A fair advantage to my new desires!
I Will stand aside, until his serious eyes
Have given free welcome to his paper-guests.
Pall. I stand betwixt two minds! what is best to do?
This bids me stay; This spurs me on to go.
Once more let our impartial eyes peruse
Both the one and the other: Both may not prevail.
My Lord,
PRize not your honor so much as to disprize her that honors you, in choosing
rather to meet Death in the field, then Pulchrella in her desires. Give my
affection leave once more to dissuade you from trying Conquest with so unequal
a Foe: Or if a Combat must be tried, make a Bed of Roses the Field, and me
your Enemy. The Interest I claim in you is sufficient warrant to my desires,
which according to the place they find in your Respects, confirm me either the
happiest of all Ladies, or make me the most unfortunate of all women.

PULL CHRELLA.




A Charm too strong for Honor to repress.

Mus. A heart too poor for Honor to possess.

Pall. Honor must stoop to Vows. But what says this?
[Reads the other Letter. My Lord,
THe hand that guides this Pen, being guided by the ambition of your honor,
and my own affection, presents you with the wishes of a faithful servant, who
desires not to buy your safety with the hazard of your Reputation. Go on with
courage, and know, Panthea shall partake with you in either fortune: If
conquered, my heart shall be your Monument, to preserve and glorify your
honored ashes; If a Conqueror, my tongue shall be your Herault to proclaim
you the Champion of our Sex, and the Phoenix of your own, honored by all,
equaled by few, beloved by none more dearly then

Your own Panthea.




I sail betwixt two Rocks! What shall I do?
What Marble melts not if Pulchrella woo?
Or what hard-hearted ear can be so dead,
As to be deaf, if fair Panthea plead?
Whom shall I please? Or which shall I refuse?
Pulchrella sues, and fair Panthea sues:
Pulchrella melts me with her lovesick tears,
But brave Panthea batters down my ears
With Love's Pettarre: Pulchrellas breast encloses
A soft Affection wrapped in Beds of Roses.
But in the rare Pantheas noble lines,
True Worth and Honor, with Affection joins.
I stand even-balanc'd, doubtfully oppressed,
Beneathe the burden of a bivious breast.
When I peruse my sweet Pulchrellas tears,
My blood grows wanton, and I plunge in fears:
But when I read divine Panthea's charms,
I turn all fiery, and I grasp for arms.
Who ever saw, when a rude blast out-braves,
And thwarts the swelling Tide, how the proud waves
Rock the drencht Pinace on the Sea-greene breast
Of frowning Ahimptrite, who oppressed
Betwixt two Lords, (not knowing which to obey)
Remains a Neuter in a doubtful way.
So tossed am I, bound to such strair confines,
Betwixt Pulchrella's and Panthea's lines.
Both cannot speed: But one that must prevail.
I stand even poys'd: an Atome turns the scale.

Mus. Dare thou be doubtful? Fie, Palladius, fie.

Pall. How now? What, is Museus care so nigh!
Lend me thy grave advice: Peruse these lines,
My choice shall fix on what thy judgment fings.
Reads the Letters softly. Read both. Compare and judge.

Mus. Weigh Heaven with Hell:
Compare harsh Owls to warbling Philomel:
Weigh Froth with Honor, or dejected Shame
With the downe-weight of an illustrious Name.
Pulchrella wooes thee with a Sirens song;
But brave Panthea's more Heroic tongue
Chaunts streynes of honor: False Pulchrella sheds
The tears of Crocodiles: Panthea treads
High steps to triumph, where thy growing Name.
Shall stand recorded in the Rolls of Fame.
But take thy course: The Advice is only mine:
Thine is the interest, as the choice is thine.
Restores the Letters. This only know, Bellarmo's tongue proclames
Palladius dares not fight, but with his dames.

Pall. The scales are turned. Panthea lodge thou here
Next to my heart, Pulchrella, lie thou there.
Puts that in his bosom, tears the other. Farewell my soft embraces: Sports
stand by:
Bellarmo, if Palladius lives, shall die.
Ex.
Mus. So, now it works: If either hap to fall,
I the sole-second to both parties shall
With my breathed sword do justice on the other:
Crowns weigh no friends: Ambition knows no brother.
Then, then, Museus, shall the Imperial Crown
Adorn thy sacred Temples; and the Throne
Of Earth's unrivaled Majesty shall be
Thy purchased Prize, possessed alone by Thee.
Then shall those golden, those forgotten days
Return to earth: Then shall the learned Bays
That wants deservers, in this trifling Age,
Immortalize the Sophoclean Stage:
Unbroken Faith shall then forget to start,
And be entayl'd upon the single heart.
Unblemisht Loyalty shall crown the loves
Of twined souls, more innocent then Doves.
But stay, Museus! Thou forgett'st to play
The the other part with thy Bellarm', Away:
Go feel his humor: If his rage be down,
Go switch it up: Thou labour'st for a Crown.
Ex.
ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Quibble mounting his Bank. Quib. BE it known to all men by these presents,
that I Jeffery Quibble, am the trusty and right wellbeloved servant and kinsman
to the renowned, famous, skillful, learned, able, admirable, incomparable
Master of Phisgigge, Cornelius Quack, a man of rare Qualcoms, and singular
imperfections, who by his studies abroad, and travells at home, through France,
Spain, Italy, Germany, Denmark, Poland, Finderland, Freezeland, has
marvellously unbefitted himself with all manner of Oils, Waters, Powders,
Drugs, Spirits, Balsomes, Syrops, Salves, Sere-cloathes; bountifully unstor'd
with all sorts of Preservatives, Conservatives, Restoritives, Antidotes, for
all manner of Temperatures, Constitutions, Complexions; Richly unfurnisht with
all kind of Prescripts, Deceits, and all other rare Impediments belonging to a
man of his Defunction, who to the great dimolishment of this Town, and
benefice of this Incorruption, has redressed himself to you, and here sets up
his Banck, offering health to the imperfermity of your bodies, soundness to
the impudency of your limbs, and present cure to your outward Mallanders, and
inward exturbances. And for your farther sartifaction of his deficiencie in
this kind, Behold his License under the hands of her most Excellent Majesty,
and Bellarmo her illustrious son; which, when occasion shall require it,
shall be shown, to the honor of my renowned Master, Cornelius Quack, and his
pragmaticall servant Jeffery Quibble.

But to the purpose, Gentlemen: It may be you will think me more knave then
fool, And may be so I am: And now perchance you will say I Am both by my own
confession: And may be I am so too. Artesio my old Master made me a knave, and
my new Master has made me a fool: And so he will do ye all before h'as done
with ye. Which that he may the better do, have patience a while.

Draws a Curtain, and discovers his shop furnished. Gentlemen, Here Is that
will do the deed. Here Is Physic of all kinds, for all diseases: Salves of all
natures for all sores: Medicines of all compositions, for all constitutions,
colors, of all sorts, for all complexions.

[Takes a box and reads. The costly Powder in this box
Cures him that is powdered with the Pox.
This helps the back, and cures the Reyns;
Reads another. Makes her weight that wants two grains.
The Ointment that this glass incloses,
Reads another. Palliats blew cheeks, and purple noses.
This cures the Cholick, Stone, or Wind,
Reads another. Makes crazed bodies belch behind.
This cures the careful married life
Reads another. Of that disease men call a Wife.
This cleares complexion when it fades;
Reads another. Cures Falling-sicknesses in maids.
This cures the twattles, and the flouts;
Takes a wand. Grumbles, sullens, and the pouts.
This helps all gouts both old and young,
Reads another. And cures the palsy in the tongue.
This makes night-walkers keep their beds;
Reads another. Cures heavy hearts, and giddy heads.
If Jack love Jone, and Jone fly back,
Reads another. This powder will make Jone love Jack.
If Jone love Jack, and Jack will none,
Reads another. This powder will make Jack love Jone.
This first and last if ye apply,
Reads another. You Will nere be sick but when ye die.
But this rare Quintessence such strength does give,
Anoth. You Will never die so long as ere ye live.

Gentlemen, This is a rare man, (though I say it) and has a thousand secrets
more, which next market day you shall have from his own plentiful mouth. He
has done rare cures by natural Magic, Sympathies, and Antipathies; But this
is Heathen Greek to you: Who would have conceived that Sir Walter Raleighs
blood should have cured Goudomors Fistula in ano? But this is likewise Greek to
you: We Will leave these mysteries to the wise, and tell ye things according to
the measure of our apprehensions.

My Master had for taking a Corn out of the great Mogulls toe, -- 100.1.
sterling. For strengthening the Pr: of Orenge's back, 1000. Gilders. For curing
the Emperor of a Dropsy, 4000. Rx Dollers. For taking a black Cataract out of
his Holiness his left eye, -- 600. Checkeens. For curing Card: Richelieu of
the Kings evil, 800. French Crowns.

Well Gentlemen, to be short, My Master loves money woundly well, and so does
my Masters man. If therefore ye want any thing, greaze my fist with a Tester or
two, and ye shall find it in your penny-worths. And why should not I cheat him
with as good a conscience, as he you?

But stay! We must have a parting song, before ye go. Sirrah, Jack, Rogue,
Boy, Hoe Jack!

Enter Boy. O are you come, Sirrah! Sing these Gentlemen a song. Come, be
nimble, 'Twill be your own another day.

Boy. Song.
IS any sick? Is any sore
Oppressed with Qualmes and fainting fits?
Or bound behind? Or loose before?
Has any Lover lost his wits?
Let him draw near,
And make his griefs appear,
We Will cure them all from top to toe,
Before, behind, above, below.
II.
Is any heart oppressed with dolor?
Sullen, sad, or melancholy?
Ore-flowne with blood? inflamed with choler?
Or surcharged with Phlegm or folly?
Let him draw near,
And make his griefs appear,
We Will ease ye all, what ere ye feel,
Within, without, from head to heel.
III.
Is any foul that would be fair?
Would Rav'ns appear as white as Lambs?
Has any Courtier lost his hair?
Or finds a crickling in his hammes?
Let him draw near,
And make his griefs appear,
We Will cure all their wants throughout,
Above, below, within, without.
IV.
Has any Morpheus, Freckles, Staynes,
Warts, or Wounds, or Wens, or Scar's?
Blisters, Botches, Biles, or Blanes,
Coughs, Consumptions, Colds, Catarrs?
Let them draw near,
And make their griefs appear,
We Will make them sound from bone to skin,
Above, below, without, within.
V.
Chollicks, Fevers, Palseyes, Flux,
Cancers, Dropsies, nauseous Fumes?
Megrims, Skirvies, Cramps, or Cricks,
Iaundies, Rickets, Piles, or Rhumes?
Let them draw near,
And make their griefs appear,
We Will give them ease, and health restore,
Within, without, behind, before.

Quibble. It Is a good Boy!


Now Gentlemen, you have heard the truth both sung and said, confirmed by fools
and children, who ye know speak truth. If after all this ye cannot believe, we
have lost our breath, and you the benefit.

But to confirm your Confidence, and to magnific the excellence of our skill,
I will present such visible demonstrations to your eye, that Doubt shall find
no ground to question, and Unbelief shall blush at her own infidelity. And
first,

Here is a Sovereign Balsome, that in the space of one minute and three
quarters, shall cure the deepest wound that dagger can inflict, whereof behold
sufficient proof.

Stabs himself. Gentlemen, this wound which I have made, shall by the virtue of
this Balsome be as quickly cured.

Annoynts. So, now the blood retyres unto his wonted veins, I feel the
Orifice, which even just now had room enough to lodge my finger, now closed,
and smoothe, and flesh delivered from the sense of pain.

Secondly, here is an excellent Antidote, which taken, shall preserve the taker
from the injury of poison, hot or cold. As for example --

This ugly Spider here contains the rankest of all venim.
Now Gentlemen, I take my Antidote.
And now my Spider.
Eats it. It Is gone! Fight Dog, fight Bear. Hem!
Poison do thy worst. Hah! Do thou rejounce?
Thy power's curbed, and cannot work her end.
Needs fear no Foe, that has so true a friend.
Thirdly, here is a sovereign Restoritive which shall correct the deadlyest
poison in the height of operation. See ye this swelling Toad, whose poison
taken shall swell ye till ye burst, And from the very Porch of Death this rare
Preservative shall soon redeem ye. Gentlemen, mark how I squeeze this mortal
bit into this Boule. Now Gallants, a Health to my Mistress.

Drinks. Now pledge it that dare. Mark the operation, Hem! Hem! Hem! Now it
begins to work, O I am sick, my bowels gripe, I sweat, I burn, I burst --

Takes the Restorative. O what a Julip breathes into my veins!
And how these strong Convulsions of my soul
Begin to loosen! How the loathsome Qualmes
Of my obstructed stomach turns to ease
And appetite! O sovereign drop
How, how have thou restored my dying life
With thy unvalu'd excellence, and lent
My tongue new power to call thee excellent!
Now, my Masters, you that delight in Chimestry, know also, my Master can show
you many rare Experiments. He says he can make the Philosophers Stone, but
saving his Reverence I think he lies, else he would be hanged ere he would thus Quack
for Testers.

But this upon my knowledge: he can bring an Artificial Resurrection, and
Vivification to Mercury, which being mortified into a thousand shapes, assumes
again its own Body, and returns to its numericall self. He can likewise
from the Ashes of a Plant, revive the Plant, and from its Cinders recall it to
the Stalk and Leaves again. Lastly, by the virtue of a thing called Wit, he
can do such wonders at Cribbidge, or New-cut, that the experience thereof
shall teach ye more wisdom in an hour, then all the Volume of Thomas Aquinas
can afford you in ten days: Wherein if you please the next market day he shall
give you a plenary satisfaction, if you repair hither with purses to be
handled, and minds to be instructed.

Exit. Madge, Cis. Cis. Well Madge, though I pawn my Poppingay Petticoat
for it, I Will have some of that powder next market day.


Madge. What powder Cis?


Cis. That powder that will make Jack love Ione.


Madge. P'sh, I don't think 'twill work any such effect.


Cis. Yes Madge, as sure as I live. Doll our Dairy-maid gave some on it to Nick
the Butlers boy, and within an hour after the boy was so mad of her: He would
never let her alone, but dogged her from corner to corner, and would so tumble
her and so touze her: And when company was by her would so gloit and cast
sheeps eyes at her, as past. She could go no where but the boy would make one.
Sometimes he would bring her May-bushes, sometimes mellow-Apples, sometimes a
Busk-point, sometimes a Silk-lace. And if she spoke but a kind word to him,
Lord, he would so simper, and so jemper, and so lick his lips, and so scratch
his elboe, as 'twas admirable.


Madge. Is It possible?


Cis. I tell thee Madge, I saw it with my own eyes, and thought the next time
the Mountebank came I Would buy some on it to see what mettle our Frank the
Faulkner was made on.


Madge. Why sirrah, he loves thee well enough without it: Would I know who
loved me half so well.


Cis. Yes verily, I confess I think he loves me dearly well, but yet not so
dearly as I Would have him. He Is such a maydenly man! --


Madge. Why? I Am sure I saw him kiss thee twenty times together, to be sure so
often that my teeth watered soundly.


Cis. Twenty times? what is twenty times? what is that? It Is done before one can
say What Is this? Twenty times? It Is a mighty piece of business. And then
forsooth, he must stroke his Hawke, And then forsooth he must feed his Hawke,
and then forsooth, he must bathe his Hawke, And then forsooth, he must lie down
by his Hawke, and see his Hawke pick her self, and prune her self, and there is
such a deal of fidling, and such a deal of fadling, And then forsooth, he must
go abroad a hawking, and stay out all day, and then at night come home as
weary as his dogs, and sit without life or soul, That one has as much comfort
in him as comes to nothing.


Madge. Well Cis, would some body did but love me half so well, a that
condition it cost me a fall.


Cis. Goodly, goodly, would Antony at George were here to draw his name out a
your politic mouth, You are so close, and so wise now.


Madge. Why, I am not ashamed to name him, nor he of his name: Well, he has
cost me many a bitter sigh in his days, Yet I dare take my oath he is as
honest a young man as lives by bread.


Cis. Why do thou sigh? He may leave his honesty when he will, and see never a
whit the worse for it.


Madge. I care not, so he left it with no body but me; yet in the way of
honesty too (I tell ye but so:) Well, no body knows what I have endured for
his sake; But I may thank my modesty for it, and my Mother for that. She gave my
a Rule forsooth, once, which I have beshrew'd her for a thousand times.


Cis. What Rule was that, Madge?


Madge. She charged me, that when any sued for my love, I should be coy, and
say Noforsooth, and still Noforsooth, and Noforsooth, which I ha'done so long,
that I have almost Noforsooth'd away all my fortunes. But sirrah, (here is none
but Thee and I) I Will tell thee. This very day two months (well fare all good
tokens) Antony at the George would needs ha'me down into his Wine-celler, and
gave me a Pint of Brown-bastard; and being in a good humor, brake his mind to
me, And taking a glass of Wine, wished it might be his poison if he did not
love me with all his heart.


Cis. But did he drink it?


Madge. Every drop as I live; Nay more, would may nere store, if he offered not
(I Will tell it to thee) to fetch a License instantly, and marry me forthwith, if
I Would go with him; But I, like a puppinos'd fool, followed my Mothers
directions, and cried Noforsooth, to make him the more eager, which he taking
in earnest, flung away in a pet, and as I live, took me at my word, and never
spoke kindly to me since: And this is the fruits of Noforsooth.


Cis. And were thou not served in thy kind, to be such an ass, to refuse a
good thing when 'twas offered?


Madge. Nay, Sirrah, See the luck on it; Had he but asked me once more, I had
resolved to ha'taken him at his word: But if he, or any other hereafter take
Madge a crying Noforsooth, I Will give him leave to bite off my tongue, and spit
it in my face, I tell ye but so.


Cis. Do thou think he has forsaken thee upon it?


Madge. I cannot tell: I ha'made many a frivolous errand to the George since,
And when he sees me, the Gentleman will bite his lip, and put off his hat, but
as I live, neither kiss me, nor nothing else, That I came away with a flea in
mine ear, and in a fustian Fret, and had such Qualmes, and such Swamps come
over my stomach all night long --


Cis. But art not mightily troubled with him in thy dreams?


Madge. O, sirrah, abomination; There Is never a night scapes me, on my
conscience: Sometimes, methinks I see him twirling up his pretty little black
beard: sometimes stroaking up his fore-top: sometimes singing that heavenly
tune of Walsingham to his Citterne: sometimes crying Anon Anon Sir, and running
up stairs: sometimes Very welcome Gentlemen, Is all paid i'th'Rose? which he
fetches up with such a grace -- As indeed every thing he does becomes him most
sweetly. O how I could curse this peevish tongue of mine for saying that last
Noforsooth. Ah! if he had asked me the Question but once more, verly I had been
to morrow two months gone: But who can help it?


Cis. Well Madge, our conditions are much alike: we must even comfort one
another as well as we can.


Madge. That Is but cold comfort Cis: I but my case is thousand times worse then
thine; Thou may see him thou love every day, and dine together, and sup
together, and sleep together under the same roof; but I a poor forsaken
creature must waste my disconsolate hours in thinking, and in sighing, and in
[Weeps] sobbing. Insomuch that I have not eaten a bit of bread that has done me
any good these three days. But yet I cannot choose but laugh to think -- Ha,
ha, ha, ha, how Frank the Fawlkner -- Ha, ha, ha, ha, was caught in's Roguery
last night, Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Cis. How? Prithee tell me.


Madge. I think my heart will burst when I think on it. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Cis. Prithee tell me the conceit.


Madge. Sirrah, yesternight when thou were gone up with my Lady, Frank and I
were raking Husbands and Wives in the Embers, And Frank hearing the stayres
creake, and thinking thee had been coming down, caught my Lady fast by the
-- Ha, ha, ha, ha, middle; but she lent him such a whirrit upon the ear, that
all the house rung on it: But 'twould make a Horse break his Halter to see how
like an Ass poor Frank looked and sneakt away with his tail clapped between
his legs, Ha, ha, ha, ha, Did he not tell thee on it yet?


Cis. No verily, I see him not to day: Huds lifelykins, Alas poor heart, But
it is no matter: Let him keep home adays then, that he may see what he does,
and whom he embraces. But sirrah, now I think on it, I ha some a Dolls powder,
which I stole from her, Till we get more, let us try conclusions with that.


Madge. With all my heart, let us: But how shall we give it them?


Cis. How? Leave that to me: Frank and I will go to the George, and drink a
pint with Antony, and then we'll send for thee, And I warrant thee I Will spice
their Cups, and then

In spite of my mother, my grandame, my aunt,
We'll drink off our cups, and make a night on it.

Madge. A match! Come, let us way; we shall be both hanged for staying so long.


Exeunt. Evald. Artesio, Formidon, Comodus. Evald. Artesio, Can you resolve us
yet concerning the death of Pertenax?


Art. Sir, he was opened, and we apparently find that he was poisoned.


Evald. Go Artesio, and comfort thy poor afflicted daughter, Let her know,
that we are partners in her forrow, and will be a husband to the widow, and
take her welfare into our protection.


Art. Heaven bless your Highness.

Ex. Arts.
Evald. Does there appear any new light by your Examination?


Formid. Sir, I find there was such a Letter counterfeited from your Highness,
and a silver Cup was delivered to Kettreena by a stranger, who after the
delivery instantly departed. Likewise I find that Pertenax coming in the nick,
snatched it from Kettreena's unwilling hand, and in a passion retired into a
room, not suffering her to follow him, where he was found dead an hour after.


Another Examinate faith, that he sent for a dram of Arsnick the night
before, but for what purpose the Examinate knows not.

Another Examinate, being one of his fervants, says, that she harkning at the
door, did hear him say, that he would put in a dose of Arsnick into the Cup
for? Kettreena, which she saw him search in his pockets for; but being suddenly
called away by her Lady, stayed not to see the rest. And indeed it is generally
believed, that he was chief Agent in his own death.

Evald. Comodus, what account can you give us of this business?


Com. Sir, we found in his pocket the Cup and the Letter, but no Arsnick: Upon
suspicion I examined Madam Lactusia, and one Cornelius Quack, once servant to
Artesio, who falter something in their examination, but deny any knowledge of
the proceedings: Only they both hear that Pertenax counterfeited the Letter,
to see with what Affection his Lady would receive it.


Evald. Even like enough, The just reward of a jealous brain.


Com. But this she added, That when time should serve, she would discover a
secret of another nature, which will make such an alteration in the State, as
Time could not example: whereupon I committed them both to Prison till a
farther Examination.


Evald. 'Twas wisely done.


Formidon, See a firm Conveyance made of all Pertenax his Estate to our use,
which we freely give to Kettreena. And you Comodus, take a special care to
call in her debts that are upon Book and Specialties.

Ex.
ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Glisterpipe. THe Devil a bit of meat have I gotten these nine days, but once
a lean scrag end of a Neck of Mutton, which one of my Masters Patients loathed
to eat: Else my whole diet has been nothing but the overplus of thin
Physick-broth, and my drink, the heartlesse reversion of dis-curded Posset-Ale:
Insomuch, I had rather be my Masters Hangman, then his Serving-man; For then
perchance I might get a Caft Suit, and a gratuity for a quick dispatch. Knocks
at door. Who Is at door there?


Opens it, and enter Page with an Vrinall. Page. Sir, Is Master Doctor within?
I have brought him a Urine.


Glist. From whom?


Page. From my Lady Albion.


Glist. My Master is very busy, and cannot be spoken with these two hours.


Page. Good Sir, my business is upon life and death: I pray bring me to him,
and I shall be very thankful.


Glist. How shall that appear?


Page. By this small carnest of a greater Reward.


Gives him a Fee. Glist. Well Sir, I shall make a trial. Opens the curtain. Sir,
here is one would speak with you from my Lady Albion.


Arts. Bring him in. Now friend, what is your business?


Page. Sir, my Lady has sent you her Urine, and desires your Advice.


Art. Glisterpipe.


Glist. Sir.


Poures it in a dish. Art. Go air it.


Glist. Now I Would as liefe he had bid me gone to supper, but take him in that
fault, and hang him. Stumbles, and spils the urine, and rises. So, now am I as
sure of a cracked Crown, as my Master is of a whole Angel: But I Will serve him a
trick, and save my self some labor. I Will make it up again out of my own
stock.

Exit.
Art. Has your Lady made no use of any other Doctor formerly?


Page. Yes Sir, she took advice of a Scottish Doctor, but she is not much the
better for him: He drew a great deal of money from her Ladyship, who is now
feign to give him money to be rid on him -- Whisper.


Ent. Glisterpipe. Glist. It Is all but Piss, and it is not the first time my
Master has had an eye to my water.


Page. Truly I cannot tell Sir.


Shakes the Urinal. Art. This water shows no great defect in her Ladyships
stomach.


Glist. His Doctorship may swear it.


Art. Her Ladyship accustomes her self to too thin a diet, eats too much broth,
and too many Sillibubs.


Glist. Posset-Ale ye mean Sir, a halter stretch ye.


Art. And does not encourage her stomach with good substantial meat.


Glist. Thanks to your miserable purse Sir, he would if he could get it.


Art. Her Ladyships body is much out of order, and there is a Malignant
Hypocondriacall Flate within her, which fumes up, and disturbs her Head: Is she
not much troubled with the Headache?


Page. Yes Sir, exceedingly: She complains of it every day.


Art. She is likewise much troubled with inflammations, and obstructions in the
liver, which causes an inordinate swimming in the Brain, and giddiness. Is
she not apt now and then to speak idly?


Page. O Sir, when the Fit takes her, she speaks never a word of sense: she
talks of nothing but Bishops, and Petitions, and I cannot tell what, and her
tongue runs so wildly, and indeed I think she is scarce sensible sometimes of
her own sickness.


Art. That proceeds altogether from the rude confluence of loose humors. I find
by her water, she is much troubled with wind and choler, which occasions a
great and frequent heart-burning: Is she not much subject to unaccustomed
sadness at times?


Page. Extremely Sir.


Art. I find she has a great imbeeility in her spirits natural, which causes
in her a general faintness, and now and then inclined to the Cardiaca Passio.
Is she not often possessed with sudden frights, and fears, and jealousies, and
mis-understandings?


Page. Exceedingly Sir.


Art. I find likewise, that she is much troubled with the Spleen, which
occasions stupidity, melancholy, and at times distractions? Is she not often in
a brown study?


Page. Very much Sir.


Art. Well, I fear we must be forced to draw some blood from her, which as the
case stands now with her, I should be loath to do. There is some bad blood in
her veins; but if a vein be once opened, the best blood in her body may
chance to pass too, which she can hardly spare, without palpable danger.
Until I see her, I can prescribe little. To morrow I shall wait upon her
Ladyship, and what I shall then find fitting, shall be carefully administered.
In the mean while, let her keep her head warm, and be very careful of her
Temples: Let her forbear Salt and Usquebagh: Let her use Moderation in her
Exercises, wherein she might not be forced to lift her arms too near her
head: And for the relieving of her drooping spirits let her recreate her self
now and then with a game at Irish: Ler her forbear Noddy, and Chesse, as Games
too serious. Farewell.


Page. Take this, Glisterpipe, to drink my Ladies health.


Gives Glist a Fee, and Ex. Glist. How odoriserous is a very stool! how sweet,
When full-cramm'd Purses, and crazed Bodies meet!
Knocks. What? more Fees yet? Who Is at door?

Page. Pray is Mr. Doctor within? Ent. Page with an Urinall. I have brought him
a water.


Glist. From whom?


Page. From my Lady Temple.


Glist. He cannot be spoken with as yet, unless --


Page. I know your mind, Sir, let this quicken you.


Art. Glisterpipe?


Glist. Sir.


Art. Who Is there?


Glist. One that would speak with your Honor from my Lady Temple.


Art. Bring him in: Now friend, what is your business?


Page. Sir, my Lady desires your Advice upon her Urine.


Art. Glisterpipe, go chafe it.


Glist. So, there is a shilling more for Glisterpipe.

Ex.
Art. How long has your Lady been sick?


Page. These three years, Sir: she took a tedious journey to Canterbury, where
she conceives she took a surfeit with too much Duck, which has lain very heavy
upon her Ladyships stomach ever since.


Enter Glist. with the Urinall. Art. This water shows a great diftemper in her
principal Parts, which indeed sets her whole Frame out of Order. Has she taken
no Advice formerly?


Page. Sir, she has had many Advisers, but men of mean quality, and of no skill
at all.


Art. What were they?


Page. Her poor Neighbors Sir, Cobblers, Weavers, Felt-makers, Coachmen, and
Brewers Clerks, who pretend a great deal of slovenly skill.


Art. In good time! But what Doctors had she?


Page. Some Doctors of very good worth, but this Rabble jeers them, and laughs
them out of doors.


Art. I find by her Water she has a foul Liver, and can digest no wholesome
food: And her first digestion being bad, makes her second worse: Is she not apt
to frights?


Page. Sir, her Ladyships stomach was prittily well purged of her Canterbury
Duck, and being finely at ease, and laid to rest, a rude company of
cock-brain'd Rascals in an humor beset her house, and brake down all her
Glasse-windowes, and put her into such a fright, that she has been the worse
for it ever since.


Art. I find by her water, there has been too sudden Alterations in her
constitution: Is she not sometimes very hot, and sometimes very cold?


Page. Yes Sir, sometimes as cold as Charity, sometimes as hot as Zeal.


Art. I find obnoxious fumes rising from her stomach, and stupifying her
brain: Is she not at times very drowzie?


Page. Yes Sir, Insomuch that the common people think she is troubled with a
Liturgic.


Art. A Lethargy you mean. It is a Chronicall disease, and time must cure it.
But let her know, that so long as she entertaines this rude Rabble of
unsanctified Mechanics, She can never prosper in her health. Till she banish
them, there will be no room for me. Fare ye well.

But hear ye. Let her Fasting be frequent, and her Prayers, Common.


Glist. Sir, I shall pray for your Ladies health.


Page. Fast too.

Ex.
Glist. A fair Reward! It Is Supper time: I Will hence. My Pater Nosters shall be
like her Pence.

Ex.
Evaldus, Augusta, Bellarm. Pallad: Museus, Arts. Form. Comod. Kettreena,
Marina, Roscia, Phonilla, Tripit. All bow to the Oracle and take their places.
Enter three Pythian Virgin Priests with Censers in their hands, in Linen
Robes, and crowned with Bays. Thrice bow to the Oracle. 1. Great Apollo, we
adore thee.
2. We importune, we implore thee.
2. Thus we prostrate fall before thee.

All bow to the Oracle. 1. Sacred Phoebus draw thee nigher.
2. Grant the boon that we desire.
3. And resent our. holy Fire.

Offer their Incense. 1. Thou before whose open eye
2. All unshadow'd secrets lie,
3. Clear our doubts, and make reply.

Bow, and stepping nearer to the Oracle, bow again, and retiring back, bow
the 3. time. 1. When Evaldus shall lay down,
Shall Bellarmo wear the Crown?

Oracle, No. Bell. Apollo lies: This is the Oracle I appeal to.

Lays hand on his sword. Evald. On pain of death, keep silence there. Proceed.
2. When Evaldus shall lay down,
Shall Palladius were the Crown?

Oracle, No. Pall. Nay now Apollo's ignorant or unjust.

Eva. Silence once more. The next disturberdies. Proceed.
3. When Evaldus shall lay down,
Shall Museus wear the Crown?
Oracle, No. 1 When Evaldus shall lay down,
2 3 Whose head then shall wear the Crown?

Oracle. The Babe unborne shall end the strife,
Whose Mother is both Widow, Maid, and Wife.

Aug. The Oracle speaks Treason, and Apollo's Priests
Are all Impostors --

A flash of fire from the Oracle; A cloud of smoke; which being vanished,
Augusta is found dead in her Chair of State, her Crown struck off, conveyed
upon Kettreena's head: Bellarmo, Palladius, and Trippit, dead upon the ground,
and the 3. Pythians kneeling upon the floor. Evald. Are we all safe? Are we
not all consumed?

For. Bellarmo's stricken dead.

Kett. He Is in a trance, O chafe his Temples!

Art. Ye stand too close, Bear back, and give him air.

Com. Palladius.

Mar. Bend him, O bend him forwards.

For. He Is past recovery.

Art. I feel no Pulse.

Pho. Her eyes are open.

Ros. Methinks I feel some breath.

Art. Stand by.

Evald. Are they all dead Artesio?

Art. All three as dead as earth.

Evald. O unexampled Justice! Who can stand
Before the power of great Apollo's hand?
Augusta, let us away; Our flight may escape
Approaching after-claps: Augusta, come.
What, fallen asleep?

Art. The Queen is in a Trance.

Evald. Augusta.

Ket. Heaven bless the Queen.

Ros. She stirs not.

Ma. She breathes not.

Art. Make room, Stand farther off.

Evald. O she is dead, Is any hope of life?

Art. Sir none at all.

Evald. Augusta, dear Augusta, speak,
Move but a finger: O she is past all cure!

Ros. But where is her Crown?

Ma. Look here, upon Kettreena's head.

Mus. How came it thither?

Kett. Most Royal Sir, How this Crown came here
I cannot tell: Excuse me gracious Prince,
Who humbly lay it at your sacred feet.

Evald. Kettreena, keep it for us; keep it safe,
Till we require it, and dispose thereof.
Apollo's will must be, who give us patience
To bear his punishments: Take up the dead,
And let us see them all bestowed, and laid
In the sad Clofets of eternal rest.

Exeunt. Antony, Frank. Frank. Would may never swear if I had not rather ferve
the great Turk in his Galleys, then a Court Lady in her humors.


Ant. Sirrah, how the poor wenches trembled when we made them stay the other
pint. But is my Lady so strict Frank?


Frank. O she is a pestilent vixen when she is angry, and as proud as Lucifer.
She has been to me knowledge a whole hour by the Houre-glasse making Faces in
a Looking-glass. Sometimes putting out the nether lip, sometimes bridling in
the chinne; sometimes forming of a smile, sometimes figging up her cheeks,
sometimes kissing of her white hand, sometimes practicing a new French Curtsie.
And then Cis must be called, and then her Ladyships hair must be crispt, and
then her Ladyships face must be complexion'd, and then her Ladyships teeth must
be scaled, and then her Ladyships brows must be mullited, and then her
Ladyships Turkie-egge must be eaten with a good grace. And then her Ladyships
foysting dog must be combed, and then Cis must be sent for this dressing, and
for that petticote, and Madge must be employed for that plain Hankercher, and
then for that purl'd Gorget which Cis was filling all last night. Then fault
must be found, then Cis must be chidden, and Madge must be rated: And her
sullen Ladyship must keep her chamber all day, and at night her peevish
Ladyship must be sick and go to rest. Then at Midnight Cis must be called to
kill the Flea that keeps her Ladyship from sleeping forsooth. Then Cis must slip
on her petticote to see if the Hall-doore be shut, then down again to rate
the dogs, then down again to fetch her Ladyship some Beer. Then Cis must
look under the Bed; after that into the Closer, to see if there be never a Cat
to break her Ladyships Glasses. Insomuch that I hold it the greatest misery
in the world, next being a Lady, to be a Chambermaid. But I must away. Tony,
farewell.


Ant. Nay Frank, we'll have one sresh pint to drink Madge and Cis's Healths
before we part. Knock within. Anon, anon, presently, presently.


Frank. But Tony, Tony, Tony, let it alone, for it is Hawking time; My Hawk has
been empty pannel'd these three hours.


Knock within. Ant. I come, I come, presently, presently.
Hang Hawks, we'll have one pint.
Knock within. By and by, By and by, I come I come.

Frank. Prithee Tony be nimble then.

Ex. Now had I as liefe go a hanging as a hawking -- Whatsoere the matter is,
I ha'no mind to that sport. I Would rather have Cis in my arms, then a leash a
Partridges in my poutch: It Is a feat Girl. O that this were my marriage day! on
that condition I went barefoot to bed. Pretty Rogue! Well, I Am resolved, what
ere come on it, I will marry and I must marry, and I will marry ere two days
come to an end. Let my Lady get her a new Fawlconer, or eat Mutton if she
please. O Mutton, Mutton, Mutton! Well, I must marry, and I will marry; To day
I receive my wages, and to morrow I Will buy a License, and next day Cis and I Will
clap hands, And hey! then up go we.


Ent. Antony. Ant. Here Frank, a Health to Cis.


Drinks. Frank. Come, I Will pledge't, were a mile to the bottom. Pledges. Now
Tony, fill me a cup: A Health to Madge.


Drinks. Ant. Come away: Madge shall never go unpledg'd whilst I am worth a
Pint, nor never want while I am worth a penny.


Pledges. Frank. Thou art grown wondrous kind to day, Tony.


Ant. I think the Moone's in the Hotti-totty, and all the loving Planicles are in
Conjunction. Sirrah, I am so strangely taken within these two hours, that I
ha'much ado to keep my self honest.


Frank. Hudds Wookers, I Am in the same Predicature Tony. My Stars lend me
honesty enough to light me to bed, and keep Cis out of my way. But tell me, how
likest thou Cis?


Ant. Hougely well I perrest. As I live, it is a dainty Girl: She speaks so
wisely and her words are so well placed, and she lisps so prettily, and so
thweetely, And sirrah they say that lithping wenches are good to kith. Now tell
me thy opinion of Madge.


Frank. I tell thee Tony, she is as good a creature as ever lived in a house,
and as well beloved of the servants. Thou shall have a dainty huswife, and an
excellent Starcher, and one that my Master respects above all the rest. If his
Band be to be pinned, no body can please him but Madge; When his Corns are to
be cut, none must do it but Madge. If his Cuffe-strings are to be tied, none can
tie 'em but Madge. When his Muskadine and Eggs are to be prepared, none can
please him but Madge: When his head aches, Madge must hold it: If his back itch,
Madge must scratch it: And to her credit be it spoken, he swears, for a Foot,
and a Leg, and a dainty black eye, and a white smoothe skin, and a --


Ant. No more good Frank, thou make me mad. My Stars lend me but honesty
enough till I have opportunity to lose it.


Frank. And me but patience till Thursday.


Ant. Why Thursday?


Frank. If I breathe, Cis and I Will have a marriage day ont.


Ant. Say thou me so? Art in carnest? Give me thy hand.


Frank. I, as sure as this is flesh, and blood, and knuckles.


Ant. If Madge and I don't the like (if she be as willing as I) hang Tony. But
shall's marry in our old Clothes?


Frank. Huds diggers, I Would not stay till Friday for the Kings Wardrobe.


Ant. A match then! Give me thy clutch, Bring them bither a Thursday morning,
by break a day, and we will dispatch the business before the Crow piss. Now
Frank, here is a Health to the happy day.


(drinks. Frank. Let it come, boy.
pledges. Here Is another to the happy night.
drinks.
Ant. Come away.
pledges. Anon, anon, presently, presently.
Knock within. Farewell Frank.

Frank. Tony farewell, and remember --

Exeunt. Ant. Very very welcome, Gentlemen.
Without. A pint a Canary in the Lion, Skore!

Evald. Museus, Artesio, Form: Com: Kettreena, Rosia, Marina, Officers. Evald.
I cannot rest, Artesio, till I purge
This groaning Land of Pertenax his blood.

For. See, here the Prisoners.

Ent. Prisoners with Keepers Lact. Mercy, O mercy, gracious Prince.

Quack. Mercy, dread Sovereign, mercy.

Evald. Wretches; The way to Mercy, is Confession.
Speak truth, Are ye guilty of this murder?

Lact. Most gracious Prince, I was no Actor in it.

Quack. Nor I Contriver, may it please your grace.

For. No, She contrived, and He acted it.

Evald. Speak, is it so? Come speak the truth.

Lact. True gracious Sovereign, but we hope for mercy from your gracious hands.


Evald. Say, what Confederates had ye?

Quack. May't please your Grace, Lactusia set me on.

Lact. Trippit first called me in.

Evald. She has her punishment: Who writ the Letter?

Lact. The Queen, most Royal Sir.

Quack. Who promised on her Royal faith to stand 'twixt me and danger. Sir,
for her dear sake be gracious,


Evald. O marble hearts, to plot so vile a fact
Against such Dove-like Innocence as this.

Points to Kettreena. Well, take them hence, and see due Justice done
According to our Laws, whereof we charge
A present Execution.
Prisoners. Mercy, O Mercy. It Is the first offense.
Be gracious to us. Mercy, mercy.

Evald. Officers, Away with them.

Exeunt. Since Heaven has pleased to deprive us thus
Of our dear Consort, our beloved Queen,
We think it fit, to let our people know
That we have made a second choice, to cafe
The weighty Burden of our careful Crown.
Kettreena, bring the Crown.
Delivers it. And for thy pains,
We here accept thee for our lawful Spouse,
To be our Consort in Augusta's stead:
In pledge whereof we crown thy Royal head.
Do thou consent Kettreena?
Crowns ber. Ent. Lact. with Keepers. Lact. Be pleased most Royal Sir to Give
me leave to disburthen my conscience of a secret that concerns the State.


Evald. Speak on.

Lact. Sir, Augusta was no lawful Queen.

Mus. The woman's mad.

For. Away with her.

Lact. Good Sir be pleased to hear me out.

Evald. Speak on, speak on.

Lact. Kettreena was the lawful Queen, whom newly borne, I then her Nurse,
exchanged for Augusta your late wife, who was no other but Artesio's daughter.


Enticed by him I did it, unto which
He did corrupt me with a great reward.
That this is truth, I seal it with my blood.
Artesio, is it not so?
Evald. Artesio speak. What say to this?

Art. Sir I Am a dying man, if not by Law, by age.
I, whom my frozen blood denies to blush,
Must not be bold to lie.

Mus. I Am likely to have a fine pull of this.

Art. Lactusia speaks but truth: The Act's confessed.

Mus. Are my hopes come to this?

Art. My life or death lies in Kettreena's breast.

Evald. Officers conduct the Prisoners back, and stay
Their execution till you farther hear:
If this be so, Evaldus must resign
Both place and Crown,
(Leads up Kett. into the Chair. And now an humble Subject join

Omnes. With all the rest, and say, LONG LIVE OUR QUEEN KETTREENA.


Mus. And now Museus may go hang himself.

Kett. Being thus ordained by heavenly powers to wear
The facred Crown of unexpected Care;
And well advising, what great danger waits
Upon the Scepters of ungoverned States:
Conscious of too much weakness to command
So great a Kingdom with a single hand:
We Are pleased to choose a Consort, in whose care
The Realm has prosper'd, and to whom we dare
Commit our self and it.
Evaldus, to requite thy charge, we choose
Thee our dear Husband, and with sacred vows
We make thee partner in our unknown bed,
And set this Crown Imperial on thy head.
Crowns him. And let the tongues of our good Subjects ring
Loud peales of joy,

Omnes. LONG LIVE EVALDUS KING.

Evald. Two Crowns have blessed Evaldus in one hour.
This crowns my heart with joy:
Embraces Kett.
This crowns my head with power.
Touches the Crown. Fair Queen, Artesio's punishment we leave
To thy dispose.
Kett. The personal offense we freely pardon;
But for the public wrong, we must confine him.

Evald. And left that after-Ages
Should interrupt the right of true succession,
We charge Museus to the self-same place:
Where they shall want for nothing, but enjoy
(Excepting Freedom) their own hearts desires.
Mean while, what Art, and Industry can do
To Express our joys, and Subjects full content,
Let not be wanting: Let us bend our care
To Advance a public mirth, and to prepare
Such Triumphs, whose bright Honor might display
A panick joy, and glorify the day
Of Marriage-Royall, solemnized between
New-crown'd Evaldus, and his Royal Queen.

Exeunt. THE END.

