Regale Lectum Miseriae: OR, A KINGLY BED OF MISERY: In which is contained A
DREAM: WITH An Elegy upon the Martyrdom of CHARLES, late King of ENGLAND, of
blessed Memory.

AND Another upon the Right Honorable the Lord Capel. With a Curse against the
Enemies of Peace, and the Authors Farewell to England.

By JOHN QUARLES.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

To that Patroness of Virtue, and most illustrious Princess, ELIZABETH, The
sorrowful Daughter to our late Martyred Sovereign, CHARLES, King of England,
etc.
Most virtuous Princess:
AS this subject, which my zealous presumption presents to your serious view,
is a compound of joy and grief; so I hope it will furnish your Royal breast,
as well with the raptures of joy, as the principles of sorrow. Madam, I am
confident that I may, without adulation say, that your Royal Fathers death,
gave a life to Virtue. And as we have a sufficient cause to deplore the absence
of his Person, so we have an undeniable reason to rejoice for the presence of
his perfections, which will build everlasting Pyramids in the hearts of those,
which were his loyal Subjects. Madam, although Heaven has been pleased to
diminish your joys in this miserable Kingdom, yet no question but he will
hereafter multiply your pleasures in his own. In the mean time, may the Glories
of heaven, and the Meditations of your incomparable Fathers virtues, keep a
constant correspondency with your Royal heart, as it is the unfeigned prayers
of him, who dedicates himself to your Highnesses perfections, and is

MADAM, A sworn Servant to your Virtues, JO. QUARLES.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Have not much to say in my own defense for the weak performance of this
work, which I confess was hammered out of a disturbed mind; therefore if there
be any thing in it contrary to thy disposition, I shall desire thee to moderate
thy passion, and pardon my imbecility; for it is generally known that errors
in grief, are incident to all: as for the errors of the Press, I suppose them
pardonable, in respect that it has received many interruptions, and have,
joined with fear, are conductours to mistakes: Now Reader, my occasions beyond
Sea advise me to bid thee adieu; the worst that I can expect to suffer abroad,
is but the extremities of War; and the best that I can expect at home, is but
the worst of miseries: if therefore there be a necessity of suffering, I
conceive it to be the best of sufferings to suffer with the best of sufferers,
whose faithful Subject I am, and thy Servant, Reader, (if thou art Loyal)

JOHN QUARLES

A Dream.
MOrpheus (thou Turn-key to all humane sense)
Unlock my brain, that I may fly from hence,
Out of this Cage of sleep, let me not lie
And drown my senses in stupidity.
My thoughts surprise my thoughts, I cannot rest,
I have a Civil War within my breast;
I Am full of thoughts: what uncontroled streams
Flow from the fancies Ocean? Oh! what dreams
Have sailed into my stormy mind? And bring
No other burden with them but a King,
A King! could I but kiss that word, and not be thought
An Idolizer; it is too great a fault
To kiss his hand. Nor can I think it strange.
For times, and manners needs must have their change.
It Is true, I dreamed methoughts my watchful eyes
Observed a King, and then a sacrifice;
And ravished with that majesty and grace
I saw united in his modest face,
I ran to kiss his hand, but with a fall
I waked, and lost both King, and kiss, and all.
And thus restored to my former sense,
I thus proceeded in my thoughts; from whence
Arise these fancies, what? did fancy mean
To cause a sudden fall to intervene
Between a kiss and me? 'twas an abuse,
That runs beyond the limits of excuse.
I was enraged to think that I should miss
(Being so near his hand) so sweet a kiss.
I checked my fancy; which was too precise
To make me run so fast, yet lose the prize.
Thoughts, follow thoughts, and when the first is spent
A second rises, which does often prevent
An inconvenient action, many time
A second thought gains virtue by a crim:
The first being banished, reason thought it good
To place a second, where the first thought stood,
And then I found my active fancy play*d
The Politician, and that thought allayed
The former flames of passion in my breast.
Then was I pleased with what my thought expressed
Which was to this effect --
Me thoughts I saw
A grieved King, whose very looks were Law.
He sighed as if his tender heart had taken
A farewell of his body, and forsaken
This lower world, his star-like eyes were fixed
Upon the face of Heaven, his hands commixt.
His tongue was parsimonious, yet my ear
That was attentive) could not prevail to hear
This whis'pring echo: Oh be pleased to incline
Thy sacred ears; was ever grief life mine?
Was ever heart so sad? was ever any
So destitute of joy, that had so many
As I have had? though all be snatched from me,
Yet let me have an intetest in thee.
Oh Heaven! and there he stopped, as if his breath
Had stepped aside to entertain a death.
My soul was ravished, and the private dart
Of new-bred love, struck pity in my heart.
I could not hold, but silently bequeath
Some drops unto the ground, my soul did cleave
Unto his lips, for every word he spoke
Was ponderous, and would have easily broke
The obdurest heart; I turned away my eye,
And suddenly methoughts I did epsy
A sacrifice; which when I did behold,
My blood recoiled, and my heart grew cold:
I was transported, and methoughts the place
Whereon I stood, seemed bloody for a space:
I trembling, cast my wearied eyes about,
Thinking to find my former object out,
But he was gone; and in his room was placed
A many-headed monster, that disgraced
The very place, they vanished, then appeared
A large pretending rout, as well be-ear'd
As Balam's Ass, methoughts they did excel
The Ass in ears, but could not speak so well.
Methoughts they called a Counsel to contrive
Their high designs, and zealously dissive
Some great Offenders that they thought too wise
To live amongst such ears, such cast-up eyes.
One I observed amongst the studious race
"That had (methoughts) a bone-fire in his face:
"Another I descried amongst the pack
"That seemed to bear a Kingdom on his back:
"Another I beheld which pleased me best,
"That could not rule himself, yet ruled the rest:
"Another I espied which seemed to look
"And read, but at the wrong end of his book:
"Another I observed, which seemed to weep,
"And in conclusion, prayed himself asleep:
"Another I descried, among these Brothers,
"That vowed 'twas right, because he would please the others:
"Another he stood up, and wisely broke
"His long-kept silent lips, and thus he spoke.
Come! let us no longer now be kept in aw,
I Am sure our welfare is the Supreme Law,
A King, that is nothing but a power that is
Subordinate; the Laws are ours, not His;
Is It not the People makes a King? well, then
If we let him be King, we are fools, not Men:
For now we have him in his own made snare,
We Will keep him fast, oh that we had his Heir!
Come, let us proceed, and if our plots hit right
You shall be Lords at least, and I, a Knight.
And let Malignants prate, their Purses shall
Pay tribute for their tongues at Gold-smiths-hall:
And if they grumble at what we shall do,
We Will make them pay their lives and money too;
The day is ours, let us not abuse that power
Which Heaven has lent us; for sweet things prove sour
If not made use of, have we not been poor
And others, rich? Come let us increase our store:
Had we but our deserts, might we not crave
The privilege of all that others have?
All Is ours, and yet our miseries are such
That we are rich in little, poor in much;
Alas! our tender hearts are filled with pity
To see so many blind in one poor City;
If they would please in a true zealous fashion
To moderate their long-continued passion,
'Twould much rejoice the Saints, and we will pray
That they may live until a wiser day;
The' are very pious People, and we could
Both live, and die together, if they would
But furnish our desires with every thing
We want, and dote not too much on a King;
He Is but a man at most, and yet they must
Adore his Person, though he be unjust.
I could not choose but laugh the other day,
I 'spy'd a Cavalier that closely lay
Perdue to kiss his hand, and by and by
He starts away, and when he was as nigh
(That which they call a King) as his own length
His legs (not having that sufficient strength
His have required) received a sudden fall
And overturned himself, his King, and all:
The sight much pleased me, being very near,
I never helped the King, nor Cavalier:
I soon retreated from that happy place,
And left them both in a distracted case;
But as I went, I was so blessed to meet
An upright Sister, whose dividing feet
Srept with such innocence, that my heart
Did almost leap upon her to impart
My new-bred joy; her very looks betrayed
Her heart, indeed she was a lovely Maid;
I bowed my self, and zealously embraced
The small circumf'rence of her bending wast,
I kissed her mouth, and having done that duty,
My lips divided, and I praised her beauty;
Extremes of joy did almost make me faint:
I thought, oh! here is a Sister for a Saint;
I was amazed, my very soul did move
Between the great extremes of fear, and love;
She smiled upon me, and that very smile
Proved a Restorative, and for a while
I mused; at last my lips began to break
As that smile had licenced them to speak;
Oh! then my mouth being ram'd with words, let fly
Both wit, and language, and did soar as nigh
As our Remonstrance, oh! how I did heat
Her ears with my discourse, it was so neat
As if my ready mouth had been the School
Of language, yet she pleased to call me Fool;
But 'twas in jest I Am sure, or were it not
It Is nothing, since my good has forgot
My Sisters weakness, and indeed we men
Must bear with Sisters failings, now, and then;
They often trip in zeal, and sometimes take
A fall, and love it for the Givers sake:
Our greatest faults they will pardon for a buss,
Come, we must bear with them, they bear with us:
But after she had called me fool, she checked
Her self; I wisely owned it with neglect,
I spread my cloak upon the ground, and there
We cooled our passions in the open air:
Sister, said I, you have been pleased to spend
The name of Fool upon your faithful friend,
It was my worth you rashly did eclips,
And I Will have satisfaction from those lips
That gave the affront, let me no longer stay,
My fury will admit of no delay.
Dear Brother, she replied, if it be so
You must have satisfaction, take it below;
You soar too high at first, I must detest
Your lofty play, the middle way is best;
But if you are resolved, you shall not say
I Am obstinate; for if you will, you may:
I soon returned her thanks, and with my hand
I pulled her close, and made her understand
What I had seen: but oh how she was pleased!
Ah verily (said she) the news has eased
My longing heart. But when the King fell down
Thou were unwise thou had not snatched His Crown.
It Is rarely spoken Sister, had I had
The Crown, I should have made a gallant Lad;
Should I but sway the Scepter of this Land,
I Would make my Subjects die at my command;
I Would lop the great ones off, and make the low
Subordinate to me, I Would make them know
The reins were mine; but at the first I Would steal
Into their hearts, and fool them with my zeal.
I would declare unto the world, and take
An Oath, I acted for Religions sake:
I Would fill them full of novelties, and then
Sister thou know the common sort of men
(Like flies) will buz about my new-made light;
I Would call them Babes of grace, and make them fight
With Cerberus himself in my defense,
My Soul now tells me, it is a rare pretense:
I Would hire some babbling Preachers to infuse
Division; and to flatter them with news.
I Would plump their souls with promises, that they,
Should never fail to swear; what should I say;
I Would make my Preachers urge them all to join
And fight for God; then will their* Plate be mine:
This is an art that lies above the reach
Of every brain: I Would suffer all to preach
And sow sedition, every one should be
At least a Saint, and preach upon a Tree:
And if my great occasions should require
Large sums of money, then would I inspire
A Public Faith; and if it would not rise
That way, I Would make the bellows of Excize
To puff it up; this is a cleanly way
To sweep up money, Soldiers must have pay.
Sister, thou know* it is no disgracing stealth
To make Religion rob the Commonwealth:
What though Malignants rail at our designs,
We can extract our livings from their fines:
I Have spoke enough, now Sister, I Will divorce
My nimble tongue from this profound discourse:
Now give me leave to dedicate my heart
To thee (my Patroness) before I part.
Brother, alas! I am a harmless maid,
And we you know, are easily betrayed
By men's delusion: if your love be true,
The zeal of my affections light on you;
You know we ought to love, and none can be
More honest in their harmless loves then we,
For we may love each other in the spirit,
And pray, and preach together, and inherit
Our own desires, whilst others send their cries
To their beloveds, and yet lose the prize.
Sister, thou have exactly satisfied
My large desires: my happiness bety'd
The thriving Spirit, truly, it is a pain
To part, but that I hope to meet again:
London, (that nest of worth) that yielding place,
I am resolved to view, within the space
Of forty hours, where I intend to spare
Some time, and see some Brethren I have there.
It is a goodly place, as fame relates,
For there the Sisters live, and all the States;
Truly, the are very godly, and pretend
Just like our selves, to be a faithful friend
To King, and Monarchy, when as Alas --
And then I waked, and let the other pass
Unutter'd, but indeed I do confess
I wish that I had heard a geat deal less,
And yet (to speak the truth) I was perplexed
Because I could not hear what followed next.
This was a midnights dream, I was in pain
Till night had lulled me in her arms again,
And for the space of half a tedious hour
I was disturbed, till sleep had gained some power
Over my slumbering senses, but at last
Called to the bar of sleep, I there was cast:
I had not long in peaceful pleasure slumber'd,
Before an interposing Dream encumbered
My quiet fancy, suddenly my ear
Was filled with such a noise, as none could hear
Without much fear, as if the incurved back
Of burth'ned Atlas had begun to crack.
Me thoughts I saw the Heavens how they begun
(As if they had scorned the glory of the Sun)
To frown upon the earth, which seemed to flame
Like sulpherous Etna, from whose bowels came
Whole Regiments of Spirits which disturbed
The air, whose fury hated to be curbed;
Me thoughts they were ambitious to expel
Some Potentate, and make his seat, their Hell:
Me thoughts at last (I slumbering) seemed to hear
A single voice that whispered in my ear,
Yet thund'red in my heart, which made me groan
At every word; expressed in such a tone
Which would with great facility have turned
A Tyrants heart, or else consumed and burned
His breast to ashes, and if language could
Move pity in a flinty-soule, this would.
He bolted forth his griefs, like claps of thunder,
As if each word should cleave a heart in sunder;
His voice being guarded with a pleasing force,
I sacrificed my ears to his discourse;
Me thoughts my soul, my very ears were blessed
In giving audience, whilst he thus expressed.
Oh Heaven! oh Earth! how can they choose but frown
To see them make a football of a Crown?
How long shall I be made an aimed at mark
Of pointed envy? shall they make me dark
That I made light? and shall that light devour
The former principle? Unhappy hour
When my abused willingness was made
A Stalk-horse unto those, who have betrayed
An Island unto tyranny; whose Laws
Oppress true Subjects, and make me the Cause:
Malicious age, and will their fury have
No end, until it send me to my grve?
A grave most peaceful place, for I Am sure
There Is no Rebellion; there I Will rest secure
Where neither grief, nor care, shall dare torment
My sublime soul, there, there lies true content.
There there is the death of sorrow, and the life
Of peace, and there a period to all strife.
There Is none can mock my woes, there none can try
A King, nor make a Garrison, but I,
And what I spoke, my soul protests is true,
I am no slave to death, but unto you
My soul's my Gods, and Tyrants do your worst,
Jobs soul was free, when is body was accursed.
But you blood-thirsty Zelots, learn to know
You never can rise high, if I fall low.
I fear no threats, let torments all conjoine
Themselves, at last ye'l find them yours, not mine.
What though I suffer here, my sufferings shall
Advance my soul; May they not make you fall?
Let out my life, go make a streaming flood
And bath your selves in my diffused blood.
Let loose your Furies, give your passions breath,
And let them bait my body unto death.
I am resolved, my heart shall fly above
The reach of fear, and view the God of love;
Consider well, what glory can accrue
From my destruction, to such souls as you;
Be not too rash, but know a cause that is died
In guiltless blood cannot be justified,
A prosperous vice shall never claim a right
To perpetuity, 'twill but in-right
A total ruin, it is a greater Fame
To die with virtue, then to live with shame.
Ye seek for truth, and yet you go the way
To make the field of truth a Golgatha;
There is a great antipathy between
Faction and Peace, and yet my eyes have seen
How you (whose restless spirits still increase
With Faction) seem to study for a Peace;
Do not mistake, for they that will compose
A difference, must never do it by blows.
The want of apprehensions may discrie
You nourish Spiders, and destroy the Fly.
Who glorious in a crime, will in conclusion
Receive a curse, and with that curse confusion:
I long to be resolved, pray tell me why
Ye think ye cannot live, except I die?
Your thoughts are vain, 'twill be a tainted breath
That had it is derivation from my death.
Am I Basiliske? and can my eyes
Devour you? for you know my body lies
Subject to be destroyed, not to destroy
(By taking up of Arms) your Kingly joy:
But you suppose, if I should long survive,
I would become laborious, and contrive
Some new designs, and with my numerous forces
Divert the stream of your unlawful courses;
Make reason your Companions, walk a while,
Consult together, stride not over the style
When as the gap lies open, they are unwise
That will (when they foresee a harm) despise
Preventing means; for if you take this life
From my enjoyment, ye'le beget a strife
That will not end, and when that strife is bred,
Then will my wrongs survive, though I am dead,
And you that caused my guiltless heart to bleed
Will find another to revenge the deed;
Ask Heaven's forgiveness, for ye cannot crave
Leave to abscond your crimes, within my Grave:
Be well assured, that every drop which parts
Out of my veins, shall cleave unto your hearts
Like tangling bird-lime which will hold you fast,
And vengeance too, shall find you out at last,
Heavens all-surveying eye must needs observe
Your late unpolished actions, which deserve
As many torments as the enraged hand
Of vengeance can impose, or Heaven command:
Did I not labor with a serious breast
During the Treaty, to restore some rest
To this distempered Kingdom; but the gales
Of Malice, were oppugnant to my sails;
My heart was loaded with the large increase
Of hopeful thoughts, my soul was filled with peace
But at the last my hopes proved useless dross,
And then I lost a Crown, and found a Cross;
Heaven hear my wish, oh grant I may commence
A Doctor, in the art of Patience!
It matters not how poor my Person be,
If at the last I may be crowned with thee.
Thou know the secret corners of my heart
Which is at they disposing, for thou art
The King of Kings, and unto thee i will pay
The tribute of my soul, both night, and day.
I am thy Subject, give me grace to stand
Firmly obedient to thy just command.
When for my sins I shall receive thy blows,
Oh give me power to suffer, not oppose!
Pardon my Enemies which have been strong,
And always studious how to do me wrong:
And though they 'ave vented that which is untrue,
Father forgive, they know not what they do.
They hate their King, and are not pleased with any,
O grant, good God, they may not find too many.
The chiefest of their work, is to devour;
( Stones have usurpt their hearts, as they my power)
Against the sound of Peace, their ears are barred
Oh never sure, was Pharaohs heart so hard.
They dis-respect their King; it was not so
With Shadrach, Meshach, and Abeduego;
Their tongues have vilifi'd me oftentimes,
These three were never guilty of such Crimes;
Their hearts had vowed obedience to their King,
And never tried by force of Arms to bring
Their own Designs to pass; but their submission
Sent comfort to their souls, and much contrition
To him, whose more then seven times heated breast
Did soon regreet what his hot rage expressed.
But well, since thus it is, I Will strive to sway
The Scepter of my miseries, and lay
A good foundation, that my Foes may build
Their torments on my breast, which shall be filled
With true content, I Will labor to support,
(But yet must yield, when death shall storm the fort)
I cannot start at death, I know it brings
A finis to my ancient griefs, and sings
Anthems of Peace: how happy's he that can
Fly to his God and scorn the rage of Man:
Thunder ye Sons of Tyranny, let rage
Flash from your sulfurous souls, strive to engage
The flames of Etna too, and let them dash
Against my breast; I Will own them as a flash;
Flatter your souls, prepare your hands to do
A deed, that Heaven will not advise you to.
I pity you, my heart cannot forbear
To sigh; and Nature too, commands a tear;
Oh that my head (like to a Fountain) could
Furnish my eyes with tears, oh then I would
Begin the morning, and conclude the day
Whith Drops, and wash the black-brow'd night away;
Oh let my language whet your dull belief,
'Twas you that filled my flowing heart with grief,
And now my Torments more and more excel,
Heaven grant me breath enough to bid Farewell,
Farewell; sad word, that like a bolt of thunder
Has more then cleft my reaving heart in sunder.
Death's nothing like the sorrow which I find
Raising a tower of woe within my mind.
Thou partner of my soul, how can I die
And leave thee here to weep a Lullaby
To my indulgent babes, how can it be
That I must leave so dear a spouse as thee?
Poor hearts, If I must go and leave you all
Confused together in the common hall
Of this enraged world, what will ye do
But mourn for me, as I have mourned for you?
Oh where will you retire your selves, and spend
Your groaning hours, oh what regarding friend
Will give a minuits audience, or relieve
Your pining wants, or mean to hear you grieve?
What Nation will regard, or entertain
(A royal) though a miserable train?
This is a sorrow that divides my breast;
This is a grief that cannot be expressed
Without a fractur'd heart, this is a wound
That makes confusion active to confound.
Were it a possibility to have
Ten thousand Lions lodged within this Cave,
(This trunk of mine) they could not more torment
My heart, then this unbounded discontent;
Should all the Tyrants in the world contrive
A way to make a dying soul survive
With living pain, they never could exceed
The Tyrants of these Times in such a deed;
I have been long imprisoned; and at last
Called to the bar; how soon I may be cast
Heaven knows, not I, for they that were so bold
To bring me thither, will, if not controlled,
Force me to death, their very looks declare
Their resolutions, whilst their hearts prepare
To suck my veins; Ah thus they have betrayed me,
And smile to see how glorious they have made me
They swelled like mountains, and at last brought forth
The Mouse of Reformation, whose worth
Is seated in all lofty brains, and hurled
Through every corner of the inquiring World.
But why should I insist upon your Crimes?
May heaven forgive you, and send better times:
I know my days are short, it is therefore meet
To leave this Crown, and buy a winding- sheet.
Be gone terrestrial pleasures, for ye are
But Goalers to your Keepers, and ensnare
Your fond believers, go, my heart's no tomb
To give you burial, seek some other room;
Fly then my soul; but stay, what hand is this
That seems to hold me from my longed-for bliss?
More sorrows yet; will not the Almighty please
'T afford my soul on earth a minutes ease?
Oh thou that make my harvest full of pains,
Grant that my working soul may reap the gains;
Grief's grown a Politician, and it keeps
A strong reserve; what eye is this that weeps
These briny tears into my fluent heart,
As if those floods should drowned me e're I part?
What voice is this I seem to hear? what tones
Are these that lavish out themselves in groans?
What ails my thoughts? what near related breath
Is this that seems to breath a sudden death
Into my panting breast? methinks I hear
A female voice, cry, must I languish here?
Hard-hearted death, why art thou thus unkind
To take him hence, and leave me here behind
To weep his obsequies, draw up thy boe,
And send me whither I desire to go.
Shoot, shoot, oh Death, thou shall not be withstood,
Come, dip thy arrows in my crimson blood,
Fear not, let fly, and let thy rovers hide
Their twi-fork'd heads within my wounded side:
Oh Heaven, since thou were pleased to join our hands
And hearts together, let thy strict commands
Urge death to strike us both, that we may fly,
And dedicate our souls to eternity;
Alas, what joy, what comfort can accrue
To me, when he shall bid this world adue.
I lived within his heart, but ah, if he
Shall quit this earth, what life remains in me.
Alas sad heart, what can thou do but pine?
Never could grief be paralleled with mine;
I am the Sea of grief, all streams do tend
Toward me, for ah my sorrows know no end:
The sturdy winds of care, and trouble blows
Into my soul, my Ocean always flows
And never ebbes; oh miserable age;
How am I made a subject to their rage
Whose pare-boyl'd souls observes no other diet
But blood; and seem to rest in our disquiet;
You all-exceeding Tyrants, if ye thirst
For royal blood, be pleased to take mine first,
Mines but a draught, yee'le quickly swil it up,
Alas, it will not yield each soul a sup;
You are the fountains from whose breasts do spring
The streams of murder, and your souls can sing
Nothing but bloody notes; you can contract
The body of all mischief, and enact
What pleases you; But will you subjugate
Your legal King, whose patience is your hate;
But if you seek his fatal overthrow,
Ye'le murder more then thousands at one blow;
But why do I thus languish breath in vain,
On those whose fury have no ears? refrain
My trembling tongue; Tyrants; I Will leave you here,
And turn my thoughts to Charles, whose lif's as dear
To me, as death is cheap to you; Alas,
My heart is full, I cannot let thee pass
Without a sigh, nor can my eyes forbear
To wash thy sad remembrance with a tear.
Has Heaven decreed it? must we be divided
Dear King; and must our sorrows be derided?
Thou great Recorder of my thoughts, to thee
I will resign; command, and I will be
A subject to thy will; Oh let me have
Thy gracious pardon, then a speedy grave,
For ah, what comfort can my wasting breast
Hope to receive, when I am dispossessed
Of such a Joy? alas where shall I seat
My heart; tears are my drink, and sighs my meat,
These pallid lips of mine shall never dare
To own a smile; I Will live with grief and care,
Except my God will please to take me hence,
And make his glorious Kingdom my defense;
Was it not grief enough to be absented
Five years from him, whose absence was lamented
With real drops, yet then I could obtain
Some hopes to see him in his throne again.
But hark! methinks my Fancy seems to hear
An air of comfort breathing in my ear,
It is the voice of Charles, whose pleasing breath
Seems to advance me from the shades of death,
Methinks I hear his language, which distills
Out from the Limbick of his soul, and fills
My pining heart with a triumphing joy
His voice revives me, but his words destroy.
He thus proceeds; -- Oh thou that are the vine
Which twists about this twining heart of mine,
Approach my presence* and I will declare
How great my sufferings, and my comforts are:
First I was tossed, and banded to and fro
From place to place, permitted not to go
Without a guard, a guard that did pretend
Rather to act a murder, then defend:
Then was I hurried to that fatal place
Of London, where I know I must uncase
My willing soul, which shall rejoice, when they
That are my Judges shall presume to lay
Their accusations on me, and dcclare
My new-coyn'd faults, with their pretended care.
And to advance their plots, they first infer
I am a Tyrant, and a Murderer,
Nay, and a Traitor too; if so it be
That I Am a Tyrant, where is my Tyranny?
Or if a Murderer; I here require
To know whose blood it was that quenched my fire.
Suppose (but Heaven forbid) it should be true,
It was against my God I sinned, not you.
Oh what an Age is this, where seeming Reason
Pretends to make me Traitor, without Treason!
Death; come, and welcome, to my heart, I know
That my Redeemer lives, and that I owe
A debt to Nature, which cannot be paid
Till these condemned corpse of mine are laid;
Now grief be gone, and let my comforts take
Possession of my soul, awake, awake
My slumbring senses, I Will triumph and sing,
For I have found, that Death has lost her sting;
My soul informs me, that I must lad down
This Mortal for a true immortal Crown.
I Am ravished with delight, me thinks I have
A Heaven within my bosom, to inslave
The Hell of torments; grief must stand aloof,
Not daring to approach within my roof;
The pleasures of this world do seem to run,
And fly (like mists) before the morning Sun,
They Are all but transetory; and can lay
No claim to perpetuity, to day
They seem like messengers of Joy; to morrow
They prove sad Heralds, and proclaim a sorrow.
As for the Joves of heaven, they far sermount
My souls arithmetic, I cannot count
Those numerous, delights, which always be
Attendants to the souls eternity:
Thou great Redeemer, to whose sacred power
I now address my self, my longed for hour
Is almost come, there is but a little blase
Remains behind, and yet methinks my days
Seem tedious to my soul; I long to throw
This burden down, that presses me below.
But since thy pleasure must be done, not mine,
Call when thou please; for my soul is thine;
I Will not resist thy hand, but kiss thy rod,
I am thy Creature, thou my gracious God:
Come my indulgent Joys, and let my breath
Inhabbit in your ears before my death.
Thou Consort of my heart, why do thou wast
Those pearly dropps, why do they make such have
To leave the sweet possessions of thy eyes?
What? will thou make a watery Sacrifice?
Oh do not weep, Heaven is not pleased to see
Those gliding streams, which trickle down for me;
My tender Babes, oh why do you stand by
And imitate your Mothers stormy eye,
Restrain those tears; for every drop you shed
Falls on my moyst'ned heart, and there has bred
A brim-fill'd fountain, which at last will dround
My heart, and give your selves the greatest wound.
Let not, oh let not, your sad eyes express
So great a sorrow, for my happiness;
Cheer up; cheer up dear souls, and learn to keep
Those tears, or weep, to see your Mother weep.
Weep not for me, I Am going to receive
A lasting Crown, oh leave (for heavens sake) leave
Those heart-infringing groans, why do ye vex
My Heav'n-desiring soul, and thus perplex
Your pensive hearts, forbear, and be appeasd,
Be not displeased, with what Heaven is pleased;
Oh how can ye expect that he will fulfill
Your large desires, if thus you thwart his will?
Come smile upon me, and that smile will give
My heart a great encouragement to live,
Death's but a speedy passage from this life,
Unto a better, and concludes all strife
Between this World and us, whilst here we draw
Corrupted air we are subject to the law
Of grief and care, which daily circumvents
Discordious hearts with griping discontents.
Be not dejected at my death, but rather
Rejoice, to think that heaven will be your father,
Comfort your woeful mother, that has been
A careful Parent, and my loyal Queen;
Give her that full Obedience which is due,
And Heaven will be affectionate to you.
Oh let the fear of God be always placed
Before your eyes; Let virtus be embraced;
What ere ye do, be careful to reserve
A spotless mind, which will at last preserve
Your heaven bred souls, let not your furies rage
Into revenge, but labor to assuage
The flames of anger, let them not aspire
Beyond your reach; Passion's the worst of fire:
Be not too much addicted to the hate
Of any, but be wisely moderate,
And when your hands begin to undertake
A consequentiall work be sure to awake
Your slumbering reasons, labor to advise
With heaven and he will crown your enterprise
With full success; and if your foes should chance
To gain the day, permit your thoughts to glance
Upon your private Crimes, and learn to know
The effect can never absolutely show
The justness of a cause, for oftentimes
Just Heaven is pleased to pardon private Crimes
With public means; God knows my cause was just
And yet he laid my Armies in the dust:
Shall I repine because I daily see
My foes prevail, and triumph over me?
No, no I will not, they shall live to dye,
When I shall dye, to live and glorify
The General of Heaven, within whose Tent
I hope to rest, where Time will never be spent.
But now, ah now, these lips must bid farewell,
Methinks I hear (Deaths Orator) the Bell,
Plead for an issue, and I must not stay,
Death comes in haste, and I must post away:
Come then my tender Babes, and dearest Spouse
(Thou that were always constant to thy vows)
And let those short-lived arms of mine enclose
You all together, e're I do repose
My earth-defatigated limbs: forbear
To drench my farewell in so large a tear;
My dear Relations, if my wasting glass
Afford no sand, I must be gone; Alas
Tears cannot hold my soul; and woe may have
More privilege to take, then he that gave;
My Iourney's almost ended, and I must
Take up an Inn, and lodge my self in dust,
Then shine upon me with the beams of mirth,
That I may say, I saw a heaven on earth,
A pleasing smile, or two, will make me know
No pain in death, but if in tears you flow,
Oh then --
-- But know, my dearest, Heaven will be
A fitter husband for thee far than me.
Thou need'st not fear thy foes contriving harms
They cannot keep thee from his folding arms,
As they have done from mine; oh may we meet,
I dare not say, within a winding sheet;
For I am sure those weeping Babes will miss
The unwelcome absence of so great a bliss,
But when thy husband, heaven shall please to bring
Thy soul into his Quire, oh then we will sing
Prolonged Anthems, where we shall combine
Our souls together, in a place divine;
Till then -- oh why, why does thy trembling hand
Freeze within mine? Ah me, why do thou stand
And gaze upon me? are thy veins afray'd
To entertain thy blood? has grief betrayed
Thy fainting heart to death? will thou precede
My resolutions, give me leave to lead
The way to heaven; Alas, and will thou die
Because I cannot live? cast back thine eye
Upon thy Royal Issue, do but see
How fast their sighs do fail in tears to thee,
Oh let the sight of them revive thy heart,
Cheer up, and give me courage to depart;
For they that dye because another dies,
Usurp a Death, and make themselves a prize;
Do not, oh do not, thus torment thy soul
For my departure, if you must condole,
Condole my stay, my soul desires to be
Disolv'd (Indulgent God) and rest with thee;
A bed of Roses; that is a fading sweet,
Oh there is no comfort to a winding sheet,
A Grave's the best of Palaces; for there
Is neither whining grief nor pining care:
Why should we scorn this earth that entertains
Our wearied bones, and hides us from our pains?
Earth is a place of worth, yet would I have
Not any dote upon it but for a grave:
Now death; march bravely on, and let thy dart
Sing as it flies unto my obvious heart,
What? art thou daunted? do thou fear to kill
Because I am a King; what? daunted still?
Why do thou look so pale? what, art thou charmed
By Majesty? or has thy self disarmed
Thy self, or else art thou ashamed to do
So foul a deed, or will it thou not imbrew
Thy shaft in Royal blood? Come, lay aside
Thy fear, and shoot, or else my foes will chide:
But hold a while (nor do I bid thee stay,
Because my soul's desirous of delay)
Once more thou sole Commandresse of my breast,
Draw nere, before I fall into my rest,
Approach unto me, let these lips of mine
Intaile a farewell on those cheeks of thine,
Weep not, but let thy tender knees salute
The ground with mine let us labor to confute
Our sorrows with our prayers, and recommend
Our souls to heaven, whose glory knows no end;
Thou great, thou glorious, thou all-ruling King,
Thou Rock, thou fountain, thou eternal spring
Of Grace; we that are clothed with the night
Of sin, present our selves into thy sight,
And with unfeigned hearts devoutly pray
That thou would send thy Son to chase away
Our soul-absconding clouds, that thou may take
A pleasure to behold us, for his sake
We beg this needful grace, in whom we know
Thou art well pleased, and to whom we owe
A debt unpayable, oh therefore let
Thy satisfying mercy pay our debt;
Oh hear our prayers, which strongly do importune
Thy gracious pardon, though it was our fortune
To be unfortunate, yet let us be
Indulgent Father, fortunate with thee,
Forgive our youthful sins, and speak some peace
Unto our souls, and as our sins increase,
So let thy mercy, more, and more abound,
That having lost our sins, thou may be found;
Heal our backslidings, guide us in thy way,
That so our feet may never go astray;
Oh bless these blessings, which thy blessed hand
Bestowed upon me, let them fill the Land
With good examples, guard them from their foes
And send them patience, when thou send'st them woes.
Hear me for them, oh God, and them for me
And hear our Savior for us all, and be
A Father, and a Husband to them all,
And let me rise in mercy when I fall:
Strengthen their souls, and teach them to renew
Their patience, when my soul shall bid adue
To this infatuated world, oh let
Their hearts seclude all grief, for it is a debt
That must be paid, let thy exchequer take
Such ill-coyn'd treasure, as my soul can make,
Oh grant (dear Father) this my great request,
Then take me when thou please to thy rest.
So, now my joys, be cheerful, let us create
A heavenly mirth, and let our sorrows wait
Upon our pleasures; let our watchful eyes
Observe our Makers great Immunities.
Let Us first observe how his free hand provided
For us, before we were, how he divided
The water from the land, and made it dry
To entertain our feet, and made the sky
To give us light, and afterward he made
Poor helpless Man, that suddenly betrayed
Himself to ruin, and by deviation,
Abused the glory of his free Creation.
But see the bounty of our God above,
Who quickly turned his fury into love,
And sent a speedy balsom to make sound
The deadly anguish of so deep a wound:
And shall we be ungrateful? shall we not
Remember him, that never yet forgot
To pity us? and shall we waste our days
In vain contentions, and not give him praise
That gave us his own Son? whose willing breath
Redeemed our souls from everlasting death.
Alas, how miserable had we been,
Had his spontanious death not stepped between
Vengeance and us, and shall we then deny
What he requires, if he command that I
Retire unto him, shall my soul refuse
To run unto him, and embrace the news,
Oh no, it must not, he is accursed that shall
Desire to stay, if Heaven be pleased to call.
Death has no ears to hear complaints, it is vain
To weep for that which tears cannot regain.
You my sad standers by, when death shall send
A Message to my heart, forbear to spend
Offensive tears, but rather joy, that I
Am gone before you to Eternity;
Where now me thinks, I see you all, and hear
The lofty Seraphims salute my ear
With heav'n-bred raptures, which does even woo
My soul out of my ears, I long to go
And fill my self with melody, and sing
Perpetual Halelujahs to my King:
So, now my wasting lamp begins to blaze,
Come Death, and put a period to my days,
Let out my life, that I may fly unto
My God, and bid this loathed world adieu:
Adieu vain pleasures of unconstant earth,
Adieu false joys, and world-derived mirth:
My dear Relations, I must now express
A farewell to you all, and then address
My self to Heaven, within whose Court I shall
(My soul now tells me) shortly meet you all.
Till then enjoy what heaven shall please to give,
And rather study how to die then live.
Make use of time, and languish not in vain
Those hours which cannot be recalled again,
Comfort each other, and if fortune frown,
Smile ye at fortune, lay your sorrows down
Before the face of Heaven and he will relieve
Your pining wants: oh let your hearts not grieve
For food and raiment; labor to be true,
And he that feeds the Ravens will feed you.
Oh let your morning thoughts be sure to mount
To Heavens high Altar, give him an account
Of all your actions; they which every day
Make their accounts to God, prepare a way
To go to heaven. But time will give me leave
TO express no more; my soul begins to cleave
Unto a blessed Eternity, my heart
Declares unto me, that I must depart;
Time whets his sith: Oh do not ring my knell,
With sighs and sobs, farewell, my Joys, farewell.
So, now the Lodestone of this world shall have
No art to attract my soul, I Will not enslave
My self to earth: shall transitory toys
Surrept my soul from heavens eternal Joys?
Oh no, they shall not. Now I Will dedicate
My self to thee (my God) who did create
Both soul and body; thou that know the thoughts
And hearts of Kings, and numerates their faults,
Pardon what I have done amiss to thee,
Forgive my enemies. Thou know I Am free
From what I suffer for; thou know my hands
Are clear from blood, thou know that my Commands
Were not tyranical, thou know my breast
Was never stained with Treason; My request
O God is this, that thou would make them know
(And timely feel) what a most wilful blow
They Have given to their Consciences; oh turn
Their flaming hearts to thee, which daily burn
Against thy servants, cause them to relent;
And let their griefs induce them to repent.
Be merciful to them, as they were cruel
To me, and mine, oh quench the blazing fuel
Of their desires, gives them not their deserts,
But wash my blood from their unfountain'd hearts;
And as for me, presented to thy eyes
Supposed (as an attoning Sacrifice)
By them whose seven-years malice have contrived
My downfall; when my body is disliv'd.
Receive my soul into thy glorious Tent,
And mak't a member of thy Parliament;
Now farewell world, and dirt-composed Crowns,
Farewell earths smiles, and fortunes surly frowns.
Farewell to you that thus my life expel,
Oh may my farewell, make you all farewell.
Reader; the sound of death has made me start
Out of my slumbers, and my wak'ned heart
Trembles within me; Oh what shall we do?
Oh may I never dream, to dream thus true:
But since it is so, (kind Reader) let thy eye
Survay the paths of his sad Elegy:
Lavish not out your tears too fast, but keep
A strong reserve, your eyes must bleed, or weep.
Till then adue; and when I meet thee there,
Reader, assure thy self, I Will spend a tear.
AN ELEGY UPON That never to be forgotten CHARLES THE FIRST; Late (but too soon
Martyred) KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland.

Who with unmoved Constancy, laid down
His Life, to exchange it for a heavenly Crown.
January 30. 1648.

-- In adibus Regum Mors venit --

Printed in the Year, 1649.

AN ELEGY UPON That never to be forgotten CHARLES THE FIRST.
WHat? do I dream? or does my fancy scatter
Into my various mind a real matter?
What ails my thoughts? what uncorrected passion
Is this, that puts my Senses out of fashion?
Where am I hurried? what sanguinious place
Is this I breathe in, garnished with disgrace?
Why? what is the reason that my eyes behold
These waves of blood? Does the Red sea infold
My shivering body? Oh what stormy weather
Was that which violently tossed me hither?
Where am I now? what rubicundious light
Is this, that bloudies my amazed sight?
What Reformation's this that is newly bred,
And turns my white into so deep a red?
Awake my fancy, come delude no more,
Say; are my feet upon the English shore?
Sure not; these are usurping thoughts that rain
Within the Kingdom of a troubled brain:
If this be England, oh what alteration
Is lately bred within so blessed a Nation;
My soul is now assured; for I see
Those lofty Structures where mild Majesty
Did once recide; abounding with a flood
That swells (and almost moates them round) with blood,
England, sad object, that wer'^ lately crowned
With a most glorious prince; how art 'thou drowned
In Royal blood? was not thy master-veine
Opened of late; ah, who can stopped again?
Look round about thee, and thou shall descry
How every face imports an Elegy.
Review thy self, see how thou art ingrain'd
With guiltless blood? was ever Land so stained?
Needs must your hearts expect a cloudy night
Now Sol is set, and Cynthia wants her light:
And do thou think, O England to immure
Thy self in blood, and always rest secure?
Oh no, assure thy self there is a hand
That rules above, which will correct thy land:
Be well advised, oh Nation; learn to know
That language cannot ebb, when blood shall flow
All hearts all eyes, all hands, all tongues, all Quillt
Will think, will weep, will write, and speak their wills
I Will not invoke; this Subject will invite
The obdurest hearts, and teach that pen to write
Which never framed a Letter, and infuse
The seed of Life, into a barren Muse*
Thou gre^^ Instructor, teach me to distill
An Eagles Uertues, with an Eagles quil:
Raised by a f^ll, my Muse begins to sing
The melancholy farewels of a KING.
And is he gone I did not the doleful Bells
Dissolve, when as they t^ld his sad Farewills.
If he be gone? what language can there be
Remaining in this Land, except, Ah me.
Ah me, Ah lass, how is this Realm unblest
In such a loss? -- I cannot speak the rest:
My Heart is full of Arrows shot of late
From the stiff Bow of a commanding STATE,
Each wound is mortal yet in spite of pain
I Will pluck them out, and shoot them back again;
And when my tongue shall empty out my heart,
Let Death surprise me with a single Dart*
I Will strive to outface Rebellion, and my eyes
Shall s(...)n all new invented Tyrannies;
Sorrow will not be tongue tied, tides must run
Their usual courses, till their strength is don *
I have a stream of grief within my breast,
That tumbles up and down, and cannot rest:
I am resolved let death distwade) to speak
What Reason dictate* or my heart must break*
I Will mount the Stage let standers by behold
My Actions, for my sorrows must be bold;
I fear not those, whose powers may control
The language of my tongue, but not my soul.
Advance dejected souls, hear reason call,
Let not the truth be passive, though we fall.
Blush not to own those tears, which you have spent
In private, for a Public discontent;
Let not your tongues be (Prisoners to your lips
When Justice calls, oh let not fear eclipse
The light of truth, rouse up your selves draw near
When Justice finds a Tongue find you an ear.
The day's expired, bright Sal has drawn his head
Within the curtains of his Tethean bed,
Where shall we hide our slumbring souls, and lay
Our wearied limbs, till he renews the day?
A day! Alas, have not our wretched eyes
Seen a great fall? can we expect a Rise?
Should Heaven (who justly may) command his powers
TO expel this light, as we have lately ones,
What should we do? where should we find a sun,
That have by too much doing quite undone
Our wilful selves? by snuffing out that light
Which he inspired, to guard us from the night
Of sad confusion, ah, how could we spoil
So pure a lamp, and so usurp that oil
Which was ordained to nourish us? We run
To light a Candle, and put out the Sun;
In vain we waste our times, and range about
To look for new lights, now the old Light's out,
We seek; and we may find; but heaven knows when
Old lights were made by God, and new by men.
Shake England for thy Grand Vpholders down,
Thy feet have lately spurned against thy Crown,
Thy hands are daubed with blood, one ruin calls
An other, to the others funerals;
Destruction thunders, and the earth is filled
With doleful echoes; blood that has been spilled
By unjust hands (like seas) begin to roar,
As if 'twould take revenge upon the shore:
The whistling woods and their subjected springs
Sends forth Elegious blasts, each corner rings
With unaccustomed sounds; All things express
(By their prognosticating looks) unhappiness;
Deploring Philomel does now repeare
Contristed notes, upon her Thorny seat;
She has forgot those sweet no turnall notes.
Which lately charmed all sorrow, now she dotes
Upon her woeful, he prolixed tones,
And finds no sweetness in her bitter groans:
The Commons of the air conspire to throw
Their Sovereign down, and will not fly so low
As formerly; but are resolved to be
Oppugnant to the Eagles Majesty.
How pregnant is Rebellion every where,
Not only here on earth, but in the air?
Can thunder roar, and not the lofty sound
Be heard? can Cedar. fall unto the ground,
And not be seen? can Mountains shrink away
And not observed? nor can there be a day
Without a Sun? nor can there be a night
Without some darknesie? can there be a light
Put our unwanted? or can murder be
Committed upon sacred Majesty,
And not lamented? sure no humane heart
Can be so brazen, as not to impart
Some sorrow to the world, for such a loss,
When gold is gone, how useless is the dross:
Now mournful Muses, light your Torches all,
TO attend your glory to his Funeral;
Shall, our Mecaenas dye, and you stand still,
And not appear upon Parnassus bill?
Away, away, invoke Apolloes aid,
Tell him that your Mecaenas was betrayed
To an unlawful death, and you desire
To sacrifice a verse; and then retire:
Could I translate my heart into a verse,
I Would pin it with my soul upon his hearse.
Could I command the world, I Would make it burn
Like a pure lamp upon his sacred Vrne:
Could I command all eyes, I Would have them make
(As a memorial for great Charles his sake)
A sea of tears, that after ages, may
Lament to see, but not lament to say
He died without a tear; and it should be
Called the salt sea of flowing Loyalty:
Could I command all hearts, I Would make them spend
Some drops of blood upon his tomb, and send
Millions of sighs to Heaven, that may express
His death was Englands great unhappiness;
Could I command all tongues, I Would make them run
Divisions on his praise, till time were done;
Could I command all hands, I Would strike them dead
Because they should not rise against their head.
Could I command all feet, I Would make them go
And give the Son that duty which they owe
To his deserts --.
I Am in a desert, and I know not where
To guide my steps, that path which seems most fair,
Broves most pernicious to me, and will lend
My feet a good beginning, but no end.
Great Charl's, oh happy word, but what is the next
(Bad's the application of so good a Text)
Is dead; most killing word; what is he dead?
Nay more (if more may be) he is murdered:
Ah then my thoughts are murdered; my sad eyes
Shall never cease to weep his Obsequies:
I Will turn this place into a bubling spring
Of briny tears; and then I Will freely bring
A Sacrifice to sorrow, which shall be
A flaming heart that is crowned with Loyalty:
Now could I spend an age in thoughts, and tire
The night with sighs, methinks I could inspire
Sorrow it self, and teach it to proclaim
What ruin waits upon our new-bred flame:
But it is in vain, persuasions have no power
On them, whose resolutions can devour
Both Law and Reason, two most horrid crimes
In these pernicious, these contentious times:
Come then my thoughts, and let us ruminate
Upon our sorrows; oh unhappy Fate,
Why did thou snuffle out Charles his royal blaze
In the Aurora of his well-spent days?
But it is in vain to blame thee, for thy hand
Cannot refrain to strike, if God command;
Heaven saw he was too good to be enjoyed
By us; but not too good to be destroyed
For his own glory; let us rejoice, we had
So good a King; but grieve to think how bad
We used his goodness; we may justly say,
He gave in mercy, what he took away
In Judgment, for his own commands appointed
We should not touch, (much more slay) his anointed
And yet we have, (as if our hearts had sworn
To contradict his will) abused and torn
His own Vicegerent, to whose thriving hand
He gave the Scepter of a glorious Land:
But now (unhappy land) thy glories fled,
Thy Crown is fallen, and thy Charles is dead;
Go then, deplore thy self, whilst others sing
The living virtues of thy martyred King;
His glory shall survive with Fame, when they
Shall lie forgotten in a heap of Clay
That were the Authors of his death, their bones
Shall turn to ashes, as their hearts are stones:
But did my tongue express that they should be
Forgot; oh no, their long-lived Tyranny
Shall be perpetual; hark, misfortune sings
The worst of Tyrants, killed the best of Kings
He was the best; what impious tongue shall dare
To contradict my language, or impare
His living worth, and they that go about
To blast his Fame, oh may their tongues drop out.
Pardon oh Heavens, if passion make me break
Into extremes, who can forbear to speak
In such a lawful cause? may we not claim
A Privilege to speak in Charles his name.
Is any timorous? then let them keep
Their language, and reserve themselves to weep;
Is any Joyful? let them keep their mirth
To please the Tyrants of this groaning earth.
Is any sorry? let them keep their grief
Til Heaven shall please to send their souls relief;
Did ever Island find so great a loss?
Was ever Nation crowned with such a cross?
Could ever Kingdom boast they had a Prince
That could be more laborious to convince
The errors of his times, or contradict
The dictates of his rage, or be more strict
In his Devotions; never did Prince inherit
So rich a Crown, with so enriched a Spirit.
He was the best of Conquerors; he made
Conquests of hearts, although he was betrayed
By some inferior spirits, which he found
Had lately started from the lowely ground,
And were not worth a Conquest; yet he gave
Them more respect then their deserts could crave.
None could observe during the time he stood
Before his Pilates: that his royal blood
Moved into fury, but his heart was prone
To hear their speeches, and retort his own;
But when they found his language did increase
With sense, he was desired to hold his peace,
And some related that their furies bred,
Because his at enclosed his royal head.
Good God, what times are these, when subjects dare
Presume to make their Sovereign stand bare;
And when they sent him from their new made place
Of Justice, basely spit upon his face,
But he whose patience could admit no date,
Conquered their envies and subdued their hate
Ah who could blame our Sovereign to decline
Their ways, and say, were ever grief like mine?
First when his feet approached into the Hall,
The ill-tun'd tongues of sycophants would call
Aloud for Justice, though they never knew
What Justice was, yet still they would renew
Their most confounding, and discordious noates,
And baul for Justice with their sluce-like throats;
But he, that Lamb of Patience, never vented
A word of anger, but with speed prevented
Their louder cries, and with a pleasing breath
Replied; If Justice can be gained by death,
Yea shall not want it, only be content,
Yea may as soon endeavor to repent,
As now ye do to spil my blood; advise,
Your souls will suffer for your forward cries;
Having thus spoke, immediately he stepped
Unto the bar, where for a time he kept
Himself in silence; like a sun he shined
Amongst those gloomy clouds which had combined
Themselves together, plotting to disgrace
His orient luster, and impul'd his face:
And with a thundering voice, they first salute
His ears with Tyrant, Traitor, and impute
Murder unto him: With a pleasing smile
He looked upon them, and a little while
He made a pause; but by and by, he broke
His silent lips, and moderatly spoke
To this effect: May I desire to know
From whence this great Authority does flow
That you pretend to act by? If it be
Derivative; I shall desire to see,
And know from whom; till then I shall deny
To give my tongue a license to reply.
You are our Prisoner Sir, you ought not to
Demand what your appointed Judges do,
For our Authority it is known at large
Unto our selves; pray answer to your Charge,
Or else we shall proceed. I thought to have seen
My Lords and Peers together, that had been
A means to make my fading hopes renew,
For most of them I know, but none of you.
As for my Charge, I own i^ as a thing
Of small concernment, as I am a King
You cannot try me: what your new made laws
May do, I know not, have a care and pause
Before you act in Blood, strive to convince
Your stubborn hearts, and know, I am your Prince;
Y' are but abortive Judges, have a care,
Ye may be tangled in your own made snare;
Proceed: ye can but throw me to the earth,
They which p(...), needs must own the birth;
God knows my heart; it is not my life that I
Account of, but my Subjects Liberty,
That Is all that I desire. -- Sir, now we must
A little interrupt You: It Is unjust
A Prisoner (as you are) should be allowed
So great a Privilege: You Have disavow'd
Our known Authority, and make a sport
Of real Justice, and affront the Court;
Feed not your guilty heart with such delay.
Waste no more time, for Justice will not stay.
Pray give me leave to speak, great Charles replied.
You ought not, Sir, to speak: w' are satisfied
Already of your guilt, you must prepare
To hear your Sentence, and you must forbear
Your vain and weak discourses. Is it so,
He then replied, that I am forced to go
Away unheard (Alas, it is not the voice
Of Death can daunt my breast, ye may rejoice
At my destruction, though you have no ear
To entertain my language, Heaven will hear.
Take notice People, that you King's denied
To speak: Was ever Justice ruled by pride?
Thus having laid the burden of their spite
Upon his head, they sent him from their ^ight.
But he (that was inspired by Heaven) did show
A countenance that did import their woe,
More then a sorrow for his death, his face
Was died with honor, theirs with foul disgrace;
His patience was their passions, and they found
His mind a kingdom, where his heart was crowned
With constant love: Oh that I could rehearse
His living Virtues with a living Verse!
But now my Pen must leave Him for a time,
And dwell upon the mountains of that crime
Which they committed: Put a King to death!
Oh horrid action! what venomous breath
Pronounced that fatal Sentence? May it live
To poison Scorpions, and not dare to give
The least of sounds to any humane ear.
Sure he was deaf himself, and could not hear
The cadence of his language: for the sound
Had been sufficient to inflict a wound
Within his marble heart: Oh such a deed
Stabs Kingdoms to the hearts, and makes them bleed
Themselves to death; to lose so good a King,
By such base means, will prove a viperous sting
To this detested Land. --
-- If Kings transgress,
And prove Tyrannical, we must address
Our selves to Heaven, and by our Prayers desire
The assistance of his mercy to inspire
Our souls with true obedience, that we may
Strengthen our selves, and passively obey
What actively we cannot; for Kings reign
By God, we therefore ought not to maintain
Our rage against them: He that shall control
The actions of a King, burdens his Soul
With a most ponderous crime: If to suppose
But ill of Kings be sin; oh how have those
Transgressed that have destroyed their King, and made
Him subject to bad Subjects, that betrayed
Their souls to Tyranny! Oh Heaven forgive
What they have done, and let their sorrows live
Within their Souls; Oh make them to behold
Their errors; Let not Conquest make them bold.
Here stop my Muse, lets labor to accost
Our former Glory, Charles, though we have lost
His sacred Person, yet we must not lose
His happy memory: Ah, who can choose
But sigh, when as they seat his glorious name
Within their serious thoughts! If ever Fame
Received a Crown, it was from Him, whose worth
My wearied Quil's too weak to blazon forth:
And when the best of my endeavour's done
I shall but light a Candle to the Sun.
Yet will I spend my strength; a feeble light
Placed by a greater, makes it shine more bright.
He was ('it is not unknown to all the earth)
A Prince by virtue, and a Prince by birth.
In the exordium of his Reign he swaid
The Scepter of this Land (till time betrayed
Cupid and Mars) with a Majestic brow,
And made his cheerful subjects hearts to bo^
In honor, and it could not be expressed
Whether he ruled himself or Subjects best.
He was a Prince, whose life and conversation
Impoverished vices, and enriched his Nation
With good examples; Honor never found
So sweet an harbor, Virtue never crowned
So rare a heart; Love reigned within his eye,
And there was clothed with Divinity:
Virtue and Majesty did seem to strive
Within his Royal breast, which should survive
In greatest Glory: but 'twas soon decided,
Martha and Mary would not be divided:
No more would they, there was a sympathy
Between them both; for if the one should die,
The other could not live, they were combined
Within his breast, and could not be disjoynd.
O happy is that Land, where Virtue shall
Meet Majesty within a Princes Hall.
He was a King not only over Land,
But over Passion, for he could command
His Royal Self, and when approaching trouble
Assaild his mind, his wisdom would redouble
His present patience, and he would allow
The worst of sorrows, a contented brow;
His undivided soul was always free
To propagate the works of Piety
His heart was still attracted to good motions,
By the true Loadstone of his firm devotions.
He always studied how to recompense
Good deeds with full rewards: as for offense,
He sooner would forgive it, then impose
A punishment; his meekness made his foes
Grow supercilious, and at last they made
A private snare, and zealously betrayed
The Lord of Englands life, whose free consent
Granted them a Triennial Parliament
To salve the Kingdoms grievances: but they
Took not the grievances, but Him away.
It could not be distinguished which did reign
Mars or Apollo most, within his brain:
He was a Caesar, and the equal fame
Of War and Wisdom dwelt upon his Name:
As for his Martial parts, Edgehill will bear
An everlasting record, how his care
And resolution did maintain that Fight,
Till day submitted to the incroaching night.
Although Heavens General was pleased to bring
Such small conditions to so great a King,
We must not judge, that it is success that can
Procure the title of a valiant man;
For that will but instruct him how to fly
Upon the wings of popularity.
As for his Theologick parts, I may
Without presumption absolute say,
He was a second David, and could raise
A lofty strain, to sing his Makers praise:
Read but his Meditations, and you will find
His breast attained an heav'n-enameld mind.
Now Reader, close thine eyes, and do not read
My following lines, except thy heart can bleed,
And thou not die. Ah, here is a mournful text,
Imports a death: Suppose what follows next,
And it is enough. Oh that I could ingrosse
The Language of the world, to express this loss!
Break hearts, weep eyes, lament your Sovereign's
And let Him swim unto his Funeral
In Subjects tears; oh had you seen his feet
Mounted the stage of blood, and run to meet
The fury of his foes, and how his breath
Proclaimed a correspondency with death;
Oh then thy diving heart must needs have found
The depth of sorrow, and received a wound
That Time could not recure, oh such a sight
Had been sufficient to have made a night
Within this little world, had thou but seen
What soule-defending patience stood between
Passion and him: with what a pleasing grace,
( As if that death had blushed within his face)
He looked upon his people, which surrounded
His mourning Scaffold, whilst his thoughts abounded
With heavenly ruptures; his Angellike voice
Taught Joy to weep and sorrow to rejoice;
Tears blinded many, that they could not see
So bloody, so abhorred a Tragedy,
He looked as if he rather came to view
His Subjects, then to bid them all adue;
Fear had no habitation in his breast,
And what he spoke, was readily expressed:
Heavens sacred Orator divinely typp'd
His tongue with golden languages, and dipped
His soul in Loves sweet fountain, so that all
That loved, admired and grieved to see him fall.
Whil or he (submitting Prince) devoutly prayed
That Heaven would pardon those that had betrayed
His body to the grave; as from his soul
He had forgave them all, and did condole
Their sad conditions; having spent his breath,
He yielded (like a Lamb) unto his death.
Much more he utterd; but my burdened Quill
Recoils, and will not prosecute my will:
My Pen and I must now abrubtly part,
Pardon ( oh Reader) for love binds my heart
With chains of sorrow: let me crave, what I
Shall want in Language, that thou will supply
In Meditation; But before I let
My Quill desert my hand, I Will make it set
This Tragi* comic period to my story,
Charles lived in trouble, and he died in glory.
FINIS.
Habakkuk chap.1. ver.13. Thou art of purer eyes (O God) then to behold evil,
and can not look on iniquity: Wherefore look thou upon them that deal
treacherously, and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is
more righteous then they?
AN EPITAPH.
Upon
Caines, having killed their Abel, laid
Him underneath, whom they betrayed
And forced to death (Kind Reader) know
Religion was his overthrow.
Lament, lament, this fatal loss,
England never had a Cross
So Great as This; Let every Eye
Keep tears to weep his Elegy.
I may presume to say, a Tomb
Never had a richer womb.
Go not till your sorrows have
Offered tears unto his grave;
Fail not to spend some real groans,
Except your hearts are turned to stones
Now methinkes his ashes cries
Guiltless blood's a Sacrifice,
London lately lost her heart,
And is sick in every part,
Nothing could appease but blood,
Death took her King, and left a flood.
FINIS.
AN ELEGY UPON The Right Honorable, the LORD CAPELL, Baron of Hadham; Who was
beheaded at Westminster, for maintaining the ancient and fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom of ENGLAND.
March the 9. 1648.

Heu^jrc^t, aut fuctis vivat ubique suis. Disturb me not, my thoughts are
mounting high
To build a Nest for Capells memory.
Fool that I am, I do not mean, a Nest,
No, nor a Kingdom neither that is the least
Of all my thoughts, It is a world, that shall
Be ruled by Capells echo; hollow all
Ye sacred Muses, and conspire to bring
Matterialls to this work, and learn to sing;
For should ye weep, your eyes might undertake
To drown that world, which I intend to make.
Forbear; your tears are useless, you must now
Gaze upon death with an undaunted brow,
Capell has taught us how to entertain
The palled looks of Mars, by him we gain
The art of dying, and from him we have
The diffinition of a Noble Grave;
Rare soul, I say, thy ever active Fame
Shall build a world upon thy pregnant name,
And every Letter of thy Name shall raise
A spacious kingdom, where thy ample praise
Shall be recorded, every harkening ear
Shall prove Ambitious, and admire to hear:
'Twill be a glory, when the world shall say
'Twas bravely done, his Sovereign lead the way,
And he (as valiant Soldiers ought to do)
Marched boldly after, and was always true
To sacred Majesty; his Noble breath
Disdained the fear of a Tyrannick death;
Death added life unto his thoughts, for he
Contemned a life, if bought with infamy.
The very birds shall learn to prate, and sing,
How Capell suffered for his Royal King.
Rouse then ye stupid sons of Morpheus; Let
This shining Sun of English valor set
And rise within your horizons, your hearts
I mean, and teach you how to sing in parts
The Anthems of his worth; Oh understand
That this was he, whose death has filled the land
With living sorrow; this was he, whose glory
Shall lend the world an everlasting story.
You lust-obeying Tarquins, that permit
And tolerate your pleasures, to commit
Adulterated actions, and command
England, our poor Lucretia, to stand
Subject to our libidinous desires,
And cannot help her self, heaven grant your fires
May soon expire, that at the last we may
(Like Tarquins) see you banished quite away,
Say, will your hung'ry appetites receive
No satisfaction? have you vowed to leave
No Noble blood? Alas how can your meek
And tender consciences; thus roar. and seek
Like greedy Lions, senting up and down
To find your prey in every Royal Town.
Where is that zeal which was in former times
A golden pretext, to your drossy crimes?
Do you not think of heaven? have ye forgot*
There is a God? or will ye own him not;
Where is Religion (your upholder) fled?
What? is that murdered too; or have ye spread
A veil upon her, that she may not be
Observed, or owned, but in necessity,
Has not Religion all this while maintained
Your unjust cause? what mony's ye have gained
Was for Religions sake, which still supplyd
Your wants, but now you are full, that is laid.
Unhappy is that land, whose people braggs,
That they have put Religion up in baggs.
Money precedes Religion now; but stay
Precipitating quil, I Have lost my way,
Nay, and my subject too, how came my mind
Thus much to deviate; oh where shall I find
My former subject? shall my thoughts object
His memory, and own him with Neglect:
No, no, they shall not come my Muse, repose
Let Us think upon your Friend and let our foes
Remember us, Capell, thy worth shall fill
The black mouthed concave of my mourning quil.
He was a Pompie, but received his harm
From Tyrants, not from Caesar's noble arm.
He had an Army in his mind, could call
Virtue to be their bold faced General;
He had no Pride, no Faction to create
Or nurse division in his peaceful State;
He had a Court of Justice in his breast,
But not to tyrannize to make inquest
After the sons of Loyalty, or bring
Illegal Judgments: to their legal King;
He had a heart that never used to hide
The heat of envy, or the flames of Pride,
He had a Conscience never used to exact
Upon a widdowed Kingdom, or extract
The treasures of a Nation, to defray
His own desires, he never used to play
The Devil in the habit of a Saint,
Or teach his Agitators how to paint
A vice with pleasing colors, or prepare
His ready eyes to shed a zealous tear
With a false heart, he never strived to please,
And turn the Peoples hearts with Peters-Keyes;
And to conclude, he never would desire
Other men's fuels to maintain his fire;
Now Reader, thou have heard he had a mind
Not morgag'd unto baseness, but inclined
To honorable actions; It was he
That was the Emblem of true Charity,
Yet some unworthy Spirit have expressed
He was a son of Rome, because his breast
Was filled with pity, and would still relieve
The Poor, whose wants, instructed him to grieve.
False are those base reports, he was a man
Always reputed a great Puritan,
And not a Papist, and he had a care
To have that hated Book of Common prayer
Read to his Family, himself would join
His aid to any thing that was Divine;
The Church did seldom fail to entertain
His Hoble self, and his domestique train,
Until this blessed Reformation spread
It self abroad and struck Religion dead;
And then indeed his Conscience would refuse
To let him hear some Rabshekah abuse
His Gods Anointed, and his real heart
Could not endure to hear time-servers dart
Arrows of envy at his King, and rail
Aginst his Consort, laboring to intaile
Disgrace upon their names, and fill the earth
With heaps of errors, and rebellious mirth;
These things* his heart abhorred, he could not hear
His King abused with a patient ear:
He was the soul of Loyalty, his mind
Was always active: for he still inclined
His thoughts to goodness, striving how to bring
Peace to his Country, honor to his King?
He was a man that always used to fly
Upon the wings of true sollidity;
He was complete, and rich in every part,
His tongue was never traitor to his heart;
But now, ah now (I shall make death too proud
To speak it he has lately left this cloud,
This world of envy, and is gone to inherit
Those joys which wait upon a noble Spirit:
Now, now he is gone to heavens sublimer court,
Where Justice lives, a place were false report,
Shall find no ear; a place where none shall dye
For being rich, or wise; their Loyalty
Shall be respected; there, the weeping eyes.
Of Orphans shall be pitied; there, the cries
Of Ladies pleading for their Lords, shall find
A full respect; where Virtue is refinde,
There must be happiness, oh think but where
It is, (kind Reader) and brave Capels there:
There, there, he rests who stoutly trod the stage
Of blood, whose life, whose death no age
Will ever parallel his courage gave
A life to death, and pleasure to a grave;
He had a pleasing countenance, his face
Did seem to blush, but 'twas for their disgrace,
And not his guilt, he hever seemed to express
The least of fear, but hasted to address
Himself to heaven, and like a Stagge, he bay'd
At his unsatisfied hounds and laid
His use before them, and contemned their power
Because he knew they only could devour
His little world; but for his soul, that went
Before a more conscientious Paliament,
Where now he rests in peacefulness, and doubles
His pleasures, whilst his foes survive in troubles,
There rest heroic Capell, and enjoy
Those rich delights which time cannot destroy;
Rest thou, whilst those are restless which denied
To let thee rest on earth, whose hearts are tied
In bloody fetters, which conglutinates
Their souls, and leads them to the worst of Fates.
But now my Quil grows weak, I must forsake
These sable paths, I dare not undertake
So great a journey, for my feeble Pen
Begins to stagger, grief can teach me when
I shall begin, but will not prove my friend,
And lead my sorrows to a peaceful end:
My thoughts increase, this subject would infuse
A youthful life, into an ancient Muse.
My heart's composed of raptures, and my hand
Receivs new strength; methinks I could command
The spacious world, and teach it to express
His praise on earth, though not his happiness
In Heaven, where now I Will leave him, and retire;
I Will cease to write, and practice to admire.
Ye have killed, and condemned the Just, and he does not resist you. Jam. 5.6.
AN EPITAPH.
UPON

The Right Honorable.
A tower is fallen, and it lies
Represented to thy eyes:
Therefore, Reader, if thy breath
Had an interest in his death,
Vnfix thy thoughts, and post away,
Reason forbids a Tyrants stay:
Lavish out your hearty cries,
Open wide your flowing eyes,
Record his worth, and let all hearts
Doat upon his living parts:
Can any think upon his Name,
And not labor to proclaim
Perpetual praises to his worth,
Engaging hearts to set him forth:
Let all men say, and not repent,
Lo here lies Murders complement
Dignum laud virum musa vetat mori. -- A CURSE AGAINST The Enemies of PEACE.
PEace, peace, Rebellious Vipers; you that cry*
Advance Mechanics, down with Majesty,
Cease your vain wishes, may ye never rest,
That love no Peace; nay, may ye never be blessed
That envy Sion; ah I shall Sions glory
Be thus abstracted, and thus made a story
To after-ages; has your hungry zeal
Devoured all your senses at one meal?
What do ye mean? do ye intend to try
A Reformation with Phlebotomy?
Or has your hell-bred thoughts found out a way
To turn a Canaan, to a Golgotha?
Has the Tartarian Counselor invented
Such thriving plots that cannot be prevented.
Leave off base acts Mechanics, and begin
To deal uprightly, and reform within:
Bury your aged crimes, and then go call
Your straggling senses to the funeral.
Thus I advise you, if this will not do,
Assure your selves I Will learn to curse you too.
May heaven whose frowning countenance does show
An angry resolution, overthrow
You, and your prick-ear'd Progeny, and make
Your children suffer for their parents sake;
May ye all beg, and wander up and down
Like vagabonds, be lashed from Town to Town;
And may the Loadstones of your crimes attract
Ten thousand plagues, and may those plagues exact
Upon your lavish souls, let impious Fate
Blush, if she chance to make you fortunate.
May torments pursue torments, and still grow.
Till Rithmatick be non-plust, and overthrow
Your treason-loaded hearts: And if this Curse
Will not succeed, may't yield unto a worse
For you, that this declining age may see
The just rewards of your impiety.
Let baseness be entayl'd unto your names,
Too strong for all recovery; Let shames
And lasting infamies remain
In deeper Characters then that of Cain.
May your souls burn, till heaven shall think it good
To quench them in your generations blood,
That all the world may hear you hiss, and cry
Who loved no Peace, in Peace shall never dye.
THE AUTHORS FAREWELL TO ENGLAND.
ENgland, farewell; the affections that I bear
To thee, I cannot name without a tear;
I must be gon' my troubled Conscience loathes
To stain it is welfare with thy new-made oaths,
Heaven knows my heart, I truly hate disorders,
And pity them that live within thy borders.
As for my self, I cannot stoop so low,
To be subordinate to them I know
Are but inferiors, though they have of late
Converted Monarch^ into a State;
Though heaven conce^ls his anger for a time,
Giving them leave to doat upon a crime;
A day will come to plague their souls, and then
They Will prove but devils in the shapes of men.
And so farewell, poor England, quite farewell
Where Furies reign, there needs must be a hell.
Anglia, jam quantum, quantum mutata vetustas,
Nunt caput as sceleris, qui caput orbis erat.
FINIS.

