QUERIES OF SOME TENDER Conscienced CHRISTIANS.

About the late Protestation, commended to them by the House of Commons, now
Assembled in the High and Honorable Court of Parliament,

Wherein they desire to be resolved, Concerning 1. The Authority imposing it.
2. The necessity of it. 3. The danger of it. 4. Whether it can be taken in
Faith.


As also Certain Queries concerning the Ambiguity thereof, appearing in most,
if not in all the several Branches thereof.

Together with a Form of such an interpretation of it, as may safely be taken,
and does not go against the literal Sense.

Written by a Learned Divine.

Printed 1642.

The Queries of certain tender-Conscienced Christians, concerning the late
Protestation, commended to them by the House of Commons, now Assembled in the
High and Honorable Court of Parliament wherein they humbly crave a clear
satisfaction from their abler brethren, that they may take it with a well
grounded and cheerful Conscience.
FIrst, as concerning the Authority of it, whether it comes sufficiently
authorized to be imposed upon any, unless by the joint consent of his sacred
Majesty, and both Houses of that High and Honorable Court both Head and
Members; We do not hereby intend to charge any with the guilt of combination
against Authority, but in the tenderness of our consciences, humbly to
signify our just scruples about the authority imposing it, and the contents of
it; if it be said, it is not to be imposed on any, then we hope none can justly
blame us; for using our lawful liberty, and refusal of that, which is not
imposed on us.

Secondly, concerning the Necessity of it; what need is there of urging or
taking a Protestation at this time; since Oaths, sacred Bonds, are not to be
taken without urgent necessity, unless we will take the Name of God in Vain:
and though the prudence of the contrivers may see a necessity to commend it,
yet it is no wonder if such silly ones as we, see not the necessity of taking
it, until they shall be pleased to impart their reasons. The conscientious
will hold them selves bound to maintain the Doctrine established, power of
Parliaments, and liberty of Subjects without it, all others will slight it: we
think in all humility love a stronger bond then compulsion, and other means
more effectual for holding out of Popery, namely diligent Preaching, Prayer,
Humiliation, and Reformation, whereby we may increase in the knowledge of the
Truth, and the ability to defend us against the enemies of it. But for
Ministers it seems less needful, who have already subscribed and sworn, and
subscribed to the Doctrine of the Church of England against Popery, against
whom sufficient Provisoes are made in case they revolt.

3. Thirdly what danger by multiplying Oaths? where diverse for fear may be
forced to take them, Reluctante conscientia. Most do make too little conscience
of them, and may endanger the land by drawing on it a Judgment for their
slighting such a sacred bond, or violation of it, For Oaths the Land mournes,
Ier. 25.10. Whereupon Saint Austin in his second Sermon, De verbis Apostoli,
Falsa juraetio exitiosa, vera iuratio periculosa, nulla iuratio secura est,
Above all things my Brethren, swear not, Isaiah 5.12.

4. Fourthly, whether can this Oath be taken in Faith? without which,
whatsoever we do is sin, Romans 14.23. Now this Oath comprehends so many things
of several kinds, and diverse of them unknown to most of us, that though we
be ready to believe and receive some of them single, yet our Faith cannot
fathom them altogether, and so we cannot swear without doubting, and surely
doubtful swearing is as dangerous as doubtful eating, every Oath should be
taken in Truth, Righteousness and Judgment. Ier. 4.2. How can we take an Oath
in Judgment, not having a full persuasion in the meaning of it, or how can
others with good Conscience press it on us, till they give us full
satisfaction herein?

If it be answered that the Creed, etc. are ambiguous, subject to doubtful
Interpretations, as appears in diverse Articles, yet upon this reason, may not
be refused to be sworn: to this, the learned Divines of Aberdine have given
sufficient answer. page 50. of their Duplice, these are of Divine Authority, or
next Divine, agreeable to the Word, approved by the uniforme consent of all
places in all ages. Whereupon we are undoubtedly persuaded that the contrivers
of them did neither intend, nor yet set down any untruth, and therefore we do
submit to the unfallible authority of them, though some things be controverted
in them, whereas we cannot suppose the same in any Oath contrived by men,
subject to errors, wanting that general approbation.

The Ambiguity of the OATH appears to us in most, if not in all the several
Branches of it.
1. I Promise, Vow, and Protest, to maintain with my life, goods, and Power,
the true Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of
England. Quaere, What is the Doctrine of the Church of England? Whether that in
the 39 Articles? Why is it not specified that we may know to what we swear?
Whether may it not be extended to that which hereafter shall be established;
since in the Oath it is not (now expressed, or already established) but,
Expressed, in the Doctrine of the Church of England; which we suppose will bind
us, if expressed hereafter; if so, None will set his seal to a blanke bond, so
as the Obligee may make his dept as large as he lists: and we conceive we
should be more cautelous in engaging our selves by Oath, then our Estate by
Bond, since the tie is more vigorous, and the breach more dangerous. Ley. page
55.

2 I swear to maintain this Doctrine against all Popery and popish
Innovations. Quaere, in what extent is Popery here abjured? Whether only in
Doctrinalls, and such only as are fundamental or come nigh the foundation? or
to remoter superstructions undetermined? Wherein it has always bin held
lawful for Scholars to vary, and abundare sensu suo. Whether to Discipline
also? and has not episcopacy bin branded for a Popish Hierarchy, and the
Ministers ordained by them and standing under them. Notwithstanding it has
been allowed by our Doctrine, and established by our law? Has not our Liturgy
(though established by Act of Parliament) been rejected as Popish? and all
innocent Ceremonies (though ancienter far then Popery) if abused by them? Nay
one of late, against Popish Ceremonies tells us, that an oath must be extended
to the largest sense; Disput. against Engl. Ceremonies, p. 93.97.

3. I swear to maintain the power and privilege of Parliaments, and the
lawful liberty and rights of Subjects. Quaer. What are those privileges of
Parliaments and rights of Subjects? Are these evident by the light of nature?
that upon notifying them, every one that swears is able to give his assent,
acknowledging them undoubted priviledg^s and rights? or do they vary in
diverse Countries, according to the different constitutions of Statutes and
charters depending on positive laws? Why are we not directed to those laws?
where we may be clearly informed, what are those undoubted privileges and
rights?

4. I will maintain every person that makes this Protestation, in what he
shall do in the lawful pursuance of the same. Quaer. Whether am I hereby
bound to imbroyle my self in every private quarrel betwixt particular
persons? Suppose one that has taken this Protestation be oppressed by some
great one and pursue his right. Whether am I hereby bound to engage my self?
If it be with reference to the public State. Whether am I alone bound to
maintain him in his rights, or only jointly with others? And how shall I be
assured that it is his right, and that his pursuance is lawful, that I may
join with him?

5. I will oppose and bring to condign punishment, all such as shall do any
thing to the contrary. Quer. Whether is his sacred Majesty and his lawful
Successors here excepted, in case they should attempt some innovation in
Religion, or to infringe the liberty of Parliaments; or the rights of Subjects,
or to oppose any that has taken this Protestation? Now to take up arms
against our Sovereign, either offensive or defensive, we have not as yet
learned. We neither in the Scriptures, nor the writings, nor practice of
primitive times find any other remedy for Subjects unjustly prosecuted by
Hereditary Monarchs, but flight from their wrath, or patient suffering, or
humble supplication with tears and prayers. Nor dare we subscribe till we see
those arguments answered in the learned Duplice of the Divines of Aberdine,
page 160. If his Majesty be excepted, why is it not expressed? Nor can the
expression of such an exception be thought needless, though elsewhere we
swear to maintain the King.

Nor can it seem a greater tenderness of his Majesty's Honor, to omit the
exception in this clause, supposing his Majesty's constancy in Religion, and
equitable disposition in the administration of Justice. Surely the modest
request of such an exception cannot in the judgment of any reasonableman,
import the slenderest suspicion of his Majesty's inconstancy in Religion, or
disposition to injustice. None are more fully settled in their good opinion of
him then we. But we provide for our own peace, in case of dispute about the
boundaries of Religion, privilege of Parliaments, and rights of Subjects. Nor
do we cast the least aspersion of imprudence or disloyalty upon the contrivers
of this Protestation, which we doubt not but their wisdoms can easily clear,
and we much crave may be cleared to us.

6. In case of dispute, what is the Religion established? power and privilege
of Parliaments? rights of Subjects? and the lawful means of the pursuance of
the same? or concerning the boundaries of those? who shall be Judge? The
dictate of every private man's conscience? That were to expose the Kingdom to
perpetual contention; the Parliament? what if a dispute arise when no
Parliament sits? The King and Counsel? or some deputed by his Majesty and the
Parliament? or the stronger part?

7. I swear never to relinquish this Protestation, etc. Quaere, does this
clause bind me for ever in no case to alter? What if the King and State should
find it expedient hereafter to revoke this Protestation, or something in it?
Why is not there a reservation of liberty to change with the State? Master Ley
in his book of the late Canons, page 86. thinks it unfit to make Median and
Persian Protestations, that cannot be ^^tered, when as such changes may fall in
a State, as the wisest law may be thought necessary to be altered, and
therefore to receive no farther establishment, then may agree with all humane
laws to be left alterable.

Nor let us be thought herein to wrong our selves, in forging exceptions and
laying impediments in our own way. We walk in sincerity according to our light,
not forging to our selves impediments or laying stumbling blocks in our own
way, but showing such as seem to be laid in our way, by the incommodious
expression of the Protestation. If any think our doubts are too many,
perchance he thinks too little of the peace of conscience of private
Christians, and price of Ministry.

If any inforcement should be used, our suspense, till satisfaction be given,
may be charitably ascribed rather to conscience then contumacy. And therefore
the case so standing, we hope we shall neither be pressed to the taking, nor
our modest refusal oppressed with any penalty.

What pity were it? which some men's fears begin to suggest, that after our
painful studies in the Universities, the expense of our patrimonies in out
costly education (which might have maintained us plentifully in another
course.) After our painful employments in our Pastoral charge, to the tyring
out of our strength. After our families increased above our abilities to
support them (without the means we receive from the Church) to be thrust out
of all, who cannot dig, and are ashamed to beg. After our hopes of removal of
all burdens, now to be oppressed. With the same tongue that has blessed God for
the heroicke zeal of that High and Honorable Court in removal of one Oath,
now to complain of the pressure of our consciences by another? that when such
care is taken for the establishment of the rights of Subjects (should this Oath
come hereafter to be pressed) it might strip us of al which we conceive
derogatory to our rights, who are not the worst Subjects. That those, who have
complained of subscriptions and oaths these eighty years (though of such
things only as were established by Parliament) should now be so forward to
promote this, and press it upon others. When diverse things established by law
were inconstrued, the Church and State thought it expedient to interpreat them,
as appears, by diverse Canons, Rubricks, and Injunctions, and the preface to
the Common Prayers. When the Oath of Supremacy was inconstrued, King James of
blessed Memory, vouchsafed to clear it by public writings, and after to
clear this explication from all objections of Fall and others, by Bishop
Andrews and others. When the Reverend Primate of Armagh had cleared the same
Oath in Ireland, the King gave him thanks for his pains taken therein, by a
Letter now Printed. And this present Parliament to remove the fear of some
Londoners (as we hear) vouchsafed to set forth an interpretation of one clause
of this Protestation.

Whether would it not highly commend their prudence, and eternize their
goodness, to vouchsafe a further interpretation of all the several branches
of it, or authorize by special Commission, some grave, wise men, in every
Diocese, to admit of such interpretations as did not go against the literal
sense, and clear it from all ambiguity.

Whether this interpretation, or such like might be accepted.
1. I Swear to maintain the Doctrine expressed in the Church of England, etc.
I understand the Doctrine already established in ^he 39. Articles.

2. This Doctrine I will maintain against all Popery, and Popish innovations
etc. I understand all Popery Doctrinall, and innovations practical, contrary
to the Doctrine already established.

3. I Swear to maintain the power and privilege of Parliaments, the lawful
liberty and rights of Subjects, etc. I understand this so far as they shall be
evidenced to me, by the standing laws of this Kingdom, not repugnant to the
laws of God, to be undoubted privileges and rights, and further the
maintenance of these rights of Subjects, I understand not with reference to one
another, to be hereby bound to imbroy I my self in every private man's quarrel,
though I conceive right, but with reference to the public State.

4. I will maintain every person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever
he shall do in the lawful pursuance of the same, etc. This maintenance I
understand not to bind me to maintain them by my self alone, but together
with others consenting and lawfully authorized, the same I understand of
opposing in the next clause.

5. I will oppose and bring to condign punishment, etc. In all the several
clauses, I expressly except his sacred Majesty, and his lawful successors,
according to my Oath of Allegiance, not daring to think a disloyal thought,
much less to lift up my hand against the Lords Anointed.

6. I will never relinqush this Protestation, etc. Unless the State shall
think it expedient to alter or revoke it, in which case I reserve my freedom.

FINIS.

