The Professed Royalist: HIS QVARRELL WITH THE TIMES: MAINTAINED IN THREE TRACTS:
viz.

The Loyal Convert. The New Distemper. The Whipper Whipped.

Opus Posthumum.

HEB. 11. 4. He being dead, yet speaks.

OXFORD, Printed in the Year, 1645.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF KING CHARLES, My most dear and dread Sovereign.
SIR,
BE pleased to cast a gracious eye upon these three Tracts, The 1. against
Disloyalty.
and at Your leisure (if Your Royal Employments lend You any) to peruse them.
2. Public Distempers.


In Your Three Kingdoms^ You have three sorts of people: 3. Private Calumnies.
The first, confident and faithful; The second, diffident and fearful; The
third, indifferent and doubtful.

The first are with You in their Persons, Purses, (or desires) and good wishes.

The second are with You neither in their Purses, nor good wishes, nor (with
their desires) in their Persons.

The third are with You in their good wishes, but neither in their Persons, nor
Purses, nor Desires.

In the last, entitled, The Whipper Whipped, these three sorts are represented
in three Persons, and presented to the view of Your Sacred Majesty.

You shall find them as busy with their Pens as the Armies are with their
Pistols: How they behave themselves, let the People judge: I appeal to Caesar.
Your Majesty's Honor, Safety, and Prosperity, The Churches Truth, Unity, and
uniformity, Your Kingdoms Peace, Plenty, and Felicity, is the continued object
of his Devotion, who is

SIR, Your Majesty's Most Loyal Subject, Fra: Quarles.

THE LOYAL CONVERT.

VIRG. Improbus haec tam culta novalia miles habebit?
Barbarus has segetes?


HOM. (...).

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, 1645.

To the honest hearted Reader.
READER,
I Here protest before the Searcher of all hearts, that I have no End, either
of Faction, or Relation in this ensuing Treatise. I am no Papist, no Sectary,
but a true Lover of Reformation and Peace: My pen declines all bitterness of
Spirit; all deceitfulness of heart; and, I may safely, in this particular,
with Saint PAUL, say, I speak the truth in Christ and lie not, my Conscience
bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, that I neither walk nor write in
craftiness, nor handle the holy Scriptures deceitfully: Therefore if thy Cause
be Jesus Christ, in the name of Jesus Christ, I adjure thee to lay aside all
wilful ignorance, all prejudice, all private Respects and Interests, and all
uncharitable censures: Deal faithfully with thy Soul, and suffer wholesome
admonitions: Search the several Scriptures herein contained, and where they
open a Gate, climb not thou over a Style: Consult with Reason, herein
exercised, and where it finds a mouth, find thou an ear: And let Truth
prosper, though thou perish; and let God be glorified, although in thy
Confusion.

THE LOYAL CONVERT.
THE Kingdom of England, that has for many Ages continued the happiest Nation
on the habitable earth, enjoying the highest blessings that heaven can give, or
earth receive; the fruition of the Gospel, which settled a firm Peace; which
Peace occasioned a full Plenty, under the gracious Government of wise and
famous Princes, over a thriving and well-contented People, Insomuch that she
became the Earths Paradise, and the Worlds Wonder, is now the Nursery of all
Sects; her Peace is violated; her Plenty wasting; her Government distempered,
her People discontented, and unnaturally imbroyld in her own Blood, not knowing
the way, nor affecting the means to Peace, Insomuch that she is now become the
Byword of the Earth, and the scorn^ of Nations.

The Cause and Ground of these our National Combustions, are these our
National Transgressions, which unnaturally sprung from the neglect of that
Truth we once had, and from the abuse of that Peace we now want: Which, taking
occasion of some differences betwixt His Majesty and His two Houses of
Parliament, has divided our Kingdom within it self, which had so divided it
self from that God, who blessed it with so firm a Truth, so settled a Peace, and
so sweet an Unity.

As that sin brought this division, so this division (sharpened with mutual
Jealousies) brought in the Sword.

When the Lion roares, who trembles not? And when Judgments thunder, who is
not troubled?

Among the rest, I (who brought some Faggots to this Combustion) stood
astonished and amazed: to whom the mischief was far more manifest then the
Remedy: At last, I laid my hand upon my heart, and concluded, It was the hand
of God; Where being plundered in my understanding, I began to make a scrutiny,
where the first Breach was made, that let in all these Miseries.

I found the whole Kingdom now contracted into a Parliament, which consisted
of three Estates: A King, a house of Peers, and a house of Commons; by the
Wisdom and Unity whereof, all things conduceable to the Weale-publique, were
be advised upon, presented and established.

I found this Unity disjoynted, and grown to variance even to Blood: The King,
and his Adherents on the party; and his two Houses and their Adherents on the
other.

The pretense of this division, was the true Protestant Religion, which both
protested to maintain; the Liberty of the Subject, which both protested to
preserve; the Privileges of Parliament, which both promise to protect; Yet,
nevertheless, the first never profaned; the second never more interrupted; the
third never more violated.

Standing amazed at this Riddle, I turned mine eyes upon his Majesty; and
there, I viewed the Lords Anointed, sworn to maintain the established Laws
of this Kingdom: I turned mine eyes upon the two Houses; and, in them, I
beheld the Interest of my Country, sworn to obey his Majesty as their supreme
Governor.

I heard a Remonstrance cried from the two Houses: I read it; I approved it; I
inclined unto it: A Declaration from His Majesty; I read it; I applauded it; I
adhered to the justness of it: The Parliaments Answer; I turned to the
Parliament; His Majesty's Reply; I returned to His Majesty.

Thus tossed and turned as a Weather-cocke to my own weakness, I resolved it
impossible to serve two Masters.

I fled to Reason; Reason could not satisfy me: I fled to Policy; Policy
could not resolve me: At length, finding no Counselor, but that which first I
should have sought; I hyed me to the Book of God, as the Great Oracle, and
ushering my Inquest with Prayer and Humiliation, I opened the sacred leaves,
which (not by chance) presented to my first eye, the 20. of the Proverbs, v. 2.
The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion, and who so provokes him to
Anger, sins against his own soul.

Now I began to search, and found as many places to that purpose, as would
swell this sheet into a Volume; so that in a very short space, I was so
furnished, with such strict Precepts, backed with such strong Examples, that my
Judgment was enlightened, and my wavering Conscience so thoroughly convinced,
that by the Grace of that Power which directed me, neither Fear nor any
By-respects shall ever hereafter remove me, unless some clearer light direct
me.

But, above all the Rest, a Precept and an Example out of the Old Testament
(strongly confirmed by a Precept and an Example out of the New) settled my
opinion, and established my Resolution.

The first Precept Pre. 1.
out of the Old, Jeremy 27. v. 6. Where it pleased God to own Nebuchadnezzar
his servant, (although a known Pagan, a professed Idolater, and a fierce
Persecutor of all Gods children) concerning whom he says, 8. They that serve
not the King of Babylon, and that will not put their necks under his Yoke, I
will punish them with the Sword, Famine, and the Pestilence, till I have
consumed them. verse 9. Therefore hearken not to your Diviners, and Prophets,
that say unto you, You shall not serve the King of Babylon, for they prophecy
a lie unto you. v. 10. But the nations that shall serve the King of Babylon,
and bring their necks under his Yoke, those will I let remain in their own
land, (says the Lord) and they shall till it, and dwell therein.

Can there be a stricter Precept? or could there be a more impious Prince? And
yet, this Precept, and yet, this Prince must be obeyed: nay, sub poena too;
Upon the pain of Gods high wrath; fully expressed in Famine, Sword, and
Pestilence, not only upon the people, but upon the Priests also, that shall
persuade them unto disobedience.

The second Precept Pre. 2.
is enjoined us out of the New Testament, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be
subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God; The Powers that
be are ordained of God: Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.
This Power ( this King) to whom S. Paul commands this subjection, was Nero,
the bloody persecuter of all that honored the blessed Name of Jesus Christ.

Gods Command should be a sufficient Argument, (...), is enough: But when he
adds a Reason too, he answers all Objections: But when he threatens a
punishment, (no less then damnation) upon the resistance thereof, he has used
all means to persuade a necessity of obedience.

Let every soul be subject.)

Not equal, much less superior. And what is taking up of Arms, but an
employed supposition of at least equality? What are the hopes of Conquest, but
an ambition of Superiority? What is condemning, judging, or deposing, but
Supremacy? For it is against the nature of an Inferior to condemn, judge, or
depose a Superior.

And, lest the Rebellious should confine his obedience to a good Prince, the
next words reply,

For there is no power but of God.

Power in it self, is neither good nor evil, but as it is in subjecto, the
person; If an evil King, an evil Power; If a good King, a good Power: God
sends the one in mercy, and we must be subject; the other in judgment, and we
must be subject: In things lawful, actively; in things unlawful, passively:
If a good King, he must have our praise, and our plyance If an evil King, he
must have our Prayers, and our Patience.

He that resists the Power ( whether good or evil, for all power is of God)
resists an Ordinance of God, ( Ordinances of men are not resisted without
ruin) and whosoever resists shall receive, but what? (...) damnation to
themselves.

Now, compare this place with that 1 Cor. 11. 29. He that shall eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, eats and drinks What?
(...) damnation to himself.

If then there be proportion betwixt the Sin and the Punishment, you may hereby
gather the heynousnesse of disobedience; the punishment whereof is the very
same with his that is guilty of the Body and Blood of our Lord; to the o^e, for
not discerning the Lords Body; to the other, for not discerning the Lords
Anointed.

The Lords Anointed? Ob.
And who is he? None but the Regenerate: Christ is not Christ to any, to whom
Jesus is not Jesus.

Gods word answers your silly Objection, Ans.
not I: Was not Saul Gods Anointed? 1 Samuel 26. 9.
Was not Cyrus Gods Anointed, and many more whom God acknowledges so, and yet
wicked Kings?

Cyrus is mine Anointed, Yet he has not known me.

The first Example Ex. 1.
for our Obedience the Old Testament proposes to our imitation, Ex. 1.
Dan. 3. 16. Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon sets up a golden Image:
Shadrech, Meshach, and Abednego were commanded to fall down and worship it.

The King, a known Pagan, commands a gross Idolatry; Did these men conspire?
Or (being Rulers of the Province of Babel) did they invite the Jews into a
Rebellion? Did these (to strengthen their own Faction) blast their Sovereigns
Name with Tyranny and Paganism? Did they endeavor by Scandals, and impious
Aspersions, to render him odious to his people? Did they encourage their
Provinces to take up Arms for the defense of their Liberties or Religion? Did
they seize upon, or stop his Revenues? or annihilate his Power? Did they
estrange themselves from his Presence? Murder his Messengers? Or would they
have slighted his gracious Offers? No, being called by their Prince, they
came, and being commanded to give actual obedience to his unlawful Commands,
observe the modesty of their first answer, We are not careful to answer thee
in this matter, Dan. 3. 16.
and being urged, mark their pious resolution in the second, Be it known, O
King, we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image thou have set
up. Dan. 3. 18.


The King threatens the Furnace; They yield their Bodies to the Furnace, and
say, Dan. 3. 17.
God whom we serve will deliver us out of thy hands, and not, He will deliver
Thee into our hands. They expect deliverance rather in their passive Obedience,
then in their actual Resistance.

But they were few in number, Ob
and their Forces not considerable.

Admit that, Ans.
which all Histories deny. Was not God as able to subdue Him with so few, as to
deliver them from so many? Had their weakness less Reason (for the Cause of
Gods apparent dishonor) to expect a miraculous assistance in those days of
frequent Miracles, then we, after so long a cessation of Miracles? Gods glory
will not be vindicated by unlawful means, or unwarrantable proceedings.

I, Ob.
but we take up Arms, not against the King, but against his evil Counselors.

Adherents ye mean, Ans.
A rare distinction! And tell me; whose power has his Adherents? The Kings. By
which appears, ye take up Arms against the Kings Power; He that resists the
power, (it is not said the Prince) shall receive damnation. Eccles. 8.
Again, Where the word of a King is, there is power: God joined the King and
his Power, and who dare separate them? They that take up Arms against the
Parliaments power (you say) take up Arms against the Parliament; Do not they
then that take up Arms against the Kings power, by the same Reason, take up
Arms against the King? Now, look back upon your intricate distinction, and
blush.

But, Ob.
if the King betray the Trust reposed in him by his Subjects, they may suspend
their obedience, and resist him.

Kings are Gods Vicegerents, Ans.
and cannot be compelled to give an account to any, Psalm. 51. 4.
but to God, Against thee, against thee only have I sinned: That is, to thee,
to thee only must I give account. Though I have sinned against Vriah, by my
Act; and against my people, by my Example, yet against Thee have I only
sinned. You cannot deprive, or limit them, in what you never gave them. God
gave them their Power, and who art thou that dare resist it? Pro. 8. 15
By me Kings reign.

But, Ob.
his Crown was set up upon his Head by his Subjects, upon such and such
conditions.

Why was the penalty, Ans.
upon the fail, not expressed then? Coronation is but a humane Ceremony. And
was he not Proclaimed before he was crowned? Proclaimed? but what? A King:
And did not you at the same instant, by relative consequence, proclaim your
selves Subjects? And shall Subjects condition with their King, or will Kings
bind themselves to their Subjects, upon the forfeiture of their power, after
they have received their Regal Authority?

But, Ob.
the King has, by Writ, given his power to his Parliament, and therefore what
they do, they do by virtue of his Power.

The King, Ans.
by his Writ, gives not away his power, but communicates it. By the virtue of
which Writ, they are called Ad tractandum and consulendum de arduis Regni, To
treat and advise concerning the difficulties of the Kingdom: Here is all the
power the Writ gives them, and where they exceed, they usurp the Kings power,
being both against the Law of God, and the constitutions of the Kingdom.

Well, Ob.
but in case of necessity, when Religion and Liberty lies at the s^ake, the
Constitutions of the Kingdom (for the preservation of the Kingdom) may suffer
a Dispensation.

Admit that: Ans.
But what necessity may dispense with the violation of the Law of God? the
deviation wherefrom, is evil, and Thou shall do no evil that good may come
thereon.

But, Ob.
we take no Arms against the King, but only to bring Delinlinquents to
condign punishment.

And, Ans.
who are they? even those that take up Arms for the Kings; which, an unrepealed
statute, 11. Hen. 7. acquites. But, admit Statutes may be broken, and you seek
to punish them; Who gave you the power so to do? The Law: And what Law denies
the King power to pardon Delinquents? God, that has put power into the hand of
Majesty, has likewise planted Mercy in the heart of Sovereignty: And, will ye
take away both his birthright and his Blessing also? Take heed, you do not
slight that, which one day may prove your Sanctuary.

But, Ob.
the King being a Mixed Monarch, is bound to his own Laws.

There be two sorts of Laws, Ans.
Directive and Coercive; As to the first, he is only bound to make his account
to God; so, to the second, he is only liable to the hand of God; Eccl. 8. 4.
Who shall say unto him, what do thou?

But, Ob.
Kings, now a days, have not so absolute a power, as the Kings mentioned in
the Scripture.

Who limited it? Ans.
God, or Man? Man could not limit the Power he never gave: If God; show me
where? till then, this objection is frivolous.

But, Ob.
when Kings, and their Assistants make an affensive, and a destructive war
against their Parliaments, may they not then take up defensive Arms?

It is no offensive War for a King to endeavor the Recovery of his surrepted
right; Ans.
however, Hester 8.
are not the members of a Parliament Subjects, to their Sovereign? if not, what
are they? If Subjects, ought they not to be subject? Gods people, the Jews,
that were to be destroyed by the Kings Command, neither did, nor durst make a
defensive War against his abused power, until they first obtained the Kings
Consent.

But, admit it lawful, (though neither granted, nor warranted) that subjects
may upon such terms make a defensive war, does it not quite cross the nature
of a defensive war, to assail, pursue, and dispossess?

Wh^ you shot 5 pieces of Ordnance, before one was returned at Edgehill, was
that defensive? When you besieged Redding, which you after slighted, was that
defensive? When ye affronted Basing-House, was that defensive?

The warrantable weapons against an angry King, are, Exhortation, Disswasion,
wise reproof (by such are nearest to him) Petition, Prayer, and Flight: All
other weapons will at last wound them that use them.

The Second Example, Ex. 2.
was lest us out of the New Testament, by Him that is the true president of
holy obedience, Our blessed Savior; 1 Pet. 2.
whose Humility, and sufferance, was set before us as a Copy for all
Generations to practice by.

The temporal Kingdom of the Jews, successively usurpt by those two heathen
Princes, Augustus and Tiberius, two Contemporaries, was his natural
Birthright, descended from his Tipe, and Ancestour King David. Had not he as
great an Interst in that Crown, as we have in this Commonwealth? Was not He
as tender eyed toward his own natural people, as we, to one another?

Was not the Truth as dear to Him (who was the very Truth) and the way to it,
as direct to Him, (that was the only Way) as to us?

Was not He the great Reformer.

Had the Sword been a necessary stickler in Reformation, how happened it that he
mistook his weapon so? Instead of a Trumpet he lifted up his Voice.

Was Plots, Policies, Propositions, Prophanations, Plunderings, Military
Preparations, his way to Reformation? Were they not his own words, He that
takes up the sword, shall perish by the sword? Matthew. 26. 52.
Nor, was it want of strength, that he reformed not in a Martial way: Could
not he command more then twelve legions of Angels?

Or had he pleased to use the Arm of flesh, could not He, that raised the
dead, raise a considerable Army? Sure, S. John the Baptist would have ventured
his head upon a fairer Quarrel, and S. Peter drawn his sword to a bloodier
end; No question, but S. Paul, the twelve Apostles, and Disciples would have
proved as tough Colonels, as your associated Essex Priests did Captains; and
doubtless S. Peter, who converted 3000. in one day, would have raised a strong
Army in six.

Our Blessed Savior well knew, that Caesar came not thither without divine
permission; In respect whereof, He became obedient to the very shadow of a
King; and whom he actively resisted not, he passively obeyed.

I, Ob.
but there was a necessity of his obedience, and subjection, to make him
capable of a shameful death.

No, Ans.
his obedience, as well death, was voluntary; which makes you guilty of a
shameful argument.

But, Ob.
He was a single person; We, a representative body: what is unexpedient in the
one, is lawful in the other.

Ans.
Worse and worse! If our blessed Savior be not Pepresentative, Tell me,
whereof art thou a Member? woe be that body politic, which endeavors not to
be conformed, according to the Head Mystical.

He preached Peace; Your Martial Ministers (by what authority they best know)
proclaim War; He, Obedience; They, Sedition; He, Truth; they, Lies; He,
Order; They, Confusion; He, Blessedness to the Peacemakers; They, courage to
the Persecutors; He, Blessedness to the persecuted; They brand them with
Malignity that call them blessed.

God was not heard in the whirlewind, but in the still voice.

But, his thoughts, are not as our thoughts, neither are our ways like his
ways.

But, whence proceeds all this? even from a viperous Generation (which has
long nested in this unhappy Island) and those increased Multitudes of simple
souls, seduced by their seeming sanctity, who taking advantage of our late too
great abuse of Ceremonies, are turned desperate enemies to all Order, and
Discipline, being out of charity with the very Lords Prayer, because it comes
within the Popish Liturgy.

How many of these, have lately challenged the name of sanctified Vessels, for
containing the poison of unnatural Sedition! How many of these, have usurpt
the style of well-affected, for disaffected Peace! How many of these, have
counterfeited the honor of good Patriots, for largely contributing toward the
Ruins of their Country! How many does this Army consist of! How, for their
sakes is Blasphemy connived at! Sacrilege permitted! How, for their
encouragement are Lies and brasle-browd Impudencies invented, nay published (nay
published in the very Pulpits) and tolerated (if not commanded) even by them,
who (perchance, were this quarrel ended) would throw the first stone (...)
them! How many of our Learned, Religious and Orthodox Divines (who by their
able Tongues, and Pens, have defended and maintained the true ancient and
Catholic Faith, and vindicated the Reformed Religion from the aspersions of
her potent Adversaries) are now plundered in their Goods, sequestered in their
Livings, imprisoned in their persons, (if not forced in their Consciences)
whilst their wives, and poor children, begging their Bread, are left to the
mercy of these unmercifull times; even for the encouragement of them, whose
pedanticke learning durst never show her ridiculous face before an easy
Schoole-man, whose livelyhoods they unworthily usurp, not dispensing the bread
of life, but the darnell of giddy-headed fancy and sedition, abhorring the way
to peace, and maligning those that ensue it.

I, Ob.
but we desire Peace, so we may have Truth too.

What mean ye by having Truth? Ans.
The preservation of the Old Truth, or the Institution of a New?

If ye fear the alteration of the Old (having your Sovereigns Oath, which you
dare not believe) what other Assurance can you have?

The Blood you shed, is certain; The change you fear, is uncertain: It is no
wisdom to apply a desperate Remedy to a suspected disease.

If the enjoyment of Peace depends upon a full Assurance of Truth, our discords
may bear an everlasting date: God has threatened to remove his Candlestick,
and our wickedness justly fears it; And so long as we fear it, shall we
abjure Peace, the blessed means to prevent it? He that seeks to settle Truth
by the sword, distracts it.

Or, is it a Truth ye want? If so, Is it of Doctrine, or of Discipline? If of
doctrine, Actum est de nostra Religione, Farewell our Religion. Or, is it of
Discipline? Discipline is but a Ceremony. And did the Lord of the Sabbath
dispense with a moral Law, for the preservation of an Oxes life, or an Asses,
and shall we, to alter some few indifferent Ceremonies (allowed by the
Parliaments of three pious and wise Princes, and the practice of many holy
Martyrs, who sealed the true Protestant Religion with their blood) cry down
Peace, and shed the blood of many thousand Christians?

Our seduced Protestants, will have no set Forms of Prayer, but what proceeds
immediately from their own Fancies. This is their Truth.

Our Semi-Separatists, will hear our Sermons, (if they like the Teacher) but
no Divine service. This is their Truth.

Our Separatists, will not communicate in our Churches, nor joy^e in our
Congregations. That is their Truth.

Our Auabaptists will not baptize, till years of discretion, and rebaptize.
That is their Truth.

Our Antinomians will have no Repentance. This is their Truth.

Our Independants, will have an universal Parity; This their Truth.

Good God, when shall we have Peace, if not, till all these Truths meet!

But, Ob.
Christ says, I come not to bring Peace, but the Sword; therefore, for the
propagation of Peace, it is lawful to use the Sword.

So, Ans.
He is termed a stumbling Block, and does that warrant us to stumble? So, ^
Cor. 1. ^3.
He says, All you shall be offended because of me; and does this patronize our
Offenses? The Law is good and just; Because, then we had not known sin but by
the Law, Matthew. 26. 31.
is it therefore lawful for us to sin? God forbid. Romans 7. 7.


Our Savior brings the Sword among us, as wholesome meat brings sickness to a
weakly sick stomach, or physic to a body abounding with Humors; not
intentionally, but occasionally.

Thus, by your erroneous and weak mistakes, you make the Prince of Peace, the
Patron of your unnatural War; and the God of Truth, the president of your
unexamined errors.

But, Almighty God, the Champion of his own Truth, and maintainer of his own
Cause, has (to more then common admiration) appeared in this great enterprise.

He that delivered Isreal's handful from the hand of Pharaohs Host, has showed
himself in the (almost incredible) proceedings of this heaven-displeasing
War; the brief relation whereof, may move those hearts, that are not scared,
or stone, to melt into a thankful Acknowledgement of his Power, and remain as
Monuments of his Mercy, that children, (yet unborne) may say hereafter, God was
here: viz.

The two Houses of Parliament made first a general seizure of all the Arms,
Ammunition, Castles, Forts, Magazines, and Ships, (being the whole visible
strength of this unhappy Kingdom) to whom (having now settled the Militia, both
by Sea and Land, in their own hands) tides of Proposition gold came in, upon
the Public Faith; Money (like blood from the Liver, conveyed through all the
veins) issued, to make a large supply, and where it stopped awhile, mountains
of massy Plate, from the vast Goblet to the slender Thimble, this Faith
removed into their safe possession: And when the great Milch Cow began to
^lake; they pressed her Nipples, and by hard streyning renewd the stream. As
Physicians evacuate the Body, sometimes by Vomit, sometimes by Purge, sometimes
by Phlebetomie, sometimes by sweating, sometimes by sluxing, sometimes
diuretically, yet purge but the same peccant humor; So did they, first by
Proposition, then by way of Contribution, now by way of Loan, then by way of
Subsidy, (no less then 50 at one time) hereby way Assessement, there by way
of Twentieth part, then by way of Excise, one while by way of Sequestration,
then by way of Plunder, but still, the issue, MONEY: And, to work the better
upon the Affections of the Multitude, all this for the behoof of King, and
Parliament, for the pretended defense of (God knows what) Religion; Insomuch,
that Men came in like Swarms to the next Tree, or rather like treacherous
Decoyes, with their innocent Multitude, into the Net, and Horses without Number.

Thus were they supplied with all necessaries, which the Arm of flesh could
provide for the waging of an inconquerable war, whereon, the money already
expended, makes no less figures then 17. Millions Sterling. besides the Revenues
of the King, Queen, Prince, Duke of York, and the whole Estates of all such
that take up Arms against them, besides free Quarter, and Soldiers yet
unpayd. His Majesty, on the other side, driven away with a few Attendants, not
having among them so many Swords and Pistols, as these had Cannons, wanting
both Money, Horses, and Ammunition, only what he received from the piety of
some beleiving Subjects, (whose ears were Pamphlet-proofe against all
defamations, and scandals cast upon sacred Majesty) finding slender Provision
in his own Dominions; and that stopped or seized, which came from foreign
parts; No Shipping, but what he purchased, with the precious and extreme hazard
of his few (but valiant) Subjects; No Arms, but what he gained by the
courageous venture of his own neglected life, the subject of our continual
Prayers. Yet has God covered his head in the day of battle, and blessed him
with such success, that He is (by the Divine Providence) become a great Master
of the Field, and almost able to maintain fight with his own Ships at Sea.

The God of Heaven bless him, and prosper him, and make his days as the days
of Heaven, that being here the Faiths defender, he may still be defended by
the Object of that Faith.

Nor is the providentiall hand of God more visible in prospering him then in
punishing his Enemies, whose ruins may remain, as Sea-marks to us, and
Pyramids of Gods Power, whereof a touch.

Sir John Hotham, then Governor of Hull, who first defied and dared his
Sovereign to his face, what is become of him? How stands he a Mark betwixt
two dangers, having nothing left him, but guilt enough to make him capable of a
desperate Fortune?

Master Hambden, that first waged Law, and then War against his own natural
Prince, has not he (since these unhappy troubles began) been first punished
with the loss of children, nay visited to the third Generation, to the
weakening, (if not ruining) of his Family, and then with the loss of his own
life, in the same place where he first took up Arms against his gracious
Sovereign? was it not remarkable that the Lord Brook, who often excepted
against that clause in the Lyturgie, (From sudden death good Lord deliver us)
was slain so suddenly? who was so severe an enemy against Peace should perish
in the same War, he so encouraged? Who so bitterly inveyed against Episcopal
Government, should be shot dead out of a Cathedral Church? who laboring to
put out the left eye of established Government, his left eye, and life were both
put out together?

How is Duke Hamilton (scarce warm in his new Honor) taken in his own snare,
having entangled his Lord and Master in so many inconveniences?

How is Holland, whose livelihood was created by his Sovereigns favor,
branded with a double treachery, and like a Shittlecocke fallen at the first
return, and scarce able to raise himself by a sorry Declaration?

Is not Bristoll Fines (who at his Council of War condemned and executed
innocent blood) himself condemned (pleading innocence) at a Council of War
from the mouth of his own General, though finding (perchance) more Mercy then
he either deserved, or showed? But that blood that cried to him for Mercy, will
cry to Heaven for vengeance.

And, are not many more ripe for the same Judgment, whose notorious Crimes have
branded them for their respective punishments?

How many of those blood-preaching Ministers, have died expectorating Blood?
whilst others, at this time, laboring under the same disease, can find no Art
to promise a Recovery. All whom I leave to possible Repentance and pass over.

Cromwell, that professed defacer of Churches, (witness Peterborough and
Lincoln, etc.) and Rifeler of the Monuments of the dead, whose profane
Troopers (if Fame has not forgot to speak a Truth) waterd their horses at the
Font, and fed them at the Holy Table, that Cromwell.

Sands, whose sacrilegious Troopers committed such barbarous insolences, with
his (at least) connivance, in the Church of Canterbury, and used such inhumane
tortures on the tender breasts of women, to force confession of their hidden
goods, the golden subjects of their Robbery;

What can the first expect, and what reward the other has found, I neither
prophecy nor judge. If these, and such as they, do fight for the Reformed
Religion, God deliver every good man both from them, and it, Cursed be their
wrath, for it is fierce, and their Anger, for it is cruel.

These, (and of such many) are they, that whilst they pretend a Reformation,
need, first, to be reformed.

Nor do I, in taxing this Army of such impious Barbarismes, excuse or rather
not condemn the other; whereof, no question, too great a number are as equally
profane; whilst all together make up one body of wickedness, to bring a ruin
on this miserable Kingdom; for whose impieties. His Majesty has so often
suffered.

I, Ob.
but His Majesty's Army, (besides those looser sorts of people) consists of
numerous Papists, the utter enemies of true Religion.

To whom the King has sworn his protection, Ans.
from those he may require assistance.

But, unto all his people, as well Papists as Protestants, he has sworn his
protection, therefore from all his subjects, as well Papists as Protestants, he
may require assistance.

Neither does he call in Papists, as Papists, to maintain Religion (as
himself has always manifested) but as subjects to subdue, or at least
qualify, Sedition.

The aid of the subject, is either in his person or in his purse; both are
requireable to the service of a Sovereign.

Put case, His Majesty should use the assistance of none but Protestants: tell
me, would ye not be apt to cavil, that he is favorable to the Papists;
neither willing to endanger their persons, nor endammage their purses; or, at
least, that they are reserved for a last blow?

Or, in case, Papists should largely underwrite to your Propositions, send in
Horses, Arms, or other Provisions, would you not accept it; and, for its sake,
their persons too?

Are you so strict in your Preparations, as to catechize every soldier? Or, to
examine, first, every Officers Religion? Or, having the proffer of a good
Popish, or debaucht Commander, tell me, should he be denied his Commission?

Remember Sir Arthur Ashton, whom His Majesty entertaines by your Example.

These things indifferently considered, it will manifestly appear, that the
honest minded vulgar are merely seduced, under the color of piety, to be so
impious, as by poisoning every action of their lawful Prince, to foster their
implicit Rebellion,

But, in case, your side should prosper, and prevail, what then? would then
our Miseries be at an end? Reason tells us, No; God keeps us from the
experience: Think you, that Government (whether new, or reformed) which is set
up by the sword, must not be maintained by the sword? And how can Peace and
Plenty be consistent with perpetual Garrisons, which must be maintained with
a perpetual charge? besides the continual excursions, and connived-at
injuries, committed by Soldiers, judge you.

Or, put the case, this necessary Consequence could be avoided, think you the
ambition of some new Statesmen, accustomed to such Arbitrary, and necessitated
power, on the one side, and the remaining loyalty of His Majesty's
dis-inherited Subjects, watching all opportunities to right their injured
Sovereign, and themselves, on the other side, would not raise perpetual
tempests in this Kingdom?

Or, if such an (almost) unpreventable evil should not ensue, think you, such
swarms of Sectaries sweat for nothing? Are their purses so apt to bleed to no
end? Will not their costs, and pains expect, at least, a congratulatory
connivance in the freedom of their consciences? Or, will their swords, now in
the strong possession of so great a multitude, know the way into their quiet
scabbards, without the expected liberty of their Religions? And, can that
liberty produce any thing but an established disorder? And, is not Disorder the
mother of Anarchie? and that, of Ruin?

Open then your eyes, closed with crasse, and wilful blindness, and consider,
and prevent that, which your continued disobedience will unavoidably repent,
too late.

But, the truth is, They are all Papists, by your Brand, that comply not, in
this action with you: Admit it were so; Are not Papists as tolerable for His
Majesty, as Anabaptists, Brownists, Separatists, Atheists, Antinomians, Turks;
and, indeed, all Religions, and Factions, nay Papists too, for His Subjects?
These, of His Majesty's side, come freely, out of their Allegiance, as
Subjects: Yours, are preached in, coming out of obstinacy, as Rebels: They,
at their own charges, proportionable to their Abilities; These, like Judas,
selling their Sovereigns Blood for ill paid wages: Yet, both sides pretend a
Quarrel for the true Protestant Religion.

Good God! What a monstrous Religion is this, that seeks protection from the
implacable opposition of her two Champions!

His Majesty protests to maintain it: The two Houses protest to maintain it: O,
for an Oedipus to read this Riddle!

His Majesty adds one Clause more, wherein if the other Party would agree, the
work would be at an end, which is,

According to the established Constitutions, by Oath taken by him, at his
Coronation; And there, the two Houses leave him, contending for a yet,
undetermined alteration.

And, for my part, I dare not conceive such evil of the Lords Anointed, and
my Gracious Sovereign, as to fear him perjured.

Has not His Majesty, in the presence of that God, by whom he reigns,
imprecated the Curse of Heaven on him and his Royal Posterity, ( Sub Sigillo
Sacramenti too) if He, to his utmost, maintain not the True Protestant
Religion, exercised in that blessed Queens days, and propagated by the blood
of so many glorious Martyrs (at which time God blessed this Island in so high a
measure) if he preserve not the just Privileges of Parliament, and the
Liberty of the Subject?

Nay, more, did not His Majesty so promise the severe execution of the Statute
against all Recusants, that if he failed, he desired not the aid of his good
Subjects?

What inferior person would not think his Reputation wronged, not to take up
confidence upon such terrible terms? What notorious evil has his Majesty
perpetrated to quench the sparkles of a common Charity?

Consider, O, Consider; He acts his part before the King of Kings, whose eye
is more especially upon Him; He acts his part before his fellow Princes, to
whom he has declared this his Imprecation. He acts his part before his
Subjects, whose stricter hand weighes his pious words with too unequal
Balances.

Were he the acknowledger of no God, yet the Princes of the earth, (if guilty
of such a Perjury) would abhor him. Or, were all the Princes of the earth,
blind, deaf, or partial, would not he think his Crown a burden to be worn
upon his perjured brow before his own abused people? Or, (having renounced his
Subjects aid, upon his fail) could he expect that loyalty, which now he wants
upon a mien suspicion?

But, He is a Prince, whom God has crowned with graces above his fellows; A
Prince, whom, for his Piety, few Ages could parallel.

What Vices of the times have branded his Repute? His Youth, high diet,
strength of body, and Sovereign Power might have inclined, and warpt him to
luxurious vanity, as well as other Monarks, whose effeminaries have enerved the
strength of their declining Kingdoms; How many would have held it a Preferment
to be Attorney to his Royal Lust, or Secretary to His Bosom Sin? Yet, he
remains, a president of unblemisht Chastity.

He might have pleased and pampered up his wanton Palate with the choice of
curious Wines, to lighten Cares, which wait upon the regal Diadem; Yet, he
continues the pattern of a chaste Sobriety: He might have magnified his Mercy,
and sold his Justice, to reward a Service, in pardoning offenses, (committed by
those of near relation) yet, He abides the example of inexorable Justice.

These and many other eminent Graces, and illustrious Virtues can claim no
Birth from Flesh and Blood; especially, in those, whose pupillages are
strangers to Correction; Nor, is it safe Divinity, to acknowledge such high
Gifts, from any hand, but Heaven.

Which, being so, my Conscience, and Religion tells me, that Almighty God, (who
is all perfection) will not leave a work so forward, so imperfect; but, will,
from day to day, still add and add to his transcendent virtues, till he
appear the Glory of the World; and, after many years, be crowned in the World
of Glory.

Martial. lib. 8. Ep. 66. Rerum prima salus, and una Caesar.
Postscript to the Reader.
NOw thou have heard the Harmony of Scriptures, without Corruption, and the
Language of Reason, without Sophistry.

Thou have not only heard Divine Precepts, but those Precepts backed with holy
Examples, Neither those out of the Old Testament alone, but likewise out of the
New. Being now, no Matter left for thy Exceptions, prevaricate no longer with
thy own soul: And, in the fear of God, I now adjure thee, once again, as
thou will answer before the Tribunull at the dreadful and terrible day, that
thou faithfully examine, and ponder the plain Texts which thou have read, and
yielding due obedience to them, stop thine ears against all sinister
expositions, and remember, that historical Scripture will admit no
allegorical interpretations. If any thing, in this Treatise, shall deserve thy
Answer, do it punctually, briefly, plainly and with meekness; If, by direct
Scripture, thou can (without wresting) refute my Error, thou shall reform,
and save thy Brother; If not, recant thine, and hold it no dishonor, to take
that shame to thy self, which brings Glory to thy God.

1. S. PET. 3. 15. Be always ready to give an answer to every one that asks
you a reason, with meekness and fear.

FINIS.
THE NEW DISTEMPER.

WRITTEN By the AUTHOR of the Loyal Convert.

Hilar. de Trin. Lib. 4. Hoc habet proprium Ecclesia; dum persecutione^
patitur, floret; dum opprimitur, proficit; dum laeditur, vincit; dum arguitur,
intelligit; tunc stat quum superari videtur.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1645.

THE NEW DISTEMPER.
AS it is in a Principality, or in a Republique. The further it swerves from
the first Constitution, and Fundamental Principles, the faster it declines,
and hastens toward Ruin; So is it in the Church; The more she deviates, and
slips from her first Foundations, the more she grows into Distempers, and the
nearer she comes to Desolation.

It has been the wisdom of all Princes, and Free States, of former times, to
carry a watchful eye upon the growing Inconvenients of their Kingdoms and
Republiques; That, as evil manners daily breed diseases, so the continual
making, and execution of good laws should daily be prescribed as Remedies^
lest, by too long neglect and sufferance, the Body of the Commonwealth should
grow so foul with superannuated evils, and the humors wax so prevalent, that
the desperateness of the disease might enforce them to as desperate a Remedy.

It is no less prudence and providence in those that are appointed by the
Supreme power (as under him) chief Governors and Overseers of the Church, to
be very circumspect; and, not only faithfully to exercise their Ministerial
Function, by due and careful preaching of the Gospel; but likewise, diligently
to discharge their office in governing, that is, in making wholesome Ordinances,
and duly executing them; That the Inconveniences that grow daily in the Church,
may be daily rectified, lest by too long forbearance they gather head, and so
become either incureable; or else, capable of Remedy, with too great a loss.

The natural Affection I so dearly owe to this my native Country, (to which my
soul always has, does, and will for ever, (...) as much happiness as heaven
can please to give) permits me not to think our Church in so forlorn and
desperate a Case, but that it may be capable of a wholesome Cure; Yet Sense and
Reason (flying with the natural wings of Love and Duty) bids me fear, that
those unnatural Humors, Pride, Negligence, Superstition, Schism, and (that
Harbinger of Destruction) Security have so long been gathering, and now settled
in her, that she cannot, without long time, and much difficulty, (or else
especial providence and divine mercy) be restored; For the hastening whereof,
accu^sed be that unworthy Member that shall not apply the utmost of his
endeavor, and diligence; and, not return the best of those Abilities, he
sucked from her in health, to her advantage, in this her great and deplorable
extremity of Distemper.

The wearyed Physician, (after his many fruitless experiments upon a consuming
Body) advises his drooping Patient to the place of his birth, to draw that
Air, he was first bred in: The likelyest way to recover our languishing
Church, is to reduce her to her first Constitutions, that she may draw the
breath of her first Principles; from whence having made so long a journey, her
return must take the longer time.

The Physician requires not his crazie Patient to take his Progress thither in
a rumbling Coach, or a rude Wagon, (they are too full of motion for a
restless body) nor to ride Post, (the swiftness of the passage makes too
sudden an alteration of the Climate) but in an easie-going Litter, the
flownesse of whose pace might give him a graduall change of Air.

The safest way to reduce our languishing Church to her first Constitution, is
to avoid all unnatural Commotions, and violence in her passage; and carefully
to decline all sudden alterations which cannot be without imminent danger, and
to use the peace-ablest means that may be, that nothing in her journey may
interrupt her, and prove too prejudicial to her journyes end.

The disease of our distempered Church, (Cod be praised) has not as yet taken
her principal parts; Her doctrine of Faith is sound; The Distemper only lies
in her Discipline and Government; which has, these many years, (...)
breeding, and now, broken forth, to the great dishonor of (her Mystical Head)
Christ Jesus; to the unhappy interruption of her own Peace, (the Legacy of
our blessed Savior;) to the great disquiet of our gracious Sovereign, (her
Faiths Defender) to the sharp affliction of his loyal Subjects, (her faithful
servants) and to the utter ruin and destruction of this Kingdom, (the
peaceful Palace of her Glory.)

1. As for her Discipline; In the happy days of Edward the sixth, when all the
Romish Rubbish and Trumpery was seavengerd out of this (the new Reformed)
Church, and the wholesome doctrine of undubitable Truth was joyfully received
into her gates, (being for many years clo^'d with Ignorance and Error) the
piety and providence of her newly chosen Governors, (whose spiritual
Abilities, and valor, were, after, characterd in their own blood) thought
good, in the first place, to make Gods Worship the subject of their holy
Consideration; To which end, they met, and (finding in the Scriptures no
express form of Evangelicall Discipline in each particular, and therefore
concluding, it was left as a thing indifferent. to be instituted according to
the Constitutions of every Kingdom where Religion should be astablisht) they
advised, what Discipline might best conduce to the glory of God and the benefit
of his people; They, first, debated, and put to the question, Whether the old
Lyturgie should be corrected and purged, or whether a New should be contrived.

Cranmer, then Archbishop of Canterbury, a pious, moderate, and learned Father
of the Church, (and not long after a glorious Martyr) finding, that the old
Lyturgie had some things in it derived from the Primitive Church, though in
many things corrupted) conceived it most fitting for the peace of the Church,
not to savor so much of the spirit of contradiction, as utterly to abolish it,
because the Papists used it; but, rather, inclined to have the old Garden
weeded, the Errors expunged; thereby, to gain some of the moderater sort of
that Religion to a Conformity: But Ridly Bishop of London, a man though very
pious, yet of a quicker spirit, and more violent, (and not many years after
suffering Martyrdom too) inclined to a contrary Opinion, rather wishing a
total abolition of the old Liturgy, and a new to be set up, lest the tender
Consciences of some should be offended.

The business being thus controverted, it was at length voted for the purging
of the old; to which service were appointed Doctor
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. Martyr. Goodrick Skip Thirlby Day Holbeck
Ridley C^x King EDWARDS Almoner. Tailor Heynes Redman
Bishop of
Ely. Hereford. Westminster. Chichester. Lincoln. Rochester. Martyr. after B.
of London.
Deane of
Lincoln. Martyr. Exceter. Westminster.


Master Robinson Archdeacon of Leycester.

Mense Maio 1549. Anno Regni Edwardi sexti tertio. Whereof three were famous
Martyrs; and the rest, men of unquestionable sanctity, soundness, and
learning; which, being done, was authorized by Act of Parliament in that
blessed Kings reign Edw. 6. and with a full Consent received into the Church
of England, confirmed by diverse Acts of Parl. in the days of Q^. Eliz. King
James, and King Charles, our now gracious Sovereign, whom Almighty God long
preserve.

But this established Discipline, had no sooner being, but enemies, (of which
sort the devil has always instruments to nip the Plants of Religion in the
Bud) whose number, daily since, increasing, grew hotter and hotter in
opposition, and stronger and stronger in faction, being too long, for peace
fake, connived at; and, at last, too unseasonably, and violently opposed,
insomuch that the disease, in these our late days, grew too powerful for the
Remedy; so that the Distemper of our Church, in that respect, is grown so
high, that I fear Phlebotomy will rather produce a further languishment (being
already come to Madness) then a Cure.

Nay, so far have the Enemies of this established Government and Discipline,
given way to their exorbitant and refractory Opinion, that they will neither
allow the Matter, nor the Form, nor the Authority and testimony of the
Composers.

1. Not the Matter; (though they cannot but acknowledge it, in the general, to
be very good, yet) because it was unsanctified by superstitious lips.

2. Not the Form; because set, and composed by Humane Invention.

3. Not the Composers; because Bishops, and so (though Martyrs for the Cause of
God and his true Religion) Members of Antichrist.

1. As for their Exceptions against the Matter; how ridiculous they are, let
Reason judge: Have not superstitious tongues, and eyes, viewed and read the
Scriptures in their very Original and purity? Shall therefore the Scriptures
be disallowed? Have not superstitious persons profaned our Churches with their
Popish Doctrines, Sacraments and Ceremonies? and shall our Churches therefore
be cried down, or shut against the Ordinances of God? because those Poets were
Heathenish, was S. Paul afraid to use their sayings? Was the Spirit of God too
blame, to endite them? Good things, abused, work evil effects upon the
abusers; but lose not their goodness by the Abuse,

2. As for their Exceptions against the Form, being set, and not conceived,
the Authority of the Scriptures I hope will answer.

God the Father warrants it: God the Son prescribes it: God the holy Ghost
allows it.

1. God the Father warrants it, in the Old Testament, at the time of the Law,
by his command to Moses, Numb. 6. 21. where he gives him a set form and words
to bless the people, The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his
face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee.

2. God the Son prescribes it in the New Testament, in the time of the
Gospel: When S. John the Baptist had taught his Disciples to pray, the
Disciples of Jesus Christ (whose house was called the house of Prayer) humbly
requested the fame boon from him, who prescribed them that Form which he had
formerly used in the end of his Sermon, Mat. 6. 9. which he intended not as a
Model, (as some would have it) but a very Prayer it self, to be used in those
very words, as they were delivered Luke 11. 2. not, After this manner, but,
when ye pray, (...) say.

That he willed the same words to be used, is evident; For his Disciples would
be taught, as John taught his: And how were they taught? S. John taught them
the words only; he could not give them the Spirit to make an extemporary
descant upon them. So that being a direct Set Form, it warranted Set Forms,
which were used from the beginning of the Primitive Church; from whence, this
part of our Discipline had her original.

3. God the holy Spirit allows it: Who dare question, that the holy Spirit
inspired S. Paul in all his Epistles, written to the Churches? In all which
Epistles he concludes with this one Prayer, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
etc.

3. As for their exceptions against the Composers of this Lyturgie, who were no
less then holy Martyrs, (and by Fire-light saw more Revelations then these
Objectors did by daylight) men of approved learning and true piety: though
some have impudence and spiritual pide enough, to think their own abilities
and inspiratious to fly a higher pitch; and Ignorance enough, to acknowledge
greater knowledge in themselves, yet the most humble, able, and truly
sanctified minds, have always had Martyrdom in so high reverence, that they
conclude, that God that made their blood the seed of the Church, and gave them
the courage and honor to dye in the maintenance of the Truth, would not permit
that seed to bring forth such darnel of superstition; or them, to die guilty of
those Errors, they so resolutely cried down with their dying blood.

2. As for her government by Episcopacie (the extirpation whereof being a great
addition to her Distemper) It has as much or more Ius Divinum to plead, then
that, which endeavors to demolish and succeed it, Presbytery; Both are but
mentioned in the Scripture, at large; but no particular Rules for the executing
the office of either; which, being left wholly as arbitrary, it rests in the
power of the Supreme Magistrate (whom God has constituted his Vicegerent) to
choose, and establish, which may best be found consistent with the
Constitutions of the Kingdom, and stand to most advantage with the civil
Government.

But admit the Civil Government will stand with either? When the Balances stand
eavenly poised, the least Grain turns it. In things indifferent, the smallest
circumstance casts it.

This Island of Bitaine (if we look back above 1400 years, being a long
Prescription) when she first received the Faith, was then governed by King
Lucius, whom God made a great Instrument for reducing of this Kingdom from
Paganism; who, sending to Rome, and accommodated from thence with two
Christian and learned Divines, by their labors, and Gods assistance upon them,
planted the Gospel: At the beginning of which plantation Arch-Flamins and
Flamins were put down, and in their room Archbishops and Bishops were
introduced; which Government successively continued, and flourisht through the
reigns of many wise Princes, confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, since the
Reformation; exercised and approved by holy Martyrs; and allowed of, as most
fitting, until the year of our Lord 1641. At which time, multitudes of the
lower sort of people, throughout this Kingdom, petitioned, and tumultuously
troubled the Parliament, so that some of the Members, perchance according to
their inclination, and others, for quietness sake, consented to the abolition
and extirpation of Episcopacy, the unadviz'd Contents of their clamorous
Petitions.

Now if these Governments Hierarchicall and Presbyteriall be indifferent; these
Circumstances, (First, of the time, when Episcopal Government began; Secondly,
of the unintermissive continuance, for so many Ages; Thirdly, the credit of the
persons confirming and approving it) me thinks, should cast such a kind of
necessity upon it, that the other (being an untried Government, and having no
consent or approbation from the Supreme Magistrate; and, being only cried in
by the Ignorant multitude, affected to novelties and change) should have no
wise friend to plead for it.

We read in the Scriptures of Elders ( which are members of a Presbytery) as
it is written, Ob.
Titus 1. 5. For this cause I left thee in Creete that thou should set in
order things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had
appointed thee. Also, 2 Pet. 5. 1. The Elders which are among you. I exhort,
who am also an Elder. By which it appears, that Titus had instructions to set
up a Presbytery.

You take the Scriptures by snatches: Ans.
Had you read in Titus the next verse following but one, you would have had
Saint Paul's meaning with his words, viz. ver. 7. For a Bishop must be
blameless, as the steward of God, not selfe-willed, etc. So that, it plainly
appears, that Elders mentioned in the 5. verse, are expounded Bishops in the
7. Or, had you compared Saint Peter's first verse (before mentioned) with his
fifth in the same Chapter, you would have found Elders no positive, but a
relative word; no Office, but a degree of Age. Ver. 5. Likewise the younger
submitting themselves to the elder; the Apostle here showing, what the
behavior of the Elder Ministers should be toward God, and of the younger
toward them. So that if either of them had set up a Presbytery, it was
suddenly pulled down again; and Episcopacie (which you so much dislike)
placed in the room.

We are so far from disliking Bishops, Ob.
that where there is one, we desire there were twenty; nay that every Church in
England and Ireland had a several Bishop; Diocesan Bishops we dislike,
Parochial we allow.

How suddenly (to cross a settled and warranted establishment) your windmill
fancies can make an alteration. Ans.
Titus, c. 1. 5. had a command from S. Paul to ordain Elders in every City,
(which he interprets Bishops) not in every Church, or Parish; which Ordinance,
the Church of England has punctually observed from the Primitive times to this
day. But you have refractory and gaine-saying spirits, spirits of
contradiction, that understand not the Scriptures, but by your own
Interpretations; always stirring, but never settled; hating order, despising
Government, and resisting all Authority.

But this Episcopal Government had her original from Rome; Ob.
and being poisoned in the Root, it cannot be wholesome in the Branch.

Ignorance is the mother of all Error. Ans.
Your Chronology fails you: If you carefully search Antiquities, you will
find your Objection against it, a good Argument for it. I confess Episcopacie
had her original par^ly from Rome; but, in those days, when we conformed
according to the Church of Rome, the Church of Rome conformed according to the
Word of God. Rome was, then, part of the Primitive Church, not being above 187.
years after Christ: The Bishops of Rome were then so far from being
Antichrists, that most of them were Martyrs, and dyed for Christ.

But our Bishops have too great Revenues; Ob.
whereby, they are occasioned to Riot, pomp, and glory.

Those Princely Benefactors (whose bountiful Pieties thought nothing too much
for Gods Ambassadors, Ans.
and therefore enlarged their Revenues so much) well knew their places and
callings required it; whose gates were to be open to all comers; and bread to
be given to all that wanted. Their Places owe relief to the fatherless;
comfort to the widow; supplies to the needy; and succor to all that are
afflicted; and hospitality to all strangers. No, their great Revenues are
greater Eye-sores then Inconveniences, if not abused.

But these great Revenues might have been decimated, Ob.
and the Tenth part might have sufficiently maintained a preaching Ministry,
and the nine other parts might have been added to the Kings Revenues, which
would have made him the richest and most glorious King in Christendom, and
taken away the necessity of Subsidies from the Subject.

This is robbing Peter to pay Paul; Ans.
beggering the Keys to enrich the Sword, and the next way to bring a curse
upon the King, and all his people in general, by a general guilt of
Sacrilege. The Shewbread must not be eaten but upon more necessity then (God
be thanked) His Majesty was at that time put to. The holy Oil must not be put
unto a Civil use; But His Majesty's pious and resolute refusal ^stereof has
in one word, fully and fairly answered this Objection.

But Bishops have too absolute a power, Ob.
which gives them occasion and opportunity to be tyrannical, and to exercise
an arbitrary Jurisdiction over their Brethren.

From the beginning, Ans.
I confess, it was not so; neither stands it with wisdom or policy to suffer
it to be so: For the Government of the Church must have proportion with the
Government of the State: Government of several natures in one Nation, breeds
confusion; and that, ruin: We therefore being a mixed Monarchy, necessarily
require a mixture likewise in the Hierarchy; which excledes all arbitrary power.

It is true, absolute Monarchy, and an unlimited Hierarchy are apt to fall into
the distemper of Tyranny; and Democracie and a parity in Government is as apt
to run into the disease of Tumult; but of the two evils, Tyranny is the least,
by how much it is the easier to be cured. A monster with one head is sooner
overcome then a Hidra with many. If our Hierarchy has slipped into this
irregularity, it is great wisdom and reason for a Parliament to rectify it.

But the King having the sole election of Bishops, Ob.
and so much favoring them, will hardly consent to the abridgement of their
power and greatness; so that, being his Creatures, their power will be upheld
by him, to the end that upon any difference betwixt him and his people, they
may be the more able to uphold him, and ready to make a strong party for him;
so that the more their power is weakened, the less his party will be prevalent,
whereby, his Prerogative may want Advocates, and the Liberty of the Subject no
enemies.

His Majesty, Ans.
by his yielding to the Bill of taking away their Votes in Parliament, has
given a sufficient Earnest of a further Moderation of their power; and no
question, was, and will be ready to hearken to this or such like humble and
reasonable Petitions (for the extirpating this jelousie) viz. That when any
Bishop dies, or is translated, he would give liberty to the whole Clergy and
Freeholders of those Diocesses to choose, nominate and present four learned
and religious Divines, most unblameable in li^e and doctrine, able for
government, and diligent in preaching: Of which four, His Majesty to prick
one, which maybe consecrated Bishop of the Dioces; By which means, both His
Majesty and His People, having an interest in him, he will be equally engaged;
who, in cases of difference, may become rather a Mediator then Partaker: and,
receiving just power from the King, may execute it as uprightly amongst his
people.

But they are Lords, Ob.
and lord it over Gods Inheritance: Whereas, 1 Pet. 5. 3. forbids it, Be not
Lords over Gods inheritance: and Christ, Luke 22. 25. says, The Kings of the
earth exercise Lordship, but it shall not be so with you.

Our Bishops were Lords, Ans.
as they were Peers of the Land, and as Peers, they had Votes in Parliament;
which, being taken away, they are no more, now, then what the dignity of their
Calling and their own Merits make them. As for that place in S. Peter, thus it
is meant; Ye shall not be Lords over Gods inheritance, that is, Tyrants; Lords
and Rulers being at that time none but Heathens and Persecutors, whose tyranny
made the very name of Lord, terrible, and odious: So that, in that place, by
Lordship is certainly meant Tyranny. Neither can this imply a Parity in our
Church; for without a Superiority, and Inferiority, there can be no Government:
A Parity cannot be considered in order of Government; but only, in the work of
the Ministry. In this, all are fellow laborers; In the other, some command,
and some obey: S. Paul and Timothy had an especial command and charge over
other Ministers. As for that place in S. Luke, which you allege, The Disciples
striving who should be the greatest among them, our blessed Saviors answer was
to this effect, Let Kings exercise power and authority over their vassals, (as
indeed their tyranny made them little better) but it shall be otherwise with
you: You are all fellow servants to me, that am your chief Lord and Bishop of
your souls; whilst I am here, all superiority lies extinct: Christ was then
the only Governor, and the Root of Government was in him: But at his
departure, he gave some to be Apostles, some to be Pastors, etc. and yet all
those degrees were equal in respect of the work: He himself said, Ye call me
Lord, and so I am, and yet, Luke 22. 27. I am among you as he that serves:
whereby it manifestly appears, he intended a parity of the workers in respect
of the work, not a parity in the government in respect of the workers.

Bishops (whose office is to promote Religion, Ob.
and to advance the Gospel, (as is pretended) and to encourage Prenching as the
ordinary means conducing thereunto) are so far from so doing, that instead
thereof, they silence godly Ministers, and put down weekly Lectures, which
were set up at the proper charges and the piety of the people; and to the great
establishment of true Religion.

Here lies a Mystery; Ans.
being the most crafty advantage the devil ever took of popular piety.

Admit the piety of the honest hearted People was the first motive to these
weekly Lectures, how was that piety abused, by those weekly Lecturers? They
were chosen by the people; their maintenance (consisting most of Gratuities)
came from the people, which ebbed or flowed according as their Lunatic
doctrines wrought upon the people. Those Lecturers (whose whole subsistence
thus proceeded from the people) must for their own better livelyhoods please
the people: And what more pleasing to the people then the preaching of Liberty?
and how should Liberty be enlarged, if not peeced with Prerogative? Then down
goes Authority, and up goes Privilege; Down goes the Book, and up goes the
Spirit; Down goes Learning, and up goes Revelation; who gaining credit in the
weak opinions of the vulgar, grew the Seminaries of all Ignorance, and the
nursing fathers of all Rebellion. These are those godly Lecturers that Bishops
put down, who never lost themselves so much, as in not setting up better and
more orthodox in their rooms, which had taken away the ground of this
Objection.

Our Bishops being proud, Ob.
idle, covetous, and Popishly affected, are therefore fit to be extirpated.

Ans.
Admit some be so; must, therefore, such, among them, as are humble, diligent,
charitable, and enemies to Popery, perish? Shall they that are bad, have more
power to pull down a settled Government, then they that be good, to keep it up?
Did Moses, the man of God, extirpate the Government of Priesthood because Aaron
had a hand in the peoples Idolatry? Or, will you undertake that the Elders in a
Presbyteriall Government shall be all faultlesse? Let the guilty receive their
respective punishments, and let others take their office: But the innocent to
suffer with the guilty, is a point of high injustice.

But admit this Government by Bishops, had nothing to plead for it, neither
prescription, nor continuance without Intermission, nor the Authority of
Parliaments in all Ages, yet considering it is, now, a Government, in Being, it
seems not consonant to Reason, or policy to extirpate it, or take it away,
before an other Government be pitched upon. To pull down one maine Pillar,
before another be made to supply the place, and to support the room, is the
next way to pull the Roof upon our heads: Has not Episcopacie been long voted
down? And is not the Assembly, at this time, divided and in controversy, nay
puzzled what Government to set up in the room of it? By which means, occasion
is administered to all disorder, Liberty lies open to all Schisms, Sects, and
Heresies, and Sectaries grow bold to vent their giddy headed opinions without
controlment, confirming themselves in their own Errors, infecting others with
their new fangled and itching doctrines, the nature whereof is (like a Tetter)
to run, till it overrun the whole Body. (Have not our eyes beheld all this?)
which if these unsettled times should long continue, (as God forbid) would
gather such head, and strengthen this our confused Kingdom, that if her issue
of blood were stopped in one place, it would break forth in another; and, like
Hercules his Monster, if one head were struck off, another would arise, to the
utter confusion of the true Protestant Religion, which already begins to be the
least part of this tottering Kingdoms profession, and rather connived at, then
exerciz'd by some. Are not complaints preferred against Brownists and
Separatists, See a book Entitled, The sum of a conference at Terling in
Essex, Ian. ^1. 1643.
unheard? Nay, are not men afraid to complain against them for fear of
punishment? Have not protest Anabaptists challenged our Ministers to dispute
with them in their own open Churches? Have not their disputations been
permitted, nay, unadvisedly undertaken by some of our Ministers, (who
themselves are thought little better) wherein they have made many Proselites,
and left many of the vulgar (who judge the victory to the most words)
indifferent? Have they not after their disputations retired into their Innes,
and private lodgings, accompanied with many of their Auditors, and all joined
together in their extemporary prayers for a blessing upon their late Exercise?
How often has Bow-river (which they lately have baptized New Jordan) been
witness to their prophanations? How many daily make their private meetings,
and assemble in the City of London to exercise their Ministry? How many have
been convicted of Blasphemy, and yet unpunisht? How many times have their
witnesses been taken against some of our most learned and religious Ministers?
for which, some, are plundered, some sequestered, and some imprisoned: How many
of our Ministers whose severity proceeded formerly against Fornicators,
Adulterers, Drunkards, Swearers, and such like, are now undone upon their
revengefull witnesses and testimony, appearing now (for the better coloring of
their malice) well affected to the Cause? All which in time will so encourage
all Sects, Factions, Hypocrites, and make Heresy so bold, and strong in this
Kingdom, that the true Protestant Religion will be (under the detestable name
of Popery) even turned out of doors for company, or at least so little
favored, that it will be forced to shroud it self in corners, as those
Sectaries did, before these troubles were.

I, Ob.
but when things are settled, and Justice done upon the Popish Faction, these
Sectaries with their Sects will vanish like the Mist before the mid day sun,
and a true reformed Religion will be established to us and our Posterity.

You seem by this Objection but a young State Physician, Ans.
and a mere novice in the curing of a disease of this nature. In some cases,
where the undisturbed humors keep their bounds, distempers are quickly
evaporated, and being scatterd through the whole body, every part breathes out
some, and Nature (being able to truckle with the disease) by her own power,
relieves her self; and, in a short time, rectifies the Body: But upon a
continual confluence, and gathering head of lawless humors, she is so
weakened; that she has no power to resist, and less heart to struggle with her
enemy, but is forced to yield: But the time you prefixe for the subduing of
these numerous Sects, is, first, when all things are settled, secondly, when the
Land is cleared of Papists.

1. For the first, It is all one as if you had said, When the body is in good
health, you will easily find a cure. A rare Physician! In the mean while, you
will connive at this continued confluence of humors, which makes it at length
incureable.

2. As for the second: Take heed while ye go about to cure a Fever, you run
not the Body Politic into a Dropsy, with too much Phlebotomie. But you will
first clear the Kingdom of Papists: And who be they? In your Account, all
such as stand for Episcopal Government, (a Government coetaneous with this our
almost out-dated Religion) All such as approve of the Book of Common Prayer, (a
Form established by many Acts of Protestant Parliaments) All such as are
passively obedient, and loyal to his Majesty, (a duty commanded by Gods own
mouth) Of the Clergy, all such as will not preach for blood, (although
Ministers of the Gospel of Peace.) All such as will not take the Covenant, to
suppress Bishops, (although they have formerly sworn canonical obedience to
their Ordinary) All such as will not encourage Subjects to resist the power of
their natural Prince, (although having taken the Oath of Allegiance, and the
late Protestation.) And to conclude, all that have not contributed willingly,
bountifully, and continually to this War; and in a word, that have any
considerable Estates to pick a hole in: If all Sects and Sectaries be not
suppressed till then, we are like to have a comfortable Reformation.

But in case, you only mean such Papists as own, and acknowledge the
doctrine of the Church of Rome; Tell me, what course would you take with the^?

Either you must banish them, or disinherit them, or take away their lives.

1. If banish them; It must be done, either with the Kings consent, or against
it; If against it, you resist the power, and he that resists shall receive
damnation, Romans 13. If with it, you make the King guilty of perjury, who has
sworn to protect all his Subjects in his Coronation Oath.

2. If disinherit them; It must be done, either according to the known Laws of
the Kingdom, or against them; According to the Laws, ye cannot; for there is
no Law for it. If against them, you transgress what you pretend to maintain
in all your Declarations.

3. If take away their lives, It must be done, either for a Cause, or without a
Cause; If for a Cause, show it, that the world may be satisfied: If without a
Cause, you are guilty of murder.

Which course soever ye take, you have not Christ for your example, who quietly
suffered the two Caesar's, being Idolaters, not only to possess that Kingdom,
but to usurp it, because God permitted them, and permissively placed them
there: When the Disciples asked our blessed Savior, Did not thou sow good
wheat? Whence comes it that there be tares? His answer was, The evil one has
done it. His pleasure being demanded, whether they should weed them up? his
Reply was, No, Let them alone until the harvest and then he would separate
them.

A good deed may be ill done, when either against command, or without warrant.

Though God has permitted the evil one to plant Papists among us, yet he has
not authorized us to root them up, nor yet to take the lives of any, until
their actions come within the danger and compass of the established Laws of
the Land.

We have presidents for the rooting out of Idolaters in the Scriptures; Ob.
which warrant us to do the like.

You find it no where, Ans.
but in the time of the Law; at which time, God immediately commanded it; which
kind of Warrants are now ceased.

Again, In the time of the Law, some were accounted Strangers, And strangers
had not the privileges that brethren have. Usury was lawful to be taken of
strangers, not of brethren: Now, in the times of the Gospel, Christ has made
us all Brethren, and called us by his own name, Christians: and what was
lawful, then, to be done to strangers, is unwarrantable, now, to be done to
Christians. We are brethren.

Then Protestantisme and Popery may be consistent in one Kingdom, Ob.
and Gods name may be harmelesly profaned with Idolaetry and superstition, in
the same place, where it is truly and sincerely worshipped.

Your inference is not good. Ans.
It is one thing for a Prince to protect his subjects; and an other to be
partaker with them, or to allow of their superstitions. Kings cannot enforce
Consciences, though pitched upon a false Religion: All that Magistrates can do
against them (unless for Seducing, which a particular Statute made Treason) is
to punish their purses, for not observing his Statutes respectively, or for
exercising their Religion contrary to his Laws, But well it were if such a
necessity of Connivance had no such subject to work upon.

How happy had it been for this unlucky kingdom, if his Majesty's most prudent
and pious offer, two year since, propounded to us, had been accepted in this
particular, That all the Children of his subjects of that Religion, should be
taken from them, and educated in the Religion of the Church of England? By
which means, the whole Kingdom, in a short space of time, would have been
peaceably reduced to an Unity in Doctrine; And, if the same course were taken
with oath Srectaryes, an Uniformity in Discipline also. But our Kingdom must
not expect an universal and through Reformation in all particulars, till
Catechismes be more strictly used, and the intercourse of Ambassadors (which
cannot simply be avoided) and Legers be restrained; and strict statutes made
and executed against sectaries.

But to return to our first matter. Admit Episcopacy were a Government,
accidentally inconvenient, and that a more fitting Government, were discovered,
prepared and made ready to be set up, It would be but a new untryed Government,
and not experimentally known what proportion it would bear without temporal
Constitutions. A horse may be well metled, and conditioned, and every way
commendable for the saddle; yet not draw well in a Coach or Chariot: A great
part of our Common Law is built upon the Cases of Bishops, insomuch that if
that Government be changed, there must be a necessary alteration of many Laws
of the land; And what inconvenience may arise from such an Alteration, I leave
to the Judgment of Lawyers, being not unworthy of some Consideration.

But let these things be accounted not Inconveniencyes, and that the
Hierarchicall Government is fit to be demolished, either for the abuse of it,
by some few exorbitant Prelates, or for the mischiefs that follow, in respect
of it self, in that it administers such occasion of offense, yet the too sudden
Execution of a business of so great a consequence, and concernment, gives a
livelier testimony of passion then discretion, (if Polititions may have credit)
and savours of extremity, (which is opposite to all virtue,) and too much
rashness, the distemper of all serious and honorable undertakings: Too sudden
an Alteration in matters of small moment, passes not without some
inconvenience; but, in things of such a nature, as a Government, nay a Church
government too (the nursery of the whole Kingdoms happiness or misery) it
cannot be without imminent danger; but the sudden alteration of a fundamental
Government of the Church, (which necessarily carries the State with it)
threatens, nay brings no less then unavoidable ruin to both.

A Rashness, too much (we fear) relishing of private ends to demolish that
government in twelve months, which has been setting up and maintained by as
wise generations as ours, above fourteen hundred years.

How happy had it been for this (at that time prosperous, but now miserable)
Kingdom, had we taken the advantage of (that greatest blessing, that ever
gracious Prince conferred upon unthankful Subjects) the Trienniall Parliament,
wherein, we might every 3 years have inspected this new recoverd Kingdom, and
kept it always in a perfect Crisis, the approaching Terror whereof, would not
have afforded popular evils so long a time, or liberty to root themselves or
gather head against the peace and welfare of our happy Government; through the
benefit whereof we might have taken an advantageous leisure and mature
deliberation to ripen every Bill, and, by degrees, to rectify every nonag'd
Grievance; and indeed, what happiness was there, which we had not then an offered
opportunity to bring upon this (now) unhappy Land? The Government of the State,
as in many things, it was reduced into an excellent temper; so, questionless,
(had not this unnatural difference interposed) it had in all things (by the
continued goodness and favor of His Sacred Majesty) been perfected, to the
comfort of us, and the happiness of succeeding Generations.

The Government of the Church likewise might, by the virtue of the granted
Trienniall, been narrowly and exactly searched into; The Governors strictly
observed; The Bad turned out, and changed for better; They that deserved
punishment, punished according to their misdemeanors; Others, less offending
through some neglect, reproved and checked; and, upon no amendment, the next
Trienniall, proceeded against accordingly.

The Fig Tree was not presently cut down, Root and Branch, but suffered till
another year; And punishments before an Admonition are too rashly and severely
inflicted.

Thus by this graduall and Trienniall Course, Mercy and Justice would have
incorporated; the Government of the Church had been established; the peace of
this Kingdom had been secured; the bad Governors had been rectified, or
removed; the good, encouraged and honored; and Peace and Truth had kissed each
other.

But the multitudes of these our national sins were too great, to permit so
great a Blessing on this Nation, as the benefit of this Trienniall Prrliament.
God suffered Abraham to see the holy Land, but for the transgressions of the
people, not to possess it: God showed us a glimpse of that mercy (which our
sins made us unworthy to enjoy) and snacht it from us. In which respect, we are
now left to our own ways, and governed by our own Inventions; and (what is
wors^) we are neither penitent for our national sins, nor our own; nor (what
is worst of all) sensible of Gods Judgments, nor our own miseries.

How often have our Modern Ministers in their unmeditated prayers, before the
open Congregation, given God joyful thanks for these blessed times! Eccles. 5.
Whereas (if their hearts had not been hasty to utter any things before God)
they might have rather petitioned for a removal of these his terrible
judgments: How often have they prayed for the continuance of these happy days
^ whereas, Eccles. 5.
had not their mouths been rash, they might better have deprecated those
miseries. How often have they in their Sermons. blasphemously challenged God
(upon the forfeiture of his Justice) to crown their Cause with Victory! How
often, instead of wholesome doctrine, have they delivered such reports as their
Consciences knew Fables, and were before next Sabbath Lies upon Record? How
often have they preached down Subjection to Princes, and encouraged the Sword
to grow warm in the blood of Christians? How often have they Articled against
Orthodoxe, able, and learned Divines; and crowded themselves into their
Livings, who upon my certain knowledge (some of them) can neither make true
Latin, nor write good English; and then, lay their preferment upon the wisdom
of the Parliament? How many children above a year old (because their fathers
are suspected to be loyal to their Prince) continue unbaptiz'd? many parishes
can witness. How long time is it since the last Sacrament of the Lords Supper
was administered, let the people tell, if their memories be so good; and then,
the Elements deliverd in their own new devised words. These are now the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel of Peace: These the Ministers of this blessed
Reformation: These the men that must pull down Antichrist out of his seat, and
set up Christ Jesus in his throne: Nay, rather, these are they that for filthy
lucre carry men about with diverse and strange doctrines: These are the men that
in former times separated themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. These
are they that despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities: These are such as
have gone the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam for
reward; and have perished in the gaine-saying of Core: Jud. 1^.
The fear spies in your feasts of charity, feeding themselves without fear;
clouds, that are without Water carried about with the wind; 13.
rageing waves of the Sea, fo^eing out their own shame, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever.

Is not this a blessed Priesthood? Are not these rare materials for a hopeful
Presbytery? (...) ^overnours for the house of God?

Are not the two great Nurseryes of this kingdom like to flourish; when the
chief Plants are pulled up by the roots, and only the^e Crabstoc^s suffered
to prosper, and bear their own natural fruit? Our fathers have eaten the
Grapes, and their childrens teeth will be set on edge. They that have been the
Pillars of our Religion are hewn down, and our falling Church is shored up with
these inconsiderable spars. They that grappled with, and foyld the stoutest
Champions of the Church of Rome, are imprisoned; wanting both bread and
liberty; And such as neither did, nor could, nor durst appear in such a
quarrel, are crowned with their Reward: They whose learning and orthodox piety
made England the glory of nations, and the envy of foreign kingdoms, are now
disgraced and ruined; and th^se, that learning made not capable of a Degree,
advanced and honored to the great dishonor of this kingdom.

Nor can I hear forget, how much this staggering Church of England owes to her
pious and religious Nursing Father, and her faiths royal Defender, our
gracious Sovereign; whose wisdom, moderation and tender piety (amongst other
of his princely virtues) has so manifesty showed it self; in not following the
example of those, whom my heart bleeds to call his Enemies; and blazing the new
Ministry of this kingdom, as they have done the old? Had his provoked passion
published a Century to the eye of all the world, of those moral vices, hideous
blasphemies, infirmities and faylings of the Clergy of the one party, as they
did on the other, how would the Church of Rome, and all the Enemies of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, have hissed and derided our Religion? that, by the
general Confession both of Prince, and people, had such Monsters to adorn it?
How would foreign Christians have been frighted at the very name of the
Church of England? How would the style of Protestant have become the Obloquy,
and By word of all Religions: It was not for want of matter: Report would have
(...) enough, besides that, which, perchance, would have made the truer history.

Nor was it scarcity of penmen, to paint their actions to the life: Oxford had
and yet has Pens, sharp enough, and Ink that wanted no Gall: Nor can I
conceive how such nimble, active, and such salik fancyes here could have
forborne it, had not the wisdom and providence of his Sacred Majesty laid upon
them his restraining power: By which it evidently appears to those that are
not obstinately and maliciously blinded with the darkness of resolved
Rebellion, that his Majesty's solemn Vows, and serious Protestations, for the
maintaining the honor of the true Protestant Religion, agree with his most
pious Intentions, and published Resolutions: Had his secret affections been
warpt, or the least degree wavering from the Church of England, or any whit
inclining to the Romish superstition; had the imaginations of his heart
intended secretly an introduction of the Popish Religion, how could his new
design been better animated, then by an inward dislike of the Protestant
Religion, and how could that dislike have been better fomented and encouraged,
then by the Advantage, the just Advantage taken of the general corruption of
her Ministry?

But the wisdom and tenderness of his Piety stands silent, in this behalf;
and, in his singular prudence, has not so much as taken notice, or in any of
his Declarations once reproved the uncharitable impiety of that scandalous
Pamphlet, for fear of further blazing it, but rather suffering it to perish in
its own filthiness, and choosing rather to groan under the burden of his
faithful and abused Clergy, then by revenging and painting forth the crimes
of the other party (far more guilty) to afflict Religion under the burden of
both.

Thus is the health of our languishing Church impaired; thus is the body of our
crazed Government distemperd; thus is the peace of our Saviors Spouse
disquieted; thus is the welfare of our English Sion determined; Her Dove-like
piety is turned to Serpentine policy; her Unity, to Division; her Uniformity,
to Disorder; her Sanctity to Profaneness; her Needle Work robes to a
parti-colored Coat; her honor into disgrace, her glory into disdain, and her
prosperity into destruction. Lam. 1. 2.
She weepeth in the night, and her tears are in her Cheeks. Among all her
Lovers there is none to comfort her; ver. ^.
and all her friends have dealt treacherously with her; Her adversaries are the
chief; and her enemies prosper; for the Lord has afflicted her for the
multitude of her transgressions: Her children are gone into captivity before
the Enemy, 2. ^.
and her gates are sunk into the ground: Her Kings and Princes are among the
Gentiles; her law is no more, and her Prophets find no vision from the Lord:
ver 10.
The Elders of the Daughter of Sion sit upon the ground, and keep silence, and
have girded themselves with sackcloth; The horn of her enemies is lifted up;
They spared not the persons of her Priests, they favored not her Elders, they
have laid wait for the breath of our Nostrils, Lam. 4. 20.
the Anointed of the Lord, and servants bear rule over us. Our Inheritance is
turned to strangers, Lam. 5. 4.
and our houses to Alyants: We drink our water for money, Lam. 3^ ^3
and our woods are sold to us: We have sinned and have rebelled, therefore thou
have not spared: For this our hearts, our hearts faint, for these things our
eyes are dim; For these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with
water.

Where, O where are you, all you that are the wisdom and Governors of this
unhappy Island? Where, O where are you, the great Counsel and grave Senators
of this falling Kingdom? Where, O where are you, the great College of
Political Physicians of this languishing Commonwealth? Are ye all fallen
asleep, while we perish? and is there none to awake you? Open your eyes, unlock
your ears, and mollify your hearts: Behold, behold the miseries of your land,
and if Compassion be not banished from the earth, pity, O pity the approaching
Ruins of this your groanning, this your native Kingdom. Hear O harken to the
sad Complaints of your afflicted petitioners; and, if your hearts be not of
Adamant, relent, and let them not in vain petition for their lives: Let the
breath of this distempered Kingdom, contracted into one extreme sigh, move
you to the speedy endeavors of a timely Cure. Inquire into her Constitution.
Examine her distempers, and reduce her to her first Principles: Try no
experiments upon a body so declined, and let not the Acuteness of her disease
swade you to a desperate remedy. Look, O look back into the blessed days of
Queen Elizabeth: Observe what blessings we then had, both by Sea and Land;
What plenty; what success; what victories; what honor abroad; what unity at
home; and indeed what had we not that could make a Kingdom happy? Reduce us, O
reduce us to that happy government; and let not the eagerness of a Reformation
be a means to want men to be Reformed, or matter for a Reformation: Remember,
O remember that great Reformer Christ Jesus; He was against all bloodshed, but
his own; for that blood sake follow his Example: Or, if the way must needs be
made by blood, let it light rather a little, upon many Generations, then all
upon one; the ruin whereof will deny us another Generation: Let not the
children of your Mother sterve in the land of bread, and let not the
foundations of your natural kingdom be longer dabled in unnatural blood.
Turn, O turn your eyes upon her breaches, and let not strangers Lord it in her
Gates. For the mercies of that God which has been merciful to you, be
merciful to millions of Christians, whose lives depend upon your Care; be
merciful to millions of children, that know not their right hands from their
left; be merciful to generations unborne; to whom, when deep Records shall
bring the Chronicles of your Actions, ages to come may magnify your Merits:
For his sake that is the Prince of peace, as you desire to meet peace upon your
Death beds, let this Sea of blood already spilt be thought sufficient: For the
whole body of Englands sake, who have trusted their power into your hands, that
have cast all their welfares upon your wisdoms; for their sakes that venture
their lives and fortunes upon your providence; for your own sakes; for your
tender wives and dear childrens sakes; for the God of mercies sake, as you
love mercy; for Christ Jesus, the God of peace his sake, as you prize the peace
of a Good Conscience, harken to, and ensue peace, while there is a possibility
of peace.

Darken not that Religion with the black storms of contention, you profess to
glorify: Lessen not the glory of that Church, by partiality, which you have
promised to beautify: Draggle not that Gospel in the sinks of blood, which you
have protested to magnify: The sins of Nineveh were not too great for Gods
compassion, and shall the offenses of poor England be too great for yours?
Nineveh cried mightily to heaven, and they were spared; and shall the miseries
of three Kingdoms be hollowed in your ears, and not heard? Well, Hest. 4 13
If Ruin, by a foreign power come, (which the God of heaven and earth
forbid) think not with your selves that you shall escape the Fury more then all
the rest: 14.
But if you altogether stop your ears, at such a time as this, then shall
Enlargement and Deliverance arise to England from another place, but you and
your houses shall be destroyed; And who knows whether you are sent to this
employment, for such a time as this?

O thou that art the great preserver of mankind, to thee, to thee we turn the
voice of our complaint: Thou, thou art gracious, and plentiful in Compassion,
but in man there is no help, Lam. 3 24.
nor mercy in the sons of men. Job 13. 15.
Thou art my portion O God, and I will trust in thee, Psalm. 146.
although thou kill me. I will not trust in my bow, Ps. 14. 1, 2
it is not my shield that can save me, but it is thou alone, O God, that can
deliver us. Deliver us O God from the evil men, preserve us from the cruel
men, which imagine evil in their hearts, and make war continually. Have
mercy, O Lord, have mercy upon us, 123. 3.
for we have suffered too much contempt:. Hear the mourning of the Prisoners,
102. 20.
and deliver the children from death. 83. 5.
They have consulted together in heart, and have made a league against thee. 79
4.
We are a reproach to our neighbors, even a scorn and derision to them that
are round about us. 74. 10.
O God, how long shall the Adversary reproach thee? Shall the enemy blaspheme
thy Name for ever? 137. 7.
Remember the children of Edom O Lord in the day of Jerusalem, which said, Raze
it, raze it, to the foundations thereof. 132. 9.
Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints rejoice.
Lord, how long wilt then hide thy self? 89. 46.
for ever? Shall thy wrath burn like fire? Will thou be angry with us for
ever? 85. 5.
Will thou prolong thy wrath from generation to generation? 84. 9.
Behold, O God, our Shield; and look upon the face of thine Anointed. Let thine
hand be upon the man of thy right hand, whom thou have made so strong for
thyself. Give thy Judgments to the King, 80. 17.
and thy righteousness to the Kings son; 72. 1.
that peace may be in his days, and let his enemies lick the dust: Clothe his
enemies with shame, but upon his head let his Crown flourish. 132. 18.
How long shall the wicked, O Lord, how long shall the wicked triumph? They
prate and speak fiercely, and the workers of iniquity vaunt themselves. 94. 3.
They smite down thy people, O Lord, and trouble thine Inheritance. They slay
the widow and the stranger, 115. 10.
and murder the fatherless. O house of Aaron trust in the Lord, for he is our
help and our shield; He will bless the house of Israel, and he will bless the
house of Aaron. Praise ye the Lord ye house of Israel, 135. 19.
praise ye the Lord ye house of Aaron, praise ye the Lord ye house of Levi: Ye
that fear the Lord, praise the Lord.

PSALM. 122. 6, 7, 8, 9. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper
that love thee.
Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.
For my brethren and companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.
Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.


Hier. sup. Epist. ad Romans Quisquis corpus suum affligit, and concordiam
deserit, laudat
Deum quidem in Tympano, sed non laudat in Choro.


The End.
THE VVHIPPER WHIPPED. BEING A REPLY Upon a scandalous Pamphlet, CALLED THE
WHIP: Abusing that Excellent Work of CORNELIUS BURGES, Dr in DIVINITY, one of
the Assembly of DIVINES, ENTITLED, The Fire of the Sanctuary Newly discovered.

Incerti Authoris. Qui Mockat, Mockabitur.

Imprinted, M. DC. XLIV.

THE WHIPPER WHIPPED
THere came, by chance, to my un-enquiring hand, a Pamphlet called The Whip;
whose Pharisaicall Author pretended a transcendent Zeal to my first eye; but,
after a leafes perusal, I found his flame so extremely hot, that his Religion
seemed (for want of due stirring) burnt too; and so much tasted of the Brass,
that no Orthodox palate could relish it, nor a well-grounded Conscience digest
it: The namelesse Author had an Vtop^an spirit; and the Government he best
affected, was Anarchie: He was a Salamander; his very dwelling was in Fire: His
Heart was a sink of Ignorance; is Spleen, a spring of Gall; a Shemei, a
Rabshekah: his mouth ran bitterness and malice; and his Pen flowed venime, and
Rebellion.

The object of this fiery Pamphlet, was the orthodox and most excellent work of
Doctor Cornelius Burges, a man of singular parts; and, at this time, a worthy
Member of the Synod; or Assembly of Divines; entitled, The Fire of the
Sanctuary newly discovered, or A Complete Tract of Zeal, and printed by George
Miller and Richard Badger, anno 1625. which, this Pamphleters unlearned Pen
has to poorly answered, so impiously maligned, so maliciously calumniated,
that I have thought good to cast away some Ink upon him, (not in vindication
of the Doctor, whose Conscience, enlightened by the Scriptures, needs no
Champion) but to rectify the abused vulgar; who, by the help of such
Pneumaticall Fantasticks, have turned their leaden apprehensions into
Quick-silverd Zeal, which has swallowed up and devoured their duty to their
betters, their fair demeanor to their equals, and their charity to all
Relations.

This unwo thy Pamphleter, in the Progress of his more unworthy work, against
this worthy Member, uses that method, which B^elzeb^b the prince of Flies
prescribes him; who, like a Fly, buzzes through his whole Larder, blowing here
and there; but lea^ing such fruitful corruption, that, in short time, his
whole store, nay (if possible) the very Bread of life, molded by the hand of
heaven, which he has set apart in his margent, would grow unsavory.

He begins at the Dedication Epistle, repeating the Doctors words, then
poisoning them with his own Calumnies; whereunto, if ^ur Patience (equal
Readers) will admit me, by the name of a Replyer; you shall have all woven
together in one Loome: Wherein I purpose not to load your ears with those his
frivolous preambles and impertinences, which would swell this Pamphlet beyond
your Patience; but, suddenly to rush into the List.

D. Burges Dedication Title. To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of
PEMBROKE, etc.

Calumniator.

Popery and Superstition at the first dash! Dedication is a mere P^pish
Ceremony, begun by the Antichristian Hierarchy, derived from deo and dicatio,
which is a vowing to God: It was first used when Steeplehouses, or
Meeting-places were built, which Papists call Churches, dedicating them to God;
or to those they honored as much, Saints, whereof some of them are now roaring
in hell; under which pretense, they juggled holiness into them, more then into
Barnes or Stables: Now this Book the Doctor dedicates to the Earl of Pembroke,
whereby he secretly acknowledges him either a God, or a Saint; If a God, he
blasphemes; If a Saint, he lies; for he was a Courtier, and preferred the King
before the Elect; whereas Saints imitate God, and should be no Respecters of
persons; in whose eyes, Kings and Subjects are alike.

Replyer.

When Ignorance has shot forth her shady leaves, how quickly Impiety budds!
and, then, how suddenly Rebellion blossoms! Ignorance first taught thee a false
E^imologie of a word; then, Impiety suggests a slight estimation of a Church;
and then, Rebellion insinuates a disreputation of a King. Now, one lash more at
school, would have helped all this, by curing that Ignorance, and letting you
know, that Dedication is derived from De, (here taken perfective) and dicatio,
(which is an offering or a presentation) which two words, joined, carry the
sense of a full or total presentation of this Book to whom he presented it.
Now Call. where is the Blasphemy? or where is the Lie? ^^t them even both return
to the base mouth from whence they came; And that one lash more which might
have cured thy Ignorance, in time, might save Gregory some labor; and thee,
some pains, in an undedicated Meeting Place.

D. Burges in the Epistle Dedicatory.

It (viz. this Treatise) speaks of Fire; But such, as was made to warm, and
not to burn any thing, unless stubble.

Call.

I knew what temper your fire (your zeal) had, (lukewarm Master Doctor) apt
to receive warmth or flame according to the times.

Rep.

It is the devils custom to leave out half the Text: Let me supply your
defect, Call. To warm solid hearts; Not to burn any thing but such stubble as
you, and then the sentence is perfect.

D. Burges.

Here is no ground for an Utopian spirit, to mould a new Commonwealth; no
warrant for Sedition to touch the Lords Anointed, so much as with her tongue;
No occasion administered to Ishmael to scoff at Isaac; no Salamanders lodge
themselves here.

Call.

An Utopian spirit is a word of your own coining, whereof I confess my
ingenious ignorance. But I perceive, this opinion which you pin upon Pembrok's
sleeve, admits rather of an old Popish Government, then of the moulding of a
New, by an holy Reformation: It makes such an Idol of your King, (whom you
falsely tear me the Lords Anointed) that it brands that hand with the aspersion
of Sedition; and that tongue, with the guilt of Impiety, that touches him;
whereas Kings are but men, and wicked Kings but Beasts, in Gods eye, and the
righteous have Gods power, and may touch them; nay, and scourge them too; But,
I fear, your Zeal burns now only to light your Doctorship to a Deanery: What
you mean by Salamanders, I know not.

Repl.

You profess Ignorance, Call. in the beginning and ending of your learned
speech, and discover Treason in the whole Body: The first Ignorance you
p^ofess^, is, of an Vtopian spirit, wherein I thus inform you: It is a
fanaticall spirit, even your own spirit, by which you pray Nonsense by the
hour, preach Treason by the half day, and ejaculate blasphemies every minute.
Your last ignorance is, of the Salamanders; wherein I thus instruct you. They
are the fiery spirits that dwell within your flaming bosoms, by which ye
murder, under the pretense of piety; rob by way of Religion; and fling dirt in
the face of Majesty by color of zeal: No wonder, Call. those spirits are
unknown to you, when ye know not of what spirit ye are: As for the body of
your speech, we leave it to the judgment of Authoritis.

D. Burges.

But here is a flame that will lick up all angry wasps, and inflamed tongues
that presumptuously and without fear speak evil of dignities, and of things
they understand not, railing on all not so free as themselves to foame at the
mouth, and to cast their froth on all that are near, without difference.

Call.

This your Flame, courtly Master Doctor, lights us to understand, that your
saintly Patron had then some remarkable Living in his Gift; or power, to make
you one of the Kings Chaplains, in ordinary; strengthened, with the hopes
whereof, you thus magnify dignities, that is, Kingship, Lordship, and
Bishopship: And I am verily persuaded, if Amal^ck or Esau, (whom God cursed)
were in being, your li^sy- woolsy Zeal would endeavor to vindicate them from
that Curse; Or if Caiphas, the High Priest, were placed in office here, you
have a Pensill to paynt his Wall white enough, for Paul to curse.

Repl.

Call. I fear you are one of those angry wasps the Doctor's Zeal licks up, and
his Pen (now above 19 years old) discoverd your nest, being a faction now in
power, and prophesied of above 1500 years since; whose malepert, saucy, and
slovenly Tenets were well known to him, to be the Ivy of the true Orthodox and
Primitive Religion, whose ambitious and fiery spirits, (hating all Government
both in Church and State, casting their foame and froth in the face of Majesty
and Hierarchy, without respect of honor or place) his conscience (enlightened
and instructed by the holy Scriptures) hated with a perfect hatred, and used
his best means to suppress and quench.

D. Burges, in his Preface.

My sharpness against some Democraticall AntiCeremonians is not meant to weak
Consciences, joined with pious, sober, and peaceable courses.

Call.

Mark, whilst this sharp Doctor would boast of a virtue called Moderation, he
turns Advocate to that detestable sin of Lukewarmnesse: As if he should have
said, My sharpness against the enemies of Popery, extends not to them, that
are not too active and zealous of Gods glory. Doctor, this Fire will hardly
make your Pot boil.

Rep.

Mark how this bitter Calumniator acts his own part to the life; at one
breath, both wresting the words, and wronging the person: And how it offends
him, (whose glory is to set weak Consciences upon the Rack) to see another,
fearful of offending a weak Conscience: Call. This Zeal will make your pot
boil into the Fire.

D. Burges.

But I speak to such as keep a frantic coil about Ceremonies, and think they
never take their level right, but when, with every bolt they shoot, they
strike a Bishops Cap sheire off his head, and yet are more fantastical,
ignorant, proud, self-willed, negligent and deceitful in their particular
Callings then many whom they despise and condemn to Hell for carnal men,
forsooth, as any observing eye may easily discern.

Call.

So, Master Doctor; I now call both the Parliament, and the whole Assembly of
Divines to witness, you are either a Malignant, or a Turnecoate: When you
read this clause, remember your own late Votes, and tell me, what Mettle your
Conscience is made of. Tell me now, in sadness, Doctor, Are they ignorant,
proud, self-willd, negligent, and deceitful in their Callings, that inveigh
against Ceremonies, forsooth? that endeavor to strike off a Bishops Cap
forsooth? Once again, I say, remember your own Votes and blush: Nay, if, with
the Satyr, you can blow hot and cold with one Mouth, you are no Divine for me,
forsooth.

Repl.

You triumph Call. too much before the victory, and crow too confidently upon
your own Dunghill: I justify the Doctor in what I know: you condemn him, in
what you know not: What his Votes were, or how, or when made, it matters not to
me, but his opinion (declared to all the world) proclaims him no less then
Orthodox: I look upon him as a Divine, absolutely; not as an Assembly-man,
relatively: The Satyrs hot breath warmed his fingers, which else had been too
cold: The Satyrs cold breath coold his Breath which else had burnt his lips:
The first was Breath; The last, but Wind.

D. Burges.

Touching the Carriage of Zeal toward Princes, my CONSCIENCE witnesses with
me, in the sight of God, that I have spoken nothing, but what in my judgment
is the Truth, without sinister or base intents.

Call.

This Clause stands like a Pander to keep the door, till you have committed
your spiritual Fornication within; and to anticipate your believing Reader,
whilst you basely flatter Princes; wherein, you have engaged your Conscience,
and attested God concerning that your opinion, we shall hereafter understand;
which in his due place, you shall not fail to hear of.

Repl.

How like a snarling Cur you gurne before ye bite: Call. as you have acted your
first part, in showing your teeth; so, anon, we shall expect your second part,
in clapping your tail betwixt your legs, and shamefully running away.

D. Burges.

Nor do I touch on that, presuming to teach my Betters (but rather as men use
to do, when they go for Orders, or a Benefice) to give account.

Call.

Doctor, It is the property of Dogs to baule at Beggars, or Inferiors, who
come empty handed; but to fawn upon their Feeders, and wag their flattering
tails at those, from whose well furnished Trenchers they expect some scraps:
No, you presume not to teach your Betters; Tell me, Doctor, who sent you? Whose
Ambassador are you? Come you in your own name? It seems you do: He, in whose
Name you should come, knows no betters: The Truth is, Christ sent you; but
Antichrist (from whose surrogates you had your Orders) signed your Commission:
Christ sent you to Preach, and Antichrist bad you take a Benifice by the way;
which (speaking to your Betters) you here craftily insinuate in your Simile:
lesuites beg not, but point ye where the Box stands.

Repl.

Your saucy Impudence, Call. Votes Modesty a vice, and rudeness, Zeal: Our
blessed Savior says, Give unto Caesar those things that belong unto Caesar; and
Saint Paul, Honor to whom Honor belongs, commanding all things to be done
decently and in order: Which is too neat a Doctrine for your nasty spirits:
God, who is no Respecter of persons inmatter of Justice, commands you not, to
disrespect persons, by way of manners: Diet for Princes and Pesants require
several dressings: When Saint Paul said to that heathen King Agrippa,
Beleevest thou the Prophets? I know thou beleevest; have not you blasphemy
enough to traduce the Apostle of a courtly lie? I fear, your Rabseka-spirit
would have lent him courser language. And as for the Benefice you say the
Doctor insinuates in his Simile, you might have charitably translated it into
two or three Sequestrations, and then it had been tolerable.

D. Burges.

And yet I would teach withal: I mean, the boystrous Multitude; who, ever
prefer the rough Channel before the temperate shore, and think no man preaches
well in a Prince his Court, but he that is so fiery and rude (plain as they
call it) as with his Thunder shakes the very house: And if he cast no squibs in
a Princes face, or preach not like a Privy Councellor, they say he has no holy
Fire in him.

Call.

How this temporizing Doctor still courts Preferment! In his last Clause, he
Craftily insinuates for a Benefice; and in this, as grossly for a Court
Chaplainship, wherein, he openly discovers how his silken Conscience stands
qualified for such employment, being more ready to sow Pillows under Princes
Elbowes, then denounce Judgments against their sins; declaring himself a
professed enemy against the, boisterous multitude, who love the rough Channel;
And who are they? Even those Nathanian spirits that dare tell the King, Thou
art the Man; and professing himself a Friend to such as love the temperate
shore; And who are they? Even such as flatter Princes into the flames of hell.
A fit Doctor to consult and vote in the Assembly.

Repl.

It is one part of the devils office, Call. to accuse man to man, w^ Office, I
fear, you rather execute under him, as his Child, then usurp from him, as a
Stranger: Gods servants must wear Gods livery, Meeknes; They must reprove with
wisdom, sobriety, and mildnes; especially, the sacred persons of Kings: God was
more in the still voice then in the thunder: Squibs, taunts, and Raylings are
none of Gods ways; but love, temperance, and moderation: If your house have a
flaw, or an unsound pillour, will you, straight fire it; and, not rather prop
it, and, by degrees, strengthen it, for after service? Gods fire, (that
appeared in the bush) gave light; but, burnt not; But your Zeales have no
patience, demolishing and consuming, even from the Cedar that grows in Lebanon
to the Hysop that is upon the wall: If such fire become the Assembly, then take
out Burges, and put in Peter's.

D. Burges.

If men dislike a Book in this Age, their Censure is usually, It has no salt
in it: A discourse of this nature should have salt good store, for all
sacrifices must be seasoned with salt; So is this, but intended to season
only, not to fret any, unless by accident.

Call.

But if salt has lost it is savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? So has
yours, Doctor; Your Sacrifice then will quickly stinck: You are a very bad
Physician for the soul; Your kichen Physic (for you have no other) were good
to keep a healthful soul in a good state; But when feavors of lust, dropsies
of drunkenness, plurisies of Blood, faint fits of Lukewarmnesse, etc. accost
the soul, your seasoned Brothes will fail: sometimes the disease will require
vomits, purges, phlebotomy, cautherizing, scarifying, cutting, etc. But, I
fear, your end is rather to cure your own defects, then your patients
distempers.

Repl.

I fear, Call. some of the Doctors salt has fretted your chapt fingers; which,
perchance, you strive to wash out with your own vinegar, which so much troubles
you: you name some diseases in others, but forget your own, both acute and
chronicall, the cardiaca passio, the tumor of the spleen, the petulancy of
the tongue, the Cold Fits of uncharitableness: The first, second, and fourth
of these are inward and habitual; and, I fear, incureable; but for the third,
the Beadel of Bridewell will be your best Physician.

D. Burges.

Thus have you my Apology (if it be one) as a small skreen to hold between you
and the fire, if you think it be too big, or too near, and that it would heat
you too much.

Call.

Doctor, Your Apology is as needless as your work: Your Fire (whereby (I take
it) you mean your Zeal newly discovered) is but an Ignis lambens, or as
rotten wood, shining in the dark; Or if it be a true Fire, it is but of
Juniper, which rather serves to perfume a princes chamber, then to warm a
Christians heart; and so dull, that it requires, rather, a pair of Bellows,
then a Skreene.

Repl.

I hope, Call. It is not such a fire as yours, called Ignis fatuus, which
entices poor souls, (wandering in the dark,) to break their necks; But (as
you have excellently, (although against your will) termed it) a fire of
Juniper; No perfume, sweeter; no Coals, hotter; This Juniper fire sends up
sweet perfumes of Comfort to the broken heart, and contrite spirit; but
threatens the fiercest of Gods Judgments to the Rebellious and impenitent
soul.

Here, Reader, be pleased to pause a while, and to understand, our Calumniator
has done with the Doctors Preface, intending now to set upon the body of the
work it self; wherein, he undertakes not his Task progressively, but
selectively; whether, he drives at one subject, collecting what he finds
scattered through the whole book; or whether his with can only dance after a
Pipe of that nature, I cannot resolve you; You have it as I found it: This I
perceive, by his straggling Method, that it was leap year in his Brains, as
well as in his Calendar; And so, we begin again.

The Fire of the Sanctuary uncoverd.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 39. lin. 13.

It had not been lawful for Elijah to put those Idolaters to the sword, if he
had not been able to plead special Commission from God, as he did.

Call.

Take heed Doctor, you run not your self out of the Assembly into Ely house:
What special Commission had our Parliament to do the like? Yet how many
thousand more have perished by the sword, at their Command? Are not they wise,
and truly religious, and holy Merchants for Gods Glory, and blessed Agents for
our Kingdoms Reformation? And would they do such an act, and stand guilty of
such a Fratricide, so horrible a slaughter, had they not a Warrant for it?
Come, Doctor, It is wisdom to retract and change a misopinion: It is a good
bargain, to change for the better, and get 400. l. per. annum. to boot, and
God knows what besides.

Repl.

You ride, Call. upon the surer horse, as the case stands now: Take heed of the
Kings plunderers. The Parliaments Authority is inscrutable, and too great a
mystery for a private man's Capacity; But if the Doctors opinion be firmly
grounded on the word of God, my Confidence of his Piety is such, that neither
fear of Prisons, nor hope of Fortunes, are able to divert, or to corrupt him:
But, Call. it had been better worth your pains, to have refuted his opinion, by
the strength of holy Scripture, then pinned your implicit faith upon the
Authority of men, though never so learned or religious, being the self same
Error, we cry down, in Popery.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 40. line 21.

He that being under authority will rather resist then suffer, makes the Cause
suffer by his resistance, and so in stead of standing zealously for it, he does
in effect raise forces against it.

Call.

A high and desperate Malignancy! A Doctrine most dangerous and damnable! not
only contrary to the practice of all Churches, that labor for a Reformation,
but directly opposite to an Ordinance of Parliament also. If this Doctrine be
permitted from the Pen of an Assembly man, without punishment or public
Retractation, our Cause will carry warm Credit; and his bosom a strange
Conscience: If this Clause be sound, we are at a weekly cost to much purpose;
If unsound, our Assembly has a sound Member.

Repl.

No question, Call. that Malignant Doctrine has been the ancient and received
Tenet of former days; neither do I know any Religion so opposite to it as the
Church of Rome, which holds it not venial, but meritorious, not only to resist
but also to depose the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate; But we are better
taught by Scripture, and not alone commanded, but also find it frequently
exemplifyed unto us by holy men, to give all passive obedience to the power of
our Princes, whether good or bad; without which Gods true Religion, would,
surely, want that honorable Confirmation of holy Martyrdom, which formerly it
had; But whether the year 1642. brought new inspirations and revelations with
it, or whether the thousand six hundred and forty one years before it, slept
in the darkness of this point, deluded by false Translations, the Doctor (if you
repair to him) no question, can render you a satisfactory account.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 41. line 20.

Zeal may stand with suffering and fleeing, but not with Resistance, which is
Flat REBELLION; And no good Cause calls Rebellion to aid.

Call.

Here Is more Water from the same Ditch, but a little more stinking, through
the addition of this odious word REBELLION: What Malignant Devil haunted this
Doctors Pen? Nay, in those calm days, when that base term (REBELLION) was
hardly understood, but in our Prayers Confessive; Nay, scarce then; A word,
more fit for those that can submit to the inordinate power of a Prince, and
crush Religion in a Commonwealth.

Repl.

How now, Call. Does your shoe pinch you there? Dare you resist who have liberty
to flee? Can you resist, and not rebel? Can you do the Act with a good
Conscience, and not hear of the Action without impatience? How willingly can a
dog foul the room, and how loath to have his nose rubbed in it? Did not I
tell you, in the Preface, (where you showed your teeth) that you would clap
your tail between your legs anon, and run away? He whose enlightened judgment
there called his God to witness, has condemned your Cause, styled you by the
Name of Rebel, and branded your actions with the style of flat REBELLION: His
Conscience, then, had neither Fear to pinch it; nor Affection, to enlarge i^;
nor could his Merits aim at any By-respects for his maintayning of so known a
truth, so doubly fortified both by the law of God and Nature: REBELLION is a
Trade the Devil is free of: It is both Trade and Devil too: No wonder, Call. to
see you run so fast; You know who drives you: Nay, he has driven you so far
beyond your senses, that you hold him only loyal, that rebels; and him
rebellious, only, that submits.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 45. lin. 20.

I think no wise man doubts, that even in the purer times of the old Church in
Israel, corruptions grew in Ceremonies as well as in the substance of Gods
worship, and yet pry into the Scriptures never so carefully, we shall not find
any of the most Zealous Saints fall on fire for Ceremonies, which is worth
observation.

Call.

A true Chip of the old block Canterbury, who after he had familiarized the
name of the Altar, in the common ear, (not daring to bring in
Transubstantiation, with a full Tide) innocently left out those words in his
Service book, which only made the difference betwixt a Sacrifice, and the
Sacrament; so that, but one step more, and the work had been fully done. So
this our Doctor (not daring to urge Ceremonies too loud, left the Godly should
hear him) sets the peaceable Custom of the former Saints betwixt him and the
danger of all good men's Censure. He made the example of the Saints the wall by
which his creeping Popery might hold, for fear of falling; who, (had not this
blessed Parliament dropped down from heaven, to crush these Superstitions in
their Rise) had been, by this, as perfect a Proficient as the worst; had had
his high tricks, his low tricks, and perchance, his Merry tricks too, as well
as his fellows.

Repl.

How you wonder at a spark of fire, Call. when just now your eyes dazzled at the
flame! Did not the Doctor, in his Dedication, as good as confess himself an
enemy to Anticeremonians? did not your self tax him of rank Popery? and yet,
what a business now, you make of his creeping Ceremonies? The liar, Call. and the
malicious, sometimes, are alike forgetful; But, to the purpose; If you loved
the substance of Religion more, you would have more lamented that sea of
Christian blood, that has been shed about these Ceremenies, then I find you
do: We contend, so much, about the shell, that, I fear, we have lost the
Kirnell: But this know, Call. so long as you traduce your brother, and thus
abuse your spiritual father, neither the love of God, nor the God of love
abides in you.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 66. line 14.

Again, let such as be Zealous sticklers for Democraticall, or Aristocraticall
discipline, consider how ill the Church can be governed by one policy, and the
Commonwealth by another.

Call.

Our Doctor is grown a Machiavilian; and forgets that Piety is the best
Policy; We, living under a Monarchical Government in the commonwealth, how
he pleads for a Hierarchicall government in the Church? consequently,
dissallowing Democraticall or Aristocraticall Discipline, which our gracious
Parliament is now setting up; But it is no wonder to hear him, that has so
Zealously pleaded for the Robes and vanities of the whore to apologize for her
government; and^ by consequent, for the whore her self also!

Repl.

When Ignorance and Folly meet, how malice domineeres? How this government, by
Bishops, erected in the Apostles days approved by Polycarpus, Saint John's
Disciple, and Irenaeus the Disciple of Polycarpus, Ignatius, and all those
first Planters of the Gospel; submitted unto by the whole Primitive Church;
confirmed by Lucius, the first Christian King in this Island; afterward,
established by so many Acts of Parliament, (as yet unrepealed,) and freely and
personally exercized by so many godly and learned Martyrs; how this Government
sticks in ignorant Cal's stomach? whose forgetful malice, would make the
Doctor an enemy to the proceedings and designs of Parliament, whose writings
were printed so many years before this Parliament was dreamed of: As for his
pleading for the whore, this know; had the popish Strumpet found no better
friends then he, she had wanted that retrograde Mercy of a Third part, when the
Protestant Matrone must be content but with a Fifth.

D. Burges cap. 3. page 68. line 20.

It was long since the Zealous Complaint of a Holy Man, that men could no
sooner get up their names in the world, and be able readily and confidently to
muster up a few places of Scripture, nothing to the purpose, but they thought
themselves sufficient to encounter Moses himself, setting upon him as furiously
as Dathan or Abiram ever did: Happy were this age, had it none of that Temper.

Call.

But has that holy man no name, Doctor? or, was it your own self? The man we
know not, but his Intentions are apparent; namely, to conclude none able for
the Ministry, but such as have first their Ordination from your popish Bishops,
from whose imposition of hands, they presently receive the spirit; till then,
being neither called nor qualified: brave Iuggling! when the laying on of
Symonaicall hands must enable a drunkard, or a whore-master, or worse, to
preach the sacred Word, and administer the holy Sacraments, who now, by the
virtue of this Hocas pocas, has a capacity to forgive sins, being (though
formerly very ignorant) now gifted more or less, according to the gift he
brings; where they that are called by the secret working of Gods spirit,
inwardly, enlightened by knowledge, and especial Revelation, and able for
Interpretation (though never gifted with tongues) were not permitted to
exercize their ministerial Function: but imprisoned, persecuted, and pilloryed.

Repl.

True, Call. you hit the intention right; and have so plainly discovered yours
too, that every fool may read it; and (being converted by you) approve it,
too: wherein, you intimate, how needless, Ordination and Learning are, to
qualify a Minister; and, that any, who finds himself gifted, may execute the
Priestly office. Tell me, Call. may any, that has skill to make a shoe, a hat,
or a suite, profess the Trade, till he be made free? Your Halls say, no: Why?
he has skill in the Mystery, and his Apprentiship is served! what hinders him,
he cannot practice? His Master must make him free, and he must perform the
City Ceremony. And shall the calling of a Minister be undertaken by every
unexamined tagrag? Shall every Cobbler, Feltmaker, or Taylour intrude into that
honorable calling, and be judges of their own sufficiency? and leave their
lawful Trades for unwarrantable Professions, according to their own humerous
Fancies? Our bodies, Call. expect the help of the most rational and authorized
Physicians; but our souls can be content with every Emprick, and accept of
every Theological Mountibank: As for our Bishops you term Popish, How many
of them have lately forsaken (for their Conscience sake) their lively-hoods,
and fled from the Popish faction in Ireland, hither, where, instead of
charitable relief, they are thrasht and tribulated, with another Flayle?

D. Burges cap. 3. page 70. line 11.

The next way we can possibly take to the best Reformation is by prayers and
tears.

Call.

I see, the Doctor loves to sleep in a whole skin, and far enough off from
Resisting to blood: It Is true, Prayers and Tears, are said to be the weapons of
the Church; And happy it were if such weapons could prevail: But where
Entreaty finds defect, Compulsion must make supply; If Prayers cannot, Swords
may: If Tears may not, Blood must.

Repl.

Let them perish by the sword, that take up the sword; And let them that thirst
for blood, guzzle blood until they burst: David, that fought Gods Battles,
commanded by Gods own mouth; nay a man after Gods own heart; yet his hand (that
was in blood,) must not build the Temple; And shall we expect, by blood, a
Reformation of the Temple? The stroke of a Poleaxe is not acceptable, where
the noise of a Hammer was not warrantable.

D. Burges cap. 4. page 79. line 4.

When many people are demanded their Reasons of diverse opinions, which they
stoutly stand unto, is not their answer thus? Because the contrary is against
the word: Being pressed to show wherein, they reply, We are but ignorant
People; we cannot dispute with you, but so we are taught by Reverend men, if
you talk with them they will be able to satisfy you to the full.

Call.

Do, Doctor, offend those little ones, and despise Gods Blossoms: All have not
learning to maintain their Opinions, by Argument, and Sophistry. The battle
is not always to the strong, nor the Race to the swift: The persuasion of a
Conscience is an able proof; and the opinion of holy men a strong Refuge:
Better to stand courageously (though ignorant) in a Good Cause, (as some do)
then to maintain Error (as you do) with learned Impiety.

Repl.

Hence it is Call. your Cause is stronglyer defended by the Sword, then by the
Pen, whose Ignorant Patrons, can better thrash then plead: It Is confessed, the
persuasion of a wel-grounded Conscience is a good proof to the party so
persuaded; but here it sticks, not able to convert a brother. Review those
world of Pamphlets, of both sides published, and weigh them; In those of the
one side, you shall have the full consent and Harmony of Scriptures; strict
precepts, commanding; holy Examples, confirming; and all, undenyably pressed, and
learnedly urged home to every Conscience that is not feired; On those, of the
other side, what Wresting of Scriptures? What allegorizing of plain texts?
What shuffling? What faultring? What obscurity of style? What Rhethoricall
pretermissions of things material? What pasquills? What invectives? What
raylings? What bitterness? Enough to discover a Bad Cause, and to disparage a
Good: But, Call. your unmaintain'd Opinions are pinned upon the Authority of
men: Say, where is the Papist, now? Is not Implicit Belief one of our greatest
Quarrels with the Church of Rome, even unto this day? Did not our Savior
himself condemn the old Pharisees, for their Traditions? If this be not blind
Zeal, that Scripture is Apochrypha, which said, Without knowledge the mind is
not good. Pro. 19. 2. No, Call. such Zeal is the mother of all Sects and
Heresies, being guided by the opinion, we conceive, of those men, who are
subject to Error, because but men: I advise such to keep their ears open; and
their mouths, shut.

D. Burges cap. 4. page 82. line 12.

I wish it were no breach of Charity, to compare the stirrs of our Brownists,
Anabaptists, and Familists, and all the Rabble of such Schismatic sectaries
(who may truly be termed Puritanes) with this inconsiderate action of those
rude Ephesians, ( Acts 19. 32.) If there be any difference, it is only in
this, that these mad Martinmarre prelates profess in their words, that they
knew God; but in their works, they deny him.

Call.

All that hate Popery and Popish Prelates, are, in our Zealous Doctors esteem,
Brownists, Anabaptists, and schimaticall Sectaries, which he brands with that
(now almost forgotten) style of Puritanes; all, far honester men then himself;
whom (compareing them to those rude Ephesians) he makes (according to the Kings
unworthy Declarations) the Authors of all these Commotions, calling that worthy
man Martin marre-prelate, mad, for touching the apple of his eye, the
idolatrized Hierarchy. A Malignant of the right stamp, and coined at the Kings
own Royal Mint!

Repl.

Once again, good Call. (if it will not too much prejudice the progress of your
wit) correct the frailty of your Memory; and remember, the doctors book, which
you so soundly answer, was Printed in the year 1625. which was a little before
this unhappy Commotion; which, you say, he fathers upon the Brownists and
Anabaptists, and schismatic sectaries, according to His Majesty's
Declaration: Truly, Call. your malice may rather brand him for a witch, then a
Malignant; but your discretion may hold him rather for a Prophet, then either;
that, so long since, foresaw this: Indeed, in that point, he jumps word for
word with His Majesty's Declaration: and, if the King speak true, the Doctor
speaks not falsely: For what His Majesty writes, now, by way of history, our
Doctor delivered then, by way of Prophecy.

D. Burges cap. 4. page 137. line 20.

Such as make a great blaze when prosperity, credit, Peace and Preferment are
Bellows to blow it; but are so carried about as hay in a whirlwind with the
blast of Time, that they will be ready to fire that which before they
maintained, if the wind turned never so little about, and through fears or
hopes, will be of any Religion and temper, that the strongest faction embraces,
resolving to go no further then a fair wind and weather, and a calm tide will
carry them; And if any storm arise, presently to make to the shore, to prevent
peril of life and goods; Such Zealots I say as these never had any Coal from
the Altar, to kindle their Sacrifices; they never knew what it is to aim at
the Glory of God.

Call.

Your Doctrine is good, had it been as well followed; Say Doctor, who was he,
that a little before this Parliament (when our brethren the Scots made their
first approach into this kingdom, and whom a little after, the King Injuriously
Proclaimed Rebels) in his Sermon at Magnes Church by London Bridge, flew in
their faces, vilified them with opprobrious terms, styled their design,
Rebellion, proclaimed them Robbers, Ravishers, Traitors, and the disturbers of
the Churches Peace, called their Doctrines schismatic, new fangled, and
seditious, brought in to refine us, (with this addition) God will not be
beholding to the Devil to sweep His Church; And not above a month after, at the
beginning of this Parliament in another Sermon at the same place, out of this
Text Act. 17. 30. (And the times of this Ignorance God winked at, but now
commaneth all menevery where to repent) took an occasion to eat his words, and
contradict every thing he formerly delivered? Who was the cowardly ^ur then?
according to your own phrase page 138. line 3. Who is the Sheeps-heads now
according to your own term? page 139. line 23. Who turned his Fiddle to the
Base of the times? page 147. line 1. Who is guilty of Parasiticall baseness?
page 147. line 18. Who is the Whiteliverd Christian to be turned out among dogs
and hell hounds? page 182. line 11. Doctor, now you have told us what he is,
the whole parish of Magnes can tell you who it is. Who was it that was so
active for the oath Ex Officio, so eager for the two shillings nine pence so
contentious with his parishioners? The Clergy can witness the first, the City
can testify the second, Magnes can attest the last: Yet all this was done by
way of zeal.

Repl.

Call. First your tongue is no slander, Secondly your profession gives you a
Patent under the broad Seal to lie: but to spoil your jest, if any such man
was, (...) True, Saint Magnes was the Doctors Church at that time, and if any
slipped into, and abused his pulpit, and himself, no question but the Doctor is
as much troubled for it as you are pleased with it: But who ever you tax (if
you play not the Poet) he may, in spite of your bitterness, justify his
seeming Contradiction, and eat his words as harmelesly as a Potato pie in
Lent: Whether the Scots were Rebels or no, was no matter of Faith, but Opinion;
The object of opinion is Reason, and it alters with Reason; When His Majesty
proclaimed them Rebels, (being a matter of fact and state,) was it not reason
for him to own it? But being pleased, by pardon graciously to take off that
odious imputation, it had been neither reason, manners, nor safety not to
approve of it. When a ship has made a voyage with one wind into New England,
will you blame it for returning back with a quite contrary? No wise man Call.
will do it, unless you, or such as you were in it.

D. Burges cap. 4. page 93. line 13.

It is then a clear case, that a Christian is not bound to reprove, or
discourse of Religion to known or suspected scoffers: If he testify in secret
to his God, his dislike of such Varlots, avoid needless society, and
unnecessary commerce with them, and in his soul, secretly mourn for their
dishonouring God, he has done his duty.

Call.

By your leave, Doctor, Your zeal here smells a little too much of the Coward:
Did your dying Savior endure the base Scoffs, and bitter Taunts of the Jews,
for your sake, and is your Reputation so dainty, not to abide a little jeering
for his sake? Will your zeal sell Gods honor for the impatience of a Scoff?
Were it your own case, I fear, Your wit would find spirit enough, either to
contemn it, or retort it: But you will away, and complain to God in a Corner:
Metal to the back! Doctor, He that refuses the vindication of Gods honor,
denies him; And he that denies him at Court, him will God deny in his Chamber:
Can you hear your Sovereign abused and be silent? perchance (as the case now
stands) you can, and make one for company, too, if you fear not his prevayling
power. But can you hear your bosom friend injuriously reviled, and lend him
no Apology, but run away; and whisper in his ear a tedious Complaint? If this
you can, you are no friend for me: This (if your zeal belie not your
conscience) must serve Gods turn, nay more, you have done your duty too.

Repl.

Have you not an inhibition, Call. to cast Pearls before Swine? Are you more
tender of Gods glory, or more wise to propagate it, then David, who accounted
it his duty to keep his mouth close whilst the wicked were before him? Call.
your zeal tastes a little too rank of the mother; a Bellings-gate zeal, where
the Revenge is often more sinful then the Offense: Perchance you would spit in
the offenders face.: That zeal is a strange fire, that produces such moist
effects: Call. your Religion is too rhumatick: Sure, Saint Peter had a good
quarrel, to draw his sword, yet the action had too much rashness in it (as
well as blood) to be accepted: Where the party offending is not capable of
reason, or the party Vindicating, has no capacity of discretion, the action is
not warrantable: Better to bear the hazard of some dishonor, then to have it
indiscreetly vindicated.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 262. lin. 22.

The supreme and sovereign Prince, who has none between him and God,
representing the person of God, executing his office, and in this respect,
bearing his name, to whom he only is accountable for all his actions, by way
of Summons and command, this person, I say, must in all things, and at all
times, be handled with all humility and due respect of that high place he
holds; so as all may be taught not to despise, but to honor him, the more,
by the carriage of those that are, in case of necessity, to treat with him in
the name and business of his God.

Call.

How now, Doctor? None between him and God; Only accomptable to God for all
his Actions? Sure, Doctor, You are now besides your text: Shall whole
kingdoms, then, depend upon his extravagant pleasure? So many millions of
souls lie open to the tyranny of his arbitrary will? Is he not bound to his
own Laws? not limited by his Coronation oath? May he alter established
Religion, by the omnipotence of his own vast power, and turn Gods Church into a
Rout of Infidells; and our Liberties, into a tenure of Villanage? Is this your
Zeal for Gods glory? The man has overwhelmed his Judgment in the deep gulf
of flattery, and lost himself in his own Principles: Can he represent Gods
person, that commands what God forbids? Does he execute Gods office, that
forbids, what he commands? If this be zeal, or common Religion, let me turn
Amalakite, or any thing that is not, this. No, no; Doctor, (saving your private
engagements, and expectations,) Kings are no such persons as our late Idolatry
has made them: The trust of Kingdoms is put upon them; which, so long as they
faithfully discharge, they are to be honored and obeyed; but, once being
violated, their Covenants are broken; and they are no longer Kings; The safety
of the people, is the supreme Law; and people were not made for the good of
Kings, but Kings, for the good of People.

Repl.

How this Doctors loyalty, good Call. offends you! If he would temporize as you
do; abuse and slander Scripture for his own liberty, as you do; fly in the face
of Majesty, as you do; endeavor to introduce a new Government in Church and
State, as you do; Blaspheme God and the King as you do, he were then a holy, a
well-affected man, a Saint, or any thing that is good; But now his Conscience is
directed by the Scriptures, his Judgment enlightened by the Scriptures, his
words warranted by the Scriptures, especially in a Case of such Consequence,
Away with him; He is a disaffected person, a Malignant, and what not, that is
Bad? But concerning Kings, Know, They represent Gods Person, whether good or
bad; If good; they represent him in his Mercy; If bad, in his Judgments: Christ
has a Rod of Iron, as well as a Golden Scepter; a Nebuchadnezzer, as well as a
Josiah; a Nero, as well as a Constantine: We must stoop to both: He that
submits not to the power of a bad King, Kicks against Gods Judgments; But he
that resists, snatches Gods Rod out of his hand; and, refusing Correction,
falls into DAMNATION: We must submit to the Higher Powers. Romans 13. 1. And who
are they? Whether it be to the King, ^ Supreme, or unto Governors that are
sent by HIM. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. From whence necessarily this follows; That
Power which he warrants not, we have no Warrant to obey; and, Those Ordinances
his power signs not, we have no Commission to observe; As for your slighting
and deposing Kings, the Current of the Scriptures runs strong against you, and
all the examples of Gods children (through the whole book of God) bend another
Course, They know no deposing of Kings but by death; no determination of
Passive obedience, but by fire: But whether our Translation of the Scriptures
be the same with former Ages; or whether some strange light has darted
inspirations into these our later days, (which the Apostle denominated
perilous) I leave to the learned Synod; who, I hope, will at length consult us
into a Religion, which shall need no future Alteration; or that Alteration no
further effusion of Christian blood.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 272. line 19.

God made a Law to all, Not to revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of the
people; which Law prohibiteth not only Imprecations, and seditious Raylings,
(which is a hellish impiety, though it be but in word only, be the Prince
never so impious) but even all rude, bitter, and unseemly speeches, although in
secret to himself alone, much more, in public, or in other places behind his
back.

Call.

What pains the Man takes to pick out Texts to countenance his
Idolatry-royall! True, Kings are called Gods: But what follows? They shall dye
like men: Concerning which dying not a word; because it is so opposite to a
Living, which is the only Butt he aims at: But mark the Doctrine his
Court-ship raises from his well chosen Text, Though Princes be never so
impious, yet to reprove them roundly (which in his language is seditious
railing, rude, bitter and unseemely speeches) is a hellish impiety; and, in his
King-clawing Judgment, must neither be done in public, nor yet in private.
How ready are such Officers to light Princes to the Devil!

Repl.

Call. If he light Kings to the Devil by his point of Doctrine, you take a
speedy course to send his subjects after him, by your use of exhortation: But
mark your own words, you first intimate that he makes him a God; then,
conclude, He lights him to the Devil: You that can so suddenly make Contraries
meet, reconcile the King and his two Houses: The issue then of all, is this;
You say, He makes the King a God, by flattering Idolatry; and, I say, you make
his subjects, Devils, by your flat Rebellion: Calvin, whom you confide in, tells
you, That Princes (though most wicked in their Government) yet in respect of
the dignity of their places, their name and Credit must be spared; But see, a
greater then Calvin; Elihu, the moderatour betwixt Job and his miserable
Comforters (Job 34. 18.) says, Is it fit then to say to a King, Thou art
wicked? and to Princes, ye are ungodly? Behold, a greater then Elihu, Solomon
(whom ye blasphemously less Credit then either, for his partiality, being a
King) says, Eccles. 8. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who
shall say unto him, What do thou?

D. Burges cap. 7. page 274. line 19.

God has engraven so large and fair a Character of His Imperial Image in
their foreheads ( viz. of Princes) as must be sacred in the hearts of all, and
bind not their hands only, but tongues also to the good behavior, and that
for ever. Nor is this carriage only due to good princes, but universally to
all.

Call.

Sacred? a little further: nay, then make him Almighty too: and even, fall down
and worship: Make him your graven Image, your Dagon, and hoyst him up for a
God; but be sure the Ark ^e away: Nay, though an Idolator, an Infidel, sacred
too: Make him your Bell and Dragon; but you do well to bind his subjects hands
to their good behavior, for fear some Daniel be among them.

Repl.

How now Call. Is your furnace so hot? you forget that he is Gods Vicegerent,
you make so bold with; Remember, there be birds of the Air, and things with
wings; Had you lived in Nebuchadnezzers days, you would have saved him much
Fuel, and his Officers some labor: Questionless, your furnace had consumed
the three passively obedient Children, and been too hot for the fourth to walk
in.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 277. line 17.

Invectives (though but against an equal, or infeferiour) are ever odious, but
against a Prince, intolerable.

Call.

If Invectives be so intolerable, let Princes be so wise as not to give
occasion, and deserve them.

Repl.

If all should have according to their deservings: I fear, Call. the Psalm of
Mercy, would scarce advantage thee.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 278. line 6.

An indefinite Reproof of sin in public is enough; If this serve not to
reform a Prince, forbear; More will make him worse.

Call.

Kings are past Children, to be whipped on others backs. The Scripture will show
you some Prophets that feared not to rouse the very persons of Kings, by name;
and rattle them soundly, and before their people too: But, Doctor, you have
either no Commission, or are afraid to execute it: You flee to Tharshish, when
you should go to Nineveh; You whisper softly, lest they should chance to hear
ye; and give your Royal Patients no Physic but Cordials, for fear it work
and make their queazy stomachs sick.

Repl.

The actions of Prophets, which had immediate Warrants from heaven, are no
presidents for later times; neither durst those courageous Prophets speak
before special Commission: Did Eliah stir to reprove King Ahab till God had
given him charge to go? 1 King. 21. 17, 18. Amos prophesyed not against King
Amaziah, till God especially commanded him: Ordinary reproofs must not be
copied from extraordinary Embassages; but from their usual Sermons, which in
their reproofs, were for the most part, indefinitely uttred to all, in
general; by name, to none. But you, that have fresh Influences of the spirit,
may Boanarge it where and when ye please, and play the Bedlems in divinity; But
remember what is said to those that exceed their Commissions, Who has
required these things at your hands?

D. Burges cap. 7. page 280. line 18.

What shall they answer unto God, who being but private persons discontented,
shall take upon them, Shimei-like, to revile and traduce their Sovereign
behind his back, and presume to make every Tavern and Alebench a Tribunal,
whereat to accuse, arraigne and condemn the sacred and dreadful person of the
Lords Annoyted (whom they ought not to mention without a holy Reverence) and to
censure all his Actions, before their Companions as confidently as if he were
the vassal, and they the Monarch: Has not former experience told us, this is
the high way to all Treasons and Rebellions?

Call.

When Princes offend their God in suffering, or partaking with Idolaters, shall
subjects be afraid to offend them? Shall Gods name be abused and torn in
pieces with their execrable oaths and blasphemies, and shall their dainty names
be held so precious, as not to be spoken of; or (as our Doctor says) not
mentioned without a holy Reverence? Shall Gods most sacred and just Commands be
despised and slighted by them, and shall their profane Injunctions not be
unperformed, without presumption? their unlawful Commands not violated without
Rebellion? Weigh these things with the balance of the Sanctuary, and you shall
find, that you either want true Zeal; or your Zeal a right object.

Repl.

Call. review your own Argument; and you will (with the help of some reasonable
discretion) find it (TEKEL) weighed in the Balances, wanting in weight; In
case, thy Prince should offend his God, in wounding and tearing his holy Name
by oaths and Blasphemies; Put case, he should justle Gods sacred Laws out of
the Land; violate them in his countermands; profane his Temples with Idolatry,
or Barbarism; will this warrant thee to dishonor him, whom God has commanded
thee to serve? to rebel against him, to whom God has commanded thee to be
subject? to disobey him, whom God has commanded thee to honor? Because he
offends his God, will thou aggravate the offense, in offending him? and rebel
against God, in rebelling against him? Weigh these things well; and let thy own
conscience (if not bribed with partiality) be thy Judge. Think thou this
rabble of rebellious and seditious Rakeshames, that style themselves by the
name of Mercuries, Scouts, Weekly Intelligencers, etc. but, indeed, a pack of
Alebench Whistlers, decayed Captains, and masterlesse Journymen, that want
more hairs then vices; and, for Thirty pieces of Silver, betray the Lords
Anointed; for half a Crown a week, fly in the face of Gods Vicegerent; and,
under a pretense of Reformation, fell themselves to all wickedness; that, like
Sampsons Foxes join tail to tail, and carry firebrarnds about to set the
gallantest Kingdom in the world on a light flame; think thou that these are
pleasing to the God of Peace? Think thou, these brazenfac'd Monsters, with
their meditated lies, malicious scandals, printed (and shamefully permitted) in
their seditious Pamphlets, are pleasing to the God of Truth? Think thou,
these undecent and preposterous actions, tending to the confusion of
well-establisht Laws, and to the disturbment of a long settled Government, are
pleasing to the God of Order? Think thou, that they, and their Abettors will
pass unpunisht? No; Call. If our King fail in his duty to God; and we, in ours
to him; God will keep us still divided in our affections so, that we shall
join in nothing, but in drawing down Judgments upon the whole land; which,
without Accommodation (the King always living in his Royal Posterity, and the
Parliament never dying) will perpetuate us in blood, till the utter Ruin both
of Church and State.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 282. line 16.

If good People should discern some Errors, (and those not small) in Princes,
the best Pattern they can propound themselves is, that of Samuel (1 Samuel 15.
35.) mourning and praying for Saul, not for Form only but heartily, and
fervently indeed; and the worst they can pitch upon (unless they proceed to
open Treason) is that of common Newesmongers and seditious spirits, who cannot
make a Meal, spend a Fire, drink a Pint, or drive away one hour, without some
pragmaticall discourse, and censure of Princes, and their State-Affayres.

Call.

Nay Good Doctor; we have had many Samuels (or as good) that have fasted and
prayed, at least these twenty months, That God would be pleased to turn the
Kings heart, and bring him back to his Parliament, but god has stopped his ears
against us, and will not be moved. And, since God has made his pleasure so
openly known through the whole Land, (nay through the world too) that his
Majesty's heart is fully resolved and knit to Popery and Superstition; shall we
subjects (whom it so much concerns) be afraid to communicate the business to
one another? Your conscience, Doctor, is grown a great Royalist; but your
tender Zeal of your Princes honor will hardly stop our mouths or close our
ears; Our Case is so, that our discourse of him, and States-matters too,
cannot be too pragmaticall (as you call it) we must, now, take advantage of
those his faults, which our Fasts, Prayers, and Petitions could not redress;
And, since his cruel Course of life, and solid behavior will not be a perfect
white, we must die it into a sadder color; and these his Crimes, which our
tears cannot wash fairer, (for the comfort of ourselves and Children) our
reports (for the countenance of the Cause) must make fouler, for the
exasperating of our Confederates, and encouragement of our soldiers; so, that
by this christian Stratageme, through, the enterchange of news (which you
condemn) we may facilitate our own designs.

Repl.

Call. Your christian stratageme is but the modest term of a devilish project,
or, in plainer English, a piece of errant knavery; wherein the father of your
contrivements receives much glory; and the God of Truth, no less dishonor:
Read that statute which God made, Levit. 19. 16. Thou shall not go up and down
as a Talebearer among thy people; where, in the end of the verse, he signs it
with I am the Lord. The falsenes of the Tale doubles the sin; the baseness of
the end trebles it; the person damnifyed (being a King) makes it, quadruble;
the persons venting it, (being subjects) makes it terrible; but the place where
it is commonly vented (being Pulpits) makes it horrible; and by the ministers
of the Gospel too; and in the name of the God of truth too, almost impardonably
damnable; Now Call. Tell me how you like your Christian stratageme; No wonder,
if your Samuels were not heard: It Is well for you, God Ears were closed against
their prayers: Had he not been deaf in Mercy: and merciful to admiration; and
admirable in patience; they, surely, had been heard in Judgment, to the
terrible example of such unparalleld Presumption. How often have your solemn
Petitions set days apart, for the expedition of your Martial attempts in a
Pitched field, or for the raising of a Seige? How often have your solemnities
been showed in plentiful thanksgivings for the blood of those thousands, whose
souls (without infinite mercy) you cannot but conceive, in one day, dropped into
the flames of Hell! What Bells? What Bonefires? What tryumphs? And yet, for the
success of your often propounded, and (sometimes) accepted Treaties of Peace,
what one blessed hour has been sequestered? What Church door has been
opened? Which makes me fear (and not without just Cause) your Fastings and
Prayers have been rather to Contention, then to Unity; and that they have
rather been attractive for Judgments, then for mercies, upon this
blood-bedabbled Kingdom.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 284. lin. 1.

As for such as will not take out this Lesson, let their eyes, their tongues,
their tears, their sighs, their coats, their prayers be what they will be,
their Carriage savoureth not of Zeal for God, which thus casts dirt and Mire
upon the face of his Vicegerent, and tends to the taking away the life of his
life in his subjects hearts, in which all good Princes desire as much to live,
as to enjoy their Crowns; And if it be not lawful thus to smite at their
Persons, with the tongue only, shall that be thought Zeal for God, which
seeks their deposition from that Crown, which once a just free and absolute
Title of Inheritance has set upon their heads?

Call.

Doctor, you are very confident of your own learning, and definitive Judgment,
to tie every man's Zeal to your Rules: and it seems, you are more tender in
flinging Dirt (as you term it) in your Sovereigns face, then in preserving
his soul from the flames of Hell: Neither do I conceive it a thing so he
ynous, to take his Subjects hearts from him, as to unite them in the
superstitious Bonds of Popery: And as for your deposing him from the Crown,
(which you falsely call his absolute Inheritance) if he break the Covenants,
whereby the Crown is set upon his head, he dissolves his own Authority, and our
Obedience; and himself is become his own deposer.

Repl.

Call. It is not the Doctor, that prescribes Rules to another Zeal, but the
holy Scriptures, from whence he draws his infallable principles, and
Conclusions; And whereas you censure him for more prizing the cleanness of his
sovereigns face, then the welfare of his soul, your malice wrongs him in your
hop-frog confutation; wherein, you make a wilful preterition of that point,
whereof you censure his neglect, in the wrong place. And whereas, you turn
Deposition upon the default of Princes, know, kingdoms are neither Copyholds,
nor Leases; subject, either to forfeiture, or Reentry: Kings have, from God,
their power of reigning; from Man, the Ceremony of Coronation: To God they must
give account, (not man) on whose pleasure their Titles absolutely depend.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 288. line 4.

In fine, David thought him ( viz. that slew Saul) worthy of no Reward but
death; and of this, so worthy, that instantly he gave order for his execution,
with this sharp sentence uttered, Thy Blood be upon thine own head, for thine
own mouth has testified against thee, saying, I have slain the Lords
Anointed; A memorable example, and an Argument unanswerable against all
King-killers, and deposers of absolute Princes, absolutely anointed by just
title, as here with us.

Call.

Here, revereud Doctor, Your Simile limps: First, David was a Prophet; and,
(knowing the Crown so near his head,) spared that life, which he knew so near
a Period; not willing to dabble his Conscience in such needless blood:
Secondly, (being confident himself was the next successor) commanded present
Execution, to terrify his new Subjects from the like presumption: Thirdly,
(Though you deny it) our Kings bold not their Crowns by such an absolute
Title, as those of Judah and Jerusalem.

Repl.

Is the Doctors Simile lame, Call. Sure, 'twas your ill usage made it so: But
say, was David a Prophet? Had he special Revelations? then, doubtless, his
ways and actions were the best presidents for us, to follow: But was he a
Prophet? Then, sure, he knew it a heinous sin, to take away the life of Gods
Vicegerent (though an Idolater) Had he special Revelations? then,
questionless, he knew death a just Reward for killing the Lords Anointed
(though a wicked King.) But did this Prophets heart smite him, for cutting off
his Sovereigns skirt? then, sure, God will not let him go unsmitten, that
takes his Crown from off his head, or power, from his hand: But, Call. how truth
will be confessed by your unwilling lips! which intimate, the Prophets conscience
had been dabbled in blood, had the deed been done, and his subjects guilty of
presumption, that should do the like: And, whereas you deny our Kings so
absolute a power, or title as the Kings of former times, you should have done
to better purpose, to show, who limited it, and when; for your own single
assertion is not Classical.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 290. line 2.

Authority is ever one of Envies eye-sores: Subjection a yoke, that Humane
Nature loathes. Although Inferiors cannot help it, nor durst complain,
Liberty, Liberty is every man's desire, though most men's ruin.

Call.

When Authority is put into a Right hand, Subjection is no Burden to a good
heart: But when Tyranny usurps the Throne of Monarchy, then the people may
suspend Obedience, and cast off the yoke of their Subjection: We that are
received into the liberty of the sons of God, and made heirs of an everlasting
kingdom, have too much privilege to be enslaved to men, or made vassals to
perpetual bondage: If desire of holy Liberty be our labor here, eternal
Sovereignty shall be our Reward hereafter.

Repl.

He that gives Authority, knows not where to place it: The people were pleased
with goodly Saul; God was pleased to choose little David: Tell me, did the
burthen-threatning hand of Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, the King of Israel and
Judah; or Jeroboam (the rebellious subject of Rehoboam) who made Israel to sin,
deserve the Scepter? By your marks, neither; In Gods wisdom, both: The one, to
crush the liberty of the too proud subject; The other, to exercise the
consciences of his chosen people: In both, to work his secret pleasure. But
Guild Hall has wiser counsel; and your Conventicling wives are fitter Judges
for the setting up, or pulling down of Kings; for regulating the power of the
good, or limiting the prerogatives of the bad: But, 'twere fitting, first, to
correct S. Paul's Epistles, or to vote S. Peter's works APOCRYPHA; who, both,
instruct us to submit to the Authority of Kings, good or bad; But, indeed, the
Liberty of the Subject had been a strong plea, had not His Majesty spoiled
their jest, and granted all 1 Trienniall Parliam. 2 Starchamber. 3 High
Commission. 4 Shipmoney. 5 Coat and Conduct money. 6 Monepolies. 7 Forests. 8
Tunnage and Pound^ 9 Regulate the Clerk of the market. 10 Knighthood money^ 11
For the continuance of this Parl.

Petitions; and the Badge of slavery had been unanswerable, had not our
glorious Savior honored, and worn it upon his seamlesse Garment: The God of
glory endured what we despise; and showed that example, we scorn to follow.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 307. line 14.

For my part, I am so far from taking away Prayer from preaching, that I
could wish not only more preaching in some places, but more Prayer also in
other places; and I mean, only that Prayer which is allowed too: In
performance whereof (if the fault be not in them who undertake it) much more
good will be done, then will be acknowledged by some, who magnify preaching,
rather then adorn it; Yea, I will add, more then by some men's preaching,
admired by so many.

Call.

It is very much, Doctor, you durst so openly wish more preaching in those
days, when your dumb-dog-Bishops silenced so many; and most of all,
themselves: Nay, you are not ashamed to wish more Prayer too: What a Lot is
this, among so many Sodomites! But after all this, Lot was drunk: Our Doctor,
being afraid to be thought too righteous, put in one her be that spoiled his
whole pot of Porrage: I mean (says he) that Prayer which only was allowed:
And what Prayer was that? even that English Masse-book, which (God be thanked)
the sacred piety of Soldiers, and the holy boldness of Inferior Christians,
has most blessedly taken away. This is that Prayer, our Doctor desires only
should be used; This is that Prayer Book, our preaching Doctor deifies, and
prefers before some men's preaching (and who were they, in those Episcopal
days, who knows not?) admired by so many. This is that Prayer Book, that
Prelacie, which this temporizing Doctor has now entered into Covenant (in the
presence of Almighty God) to suppress.

Repl.

It seems Call. this Book of Common Prayer is your maine quarrel here; and
Bishops, by the Bye: Tell me, who composed that Book? In whose Reign was it
composed? and what Authority confirmed it? Were not those blessed Martyrs the
composers? they, who gave their bodies to the flame, in the defense of the true
Protestant Religion, and in defiance of that superstition, whereof you say it
is a Relic? Dare you vye piety with those Martyrs, that are so daynty of your
passive obedience? They composed it; You defy it: Was not this detestable book
composed in that pious Saints days Ed. 6. of holy memory, when the Protestant
Broom swept cleanest? and when the cruelty of that bloody Religion was but
newly out of breath, and fresh in Memory? This blessed Saint allowed it; You
despise it: Was not this book, ye so revile, confirmed by Act of Parliament (in
those days) the Members whereof were chosen among those that were (excepting
the blessed Martyrs) the greatest sufferers under the tyranny of that barbarous
Religion, whereof, you say, it favors? The Authority of this great Council
confirmed it: You condemn it: Did not the Phoenix of the world, and of her
Sex Queen Elizabeth, of everlasting Memory, (in whose days God so smiled upon
this kingdom) and that Monument of learning and wisdom, King James, of never
dying memory in all their Parliaments, establish it? Yet, you revile it: Did
not your self, in your oath of Allegiance, swear to maintain the King in his
established government, in Church and Commonwealth? Yet, in this particular,
you violate it. Ponder all this, Call. and, then, reviewe your own words, and if
you blush not, you are brazen-faced.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 309. line 21.

If they can pick out some boldfac'd mercenary Emprick, that by the help of a
Polyanthea, or some English Treatise, can make a shift, five or six times a
week, with his tongue, and teeth, to throw over the Pulpit a pack of stolen
wares, which sometimes the judicious hearer knows by the mark, and sends it
home to the right owner again.

Page 310. line 15.

Or if the man has been drinking, feasting, or riding, that so no time is left
to him to search so far as a naked Commentary, Postel, or some Catechism, yet
adventures on the sacred business of preaching, carrying to the Pulpit a bold
face, instead of savory provision, and thinks it sufficient, that the people
hear Thunder, though they see no Rain, and, that loudness will serve, for
once, instead of matter; because (if he be earnest) silly women, and some
ninnyes more will count him a very zealous Preacher, and impute his want of
matter to his wisdom and desire of edifying, not to his want of study, or
ability, and say, He preaches to the Conscience: He stands not upon deep
learning: He reproves sin boldly, that is to say, other men's, therefore they
love him: not theirs, otherwise, they would abhor him.

Call.

And such a ^cale of Trumpery, that my pen tyres before it come to the teadious
Journies end of his invective speech; wherein, I have so much charity left to
excuse him; in that, he personates some Ministers, whom his malice conceives no
better them fools; Who, indeed, though they make no flourish, quoate no
Fathers, repeat no sentences of Greek and Latin, and preach not themselves
(as our learned D. does) yet edify the simpler sort of people more in two
hours, then he with his neat Orations and quaint style does in five Sermons,
ushered in by his Popish L^ttany. These are those men who (in his last clause,
be covertly says) are admired by too many, and whose preaching less edifies
then the superstitious Common Prayer book: Doctor, leave your gibeing, and
presume not too much upon your learning and wit, which God has given you, as a
sharp knife to cut your own Throat, And deride nor those whose D^fects of
learning are so bountifully supplied with Inspiration^ and Revelations of the
spirit.

Repl.

Take h^^d, good Call. you merit not the Honor to be called the Dunces
Advocate: These are the men, that carry their Provaunt Sermons up and down the
Country, and in their people-pleasing Lectures, cry up Liberty, and pra^e down
Government; cry up the Spirit, and bear down Learning; cry up Sedition, and
preach down Authority. But tell in, Call. where were all these Edifyers, these
inspyred Pneumasticks, when the daring Pens of Fisher, Campion, Harding, and
other learned Heretics breathed forth their threatenings against the true
Protestant Church? when as the hot mouthed Challenges of Romes Goliahs thundered
in our English Host, where, where were all those long-winded Lecturers? Which
of them took up the Sling? What one amongst them threw down his Gauntlet? Who
among so many, struck one blow in the just defense of the true Reformed
Religion? Or tell me, without blushing, where are they that did it? These, that
bravely rusht into the Lists, defied the Enemy, grappled with him; nay, laid
him on his back; tore the Crown from the bold Strumpets head, and snatched the
Cup of poison from her trembling hand, what Palm, or what Reward have they, I
shame to tell: These, like undaunted Champions endured the Brunt, in dust and
sweat, and stoutly undertook the Cause; whilst they, like Trouts, all day
betook them to their Holds, and now, in the dark night of Ignorance, prey upon
the Churches Ruin: They fish in Waters, which themselves have troubled. These,
these are they, that lead silly women Captive, and creeping into Widows
houses, devour them under a pretense of long, Prayer; Learnings shame,
Religions Mountebanks, the vulgars Idols, and the Bane of this our (late
glorious) now miserable Kingdom.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 319. line 22.

God made a Law, that every word of an Accusation should be established by two
or three witnesses: This Law is revived by the Apostle in the Gospel, and
applied to the Case of Ministers. Against an Elder receive not an Accusation,
but under two or three witnesses. 1 Timothy 5. 19. By an Elder, meaning a
Minister, as Saint Ambrose, Epiphanius and others rightly do expound it.

Page 129. line 9.

It were therefore a most uncharitable, and unchristian Course upon a bare
Accusation of an Enemy, to condemn a Minister, before himself be heard, and a
competent number of Witnesses of worth produced against him.

Call.

How now Doctor, does your Guilt begin to call for more witnesses? Are you
tormented before your time? The Law (you speak on) would in these days, be
nedlesse: Our Ministers faults are now writ in their foreheads, and as apparent
as the Sun at noone, whose lewd looser Conversations, are impudent Confessions,
and visibly manifest, enough without farther Witnesses: Our Crime-discovering
Century, is both Witnesses and ^ury, and the pious Composer thereof, a most
sufficient Judge: But some there be so craftily vicious, that they can keep
their words and Actions from the eyes and cares of Men: For such, I hold a
reasonable Presumption, Evidence enough; Others there be, whose vices want no
Witnesses, but, perchance, their Witnessses, (as the too partial world
expounds it) want worth and Credit. Some measure worth by a visible Estate;
some, by unimpeachable honesty of body, or behavior; others, by a religious
demeanor according to established canstitutions; whereas, for my part, If a
poor handicrafts man, or whose Infirmity denies him a through-pac'd honesty, or
whose piety is a little zealously refractory to established discipline; nay, be
he a convicted Anabaptist, or Blasphemer, or what not? (in case it be for the
Cause) that brings an Accusation, or appears a Witness against a Malignant
Minister, I question not, but such a Witness may be valuable.

Repl.

The Law denies it, Call. But now the Law's asleep, all actions are arbitrarie:
But the ground of that Law was very just; for, as Theodores in 1 Timothy 5. says,
Because Ministers touch sinners to the quick, it exasperates many against them;
in respect whereof, their Accusations require many witnesses. Eutichianus an
ancient Bishop, about the year 276. after Christ, (if Bishops retain any
credit more then a Turk) Ep. 8. Episc. Syrill. admonishes, to weigh well the
Accusation of a Minister, because the faithful execution of his Office gains
him many enemies. He also proceeds to disenable all Heretics, all suspected
of Heresy, excommunicate persons, Malefactors, Thieves, Sacrilegious,
Adulterers, that seek to Witches, or Conjurers, and all other Infamous persons.
In the 3. Council of Laterane (Vide Append. Council. Lat. 3. par. 50. cap. 69.)
It was decreed, That upon an unproved accusation of a Clerick, his own single
oath should free him. It was agreed in the 7. Council of Carthage, that all
servants, Stage players, unclean persons, wanderers, all that came uncalled,
all under 14. years of age, and all that the Accuser brings from home with
him, shall be rejected, as Witnesses, against a Minister. Another Decree of
Analectus, denies the Accuser to be a witness, or the witnesses to be such as
are revengefull, and must be clear of all suspicion. In a Synod at Rome, about
Constantines time, it was decreed, No Deacon should be condemned under 44. able
witnesses: Such tender care was, always, had of the accusation of a Minister.
But now Call. your Tenets can (in favor to your new fashiond pieties) qualify
secret whoremasters, open blasphemers, and such as your self; nay, one single
Accuser (and a sorry one too) will do the feat.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 232. line 20.

But what? is every tatling Basket-maker, or Butcher, or mincing She a fit
Judge of a (Ministers) doctrine, and meet to reprove and confute him for it? Is
that Zeal, which catches at pieces of sentences, and then runs away; and
gives out, that he preaches false doctrine, contradictions, or Invectives, to
shame him to his flock?

Call.

Doctor, if some of your Coat (I name no body) were as tender of your Lives,
as ye are of your Doctrines, you would have fairer reports: But your bent is to
bring the vulgar to believe your words without Examination; and, then, you would
preach them into what Religion ye list. Could you but once work them to
Implicit faith, the Kingdom of Antichrist were more then half set up: The
horse that winces, is galled somewhere, or we account it the trick of a Jade,
that fears riding. God has commanded all to search the Scriptures; and will
ye take Pett if we examine the Doctrine you raise from thence? Did our Savior
storm, when the Sadduces reproved his words? How often were his Doctrines
traduced, as false? How often was his Authority questioned? nay more, denied?
Yet he reviled them not. Doctor, stroke down your stomach; The closer you
follow Christ, the cheerfullier your flock will follow you: But know, in things
so near concerning us, our mouths shall be as wide as the faults, be they of
Potentates, Generals, or Princes: and if they do not what our Conscience tells
us is their duties, they shall not fail to hear ont.

Repl.

Call. I think Ignorance has given thy tongue a Bribe, thou playest her
Advocate so well: Both of their lives, and doctrines, Ministers must give
account to God, and his subordinate Authority; and not to you: Call. you forget
the Calling of a Minister: He is your spiritual Father: Cham was cursed, for
discovering his fathers nakedness. Put case, your Minister should show his
nakedness in some Error; either, of life, or doctrine; it were more modest
piety for you to cover it with your silence, or to recover it by your prayers,
then to upbraide Him with it. Had you searched the Scriptures as you ought, you
would as well have condemned the saucines of the Sadduces, as the mildnes of
our Savior, whose high Authority needed no Credit among men; but our poor
Ministers (whom the least breath of a Mechanics mouth, is able (now) to ruin,
and undo both wives and children, without compassion) have reason to be moved
with such affronts: But, Call. perchance, you vindicate your own natural
father, whilst you revenge your self upon your spiritual; from whence, arises
this doctrine; You have more love to the f^^sh, then to the spirit: No
question, Call. your saucynesse is universal, and fears not to be exercized
upon the Sword, as well as Keys; Your Prince has found it; Your General has
found it; whose slow designs cannot agree with the Constitutions of your too
fiery spirits, your discontents have found unbridled tongues, to propagate your
liberties, although by blood; But the Synod, (whose consultations are to settle
peace in our distemperd Church) can go their own paces, without petition or
complaint, from whence, ariseta this doctrine; You love your own safeties above
the glory of God.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 335. line 21.

I wright this, to clip the wings of those Batts, and Reremice, that are ready
to fly in the Ministers face upon all occasions, with false accusations, saucy
Reproofs, and proud Censures of his Ministry, desiring to be teachers of Law,
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

Call.

Doctor, you still harp upon the same string: But do these Batts, these
Retemice trouble you? Then walk less in the Dark; (You know my meaning) But
you now pick a Quarrel against your forenamed Reprovers, That they desire to
be teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor what they
affirm. How your Orthodoxe nose swells at that! If ye would be oftener in your
Pulpits, there would be the less room for them: But tell me, Doctor; If a
Smith or a Tinker should happen to be gifted, and strike a Nail of edification
into the spiritual foot of an unregenerate brother, and thereby save his
soul, would it trouble you, because the Smith was not called? would it grieve
you, because the Tinker had no Ordination from a Bitesheepe? If a good deed be
done, true piety will never blame the hand that did it.

Repl.

Call. You have twice together, out of your sinck of bitterness belched out
your naucious malice upon the Dr. in these dark words, ( I mean no body, and
You know my meaning) which like the status hypocondriacus (fuming from your
spleen, the Receptacle of all base humors) troubles and distracts your head.
But, in His Name I defye both them, and thee: And, as for your Tub-preachers,
you so much defend, I perceive by your Metaphor, they edify the clean contrary
way; Concerning whom, this only. When the great Block of Religion is removed,
then such Buggs appear: Rebellion, like an Easterne-wind, brings in such
vermin^: When Jeroboam rebelled against his lawful Sovereign, and dispossessed
him of the Crown of Israel, he made Priests of the lowest of the people, which
were not of the house of Levi. 1 King. 12. 31. And this became sin unto the
house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of
the earth. 1 Kin. 13. 34. But your Tubbists have learning enough, and
understanding too, sufficient for an Auditory composed of such as you, whom
Ignorance cannot injure.

D. Burges cap. 7. page 360. line 11.

If he that seems religious, will yet be idle, false, undutifull, and
stubborn, rail at Ceremonies, Bishops, and Common Prayer, disdain to be
corrected, and maintain his fault; that man or woman will never have any true
Religion in him, till with a Cudgel all these Counterfits be beaten off.

Call.

As our Doctor has, formerly, in his several Clauses and Chops of Zeal set
down the particular Items of his ill-affected and malignant opinions; so in
this last, he has comprehended all in a Summa To: alis: And, to conclude mark
one thing, right worthy to be observed; and then, farewell; He, that has
buzzed so long about the Room, like a Flesh-Fly, has now discovered himself
to be a Hornet, with a sting in his Tail: He ^^ath, at length, turned the
weapons of the Church into a Cudgel; and changed the peace of the Gospel into
Club-law.

Repl.

Call. If the Doctors Inventory please thee not, the fault lies in thy own
Ignorance, that know not how to prize such Jewels; Grains are fitter for
Grill, then Pearls: Our Doctor, whom you revile, is neither Fly, nor Hornet,
but a painful Be; who, though he carry a sting in his Tail for such
turbulent spirits as you, yet he has likewise honey in his Bag, for such as
shall deserve it: Think not his Zeal cruel, because, it mentions a Cudgel; A
Cudgel draws no blood, as your encouraged Swords have done: If Iustruction
will not do, Correction must; but Love, in both; If Saint Paul cannot persuade
subjection to higher powers, Nor Solomon obedience to Sacred Majesty, Paul's Rod
is for the stubborn heart, and Solomon's Scourge for the fools back.

HEB. 6. 4, 5, 6. It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Spirit,

And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come;

If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance: seeing they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.



To the Readers.

NOw the business is ended. If you look upon this skirmish with a general
eye, you will see nothing but (as in a Battle) smoke and confusion: But if you
mark every ones particular behavior, you will easily distinguish betwixt a rash
fiery spirit, and a truly valiant. In the Doctor, you shall find a David,
fighting Gods defensive Battles, without sinister respects, or private
passion: In Call. you shall see the son of Nimshi, marching furiously, and hewing
down the Priests of Baal, yet nevertheless a great worshipper of Calves: In
the Replyer, you may behold Jonathan coming a Reserve to David, though
perchance shooting his arrows sometimes wide, and sometimes open: It lies in
you, Readers, now, to judge, and give the Palm: For the Doctors part and mine
(would Call. durst make the third) we both resign our shares: Let Truth be
crowned with the Victory, and the God of Truth, with Glory.

FINIS.

