portrait of John Quarles But for this Face, the Work had clearly gone
For old smooth Qvarles himself, and not his Son;
Who sighing how KINGS fell, and Subjects rose,
Scorns to mis-spend one single Tear in Prose;
This Book's his shadow, He Is his Fathers Shade,
QVARLES is a Poet as well Borne as Made.
T: M:
W. Marshall Fecit


FONS LACHRYMARUM OR A Fountain of TEARS.

London Printed for Nathaniel Brooks and sold at his shop at the Angel in
Cornhill.



Fons Lachrymarum; OR A FOUNTAIN OF TEARS: From whence does flow Englands
Complaint, Jeremiah's Lamentations PARAPHRASED, WITH Divine Meditations; AND AN
ELEGY Upon that Son of Valor Sir CHARLES LVCAS.

Written by JOHN QUARLES.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Brooks, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1649.

TO THE illustrious Prince CHARLES, PRINCE of WALES.
Sir,
IF the Current of my affections force me against the Rocks of presumption, J
humbly crave the assistance of Your gracious pardon: The extent of my ambition
is to prostitute at Your Highnesses feet the first fruits of an Orchard, which
J planted in Flaunders, during the time of my banishment, and now have brought
them into England to be pressed for growing in a strange Country; J confess,
the fruit is green, and sour, and cannot ripen till it feel the Sunshine of
Your Princely eye; nor sweeten, till Your approbation shall be pleased to
afford them a liking, and that liking honor them with a free acceptance. There
is nothing that can make me esteem my self unhappy, but that the severity of
these times will not permit me to tender Your Highness that service which my
heart is ambitious to perform, and my duty binds me to acknowledge: J have
nothing that J can style my own but a fidelious heart, which shall always pray
for Your prosperity; and that Your successes may (like waves) ride in one upon
the back of another; and that at last You may, like the Sun, break through
the Clouds of Opposition, and once more shine in your proper Hemisphere: Heaven
season Your Royal Heart with the Principles of Wisdom, and grant that You may
not Hide Your Counsels in the Bosoms of them that honor You with their Lips,
when their Hearts are far from You. These are the serious and fervent Prayers
of him, that desires to live no longer then he is willing to devote himself to
Your Highnesses Commands, and is

Your Highnesses most obliged Servant, JOHN QUARLES.

TO THE READER.
Kind Reader,
I Here present to thy view a Fountain, from which does flow, Complaints,
Lamentations, and Meditations, three Necessaries for these Times. Never were
Complaints more frequent, then they are in this age of obduracy and oppression;
Nor Lamentations more requisite, then in these Lachrymable Times; Nor
Meditations more commendable, then in these days of uncertainty. Reader, I
shall desire thee to pass by the errors of the Press, which are now too late to
correct: Had not the perverseness of these times debarred me from coming to the
Press, the Printers Mistakes had not been so numerous. For my own part, I have
nothing to boast of, but this that I am confident the judicious Reader will
pardon the weakness of my endeavors, and know, that the tallest Cedars were but
twigs at first.

Reader, Farewell.

TO My dear Friend the AVTHOR.
THe Son begins to rise, the Father's set:
Heaven took away one light, and pleased to let
Another rise. Quarles, thy Light's divine,
And it shall teach Darkness it self to shine.
Each word revives thy Fathers name, his art
Is well imprinted in thy noble heart:
I Have read thy pleasing lines, wherein I find
The rare Endeavors of a modest mind.
Proceed as well as thou have well begun,
That we may see the Father by the Son.
R.L.

TO My much esteemed Friend the AVTHOR, On his Book, entitled, Fons
Lachrymarum.
THou prov'st Prophetic in thy doleful Muse,
Whilst it the Prophets mournful tears renews
Yet e're thy tears be spent, may England stand
In her first glory, raised by Charles his hand.
Then may each drop (to add unto her grace)
Turn solid pearl, and beautify her face:
There whilst in native brightness fixed they be,
Their radiant luster shall reflect on thee.
Rich. Quiney.

Englands Complaint.
EXperience tells us, those that are in pain
Need neither Act nor Ord'naence to complain:
Griefs have their privilege, whose passions break
All Laws, and Losers claim a power to speak.
If passion be too rude (Reader) excuse;
Grief knows no manners, sorrow needs no Muse:
But stay my hasty quill, forbear, I know
Thou art too young, too tender yet to go
Without a guide, a guide that may direct
Thy staggering feet; A guide that may protect
Thy Infant years. Do not too much endeavor;
A fall at first will make thee lame for ever.
Invoke the Nine, and if they do deny
To give thee aid, complain to Mercury:
Tell him, thou art a babe, and do desire
To warm thy genius by the Muses fire:
Where are Apollo's offsprings? are they tied
In sorrows chains, e're since Mecaenas died?
Or are their Helleconian waters spent?
Or do they stay t'expect a Complement?
I wonder what they mean, to be thus slow,
In former times they would run, they will now scarce go:
My heedless Muse, do thou not understand
They Are all distracted and dispersed the Land?
Only Melpomene, who now appears
Like Nioby, a monument of tears.
Know thou not this (rash Muse) then how can thou
Implore a help from them that know not how
To help themselves? Nay Pegasus is made
A poor Dragoon; his friends are all betrayed:
Though all distracted, and thus routed be,
Yet, helpless Muse, there is Heaven to succor thee:
Then hear me Heaven, O hear me, now I sue,
The art my Apollo, be Mecaenas too,
And great Conductor of my Soul, inspire
My frozen heart with thy celestial fire:
Light thou my Candle, O then I shall see,
By thy own light, how to discover thee;
Inflame my frozen senses with thy Spirit,
That I may learn to live, and live t'inherit
The glory of thy Kingdom, and to rest
Where joys are greater then can be expressed:
And so go on; but stay, rash quill, and know
What it is to be engaged, before you go
Too far; Be careful these bad times, unless
Your rash adventure want a good success:
Be wary what you do; these are no times
To please fond fancies with lascivious Rhymes.
Be circumspect; Let every word you write
Be Truth, and then let every word invite
A tear; each tear, a sigh; that every Eye,
That reads, may melt into an Elegy.
And cursed be that dull eye, that will not lend
A tear, or two, to see poor England spend
Weeks, months, and years, in sighs, in sobs, in groans,
In tears, in prayers, and wilt not move the stones?
Vollies of tears, discharged from her eyes,
Shake Heaven and Earth, and penetrate the skies
With sad co^plain^? heaven mourns at her condition
And weeps down showrs of tears at her Peti^ion:
Then rouse, ye Britains, from your flattering sleep,
Hear Englands groans, thus she begins to weep;
No Peace, no ease, no pleasure; is all gone,
Pursued with envy and rebellion?
Whither, oh whither, are my glories sent?
Banished my breast by Act of Parliament?
Virtue is fled, and scared into a trance
By the ill shape of Bughear ignorance
What mists are these that thus eclipse the light
Of splend^nt truths? From whence proceeds this night
Of darkening Errors? how am I begul'd
Of all my joys? Nay, how am I defiled
With leprous humors? On how grief transports
My frightened sense! what envy's this resorts
Unto my swelling breast? Is there no mean,
No pleasing Music to divide my scean?
Were I an Atlas, I could not sustain
This Firmament of grief: who can refrain
From falling, that is so much oppressed as I
With such a burden of Malignity.
Where shall I run, to whom shall I address
My burdened self, or how shall I express
My uncontrouled sorrows, or relate
The unhappy discord of my factious State?
Where shall I fly? Is there no Ark above
To hide me from these waves? Is there no Dove
To bring me tidings that the Land is clear,
And that the hills of Peace do re-appear?
But must I perish? shall the waves of pride
Dash me in pieces? still a flowing tide,
Still flow, and never ebb! Is there no bliss?
Wonder sad Soul! O what an Ocean's this
Ambitious winds, why rage ye more and more,
And make the Seas thus envy at the shore?
Is there no Peter can pray Heaven to please.
To check the winds, and qualify the Seas?
Am I the worst of all? Is my condition
So bad, that there is no Petition
Can have an audience? Ah my conscience says,
I Have Peter's fears, but yet want Peter's faith.
Here let us stop a little, and advise
With flesh and blood; Can greater wants arise,
To damage Souls, then faith, whose want procures
All these extremes, which my poor heart endures?
Oh no, there cannot: he that wants the hand
Of Soul-supporting Faith, forgets to stand:
This is my want, and till I find relief,
I Will lie and tumble in the shades of grief,
And glut the air with sighs; my hideous cries
Shall roar like thunder in the troubled skies:
O that my eyes were Oceans, that I may
Drown all my sorrows in one stormy day;
Or would pleased Heaven, enable me to strain,
To gulp up Seas, and weep them out again,
Then should my briny streams gush forth so fast,
That every tear should strive to be the last;
So the swift current of my swelling eyes
Should overflow my heaped up miseries.
I have offended Heaven, and now I see
My sins are walls betwixt my God and me,
Which stop the passage of my fervent prayers,
That there is no prevailing but by tears,
To batter down the wall that thus prevents
My cries, my vows, and hinders my intents
To Heaven, that Heaven can send me no relief,
Nor take me from this labyrinth of grief.
Gone are my golden, my forgotten days,
When every bird could whistle forth my praise.
Gone are those days when this consuming Earth
Was stuffd with pleasure, and perfumed with mirth:
Though all be gone, yet will I strive to endure;
He that has made the wound, can make the cure:
For now I Am wounded, and my wounds do smart
Beyond my patience; and my tender heart,
Swelled up with sorrow, does predestinate
What woe must happen to my bleeding State:
My head, my head's tormented; and my eyes
Are dim with gazing after vanities:
My members swell like Oceans, and from thence
Proceeds so great, so large a confluence
Of noisome humors, and they run so thick,
That they surcharge, and make my stomach sick:
I ave purged alr^ady, and that will not do,
I fear, I fear, that I must vomit too:
I doubt it is too much action that has bred
These ill diseases that disturb my ^ead;
Oh I am sick to death, my bowels yern!
I fre^z I fr^^z* and whilst I fre^z, I burn;
I burn, I melt, my soul is parched within.
(How hot's the furnace of tormenting sin?)
And Ah! how soon is feebled nature lamed
With joint contracting cold; if not inflamed
By heavens enlivening fire? how hot's my blood
To what is bad, and Ah, how cold to good!
Oh grief! how two extremes perplex one heart,
So linked together, that they cannot part!
Thus am I tossed, and doubtfully oppressed
Beneath the burden of a dubious breast?
Nothing but Wars, and Tumults do arise;
Thrice hapyy I* had I known how to prize
My happiness? Alas I never did know
The good of peace, till Heaven was pleased to show:
War makes me know, what joy it was before
To live in peace and plenty, now the more.
To live in peace and plenty, now I know by this,
This want of peace, what a combining bliss
It was to live united, and to praise
That God of Peace, that blessed my peaceful days
With large increase; Oh misery to think,
Loaded with too much pleasure, how I sink!
I that was wont to boast my heaps of treasure,
Now swim in sorrow, and now sink in pleasure:
I that the world did envy, now am brought
To be not worth the env'ing, worse then naught,
Reviled by all; see how the hand of Fate
has pleased to make me thus unfortunate:
What shall I do? what physic can procure
A little ease? I cannot long endure.
Where are my grave Divines to give advice
To a relapsing Soul? are they grown nice
Of late? Are their conspiring hearts agreed
T'absent themselves in this my time of need?
What do they mean? Oh whither are they fled?
Sure, sure, they are silenced all, or else all death:
Do they not see me falling? Do they stand
Amazed, not daring to afford a hand
To help me up? Methinks I hear them cry,
That they are falling to, as well as I.
Where is Religion, that was wont to be
The Governor of Peace, the branched Tree
That ever flourished? see, now every Clown
Being authorized presumes to cut her down.
Will they still strive with swords, with guns, with clubs,
To pickle my Religion up in tubs?
Have they no Reason? has their greedy zeal
Swallowed up all their Senses at one meal?
Have they agreed that Piety and Reason
Shall be condemned, and voted into Treason?
Or has their hell-bred thoughts found out a way
To turn our Sion to a Golgotha?
Has the Tartarian Counselor invented
Such thriving Plots which cannot be prevented?
Leave off base Acts Mechanics, and begin
To deal uprightly, and reform within;
Bury your aged crimes, and then go call
Your straggling senses to the Funeral:
Adjourn your thoughts, which now are quite contrary
To Peace, and think a peace is necessary.
Honor your higher Powers, and do not mock
And vilify them as your laughing stock.
There are a brainsick multitude, a rabble
Of all Religions, that do daily squabble
About vain shades, and let the substance pass,
Hating good manners as they hate the Mass:
It Is such as these which thus my woes advance,
Whose very Souls are starved with ignorance:
It Is such as these who daily strive to smother
The truth with flattring zeal, and call him brother,
Nay holy brother; though his faith be small,
If he can rail, and reverently baul
Against grave Bishops, and their pious King,
Oh this is holy, nay a zealous thing:
And those are holy that can pray by chance
According to the Spirits influence,
And teach their prick-ear'd brethren to deny
The Common Prayer, but know no reason why;
And those whose great humility can be
Content to make a Pulpit in a tree,
Or in some Barn, there by the Spirit pray
Five or six hours, not caring what they say;
Or if a Blacksmith or a Tinker can
Hammer out Treason, he is a zealous man
Or if a learned Cobbler will be sure
To stitch it close, oh he is a Christian pure!
Oh these are holy, yea and learned Teachers,
These are Divines, and only these are Preachers:
They Will cry all learned Prelates out of season,
They must not preach, for fear they should speak reason.
Oh these are they, whose ruder tongues can cry,
Advance Mechanics, down with Majesty:
These, these are they, whose du^ghill thoughts could never
Attain perfection, but they still endeavor
To banish wisdom, that at last they may
Make all the world as ignorant as they.
See how they'ave turned my joy to griping sadness,
Plenty to want, and peace to downright madness;
Virtue to vice, and chastity to vainness,
Learning to scorn, Religion to profaneness,
Flattry to zeal, and nonsense unto Reason,
Honor to shame, and Loyalty to Treason,
Pity to Murder, Truth to feigned lies,
Prayers to curses, Plundring to a prize:
Thus, thus they gripe my Soul, and go about
To change my shape, and turn my inside out.
Unhumane Actions; Ah who can behold
Such Tyrannies, and not his blood grow cold!
Break, break, ye floodgates of my brimfil'd eyes,
And let my tears have passage to surprise
This Fort of sorrow, and tumultuous cares,
And drench the mountains in a Sea of tears.
Forbear, ye lowering skies; there is no need
Ye should disburse a shower: I have agreed
With sorrow, and his powers still to remain
Clouded with grief, and f^ll the Earth with rain;
Oh horrid, dismal, Heaven provoking times,
Surpassing Sodoms; nay Gomorrah's crimes
Were never so bad; Oh Hell-invent^d fate,
Worse then the worst that I can nominate.
Are these my people, for whose sakes I lie
Involved with torments, wrapped in Tyranny?
Are these my Sons, whose sorrows now I weep?
Are these my children that are lul'd asleep?
See how secure they rest, and never fear
Approaching woe; mine eyes, can ye forbear
To vent ten thousand tears? Oh never let
Your lids conceal you, till you have paid the debt
Ye owe to sorrow, for those sins which thirst
For greater plenty, then can be disburst:
Oh sigh, sad Soul, until thy heart be sore,
Then sigh, because thou can not sigh no more.
Oh that my voice, like thunderclaps could tear,
And split the portals of each deafned ear;
That so my cries might ravish every brain,
And filled with horror, make them deaf again.
And this I wish because my Sons are all
So deaf, they will not hear me when I call:
Did they not flourish in a peaceful state,
Enjoying store of all things, till of late
They grew thus factious? and have I not been,
In former times, the worlds admired Queen?
Have not all Nations formerly been proud
To do me service? Have they not allowed
A due respect unto me every where,
And honored me, if not for love, for fear?
And must I now by your, your means incut
As many plagues as mischief can infer?
Must I now pine away, that have been strong?
Must I now stoop, that have stood up so long?
Must I be now subordinate to those
That never dat'd subscribe themselves my foes?
Must I be now divided, that was never
Divided yet? Must I be lost forever?
Must I be now consumed and thrown down?
And must they scoff me now, that dared not frown
In former times? Must I be now confounded?
Must I be now reviled, and called a Roundhead?
Must I be now nick-nam'd? Must frighted fame
Sound a Retreat, and scorn to own my name?
Must I be now dispersed? Must my own hand
Destroy the bounty of my fruitful Land?
Oh grief transcending thought, shall Englands glory
Be thus abstracted, and thus made a story
To after ages? Would not this perplex
A Soul, that never knew what 'twas to vex?
What grief can equalize my grief? What pain
Can be equivalent? Would any gain
Experience? If they would, may they incline
Themselves to this experienced grief of mine:
Ah grief of days; what marble eye can read
Of such extremes as mine, and never bleed?
'Twould dull the sharpest brain to meditate
Upon my grief; nay, make them desperate.
Had Nero lived in this tempestuous age,
He might have blushed to see his boiling rage
Out-vi'd by yours; nay, Corah and his crew
Never pursued their Moses, as ye do,
With such untutored violence; it is strange,
Oh whither will your headlong fury range?
Advise by times, and know there is a God
That overlooks you: Know, that Moses Rod
May turn a greedy Serpent, and devour,
As well the greater, as the smaller power.
Go, go, ye sad contrivers of these times,
Consult with sorrow: think on all those crimes
Ye have committed; and then think what you
Have done, and after what ye have to do.
Advise with care, for your condition's such,
You Have much to do, because you have done too much.
Too much; Alas too much in my sad state
Is done already; and I fear too late
For remedy: And secret danger lies
In dull delay: it is wisdom to advise
Betimes; for true and timely care prevents
Untimely ruin, hindering the intents
Of studied malice; industry prepares
A balm for that which negligence impairs.
Those that by dreaming sloth, sustain a loss,
Obtain least pity, and the greatest cross.
Consider what a grief 'twill be to see
The sad distraction of this Monarchy,
Wrought by your slothful negligence, when all
My lofty structures by your hands must fall:
Nay, worse then this, when famine shall devour
What fire and sword has left; when every hour
The Bells shall toul, with such a feeble sound,
As if that they themselves a want had found.
Will it not melt a stone to hear the cries
Of hungry children, and the sad replies
Of their dejected friends? who can forbear
To think on this, and never shed a tear?
How children cry for bread, and fain would rest,
Seeking protections in their mothers breast?
Alas poor Orphans, how are they beguiled,
When the sad mother's forced to eat the child
For want of food, and make their blood their drink!
Oh what a wounding sorrow it is to think
How all will be destroyed, both young and old,
How warm blood will be mingled with the cold!
How you will roar and cry for want of bread,
Some on the ground, some dying, and some dead;
Some gnaw their flesh, and some fight who shall eat
Each other; O uncomfortable meat!
And then the ravening Wolves seek up and down
To find a prey, in every starved Town,
Shall eat deaths relics; having spent that store,
Shall ransack up and down, and howl for more.
All beasts and fowls shall then amazed stand,
To see the Sea is turned into a Land:
The Land into a Sea, a Red Sea, where
Nothing but bones in stead of fishes are.
Where nothing's heard, but cries, and shrieks, and groans,
Where nothing's seen, except consuming bones.
Oh had you but the power to apprehend
These sad destructive dangers, how they tend
Da^ly toward us, with all the power that they
Can make, as if they would rout us in one day:
Dull sons of men, have ye forgot to rise,
And draw the Curtains of your slumbring eyes?
Methinks this hot Alarm should affright
Your Souls for ever from your fond delight!
What do ye mean? ye cannot choose but hear
Heavens thundering Judgments rattling in your ear
What, have ye sworn Allegiance to the Prince
Of utter darkness? Will no words convince
Your Stubborn Souls? Has a perpetual vow
Been lately past betwixt Hells Prince and you?
Why do ye thus delight to overthrow
Your selves, and lose a Kingdom at one blow?
Oh where are my grand Rulers to correct
These their enormous humors, that infect
The world with Errors? To what fatal place
Are all my Senators retired?
You my Triennial Powers, come and dispose
Your ears to my discourse; and I Will disclose
My grief to you, whose Judgments can prescribe
A timely remedy without a bribe.
Then hark!
THe climing power of my disease is grown
To such a height, that I can hardly own
A minutes rest; my body politic
You apprehend (I know) is very sick:
Then let the depth of understanding move
The depth of pity, that ye may remove
These growing inconveniences, that moan
For your assistance: Can a Kingdom groan,
And not be heard? Can a disease remain
within my body, and not I complain
O^ what I suffer? That were Tyranny
Not to be paralel'd: O pity me,
And let the fervor of my language turn
Your thoughts to tears, to quench those flames that burn
My wasting intrals: Let your hearts relent
With meditating on my discontent:
Open your willing ears, and hear me call;
O do not fall a slumbring whilst I fall:
O hear me soon, that now complain too late:
Let my complaints make you compassionate;
Dissolve into a Sea of tears. Involve
Your selves with sackcloth. Let your minds revolve
Upon your native soil; resolve to spend
Your greatest skills, to consummate the end
Of my distractions; and let mercy join
With justice; so shall endless love combine
Your Souls: That like Ezekiels wheels ye may
Run one within another, and not stray:
But like Isaiahs Seraphims may cry,
O holy, holy, holy God on high.
But stay; nor can I end, my griefs must fly
A little further; Mountains that are high
Must be discovered: Molehills often times
Lie out of sight, like undiscovered crimes.
A public sorrow oftentimes admits
A cure from them, whose more concreted wits
Do daily study with more active arts
More public mischief with more private hearts.
Does not the fawning Crocodile obtain
By public sorrow her more private gain?
Does not the crafty Lapwing cry the least,
When she is nearest to her close-made nest?
Are there not those in this conniving age,
Whose outward meekness is but inward rage?
Are there not those in these contentious times,
That live by nothing but their private crimes?
Oh grief to speak it: Are there not a sort
Of wilful people that can make a sport
At others ruins, whose pretended zeal
Has bred much mischief in this Commonweal?
Are there not those that would pretend to be
Reformers, yet deform a Monarchy?
Are there not those, whose upstart honors crave
Perpetual durance, only to enslave
The Sons of Honor? Thus they play the thief,
And joy in nothing, but in others grief.
Are there not those, who in one breath can cry
Against a Liar, yet can forge a lie
for their advantage, and abjure the Laws?
Lies are no lies, if they advance their Cause.
Are there not those that persecute the Arts,
And yet retain Monopolizing hearts?
Are there not those that daily take delight
To twist themselves into another right?
Do not all these, which I have named, pretend
To do all this, to a religious end?
And ah Religion! how art thou betrayed
By those, whose worthless industry have laid
Thine honor in the dust; nay, and have thrown
Dirt in their faces, that shall dare to own
Thy very name? these are a sort of people
That love no Church, because they hate the steeple.
I dare affirm, that Proteus never could be
So much transformed, as they have transformed thee:
Nor can I yet conclude; I must deplore
My greater sorrows, yet a little more:
Let no man take exceptions, for I speak
Unto my self; sorrow must find a leak.
I cannot hold; and O that I were able
To make my feeble tongue infatigable,
That by my full expressions I may prove
How much the Serpent overrules the Dove.
There was a time (not long since) when my fits
Had found as expiation, if those wits
(Which proved too serpentine) had not delayed
Their too-soon violated vows, and played
A double game: I even blush to name
What odds they had, and how they lost the game*
The world (though sad) is not so melancholy,
But that it smiles at, and records that folly:
The breach of vows cracks honor, and the loss
Of opportunity deserves a cross
^n honors book; and he that shall neglect
A public good, shall find a bad respect
In private hearts, and ruin must attend
A public Actor, for a private end.
Are there not those hate Rome, and yet make roo^
For Catiline, and labor to entomb
His vile prescriptions in their Romish thoughts,
And yet excuse themselves, and him, from faults
Do I not see them how they run his paths
With headlong force, and prosecute his Laws?
Do I not see their Agents, how they strive
To ruin others, and to keep alive
Themselves, that lived not, till this greedy age
Raked them from dunghils, to adorn the Stage
Of Hell-bred Tyranny? Do I not see
How much they are honored for their Tyranny?
The Salamander, when he is crowned with ^i^
Is in his Kingdom; if his Crown expire,
His life concludes: Tell me what then remains
Except the relics of consuming flames?
Even so the Salamanders of these days
(Whose hearts are made of flames) at last will blaz
And smother into ashes: Thus declined,
What can they leave (except a stink) behind?
Each thing must live within its element;
Discretion tells us, fishes must content
Themselves with water; and all things must live
Content with that which Heaven was pleased to giv^
It Is only man that surfeits with desire:
The earth, the air, the water, quickening fire,
And all was made for man, and man was made
Of all these things: O let it not be said,
That fire predominates, and breeds contest
Within my bowels, and destroys the rest*
O strive, now your unruly flames arise,
To quench your hearts with water from your eyes:
Strive not with Catiline, that lavish creature,
To stop great mischiefs, by enacting greater.
But tell me now, how can your thoughts reflect
Upon a Peace, when as ye dis-respect
The principle? it is an uncertain way
To gain a Peace by Arms; for every day
Will breed new tumults, which will in conclusion
Inviron you with Armies of confusion:
Peace cannot swim in blood, blood cannot stand
Like pools of water in a peaceful Land.
Delight not thus in contraries; forsake
Your former ways, let not your hearts partake
Of blood, and rain, Heaven will never own
A blood-bedab'led Soul: It Is not unknown
How ye have belched out oaths, and vowed to bring
Peace to your Country, honor to your King:
Now where is your Countries peace? now where is the glory
Your King was promised? O nefandous story!
Can peace and strife cohabitate? Can fame
And glory be imprisoned? It Is your shame,
Not his dishonor, that ye perpetrate
Such horrid acts: I tremble to relate
What I have suffered: Is It not you that have
Exploded all my comforts? You that crave
(Like greedy Cormorants) still more and more,
Pretending charity, yet starve the poor?
Was it not you, whose active hands provided
To pull down Crosses, that have thus divided
My yielding people? Can ye now pull down
These Crosses ye have builded? You that crown
Your hearts with malice, will you always stand
In opposition? will you still command
In spite of Fortune? will ye always be
Majestique too, in spite of Majesty?
I may affirm, that never Nation had
So good a King, whose Subjects are so bad.
Do ye not see how Heaven has pleased to smile
Upon his Soul, and bless him all this while
With long-continued patience? It is he
Whose life has given life to Piety.
He is a second Job, whose patience can
Outvy the base indignities of man:
Go ransack Europe, see if you can find
A more composed Prince, whose noble mind
Can entertain a grief, and never vent
(But turn) his passion into blessed content;
Whole volumns of his grief may be expressed;
And since I dare not speak, I Will weep the rest.
O stop my tears, or else my eyes will flow
Into a deluge; for my sorrows know
No mean at all; extremes of tears must fall
For such extremes of grief: Attend me all,
Whose hearts are not too flinty; I Will declare
Your Sovereigns suffering, with your Sovereigns care
How many widowed night has his sad heart
VVorn out with sorrow, having none t'impart
His thoughts unto, except he please to spend
His language on the ears of such a friend
As Haman was; whose unrestrained power
Punished his own offense in half an hour.
Judge you, whose hearts have vowed a double life,
What are the endearments of a tender wife.
Judge you (what it is) whom bounteous Heaven has blessed
With numerous offsprings, to be dispossessed
Of those increasing comforts, which discry
No real joy, but in their parents eye.
And if the enjoyment of these blessings yield
Such large content, needs must the want unshield
The Soul of comfort: O unhappy fate!
Who'd be a father at so dear a rate?
A wife, unhappy, happy word; a wife
Happy oft-times to an unhappy life:
A wife, that word imports joys
Unparalled; that very word destroys
Armies of grief, and oftentimes it brings
A heavenly sorrow to the hearts of Kings;
And cursed be they, heaven gives me leave to speak,
That shall presume to separate, or break
Conjugal bands; How many in this Land
Lie subject to this curse? how many stand
Amazed, almost distracted, that have been
Actors? Heaven bless my King, protect my Queen;
How many false aspersions have you cast
Upon their heads? Did ye not strive to blast
Their spotless honors? What was spoke of late,
I hate to think, much more to nominate:
Admit it had been truth, then had ye not
Proved much unjust, to leave so large a blot
Within this Kingdom: Thus you can discry
Inferior molehils, but let mountains lie.
But tell me then, is this the only way
To make a glorious King? Heaven grant he may
Want such obnoxious honor, till he crave
Honor from you, to whom he honors gave:
Consider well, and ye will find it true,
'Twas heaven that made him glorious, and not you:
'Twas he that filled his Soul with true renown,
And crowned his Cross as you have crossed his crown
Heaven breaks no Covenants, he never fails,
He never unvotes what he votes, or rails
Against his enemies, but grieves to see
Their Souls run headlong to their destiny.
Abused Peace perverts into a Curse:
What can be better, or what may be worse
Then Peace, whose presence (like the Sun) display
Its golden Ensigns; whose refulgent rays
Adorns the Earth, and fills the gazing eye
With glorious light, and peaceful Majesty?
But when rude Boreas summons all his power,
And argues with the Seas; In half an hour
You may behold a change: they which before
Were wrapped in silence, now begin to roar
Into a fury; contradictions bring
Endless disputes: Shall Boreas be a King,
And rule the unruly w^vves? (when surges meet
How rudely do they part, how rudely great!)
Whilst peaceful Zephyrus must be denied
To breathe upon the floods? Can storms abide
For ever? No: rash Boreas must at last
Submit to Zephyrus; whose milder blast
Proclaims a sudden Peace, and strives to grace
The simp'ring Ocean with a smoother face.
But whither am I hurried? slack my sails,
I fly beyond my Port; I find the gales
Of grief are too robustuous, and I doubt
I cannot anchor here, but tack about.
Seven years are now completed since my grief
Had its initiation, yet relief
Stands at a distance; Peace is in a doubt
Whether to come within, or stay without.
Your rash proceedings and your great disgraces
Make Peace even blush to look you in the faces:
O miserable men that live to know
Such Times, such a reduplicating woe*
Is there no art remains? Is there no way
To set you right, that thus have gone astray?
Is there no faithful Lot to pray for Peace,
And stop the cause, that so the effect may cease?
Is there no Jonah dare proclaim, and cry
Unto the sons of men, Destruction's nigh?
But are they all asleep, now sorrows swarm?
(O how can they repose in such a storm!)
Rouse slumbring Souls, and lift your heads above
The decks of negligence; The God of Love
Will be too angry, if you sleep too long:
Advance your thoughts, and let your prayers be strong
For me, who am thus weak, and must decay,
Except this grief-encreasing Remora
Be wiped away; O may I not offend
The Auditor of Heaven, if I shall spend
Some words to this effect; I must confess
Dear God, I am corrupted, I address
My self to thee; O let thy healing hand
Prescribe a Balsam for this bleeding Land:
I have been too progressive, grant I may
Be retrograded to my former way:
Spoil not the path because I stepped aside,
Correct my feet, and let the path abide.
What though the path be something rough and small,
Better's a rough path then no path at all;
For now I ramble up and down, and see
No certainty, except of misery.
Is it discretion to pull down a fair
Cathedral Church because one spider's there?
Is it discretion to condemn the Sun
Because the Dials false? the Times must run
Their revolutions; set the Dial right,
Then you will not want a truth till Sol wants light.
Let all things move within their orbs; suppose
The inferior lights should labor to depose
The Prince of light, and drive him from his throne,
And by an usurpation make it their own:
What strange aspects would this produce t'affright
Supine Astronomers, to see that light,
Which was at distance, now approach so near,
And blaze in an improper Haemisphere!
Consider then, would not the Stars let fall
Too great an influence, the Sun too small,
On humane bodies? O may they remain
In their own Region, then would Sol again
Enjoy his just prerogatives, and feed
The world with such a luster, as I need:
Peace is the light I want, could I obtain
But Peace, how soon should I survive again!
Peace is the best Physician, I require
Nothing but Peace to quench my hot desire.
A good Physician will be sure to see,
E're he prescribes, where lies the malady;
Then he will begin to study, and to try
What may be best; whether Phlebotomy
Be good, and if it be, opens a vein,
And so restores his Patients ease again:
Thus, thus, grand authors of my woes, should you
Have done at first, if ye had been but true
To me; but when at first my griefs you saw
Ye thought it good to purge me with your Law:
And having purged me, ye began to see
How weak I was, and what a low degree
Y'ad brought me to, and then ye fell at strife,
By killing me, how to preserve my life.
You brought strange Doctors to me, whose advice
I Am sure was purchased by too high a price:
They bid me lift my arms up to my head,
And stir my Body; for diseases bred
For want of exercise: they bid me play
A game or two at Irish every day.
I took the advice, then I begun to find
A sudden alteration, and my mind
Was so transported, that me thoughts the ground
Began to dance, and I my self turned round:
I fell into a trance, with this presumption,
And ever since I Have lived in a Consumption.
Let this example all the world assure,
An English Grief will have no Scottish Cure.
And so farewell, if these be your conditions,
Henceforth you may prove -- But not Physicians
Englands Petition to Heaven.
AH me! Ah me! can nothing but Ah me
Fly from my barren heart (dear God) to thee?
Ah me! and why will not that word import
Ten thousand prayers, that so I may resort
Unto thy ears by Troops? then would I run
Division on ah me, till Time were done.
Weak as I am, distracted, and defiled,
I prostitute my self, not as a child
Of Sin, but as a Parent that has had
A numerous offspring; Now my heart is sad,
O grant that my unfeigned grief may grow
Upon a real graft, that I may show
The fruit of perfect sorrow, and declare
How great my sins, how great thy mercies are:
Storm thou my sins, and force them to retreat,
And make my craving breast thy mercies seat:
Strike thou my flinty Soul, that my desires
May, from a spark, increase to flames; Thy fires
Must thaw my Icy Soul, or else I shall
Remain for ever a congealed Gall:
I am composed of steel, and cannot bow,
Except thy dear instructions teach me how:
Attract me by the loadstone of thy grace,
That through thy mercies I may see thy face;
And having viewed it, I may never more
Return to what I Idolized before;
I have a Lydia's heart, in mercy please
To open it, thy mercies are the keys:
Ravish my Soul, that I may fall in love
With thee, my God, with thee, that art a Dove
Of innocence: Let my raptures mount
As high as Heaven, that there I may recount
Thy never failing love, and sing thy praise
With David's heart, until the last of days:
Tune thou my stupid Soul, and then it shall
Be truly sweet, and heavenly musical:
Convert my swords to sighs, that I my fight
With my own crimes, and hate to take delight
To lacerate my self. O tie the hands
Of fury! make me stoop to thy commands.
Convert my tides of blood to streams of tears,
My lies to truths, my horrid oaths to prayers:
Make me to apprehend how thou have wept
Of late for me, whilst I securely slept.
Let not thy tears destroy me, but let me
Dissolve to tears (dear God) and weep to thee:
Is it the heat of my offenses make
The Heavens to melt, (O Heaven some pity take!)
Or has thy great discretion thought it good
To send these showers to wash away that blood
Which I have lost; I know thy purer eyes
Cannot endure a bloody sacrifice.
O stop thy bottle, pity my sad times,
And grant to me more tears or fewer crimes!
Be pleased to view me with a gracious eye,
And let the luster of thy Majesty
Reflect upon me, let thy glorious light
Create a day of mercy, that the night
Of sin may be expelled; O hear my prayers
Ushered unto thee with a tide of tears.
To me, O let thy mercies be expressed,
And fill the concave of a sinful breast;
Sinful, ah sinful, more then I am able
With language to express, intolerable:
Behold my festred Soul, whose wounds proceed
From sin, and being dressed with sin, they bleed;
They bleed (dear Heaven) they bleed, O what a flood
A flood they make! and I am bathed in blood:
O stop this current that does still begin,
Or I shall drown a Kingdom in my sin:
O look upon me, and in mercy please
To send me salve to palliate my disease:
Begin to hear (O GOD) begin to send,
That so my sorrows may begin to end.
THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH.
CHAP. I.
Contents.
1 The miserable estate of Jerusalem by reason of her sins, 12 She complains
of her grief, 18 and confesses Gods judgments to be righteous.

HOw does the City, that was blessed of late
With store of people, now lament her state?
How like a poor distressed widow she
Deplores her sorrows, that was wont to be
Great among Nations? greater far then any;
How tributary is she now to many?
cheeks with midnight tears,
And from her lovers can obtain no prayers:
Her friends, armed all with treachery, arise
And show themselves her public enemies:
Judah's forced to fly,
And throw her self into Captivity;
Because of sense consuming servitude
She dwells amongst the Heathen multitude:
Her Foes o're-took her when she was distressed;
Well might she wish for, but could take no rest.
Sion is with redoubled grief surpised,
Because her feasts by none are solemnized:
Her Gates are filled with desolation, and
Her Virgins tortured with afflictions hand:
Her Priests with sighs, heartbreaking sighs, express
Their grief: Ah Sion's filled with bitterness!
foes;
Just Heaven with these innumerable woes
Plagues her transgressions; and the enemy
Drives her dear Children to Captivity.

Sions dear daughter, is of late defaced:
Her Princes fly, and ransack all about,
Like hungry Hearts, to find a pasture out:
They all are fled, and flying, can procure
No strength to oppose the merciless pursuer.
Jerusalem was thus confined
T'afflictions lawless bounds, she called to mind
Her by past pleasures, and those days which she
For now her crying sins are grown so great,
That Heaven has thrown her from his mercies seat:
All those that loved her, yea and highly prized her,
Seeing her shameful nakedness, despised her:
She sighs and turns her back, as though she would borrow
A private breath t'express a public sorrow:
For being filled with wickedness, Her end
She never thought of, neither had she friend
To comfort her: O Lord my God, behold
My great afflictions: Ah my foe grows bold,
And magnifies himself: His stretch'd-out hand
Has spoyld the pleasures of my fruitful Land:
The very Heathen, whom thou did deny
Thy Congregation, do contemn, defy
Thy just commands; and with unseemly paces
Enforce an entrance to thy holy places.
Her bread-desiring people, filled with grief,
Give their chief treasures for a small relief:
Behold, O Lord, consider my distress,
For I am vile, and filled with wickedness.
Oh stop your hasty feet, ye that pass by,
And look upon my new-bred misery;
Sum up the totals of all grief, then borrow
A million more; It Is nothing to that sorrow
Which I support, wherewith the angry power
Has pleased t'afflict me in His wrathful hour:
For he from his all-ruling throne has sent
Into my bones a fiery Government:
Yea, and his ever-active hand has set,
And I am desolate, and fainting lie;
Being turned from him, am turned to misery.
He has bound on
The wreathed yoke of my transgression;
Impaired my strength, and by His just commands
I Am thrown into my persecutors hands,
Where I, remorsless I, must still remain,
Void of all hope to be enlarged again.
His unresisted strength has broke the bones,
And made a footstool of my Mighty Ones:
A great Assembly He has called that may
Punish my youngmen that will not obey;
And Judahs fairest Virgin Daughter's trod
As in a winepress by the Almighty God.
sorrows, O these miseries
Stir up a tempest in my clouded eyes!
Mine eyes, mine eyes, run over, I daily spend
More tears then any brain can apprehend:
My foes prevail, my children all are led
Into Captivity, my hopes are fled.
Sion spreads forth her feeble arms t'express
She seeks for comfort, but is comfortless.
The Lord of hoasts commands that Jacobs eyes
Shall round about him see his enemies;
And poor despised, distressed Jerusalem
Is as a menstruous woman amongst them.
just, yet I, rebellious I,
Transgrest against his glorious Majesty:
O hear my people, let your ears but borrow
A minutes time, from Time, to hear my sorrow!
My Virgins and my young men all are fled
Into Captivity; my Priests are dead:
My Friends refuse to hear me when I call;
For want of food my hungry Elders fall.
O Lord, behold, see how I am oppressed,
My heart thumps at the portals of my breast:
Oh I have sinned, and my sins indite me;
Abroad the Sword, at home grim Death affrights me.
My friends have heard my groaning, and my grief
Is known to them; But I know no relief:
My foes with clamorous voices fill the Earth,
And make my grief the subject of their mirth:
But Heaven has named a day when these my foes
Shall be Copartners in my mocked at woes.
O God, let not their faults be hid from thee,
But deal with them as thou have dealt with me:
My heart is faint, my struggling sighs are many,
My griefs too great to be expressed by any.
Meditatio in Capitulum.
IF thou would know, my Soul, what har^s attend
A sinners progress to his journeys end;
Here, here thou may, if with impartial eyes
Thou will observe the unsatiate miseries
Of poor Jerusalem, whose tedious groans,
Whose sighs, and sobs, and tears, the world bemoans.
Observe her heedless steps, and thou shall know
Sin was the Author of her self-willed Woe.
'Twas sweet at first, but sour in the event,
That little word assumes a large extent:
Where Sin predominates, there we may find
The inconvenience of a troubled mind:
For when the mind's perplexed, then we begin
Either to fall to, or to fall from Sin:
For like the restless Sea she is active still,
And always agitating good or ill;
If well employed, she builds a wall about
The Soul, to keep approaching dangers out:
But if she spends her thriftless hours in Evil,
She makes a banquet to invite the Devil,
Who with his subtle and misguiding force
Will re-invite her to a second course:
And then let Christians judge how much disquiet
That Soul sustains that loves the Devils diet.
Ah then my Soul, if thou desir'st to be
Exempted from the lot of misery,
Make Heaven thy refuge; there thou may be sure
To find contentment, and repose secure:
Thou needst not fear, there is no poisonous thing
Can wound that Soul that truly loves his King:
Nor all the malice mortals can invent,
Shall add to thee one mite of discontent:
There is no sorrow, no calamity
T'oppress thy thoughts; No wry-look'd enemy
T'upbraid thy actions: then my Soul advise
How much it profits to be heavenly wise.
Ah had Jerusalem (whose grief no pen
Can e're engrave into the hearts of men)
Been wisely wary, she had never known
Those late reaped sorrows, which her sins had sown:
Had she but searched her bosom, and contrived
Her actions well, her glory had survived:
Had she with David's tears in time repented,
Those uncorrected sins her heart lamented,
She had not felt those judgments which did wait
Upon the ruins of her falling State:
But whilst her eyes were muffl'd and deluded,
Folly came in, where Reason was excluded.
Needs must that Kingdom unto ruin run,
Where Folly sets and rises with the Sun.
Like as the body that is oppressed with grief.
Can neither hope for, nor obtain relief,
Till the disease be known; there is none can tell
The rage of sickness that was always well.
Even so Jerusalem, because that she
Judged not the Reason of her Misery
Till she was past recovery, could never
Have health restored her, but was sick for ever*
Alas! alas! that Kingdom needs must fall,
That has a grief so Epidemical.
Had she but like the Ninevites in time
Stopped those distemp'ring humors which did climb
Above her strength, her grief had quickly ended,
And Heaven revoked those judgments he intended.
Medicines are vain things when applied too late,
And through delay a grief grows desperate.
He that is Sin-sick is in bad condition,
Except Heaven please to be his Souls Physician:
And if God once deny his Patient bliss,
Whose must the fault be, when the fault's not his?
Alas! alas! it is but in vain for any
To strive to cure one grief, that had so many
As sad Jerusalem had; her plagues were more
Then all the world could reckon up before:
She had a Monop'ly, she need not borrow,
She was the Hierogliphick of all sorrow.
Yet if in time she would made repentant moan,
Heaven could have cured them all as well as one.
There is no Sin, let it be great or small,
But Heaven can find a balsam for them all.
My Soul, thou art my Monarch, therefore I
May boldly look into thy Monarchy.
First praise thou Heaven, then learn to be content
With what he sends thee; let thy government
Be still Monarchical, and fenced about
With fervent prayers, to keep Sedition out.
Let watch and ward be kept, lest Traitor Sin
Betray thee; Let not Faction come within
Thy lists: And still be careful to surprise
Rebellious thoughts, as soon as they arise:
For if they once appear within thy borders,
They Will breed confusion, and confused disorders.
Learn to be wisely politic, and be
Ready to let Religion counsel thee.
Let Reason be thy guide, and let thy Laws
Be truly executed; Let thy Cause
Be just and real: then my Soul, be sure
To let thy fundamental Laws endure,
Till he that sits on the refulgent Throne
Shall take thee hence, and keep thee for his own.
CHAP. II.
Contents.
1 Jeremiah lamenteth the misery of Jerusalem. 20 He complains thereof to God.

BEhold! Heavens Metropolitan has spread
His gloomy clouds of anger on the head
Of sad Jerusalem: He has destroyed
Those bounteous treasures Israel enjoyed;
And from his memory has his footstool thrown,
When he with floods of anger was o'reflown.
And Jacobs habitations he unfram'd,
And wrathfully consumed them: Thus inflamed
The strongest Castles Judahs Daughter had,
He tumbled down, and made her people sad:
And he, to show what his grand power could do,
Defiled the Kingdom and the Princes too.
His two-edged passion has cut off the horn
And Chief of Israel, made him a scorn
To his deriding Foes, and also stayed,
Yea and withdrawn his right hand from his aid:
His fury like an all consuming flame
Burned against Jacob, and devoured his name.
arm has bent his yielding bow;
He stood resolved like a dauntless foe:
And in the Tabernacle he has flew
The eyes delight, like fire his anger flew.
Isreal's strongest scituations,
And filled Jerusalem with lamentations.
garden has laid void
The infected Tabernacle* and destroyed
The Assemblies structures; and an angry wind
Has blown their Feasts and Sabbaths from his mind;
Both Kings and Priests in anger he forgot,
And looked on them as if he saw them not.
holy places, and his Altar he
Abhorred; and gave unto the Enemy
Her fairest Palaces: their ill-tun'd voices,
As on a feast day, filled the Church with noises.
hand stretched forth a line, when he intended
To ruin Sion that so much offended:
He has resolved destruction; therefore all
The rampart languish'd with the gliding wall.
grates,
The gaping Earth imbowel'd all her Gates
Her King and Princes dwell with Gentiles; and
Her Laws are banished from her lawless Land
Her Prophets gaze about; the frowning skies*
Do represent no vision to their eyes.
Her mournful Elders on the ground repose,
And silently consent unto their woes:
They clothed themselves with sackcloth, and they crowned
Their heads with dust they borrowed from the ground:
No joys were pleasing to the eyes of them
That were the Virgins of Jerusalem.
My bowels yern, my tear-distilling eyes
Are sore with gazing on the miseries
Of frail Jerusalem: Alas, the feet
Of her dear sucklings stagger in the street!
And like the wounded in the City, send
Their sighs for food unto their dearest friend:
And whilst they slumbred on their mothers breast,
They poured their Souls into eternal rest.
What shall I witness for thee, O thou Gem,
Thou pining Daughter of Jerusalem?
To what shall I compare thee? What can be,
O Sions Daughter, equal unto thee?
Let all the world recure thee, if they can;
For Ah, thy breach is like the Ocean!
Alas, thy purblind Prophets all have been
Hoodwinked with folly, and vain things have seen:
But never discovered thine iniquity,
Which was the cause of thy captivity.
Their misinformed senses were content
To see false Reasons for thy Banishment.
All that past by, and saw thee thus decaying,
Clapped their rude hands, yea hist at thee, thus saying;
Is this the City that the wordlings call
Beauties perfection? This the joy of all?
Thy foes revile thee, and as they pass by
They gnash their teeth against thee; thus they cry,
This is the day we looked for, now we know
She is destroyed, we see her overthrow.
King of Heaven devised, now
He has enacted and fulfilled his vow:
He has thrown down without remorse, O see,
Thy adversaries triumph over thee.
This has the Almighty done for them, at length
He made the^ strong, yea and advanced their strength.
Lord with their uncessant cries;
O wall of Sions daughter, let thine eyes
Run down like rivers, give thy self no sleep;
Forget to smile, and practice how to weep.
Arise, and in the silent night bemoan
Thy grief; O cry unto the Almighty One:
In the beginning of the watch implore
Thy growing sorrows; make a flood before
The Eternals face: O crave that he would please
To sent thy young, faint, hungry children ease.
Lord, to whom thou'st done this great, lie
This unrepented ill: Shall women eat
Their span-long children? Shall thy slain Priests
Tomb'd with thy Prophet in thy Sanct'ary?
young and old have shared in equal harms,
They lie and tumble in each others arms:
Upon the flinty streets my Virgins fall,
With my young men; the sword disliv'd them all:
Thus in thine anger have thou struck them dead,
Thus have thou killed, and never pitied.
As in a solemn day, my terrors round
About thou'st called, so that none was found
In the Lords day of anger to remain:
Those that I swadled and brought up, in vain
I brought them up; the enemy infum'd
Envied this offspring, and their days consumed.
Meditatio in Capitulum.
SEe, see, my Soul, what Heaven has done! O see
What it is to offend a powerful Majesty!
Go, go, and quickly tell the sons of men
What it is to rouse a Lion from his Den:
Bid them keep peace and quietness in Sion;
Bid them turn Lambs, or Heaven will turn a Lion.
Bid them take notice, she that was the stem
Of honor, now is poor Jerusalem.
Alas! alas! experience made her know
Griefs abstract, and the quintescence of woe.
And ah my Soul! who knows the course of sorrow?
There it is to day, it may be here to morrow.
Then have a care, let thy well tutored grief
Know rather how to purchase a relief,
Then plagues and torments; Let thy sober will
Be swayed by reason; let thy reason still
Lead thee to meditation: then begin
To search thy self, and cipher up thy sin.
Having thus done, thou quickly wilt discry
Thy grief, and where the imperious humors lie;
And having found them out, let no delay
Damage thy Soul, but quickly haste away;
And from the bottom of thy heart confess
Thy greatest sins; so Heaven may make them less.
O kiss the Son; for if his anger be,
Yea but a little kindled, blessed is he
Whose groping Soul his sealed up mercies found,
And cast his anchor in so firm a ground.
Heaven smiles on them whose oft-repeated prayer
Expands their sins, and makes their God their care.
But when revolting negligence shall call
Confounding ruin from the imperial hall
Of Heavens high-seated Palace, and invite
A dreadful vengeance, to eclipse the light
Of a resplendent happiness; and double
The laboring Soul with interposing trouble:
Ah, then our pleasures shall be turned to toys,
And sudden grief shall expiate our joys!
And like Jerusalem, confused shall we
Wander and languish in obscurity:
Then, then our down-cast spirits shall lament,
And moan their just deserved punishment:
Then shall our Peace be drawn unto an end,
Then shall we look for, but shall find no friend:
Then shall our sad Ambassadors prepare,
And mount to Heaven, but find no audience there:
Then shall our blubbered eyes in vain let slide
Innumerable tears: then shall the Tide
Of Heavens high-flowing anger rage and roar,
And dash against our sin-polluted shore:
Then shall we run, and in our running, meet
The obvious sword in the blood-streaming street:
Then shall our hasty trembling feet retire
To our sad houses; there shall Death require
The arrears of sorrow* Lingering Famine shall
Like to a lean-cheek'd Fury grasp us all:
And from our strouting veins shall squeez a flood,
A lukewarm deluge of diffused blood.
Then shall our children with their midnight cries
Lament for food; Then shall their mothers eyes
Bedew their bosoms with the falling showers
Of dribling tears: Then shall their lothed hours
Haste to an end; And having thus expressed
Their woes, shall creep into Eternal rest.
Then shall the early melancholy Bells
Sound mournful peals for their sad last farewels.
Ah now my Soul! Can any griefs out-vy.
Such griefs as these? Can any heart deny
The justness of these Judgments? If they do,
May they feel Sodoms and Gomorrahs too.
Heaven cannot be unjust; No, no, it is we
Provoking sinners are unjust, not he.
Shall we offend, and shall we every day
Hale down his Judgments on our backs, then lay
The burden of our faults on him, and cry,
Like Traitor Judas, Master is it I?
No, no, we must not; but let every one
Vnbosom all his actions, and make known
His misdemeanors; then if any can
Plead himself guiltless, he is a happy man.
Find out but ten good men, and for their sake
Heaven will deduct a thousand plagues, and sha^^
Ten thousand more from his incensed breast,
And for their sakes will give ten thousand rest.
Sodom can witness Heaven brooks no denial,
He had saved all, had ten been found but loyal.
Oh blind and foolish is that City, when
Ten thousand doubled cannot number ten.
CHAP. III.
Contents.
1 The faithful bewail their calamities. 22 By the mercies of God they nourish
their hopes* 37 They acknowledge Gods Justice. 55 They pray for deliverance, 64
and vengeance on their enemies.

I have seen affliction by the rod,
The impetuous anger of the wrathful God.
pitchy darkness masked my sight,
And has not clothed me with the robes of light.
hand against me all the day;
bones, and made my flesh decay.
His laboring fury has built up a wall
Against me, and surrounded me with gall.
In dungeon places he me set, like those
Which in their graves have had a long repose.
And he has made my toilsom chains to be
Heavy; He hedged me from my liberty.
And when I shout and cry he will not hear,
But makes my prayer a stranger to his ear.
He has enclosed me with stones that stay
My hasty steps, he has incurv'd my way.
And as a lurking Bear observes my paces,
Or as a Lion in the secret places.
He turned me from my ways, disturbed my state,
Pulled me in pieces, made me desolate.
He bent his Bow, and made my trembling heart
The aym'd-at object of his fatal dart.
He caused his quivered guests t'inforce my veins,
And take a large possession in my reins.
I was my peoples laughing stock, their song
Was tuned to my mischief all day long.
He filled me full of bitterness and woe,
And made me drunk with nauseous wormwood too.
He brake my teeth with gravel stones, and he
With heaps of ashes has involved me.
Banished my Soul from Peace, Prosperity
Is quite relapsed from my memory.
I said, my strength, my very hope is even
Wasted and perished from the Lord of Heaven.
Ponder my woes, and my afflictions all,
Remember both the honey and the gall.
remembrance rest,
And ah, my Soul is humbled in my breast!
swift-roving mind,
Therefore I hope, and hoping, hope to find.
mercy of the Lord we sail
So safe; for his compassions never fail.
faithfulness
Is great, and greater then I can express.
Lord's my portion, says my Soul; and I
Will therefore hope unto Eternity.
just Soul, which daily shall attend
Upon the Lord, shall never want a friend.

The Almighties pleasure and salvation.
man to exercise the truth,
And bear the yoke of his offending youth.

He bears no other burden then his own.
mouth salutes the dusty ground,
As if some hopes of mercy may be found.
shame, he willingly invites
T'a second stroke the hand of him that smites.

God will not leave, nor cast them off for ever.

In multitudes of mercy lies relief.
smart
Of sinners children with a willing heart.
feet take no delight to crush to death
The offending prisoners of the inferior earth.
To turn away man's right (his heart abhors)
Before the face of their superiors.
And to subvert a man in his just cause,
The Lord approves not, it is not his Laws.
And who is he whose spend-thrift tongue dare say,
This thing shall come to pass, when Heaven says nay?
Out of the mouth of him that is God indeed
There does not evil, but known good proceed.
Why does a living man with grumbling thoughts
Complain as one that is punished for his faults?
Let Us search, let us try our ways, let us turn again
To God, and he will turn away our pain.
And let our hands b'extended with our Souls
To Heavens Star Chamber, where our God controuls.
We have rebelliously transgrest, and thou,
Thou have not pard'ned with a cheerful brow.
Thine anger has o'reshadowed us, thou have
Slain without pity, we thy anger taste.
The ast veiled thy self with clouds, which will not let
Our prayers pass thorough to discharge our debt.
And as the offscouring thou, O Lord, have made us
Amongst those factious people that betrayed us.
Our greedy enemies have opened wide
Their mouths against us, and our pains deride.
Fear, like a snare, incloses us about,
And desolation will not keep without.
Mine eyes run down like hasty floods of water,
For the destruction of my peoples Daughter.
Mine eyes are full, and tears do stream upon
My cheeks without an intermission:
Heaven looked down on my enriver'd face,
And viewed my weeping from his holy place.
eyes affect my pining heart with pity,
Because of all the Daughters of my City.
frighted bird that flies)
I still am chased by my enemies.
dungeon, nay
They cast a stone upon me where I lay.
waves mounted above my head,
And then I cried, Alas, alas, I Am dead.

Out of the dungeon made a dreadful noise.
cries, Oh let thy ears not lie
Hid from the breathing of my doleful cry.

Thou came, and bid me never fear at all.
Soul (O Lord) was filled with strife,
Thou did both plead my cause, and save my life,

Judge thou my cause, be thou my Advocate.
thou have seen their vengeance, thou do see
Their deep imaginations against me.
reproach have heard, and apprehended
What against me their busy thoughts intended.
Thou know the very lips of them that rose
Against me, and the malice of my foes.
sitting and their rising, I
Am all their music, and their melody.
them a recompense, O God,
And let them feel thy handiwork, thy rod.
O give them grief of heart; O let them burst
With dregs of sorrow, let them be accursed.
And let thy angry persecuting hand
Destroy, confound, and sweep them from the Land.
Meditatio in Capitulum.
COme, come, my Soul, do not obnubilate
Thy self with smoky pleasures, nor create
More vain delights to please thy toyish mind:
Be serious now; let pleasures be confined.
The Almighty's angry, and his angry Breath
Expresses nothing but resolved Death.
His wrath is kindled, and his furious hand
Threatens a ruin to a sinful Land.
His bow is bent; behold he stands prepared,
It Is he, it is he, that will not be out-dar'd:
And should his roving messenger impart
A secret sorrow to a private heart;
What then? Can all the balsams may be found
^ecure so great, so terrible a wound?
No, no: O then let thy discerning eye
^e truly watchful; for discovery
^ft-times prevents a mischief: he is a stranger
^o Heavens high Court, that thinks t'outbrave a danger
^ehold (my soul) thou art environed round
^ith troops of adversaries; hark, they sound
Their vilifying trumpets: hark, they mock,
And make thy sorrows but their laughing stock.
Do thou not hear them, how they shout and cry*
As though they would cleave the unseparable sky?
O be not deaf; rouse up thy self, advance
Thy backward thoughts, sleep not in ignorance.
Provoke not Heaven too much: O do not still
Urge more and more his most unwilling will.
Observe but how unpleasantly his arm
Draws up his bow, as one that is loath to harm.
Methinks I hear him say, O can ye tell!
Why will ye dye, ye house of Israel?
Methinks I hear his never-ending breath
Breathe a disdain against a sinners death.
Methinks I hear his grieved spirit say,
Ye that are weary, come, O come away,
And lay your burdens on my back, and I
Will bear them all; I Will bear them willingly;
Why will ye dye? why will ye shut your eyes,
And thus run headlong after vanities?
Open your Adder ears, come and rejoice
With me and mine; let my harmonious voice
Invite you: Ah, what pleasures can accrue,
From shadows, to such substances as you?
Cast off the works of darkness, let true light
Expel those mists: O come when I invite.
What do ye mean? O tell me, tell me why
Ye love to tumble in impurity?
Ah now my Soul! let admiration prove
That Heaven's composed of nothing but of Love*
O Love beyond expression! My deserts
(Rather then Mercy) claim a thousand darts.
Call home thy wandering thoughts, and let them all
(Like servants) be obedient to thy Call.
Examine them; the very best will show,
Thy best deserts are but an overthrow.
Review thy actions; see if they can yield
One grain of comfort: see if they can shield
Thy threatened state: The more men strive to smother
Their sins, the more one sin begets another.
Then fly, dull soul, to Heavens high Court, and there
Melt, melt, into an everlasting tear.
Atone thy God, let not thy tongue deny
The truth to him, when he shall ask thee, why,
Why have thou done this wickedness? Confess,
It Is thou have sinned, it is he that must depress
That head-increasing Hydra: Then shall thou
^ehold with what a voluntary brow
He Will entertain thee, and those joys impart
To thee, which wait upon a contrite heart.
He will have pity, though he sends a grief:
In multitudes of mercy lies relief.
The God of Love did never take delight
^o mantle sinners with the clouds of night.
^e's an indulgent Father, and his care
^ infinite, as all his mercies are.
Compose thy numerous thoughts, my Soul, and run:
O tell that Father, thou will be his Son.
CHAP. IV.
Contents.
1 Sion bewaileth her pitiful estate: 13 She confesses her sins. 21 Edom is
threatened. 22 Sion is comforted.

gold grown dim! how is the fine
The purest changed, that was wont to shine
The stones that paved the Sanct'ary are thrown
Into the streets, for beasts to trample on.
Sion, which I could compare
To finest gold, behold, see now they are
Esteemed as earthen pitchers, which the hands
Of the industrious Potter still commands.
monsters, which the Ocean owns
As proper guests, nourish their little ones:
But ah, my Daughters are grown pitiless,
Like Ostriches within the wilderness.
children cleave
To their unliquid mouths; they never leave
Their integrating cries: Poor hearts in vain
They cry for food, but can no food obtain.

Are desolate in the unquiet streets:
They that were brought up in a scarlet dress,
Embrace a dunghill as their happiness.
For ah, my peoples Daughter suffers more
For her great sins, then Sodom did before.
Her beautified Nazarites could show
A purer white then milk, whiter then snow;
Their bodies then the rubies were more red,
With shining Sapphire were they polished.
But now their changed visages excel
The coal in blackness; they that knew them well,
Now know them not: their flesh adheres and sticks:
Unto their bones, they are like withered sticks:
Those that are ravished of their fading breath
By the encountering sword, enjoy a death
Transcending theirs, whose lingering souls are pinde
For want of food: Ah Famine's never kind!
The woeful women boil their young, they have
Turned their own fruitful bellies to a grave.
The Lord has now accomplished his ire,
Poured out his streaming anger, caused a fire
To flame in Sion, which devoured and laid
Those buildings waste, which their own hands had made,
The wisest Kings, nor the worlds copious Nations
Did ever think to see these great invasions
Of the unbridled foe, whose headlong courses
Divides her gates with their divided forces.
The Priests and Prophets crimeless blood have shed;
Their sins drew down this mischief on their head.
Like those they wander, whose benighted eyes
Attract no light from the all-lightning skies:
They have themselves polluted, so that none.
Can touch their clothes; they are with blood o'reflown.
people cry, depart, what do ye mean?
Depart, depart, touch not, it is unclean:
The Heathen, as they fled together, cried,
With us they shall not sojourn, nor abide.
Gods anger has divided them; he never
Will love them more, but cast them off for ever:
They dis-respected Priests, and they forgot
The gravest Elders, whom they pitied not.
us, our help-beguiled eyes
Failed us as yet, no comfort would arise
To us; we watched for Nations, but their power
Could not protect us from so great a shower.

Cannot divide their paces in the street:
Our end is near, and our days total sum
Is now fulfilled, for now our end is come.
persecuters, our tormentors are
Swifter then Eagles that enforce the air:
Upon the mountains they pursued us; They,
To trap our feet, in ambushcado lay.
pits, which they for ruin have appointed,
Enclosed our Souls delight, the Lords Anointed;
Under whose shadow we shall live, we said,
Amongst the Heathens; thus are we dismayed.
Edoms daughter, now stretch out thy voice,
Be glad; and for a time in Vz rejoice:
This cup shall pass along to thee, thou shall
Be drunk and naked, 'cause thou did revolt.
Thy plagues expire, O Sions daughters! he
No more will lead thee to captivity:
But Edom, O lament, lift up thine eyes,
For Heaven will visit thy iniquities.
Meditatio in Capitulum.
DIstracted Sion, having spent her days
In supine negligence, stands in a maze,
Not knowing what to do: her wonted joys
Yield torment, not contentment, seeming toys,
And childish trifles, which perplex her more,
Then thousand pleasures pleasur'd her before.
And now her alienated mind begins
To ruminate upon her former sins:
Her studious thoughts recount what precious time
She spent in folly; weighing every crime
In equal balance, posing them aright,
Finds them too heavy, and her self too light.
And like a frighted bird, her winged mind
Flies up and down, thinking some rest to find
In sorrows wilderness: But ah, who can
Find a lost Jewel in the Ocean!
Now we may see how her embraced folly
Is quite dissolved into melancholy.
And those lascivious hours, which she has spent,
Seem like grim Marshals giving punishment
To an offending wretch: As in a dream,
The fancy makes each object seem extreme;
And why? because the judgment which should guide
The unruly fancy, sleeping's laid aside:
The senses once locked up, the fancy may
Not only claim a privilege to play,
But to delude, and represent those things
To meanest Subjects, which belong to Kings;
Which makes the flattered Senses even dance,
And leap for joy, and striving to advance
Themselves, awake; and finding all is but vain,
Reason steps in, and makes them poor again.
Even thus was poor Jerus'lem lulled asleep
With fancy-pleasing pleasure, which did keep
A rendezvous within her, lest that doubt
Should interpose, and put the fancy out
Of frame; And by a more diviner art
Should breed a Meditation in her heart.
For when the wak'ned Senses once have gained
The upper hand, the fancy is restrained,
And curbed by judgment; Reason too survives
Again, and claims her own Prerogatives:
The apprehension with her new-got power
Begins to taste and apprehend how sour
Her sweets are grown: Ah then she cries! I see
I Am turned to nothing, being turned from thee,
My great Redeemer, I have quite exiled
Thy mercies from my bosom, and reviled
Thy just commands, presuming oftentimes
To urge, with my reiterated crimes,
Thy long-continued patience; and expressed
No grief at all from my obdurate breast.
My eyes were still laborious to discover
New vanities; and like a heedless lover,
Whose beauty-dazled eyes do only view
The Superficies, seeking not how true
The heart remains, but can fondly be
Content with beauties bare Epitomie.
And thus my rash advent'ring Soul went on,
(Pleasures admit no intermission
To them, whose hearts are envious to obtain
A present pleasure, but a future pain:)
And ah, how quickly's yielding flesh and blood
Surpised and conquered by a seeming good!
A Good that is good for nothing but t'invite
Fond Souls to ruin, and o'revail the light
Of real Truth: and with enforced delusions
Makes them take pleasure in their own confusions.
Since then, my Soul, no pleasures can be found
In this base Center; let thy thoughts rebound
From this fastidious Orb; learn to advance
Thy self above the frowns, the reach of chance:
And let the extent of thy ambition be
Only to purchase an Eternity
Of happiness, which shall perpetuate,
And make thee glorious in a glorious state.
Divorce thy self from thy unsum'd-up faults,
Protract no ^ime, but clarify thy thoughts.
Command thy self, and thou shall be reputed
A most deserving Victor: not confuted
By any, though their noble acts may claim
A true inheritance to a lasting Fame.
For he that gives himself an overthrow,
Conquers a Kingdom, and subdues a foe.
Then arm thy self, my Soul, and strive t'out-dare
Satan's attempts; be studious to prepare
Thy self, and let thy adversary see
When he is strongest, the art as strong as he.
Let not his vain delusions interpose
'Twixt thee and Heaven: O do not thou expose
Thy self to wilful danger, but endevor
T'accost his actions; but believe him never.
Thou see how poor Jerusalem bewails
Her sad disasters; how she stoops, and fails
Beneath the burden of her grief, and cries,
O boundless grief! O vainest vanities!
O dream thou not of transitory things,
Which are unconstant, having secret wings
To fly away; and flying will confound
Thy better parts, and give thy Soul a wound.
Be wary then, and let thy thought concur
With Heavens commands, and so will he tranfer
His Kingdom to thee, full of lasting treasure,
Where nothing's greater then the smallest pleasure.
CHAP. V.
REmember, Lord, what is come upon us; see,
Ponder the greatness of our infamy.
Strangers inherit that which is our due,
Our habitation's turned to aliens too.
For we are Orphans, and all fatherless,
Our Mothers are as Widows in distress.
We buy our water, (O unhappy fate!)
And purchase fuel at too dear a rate.
Our necks are persecuted and unblest,
And still we labor, but obtain no rest.
Unto the Egyptians we our hand have spread,
Desiring to be satisfied with bread.
Our buried fathers sinned in former times,
And we have born the burden of their crimes
Servants have ruled us, and there is none that will
Deliver us, but let them rule us still.
With peril of our lives we have obtained
Our bread, because the sword was unrestrained.
Our skins are black, like to an oven, and dry,
Because the Famine caused a Tyranny.
Sion and Judahs daughter have been led
Away, and violently ravished.
Princes are hanged up by the hands; the faces
Of Elders have no honor but disgraces.
young men grind; the children blood
Fainted beneath the burden of their wood.
Elders at their gates did not abide,
The young men's music too is laid aside.

Our active dancing's turned to passive grief.
crown is fallen from our heads; and woe,
Woe be to us that have offended so.

Are dim, because of these calamities.
Sions mountain's desolate,
The foxes walk thereon to recreate
Lord, shall sit on high
Upon thy Throne, unto Eternity.
us, and demure
Thy self so long from us, that seem secure:

Renew our days, as thou have done before.
thou
Beholdst thy servants with an angry brow.
Meditatio in Capitulum.
COmplaining, what is that? will that relieve
Impris'ned souls, or teach the^ how to grieve*
Tell me, sad Soul, can greater wants converse
With flesh and blood? nay, what more lasting curse
Can be entailed on man, then to complain
To such an ear as will not once retain
The least expression of a grief, but cry,
Let woe attend him to Eternity?
O dismal sentence! and if this be all,
'Twould grieve a man that e're he grieved at all,
To be thus harshly answered, and excluded
From hopes of mercy; Be not thus deluded
Despairing Soul.
Jerusalem, it is true, she did complain;
And was that all? O no, her tongue did chain
A prayer to her Petition, and her eyes
Were daily trickling for her miseries.
Where is that man, that if he chance to be
Deprived of his goods by robbery,
Will sit complaining by himself, and try
No lawful means for a recovery
Of what he lost? should we not deem him mad,
To lose that good, which might be easily had,
If sought? This Proverb calls it to my mind,
He that will spare to seek, must spare to find.
Even so, if Satan, whose depriving power
Shall take a watched advantage, and devour
The Manna of our Souls, shall we then say,
It Is gone, it is gone, Satan has stoln't away?
And ah, can these, these naked words recall
A lost estate? O no, 'twill but enthral
Our happiness the more, and make our grief
The more extreme, admitting no relief.
My Soul, if Satan e're shall make attempt
Upon thy weakness, laboring to exempt
And win thee from thy self; go and make known
Thy cause to Heavens Judg-Advocate: bemoan
Thy self with tears; complain, confess, and pray:
God loves confession, but abhors delay.
Run, run unto him, that thou may prevent
The wrath and censure of his Parliament.
Go, go, for there thou shall be sure to find
Abundance linked together in one mind.
There is no faction, no divisions there,
But all are settled in one hemisphere
Of true Opinion: There is none t'expect
A bribe; or else without a bribe neglect
To agitate thy business, or exact
Upon thy guiltless conscience, or enact
Their several humors: There is none to bring
Thy Soul in danger, 'cause the ast loved thy King,
Thy heavenly King, by whom thou shall possess
A true and no excised happiness.
O endless joy! a joy that far transcends
The deepest thoughts; a joy that never ends.
Be ravished, 0 my Soul! and meditate
Upon Jerusalem: Let her sad state
Be as a caveat to thee; let her fall
Teach thee to stand: let her detested gall
Prove honey to thee; so may thou derive
Thy welfare from her sorrows, and survive
In everlasting bliss: Peace beyond measure
Shall crown thee with vicissitude of Pleasure.
Play well thy game, and so will Heaven extend
His liberal grace, and bless thee in the End.
DIVINE MEDITATIONS.
MEditation we may fitly call
The Souls Arithmetitian, summing all
Our sins together; Nay, and every day
Ciphers them up, and teaches us to pray;
Then let us meditate, and strive to do
What our Arithmetitian leads us too.
He that will true examples learn to give,
First let him learn to dye, and then to live:
Prefer the surest first; for you and I
Uncertain are to live, but sure to dye.
MEDITAT. I.
PElion is fallen upon Ossa's back,
The more I cry for help, the more I lack.
There Is none will look upon me, how I lie
In the Charybdis of perplexity.
Escaping Scylla, O I thought I Would been
Past danger, but Charybdis was not seen.
MEDITAT. 2.
I Am now benighted, and obscured from light,
My day of pleasure's turned into a night
Of clouded sorrow; Grief comes sailing on,
Steered by the hand of my Rebellion.
Heaven stop his passage, may he never rest
Within the harbor of my tender breast.
MEDITAT. 3.
What have I done? or what have I deserved,
That I am thus imprisoned, and reserved
For death and sad destruction? Nay, but why,
Why do I ask, what I have done? To dye,
To dye, it is too too little, could a worse,
A worse succeed, I have deserved the curse.
MEDITAT. 4.
I have displeased Heaven, where shall I fly
To hide my self from his offended eye?
If rocks, or caves, could hide me from my sin,
There, there I Would go, and hide my self within
The bowels of the Earth, till Heaven should say,
The night of sin is gone, and now it is day.
MEDITAT. 5.
What if I stormed Heavens Paradise with prayers,
and so besieged it with an host of tears?
What if I undermined and laid a train
^ blow it up with sighs? 'twere but in vain:
^ storm, besiege, all is but labor spent,
Except I could, as David did, Repent.
MEDITAT. 6.
^^pent: O what a sound that word imports!
(...) how it penetrates! How many sorts
^f Echoes answer it! Repent of all;
^e that leaves one, repents of none at all.
^e that will learn how to repent, and when,
First let him strive to be a David, then.
MEDITAT. 7.
and art thou still disquieted, my Soul?
^^ust thou in God; in God, that does control
^^th Heaven and Earth: it is he that must and shall
(...) feared and honored, yea and loved withal.
^is he can send Jobs torments, and his woe;
It Is we must pray to have his patience too.
MEDITAT. 8.
Fain would I come before my angry God,
But that my sinful years still fear the Rod
Of his Correction, yet appear I must;
Sure, sure he is merciful, as well as just:
Cheer up dejected Soul, and thou shall see
His mercy's greater then thy sins can be.
MEDITAT. 9.
Can Heaven forget himself, or can he say
That thing over night, he cannot do next day?
Can friends forget their children, or deny
Their dearest blood? or can a mountain fly?
Heaven says, he will be a Father till the end:
Then he is a fool that doubts so true a friend.
MEDITAT. 10.
A friend indeed, but how can I expect
To purchase friendship by my own neglect?
For ah, how often has Heaven pleased to say,
Ye that are heavy laden, come away,
And I will give you ease? Alas! but I
Thought sin no burden, neither thought to dye
MEDITAT. 11.
But now I see the frailty of my mind;
I thought I was imprisoned, when confined
Only one hour to goodness; nay, that hour
I thought a year, until I had the power
To free my self; when freed, I had forgot
What goodness was, as though I Would heard it not.
MEDITAT. 12.
And should I strive to reckon up my sins,
How can he make an end, that still begins?
The sands upon the Seas, nay, and the hair
Upon my head, are Ciphers in compare
Of my excessive sins, yet Heaven can call
Me, as he did the spend-thrift Prodigal.
MEDITAT. 13.
I know my sins are great, and do increase
Within my Sion, and disturb my Peace:
O what am I (dear Heaven?) I am thy creature,
My sins are great, but yet thy mercy's greater.
Pardon (blessed Heaven,) forgive what I have done;
Thou art my Father, own me as thy Son.
MEDITAT. 14.
It is a happiness to scorn the mirth
Of this confused transitory Earth:
And he who is ambitious to create
A happiness, must make the world his hate:
Then if self-love appear, we know for what;
We love our selves in truly hating that.
MEDITAT. 15.
Life is the life's preparative, and Death
The deprivation of unconstant breath.
A well directed life shall always find
Society in Death; a glorious mind
Shall have a glorious, a celestial friend
To guard his glory to a glorious end.
MEDITAT. 16.
But can a mind, enammel'd with the glory
Of Heaven, have end? or else is Death a story?
Death is the end of Life, and yet we see
Life is derived from Deaths soveraigntie.
It Is quickly known, the Death of Sin must give
The para'ned Soul a privilege to live.
MEDITAT. 17.
Heaven is the seat of Happiness, and Hell
The place of fury, where the Furies dwell.
Then mount my Soul upon the spreading wings
Of lofty Faith; fly toward the King of Kings:
Whilst here thou shall inhabit, learn to know,
That Heaven's too high for them that fly too low.
MEDITAT. 18.
I am but sordid earth, that is daily plowed
With grief and care; and sorrows hourly crowd
Into my weak dominions, and remain
Like greedy Tenants, thirsting after gain.
My eyes are always open to behold
New woes, for I am formed in sorrows mould.
MEDITAT. 19.
I am a reeling Pinnace, and I sail
From Port to Port; sometimes a humble gale
Salutes my spreading sails, and by and by
The waves, contemning my prosperity,
Spit in my face, being hurried by their tides,
They seem to crawl into my sweating sides.
MEDITAT. 20.
I am a clouded day, I promise rain:
Sometimes I Am stormy, and then clear again;
Sometimes the Sun of Pence begins t'appear,
But cannot shine in sorrows Hemisphere:
Saddest of thoughts; needs must he be distressed
That finds unconstant weather in his breast.
MEDITAT. 21.
I am a vapor, having not the power
To Endure the fervor of one shining hour:
Vapors cannot withstand a mid-days heat;
Afflictions must be hot, where sins are great:
It Is not unlike, a misty morning may
Oft-times prove usher to a glorious day.
MEDITAT. 22.
I am a trembling reed, and every day
The wind and I are subject to a fray:
I Am bruised, and shall be broken, if some hand
Sustain me not, I shall forget to stand*
But stay my Soul, and hear Jehovah speak,
I vow, the bruised reed I will not break.
MEDITAT. 23.
I am but earth, corrupted with my deeds,
Which are but like unprofitable weeds;
My soil is rank and barren, and it bears
No grain at all, no not so much as tears:
Would thou increase (my Soul,) I Will teach thee how,
Sow but the seeds of Faith, God speeds the plow.
MEDITAT. 24.
Despair not, when affliction plows the ground,
Doubt not increases, if the seed be found:
Heaven loves a fruitful harvest, and his hand
Is always active to manure the Land;
He takes the chiefest care, the greatest pains,
He crowns the work, it is we that reap the gains.
MEDITAT. 25.
Man's like a house, whose outward beauty may
Yield pleasure to the eye; If we survey
The inward rooms, there we may find enough
Of untrim'd natures sluttish household stuff.
Would thou be fair within (O man,) and neat,
Turn but thy inside out, thou wilt be complete.
MEDITAT. 26.
Do greedy Ravens hunger? do they cry
For food? and are they fed? and must not I?
I beg, I crave, and yet am hungry still;
I pine, I starve, and Ravens have their fill.
I know (great God) I have offended thee,
Because thou seed'st the Ravens, and not me.
MEDITAT. 27.
Do Lillies flourish? do they still remain
Neatly adorned? and yet they take no pain;
They neither spin nor card, they take no care,
And yet they are clothed, and I, poor I, go bare.
I know (great God) I have offended thee,
Because thou cloth'st the Lillies, and not me.
MEDITAT. 28.
Why am I thus tormented with the Rod
Of my afflictions? Has my angry God
Forgot his creature? Shall I never have
A little ease, but be affliction's slave?
Forbear, my grumbling Soul, cheer up, and be
Mindful of him, and he will remember thee.
MEDITAT. 29.
And why does Heaven afflict me, but because
He Will make me know my self, and learn his Laws.
Then why am I disquieted? If he
Intends my good, shall I prove enemy
Unto my self? My Soul, take care, be still,
Unless he turns that good into an ill.
MEDITAT. 30.
Then learn, my soul, when Heaven afflicts, to know
It Is for thy sins he does it, and to show
The greatness of his mercy, and to make
Thee love affliction for the Afflictors sake.
Be wise and provident, and thou shall see,
'Twas good for David, 'twill be good for thee.
MEDITAT. 31.
If thou will learn, my Soul, how to endure,
With patience, thy afflictions, be thou sure,
That when the hand of angry Heaven shall smite,
Thou do not grumble like the Israelite.
Strive thou for patience, heaven will teach thee how
To bear affliction with a cheerful brow.
MEDITAT. 32.
What though the waves of thy afflictions rise,
And rage abundantly? lift up thy eyes,
And cry to Heaven, let patience calm thy mind,
And know that purest gold must be refined,
And when affliction brings thee to the brink
Of death, remember Peter did not sink.
MEDITAT. 33.
When I consider how I have offended
My Souls dread Sovereign, and vili-pended
His gracious promises, I much admire
He casts me not into eternal fire:
But he in mercy makes me kiss his Rod,
Tells me, I am a creature, he a God.
MEDITAT. 34.
Consider well, my Soul, why have thou breath,
Since that the wages of thy Sins are death?
Thou have deserved ten thousand times to dye,
But that thy GOD, whose mercy does deny
A Sinners death, reprieves thee for a time,
To make thee know the greatness of thy crime.
MEDITAT. 35.
O meditate, my Soul, what Heaven has done
For thee, that art his most rebellious Son;
He has prolonged thy days, and strived to win
And draw thee from the lothsomness of sin.
Admired patience! O indulgent care!
Mercy of Mercies! how can Heaven forbear!
MEDITAT. 36.
Have I offended? and shall I despair?
Oh no, I dare not: Ah my Soul, forbear
To harbor such a wickedness; but know,
When thy sins ebb, Gods mercies overflow:
His mercy is an Ocean, and thy prayer
Is the only wind can raise a tempest there.
MEDITAT. 37.
Then pray my Soul, and let thy prayers reveal
Thy bosom sins; O think not to conceal
A crime from him, that is the God of Truth,
And knows the sins of thy offending youth:
Ah know my Soul, the more thou striv'st to smother
Thy sins, the more one sin begets another.
MEDITAT. 38.
Can Sin, the Souls consuming Viper, lie,
And lurk secure, from Heavens all seeing eye?
O no, it is vain to think so; though that we
Are muffl'd up with sin, yet Heaven can see.
O then confess my Soul, and thou shall tread,
And trample on the Vipers poys'ny head.
MEDITAT. 39.
But can Confession in it self obtain
An absolute forgiveness? Can we gain
Heaven by a sigh? O no, my Soul express
A perfect sorrow, when thou do confess,
Then let resolved Constancy endure,
And thou, my Soul, shall truly rest secure.
MEDITAT. 40.
Do thou, my Soul, desire to be partaker
Of those celestial joys, wherewith thy Maker
Crowns those endeavoring Souls, which study still
To be obedient to his sacred Will?
Examine well the Scriptures, they will show
The ready way; then practice how to go.
MEDITAT. 41.
Let thy innocuous Meditations be
Serious and fervent, let integrity
Still wait upon them, which will still defend
And guard thy actions to a prosperous end:
Then shall thy labors have a peaceful rest;
Then daily labor to be daily blessed.
MEDITAT. 42.
But have a care (my Soul) left malice chance
To interpose it self, and so advance
Above thy patience, and disturb that peace
Which might have blessed thee with a large increase.
O have a care this be no fault of thine!
Remember who has said, Vengeance is mine.
MEDITAT. 43.
Do thou desire, my Soul, that Heaven should say,
Thy pardon's sealed, and I will blot away
Thy numerous sins; nay, and I will no more
Remember them, as I have done before?
Then learn, my Soul, to know, whilst thou do live,
He that will be forgiven, must forgive.
MEDITAT. 44.
If thou would go to Heaven, my Soul, go on,
(Not as the sluggard of wise Solomon,)
Be not so timorous as he, to say,
There is a Lion lurking in the way:
Go on with courage, let the way delight thee,
Then shall the Lion grumble, and not bite thee.
MEDITAT. 45.
The wise man says, that sluggards shall be clothed
With rags, and all his actions shall be loathed;
And he that is willing to obtain a prize,
Must be laborious, and have watchful eyes;
(My drouzy Soul) make Heaven thy prize, then strain
T'out-run thy sins, and so thou shall obtain.
MEDITAT. 46.
When on the ladder Jacob did discry
The Angels in his dream, he saw them fly
Upwards and downwards, which was to express
How much they scorned and hated Idleness:
Then learn, my Soul, how to ascend apace
From sin, to the perfection of grace.
MEDITAT. 47.
What was the reason Peter wept? Nay, why
Did he go out and weep so bitterly?
Could he not weep within? Did he not dare
Before the wicked to disburse a tear?
By this example Peter makes it known,
Who truly grieves, desires to grieve alone.
MEDITAT. 48.
Have thou my Soul, with persecuting Paul,
Envied the Church? Have thou conspired her fall?
Why then my Soul will thou despair? It Is true,
The crime is great, and GOD is gracious too.
A light may shine from Heaven, and thou shall be,
With Paul, converted from thy Tyranny.
MEDITAT. 49.
Have thou, with thrice-denying Peter, cried,
I know him not, but stubbornly denied
The Lord of Life? what then? the Cock may crow,
God may look back upon thee, and bestow
His liberal blessings: Then my Soul deny
Thy sins, with Peter, and weep bitterly.
MEDITAT. 50.
But was it not, my Soul, a sad disaster,
That Peter should so soon deny his Master,
For whose dear sake led lose his life? O what
A sudden change is this, I know him not!
Nay more, as if he thought this would not do,
He binds it with an oath, forswears him too.
MEDITAT. 51.
What was the reason that the Lions, when
They entertained Daniel in their Den,
Did rather fear, then hunger? Nay, how can
Destroying Lions fawn upon a man?
My Soul, there was a Lamb that tamed the Lion
And made the Den prove Daniels safest Sion.
MEDITAT. 52.
Advise my Soul, and how could Daniel live,
Impris'ned in the Den, and none to give
Him daily food? How could he rest at quiet,
Without the enjoyment of some slender diet?
When Heaven commands his Angels, they shall fe^
A Soul; (my Soul) that Soul can never nee^
MEDITAT. 53.
'Twas Faith that guarded Daniel from the paws
Of dauntless Lions, whose imperious jaws
Were tied by Heavens appointment, so that they
Forgot their Tyranny, and learned to play.
(My Soul) with Daniel, truly think upon
Thy God, and Faith shall be thy Champion.
MEDITAT. 54.
Did great Goliath fall? Could he not stand,
That was so strong, against so weak a hand?
Could not his armor, nor his storming power
Maintain so mean a Combat half an hour?
Here, here (my Soul) observe, and thou shall find
An armed body, but a naked mind.
MEDITAT. 55.
But how did stripling David dare to show
His childish face before so great a foe?
He had no armor on, nor sword to shield
His body, yet he fought, and won the field.
Here, here (my Soul) observe, and thou shall fin^
A naked body, but an armed mind.
MEDITAT. 56.
Be sure (my Soul) when e're thou shall begin
To war with the Goliath of thy sin,
Take David's armor, and thou shall or'ethrow
Thy sin with a most advantageous blow.
Boast not too much, but with bold courage fight;
The pebble-stones of Faith fly always right.
MEDITAT. 57.
Faith is the arm of safety, which defends
The Soul from all approaching harm, and lends
A sword to fight with Satan, who may venture
To make a thrust or two, but cannot enter.
Gain thou this arm of Faith (my Soul,) and then
Thou may out-dare a Lion in his Den.
MEDITAT. 58.
Learn how to prize thy Faith (my Soul,) and know
She is thy only safety here below:
She is a trusty buckler to protect thee
From showers of evil, and to good direct thee.
Then rouse my Soul, and be not quite cast down,
Repentance brings in Faith, and Faith a Crown.
MEDITAT. 59.
A Crown, that is only fitting to adorn
A Princes brow; and Subjects that are born
To an inferior fortune, must content
Themselves with that, which fortune freely lent.
But ah my Soul! be wise, and understand,
A heavenly Crown's not made by humane hand.
MEDITAT. 60.
A glorious Crown of Glory shall attend
Attentive hearts; my Soul, I recommend
This Crown to thee: consider but the price
It cost, and then remember Paradise:
Remember whose dear blood did trickle down,
Like tedious showrs, to purchase thee this Crown.
MEDITAT. 61.
O boundless Love! would such a Lamb as he
Dye for such wolf-like sycophants as we?
His willing Soul did even joy t'express
This introduction to our happiness.
His blood gushed out to wash us clean within:
He shed it for our sins, and yet we sin.
MEDITAT. 62.
Rouse up my Soul, and let thy Eagle-eyes
Behold that Sun in whom thy safety lies:
Look well upon him and thou shall discover
A Lamb-like Patience, and a constant Lover.
Admire with how much Dove-like innocence
He suffered death for us that gave the offense.
MEDITAT. 63.
Art thou not ravished yet, my Soul? then hear,
And I will recommend unto thy ear
The willing Passion of that Lamb, which cried
Eloi, Eloi, Eloi, and so died:
And by the virtue of his dying deed,
Our blood was stopped, when he began to bleed.
MEDITAT. 64.
Man, the unhappy offspring of that man
Of Sin, at whose beginning we began
To fall from our first principles, and stray
From good to bad, digressing from the way
Of our assured Salvation, and exchange
A world of pleasure for a world of pains;
And by that Heaven-forbidden taste, reverst
The stroke of mercy, made us all accursed,
And hourly subject to his wrath, whose power
Created us, and made us little lower
Then Heav'n-bred Angels; till the sad inventions
Of Satan's malice quickened the intentions
Of greedy Eve, whose hand soon recommended
That fruit, which by the Serpent was extended,
To her beguiled husband, whose neglect
Of Heavens Commands purchased a dull aspect
From his revengeful brow, which shined more bright
Then glorious Cynthia in her greatest light.
But ah, the cloud of Adams sin had made
A great eclipse: Poor Adam is betrayed
By his own folly, and condemned to crawl
Upon his belly, and gulp up the gall
Of his transgressions; Having thus offended,
He Is thrown from Paradise, and vili-pended
By Heaven: But all this while the Serpent sits
Ravished with laughter, tut'ring still his wits
To further mischief; having found success
In his first enterprise, doubts nothing less
Then what he hopes for; having thus overthrown
The first man Adam, thinks that all is his own:
But that our God, whose all-commanding power
Can mortify, and quicken in one hour,
Was filled with pity, pitied man whose state
He saw was miserably desperate;
Begun to view him with a gracious eye,
And invocates his sacred Trinity:
And thus proceeds. --
-- Have I made man? have I
Made wretched man, man made to glorify
My name, and given to his thriftless hand
Preheminency both by Sea and Land?
And shall I not be honored? Am I not
A mindful God? And shall I be forgot
By slothful man? Have I not gave him light
In spite of darkness, and shall he requite
My favors thus? Nay more, have I not framed
And stamped him with my Image, and proclaimed
A lasting greatness to him? And shall they
Be thus obdurate now, that were but clay
Before I gave them breath? and shall that breath
Contemn, defy, and scorn me to the death?
Is this the honor which I did expect
From them? Is this the duty? this the effect
Of all my labors? Speak my dearest Son,
What shall we do with man that has undone
His wretched self? My fury burns to be
Revenged on man for his iniquity.
Break forth my restless fury, and devour
That loathed thing called man, give him no power
To call me Father; whilst abused I
Will stop my ears, and scorn to hear him cry:
Begone, enact my pleasure.
The Son replied; Oh stop! Oh stay, my dear,
My dearest Father! Let thy sacred ear
Stand open but one minute, that poor man
May strive to plead, and utter what he can
For his own self. Alas my Son, I know
The more he strives to speak, the more he will show
His guilt; And ah! what answer can he make
To angry I, that am resolved to take
Speedy revenge? The more he strives to clear
Himself, the more he will make his guilt appear.
Begone my fury, run till thou art spent;
Away, away, and give my passion vent,
Vent it on man. My angry Father, stay
A little longer, hear what I will say
In man's behalf: Oh, is not man thy creature?
His sins are not so great, but thou art greater
In mercy: Oh be merciful, and let
(If nothing will) my blood discharge the debt:
I Will freely give it, may this Blood of mine
Extinguish quite those angry flames of thine.
Oh be appeased, and give me leave to strive
Against the power of Satan, and deprive
Him of his man-deluding power: I Will charm
His rav'ning malice, and withhold his arm
From hurting man: Nay, and I Will undergo
As many sorrows, as the world can show,
For man thy Image: Say the word, and I
Will go, nay run, for joy, that I must dye
For man's Redemption. Dearest Son, then go,
Redeem relapsed man, that he may owe
An endless debt. But say, my Son, should he,
For whom thou dy'st, revile, dishonor thee,
And trample in thy precious blood, and make
That blood prove poison to him, that should take
The venom of his sins away? I Will strive,
The Holy Ghost replied, to make man thrive,
And grow in grace; I Will teach him to express
No feigned, but a real thankfulness.
O Soul-transporting Joy! O truest Love
Without a period! O innoxious Dove!
Could thou, thou Lamb of God, be thus content
To step from Heaven, and take that punishment
Upon thy patient self, which appertained
To Heaven provoking man, man that was stained
And blur'd with sin, whose spots could never be
Washed out (blessed Lamb) by any but by thee?
Had thou not interposed, our Souls had bin
Imbowel'd in the Ocean of our Sin:
And had thou not sustained us, we had fell,
And swelter'd in the restless flames of Hell.
Had thou not looked upon our sad condition,
And pitied us, to see what expedition
We made to our own ruins, we had lost
The hopes of our Salvation, which cost
An unknown price: 'Twas not a swelling flood
Of heaped up gold redeemed us, but thy blood,
Thy precious blood, which flowed like hasty tides
In great abundance, from thy wounded sides.
Start from the bed of Sin (my Soul,) and run
To view the splendour of this glorious Sun:
See how he wrastles with the gloomy clouds
Of our transgressions; See how he unshrouds
Himself: On see what pains he undergoes,
To prove himself our friend, that were his foes.
Methinks I hear a throng of people cry,
Let Barabbas be freed, let us crucify
This Jewish King; let us lead him to his death,
It Is pity he should draw a minutes breath.
Methinks I see how his weak hands are bound
With twisted cords: Methinks I see him crowned
with sharpened thorns: Methinks I see them, how
They worship him with a dissembled bow.
Methinks I see the gazing people run
To see the glorious setting of this Sun.
Methinks I see his gentle feet divide
Their measured paces, to be crucified.
Methinks I see how his delightful face
Seems to receive an honor by disgrace.
Methinks I see how his Heav'n-fixed eyes
Do overlook his raging enemies.
Methinks I see his spear-inviting breast
Willingly ready to receive the rest
Of their intended malice; How his palms
(Like one that gives, and not receives an alms)
Are spread abroad, which truly verifies
With what a cheerful willingness he dies.
Methinks I see how his connexed feet
Salute the Cross, as if they joy'd to meet
With so, so fast a friend. Methinks I see
With what a Heav'n-infus'd reluctancie
He entertains their blows, as if he found
A lively comfort in each deadly wound.
Methinks I see his bubbling veins, how they
Swell up a little, and then shrink away,
And hide themselves, as if they had expressed
(For the departure of so warm a guest)
A secret grief; till conquering death exiled
Life from the body of that Lamb, that Child,
That Son of God, in whom true joys reside;
Who lives by dying, and by living died.
Quis miserior quam qui suam nescit miseriam?
DO I not daily see that nothing can
Be so unstable as the state of man?
Do I not see how fortune can correct
Misfortune; and as suddenly neglect
Poor helpless man? Sometimes his thoughts are crowned
With golden joys, and sometimes kiss the ground:
Sometimes he is filled with laughter, somtims weeps;
Sometimes he walks in state, and sometimes creeps.
A morning joy proves sometimes grief at night,
For fortunes dyal goes not always right.
It Is vain, it is vain; and ah that I could weep
My self into a deluge, and so steep
My cheeks in tears: Oh that I could imbark
My naked Soul, and swim like Noah's Ark
In that grand Ocean, which my flowing eyes
Have made, and overlook my miseries!
Distemp'red thoughts, why do you thus torment
My yielding Soul? why does my Soul relent?
Why am I thus afflicted? why does sorrow
Take an advantage of my Soul, and borrow
Quotidian plagues, and study how to make
My heart its Theater? How shall I shake
These coupling fetters from my captived heart?
How shall I bid adue to grief, and part?
Where shall I run, and labor to unsnare
My breasts inhabitant? Oh how, or where
Shall I retire my self! In what sad place
Shall I deplore my miserable case?
Could I but find a place where I might dwell,
And only see the Sun, I Would bid farewell
To all false pleasures.
For now my Soul still hovers to and fro
From places to place: sometimes it flies too low;
Sometimes, with more aspiring wings, it flies,
And envies at impossibilities:
Then back again, and with a seeming mirth
Surveys the center of this flattering Earth.
And thus my Soul, being left in this sad being,
Agrees in nothing else but disagreeing:
My ways are paved with thorns; I take my diet
From sorrows table, furnished with disquiet:
I am the principle of grief; my eyes,
Like windows, open to all miseries:
My head's a fountain, and from thence does flow
The headlong rivers of unbridled woe.
My sighs, like sudden storms, disturb my rest,
As if I had a Boreas in my breast.
Needs must I be molested in my dreams,
My heart's the receptacle of all streams:
Then blame me not, if sorrow makes me cry;
Sum all misfortune up, and that am I.
But stay my thoughts; post not away too fast:
Extremes are dangerous, and cannot last.
A sudden thought has made me to confess,
I may be happy in unhappiness.
And what is a thought? it is but a sudden puff;
Yet many may confound, when one's enough.
Come let us repose, and make a little stay,
Our Sun's sufficient to adorn a day.
Why should I wander in the darksom shades
Of my own errors, whilst a grief invades
My naked senses? It Is in vain to strive
Against the power of God, who can contrive
What pleases him: Why shall I then repine
At what he sends? Can wretched I confine
His will to mine? Oh no; He suffers well,
Whose sufferings tell him there is no other Hell
But in this world: Who would not then endure
Terrestrial torment, that he may procure
Celestial pleasures? Sorrow brings no loss
To him whose patience can sustain a cross.
Hereafter I will labor to prevent
A little Sorrow by a great Content.
Surgit post nubila Phoebus.
WHen gloomy clouds surround the lofty sky
It is an argument a storm is nigh:
But when the Sun's eclipsed from our sight,
We must not judge an everlasting night
Will then ensue: It Is danger to distrust
A God that is so merciful, so just.
The greatest sin that Satan can declare
Against a guilty Soul, is sad despair.
What though the clouds of Earth shall interpose
Betwixt a Soul and Heaven? the wind blows
Not always in one place; one happy hour
May breed a calm, and qualify a shower.
Some greedy Lawyers, when their Clyents stoek
Is almost spent, rewards him with a mock:
The Counselor of Heaven gives more content
To a poor sinner, when his breath is spent:
Accepts the will, although his tongue be mute;
He seldom keeps him seven years in a suite:
He Is free in mercy, and he takes delight
To end a suite, when sorrow makes it right:
God is not like to them that take a pride
In others griefs: when tears begin to slide,
His mercy falls; he cannot brook delay,
But meets a sinners language half the way.
His ears are always open to let in
A sinners prayers, when he lets out his sin.
What though I have transgrest, what tho my crime
Appear like mountains? mountains oftentimes
Sink lower; nay, and God can pardon all
As well as one: for be they great or small,
They all are sins: shrubs grow as well as trees;
Gods mercy will admit of no degrees.
He that distrusts his God shall always find
A clouded conscience, and a stormy mind.
Seven days had run, before God had attyr'd
The World with order, yet he was not tired:
And shall we then expect to climb so high
As Heaven, in half an hour, or else deny
So blessed a labor? No, perhaps to day
We keep the road, to morrow lose the way.
Contenta vita est summa foelicitas.
WHat is this world? A looking-glass, wherein
We see the body, nay the face of Sin.
What Is Wealth? what is Honor! Transitory toys.
What Is Mirth? what is Pleasure? Melancholy joys.
Honor is Envy's object; Riches, they
Are but the subjects of a frowning day.
Beauty's a slave to Time, and fond delight
Teaches the morning how to fool the night.
Were I a Midus, could my towers of wealth
Protect my person, or preserve my health?
Were I a Caesar, could wy honors save
My crazy carcass from the gaping grave?
Were I as fair as Venus, could my beauty
Acquit me from that necessary duty
I owe to change? If so, I Would honor pleasure,
And hug my honor, and rejoice in treasure.
If I had riches, they might make me fly
Upon the wings of prodigality.
If I had honor, that might make me dance
Ambition a Corranto, and advance
My self above my self: If beauty were
At my command, then might I chance t'insnare
The wantons of the world; nay, and entice
Virtue to change it self into a vice.
Now tell me Earth, where are those smooth delights
Thou often boasts of? are thy golden nights
Changed into leaden days? Oh tell me then!
Why do thou so befool the sons of men?
Who, following thee, consume their precious time,
And are at last rewarded with a crime.
Content, that well-advised word imports
A Crown of Happiness: All joy resorts
Into the palace of a blessed content,
And there resides.
Content is golden eyed, and can behold
A dunghill with as much respect as gold.
Content's a Jewel; but here lies the art,
Which way to hang it in a restless heart.
Much have I heard of that rich stone, which all
Are pleased t'entitle, Philosophical;
And Fame reports, that many wits have tried,
T'obtain it, and before obtained it, died,
And lost their eager hopes; nay, what is worse,
Left a rich study, but a poorer purse:
And to conclude, experience made it known,
Had they not lost Content, they would found the Stone.
Pax una triumpha est.
PEace is the life of Happiness, and Strife
A living Death unto a dying Life:
Envy's the child of Srife, and pregnant Peace
Is an indulgent Mother, whose increase
Adorns the Earth: Peace is a Turtle Dove,
Composed of nothing but the purest Love.
What Is martial triumph* but a little blaze,
Which now aspires, and by and by decays?
What triumph is it, to see the shivered bones
Of breathless men, and hear the impetuous groans
Of those whose feeble tongues invite a death
To dispossess them of their loathed breath?
Sad are the effects of War, and yet this age
Esteems not Peace, but lets Contention rage
Into a madness: Oh unhappy State,
Where Strife's desired too soon, and Peace too late
Soul-calming Peace, and heart-corroding Strife
Live here like Factors, both for death and life.
It is a sacred Jubilee, to hear
Soft-breathing Peace, chanting in every ear
Rare strains of Heav'n-bred raptures, which express
Full Diapasons of our happiness:
But it is a dying life to see, that bliss
Should, by a hellish metamorphosis,
Be thus transhap'd to Strife: There Is no prevention,
Abused Peace perverts into contention.
And can the Diamond of Amity,
If once dissevered in pieces, be
Composed again? Experience makes us find,
It Is quickly broken, but not quickly joined.
Oh Peace! Can we expect thy blessed return,
If we, whose flaming envies daily burn
Thy name within the Aetna's of our breasts,
Do make thee subject to our vile detests?
It Is often seen, Cantharides do dwell
Upon the fairest Rose, whose pleasing smell
Delights the sense: It may be truly said,
Envy, that base Cantharides, has laid
It self upon the Roses of our Peace,
And robbed us of a liberal increase.
Have not our eyes in former times beheld
The fruits of Peace? have not our Souls been filled
With heavenly pleasures, and our grasping hands
Gathered the plenty of our peaceful Lands?
Did not the painful husbandman bestow
His labors with a cheerful brow, and sow
The often-furrowed earth? But now, ah now,
Intruding Mars molests the active plough!
And have not we by sad experience found
Contentious Mars plows bodies, and not ground?
O miserable tillage! This will bring
A bloody Harvest, and as bad a Spring.
See smiling Bacchus, with his brim-fill'd bowls,
Would tempt us to carouze away our Souls.
Mars with a palled look proclaims an end
To all our pastimes: Sorrow knows no friend.
Mars thunders, Bacchus smiles, and Cupid cries,
Envy survives, Truth pines, and Friendship dies.
Peace flies her Country, and with discontent
Bemoans our sorrows, and her banishment.
And thus we tumble in our own confusion;
A bad beginning finds a bad conclusion.
A DISCOURSE between the SOUL and WORLD.
Woe. HOw now sad Soul; from whence proceeds those clouds
Which still eclipse my fancy thus, and shrouds
Thy splendent glory? what contentious Fate
Has bred disturbance in thy quiet State?
Tell me, come tell me, that my studious care
May be employed to serve thee: Why, or where
Art thou oppressed? Come, never fear to tell
Thy grief to me, thou know I love thee well.

So. Oh I am sick, can thou be my Physician?


Woe. I can, sick Soul: Come tell me thy condition.


So. Draw nearer then, for ah my spirits fail;
I Am sick because I know not what I ail.

Woe. If thou art sick, and can not find thy grief,
How can thou be a suitor to relief?

So. Were it a single sorrow that oppressed
My wearied mind, 'twere easily expressed;
But when pluralities shall circumvent
A troubled mind, how can that mind have vent*

Woe. Come, leave these vain exordiums, let my ear
Be heir to thy discourse, I long to hear;
Conceal not that, which if revealed may bring
A remedy: Come, tell me what is the thing
That thus corrodes thy breast; it is I alone
Must give thy heart refreshment, or else none.

So. Alas, fond World! how justly may I style
Thy help a hinderance, thy treasures vile!
What answer shall I now retort, that may
Expressly satisfy? I cannot say
What I desire; for when I strive to speak,
My passion grows too strong, my tongue too weak;
My numerous pains infatuate my wit.

Woe. Pish, this is but a melancholy fit:
Clear up thy clouded thoughts, such fits as these
Are incident to all; learn to appease
Thy instigating passion, and advise
With me; I Will make thee well, I Will make thee wise:
My bounteous treasure shall increase thy store
With great abundance: Come, let us have no more
Of these thy petulant discourses, be
Prescribed by none (dear Soul) except by me;
I Will cure thy pain. Sou: Fond World, forbear
To urge my resolution, or ensnare
My yielding spirits; let thy language be
Reserved for them that will be fooled by thee:
Thy elevating joys, which did before
Enrich my vacant senses, make them poor:
And now I find the greatest plague that can
Concomitate poor miserable man,
Is to be happy. Worcester: That Is a paradox,
Is happiness a crime?

So. Mistake me not, rash fool, for my pretense
Is good, if not corrupted by the sense
You take it in: For tell me, what can thou
Insinuating wretch vouchsafe t'allow,
That will perpetuate? have thou the power
T'assure a happiness for one half hour?
If so, I will obsequiously confine
My self to thy directions, and be thine.

Woe. I tell thee Soul, thy fancy thus disturbed
Will ruinate thy senses, if not curbed.
Convince thy self, and be not thus averse
To Reason; after folly comes a curse.

So. But what is this to my demands? I see
Thou love to hear thy self declare, not me.
Answer to my objections, then I Will rest,
A quiet Soul, in a resolved breast.

Woe. On that I were so blessed to know the state
Of thy condition. Sou: Will thou still deviate,
And ramble from thy text? Worcester: Believe't dear soul
There is no friend more strongly can condole
Thy weakness, then my self; I sympathize,
And truly grieve for thy infirmities:
Witness these falling tears; Oh, may't be known,
Sick Soul, I weep thy sorrows, not mine own:
Sorrow forbids my gentle lips to smile;
For ah I am: Soul: A woeful crocodile:
I, I, a woeful Exile. Worcester: For thy sake
I Will suffer thousand griefs, and undertake
Ten thousand more, that I at last may prove
How much I Have merited thy truest love.

So. What voice is this that penetrates my ear?
What do I hear, or do I seem to hear?
Or is it a dream? Worcester: No, no, (blessed Soul) it is true,
It Is I that suffer these extremes for you.

So. Reserve thy tears: Alas! I did but try
Thy love, and now I find the art Constancy
It self: But tell me World, will thou content
My greedy mind with wealth? when that is spent
Will It give me more? and when that more is gone
Will thou be sure to heap one bag upon
Another? Will thou make me to out-vy
The sons of men in prodigality?
Do hear me World? Worcester: I do, and I am sore
Oppressed, because thou can not ask no more:
Honor, Wealth, Dignities, and all shall stand,
Like subjects proud, to kiss their Princes hand.
I Will hug thee in mine arms, and thou shall sleep
In gold surrounded beds: whilst others weep
At fortunes gates, upon their bended knees,
Thou, thou shall sit and read sad Elegies,
Imprinted on their meagre cheeks; I, I,
These are true symptoms of Eternity.
What, melancholy yet? cannot these charms
Induce thee to my Soul-inviting arms?
Speak Soul, are these not joys? are these not pleasures
To be embraced? speak, are not these rare tresures?

So. Base World, the art truly base; now I perceive
Thy laboring policy is to deceive.
What, did thou think my heart begun to dote,
When I, to make a concord, changed my note?
Oh no, vile varlet; no, I did but try
Thy craft, by learning what thou would reply
To my demands: Divinest language could
Move no reply, when baser language would:
But now thou nothing, made of nothing, know,
The ast lost a friend by me, and found a foe.
Here I declare my self, and do protest
Before just Heaven, that whilst I live possessed
Of vital breath, I will employ my heart
To Oppose thy flattering folly; for thou art
A perjured Traitor to the Souls divine
And sacred Majesty, and wilt incline
Thy ears to nothing but to antic tricks,
And call'st divine thoughts, melancholy fits.
And so farewell, false Traitor; now it is known,
The more we are thine, the less we are our own.

Woe. And is this all? Sou: It Is all. Worcester: Then Soul adue.


So. Oh may I never prove false, till thou prov'st true.


A DISCOURSE between the SOUL and FAITH.
So. FAith, can thy hand protect me? can thy art
Prescribe a cordial for a fainting heart?
Have thou the skill to settle my belief,
And arm my Soul against the darts of grief?

Fa. I have the Art (sad Soul) had thou the power
T'imbrace belief, to bring thee to the Bower,
The fragrant Bower of pleasure, which shall be
Perfumed and decked with blessed Eternity.

So. I do believe, and my belief torments
My mind with millions of sad discontents.
I do believe what ever Heaven devised,
Then judge, oh judge, how I am Tantaliz'd!

Fa. Oh know (mistaking Soul) such faith we call
By the sad name of Diabolical.

So. Oh strange, oh sad, oh miserable case!
Has Faith robbed Janus of his double face?
Does not the sacred Volumn end this strife,
And bids believe, and have eternal life?

Fa. The eternal tenants of the infernal lake,
Believe and tremble too, but can partake
Of nothing but their torments, and obtain
Nothing, except the enlargement of their pain.

So. How comes it then to pass, if they believe,
They Are not rewarded, but must always grieve
In utter darkness? Is their faith so strong
T'acknowledg God, and yet they know him wrong?

Fa. They acknowledge God in Justice, but have run
Beyond his mercy, and despised his Son:
Their faith prevails but only to inthrall
Their Souls, because it is not salvifical.

So. But tell me Faith, how many I learn to know,
Whether thou art salvifical or no?

Fa. Examine well thy self, then go and pry
Into the sacred Scriptures; let thine eye
Peruse with diligence, and let thy prayers
Sail toward the port of Heaven in swelling tears
Then thou will find, how dearly God will own
A Soul that sings a penitential tone.

So. But when I strive and struggle to express
My self in prayer, I find a dubiousness.

Fa. It is a happiness oft-times to doubt
A happiness: --
How often did David (Gods delight) cry out,
My God, my glorious God, oh why, oh why,
Have thou forsaken me, and do deny
The spreading splendour which was wont to shine
And glimmer on this doubtful Soul of mine?
Be serious, Soul, and let thy thoughts reflect
On Gods indulgency, and thy neglect.
How often has he with his dewy locks
Attended thee, and with redoubled knocks
Desired, nay begged an entrance, to impart
Lovesick expressions to thy wilful heart?
And ah! how willingly has he delated
His dear affections to thee, and not hated
To call thee his own Image, nay his Dove?
(Oh streaming Fountain of Eternal Love!)
How has he lab'red, with a watchful eye?
To woo thee to his blessed Eternity?

So. But tell me then, if I am thus, thus dear
Unto my GOD, why will my GOD not hear
My morning sorrows, and my midnight moans,
And stop the revolutions of my groans;
But let my poor Astraea fly in vain
To his high Altar, and return again
Unanswered? Ah, what over-awing Rod
Smarts like the silence of an angry GOD?

Fai. (Distemp'red Soul) oh do not thou become
(Because thy GOD seems deaf unto thee) dumb;
Reverberate the portals of his ears
With thy complaints, and let thy vocal tears
Invite an audience; urge him by the force
Of his own language, Heaven cannot divorce
Himself from his own words; oh, let him know
Thou have his sacred Promises to show
For what thou do: Tell him, that Heaven and Earth
Shall pass away, but the delightful birth
Of his pathetical expressions shall
Be heirs unto Eternity; go call
Himself to witness for himself; be bold
To tell him to his face, thou have laid hold
Upon his promises; tell him thou art
A whole, a broken, and a contrite heart:
Tell him the art heavy laden, and oppressed,
And crav'st the enjoyment of a happy rest:
What though thy querelous desires at first
Seem to be frivolous, and slightly nursed?
Detract not thou, but be progressive still,
And not too retrograte, but let thy will
Attend his pleasure; is it not fit that he
Should be attended, that attended thee?
What if he still denies? thou art but paid
With that dull Coin which thine own sins have made.
Has he not waited at the brazen walls
Of thy regardless breast, used many calls,
Nay many thousands, and has daily knocked,
And found the nurs'ry of thy ears still locked,
And barred against him? 'Twas enough to turn
Patience into an Ecstasy, and burn
The strongest Resolution, and incite
Vengeance to make an everlasting night.
Oh think on this (blessed Soul) and be content,
Good actions seldom want a goood event.

Another DISCOVRSE Between the SOUL and FAITH.
So. I AM full, and yet seem empty; I have store
Of Earths delectables* and yet I Am poor;
I have what e're my ravenous thoughts require,
And yet I want in having my desire;
I eat delicious food, drink sparkling wine,
Enjoy my self, and yet I am not mine;
I am the worlds delight, I am the child
Of pregnant fortune, yet I am reviled:
And what external happiness can be
Thought worth imbracement, is embraced by me.
Since all these Joys are heaped upon my back,
I fain would know what it is I seem to lack.

Fa. Thy wants are soon expressed (dull Soul) I know
Who wants my helpful hand, wants power to go.
Oh what an easy matter it is to find
A stuffd-up body, and an empty mind!
Grief rests within the center of that breast,
That knows not what is worst, nor what is best;
But still looks downwards on this dunghill earth,
That alienates the Soul, and breeds a dearth
Within that sacred Essence, that divine
And glorious Monarchy: Who can define
The enchanting Raptures, and the emperious Joys
Of sublimated Heaven, that toyls for toys?
Thou say the art full, yet empty; thou have store
Of Earths delectables, and yet art poor:
It Is true, the art full; but tell me whence proceeds
That fullness, say, what charitable deeds
Have thou performed; oh learn (frail Soul) t'express,
Too great a fullness breeds an emptiness.
Experience tells thee, there is nothing worse
Then slighted mercy turned into a curse.
Thou say, the enjoyst what ever thy mind requires
And yet thou wantst in having thy desires;
Thou eat'st, thou drinkst, and have the worlds consent
To be her darling, yet art not content.
It Is true, he wants, whose fullness wants desire
To want that fullness which his wants require.
What though the world accumulates increase?
There Is no content, when Heaven denies a Peace.
If Heavens blessed mouth proclaimed no peace should be

So. Unto the wicked; what is become of me,
Who always lived to sin, and sinned to dye!
Oh miserable, miserable I!

Fa. It Is true, GOD will not suffer Peace t'arise
Unto the wicked, yet that GOD denies
A Sinners death, and by a free consent
Promised a pardon, with this word, Repen^:
It Is a persisting Sinner must expect
A sad reward, for a performed neglect.

So. Then what must I expect? have I not run
(Even from the rising, to the setting Sun)
In paths of negligence, and still persisted,
And rather backed a sinner, then resisted
The power of sin? Oh how can I obtain,
Or thoughts, or hopes to be reclaimed again?

Fa. The mouth of Heaven did never yet divide
His language thus: My Soul shall not abide
A penitent offender; no, his breath
Speaks better things, then the lamented death
Of those, who though they have in former times
Been permanent in their unbosom'd crimes;
Yet when the sense of their transgression brings
Abundant sorrow, then Jehovah sings
Rare strains of mercy to their Souls, and pours
His endless mercy down in liberal showers.

So. And is our GOD so merciful, so just
To lep'rous Souls? and shall not my Soul trust
In such a never-failing GOD? Shall I
Retort a no, when he proclaims an I?
Oh no, I Will take what he shall give, and then
When Heaven proclaims, my tongue shall say Amen.
For it is thy Christ, thy Love, thy Son must ease us.

Fa. Follow me Soul, I Will lead thee to thy Jesus.

Penetrant Suspiria Coelum.
ARe sighs so prevalent, that they can be
Admitted to the ears of Majesty?
Is Heaven so weak, or sighs so strong, that they
Can make an onset, and enforce their way
Unto the ears of GOD? Can sighs persuade
That Lamb to mercy, that our sins betrayed?
Can roaring Lions meet, and can they part
Without a combat? Can a lep'rous heart
Meet God, and think t'out-brave him in his Sion?
(Our sins are Lions, yet our God's a Lion.)
And what is a sigh? it is but a blast of wind
Blown from the center of a stormy mind:
And can the air of one poor sigh aspire
So high as Heaven? --
-- Ah, sighs can never tire
In such a progress; though they be but air,
Yet they condense within the sacred ear
Of nursing Majesty, who hears the sound
Of wel-spent groans, and takes them at the bound.
Sighs are like morning Larks; sometimes they fly
And chatter praises to the blushing sky,
Then wearied with their flights, dart down amain,
Longing to repossess the earth again.
So sighs (the Souls best oratory) fly
To the Interpreter of groans, who will not deny
To hear the hearts embassage, but delights
To see souls (wingd with sighs) to take such flights
But, when our hearts are loaded with the cares
Of this vile earth, and sigh themselves to tears,
Oh then he stops his ears, and makes them know
Their sighs are earthly, and they fly too low;
Nor can they reach the suburbs of his ear,
Unless they mount into a higher sphere.
Then let thy well-directed sighs, my Soul,
Mount upwards still, that there they may condole
Thy evening sorrow, and thy morning grief:
Then they will (like Doves) return, and bring reli^f
Unto thy floating heart, and thou shall find
The operations of a sigh; thy mind
Shall purge it self; thrice happy's thy condition,
Sighs are good physic, when Heaven is Physician.
Roganti dabitur.
WHo would not be a Beggar, that may crave
Upon such easy terms, but ask, and have?
Here Is swelling bounty, and sure this must be
No humane, but a divine charity:
Here well-instructed Poverty may live,
He that gives power to ask, has power to give.
The greatest gift that ever yet was known,
Was freely given, being asked by none.
And he that gave't has many gifts in store;
(Many give once, because they will give no more.)
But he who gave that gift, will not refrain
(If wisely asked) to give us gifts again.
And if a heart-recording gift we make
Of this, his giving teaches us to take.
Be it ordained, that begging be an art,
Heaven loves a giving hand, a begging heart.
But let us rest a little; here is the task,
Heaven knows to give, we know not how to ask.
Methinks I hear some multiloquious fool
Make this reply, What, must I go to school,
And learn to beg? I Am skilful to require,
If Heaven would suit his gifts to my desire.
Let fools delight in folly, let them think
That men are blind, because they see them wink.
Others methinks reply, Have we not cried
To Heaven for blessings, and have been denied?
Have not our early voices been extended
To Heaven, and yet our labors vili-pended?
Is this the effect of prayer? are these the gains
That we were largely promised for our pains?
Go silly Souls, and do not thus contest
With him that knows what is worst, and what is best.
Ye know not what ye ask; your fond desires,
If granted to, may breed such flaming fires
Within your greedy breasts, and so torment
Your hearts with millions of sad discontent:
Then may ye know that true discretion lies
As well in asking, as in giving wise.
And solid hearts will labor first to know
What Is fit for their desires, and then they will sow
Their prayers in such a soil as shall increase
Their stock of Grace, and everlasting Peace.
Pulsanti aperietur.
KNock, and it shall be opened; here is an art
Requires the labors of a studious heart:
It is an easi action, some suppose,
Because it commonly consists of blows.
Here Is a mysterious knock; it is not the hand
O^ ^l^sh and blood can knock, or tongue command
The gates to move; it is not Saint Peter's keys
Can turn the lock, except the Landlord please.
Heaven's a well-ordered family, whose gate
Opens not soon to them that knock too late:
But those, whose early labors shall implore
To have admittance at that sacred door,
Must well instruct their hearts, and have a care,
First learning how to knock, and after, where.
How happy's he, that really can say,
Go take thy rest (my Soul) the ast knocked to day?
H^'s happy, that can speak such words as these,
Open the door (my Soul) thou have the keys.
How happy's he, that by a faithful knock
Can make the yielding Gates of Heaven unlock?
Prayers are the keys of Heaven, the melting door
Is mercy, that lets in and out the store.
Faith is the golden key, which gives us all
A speedy entrance to the spacious Hall:
But we must open (or else not come there)
The gate of Mercy with the key of Prayer:
Go then, my Soul, into some private place,
Unlock thy heart, and when unlocked, abase
Thy self before the Throne of Heaven, and fly
Unto the Temple of Divinity.
Go knock thy heart out; if that will not do,
Say, Heaven's grown deaf, or else thy heart's not true.
Cast off the threadbare garments of thy sin,
Thy prayers will melt the gates, and let thee in:
The Governor of Heaven will not refuse
To give an audience to such welcome news;
Nor can he be ungrateful, or neglect
To crown thy labors with a true respect:
Then tune thy heart, and teach it to express
Full Diapasons of true thankfulness:
And grant (dear God) when my poor Soul shall knock,
That my unworthy key may fit thy lock.
AN ELEGY Upon that Son of Valor Sir CHARLES LVCAS; Who was shot to Death by
the Command of the Counsel of War, before COLCHESTER.
To all those that love the memory of Sir Charles Lucas. Reader,
WHen my serious thoughts reflected upon the Death of so worthy a person, I
could not but privately deplore so public a loss; and being importuned by his
virtues, and my own sorrow, I gave my pen the privilege (assisting it with the
uttermost of my power) to compose this Elegious Poem upon his Death, which I
cannot expect will be consonant to all humors, but only to them that love
Loyalty. (Reader) I shall desire thee to let the strength of thy goodness
pardon the weakness of him that is

His Kings, his Countries, and Thine, JOHN QUARLES.

AN ELEGY.
I Cannot hold, the Laws of Nature break
The Laws of Reason, and my Cisterns leak.
Pardon my tears (oh Heaven) and let thy power
Subdue my grief, and mitigate this shower:
Restore me to my self, and let my Quill
Weep for me; let it weep until it fill
Whole volumes with sad tears, tears that may flow
From age to age, that all the world may know
It weeps for him, whose never-dying name
Gives golden feathers to the wings of fame.
But is it requisite that I alone
Should storm so great a work as this, and none
Invoked t'assist me? Sorrow hates delay;
Oh hear my hasty call, and come away,
Ye grief-supporting Muses, here is that
Will sublimate your senses; ask not what
It is, for fear, lest melancholy I,
Ravished with what I speak, should faint and dye.
Times full-mouthed Herald will exactly tell
How Death has rambled from his m^sty Cell,
And with presumptuous violence has shot
A Star, whose fall will never be forgot.
Then rouse your down-cast spirits, now, or never,
Shake off your slumbers, or repose for ever:
Lucas has conquered Death, he is gone to keep
An everlasting Sabbath, and to sleep
In Abraham's bosom: Ah, methinks this breath
Should re-invite you from the shades of Death
To weep his obsequies; but if there is none
Will be invoked, my Muse shall walk alone
Into the Wilderness of grief, and there
Condole this loss, till sorrow wants a tear.
Have I betrayed my self? Am I o'retaken
With folly? Or has Reason quite forsaken
The kingdom of my mind? If he be blessed,
How dare my tears thus interrupt his rest?
Oh Times! Oh Manners! Is the world grown mad?
Some I behold rejoicing; others sad
As grief can make them: Sure we have forgot
To sympathize, or else why weep we not,
Or smile together? Has Death got the power
To make us weep, and smile within an hour?
Smile they that please, mine eyes cannot forbear,
For every smile of theirs, to shed a tear.
Come real-hearted Mourners, and incline
Your ear to my sad story, and confine
Your selves to sorrow, sorrow that shall need
No definition: if your hearts can bleed,
Now, now, they shall; and may that barren eye
That will not weep, prove blind, or always dry:
And they that can, and will not now let fall
Some tears, have hard hearts, or no hearts at all.
Lucas (rare Soul) oh that my tongue might dwell
Upon thy name; 'twas thou that did excel
The world in Martial Valor: He that can
Forget thy name, forgets to be a Man.
It Is death to say the art dead; Thou can not dye:
If thou art dead, there is no Eternity.
Thou liv'st in spite of Death, yet I condole
Thy murdered body; but I Am sure thy Soul
Lives above envy, where it shall be blessed
In spite of those, whose wisdoms thought it best
To put a period to thy days, and bring
Joy to themselves, and sorrow to their King.
Discreetly done, and sure this Act must be
Recorded in the Rouls of Infamy,
That after Ages, when they do behold,
May blush, what noble Deeds were done of old.
Say Tyrants, say, was it not a shameful strife
To send a Death, after a promised Life?
If this be Mercy, Heaven protect us all
From such a Mercy, so tyrannical.
If this be Justice, may such Justice have
A Hell to act in, or at least a Cave.
What had he acted that could contradict
The Laws of Justice? Search, and be as strict
As policy can make you, all ye can
Impute, was this, he was a valiant man,
Who loved his King, and undertook to play
A noble Game, wherein his honor lay
At stake; what would you have a Gamester do?
Should he surrender up a game to you
Without contending? Such a high-bred shame
Had left a blur within his spotless name?
I tremble at my thoughts, I cannot hold,
My quill must run, ye can but term me bold,
As ye are tyrannous: In former times,
Boldness in truths were pardonable crimes.
How could ye choose but tremble when ye named
His death, whom honor and the world had famed?
Such deeds as these we needs must discommend,
You Have murdered your own honors, and our friend.
How could ye choose but blush to see him stand
Undaunted at your tragical command?
How could ye choose but fly, when he was fled,
T'imbrace his death, and dye when he was dead?
How could your will-obeying slaves let fly
A bullet at his breast, and they not dye?
Why died they not, when as they went about
To make those holes, whereat his Soul flew out?
Mars frowned when he observed what ye had done,
And perpetrated on his dearest Son:
And thus declares; If any mortal shall
Dare to entitle, or presume to call
Such Rabshecha's his Sons, that they shall be
All voted Traitors to his Majesty:
The Muses, they complain, and are agreed
To vindicate his death, and ever feed
Upon his virtues, and will never more
Smile on your actions, but will still deplore
Their lost-love Lucas; and the Earth shall ring
With Echoes of his praise, that loved his King.
Apollo weeps, and says, ye have forgot
To cherish virtue, or ye love it not:
And to the world he will fully make it known
In his destruction, ye have overthrown
Your homebred honors: Now my Muse retire
And gather breath; it is wisdom to enquire
Which way to take our progress; we must know
Whither to go, as well as how to go:
The paths of death are darksom, and we may
Plead an excuse, if we have gone astray:
Errors in grief are incident to all
That truly solemnize a funeral.
But stay my quill, it is not my task to crave
Excuses, but to treat upon a grave,
A grave within whose sullen bosom lies
A Jem, contemned by those that could not prize
So rare a piece, within whom was reposed
Virtue and honor, for he was composed
Of both: (Kind Reader) know, that Lucas had
A Magazin of worth; his Soul was clad
With robes of innocence, and his heart
So sworn to honor, that it could not start
From noble Exercises, though attended
With troops of dangers, dangers that portended
A thousand deaths: his wisdom could descry
Both life and death with a contented eye:
Life was his Jewel, yet he did not prize
That life at such a rate, as to despise
A noble Death; he labored to express
To both a very equal willingness.
He knew his life was lent him to maintain
The rights of Majesty, and to regain
Those just prerogatives, which do belong
To CHARLES, who patiently sustains the wrong.
His Soul was undivided, and could never
Ramble from Loyalty; his whole endeavor
Was to advance that Cause wherein he stood
Engaged, and died it with his crimson blood.
Since thus he lived, since thus he died, oh then
Let Us imitate so good a life; and when
We hear the sad relation of his Death,
Let Us learn to dye: Let them that live by breath
Examine his brave actions, and they will find
He had a rare militia in his mind.
But stoutest Lions are at last overthrown
By Natures Laws; for Nature needs must own
Her principles: our earthen vessels must
At last dissolve, and turn themselves to dust.
Live we a thousand years, we do but run
In debt to Nature; and when those days are done,
We are but mortal, subject to decay,
And youth and age must go the self-same way.
Reader, as often as report shall send
Unto thy ears the death of any friend,
Wonder not that he is dead, that is too much wrong,
But rather wonder that he lived so long:
For Life's but like a Can^le, every wind
May puff it out, and leave a snuff behind.
But whither runs my pen; Does sorrow mean
To make of this an everlasting scean?
Lucas made Sorrow lovely, Death a pleasure,
And Life a trifle, Misery a treasure:
And now let no audacious tongue deny
That he taught Death to live, and Life to dye.
Now gentle Soul, go take thy sweet repose
In Heavens eternal bed, where none but those
Shall sleep, that in their life-times studied how
To dye: there rest (dear Soul) I Will leave thee now.
My heart begins to quake, that word has bred
A palsy in my hand, and grief has spread
A vail upon my Senses; and Confusion
Steps in, and leads me to a sad Conclusion.
Shall I begin, or end, I know not whether;
Oh that I could begin and end together!
Begin, what is that, but to renew a grief?
To end, what is that, but to implore relief?
What shall I do? when as I strive to end,
I still forget to do what I intend.
When I begin, methinks I am content
Never to end: Distraction is the event
Of Sorrow. (Reader) pardon this last error,
For I began with grief, and end with terror.
AN EPITAPH.
Come gentle eyes, and take a view,
Here rests a Jewel was as true
As Truth it self; see how he lies
Renowned, and crowned, a Sacrifice.
Lay your hands upon your hearts,
Each eye must weep before it parts.
Sigh, and sob; let each sigh call
Love to attend his Funeral.
Understand that this was he
Conquered Death and Tyranny:
And when your eyes begin to run,
Say ye'ave gazed upon a Sun.
AN ELEGY Upon the Death of my dear Friend Mr ROBERT REASON Who quitted this
life the 13. NOVEMBER, 1646. -- Sic voluere Fata.
By J.Q.
AH, whence proceed those swelling floods that rise
Like restles waves from my tempestuous eyes?
The surges beat (provoked by stormy passion)
My weather-beaten senses out of fashion.
But ah forbear (distemp'ring grief) surcease
Those storms, which rage against the shore of peace*
Forbear superfluous blasts, be not too brief
To dash my Soul against the rocks of grief:
But stop a time (sad Genius) here is a style
Invites a rest; Let Us meditate a while:
Can tears express a perfect grief? Or can
Excess of language re-inlarge a man
From Death-benumming shades? Can blubbered eyes
Invite him back? Can integrating cries
Enforce a life, in spite of death? Can all
The doleful sighings in this world recall
Revolted breath? Oh no: It Is therefore vain
To think that tears can call him back again
From Heavens immortalizing Throne: Thus we
Fond men expand our own infirmity;
And thus our spend-thrift eyes profusely flow
In lavish tears, for him whose Soul we know
Is far more happy then we can express:
(Why do we then lament his happiness?)
Then go (sad Genius) and advise all such
That grieve, to grieve, because they grievd so much
For him, who Heaven has lately made a stranger
To grief, who rests above the reach of danger;
There let him rest in a most glorious sleep:
And if weak Nature urges us to weep,
Let Us weep, nay weep indeed, until our eyes,
Blinded with weeping, weep for new supplies:
Let Us weep for sin, let troops of sighs attend
Our hasty tides to their long journeys end.
Oh let us deplore our most unhappy state
Betimes, for fear lest time-devouring fate
Blocks up the narrow passage of our breath,
And so surprise us with a sudden Death*
And ah how soon the shadow-flying days
Of man consumes: how soon the troubled blaze
Of his frail life expires; and ah how soon
He finds a night, before he thinks it is noon:
And how the pleasures of this sordid Earth
Shadow his senses with a glimmering mirth.
And what is this world? it is but a glass, wherein
Nothing appears but Heav'n-confronting sin:
Alas, its painted beauty represents
Nothing but folly, crowned with discontents:
There Is nothing here that truly may be styled
A happiness; here is nothing but's defiled.
Alas, alas, in what a sad condition
Is dust-composed man! what expedition
He daily makes to gain those things, which gained,
Gnaw him like vipers; thus are mortals stained
And blur'd with vanities; and thus they spend
Their winged hours, as if they could not end:
Fond Earths-consuming trash has so combined
Their hearts to worldly pleasures, that they mind
Nothing but profit, basely gained, which shall
Mount them up here, but after let them fall.
But where is that man, whose Soul contrives to be
Imparadis'd, and crowned with dignity,
With Hallelujahs Angels, which control
The Family of Heaven, who still inroul
In their sublimer thoughts, how great, how just
Their Maker is, before whose throne all must
Appear with spotless Souls, and fly from hence
With downy wings of Dove-like innocence?
But stay my quill; have I thus soon forgot
My bosom friend, as if I loved him not?
No, no; though he be dead, he cannot dye,
Death cannot drive him from my memory,
Where he shall rest, till time shall recommend
My friend-bereaved Soul unto my friend;
For whilst he lived, my sympathizing heart
Was truly his, and truly bore a part
In what he suffered; Ah but now he is fled,
And left me here, to say, my friend is dead.
Poor soul! and why poor soul? rash tongue, call back
That fond abortive word; how can he lack,
That daily feeds upon delicious diet
In Heavens great store house, and knows no disquiet?
This was an Error that my hasty quill
Too rashly stepped into against my will:
I hope it is venial, Reason may afford
A pardon for a grief-relapsed word.
When passion rules the fancy, men become
Vainly Pragmatick, or extremely dumb:
But why rash death, why did thou send thy dart
To take possession of his willing heart,
And gave no longer warning? was there none
Could please thy palate, only him alone?
'Twas quickly ended, and as soon begun;
Believe me death, 'twas but unfriendly done.
But why do I (fond man) expostulate
With thee, that art an all-consuming fate?
The ast done a happy deed, I dare not blame
Thy power, because I know from whence it came.
Shall I, because he was my friend, repine
At his departure? was he Heavens or mine?
I yield him Heavens, not mine; but yet I might
Claim him as finite, Heaven as infinite.
He was but lent me for a time, that I
And others by his life might learn to dye:
Whilst he enjoyed the fullness of his breath,
His life was a preparative for death:
His whole delight and study was to pry
Into the bosom of Divinity;
From whence he sucked such wholesome streams, that those
Which heard him, gave a plaudit to his close:
His daily practice was, how to fulfill
And prosecute his great Redeemers will:
Heaven was his Meditation, and he gave
A reverent respect unto his grave:
Faith, Hope, and Charity did sweetly rest
Within the Counsel-chamber of his breast;
And in a word, the graces did agree
To make one happy Soul, and this was he:
As for his moral duties, they were such,
That should I strive, I could not speak too much:
His civil carriage toward all men might claim
A perfect right to a beloved name:
His actions were so just, that they may tell,
He lived uprightly, and he died as well:
His love, his sweet society might call
Ten thousand tears to attend his funeral:
And to conclude, in him all men might find
A real heart, and a most noble mind:
But now he is gone, his winged Soul's aspired
To Heavens high Palace, where he sits attired
With glorious immortality, and sings
Melodious Anthems to the King of Kings.
There, there his melting Soul, ravished to see
The Sun-bright throne of splendent Majesty,
Adores his wel-pleas'd maker, who makes known
He Is pleased to crown, and keep him for his own:
Oh there he rests, free from the rubs of Earth,
Hugging no shadow, but a real mirth:
Oh there is no grief, no sorrow found to vex
His peaceful Soul* no trouble to perplex,
Or blast his new-bred joys; there is no woe,
No care, no pain, no misery, no foe,
That dare presume to interrupt him; all
Must stand aloof, and not appear, nor shall
Incroaching bold-fac'd grief, nor pale-faced spite
Dare interpose t'eclipse one blaze of light.
Oh there methink I hear him sweetly sing,
Grave, where is thy power? Oh Death where is thy sting?
Methinks I hear his warbling tongue declare,
How good his works, how great his wonders are:
Methinks I see a great united Band
Of glittering Angels, how prepared they stand
To welcome him: Methinks I hear them say,
March on blessed Soul, thou need'st not doubt the way.
Oh glorious sight! In what triumphing state
They guard his Soul to Heavens refulgent gate;
Where when he comes disrobed of all his sin,
The gates fly open, and his Soul flies in.
Methinks my ravished ears are filled and blessed
With such harmonious raptures, and possessed
With such varieties, that even I,
Were sin absolved, would resolve to dye.
Methinks I hear within Heavens Ecchoing Grove
The quavering Angels chant, as if they strove
T'excel themselves: Methinks that every breath
Is a sweet Invitation unto death.
But oh what rare, or what profound invention,
Beatifi'd with a strong apprehension,
Can sound the depth of those delights, which he
Shall swim and bathe in to Eternity:
There rest dear Soul, having thus conquered fate,
Thy pleasures never shall expire their date.
There, there the Alpha of thy joys shall never
Know an Omega, but be blessed for ever
With Alpha and Omega, who shall crown
Thy throne-approaching Soul with true renown,
Whilst we confused mortals here below
Gulp up the dregs of sorrow, and bestow
Curses in stead of prayers upon each other,
And daily labor to confuse, and smother
Our serene happiness, and turn those joys
Which Heaven allowed us, to neglected toys:
And thus our deviating Souls befool
Themselves, and practice in the common School
Of Errors: Thus erroneously we bend
Our flexive minds to folly, and commend
Nonsense for wisdom; Reason being dead,
Repose my Muse, discretion calls to bed.
FINIS.

