Questions resolved, and propositions tending to accommodation and agreement
between the King being the Royal head, and both Houses of Parliament being
the representative body of the Kingdom of ENGLAND.
The first Question.
1. Whether a King be ordained of God for the welfare of the people, or the
people appointed subjects to the King for the honor and pleasure of a King?
THis must needs be resolved that the King is instituted of God by his divine
Ordinance, but by subordinate means of the people their first and primary
Election, or by their approbation of his precedent Title or allowed merits,
wherein though it be an hereditary successive right of a Crown; Yet is that
inheritance or succession either originally and immediately given, or
subsequently and mediately approved and allowed to him and his posterity by the
people: And by and with the means of the Laws, Customs, or constitutions of
the Nation whereof he becomes the head and Governor. To the end that he may
and shall Rule, guide and govern and protect the people under his charge and
care in the true worship and service of God, with love and faithfulness, and
with such tenderness as a Lord and Master ought to use toward his family, a
shepherd toward his flock, and a father toward his dear beloved children.
Not that he should in any wife like a domineering master cruelly beat and
evil entreat his servants, or an hired (no true) shepherd, neglect or peele
his flock; or be careless of their protection and safety from ravening
Wolves, and biting Curs. Nor as an unnatural and hard hearted father, grieve
and afflict his Children with overmuch chastisement, or give them stones
instead of bread. And although it cannot be denied that the Kings of Israel
were anointed by the holy Prophets of their time by the immediate appointment
of God their proper King and heavenly father, who miraculously ruled, guided
and protected them from the beginning before they had any earthly King like
other Nations: Yet when they desired a King (like as other Nations had) the
Lord then told them what such Kings did and would take upon them and use to do.
Not that God did appoint, or assign or allow them so to do; for God did not
tell any King by the mouth of his Prophets, that he would give him a people to
use at his pleasure, but he granted the people a King to guide and command
them, as he Muse long before. And when Saul that first King was chosen (being
the tallest man among the people) and anointed by the Prophet to be King over
Israel, (which height of stature did only note that the people should remarke
the height of his dignity when he was set over them) The Declaration of Gods
divine grace and holy Spirit infused by the word of the Prophet made him fit
and worthy to Rule (yea even to prophecy among the Prophets) and so was he
accepted by the Acclamation of the people. For no sooner that Divine Spirit of
grace had left him, but he became an Apostate from God, and his religious duty
of well governing as a King; and was thenceforth relict of God, and neither the
haughtiness of his stature, nor the dignity of his Thron availed him any
longer; but the youngest and least of Ishai his sons was chosen from the
sheepfolds to be King and to Rule and govern Gods people, which after his
anointment by the Prophet and the time of his exaltation to the Crown, he
governed with a faithful and true heart, and ruled them prudently with all his
power. And in after ages the Chronicles of the Kings do show how often the
good Kings that maintained the true Worship of God, did long continue in their
States and Throns and flourisht but such as were evil, and set up Idols and
hill Altars, and caused or suffered the people to sin against their God, God
did rend and divide and utterly take away their kingdoms from them. Only it is
specially remarkable of the good King Hezekiah who had slipped and erred, but
repented and recollected himself, that the merciful God quickly heard his
prayers and saw his tears, and added to his days and happy Reign fifteen
years; which number if it be added to our good King Hezekiah, his Reign will
exceed the time of many of his progenitors. But God may please to add fifty in
steed of fifteen, and then the years both of his life and Reign will exceed
all his noble Progenitors.

The like is to be observed of Christian Kings and Emperors after our Savior
his Incarnation, and that the Christian faith was established; they had their
Annointment from God by the hand of the Bishops, but their acceptance was by
the people. And it is manifest that both the ancient Kings of Israel before the
Incarnation of our Savior, as also all Christian Kings since were bound by
Oath taken, or by Royal obligation to Rule and Reign by and according to the
Laws of the Land. For Bartolus says, a King is Solutus legibus, but obligatus
vinculo pietatis, to rule secundum loges. Of all which it follows, that Kings
Reigns are provided by God for the welfare of the people, and their honor and
dignity prolonged in reward of their righteousness ingovernment according to
the Etymologies of the terms or titles, Quia Reges (...) a regendo in pace
secundum. R^g^l^^ and normam Justuiae. Imperaiores autem ab imperando in belle.
Ty auni (...), Quod est saevire in pop^lum.

The second Question.
2. Whether a King makes or imposes the Laws upon the people, or the Laws
and ancient, native national Customs of the Land do erect and establish the
Throne and Crown of the King.
It is usual indeed amonst the flattering Courtiers, and Royalists in this
Kingdom to term the Laws the Kings Laws, Quasi dicerent, the King does
imponere leges'populo. But that is their ignorance. For the Laws of England
are most ancient right and rites and Customs of the Land, Non Jura data, ne^
leges imp^si^e, sed usu and ^ongae vitate temporum inductae and tanquam innatae
For if it ^e as truly as vulgarly said, Consuetudo est altera Natura, Then are
our Customary Laws the most natural Laws of this Land; whereby also appears
the Levity of their conceits or judgments, who having stepped a little over
the Seas in a Fly boat, and parled 2 little French in Paris or Orleance, do
peremptorily assume upon them to define and pronounce that ou^ Laws are
illiterall and imperfect, and that the Civil and Impertiall Law in other parts
of Christendom are the most excellent, absolute and best Laws for all, and for
this Commonwealth, Forgetting (in mean while) that even in those Foreign
Lands where the Civil Law, Roman or Imperial, has place and Rule, the
Natural and National or provincial usages and Customs there do abridge and
restrain the General Rules, Theses, or Hypotheses of that general Law.

And for our Statutory Laws called Ius stratutorium, they are not Indicta or
promulgata, but enacted; Statuta facta, or Constituta by the King and both
Houses of Parliament. In which the chiefest consideration and ponderation of
the reasons of making of them are most in the debate and Voting of both Houses,
and the Royal assent is only left to the King with a le Rey la veult, or his
disassent stays them; yet not peremptorily, but with a modest answer, Il Rey
se advisera. Neither is the abrogation or remission of any penal Law received
left to the King, though it be only malum prohibitum, not malum in se But His
Majesty may dispense with* or remit the pen^^ty of a Statute and that not
merely and perpetually, but only Ad tempus, and that not de jure, but by his
prerogative Royal, upon collateral or accidental event happening ex post
facto, after the making of the Statute, yet not without cause or consideration,
and for experience of some further or more weighty cause or consideration of
benefit or convenience to the Commonwealth which being discovered to be
prejudicial to the Commonwealth, then the Letters Patents of the dispensation
becomes void in Law, and frustrate, and vanishes again, or is made utterly
void and condemned for ever at the next Parliament.

The third question.
3. What power or prerogative the King has Supra legem, prater legem, or
contra legem terrae.
ALthough it was anciently said by a King of this land, H. 4 Nolumus
praerogativam nostram disputari, yet that was answered again by the Peers and
Barons in Parliament with another Nolumus: Nolumus leges Angliae mutari So that
with favor and good manners and duty the Kings Prerogative may be talked of
in respect of the law of the Land, and of the natural right, liberty, and
prosperity of the Subject. And thus it is resolved, That the King has in some
cases a regal power or prerogative supra legem, and in some cases praeter or
ultra legem. But in no case has his Majesty power or prerogative contra legem
Terrae or Statuta Regni.

The cases of example wherein his Majesty may by his great Seal do something
supra legem (...) diverse; but especially those of his mercy and Grace extended
to delinquent Subjects that fall into some offenses and danger of Law by
trespasses or felonies. Although the Law be positive and penal condemning the
offenders, yet his Majesty may pardon them the trespass or felony, and the
punishment, fine or forfeiture thereupon, Quo ad interesse suum: but therein
also the Law does stay or restrain the Kings power, that he cannot by his
pardon remit or give away Interesse partis: But that the party grieved or
wronged, may and ought to have his action; And the son or wife may have and
prosecute the Appeal, de morte patris or vi^i, and the King by no power
Imperial can take it from them.

The cases praeter legem, are some dispensative Proclamations or grants of
experience, whether something be pro bono publico or not, as for importation or
exportation of some or other foreign or native commodity, or the exercise or
practice of some new invented Art, Science, or Mystery among the people, which
having most commonly the specious show of good, yet no sooner that it be
discovered to be hurtful to the Commonwealth, or deragatory to the liberty or
property of the Subject, or that it bring on any burden, tax, or charge, or do
secretly exhaust, or diminish the rightful profits of any Trade, Mystery, or
Science, before lawfully used, or belonging to any of the Kings Liege people,
or Subjects, then the same is to be abhorred, condemned, and suppressed, as an
odious project, monopely, or unwarrantable thing. And the Rule and Reason of
common Law, which is that In omnibus salus populi suprema Lex esto, hinders
that no regal, or Prerogative power can uphold or maintain it, though the
case be praeter Legem, and not provided for by any Statute; or if it be
provided for, and the King has dispensed by a Non obstante.

The cases of example Contra Legem, are either when the King does grant,
Authorize, or permit any thing whatsoever against the common Law of the Land,
or the rule or reason thereof, such His Majesty's grant by Letters Patents,
Pr^clamations or other commands, or such license or permission cannot be, nor
is of any orce, or can, or ought to stand or be used, practiced, or suffered in
this Land. And this is first to be understood of the common Law of this Land,
in point of commutative justice, that concerns the right and interest of
every Subject, v^z. Ius personarum, rerum and actionum, of everyman, whereof
the first is expressly preserved by the great charter of England, Nullus liber
homo capietur, imprisonetur, etc. The second is secured to every man, by the
Law of property, wherein it is said, Quod nostrum est, fine furto aut assensu
nostro a nobis tolli non potest, upon which no Regal Power or Prerogative can
trench. And the third, both by the words of the great Charter, Nulli negabimus,
etc. justitiam, and by the Statute Ordaining that every man should enjoy the
benefit of the Law, and Courts of Justice for his Freehold Lands, goods or
Chattels. And that neither the great Seal, nor Privy Seal, should hinder the
due course of Law.

Secondly, in point of distributive justice, either in paena or prae mio, for
good or evil behavior in the public conversation or actions, of one toward
another. And in this part of common Law of the Land, Malum in se is most
concerned, that vice should be punished, and ought not to be spared by any
Regal power, leave, or license in any case whatsoever, for it were improper
that the King (being Gods Vicegerent) might or ever should connive at, or leave
unpunished, any crime or offense, contrary to the Commandments of God, or the
Law of Nature, For His Majesty is said to be like God, Dixi Dii estis, and the
School men say, Deus non potest malum agere quia non vult, and non vult, quod
non potest: according to which the Lawyers say, Id possumus quod de jure
possumus, and that Le Rey ne poit fair tort. And for the malum prohibitum, by
Statutes or Ordinances of Parliament, His Majesty cannot, nor will go against
them, but in Tutiorem partem, to pardon where there is hope of amendment.
Otherwise see the Statute of Northampton, wherein some odious crimes are denied
the King to pardon. Wherefore so it is, that if the King, through that natural
propensity of King (spoken of by God Himself) do more than he should do
toward the people, or that by his omission some enormities are crept in, then
it behooves him to call together his great Council in Parliament, to advise
with them for his own better direction, and for Reformation of abuses, and
corrections of such as have abused and misled His Majesty, whereupon the fourth
question ensues.

The fourth Question.
4. What power or privilege the High Court of Parliament has, when they are
assembled together; and are become the representative Body of the Kingdom?
IT is resolved, that they, with the Kings assent, may, as cause shall require,
make new Laws, or abrogate any former Statutes; but the maine common Law, and
the Ancient Rites, Vsages, and Native Customs of the Land, they themselves
cannot alter. For (as the Lawyers phrase is to say) it is Oppositum in objecto,
that they that sit by the Common Laws, and by the ancient Rites, Vsages and
Customs of the Land, should alter and change that which gave them their
Authority to be a representative body.

Also the two Houses of Peers and Commons Rege absente and non consentiente,
may declare the Common Law in Cases where doubt is, or ambiguity or difficulty,
but they can make no Law without the King, to stand as a Law and Statute. Only
they can make temporary Ordinances of Parliament, like Orders or Sentences
interlocutory, seden e Parliamento, and they may censure and and punish
Delinquents.

But in case the King will not call a Parliament, as in Richard the second his
time, when the urgent occasions of the Commonwealth required it; The Peers
called the Parliament. Then the Peers and Commons can do all things as a
complete Parliament without the King. And at this time the Kings Majesty
having called a Parliament, and so far proceeded as he has done already in
making some good and wholesome Laws for Reformation of the greatest errors and
abuses that ever were in this Commonwealth. And especially having condescended
to a Trienniall Parliament to be for ever hereafter, and neither this present
Parliament, nor any Parliament hereafter assembled, to be dissolved without the
consent of both Houses: Yet now his Majesty being seduced by evil instruments,
does dissever himself from his Parliament, and by his absence, does (as they
say) hinder their proceedings to the making of good and wholesome Laws, for
the kingdom and Commonwealth. What in this case may be done, is not to be
resolved by any wit or judgment, but by the absolute Wisdom and Authority of
that high Court, consisting of both Houses, to whom in all humbleness the
Writer hereof leaves it.

Nevertheless, with the like humility and awful fear of offense against the
Public, and with a faithful zeal to the Commonwealth, he offers these
considerations, scrutative of the matter or cause of the variances between his
Majesty and his great Council of Parliament, viz.

What is the very true cause of his Majesty's absence, and severance from his
Parliament sitting at Westminster whither they were first summoned, and which
is the most convenient place of their assembly and sitting.

The King alleges that it was the tumultuous riot of the disordered
Londoners, rash and young Prentices, and of furious and fanaticke Brownists,
Anabaptists, and Sectaries of the City and Suburbs, pretending to cry out
against Bishops, but intending and offering affront and disloyalty to His
Majesty. His Regal authority, whereby His Royal Person was endangered at
Whitehall, had he not had a Guard about him, and so His Majesty says, they
were like to do again, if he were at LONDON

The Parliament says, it was a malignant party of Cavaliers, and others not
well affected to peace, and enemies to the Common wealth, who by flattery and
false insinuations did dissuade His Majesty from concurring with the grave
advise of his great Council. And the Papists, and papal affected Bishops,
dreading that their plots were discovered, and like to be prevented, and the
delinquents punished by the more severe Laws or Orders of the Parliament, did
incite his Majesty to proceed in that ill advised Course.

And further, that such the Malignant party seducing his Majesty, endeavored to
bring in imperial power and arbitrary rule for his Majesty to over rule the
laws, and ancient usages, and customs of Eng, and the privileges of
Parliament, and abridge the liberty and property of the Subjects. The evidence
whereof has been partly shown forth by some Declarations divulged, and
Printed by Order of both Houses of Parliament, expressing the precedent
attempts of foreign force, and domestic, and coercive power of Arms, which
late before the Parliament, was plotted and put in way of constraint upon the
Commonwealth. And that moved the Parliament to carve and assume to themselves
the Militia at home, for the securing of the Coasts of the Sea, and of guarding
and fortifying the Ports and other places at land. That though his Majesty
were seduced and misled by the malignant party, and their accomplices; yet his
royal Person; Crown and dignity, should be preserved in peace and safety, and
the Commonwealth and people should be defended and kept in peace and
prosperity, maugre the divellish plots abroad, and within the bowels of the
Land, by papists, priests, papal Bishops, bloody and rapinous military men,
Captains, and Cavaliers, whose disposition was, and is properly bent to war
and bloodshed, and to rapine and spoil, and to make their pray on the wealth of
the rich Citizens and other the quiet people of the Land.

The King contrariwise taking high displeasure at that part or point of the
Parliaments Demand for, and touching the Militia, Alleged that the right of
militia, or Command of Arms within the Land, belongs properly to his
Regalitie, and as a flower of his Crown, not to be assayed, or attempted by
any Subject, no not the high Court of Parliament, though they be the
Representative body of the people* no more then it could be lawful for the
people themselves to rise and take Arms against their Sovereign King.

Wherein, as by some Written and Printed discourse or Declaration, It has
been already avowed, and maintained, that the Militia was not improperly
desired of and from his Majesty; nor unlawfully assumed by them for a certain
convenient time. They perceiving more than the King or people do know of the
eminent danger both of his Royal person Crown and dignity, and to the
privileges of Parliament, and to the Laws of the Land, and liberties of the
people like to been subverted, and most especially the whole honor and true
worship of God, and true protestant Religion to be overthrown, may and will,
by and through Gods grace and and assistance, prevent and pervert or quell and
subdue the evil and wicked attempts of all the malignant opposites. It is
therefore by all true and sound reason of all laws, Divine Laws of Nature and
nations, Civil policy, and the provincial rites, Vsages, and Custom, which
are the Laws of his land, reso^ved that the Militia is to be distinguished of,
and the point defined and determined thus, viz. The King of this Land no less,
but as much and as amply as any other foreign Christian King has in
himself, and pertaining to his Regaltie, Crown, and Dignity, the Ius
militiae, at all times to use, and to lead and to command by his Lieutenant,
the General and Captains, for the safety and peace of his land and people,
against any foreign foes, or domesticke traitorous enemies: But this is to be
understood, when his Majesty, with his own prospective eye, and
watchfulness, or by the advice of his privy Council, before parliament or
great council in parliament, has or does discover the plots or purposes of
foreign enemies intending mischief, assault or ruin, by invasion foreign,
or of domestic traitors, by Insurrection and rebellion at home.

For in truth it is a flower of the Kings crown, and an incident of his
Regalitie (as he is a King) to have Liberam and absolutam potestatem, or, Ius
Bellum indicendi and gerendi, to or against any foreign Prince or potentate;
and again, Ius and potestatem pacis contrahendae and paciscendae, with any of
them: and thus all the learned Authors, writing of Law and policy, by the
titles of their Books de lege Regia, have averred and maintained, and it is
not to be denied, because the King is the head of the body politic; which
compared to the natural body wherein the five senses are operative, and do
their Offices by their Organa rite disposita, yet the naturallists do affirm,
that the communis sensus is in the brain, or in Occipite, and that per
discursum practicum, it judges and resolves of the other senses, their
pleasing or being useful and profitable to the whole body, or offending and
annoying it: And so the King has the Ius militiae, or power and command of
Arms at home, throughout his Kingdom, for he has potestatem vitae and necis,
ast^e Civilians term it. And in our Law, the death of any is to be accounted
for to the King, and the taking away of any Liege subjects life, is in the
indictment said to be contra Coronam and Dignitatem Regis. But all this
notwithstanding the general position of the jus principis, or Lex Regia,
placing the power of Arms and Militia, in the Crown, yet his Majesty cannot
otherwise levy the militia, but by lawful means, and not by Commission of
Array, as lately has been* for that is an undue charge, not warranted by law.
And in case of particular accidents that the King the head, be misinformed of
his and the Commonwealths enemies, conceiving them to be friends which are
secret and desperate adversaries, complotting clandestine ruin and destruction
to the body, and refuse to afford aid for the prevention of imminent danger;
will any judicious man doubt but the eyes of the body, being the great Council
of Commonwealth, discerning the mischief and danger, do well and
providently, if they call he arms and hands to strike and fights, the loins
to join in strength; and legs and feet to go and run to help to defend the
total, that so the head being disquieted with ache and pains, may be
preserved in rest, and quiet repose,

Wherefore in such case as now it is here in England, the representative body
has, and in all reason, Pro salute Regis and Populi, ought to have and to use,
and command the Militia, throughout the land, until such time as the King be
better informed, and the Commonwealth and body be settled again in peace and
safety, and that then some provident Law concerning the Militia, be made for
time to come, to prevent such like accidents as this has been.

And hereupon it may be considered, whether the two houses of Peers and
Commons, had not cause to demand the approbation of some Officers of State. The
Milttia not consisting merely in the having of arms, but also in the power of
force to defend against invasion, or the fierceness of an enemy, wherein if
such Officers as should be entrusted with the dower and force of the arms, and
with the custody of the forts, and other places of strength within the
kingdom, should not bewell and truly affected to the government of this land,
how easily may it be perceived those strong holds which already are, or at
least are intended by the wisdom of the parliament, shortly to be fortified
for the greatest defense, will or may become the* reatest offense; and those
bands of military forces, which are to be supposed for the safety of the
Kingdom, turn to the ruin and destruction of the Common wealth

These then being the true and genuine causes or motives of the woeful
severance between the king and the Parliament, whereat all true hearts have
grieved: What presumption shall it be deemed in a true English heart, bleeding
with compassionate sorrow, for the head and body politic so miserably
endangered of utter perditron by unnatural and civil broils, which Lucan
writing of, lamenteth and describ^th in these words and lines, Bella per Ema
heos plusquam Civilia Campos,
Iusque datum sceleri canimus, populemque potentem,
In sua vict^i^i conversum vis^^ra dextra,
Cognitasque acies, etc


If I say, such a true hearted Englishman, do propose these Sovereign Salves
for so deadly a sore, and these present remedies for so desperate a sickness,
to prevent the instant death and desolation of this famous and renowned
Kingdom and Nation, whose people were of old time surnamed Angli quasi Angeli,
or ab Angulo dicti, as being in an angle or corner of the world, and severed
from the rest, according to that of the Poet, Et penitus toto diversos orb
Britannos; And which some Divines term one of the beloved Isles of the
Gentles, wherein the Gospel of Christ was soonely Preached after his Ascension
1. First then may it please his most excellent Majesty piously and religiously
to turn his Royal heart and gracious affection toward hi^ great Council of
Parliament, who do represent all his dear people, and be advised by them, no
more to respect or give ear to those Syrene hallucinations of flattering
seducers, the papists and Jesuit priests, the papally inclined Bishops, who
stand so much for thsir Hierarchy, as that they with Demas have forsaken the
purity of the Gospel, and neglect the preaching of the holy Word of God, and
h^ve embraced this present world, making themselves Lords over Gods heritage,
not true Shepherds to seed his flock, as they ought to do, in Season, and out
of Season; and to wait upon the alseeing eye of Gods providence for his beloved
spouse the Church, to be purged and cleansed of her late inbred and inbrought
corruptions. 2 Secondly, that his Majesty will abandon and quite put away the
thought or imagination of any Tyrannical or Imperial Government over this
land, which the papal Bishops and Hierarchicall prelates and priests, and
other Lay Flatterers, did presume to use daily, and insinuate and inculcate to
his Sacred ears under the pretense of telling his Majesty, that he is an
absolute imperial Monarch, free and above, and without all Laws, to rule his
people ad arbitrium Principis, and that he being Gods Anointed is responsall
only to God, if he do tyrannize or grieve his subjects; whereas they are or
make themselves utterly ignorant of the true stare and quality of the Kingdom
of England, after the old triple distinction of Empire, written by Bartolus and
Baldus the best Civilian Doctors, viz. That there is imperium merum and
imperium mixtum cum Jurisdiction, and that in some places tacre is only
Iurisdictio sine imperio, as is the state of the Low Countries, and other
Aristocraticall and Democraticall Governments: whereof the first, i. e, Merum
Imperium, was the Roma^e Empire merely gotten by the sword, and for the most
part kept by the sword, according to the saying of Iustine the Historian, in
the beginning of his book, Imperiam lisdem modis tenetur quibus paratur. And
by that Empire, Principis placitum legis habet vigorem. As Justinian in the
first of his institutes mentions. The second, i. e. Mixtum imperium cum
Jurisdiction, is the Crown or Kingly power of England, Monarchical indeed;
for Rex in solio is sine pari, But in Parliamento or Concilio Regendi, he has
pares Regni, i. e. peers, so dignified by him, and honored from the fountain
of his Majesty's honor. And he has also the communitatem populi, which the
blessed, and ever prosperous Queen Elizabeth accounted sib^ preciosessimam.
And all these three estates of King, peers and commons, were happily coniunct
and preserved together, by the ligaments of the ancient laws of the land, and
privileges of parliament, which laws and privileges were never subiugated by
any conquest, but ever over-lived the change of Kings, and appeased force, and
induced Kings into their settled reigns here. According as that learned chief
Justice, sir Edward Coke, was bold in presence to tell his majesty, the late
King James of famous memory, that the Law set the Crown upon his head,
Whereat his majesty seemed angry; but was so prudent and wise as not to be
so. And the old learned Bracton, that wrote like as he was; a studied Civilian,
as well as a Judge of the Common law* in King Henry the second his time,
advises every King of this land in these words, Id t^ibuat Rex legi, quod lex
attribuit ei.


Which two maine points or principles in this present state of England, that is
to say, the Church government established with the true protestant faith and
religion, and the free regal power, qualified with the natural and national
laws of this land, the untouched privileges of parliament, and the rites and
liberties of the people, being not only cordially professed, and protested by
his majesty, but seucred by the high wisewome, and care of the peers and
commons, and his majesty ioyously returning to his beloved Parliament.

May it please the Almighty God of his infinite goodness, so to inspire both
King, and peers, and commons, with his Divine grace, that Anarchie and
dissolution of Church government be avoided and prevented by due restraint,
and correction of all Sectaries and Schismatickes, Brownists, Anabaptists, etc.
Who in truth, if they might obtain their fanatike intents, would have no King a
all over them on earth, nor Church, or material Churches; but in rapture of the
Spirit would fly up to heaven for the Iudaicke King, and in the mean time
would hold their Church and Conventicles in the air, or woods, or barnes. or
Stables, or intheir own holy breasts, whereas though Christ himself said his
Kingdom was not of this World, yet he taught his Disciples, that in this world
they should obey Kings, as of Gods ordinance, and be tributary to them. Date
Saesari quae su^t Sae^aris:

And that no conceit of any popular or plebeiansway in this land, be in any
true English heart: But that the members of both Houses may so prepaire good
and wholesome laws for the Church, as may quite extirpate popcry, and prevent
Schisms, and all rendings or divisions of Christ, his seamelesse garment of
unity of the spirit, to be fast girt with the bond of peace. And for the
common wealth that never hereafter there be any more inrodes upon the laws,
privileges, or liberties of free English men.

That finally God may be truly honored, and purely served and worshipped, his
holy word rightly dispensed, and his Sacraments duly and decently administered;
And then his heavenly blessings will undoubtedly shower down upon this little
Isle of Great Britain, and the words and wishes of an ingenious Votary may be
fulfilled.

Long live king Charles, and leave brave Britain to his Son,
And he to his, and they to theirs, Until the world be done.
In this treatise may be discovered and noted six sorts of malignant parties,
against this unity of King and Parliament, and the happy effects and fruit
thereof. Whose corrections or Reformation, if it so please God, the King and
parliament, may be as follows.

1. All Papists, Priests and Lay, who certainly in their secret dispositions
(whatsoever they make show of) are against King and Church of England, and do
plot and practice the advancement of popish religion and Church, and to bring
in again that foreign usurped power of the Pope, Supra Reges, which is
banished and abolished by the Statute 1 Eliz. These may and ought to have the
Law and Statutes of the Realm put in execution against them, and more severe
if need be to compel them to come to Church and receive the Communion, which
if they will do, then let them not be branded with a name of Church papist, so
to deter them and drive them out again.

2. All papal affected Bishops and Clergy, who though they contrariwise to
the papist priests profer to obey Kings, yet in their hearts could wish the
Clergy to be separate from the Kingly Authority and temporal Law, but to
beat down Law and privilege of parliament, do Hyperbolically exalt the
monarchical arbitrary power of the King as above and solute of all Law, and
responsall only to God. These must know their error and ignorance in their
Tenets of Kingly power and government within this Realm, and be told by sir
Edward Cook, if he were living, that never any man in England kicked his heel
against the laws of the Land, but in fine the Law brake his neck; and let
these Hierarchicall Bishops be corrected of their superbity, and reformed in
their superiority and domination in the Church and their worldly mindedness
in country and Common wealth as please, the King and parliament.

3 All court flatterers and Royalists, who daily in their affections and
discourses maintain absolute and prerogative power in the King, to grant by
his letters Patents, what and how he will, above the Laws and statutes, and
would have Proclamations to be laws, that so they might have Monopolies and
projects to serve their turn. These weak men of learning for the most part,
in the deep points of Law and policy, must be taught to wait on the King
their Master, with all diligent service and attendance, and leave of their
discourses of Kingly authority and of Parliamentiall privoledges and force of
Laws, and content themselves henceforth with the King their Masters reward of
their service, without peeling or preying on the people with their Monopolies
and projects.

4 All cavaliers, captains and Martl^^^ men, who desire war and tumult and
disturbance in the Land and commonwealth, that so they may have rapine and
spoil. These must be sent into foreign parts where they may freely have and
take their rapine and spoil upon foreign Enemies, and not to take the bowels
and baggs of their own country men. And there also they may gain honor by
valor, which here is not to be used.

5 All Sectaries and Schismatickes of the Church, who disaffect government,
either Royal or Ecclesiastique. These must learn to conform themselves to
the uniformitie of the Church, and to obey and submit themselves to their
lawful King, who is the Lords Anointed, and set over them by his divine
Ordinance.

6 All popular and plebeian Humorists, who do affect and desire Democracy,
(which they term or call a free state) and by their leaves be it said, they
would have neither this King nor his posterity, nor any King to sit on the
Throne.
These must be put in mind, or made to know, that Monarchy qualified by law is
the best government. As the old poet Homer, (...) and so all the best learned
Authors writing of States and policy do affirm and conclude, and the ancient
Historians of England do show that here was ever one or more Kings. But this
Land never more flourished, then since it has been now these six or seven
hundred years, under one Christian King, ruling according to the ancient
Laws, Vsages and Customs of the Land.

FINIS.

