THE SHEPHERDS ORACLES: DELIVERED IN CERTAIN Eglogues.

By FRA: QUARLES.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Marriot and Richard Marriot, and are to be
sold at their shop in S. Dunstans Churchyard Fleetstreet, under the Dyall.
1646.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THough the Author had some years before his lamented death, composed,
reviewed, and corrected these Eglogues; yet, he left no Epistle to the Reader,
but only a Title, and a blanke leaf for that purpose.

Whether he meant some Allegorical exposition of the Shepherds names, or
their Eglogues, is doubtful: but it is certain, that as they are, they appear a
perfect pattern of the Author; whose person, and mind, were both lovely, and
his conversation such as distilled pleasure, knowledge, and virtue, into his
friends and acquaintance.

It Is confessed, these Eglogues are not so wholly divine as many of his published
Meditations, which speak his affections to be set upon things that are above,
and yet even such men have their intermitted hours, and (as their company
gives occasion) commixtures of heavenly and earthly thoughts.

You are therefore requested to fancy him cast by fortune into the company of
some yet unknown Shepherds: and you have a liberty to believe 'twas by this
following accident.

He in a Summers morning (about that hour when the great eye of Heaven first
opens it self to give light to us mortals) walking a gentle pace toward a
Brook (whose Springhead was not far distant from his peaceful habitation)
fitted with Angle, Lines, and Flies: Flies proper for that season (being the
fruitful Month of May;) intending all diligence to beguile the timorous Trout,
(with which that watery element abounded) observed a more then common concourse
of Shepherds, all bending their unwearied steps toward a pleasant Meadow
within his present prospect, and had his eyes made more happy to behold the two
fair Shepheardesses Amaryllis and Aminta strewing the foot-paths with Lillies,
and Ladysmocks, so newly gathered by their fair hands, that they yet smelt more
sweet then the morning, and immediately met (attended with Clora Clorinda, and
many other Wood-nymphs) the fair and virtuous Parthenia: who after a courteous
salutation and inquiry of his intended Journey, told him the
neighbour-Shepheards of that part of Arcadia had dedicated that day to be kept
holy to the honor of their great God Pan; and, that they had designed her
Mistress of a Love-feast, which was to be kept that present day, in an Arbor
built that morning, for that purpose; she told him also, that Orpheus would be
there, and bring his Harp, Pan his Pipe, and Titerus his Oaten-reed, to make
music at this feast; she therefore persuaded him, not to lose, but change
that days pleasure; before he could return an answer they were unawares entered
into a living moving Lane, made of Shepherds and Pilgrims; who had that
morning measured many miles to be eyewitnesses of that days pleasure; this
Lane led them into a large Arbor, whose walls were made of the yielding Willow,
and smooth Beech boughs: and covered over with Sycamore leaves, and
Honysuccles. I might now tell in what manner (after her first entrance into
this Arbor) Philoclea ( Philoclea the fair Arcadian Shepherdess) crowned her
Temples with a Garland, with what flowers, and by whom 'twas made; I might tell
what guests (besides Astrea and Adonis) were at this feast; and who (beside
Mercury) waited at the Table, this I might tell: but may not, cannot express
what music the Gods and Wood-nymphs made within; and the Linits, Larks, and
Nightingales about this Arbor, during this holy day: which began in harmless
mirth, and (for Bacchus and his gang were absent) ended in love and peace,
which Pan (for he only can do it) continue in Arcadia, and restore to the
disturbed Island of Britannia, and grant that each honest Shepherd may again
sit under his own Vine and Fig Tree, and feed his own flock, and with love
enjoy the fruits of peace, and be more thankful.

Reader, at this time and place, the Author contracted a friendship with
certain single-hearted Shepherds: with whom (as he returned from his
River-recreations) he often rested himself, and whilst in the calm evening
their flocks fed about them, heard that discourse, which (with the Shepherds
names) is presented in these Eglogues.

A friend of the Authors wished me to tell thee so, this 23. of Novem. 1645.
JO: MARRIOT.

THE SHEPHERDS ORACLES.
EGLOGVE I.
Gallio. Britannus.
GALL. HEaven-blest Britannus; thou, whose Oaten Reed
Sings thy True-Love, whilst thy proud flocks do feed
Secure about thee, on this fruitful Brow:
Above all Shepherds, o how blessed art Thou!
Your fruitful Pastures flourish, and appear
Fresh, and in perfect verdure all the year:
No Summers fire, nor Winters frost impair
Your thriving Plains, continuing fresh and fair,
And full of vigor, like the Elysian Lay,
Where every season's like the month of May:
Your milkwhite Ewes enrich your peaceful grounds,
No snarles of Foxes, nor the yelps of Hounds
Disturb their quiet; whilst your sporting Lambs,
With bended knees, draw blessings from their dams.
How happy! O how more then all the rest,
In the wide world, are Britain Shepherds blessed.

BRIT. True, Gallio, we poor Shepherds do inherit
A happiness transcending far our merit;
We have no grief, no misery but this;
Senseless we are, and blind to our own Bliss:
Goods without evils are oftentimes despised,
And common happiness is lowly prized:
But tell me Gallio, make relation how
Your pastures flourish, and what flocks have you:
What kind of government do you live under,
That make our State the object of your wonder.

GALL. Ah, gentle Shepherd, there, there lies the Corn
That wrings poor Gallios toe: O! there is the thorn
That stings my bleeding heart. The sad relation
Of our dysasters, will revive such passion
In my spent bosom, that each wounding word
Will prove a dagger, and each line a sword:
Come, sit thee down beneath this shady Beech,
And lend thine ear: Full hearts are eased by speech,
I Will tell thee, whilst thy busy flocks do feed.

BRIT. Wounds fester, Swain, the less, the more they bleed:
Speak freely then, and this sad heart of mine
Shall comfort thee, or else shall bleed with thine.

GALL. Then, Shepherd, know: There was a time
My heart even faints to think that word, There was alas!
Wherein our fruitful Pastures were as fair
As faithful Shepherds, by their fervent prayer,
Could make them, trench'd, and quickset round about,
Could neither Fox get in, nor Flocks get out:
Deep were the Trenches, and divinely filled
With living waters, waters that were stilled
In heavens great Limbeck, whose celestial power
Exceeds a strong belief; but this short hour
We have to spend, can only give a touch
In things of large discourse; Only thus much,
The German Spaw (nor yet your Britain Bath)
Has not such virtue, as this water has:
Now my Britannus, needs me not to tell
How rare's the kernel, when so sweet's the shell;
Amongst wise Shepherds is not often found
Costly enclosures, and a barren ground;
No, no, Britannus; the bright eye of day,
That in twelve measured hours, does survay
The moity of this earth, did never behold
More glorious Pastures: Nay, I dare be bold
(With awefull reverence to our great God Pan)
To say, that heaven could not devise on man
A Good we had not, nor augment our store
(If earth makes happy) with one blessing more:
Our flocks were fair, and fruitful, and stood sound;
Our grounds enricht them; they enricht the ground:
The Alpine mountains could not boast nor show
So pure a whiteness, white surpassing snow:
Our ub'rous Ewes were evermore supplied
With twins, attending upon either side,
Whose milk-abounding bags did overflow:
They fed our Lambs, and filled our dayry too:
In those past days our Shepherds knew not what
Red-water meant; that common language, Rott,
Was neither feared, nor known; nor did they fear
That heart-confounding name of Massacre:
There was no putrid Scabbe to exercise
The malice of the maggot-blowing flies,
Whose Prince, Beelzebub, (if report be true)
Breathed forth his loud Retreat, and raging drew
His buzzing Army thence; and, for a time,
Led them to forage in another Clime;
And, to conclude, no Shepherd ere did keep
More thriving grounds; nor grounds, more dainty sheep:
O my Britannus, in those halcyon days,
Our jolly Shepherds thirsted after praise,
Not servil wages; They were, then, ambitious
Of Fame; whose flocks should be the most auspicious;
Who, by most care, should most increase their fold;
They hunted after fair report, not Gold:
They were good Shepherds, and they loved their sheep,
Watched day and night: One eye would never sleep:
Small Cottages would serve their turns; That day
Knew no such things as Robes: A Shepherds gray
Would cloth their backs: for, being homly dressed,
Their sheep, whose fleece they wore, would know them best:
They were good Shepherds; seldom durst they feed
On Cates, or drink the Juice that does proceed
From dangerous vines, for fear the fumes should steep
Their brains too much, and they neglect their sheep:
They were good Shepherds; these would every day
Twice tell their flocks, and, then, at night, convay
A secret blessing, got by fervent prayer,
Into their peaceful bosoms unaware:
They were good Shepherds; They would even lay down
Their dearest lives, nay more, the eternal Crown
Of promised Immortality, to keep
Their lambs from danger, and preserve their sheep:
But now, ah! now, those precious days are done
With us poor Shepherds: ah! those times are gone,
Gone like our joys, and never to return:
Our joys are gone, and we left here, to mourn:
Let this relation of those times of old,
Suffice; the rest were better be untold.

BRIT. My dearest Gallio, had it pleased heaven,
I wish no further matter had been given
To thy discourse: it would have pleased mine ear,
And eased thy tongue to have pitched thy period here;
But since our God, that can do nothing ill,
Has sent a Change, we must submit our will;
What he has made the subject of thy story,
Fear not to tell; his ends are his own glory:
There Is nothing constant here; the States of Kings,
As well as Shepherds, are but tickle things:
Good days, on earth, continue but a while;
We must have vinegar as well as oil:
There must be rubs; can earth admit all level?
The history of a State is good and evil.
Speak then my Gallio, this attentive ear
Can not hear worse then it is prepared to hear.

GALL. Know thou Britannus, what, in days of old,
Our great God Pan, by Oracle foretold
Of that brave City (whose proud buildings stood
As firm as earth, till stained with Shepherds blood)
That there is a time should come, wherein not one
Should live to see a stone upon a stone?
And is not, now, that prophecy made good?
Grows not grass there, where these proud buildings stood?
Nay, my Britannus, what concerns us more,
Did not that Oracle, in times of yore,
Threaten to send his Foxes from their Holds,
Into our Vines? and Wolves into our Folds?
To break our Fences, and to make a way
For the wild Boar to ramble, and to prey
Where ere he pleased? O gentle Shepherd, thus,
Thus that prophetic evill's made good in us:
Our Hedge is broken, and our Pastures yield
But slender profit: All Is turned Common-field:
Our Trenches are filled up: our crystal Springs
Are choked with Earth, and Trash, and baser things:
Our Shepherds are grown Plough-men all, and now
Our generous Crook is turned a crooked Plough:
Shepherds build Halls, and carry Princely ports,
Their woolls are changed to silks; their Cotts to Courts:
They must have hospitable Barnes to keep
Riot on foot: no matter now for Sheep;
Turn them to graze upon the common Fallowes,
Whilst the luxurious Shepherd swills, and wallowes
In his own vomit: Having swallowed down
Goblets of wine, he snorts in beds of Down,
Whilst his poor Lambs, his poor neglected Lambs
Bend fruitless knees before their milkless Dams:
Nay, my Britannus, now these pampered Swains
Are grown so idle, that they think it pains
To sheare their fleeces: No, they must be picked
And rins'd in holy water (they are strict
To touch defiled things) must be presented
Upon the knee, as if they had repented
Their service, and for which they must deserve
But what? A Dispensation now to sterve.

BRIT. But stay, my Gallio, let not my attention
Too far exceed my slower apprehension;
It Is better manners t'interrupt, then hear
Things serious with an ill-instructed ear:
Make me conceive your forain acceptance
Of that ambiguous word of Dispensation.

GALL. It is a term that forain Shepherds use
Too much, (I was about to say, abuse.)
In elder times, when Pastors took delight
To feed their flocks, and not their appetite,
It was a word expressed (now fallen asleep
To that true sense) A feeding of the sheep:
But now it is altered, and it does appear
Diffring as much, as they from what they were:
And if your gentle patience will excuse it;
A word too much shall tell you how they use it:
In times of yore the pious minded Swain
Finding base Sodomy, and Incest reign
In looser breasts, taught their obedient Sheep
T'observe those laws that Goats refused to keep,
Forbidding Twins to couple, and the Rams
To take a ^arnall knowledge of their Dams:
To which intent it was their studious care
To several such flocks as might not pair:
So much those holy Swains abominated
Unnatural Incest (as we find related)
That even among their sheep they thought it good
To punish such enormous crimes with blood,
Not to be used for sacrifice, nor food:
But now Britannus, times are grown more course,
Declined from good to bad; from bad to worse:
Those rules are broke by these licentious times,
Laws are esteemed no laws; and crimes no crimes.
It Is true, our Rascall-sheep, whose fly-blown skin
Has lost her fleece, and brings no profit in,
To such, the law continues firm and strict,
On such the hand of justice does inflict
The height of law; But those, whose fleecy loins
Bear thriving burdens, there the Edict injoines
An easy penance: sisters with their brothers,
And budding Rams may tup with their own mothers:
(O! where the sacred bell of profit rings,
Murders are merits, Rapes are venial things)
Such may transgress their pleasures, such may do
Their lists, be' incestuous with their Shepherd too.
Such may have Pardons for elapsed crimes,
And cheap Indulgences for present times:
Nay, more then that, a Twin-producing suitor
Shall find a Dispensation for the future:
A liberty to sin for years, or life, our Nation
(In a more shadowed term) terms Dispensation.

BRIT. Monsters of monsters! o prodigious shame
To all mankind, and stain to Shepherds name!
I thought, our Shepherds had deserved the style
Of bad, till now; and (to speak truth) a while,
Upon the entrance of thy sad complaint,
I feared thy gamesome wit began to paint,
In shadowed Scopticks, some that bear the Crook
In our blessed Island; to which end, I took
Vngranted leave to hinder your relation,
With a forced ignorance of Dispensation,
To feel thy bent; But now my jealous ears
Are made unhappy losers by their fears:
But tell me Gallio, (for the eye of heaven
Is yet unclos'd, and has not quite made even
With earth) where graze thy flocks, and to whose keep
Have thou committed thy absented sheep.

GALL. Nor dare, nor can I tell, unless thine ears
Will give me leave to mingle words with tears,
And tears with blood, and blood with saddest moanes,
And moanes with sobs, and sobs with deepest groans:
O my Britannus, it is not yet two years
Twice fully told, since my abundant tears
Began to flow: I had, I had, till than,
The fairest flock that ever eye of man
Beheld, with envy; (ah! I had but few,
My dear Britannus, if compared with you:)
But 'twas a thriving flock: for bone and fleece,
Arcadia, no nor all the plains in Greece
Could show the like: it was my only grief,
That my report (exceeding all belief)
Was counted fictious: when I made my boast,
'Twas thought but my affections voice, at most:
Ah gentle Swain, the poorest Lamb I had
Did bear a fleece, nay such a fleece, as clad
A naked brother, and the meanest Ewe
In all my flock did suckle never so few
As Twins, besides the surplusage, that fed
A leash of Orphans, in their mothers stead:
Nay, (as these eyes can witness) on a day,
One of my weaker yeanlings hapt to stray,
Where, being fast upon a crooked Bryer,
The rest came in, and gently did supply her
With all the strength they could; I could not choose
But smile, to see while some assaid to loose
The prisoners bands, they hung as fast as she,
But in the end they set my yeanling free:
O my Britannus, when they heard my voice,
How my poor Lambs would frisk, and even rejoice
To see their Shepherd! They would come and stand
About me, and take Ivy from my hand;
But o my God, what patience shall I crave,
To tell the rest! what patience shall I have!
Upon a night (It was a night as dark
As was the deed; there was no glimmering spark
That would vouchsafe to shoot his feeble rays
From heaven, (alas! why did no Comet blaze
Against such hideous things?) upon that night
Rusht in a rout of Wolves (no Jesuit
Was sharper bent to kill:) Into my Fold
They rusht, they slew, they spared nor young nor old.
O! the next morning all my flock lay dead,
All but some few, that being wounded fled:
My self, that held ten thousand life's not dear
To save my dearer flock, they wounded there,
Upon the rescue: Ah! they gripped me sore,
Yet let me live, to wound my soul the more.
But gentle Shepherd, I am lately told,
Some of my scattered sheep have been so bold
To seek for refuge in the British Fold:
Long have I sought, like one that knows not whither
To guide his wandering steps, I happened hither:
O, can thou tell me tidings? Can thou give me
At least some hopes of comfort to relieve me?

BRIT. Toward bright Titans evening Court there lies
From hence ten miles not fully measured thrice,
A glorious City, called by the name
Of Troynovant, a place of noted fame
Throughout the Christian world, of great renown
For charitable deeds, a place well known
For good and gracious Government; in brief,
A place for common Refuge, and relief
To banished Shepherds, and their scattered Sheep;
There our great Pans Vicegerent now does keep
His royal Court, whose gracious hand has store
Of soverain Balsames apt for every sore:
In that brave City, there be folds provided
For Sheep of diverse Quarters, all divided
One from the other, ready to receive
Affrighed flocks, and bounteous to relieve
Their several wants: Have Gallio, have thee thither,
And if thou miss thy ends, return thee hither,
And make Britannus happy to enjoy thee,
Until thy pleased God shall re-imploy thee.

GALL. Thanks gentle Shepherd; let that God increase
Thy flocks: and give thy soul eternal peace.

EGLOGVE II.
Brito. Luscus.
BRI. GRaze on my Lambs, here is nothing to disquiet
Your gentle peace, or interupt your diet:
Why crowd ye thus so near your frighted dams?
Here Is neither Wolf, nor Fox; Graze on, my Lambs:
Graze on, my Sheep; why gaze ye to and fro,
As if ye feared some evil? Why gaze ye so?
What serves your Shepherd for, if not to keep
Your hearts secure from fears? Graze on, my sheep:
Forbear my Lambs, to fear ye know not what,
And feed; your feeding makes your shepherd fat:
But who comes yonder? 'Seemes far off to be
Our creeping Shepherd Luscus: and it is he:
I thought my Lambs had something in the wind,
They left to graze and looked so often behind:
They love that Luscus, on the self same manner,
As dogs, by instinct of nature, love the Tanner:
See here he comes: Lord, how my lambs divide
Their eching paces to the farther side!

LUSC. The blessed Virgin, and S. Francis keep
The joviall Shepherd, and his jolly sheep.

BRI. Would not the blessed Virgins blessing do,
Without the blessing of S. Francis too?

LUSC. Why, captious Brito, Store is held no Sore;
And two Saints blessings make us blessed the more.

BRI. Is Luscus, then, my soul two blessings deep,
Or am I joined in Patent with my sheep?
But tell me now, my Saint-imploring brother,
One Cipher being added to another,
What makes the total sum?

LUSC. No sum at all.


BRI. Such were the blessings, thy late tongue let fall:
But 'twas thy blinded love, and, to repend thee;
That blessed Virgins blessed Son amend thee:
But say, what ayl'st thou, Luscus, that thy skin
Appears so course, and thy pale cheeks so thin?
Me thinks thine eyes are dim, those eyes of thine,
That lately were so radiant, and did shine
Like blazing stars, (which oftentimes foreshow
The fall of some great Prince, or overthrow
Of prosperous States) how dull, how dead they look!
As if the style of some new-answer'd Book
Had overwatch'd them, or thy hollow cheek
Had been at buffets with an Ember week.

LUSC. Plump faces, Brito, are esteemed the least
Of Shepherds care; Good Shepherds may not feast,
They must bin sober, keep their bodies chaste;
A Shepherds calling is to watch and fast:
Their lips must taste no Cates; their eyes, no sleep;
Such diet, Brito, Roman Shepherds keep,

BRI. Or should, good Luscus: Shepherds love their ease
Too well, to make a dye of that disease:
Their faces are not always faithful signs
Of hide-bound Ribs, and narrow wasted loins:
Shepherds can make Good Friday on their Cheek,
When their full hearts, at home, keep Easter week.

LUSC. Curse on those Shepherds, that bin so untrue.


BRI. That Curse, I fear, belongs to some of you:
Your Roman faces can look thin, by art,
Their eye can weep tears, strangers to their heart.

LUS. Rash are those censures, and those words misguided,
Where Hearts and Charity, are so far divided:
But tell me, Brito; what have we misdone
To earne so sharp a censure? Whereupon
Ground'st thou thy harsh conceit? what has our nation
Committed, worthy of so foul taxation?

BRI. I Will tell thee if thy patience will but lend
A quiet ear; Plain dealing speaks a friend.

LUS. Speak freely then, Luscus shall find an ear;
Thou shall not speak, what Luscus will not hear.

BRI. When our great Master-shepheard, (under whom
We serve, being substituted in his room)
Forsook this vale, and took his journey on,
To take possession of his fathers Throne,
He called his under Shepherds, to whose care
He lent his flocks, (those flocks he prized more dear
Then his own life) to them he recommended
The highest trust that ever yet depended
On care of man: To them he did enlarge
His strict Commands, to execute that charge,
With greatest faith and loyalty, to keep
His Lambs from danger, and to feed his Sheep;
Nay, Luscus, the more fully to declare
His gracious pleasure, and his tender care
In that behalf, what his desire did move
His zeal did quicken on the Bands of love;
Nay more, that word, whose accent had the power
To ruin Heaven and Earth, and, in one hour,
To build a thousand more, (whose very breath
At the first motion could blow life or death)
He thrice repeated, O my Shepherds keep
My Flocks; O feed my Lambs; O fold my Sheep:
Yet did our bounteous Master not regard
His good alone; our Pan was not so hard,
(Although our life's, and all that we enjoy
Lie prostrate at his pleasure) to employ
The busy hands of us poor Shepherd swains,
Or to require our unrewarded pains:
He gives us peace, and freedom; He sustaines us
With full and wholesome diet; He maintains us
In needful raiment; keeps us sound in health;
Gives us content; the very height of wealth:
Besides, at every Shearing he allows
A golden Girland, to adorn our brows;
And when our faithful hands shall give account
Of our improved endeavors, we shall mount
Into our Masters joy, where, being dressed
In Robes, and Crowns, we shall enjoy that rest,
Prepared for faithful Shepherds, and there sing
Perpetual Past'rals to our Shepheard-King:
But they whose slumbring eyes have misattended
Their wandering flocks, whose hands have not defended
Their worried lambs, those Shepherds shall make good
Their own defaults, with their own dearest blood.

LUSC. Brito, this night, the Moon begins to gain
Her wanedlight; I fear, she threatens rain;
These busy Gnats, I doubt, conspire together,
To bring us tidings of some change of weather.

BRI. Luscus, 'twere much for faithless Shepherds ease,
If no worse Gnats might suck their blood then these.

LUSC. The Sun shines hot; the Southern wind blows warm:
But kindly showers would do these grounds no harm.

BRI. Less harm, good Luscus, (if my thoughts bin true)
Then this discourse (which you so baulk) does you:
We talk of Shepherds; our discourse relates
Of thriving flocks; and you of Showers and Gnats:
A pleasing subject may command your ear,
But what you like not you are slow to hear:
A Roman Swain can hear, and yet can choose;
His ears, like Jugglers, can play fast and loose,
For his advantage, nay, (and what appears
More strange) he can be deaf to what he hears.

LUSC. What ails this peevish Shepherd? I attended
Till I was tired, and his Tale was ended;
What would thou more with my obtunded ear?

BRI. That, Shepherd, which thou seem so loath to hear;
That, which observed with attentive heed,
Will make thy heart strings crack, and thy heart bleed.

LUSC. Speak, Shepherd, then, whilst I renew my ear:
A Roman spirit scorns a childish Fear.

BRI. I, Luscus, it is the want of Childish fear
That makes thee lend a fear-disdaining ear:
Thou art a Shepherd; (else, the fouler shame
T'usurp the honor of so high a name)
A Roman Shepherd too, that does profess
To feed the flock; and yet does nothing less;
You take the croppe; your flocks, alas, but gleane,
And what makes you so fat, makes them so lean;
God knows you feed your selves: by what Commission
Plough you those Pastures, for your own provision,
Which our good Shepherd severed out, to keep
And to maintain his poor deceived sheep?
Who gave you license thus, bold Swains, to pinch
Your Masters gracious bounty, and to inch
His bounteous favors, that can but allow
The Headlands, but the margents of your Plough,
To feed so fair a flock? Nay, more then so,
They are forbid those slender Headlands too,
Until the slow-paced sithe, has shorn them down
So late, that winter floods have overflowne
Their saplesse swaths, and filled them so with sand
And earthy trash, brought down from the upper land
By the unresisted current of the flood,
That it is but flattered with the name of food:
Nay, more then that, poor flocks, they are forbid
To feed at large, as heretofore they did,
They must betether'd now, must be bereaven
Of the sweet moisture, of the dew of heaven:
Nor must their slender food be simply such
As heaven had made it; no, 'tmust have a touch
Of new Invention, which our wise God Pan
Never thought on; since, devised by wiser man:
It must be mingled with fast growing Flagges,
Mire-rooted rushes, sweet'ned with the Bragges
Of pious Thrift; nor must the hungry flocks
Take what they please; it must be served in Locks,
And Ostry Bottles; neither when they would
They must be fed, nor yet with what they should:
To day, they must be dieted, and fast
From common food; no less then death, to taste:
To morrow, pampered with excess, (and nursed
With a full hand) may ravin till they burst:
Brave Shepherds, Luscus; fit to serve such flocks!
Where you command, Lambs need not fear the Fox.

LUS. No wonder, Brito, that your Censures be
So sharp to us, that so much disagree
Among your selves: you Britain Shepherds are
So strangely factious, that you would even jarre
With your own shadows, had no substance been
Subjected to the venom of your spleen:
Look, first at home, and seek to reconcile
Your selves, that mix like Vinegar with Oil:
Then snarle: Till heaven shall send you such a season,
It is your Faction speaks, and not your Reason.

BRI. We have our factions, Swain, you speak but true;
They must have Itch that touch such Blanes as you:
You broach new fangles; you devise new ways,
And give more license to licencious days:
You limit, you distinguish as you please;
You take no pains but in contriving ease,
And plotting how to pamper Flesh and Blood,
Masking true Evils with apparent Good:
Thus you corrupt our Shepherds, and even those
That of themselves are apt enough (God knows)
To love their eases; Shepherd, when we jarre
Among our selves, we do but only war
Against your Doctrines, which too much increase
Among us: No, such wars conclude a Peace.

LUSC. Our doctrines, Brito? Recollect thy thought,
Whose doctrine was it, that Swain Luther taught?
Who taught your wisdoms to forsake your flocks,
And let them ramble on the barren Rocks,
And wander God knows where? who taught your hearts,
(More hard then Marble) those well practiced arts
Of cruel Piety, to prize Conceit,
And wild Opinion at a higher rate
Then all their lives, and rather bear the loss
Of your whole flocks, then brand them with a Cross,
Our Masters Sheepmarke? These conceits are yours,
Good Britain Swain; These doctrines were not ours.

BRI. Fan not my smoth'ring Fires, lest their flame
Torment your neighboring shins: should I but name
The Tithe of that base dunghill trash, brought in
By your Dominicans, scaveng'd out agin
By worse Franciscans; the perpetual Jarres
Twixt your hot Jesuits and your Seculars;
How Thomas snarles at Scotus; and how he
Snarles back at Thomas; how your new Decree
Confronts the old; and how your last does smother
The first; and how one Council thwarts another;
'Twould stop your mouth, and make you scorn the
Or wisely pray for more increase of fools:
But to conclude, the Shepherds charge is given schools,
To us; and if an Angel come from heaven,
And teach new ways, whose rules should disaccord
From what our Master-shepheard left by word
To our performance, I would teach mine ear
A scornful deafness; or (if forced to hear)
My tongue should find the courage to defye
His words, and boldly give his face the lie:
But see! the treble shades begin to damp
The moystn'd earth; and the declining Lamp
Invites our lips to silence; day grows old:
It Is time to draw our willing flocks to fold:
Hark, hark, my Wether rings his evening bell;
I must away.

LUSC. Shepherd Goodnight.


BRI. Farewell.


EGLOGVE III.
Pan. Gentilla.
GENT. WHat ails my dearest Shepherd? what new change
Has taught his heart-rejoycing eyes such strange
And dire aspects? what humor has possessed
The Sanctuary of his troubled Breast?
What mean these sullen frowns? against whom do thou
Thus sternely bend thy discontented Brow?
At whom does this Artil'ry of thine eye
Level such flames? Here Is none but thee and I,
Why do thou turn aside? Why do thou shun
Gentilla? What has poor Gentilla done?
Have I proved false? Say, did I ever bow
To a new choice, or started from my Vow?
Have not my thoughts observed a holy Fast
From new desires? Have not these eyes bin chaste
As the eyes of Turtles? Did Gentilla's knee
Ere bend to any, but her God, and Thee?
If I be loyal; say, why do thou shun me?
Why do thy causeless brows thus frown upon me?
And if my faith be conscious of a blot,
Why stand'st thou mute so long? why chid'st thou not?
No, no, my dearest Shepherd, if there be
Cause of suspect, that cause is given to me:
How long (too too unkind!) have thou denied
Thy presence? Ah, how often have I cried
In corners? Nay, how often have these eyes
Bin drowned with briny streams, that did arise
From the full fountain of a flowing heart?
How often have I charmed by the black Art
Of all my sorrows? Yet my Shepherds ears
Were deaf; his eyes were blind to all my tears:
And now thy wisht-for presence (the full Crown
Of all my joys) is clouded with a Frown.

PAN. Thou know, Gentilla, when thy breasts were green*
Unripe for Love, there past a Vow between
Thy elder Sister Iudabell, and me,
Whose only portion was Virginity;
She had no beauty to inflame mine eyes,
Nor wealth, nor birth, nor ought to make me prize
Her naked love; her visage was uncomely,
Her fortunes poor; her breeding, blunt and homely;
I loved her for her self, and the direction
To that dear love, was my own dear affection:
In sacred bands of contract, we both tied
Our folded hands, and she became my Bride:
I made her supreme Queen of all my Vows,
And set a Crown of gold upon her Brows;
I made her sole Commandresse of my keys,
To shut and open, where, and when she please:
I made her Mistress of my Flocks, and gave
What I could give, or what her soul could crave;
She had what favors Bounty could confer;
My life was but a Trifle, weighed with her:
But she forsook me; Her false heart did prove
Disloyal; took a surfeit of my love;
She slighted all my favors; falsely broke
Her plighted Faith, and scorned my easy yoke;
My dearest love she answered with disdain,
Cast amorous eyes on every Vnder-swaine;
I loved, she scorned, and what I gave, she slighted;
Was never love so true, so ill requited.

GENT. But stay, dear Shepherd, shall my sisters crimes,
Or shall the unjust Rebellions of her times
Be plagued in me? Or shall thy lips demand
The debts of Iudabell at Gentilla's hand?
Stands it with justice, that those Vows which she
Has falsely broke, should be revenged on me?

PAN. Thou know Gentilla, when thy Sisters breast
Grew too obdurate for my dear request,
When fair entreaties, and more hard Commands
Found disrespect at her respectlesse hands,
I left my vain attempt, called home my heart,
And placed it (as I thought) on more desert;
Those dear affections, and the love that she
Unworthily despised, I fixed on thee:
The self same privilege, the self same power,
Those very favors, and the self same dower,
That was assured hers, while she was mine,
Were by a second Contract, all made thine:
What she has left, thy Fortunes have engrost;
Gentilla found what Iudabell has lost:
But o Gentilla, thou have faild to prove
A worthy object of so fair a Love;
Thou have thy Sisters frailty; Thou have all
Her Fortunes with her Faults, though not her Fall.

GENT. Tell me, dear Shepherd, that I may amend them,
I will acknowledge them, or not defend them.

PAN. Did not I trust, Gentilla, to thy hand
My Flocks, my substance, under whose command
I left them charged? Say did I not submit
My Shepherds to thy service, and commit
My Sheep to their protection, to be
Foder'd by them, and overseen by thee?
Were not those Pastures fair enough, to keep
My wained Lambs, and to maintain my Sheep?
Were they not sweet enough, and well sufficing
Without that mixture, of your Swains devising?
Unwholesome stuff! whose very taste did rot,
Or breed diseases where it poisoned not;
That insomuch, where ere I turned my head,
I saw some Flocks a dying; and some, dead.

GENT. True, gentle Shepherd, thus in former times
We did; if Ignorance may salve our crimes,
We have enough to plead: I bent my knee
To a false Master then, and not to Thee.

PAN. I thought, that Pan had had supreme Command;
I thought, my Rules might had the grace to stand
In full authority, and power; I thought,
Those Georgicks which I writ, as well as taught
By word of mouth, had been a full direction
Both for my Flocks good diet, and protection:
But you, and your disloyal Swains (it is said)
Have joined in serious Council, and have made
Another Head, whose selfe-conceited ways
I never knew; and Him your wisdoms raise
Into a height above the height of Man,
And placed Him in a Throne, which never Pan,
When he kept earth, and governed here below,
Had ere the Honor to be called into:
Him ye advance with reverence and renown,
His brows adorning with a triple Crown,
When as a wreath of Willow, or of Thorn
(For want of high prized metal) rudely torn
From the next hedge, must serve my turn, and be
A Crown, thought fit, and good enough for me;
Him ye observe, and, like a thing Divine,
Him ye adore: His words must pass, not Mine;
His words are Oracles, and his Commands
Are Laws, or Death; the power of his hands
(Which he pretends to be derived from me)
Can reach from Peasants, to the high degree
Of Princes, whom, by virtue of his Keys,
He can dis-crown, and murder when he please:
My sacred Book, wherein these fingers writ
The Shepherds Laws, his nature-pleasing wit
Has interlin'd with his own bold devises,
And made it now a starting-hole for Vices:
His holy finger can put out, put in;
Change, and on second thoughts, rechange agin:
He can correct, distinguish, reconcile;
And where a Gap stands fair, can make a Style:
His lips can bless, where I have cursed; and curse,
Whom I have blessed, according as the Purse
Feels light or heavy; if the Tides but flow,
What is it, he can? what is it, he cannot do?
This is that Head which your false hearts allow;
This is that golden Calf, to whom ye bow
Your sacrilegious knees; Him, him ye crown
With honor, whilst ye pull my Honor down:
Him ye corrupt; His open fist ye greaze,
And make your Oracle speak what you please:
Thus are my poor abused Flocks beguiled
By your disguised Impostures; thus despoiled
Of their dear life's, whilst you grow plump and full,
Fed with their Flesh, and clothed in their Wool.

GENT. Ah dearest Shepherd, in those bloody days,
I was but young, and childish; and my ways
Were ill devised; alas, my tender years
Were too too credulous; My abused ears
Were open long before my judgment had
Strength to know truth from falsehood, good from bad;
I knew no difference twixt my Friend and Foe,
Thought all was Gold, that made a golden show:
I thought, those Swains, to whose experienced care
Thou left thy Flocks, had knowledge to prepare
Covenient food; and judgment how to keep
With most advantage, thy reposed Sheep.

PAN. I, so they had, Gentilla, they could read
A Book, could teach them how, and when to feed;
The Book was fair, and penned without a blot:
They knew there Masters Will, but did it not.

GENT. I trusted them; but they abused mine ear,
Told me fair tales, which youth was apt to hear:
That little Book thou gav'st me, (when Pan wooed
His poor Gentilla, first) writ with thy blood,
They pilfer'd from me; told me 'twas unfit
To be the object of a woman's wit:
Sometimes, by snatches, they perused the Book;
As once they read, my lingering eye balls took
A view, by stealth; and my deluded ear
Was filled; with what? With nothing written there:
O, thus they wronged my too-beleeving ears;
And taking vantage of my easy years,
They kept me dark, for fear mine eyes behold
Their gilded Trash, that is current now for Gold:
Nay more, they knowing that the weaker sex
By nature's apt to loose their servill necks
From man's imperious yoke, and so to fly
Aloft into the pitch of sovereignty,
They did not blush, to weigh, at least to join
Thy sacred Oracles, with poor words of mine;
Whose later boldness ventured to debase
Thy words authority, and give mine the place:
All this my bolder Swains presumed to do;
All this my prouder weakness yielded to.
True, gentle Shepherd, it is confessed, that we
Made a new Power, but no Head but Thee;
Our first intention was not simply evil,
But accidental; all things were unlevell,
And rude disorder crept into our State:
Swain would contest with Swain, and fierce debate
Increased among us: Every hand would feed
His own devised way, which was the seed,
The pregnant seed of Ruin, and Confusion
To our green Government; till, in conclusion,
We picked the ablest Swains from out the rest,
And made them Chief, by whose discreeter breast,
Next under Thee our Head, we did annorme
Our Government, and made it uniforme:
Thus, for a while, our State was well redrest;
They were good Shepherds, and our State had rest:
They were good Shepherds, and they scorned to keep
Their lives upon the rescue of their sheep:
But days grew worse and worse, and after times
As they increased in age, increased in Crimes:
These Powers grew proud, Heretical, did hold
New-broach'd Opinions; Law was bought and sold,
And Gospel too; new orders were erected:
The Shepherds sought themselves; their Flocks neglected;
Thus each succeeding Power at last, did add,
A worse unto his Predecessors bad:
Thus were my tender years, and trust abused;
To Avoid confusion, thus we grew confused:
O, they that follow a misguided Head,
The farther go, the more they are misled:
But now my sad experience (dearly bought)
Has called me off, and made me see my fault;
My soul abhors the deeds of former times,
They, they are past, but present are my Crimes:
Let not my dearest Shepherd search my ways
With too severe an eye: As the old days
Are swallowed with the new, and past away,
So let my faults be past as well as they:
Close, chose thine eyes, or if thou needs must see,
Look, look upon thy Goodness, and not me;
Or if thine eyes will look on such a shame,
Behold not what I was, but what I am.

PAN. My dear Gentilla, dearer then my soul,
Thy wounds are cured, thy Faith has made thee whole:
Thy tears have scoured thy trespass; witness Heaven,
Thou have not done what Pan has not forgiven:
Come, come into mine arms, my greedy breast
Longs, longs to entertain so fair a Guest:
The poorest tear that wets thy lovely cheek
Has washed a world of faults; thou shall not seek
What thy prevailing language cannot find.

GENT. O let me weep, until I weep me blind!
How can my frozen Gutters choose but run,
And feel the beams of such a melting Sun!

PAN. Enough, my sweet Gentilla, O forbear
To gaul my wounded heart! each pearly tear
That trickles from thine eye, does make rebound
Upon my heart, and gives my heart the wound:
What means my dearest Love to overflow
My curious Garden, on whose banks do grow
Those flowers, whose sweetness does as far exceed
Arabian sents, as they the foulest weed.

GENT. No, no, my dearest dear; these slubber'd cheeks
Call for more water; it is the work of weeks,
To purge the Morphew from so foul a face;
It Is not the labor of an hours space
Can do the deed.

PAN. No leprosy can find
So clear a cure, but that some scurf behind
Will yet remain, Gentill^ may be sure,
The worse being past, time will perfect the cure.

GENT. My dearest Pan, such desperate sores as these
Requier fresh supplies: O! my disease
Enjoynes me to go wash nine times, at least,
In Jordans streams till it be quite redrest.

PAN. Be not deluded with traditious dreams;
It Is Pan that cures thee, and not Jordan-streames:
Let not thy Morphew plunge thy soul too far
In needless grief; deep wounds will leave a scarre:
Vex not thy self, and let no chill despair
Perplex thy troubled heart; Thou art as fair,
As earth will suffer: My contented eyes
Take pleasure in thy beauty, which I prize
Above the world: and when the time shall come,
Wherein thy Shepherd shall conduct thee home
Into my Fathers Palace, where I dwell,
I Will give thee water, (water shall excel
The streams of Jordan) whose diviner power
Shall cleanse thy stains, and in a moment soower
Thy Morphew so, that heavens Meridian eye
Shall veil, to see thy greater Glory by:
Till then, my dearest, let these chaste embraces
Twine us a while, then to our several places
Depart we both.

GENT. Then let Gentilla dye,
If ought can part my dearest Pan and I:
These twined arms shall hold thee; if thou go,
My Pan shall draw his own Gentilla too.

PAN. Forbear Gentilla, for I must be gone,
I have a Father to attend upon,
And thou a Flock; the time will come, wherein
We shall re-meet, and never part agin.

GENT. I Will drive my Flocks, whilst we walk hand in hand;
And I will feed them on thy Fathers land.

PAN. Not so Gentilla, when thy Flocks are thriven
In fat and fleece, then, then they shall be driven
Unto my Fathers Court; where, on thy knee,
Thou shall present them as a gift from thee;
And at that day thy Shepherd shall come hither,
And hand in hand conduct Gentilla thither.

GENT. If needs we must, Farewell* But see thou keep*
Thy promised word.

PAN. Farewell; and feed my Sheep.


EGLOGVE IIII.
Nullifidius. Pseudo-catholicus.
NULL. HO, Shepherd ho! What aile thine eyes to take
Such early slumbers? Shepherd, ho, awake:
Ho, Shepherd, ho! Lord how secure he lies!
What, not a word? For shame, for shame, arise:
Ho, Shepherd, ho! I think, his drouzy head
Is nailed to the ground, I think our Shepheard's dead:
Ho, Shepherd, ho!

PSEUD. I prithee leave thy hoing.


NULL. Then leave this sleeping, Shepherd, cease thy blowing,
Shake off dull slumb^r, and disclose thine eyes:
Ho, Shepherd, ho! It Is time, it is time to rise:
Til thou leave snorting Swain, I Will never leave calling;
Ho, Shepherd, ho!

PSEUD. I prithee leave thy bauling.


NULL. Then Shepherd wake, there is a Wolf broke in
Among thy sheep; what fallen asleep agin?
Ho, Shepherd, ho!

PSEUD. I prithee, let me sleep,
P'sh, what care I for either Wolf or Sheep?

NULL. Look, Shepherd, look, here flows a curious Cup
Of dainty sparkling Nectar, full charged up
To the brim; see how her sprightly dancing bubbles
Defy degenerous fears, and the dull troubles
Of poor afflicted hearts; look how they swell
In proud disdain, as if they threatened Hell
With bold defiance, or would undertake
A prosperous duel with the infernal Lake:
See how she mantles; see with what a grace
She looks upon thee; smiles upon thy face:
Ho, Shepherd, ho!

PSEUD. I, there is a voice, would raise
A dying soul, and give the dead new days;
I, there is a Rapture! what blessed Angels tongue
Has broke my slumbers with so sweet a song?
What Nullifidius! O, the sweetest strain,
That e're was sung! But, where is the Nectar, Swain?
Sure jolly Shepherd, Pan will turn my friend;
I never dream, but still my dreams portend
Some good or other; As I lay asleep
Beneath this shrub, me thought my thirsty Sheep
Demanded water; in my troubled dreams,
Me thought I sent them to the flowing streams,
To drink their fill; with that, they made reply,
There is no water, for the streams are dry:
So having said, me thought that one among
The flock unstopt my Bottle, whence there sprung
Clear cry stall streams, that water did abound;
Me thought those streams no sooner felt the ground
But turned to blood; whereat being sore afraid,
Me thought, I Crossed my self, and after said
Three Ave Mary's, and three Creeds; and then,
The blood turned water, and grew clear again:
And there I waked, as I was even about
To dream the rest: And now my dream is out.

NULL. Faith, so's my Nectar, Swain; my Nectar's ended;
Look, here is the Shrine, but the sweet Saint's ascended:
See thou this empty bottle? Hence did flow
Those rare, those precious streams of late; but now
Dried up; I sipt, and called, and sipt agin;
I told thee that a Wolf was broken in,
Among thy flocks, and yet no art could rate
Thee from thy slumbers, till it grew too late;
At last I roused thee with a potent Charm;
Advanced my voice as stoutly as my arm,
I raised both arm and voice to the height, and so
Thy slumber's ended, and my Nectar too.

PSEUD. The Cramp, the Murre, for ever bless such arms
And tongues, that can attempt no earlier charms.

NULL. Sure Pan's no friend of thine, that gives no theames
But Blood and Water to thy empty dreams:
Had thou but dreamed of Wine --. But Shepherd Swain,
I have a project to re-entertaine
Thy next attempt; lie down and dream again;
Mean while, these hands shall be imploi'd to fill
My bottle at the foot of yonder hill;
I Will brim my bottle with those crystal streams;
(Second thoughts thrive, and why not second dreams?)
Perchance (dear Swain) those second dreams of thine,
May Transubstantiate Water into Wine.

PSEUD. I prithee do, and swill it for thy pains:
'Twill wring thy bowels, ere it wrong thy brains.

NULL. You Roman Shepherds have prodigious dreams:
Can change your Bread to Flesh; your Wine to streams
Of purest Blood: You can convert a dish
Of Steakes to Roots; Surloines to Joules of Fish;
Your full crammed Capons, on your Friday table
(As Shepherds saine, and Shepherds will not fable)
Forget their fleshly natures; their smooth skins
Turn to rough scales, their wings and legs to fins:
Plump Partridge turns to Pike; your smaller dishes
Of Quails and costly Knots, to lesser fishes:
But tell me, Swain, what mean your learned Schools
To tell such tales?

PSEUD. To make you Shepherds fools.


NULL. That Is not the mark ye level at, you glance
Your shafts but there, ye hit but there by chance;
Come tell me, Swain, this shady place is free
From ill-digesting ears; here is none but we:
I have an Ewe, now grazing on my plain,
Whose bounteous Bags, thrice every day I strain,
Well struck in flesh, and of a noble race;
She has more white about her then her face:
Black is her fleece, but silk is not so soft,
She Is the only glory of my fruitful croft:
Repose this secret in my breast, and thou
Shall be the owner of this dainty Ewe.

PSEUD. I know the Ewe; how fortune made her thine,
I know not; but, I Am sure, that Ewe was mine:
But come, my Swain, I know thy peaceful breast
Is slow to strife; thou car'st not to contest
Of Shepherds Laws; I know thou art none of those
That will maintain an argument with blows:
I know, the indifferent Faith does not rely
On stiff opinion; That man's No, or I
Are both alike to thee; thou car'st not whether
It rain or shine, thy tongue keeps temperate wether:
And to say troth, but that that pretty thing,
Called Profit, lends a little fleeter wing
To our desires, no doubt but we should join
In that good, honest, harmless way of thine:
I tell thee, Swain, these darker clouds of ours
Are full of storms, but send down golden showers:
Thou know, the vulgar sort are apt to admire
Things strange; what is most unlikely, they desire
Most to believe, and only that applaud:
Now what we whisper they divulge abroad:
(For they are Fools, and Women most) whereby,
If ought be found in the Suburbs of a lie,
It Is shuffled off from us, from whence it came,
And laid upon the common breath of Fame:
But seldom't comes to that; such fools as they
(Bound to believe, not question what we say)
Never sift our Tales too near, but make them good
(In spite of Reason) with their dearest blood:
All such, for fear lest wisdom should, by chance,
Get the upperhand, we train in Ignorance:
There Is none must read a book, but only he
That Is able to corrupt as well as we:
But Shepherd, know, that these we keep so short,
Are but the women and the simpler sort;
These are our new-milch-cowes, that do maintain
Our house, these bring but slow, yet constant gain:
Now, there is a wiser sort; but they attend
In higher regions; some their worths commend
(And some their fortunes) to superior powers;
Some stand on their own legs, and some on ours:
These are our greater Pillars; men of action,
And stout maintainers of our prosperous faction:
These are our Plush Atturnies; these befriend
Our desperate suites; these day and night attend
Our thriving Causes, whilst we sleep secure;
Nay, when our self made wounds, implore a cure,
These are our Surgeons too; these stand our bail,
If need require, and drag us from the Jayle.

NULL. But dearest Swain, me thinks such high degrees
Of brave Atturnies should expect high fees:
Gamesters say, Nothing draw, if nothing stake,
And men of Plush are friends but where they take:
Sure, such Atturnies labor not for pleasure;
Tell me what pen'worths does their friendship measure?

PSEUD. Some, as I told thee, are of higher blood;
Some creatures of our own, whom we thought good
To recommend; To those we crouch the knee,
And make a Catholic face; these ask no fee.

NULL. But tell me, Swain, how come you to engage
Such great ones to your faction?

PSEUD. In this age,
The price of Pleasure's raised to a high pitch;
It Is a fair traffic, now a days, and rich
To those that sell; no gold is held too dear
To purchase but a License for a year,
To sin securely, or to swim in pleasure
But twice six months; the very height of treasure
Will stoop to this; our everlasting trade
Will never be dead, till Sin and Pleasure fade.

NULL. But tell me Swain, does any such fool dwell
Within our pale, that thinks you Swains can sell
Such privilege? Can any mortal heart
Be so befooled?

PSEUD. Why, Shepherd, there is the art,
The depth of all our trade; whereon depends
The whole design; whereby we work our ends:
When silly birds have touched the twigs, who is it
That cannot hand and take them as they lift?
Wherein t'acquaint thee fully, thou shall know
Not only what is done, but how we do;
I Will lay some grounds, and when those grounds be laid
Practice will make thee master in our trade:
Two sort of Birds do use to make resort
Into our cage; A wise, a simpler sort;
To those we teach Obedience; to these
Dark Ignorance, and Charity, when we please:
The simpler sort, are hatched, and bred our own,
We clime their nests, and take them in their down:
We feed them, and we bring them up by hand,
And make them infant Slaves to our Command;
We discipline them, teach them how to prate,
Like Parakitoes, words they know not what;
We keep them close, we never let them know,
The aerie freedom they were borne unto;
We teach them to forget their wilder note
They have b'instinct, and tune our songs by rote:
We only keep them dark, and then, with ease
We make them sing what notes soever we please:
They feed on Rape-seed, or the crumbs that fall
From off our trenchers at a Festival.
But there is a wiser sort; and such are they
That spread their stronger wings, and use to prey
For their own selves; that can behold the Sun,
Like Joves own bird, and when the day is done,
Can roost themselves; these kind of birds are wary
Where they frequent, their hagard eyes are chary
Near whom the approach: for these the Shepherd plants
His close-laid Gins; their common food are Wants,
And fucking Lev'rets; often time they stoop
At their own shades, fly thousands in a troop:
We bait our Gins with fleshly Recreations,
Larded with Pardons, dressed with Dispensations:
Often times we take; but taken, there is the skill,
How to reclaim their wildness to our will:
At first, they will strive and struggle out of breath;
If we use force, they will beat themselves to death:
They will not brook the dark, whose Eagle eyes
Have viewed the Sun; Here, Swain, we must be wise;
They must have freedom, Shepherd, yet not so
But that their freedom may appear to grow
From our permission; then they must be fed
With dainties, whereunto they never were bred;
And it is the nature of these birds to feed
So long, till their dull wings can find no speed,
Nor they, their wings; Howe'r, put case, they try
Their wings are clipped, unknown; they cannot fly;
Thus kept with feeding, and with gentle handing,
And made familiar with our wanton dandling,
They Will make themselves our Slaves; and in strong bands
Will yield themselves close prisoners to our hands;
They Will fall before thee, and like water spilt,
May draw them with a finger where thou will:
Now we begin to work, our smoother brow
Grows more severe; our wanton favors, now,
Wax more reserved; they that before we dandled
Like looser Minions, they must now be handled
Like servill stuff; they now must know their distance;
Where we command, there must be no resistance:
They must not question now; and what we say,
They must believe; what we enjoyne, obey:
These are the Hawks we fly with; and our Game
Is Gold and Glory, and an honored name:
These are the generous Spaniels that retrive
Imperial Crowns, and swallow Kings alive:
The simpler sort maintain us plump and fat,
But these advance the Glory of our State:
The Eyas Faulcon's not so fierce in Game,
As the high pitched Hagard, whom our hands reclaim:
These are brave days; and these brave days we live:
This is the trade that Roman Shepherds drive.

NULL. But tell me, Swain, what busy eyes attend
Thy flocks the while? What courses do they bend?

PSEUD. Graze where they please; if they will feed, they may;
Our Music twangs upon a higher kay:
They do but merely serve to draw men's eyes
From spying where our greater profit lies;
They are like Switches in a beggars hand,
To counterfeit a Calling; No, we stand
On higher terms; The habit of a Swain
Seems holy; gives advantage to obtain
Those glorious ends, that we pursue so fast;
They must been chary, Swain, that be not chaste;
This russet threadbare weed, that now I wear,
Can startle Monarchs, bow a Princes ear:
These very Hems be kissed, and skirts adored:
And every Button shall command a Lord.

NULL. Farewell my Flocks; Go seek another Swain:
Farewell my Office, and my glorious gain
Of twenty Marks per annum; I Will go wash
More thriving cattle; leave to haberdash
In such small pedling wares; come jolly Swain,
I Will trade with thee, and try another strain:
We Will fish for Kingdoms, and Imperial powers;
Come gentle Swain, the Gold of Ophir's ours.

PSEUD. No more, good Shepherd; It grows dark and late:
At the Popes-head-taverne, there is a posterne gate
Will give us way; where flowing cups of wine
Shall re-confirme thy Brotherhood, and mine.

EGLOGVE V.
Vigilius. Evangelus.
VIG. WHat strange affrights are these, that thus arrest
My laboring soul, and spoil me of my rest?
Before my meeting eyelids can conclude
A long desired league, the war's renewed:
I cannot rest; sometimes me thinks I hear
Loud whoopes of Triumphs, sounding in mine ear:
Sometimes the music of celestial numbers
Sweetens my thoughts, and casts my soul in slumbers;
And then the discords of infernal cries
And horrid shreekes awake my closing eyes:
Me thinks my trembling Cot does not allow
Such restfull ease, as it was wont to do:
Pray God my Flocks be safe: My dreams foretell
Some strange designs; pray God, that all be well:
I Will up (for sure the wasted night grows old)
And, if that need require, secure my Fold:
Lord how the heavens be spangled! How each spark
Contends for greater brightness, to undark
The shades of night; and in a silent story,
Declare the greatness of their Makers glory!
But hark! am I deceived? or does mine ear
Perceive a noise of footsteps, drawing near?
What midnight-wanderer is grown so bold
At such a seas'n, to ramble near my Fold?
Sure, it is some Pilgrim, burdened with the grief
Of a lost way, or else some nightly Thief:
Or else, perchance, some Shepherd that does fly
From his affrighted Rest, as well as I:
No, it is some Friend; Or else my dog had nere
Bin silent half so long; Hoe! who goes there?

EVANG. Vigilius? Is the Swain I sought so nigh?
Fear not Vigilius; it is none but I.

VIG. Evangelus? What business has divided
Thy steps this way? Or bin thy steps misguided?

EVANG. O, my Vigilius, I am come to bring
A true relation of the strangest thing;
The sweetest Tidings, and the rarest wonder
This night brought forth, as ever broke in sunder
The lips of panting Fame: I had no power
To keep it undisclos'd another hour.

VIG. What is it? Speak, speak; Vigilius ears are mad
To know the news: Say, is it good, or bad?

EVANG. O my Vigilius, it is as good as true;
True, true as heaven it self; and good to you:
It Is good to wise and simple; rich and poor;
It Is good to me; it is good to thousands more;
The greatest good that ever fell to man
Since earth had being, since the world began.

VIG. Speak, welcome Shepherd; let thy tongue proceed
To make thy tidings sweeter by thy speed:
Break open thy lips, and let thy tongue diffuse
Her welcome errand: Shepherd, what is the news?

EVANG. Thou know, Vigilius, David's Bethlem, now,
Swarms with much people, and does overflow
With tides of strangers, that attend the pleasure
And sovereign will of sole-commanding Caesar:
In this concourse, there is one, among the rest,
A Galilean Maid, a Virgin guest,
Whose radiant beauty (if we may rely
On Fames report) strikes every gazing eye
stark blind, and keeps the amazed beholder under
The stupid tyranny of Love and wonder:
And (what does more embellish so divine,
So rare a creature) she draws out the line
Of princely David longer by her birth,
And keeps his blood alive upon the earth;
Nay, what compleats both lineage and complexion,
And heaps perfection more upon perfection,
Mounting her Glory to the upper staire,
She is as perfect chaste, as perfect fair;
So pure a soul inflames her Virgin breast,
That most conceive, she is an Angel dressed
In flesh and blood; at least some Saint revived;
Some say, (if their report may pass believed)
She has no sins at all; at most, so few,
That very Scriptures are but barely true;
Her name is Mary; and if every one
May own their right, right heir to David's Throne:
She Is now at Bethlem (where being newly come)
This very night, her pregnant Virgin-womb,
Without the throws of childbed or the groan
Of the sick chair, has borne, brought forth a Son.

VIG. A Virgin bear a Son? What busy tongue
Has done thine ears, and easy faith that wrong?
Borne without pain? And of a Virgins womb?
Thou art befooled: where heard'st thou this? of whom?

EVANG. Shepherd; It is the common voic'd report
Of every tongue, and sent to Caesar's Court;
I come from Bethlem, where the dead of night
Is waked in every Corner, with the affright
Of sudden voices, and the hasty feet
Of wondering people, trampling in the street;
Wind-blazing Tapours hurry to and fro,
And every Window's turned a Lanthorn too;
The streets are filled; Some ramble up and down
To know the news; and some to make it known:
Here one man trudges; There another tramples;
Some whoop for joy; and some, by their Examples:
Some softly whisper: Others stand and muse,
Some bawl aloud; no need to ask the news:
One while, the multitude is fallen at strife;
Some say, she is a Virgin; some, a wife;
Some neither; Others, that best know, aver
She is espoused to a Carpenter,
Who finding her too great before her Day,
Brought her to Bethlem, secretly to lay
The Charge upon the Town, and steal away.

VIG. All this may be, and yet no Virgin, Swain;
Can Virgins bear? Or births be freed from pain?

EVANG. Know, faithless Shepherd, then, that there appeared
An Angel to me, from whose lips I heard
The news I tell thee; Swain, he did unfold
Not only this, but what remains untold:
Nor was it to me alone, the news was brought,
For then my slow belief might well have thought
Mine ears had bin abused; The thing was told
To many Shepherds more, that dare be bold
To call it Truth; to Shepherds, that were by,
That heard, and saw, and shook as well as I.
His face was like the visage of a Child,
Round, smooth, and plump, and oftentimes it smiled;
It glowed like fire, and his rolling eyes
Cast flames, like Lightning darted from the skies;
His hair was long, and curled, and did infold
Like knots of wire, composed of burnisht Gold;
His body was unclothed; His skin did show
More white then Ivory, or the new-faln snow,
Whose perfect whiteness made a circling light,
That where it stood, it silverd over the night;
And, as he spoke, his wings would now and then
Spread, as he meant to fly, then close again;
This news he brought; 'Twas neither Fame, nor I
That forged it, Swain; Good Angels cannot lie:
Can thou believe it? If thy faith be strong,
My greater Tidings shall enlarge my tongue.

VIG. I do Evangelus, though for a season,
My faith was tyding on the streams of reason:
Yet now, the gale of thy report shall drive
Her sails another course; my thoughts shall strive
Against that stream; and what I cannot understand
with my heart, I will believe and wonder:
But tell me, Swain, what happiness accrews
From this? Or else, relate thy better news.

EVANG. Then know Vigilius, whilst the Angel spoke,
My spirits trembled, and my loins did ache;
Horror and heart-amazing fears possessed
The fainting powers of my troubled breast,
And struck my frighted soul into a swound,
That I lay senseless prostrate on the ground;
With that he stretched his life-restoring arm,
He raised me up and bid me fear no harm;
Fear not, said he; I come not to affright
Thy gaster'd soul with terrors of the night;
My errand (Shepherd) is not to abuse
Thine eyes with horrid shapes; I bring thee news,
Tidings of joy, and everlasting peace:
Stand up and let thy faithless trembling cease;
Collect thy scattered senses, Swain, and hear
The happiest news that ever begged an ear;
Such news, whereat the harmonious quire of heaven,
Archangels, Angels, and the other seven
"Of those Celestial Hierarchies, the troop
Of glorious Saints, and souls of Prophets stoop
Their joyful ears, and being fully freight
With joys, sing forth Hosanna's to the height:
This night a Virgin has brought forth a Son,
A perfect God, though clad in flesh and bone,
Like mortal man, the eternal Prince of Rest,
And Peace, in whom all nations shall be blessed:
This night a Virgin has brought forth a Child,
A perfect Man, but pure, and undefiled
With guilt of sin; like you in shape and fashion,
And for your sakes, as subject to your passion:
A perfect God, whose selfe-subsisting nature
Required not the help of a Creator:
A perfect man, conceived by the power
Of the holy Ghost, and borne this very hour:
A perfect God; beyond the comprehending
Of man; and infinite, without an ending:
A perfect man; objected to the eye,
And touch of Flesh and Blood; and borne to dye:
Like God, eternal; yet his life a span,
Like yours; a perfect God, a perfect man:
To you a Son is given; the heir of glory,
Whose Kingdome's endless and untransitory:
To you a child is borne, that shall succeed
That princely David, and of David's seed:
A Son is given, whose name redeemed the earth
A world of days before his mothers birth:
A Child is borne, whose last expiring breath
Shall give new days; and dying, conquer death:
A Son, a Child; composed of Earth, and Heaven;
To you a Child is borne, a Son is given:
"We blessed Angels have no need at all
Of such a Savior, for we cannnot fall:
The damned spirits of the Infernal Throne
Receive no profit by this Child, this Son;
To you the glory of so great a gain
Belongs; To you these tidings appertain;
To you, thrice happy sons of men, we bring
This welcome errand from the eternal King
Of endless mercy, the great Lord of Heaven;
To you this Child is born; this Son is given.
Go, Shepherds, go to Bethlem, and your eyes
Shall see the Babe; The blessed Infant lies
In a poor Stable, swadled in a Manger;
Go, Swains, and entertain this heavenly Stranger,
Upon your bended knees; See, yonder Star
Shall be your Pilot, where these wonders are;
And as he spoke that word, (not fully ended)
Ten thousand Angels in a Troop descended;
But here my tongue must fail, not having might
To tell the glory of that glorious sight:
Nay, had I power, thine ears would prove as weak
To apprehend, as my poor tongue's to speak.
They joined their warbling notes, and in a height
Beyond the curious frailty of conceit,
Their voices sweetened our delighted fears,
And with this Caroll blessed our ravished ears.
GLory to God on high; and jolly mirth
Twixt man and man; and peace on earth:
This night a child is born;
This night a Son is given;
This Son, this Child
Has reconciled
Poor man that was forlorn,
And the angry God of heaven:
Hosanna, sing Hosanna.
Now, now that joyful Day,
That blessed hour is come,
That was foretold
In days of old,
Wherein all nations may
Bless, bless the Virgins womb:
Hosanna, sing Hosanna.
Let heaven triumph above,
Let earth rejoice below,
Let heaven and earth
Be filled with mirth;
For peace and lasting love
Atones your God, and you:
Hosanna, sing Hosanna.
With that, their Air-dividing plumes they spread,
And, with Hosanna, in their mouths, they fled:
But, Shepherd, ah how far does my report,
Ah how extremely my poor words come short
To blaze such glory! How have I transgrest,
To Express such Raptures, not to be expressed!

VIG. O, Swain, how could I lose my self to hear
Thy blessed discourse! O how my greedy ear
Clings to thy cordial lips, whose sovereign breath
Brings Antidotes against the fangs of death!
How happy are these times! How blessed are we
Above all ages, that are born to see
This joyful day, whose glory was denied
To Kings and holy Prophets, that relied
Upon the self-same hopes! How more then they
Are we poor Shepherds blessed to see this day!

EVANG. O Shepherd, had our Princely David seen
This happy how'r, how had his spirit been
Inflamed with Joy, and Zeal! What heavenly skill
Had passion lent to his diviner Quill!
What Odes! what Lyrick Raptures had inspired
His ravished soul, that was already fired
With hopes alone; that these rare things should be
In after days, which now his eyes should see!

VIG. No question, but an infinite delight
Had easily sprung from so divine a sight:
It had bin Joy sufficient, that a Son
Was born to sit upon his Princely Throne;
O, but that Son, to be a Savior too,
Able to conquer death, and overthrow
The very Gates of Hell, and by his breath,
To drag his soul from the deep Jaile of death,
Had bin a Joy too high to be expressed
By tongues, or trusted to a common breast:
But hold! whilst we endeavor to make known
Another Joy, we over neglect our own:
The day is broke; The Eastern Lamps begin
To fail, and draw their nightly glory in:
Let Us up to Bethlem; though our happy eyes
But see the Building where our Savior lies;
Perchance our prosperous Journey may find grace
To kiss his hand, or see his lovely face.

EVANG. Come, haste we then, Vigilius, let us away,
And gain the advantage of the early day.

VIG. Come, Shepherd; O how blessed are thee and I,
That may behold our Savior ere we dye!

EGLOGVE VI.
Arminius. Philamnus.
ARMIN. Shepherd, well met; Our loss has made me bold
To search thy Dounes: Five weathers of our Fold
Have straggled from our Pastures, and have strayed.

PHILAM. 'Twas soundly watched the whilst: But have you made
Search no where else?

ARMIN. My hopes first led me hither;
His way lies every where that kens not whither;
Small moment, Shepherd, guides a doubtful breast;
Our sheep often turn their faces to the East,
Which led my hopeful fears (perchance too bold)
To make enquiry in your Eastern Fold.

PHILAM. And welcome: But me thinks the Roman Swains
Should tell you news: It had bin lesser pains
And to more purpose, (if my thoughts be clear)
For you to have made your first enquiry there:
There Is but a slender ruinous hedge that bounds
And slightly limits your contiguous Grounds;
So poor a Fense, young Swain, that it is supposed
Ye feed in Common, though ye seem enclosed:
Go make a speedy Trial, and search there.

ARMIN. My hopes renew.


PHILAM. And I renew my fear.


ARMINIUS. But gentle Shepherd, Here a second thought
Puzles my quickening hopes, and I am brought
Into a greater doubt: The Roman Brand
Is so, so like to ours; nay, even does stand
In the self same place, that my unskilful tongue
Dare make no Challenge: I am yet but young
And too too green to judge, and yet not made
Acquainted with the secrets of our Trade:
I Am doubtful what to do: It is all one
Not to make search, as seek, and find unknown.

PHILAM. Then, Swain, take my advice; If what I say
Please not thy fancy, try a better way.

ARMIN. Thanks, gentle Shepherd; you shall much endear
Your thankful servant, and command his ear.

PHILAM. But Swain, acquaint me first (for it appears
Thou art as yet no Shepherd by thy years)
How often does thy Master Shepherd feed
His numerous Flocks; They are a jolly Breed,
And well come on; How often do they stand
Before his eye, and numbered by his hand?

ARMIN. Once in seven days, his food-providing care
Gives them a full Repast of dainty fare,
But for their daily diet, his command
Refers their welfare to my careful hand.

PHILAM. Which of the seav'n may his grave wisdom keep
For this Repast? Or do his ready sheep
Expect his Call, and wholly leave the day
To his wise pleasure?

ARMIN. What he will, he may:
The day is alterable; Power is given
To him, to choose, so he choose one in seven:
But yet his wisdom for the fashion sake
And his own quiet, has bin pleased to make
Choice of the first.

PHILAM. Feeds he for by-respect?
Folds he for fashion? Better, quite neglect:
But does he totally devote that day
To his fair Flock?

ARMIN. He sends them pleased away,
Full fed with dainties, mingled with delight:
All day, they feed, and when the drooping Light
Begins to trebble the increasing shades,
The Music of the Oaten Reeds persuades
Their hearts to mirth; His wanton Rams grow brisk;
His Ewes begin to trip; his Lambs to frisk;
And whilst they sport and dance, the Lovesick Swains
Compose Rush-rings and Myrtleberry Chains,
And stuck with glorious King-cups, and their Bonnets
Adorned with Laurel slips, chaunt their Love-sonnets
To stir the fires, and to increase the flames
In the cold hearts of their beloved Dames.

PHILAM. Your Shepherd takes great pains; but his Reward
Will prove as heavy as his pains are hard:
But tell me, Swain, what dainty food is that
That makes your thriving flocks, so plump, so fat?
They make rich Shepherds, and increase their stock;
Pan grant, your Shepherd make as rich a flock:
But what is that dainty food? here is none but we,
I am no Sive: I prithee Swain, be free.

ARMINIUS. I know not, why; but I stand full possessed,
My secrets find a closet in thy breast;
Where I Will repose them: Know then, Shepherd, know,
There is a glorious Plant, that once did grow
In Priestly Arons Garden, in the days
Of Legal worship; this fair Plant did raise
A swelling Husk, in whose rich womb there lay
Large Grains of Orient Pearl, which (as they say)
Rip'ned, but nere disclosed till that blessed morn
Wherein our good, our great God Pan was born;
Just then it opened; and the enclosed Grain
Unknownly vanished; and then, closed again:
This wondrous Plant still flourisht, and her strength
Maintained her empty Husks, until at length,
Ah me! our great Pan dyed, and then it droopt;
And had not brain-dissolved mortals stoopt
And watered her dry Roots with floods of tears,
'T had dyed, a fable to our faithless ears;
Which blessed Plant, whom these salt showers repair,
Was by a Roman-Shepheards holy Prayer
And some days Fast, transplanted to the Lay
Of Roman Shepherds, fruitful to this day.

PHILAM. But have those Prayers restored the Pearl again?


ARMIN. The Husks are plump; but yet they bear no Grain:


PHILAM. Those Husk-like Prayers, which vain devotion swells,
Come short for things of price, but home for shells.
But tell me, Swain, to what prodigious end
May these miraculous discourses tend?

ARMIN. Shepherd, I Will now perform (as you require)
My faithful promise, and your fair desire:
These swellings Husks, which heretofore retained
This vanished Pearl, for many years remained
Useless and vain, until an after Age
More wisely curious, and maturely sage,
Made further search, and by experience found
Their vast and wide extended wombs abound
With precious oil, whose aromatic sent,
Like fatning Amber, nourisht where it went:
This odoriferous, this unctious Juice
Our Roman Shepherds husband to their use
A thousand ways: with this their sacred hands
Varnish their painted Folds, manure their lands,
Sweeten their putrid Fodder, and improve
Their wel-contented Flocks in fear, and love:
Now gentle Shepherd; we, whose bord'ring bounds
Are even contiguous with those Roman grounds,
Have secret traffic, and a fair commerce;
Though seeming foes, we under hand converse:
We plot, contrive, consult, we enterchange
Both wares and hearts, and yet are seeming strange;
This precious Oil, (the hint of our discourse)
We hold in Common, without prayer, or purse:
With this, our thriving Shepherds every day
Anoint their formal Temples, which display
Their glorious frowns, at whose severer brow
Their croutching Flocks do tremble, fawn, and bow
Their curved bodies, and with reverence, stand
Creating Idols at their strict command:
With this restoring Oil, they dulcifye
The meanest trash that ever Shepherds eye
Disdained; nay, oftentimes their flocks do fare
No better then Chameleons in the air:
Not having substance; but with forced content,
Making their Maundy with an empty sent.

PHILAM. But Swain, me thinks, such kind of food should keep
The thriving Shepherd fatter then his sheep.

ARMIN. True, Shepherd; they seem lusty, though not full;
But what they want in flesh, they find in wool.

PHILAM. But Swain, I wonder much they make not bold,
Sometimes to straggle to another Fold,
To mend so mean a diet?

ARMIN. Every day,
If not well watched, some one or other stray
To your rich Plains: where if by chance ere found
They rue it dearly, though they escape the Pound.

PHILAM. We are poor Tenants, Swain; the Pound's not ours,
The Pound belongs to you; The Lordship's yours.

ARMIN. But Shepherd, when our rambling flocks oppress
Your valley pastures, they as well transgress
Our Mountain laws, which when our Swains present,
Our righteous scales weighs out the punishment
Companion to the offense; Sometimes we fine,
Sometimes impound, and sometimes discipline
With sharper Censures: But what wrong is made
To you, our Lordship's sure to see you paid.

PHILAM. We Are paid indeed! your Lordship is so just
That smooth-faced mercy oftentimes is thrust
From your too just Assemblies; But young Swain,
What if some stragglers in your fleecy train
Should chance to wander to the Roman Fold?

ARMIN. As often they do: Why, Shepherd, we still hold
A fair compliance there; Alas, we stand
On equal terms, not diff^ring much in Brand,
Nor soil, nor bone, nor number; Our proud Rams
Often tup their Ewes, and then we share their Lambs;
And their's, by stealth, sometimes tup ours; and thus
As we did share their Lambs, they share with us;
That insomuch, not twice two Moons full past,
Unseen, I heard some conference at last,
It was their mutual vote, That that slight Fense
Which parts their neighboring hills were taken thence
By some indifferent hand; at length, concluded
That swift winged Time (whose crooked sith intruded
Into the state of transitory things)
Would do the deed.

PHILAM. Heaven close or clip his wings.
But tell me Swain, (since thine own fair desert
Has taught thee so much trust as to impart
Thy treasured secrets in my faithful ear)
What are thy Shepherds ways? Are they severe,
Reserved, and strict? Or gives he free'r raines
To mirth and sports, as on our frolique Plains
We Shepherds use?

ARMIN. Shepherd, the early days
Of my life's Calendar can hardly raise
So high a reckoning to inform your ear
What his first ways and new-launcht courses were;
Nor can my credit warrant the report
Of doubtful Fame, which oftentimes comes short,
And often exceeds the letter of the Truth;
But here it is voic'd that his ingenious youth
Was tutored first, and trained up in sweet
And sacred Learning at Gamaliels feet
Under that famous Chapel, (which they say
Was since repaired, whose memory to this day
Is fresh in our Records) where twice at least
In every twice twelve hours he came and blessed
His hopeful fortunes; led a temperate life,
As far from idleness, as factious strife;
He was a painful Shepherd, strict, severe,
And by report, a little too austere
Against those harmless sports and past'rall songs
And ceremonious Quintils, that belongs
To Shepherds rural mirth; nay, more then so,
If same be true, he was a Zelot too.
But since promotion raised him from the plains
To Mountain service, where his flock remains
Committed to my charge, his zeal abates,
And richly clothed with Lordly silks he waits
In Courts of Princes, reveling out his days
In lavish feasts and frolique Roundelayes,
Carousing liberal healths to the dear name
Of this rare Beauty, or that Courtly Dame;
Commands, controls, usurps a power unknown,
Makes Laws, and puffs, and Lords it up and down:
That insomuch the Course he first began
Is quite forgot, and he another man.

PHILAM. O Swain, me thinks these rufflings ill befit
A Shepherds cloth; The Riots they commit,
Methinks should bring a scandal, and defame
Their public callings, and their private name.

ARMINIUS. Ah Shepherd, were their glory not too bright
For scandal to eclipse, 'twould soon be night
With their Profession; but the Clouds that rise
Upon their darkened names so blurre the eyes
Of their repute, that neighboring Swains deride
The bubling folly of their babbling Pride,
Whilst passers by cry shame, when they behold
Such burly Shepherds and so bare a Fold.
Ah gentle Shepherd, how it gripes and wounds
My bleeding soul to see our mossy grounds
Parcht up and burnt, for want of timely showers,
Bought with our painful Shepherds prayers, whilst yours
Flourish and prosper, watered with the dew
Of pleased heavens that bless both them and you!

PHILAM. True Swain, the gracious hand of heaven has blessed
Our fruitful Plains; my thriving flocks have rest
And downright feeding; what we gain we spend
With thankful hearts, and what we spare we lend:
Roots are our food, and Russet is our clothing;
We have but little, and we want for nothing:
Streams quench our thirst, nor taste we what is delicious;
Our brain's not busy; nor our breasts ambitious,
We charm our cares, and chaunt away, our sorrow,
We live to day, and care not for to morrow:
Thrice blessed be our great God Pan, that takes
A gracious pleasure in our pains, and makes
Our labors prosperous, and with sparing hand
Lends us enough, and courage to withstand
The gripes of fortune, and her frowns, for which
Our lowly hearts shall fly as high a pitch,
As they that impe their more ambitious wings
With Eagles plumes, and mount to Thrones of Kings.
But Swain, I am transported, and I fear
Too long delay has wronged your patient ear;
My promise has engaged me as your guide
To search your stragglers that have strayed aside.

ARMIN. Your blessed example has prescribed a way
To find my self that am the greater stray,
For which fair Shepherd, may the heavens increase
Your perfect welfare in eternal peace.

PHILAM. Thanks gentle Swain; And if our homely Plains
May give you pleasure, purchased by our pains,
Enjoy it freely: But the evening damp
Begins to fall, and heavens declining Lamp
Bespeaks the doubtful Twilight: Day (grown old)
Invites the fowls to Roost; my Sheep to Fold.

EGLOGVE VII.
Schismaticus. Adelphus.
SCHIS. HOw fare thy Flocks, Adelphus? Do they stand
All sound? And do they prosper in thy hand*

ADEL. I hope they do; their Pasture's green and fresh;
They Are of good bone, and meetly struck in flesh:
They bring fair Lambs, and fleeces white as snow,
Their Lambs are fair ones, and their fleeces too.

SCHIS. What makes thee then so sad? Thy flocks so fair
And fleeces too, what makes thy fleece so bare?
Thy cheeks so hollow, and thy sides so thin,
As if thy girdle had been taken in
By famine, for the want of Belly stuff
To fill them up?

ADEL. The Shepheard's fat enough
That owes the flock; I do but dress his vine,
And tread the Press; it is he that drinks the wine.

SCHIS. Art thou his Lad? Or do thou serve for Fee?
Were ever bound to th'trade? Or art thou free?

ADEL. Seven years complete, I served a jolly dame
Yclept Cantabria, whose illustrious name
Has filled the world, whose memorable Glory
Is made the subject of all Shepherds story:
For frolic Roundelayes, and past'rall Songs,
And all those quaint devises that belongs
To Shepherds mirth, she bore the bell away;
Had Thracian Orpheus lived to seen her day,
How had the glory of his Art been dim!
Sure, he had followed her, as beasts did him:
Seven years I served this jolly Dame, and she
At seven years end was pleased to set me free:
Ere since I fisht in troubled streams, to get
Some poor employment, as she thought me fit
(After my seven years bonds) to entertain;
Out fisht my patience, and yet fisht again:
My float lay still, whilst other anglers took:
Indeed, I fisht not with a golden hook,
As others did; whereby I was compelled
To flag my sails, which late ambition swelled
Above the power of my purse, and serve,
Like a poor hireling: better stoop then sterve.

SCHIS. It Is true, Adelphus; times are grown so bad,
Without that hook, there is nothing to be had;
But say, young Swain, what stipend does reward
Thy yearly pains? I know thy pains are hard.

ADEL. There Is nothing cheaper now, then poor men's sweat;
Indeed my pains are not esteemed too great
For twice ten yearly Royalls to requite,
And yet I ward all day, and watch all night.

SCHIS. Gold, dearly purchased! Does thy pains obtain
No by-commendaes, no collateral gain,
To raise and heighten up the slender wall
Of thy low fortunes?

ADEL. Shepherd, none at all;
And that which grieves me most, my straggling sheep
Are apt to roame abroad; they will not keep
Their own appointed limits; But they stray,
Rambling some one; and some, another way:
They love to change, and wander, God knows whither,
Like other flocks, they seldom feed together;
Whereby, to my great grief, they neither show their
Good will to me, nor loves to one another.

SCHIS. Thou art but green, Adelphus, and as yet
A very Novice in the trade of wit:
Time was, Adelphus, that my wants would whine
And whimper in poor rags as well as thine;
As small a girdle circled, and embraced
The empty casket of my hidebound wast;
My visage was as thin, my hollow cheeks
As faithful Almanacks of Emberweeks;
But wise Experience, the beloved child
Of Time and Observation, soon exiled
My green wit folly, and endu'd my heart
With the true knowledge of the Shepherds art;
She taught me new devises, to enrich
My flocks and me; (ways far above the pitch
Of plain, and trivial wits, and far exceeding
The downright discipline of common feeding)
I tell thee, Swain; before I learned this way,
My rambling flocks would never fadge to stay
Within my pastures; every thorn would bear
A costly witness that they had been there;
I sought about, but often sought in vain;
Some would be lost, and never come home again:
Others, unsought for, would perchance return
With bags new strained, and fleeces newly shorn;
Some hanged on crooked briars, where, unfed,
Some were discovered dying, others dead:
Thus being a fool, like thee, I lost my sheep;
They could not keep me, that I could not keep:
But when as wise Experience had schooled me,
And purged that common error that befooled me,
My flocks could love their feed, and leave to roame;
In stead of straying, there would thousands come
From other folds, that daily su'd to be
Accounted mine; and owned no Swain, but me:
That in short time, my fold was grown so full
That lamb was held no dainty; and my wool
Waxt so abundant, that one moity filled
A spacious room, which the other half did build.

ADEL. I envy not not thy wel-deserved store,
Ingenious Shepherd; I admire more
The secret of thy art, which if it be
To be reposed, repose the trust in me:
My bettered fortunes, shall have cause to pay
Their vows, and bless thy soul another day.

SCHIS. Come then, sit down, Adelphus, and attend;
Thou have desired, thou have obtained a friend,
Who, in a word, shall give thee brief direction,
Wherein, thy practice must produce perfection:
There is a glorious Island, called by name,
The Isle of Man, a place of noted fame
For Merchants trading, rich and fairly stored
With all that forain Kingdoms can afford;
Upon that Island is a City called
By the name of Kephalon, round, richly wal'd
With polisht Ivory, wherein does stand
The beauty and the strength of all the land;
At the upper end of Microcosmos streit,
Near to the Palace, where the Muses meet
In counsel, (as the heathnish Poets fain)
There dwells, (well known to many a Shepherd swain)
A man, by trade a Gardner, hight by name
Phantasmus; one, whose curious hand can frame
Rare knots, and quaint devises; that can make
Confounding Labyrinths; will undertake
To carve the lively shapes of foul or beast
In running streams; nay, what exceeds the rest,
Will make ye gardens full of dainty flowers,
Of strawbery banks, and sun-resisting bowers,
Like cobwebs flying in the flitting air;
There is no seed of any thing that is rare,
Foreign or native, which by sea or land,
Is not conveyed to his enquiring hand:
Among the rest, (to draw a step more near
To what suspends thy long expecting ear)
This Gardner has a seed, which scholars call
Idea; sweet in taste, and very small;
It is a seed well known, and much despised
By vulgar judgments, but as highly prized
By men of art; a seed of wondrous might,
And soverain virtue, being used aright;
But most of all to Shepherds, that have care
T'encrease their flocks, and keep their pastures fair.

ADEL. Neglect of what is good, is goods abuse:
But tell me how it makes for Shepherds use?

SCHIS. This seed being scattered on the barest grounds,
Shoots up a sudden leaf, which leaf abounds
With precious moisture; It Is, at first, but slender,
Like spiney grass of nature soft and tender,
And apt to chill with every blast of air,
Unless the skillful Swain take special care
To keep it close, and covered from the blast
Of Eastern winds; and then it thrives so fast,
And spreads abroad so rank, that frost nor fire
Can make it fade; and trod, it mounts the higher;
It Is called Opinion; It Is a curious feed
That sheep do most delight in, and indeed,
Is so delicious pleasing to the taste,
That they account it but a second fast
To feed, or graze on any food but that;
It makes them in a fortnights space as fat,
As full of thriving moisture, and appear
As fair, as those that pasture all the year:
It is so fragrant, that the sent provokes
The lingering appetite of neighboring flocks
To prove unknown delight; nor hedge, nor ditch,
Can be a fence sufficient to the Itch
Of their invited stomachs; they will come
From other folds, and make thy fold their home.

ADEL. But where is the profit, Shepherd, where is the gains?
He feeds but ill, that finds no price, but pains.

SCHIS. He Is but a silly Cook that wists not how
To lick his fingers; she deserves no Cow
That kens not how to milk; nor he, a fold,
That cannot sheare; he that complains of cold,
And has a lib'rall woodstack in his yard,
May freeze, unpitied; and lament, unheard.

ADEL. True, gentle Shepherd; but ill gotten wealth
Ill thrives; better be cold then warm by stealth.

SCHIS. Thou art a novice, Swain, thou need'st not take
Vngiven; nor yet, with humble suits awake
Their charity; when they have found the smack
Of thy delicious pasture, thou shall lack
No good, that they can give; one every bryer
They Will hang their fleeces for thee; they will conspire
To yeane their jolly lambs within thy cot,
To make them thine; In brief, what will they not?

ADEL. But tell me, Shepherd, will this dainty feed
Make them but seeming fat, or fat indeed?

SCHIS. What Is that to us, if they appear but so?
Their Lambs are fair; their Fleeces white as snow;
They thrive; are fruitful, and increase our store;
What need a curious Shepherd question more?
What, if their skins be puffed? no eye can see it;
What, if their flesh be rank? Their Lambs are sweet:
If plump and fruitful, whether bloat, or fat,
We take no care; let Butchers look to that:
They bear nor fleece, nor lamkin being flead;
Swain, it is the quick we live by, not the dead.

ADELPH. But I have heard some learned Shepherds say,
There is a statute, that forbids this way
Of feeding sheep: there dwells, not far from hence,
A Shepherd, lately questioned for the offense.

SCHIS. Let timorous fools fear statutes; Swain, I know
The worst that Statutes have the power to do;
They speak big words, will threaten to deprive,
Imprison, fine, and then perchance connive:
Twice have I star'd the stern-brow'd high Commission
In the open face, in level opposition;
The first time they deprived me of my Crook;
Dispoil'd me of my fruitful flocks; they took
My thriving pastures from me; even proceeding
To the height of law, to bind my hands from feeding;
But 'twas no high Commission cords could tie
My hands so fast, in public, but that I
Could slip the knot in private; I did keep
No flocks abroad; but, then, I housed my sheep;
I fed in Corners; slipped my wethers Bell
From off his lofty crest, that none could tell
Our secret meetings; There, my flocks would come,
Sometimes, perchance, and toll an Ewe from home,
To Enrich my Fold; and now my gains were more,
Being thus deprived; then ere they were before:
But soon my private practice was discry'd
By a false-hearted brother, who envied
My prosperous state; and, underhand did call
My yielding cause to try a second fall
With the high Commission, whose tempestuous blast
Confined me, fined me, and severely past,
Next market day, betwixt mine ears and me,
A firm divorce perpetually to be.

ADELP. Gain dearly bought! In my opinion, Swain,
The profit counterpoyses not the pain:
I hold more sweetness in a poor estate,
Then treasure, purchased at so dear a rate:
The day was fair, till the foul evening soiled it;
The Play was good, until the last Act spoiled it:
It Is a false Trade, that flatters at the first
With peace, and wealth, and makes last days the worst.

SCHIS. Be not deceived, Adelphus; bolts and chains
Make Shepherds prisoners, but enlarge their gains:
Where wealth comes trowling, pains are princely sports;
Bands are but golden bracelets; Jails, but Courts;
I tell thee, Swain, (I speak it to the praise
Of Charity) I never breathed such days,
As when the voice of law enjoined my feet
To tread the curious Lab'rinth of the Fleet;
Full diet came, unsought; my bounteous dish
Denied no delicates, that flesh or fish
Could yield; the sporting Lamb, the frisking Kid,
The tripping Fawn, the sucking Lev'ret did
Present themselves before my smiling eyes,
A morning, or an evening sacrifice:
The Sea-born Sturgeon, and the broadside Bream,
The wary Trout, that thrives against the stream;
The well-grown Carp, full laden with her spawn;
The scarlet Lobster, and the pricknos'd Prawn;
Oyle-steep'd Anchovis, landed from his brine,
Came freely swimming in red seas of wine;
The brawny Capon, and the full egged Hen,
The stream-fed Swan, the Malard of the Fen,
The coasting Plover, and the mounting Lark,
Furnished my Table like an other Ark:
Come, come, Adelphus, prisons are no more
Then scare-bugs to fright children from the door
Of their preferment; Linits in the Cage
Sit warm, and full, when Flyers feel the rage
Of Frost, and Famine; They can sit, and sing
Whilst others droop, and hang the feeble wing:
Besides, the name of Prison breeds remorse
In such as merely know it by discourse;
It moves compassion from the tender City,
When we deserve their envy, more then pity.

ADELPH. I, but me thinks, such bulk-improving ease,
Joined with such pamp'ring delicates as these,
Should boulster up thy brawny cheeks, and place
Such lusty characters upon the face
Of prosperous welfare, that an easy eye
Could find no object for her charity.

SCHIS. Who cannot force complaint without a grief,
May grieve in earn'st, and pine without relief:
When gentle Novices bring their bounties in,
We suck our cheeks, to make our cheeks look thin;
Put on our fustian night-caps, and compose
Strange rufull faces; whimper in the nose;
Turn up the eye, and justify our Cause
Against the strictness of severer laws;
O, how these tenderhearted fools partake
In our distress! how sadly they will shake
Their sorrow-palsi'd heads, and sigh and whine,
To see poor hunger-bitten Christians pine
In the sad Jayle! whereas we spend the day
As frolic, feast, and sleep as soft as they.

ADELP. If Prisons be so gainful, what offense
Took thy discretion to remove thee thence?

SCHIS. Fair hopes of fairer fortunes; which, in short,
My tongue shall take the freedom to report;
There was a hopeful voyage (late intended
For new Plantation) to a place commended
By common voice, and blazed above all other
For fat, and fruitful soil (the joyful mother
Of fair and peaceful plenty) called by name
Nov' Anglia; If the partial blast of fame
Be not too vainly lavish, and out-blowes
The truth too much, it is a Land that flows
With milk and honey, and (conceived of some)
By good manuring, may, in time, become
A second Land of Canaan; to which end
There is a holy people, that intend
To sell entire estates, and to remove
Their faithful households thither, to improve
Their bettered fortunes, being resolved to keep
(As our forefathers did in Canaan) sheep;
This hopeful voyage was the cord, that drew me
From Prison; but this voyage overthrew me:
I thought that my delicious kind of feed
Had bin a dainty there; I thought, my seed
Had bin unknown in that unplanted clime;
I hoped, that in the small extent of time,
(Being out of reach of Law, and uncontrolled
By high Commissions) my frequented Fold
Might soon ingrost the flocks of every soil,
And made me supreme Lord of all the Isle;
But when I came to practice, every Swain
Was master of my Art, and every Plain
Brought forth my secret; now, the common Pasture
Of all the Land; and every Hind's a Master.

ADELPH. Thanks, gentle Shepherd, for thy fair discourse;
The fiery Chariot now declines her course,
And hot-mouth'd Phlegon bows his Crest, to cool
His flaming nosthrils in the Western Poole:
My closed lips must plead a debt, and pray
Your courteous patience till another day;
I fear, my flocks will think their Swain too bold
To keep them longer from their quiet Fold.

EGLOGVE VIII.
Anarchus. Canonicus.
ANAR. GRaze on my sheep; and let your souls defye
The food of common shepherds; Come not nigh
The Babylonish Pastures of this Nation;
They are all heathenish; all abomination:
Their Pastors are profane, and they have trod
The steps of Belial, not the ways of God.
You are a chosen, a peculiar crew,
That blessed handful, that selected few
That shall have entrance; set apart and gifted
For holy exercises, cleans'd and sifted,
Like Flower from Bran, and separated from the Coats
Of the unsanctified, like sheep from goats.
But who comes here? My Lambs, why gaze ye thus?
Why stand ye frighted? It Is Canonicus.

CAN. God-morrow, Swain; God keep thee from the sorrow
Of a sad day; What speechless? Swain, God-morrow:
What, Shepherd, not a word to entertain
The wishes of a friend? God morrow, Swain:
Not yet? What mean these silent Common-places
Of strange aspects? what mean these antic faces?
I fear, his costive words, too great for vent,
Stick in his throat; how like a Jack-a-lent
He stands, for boys to spend their shrovetide throws,
Or like a Puppit, made to frighten Crows!

ANAR. Thou art a limb of Satan; and thy throat
A sink of poison; thy Canonical coat
Is nothing but a Liv'ry of the Beast;
Thy language is profane, and I detest
Thy sinful greetings, and that heathenish fashion
Of this your Antichristian salutation;
In brief, God keep me from the greater sorrow
Of thee; and from the curse of thy God-morrow.

CAN. How now, Anarchus? Has thy hungry zeal
Devoured all thy manners at a meal?
No Scraps remain? Or has the unfruitful year
Made charity so scarce, and love so dear,
That none's allowed, upon the slight occasion
Of enterview, or civil salutation?
Is thy store hoarded up? or is it spent?
Will thou vent none? or have thou none to vent?
The curse of my God-morrow? It Is most true,
Gods blessing proves a curse to such as you.

ANAR. To such as we? Go, save your breath, to blow
Your vain Cathedral Bagpipes* and bestow
Your trivial prayers on those that cannot pray
Without their spectacles; that cannot say
Their unregarded prayers, unless they hold
The Let'ny, or the charms of Sorrocold
Before their purblind eyes; that disinherit
Their souls of freedom, and renounce the Spirit;
Perchance, your idle prayers may find an ear
With them; Go spend your vain God-morrows there.

CAN. Art thou thy self, Anarchus? Is thy heart
Acquainted with that tongue, that does impart
This brainsick language? Could thy passion lend
No sleighter subject, for thy breath to spend
Her Aspine venom at, but that, alone,
That shuts and opens the Eternal Throne
Of the Eternal God? Is prayer become
So poor a guest, to be denied a room
In thy opinion? To be scorned, contemned,
Like school-boyes Theams, whose errors have condemned
The guilty Truant to the Masters Rod?
Can that displease thee, that delights thy God?

ANAR. Thou child of wrath, and fierbrand of Hell,
Flows wholesome water from a tainted Well?
Or can those prayers be pleasing, that proceed
From unregen'rate breasts? Can a foul weed
Delight the smell? or ugly shapes, the view?
I say, your prayers are all profane, like you;
They Are like that heathenish Ruff of thine, that perks
Upon thy stiffe-neckt collar, pranckt with Ferks
Of studied wit, startcht with strong lines, and put
In a set Form, of the Antichristian Cut.

CAN. Consult with Reason, Shepherd, and advise;
Call home thy Senses; and cast back thine eyes
On former days; No doubt, but there were they
That lived as sanctimonious, that could pray,
Lift up as holy hands, and did inherit
As great a share, and freedom of the Spirit,
As you; and these could count it no disgrace
To their profession, in a public place,
To use set Forms; did not their wisdoms do
What you contemn, nay more prescribe it too,
(Yet neither quenched, nor wronged the sacred motion
Of the prompt Spirit) as helps to dull devotion?
Nay, more; Has not the unanimous consent
Of all reformed Churches (to prevent
Confused babbling, and to disenorm
Pre post'rous Service) bred us to a Form
Of Common Prayer; Prayers so divinely penned,
That humane Eloquence does even contend
With heavenly Majesty, whilst both conspire
To kindle zeal, and to inflame desire?

ANAR. The Book of Common Prayer? what tell thou me
Of that? My soul defies both that and thee:
Thou art Baals Priest; and that vain Book's no more
Then a mere Relic of the Roman Whore:
Me thinks a Christian tongue should be ashamed
To name such trash; I spit to hear it named:
Tell me of Common Prayers? The midnight yelp
Of Bal my Bandog is as great a help
To raise devotion in a Christians breast,
As that; the very language of the Beast;
That old worn Masse-book of the new Edition;
That Romish rabble, full of Superstition;
That paper Idol; that inchaunting Spell;
That printed Image, sent from Rome, from Hell;
That broad-fac'd Owl, upon a carved Perch;
That Bell and Dragon of the English Church.

CAN. Be not too lavish, Shepherd; half this stuff
Will make a Coat, to prove thee fool enough:
Hold, hold: thy brainsick language does bewray
The self-same spirit, whether rail or pray:
For fools that rave, and rage, not knowing, why,
A scourge is far more fit, then a reply:
But say, Anarchus, (If it be not treason
Against discretion, to demand a reason
From frantic tongues) resolve me, Shepherd, why
This book is grown so odious in thine eye?

ANAR. Because it is an Idol, whereunto
You bend your idle knees, as Papists do
To their lewd Images.

CAN. I; but we pray
Not to, but by it;

ANAR. Just so, Papists say:
Say, in what place the Apostles ever did
Command Set Form?

CAN. Where was Set Form forbid?
What Text commanded you to exercise
Your Function over Tables? Or baptize
In Basins? What Apostle taught your tongue
To gibe at Bishops? Or to vex and wrong
Your Mother Church? Who taught ye to oppose
Your Rulers? Or to whimper in the nose?
But since you call for Precedents, (although
It Is more then our safe practice need to show)
Read, to what Blessing that blessed Saint commends
The holy Church, saluted at the ends
Of all his sweet Epistles; Or if these
Suffice not, may your greater wisdoms please
To step into the Law, and read the express
Commanded Numb. 6.23.
Form, wherein the Priest must bless
The parting people; Can thy brazen brow
Deny all this? What refuge have ye now?
Y' are gone by Law and Gospel; They both used
Set Form; What Scripture now must be abused?

ANAR. Well, if the Lord be pleased to allow
Set Forms to Prophets, are they set to you?
Or have ye so much boldness to compare
A Prelates prattling, to a Prophets Prayer?

CAN. O, that some equal hearer now were by
To laugh his treble share, as well as I!
Examples are demanded; which, being given,
We must not follow: Giddy brains! bereaven
Of common sense! Where heaven does make no mention,
You style it with the term of man's invention:
Where heaven commands, and is pleased to hallow
With blessed Examples, there we must not follow.

ANAR. So heaven (by blessed Examples) did enjoin,
Your bended knees to worship Bread, and Wine?

CAN. When your crosse-garted knees fall down before
Your Parlour-Table, what do you adore?

ANAR. So heaven commands, by conjuring words to bring
Vowed hands together, with a hallowed Ring?

CAN. It Is true; your fiery zeals cannot abide
Long circumstance; your doctrine's, Up and Ride.

ANAR. So heaven commanded, that religious praise
Be given to Saints, and worship to their days?

CAN. Whom you contemn, because they did not preach
Those Doctrines, that your Western Parlours teach.

ANAR. So heaven commanded Bishops, and the rest
Of that lewd Rank, rank members of the Beast?

CAN. I, heaven commanded such, and gave them power
To scourge, and check suchill-pac'd Beasts as you are:

ANAR. So heaven commanded, that the high Commission
Should plague poor Christians, like the Inquisition?

CAN. Your plagues are what your own behaviors urge;
None, but the guilty, rail against the Scourge.

ANAR. So heaven commands your prayers, that buried dust
Of Whores and Thieves should triumph with the Just?

CAN. Man may not censure by external view;
Forbear; we, sometimes, pray for some of you.

ANAR. So heaven commands your Paintings, Pipes, and Copes,
Used in your Churches, and ordained by Popes?

CAN. Where Popish hands have raised in every Town
A Parish Church, shall we pull Churches down?
But come, Anarchus, let us leave to play
At childish Pushpin; Come, let not the day
Be lost in Trifles, to a fruitless end;
Let Us fall to hotter service, and contend
By more substantial argument, whose weight
May vindicate the truth from light conceit;
Let Us try a Syllogism; (Art infuses
Spirit into the children of the Muses)
Whereby, stout error shall be forced to yield,
And Truth shall sit sole Mistress of the Field.

ANAR. Art me no Arts; That which the Sp'rit infuses
Shall edge my tongue: What tell thou me of Muses,
Those Pagan Gods; the Authors of your Schisms?
P'sh! tell not me of Arts, and Silisismes;
I care not for your Quirks, and new devices
Of studied wit: We use to play our prizes,
With common weapons; and, with downright knocks,
We beat down sin, and error, like an Ox;
And cut the throat of heathenish Pop'ry too,
Like Calves, prepared for slaughter; so we do:
We rash in sunder Heresy, like an Ell
Of Sarc'net, then convey it down to Hell:
We take just measure of a Christians heart,
By the yard of Judgment; then, by dextrous Art,
We cut out doctrines, and from notch, to notch
We fit our holy Stuff, (we do not botch
Like you; but make it jump, that it be neither
Too wide nor straight) then stitch it up together,
And make a Robe of Sanctity, to fit
The child of Grace; we meddle not with wit:
These be the means that overthrow our Schisms,
And build Religion, without Sigilismes.

CAN. A rare device! But tell me, were thou made
A Butcher, or a Tailor by thy trade?
I looked for Schollership; but it appears,
Hoods make no Monks; nor Beards, Philosophers.

ANAR. Surely, I was, at first, by Occupation,
A Merchant Tailor, till that lender fashion
Of Spanish Cassocks grew into request;
When having left that Calling, I professed
A Chaunler, where I was enforced to vent
That hellish smoke, whose most unsavory scent
Perfumed my garments so, that I began
To be conceived an Unregenerate man:
Which called me from that course of life, to trade
In tape and inckle; ere I year'd and day'd
This new employment, O a strange mischance
Ore threw my dealings, which did disadvance
My mean estate; and whereupon, I fled
To Amsterdam; where being trencher-fed
By holy Brethren, lived in great respect,
Sr Reverence, footing stockings for the Elect:
Surely the savor of the Brethrens feet,
Perfumed with commings in, is very sweet:
There, twice six months I had not led my life,
But I became an Husband to an Wife,
The widow of an Elder; in whose stead,
I was, (though I could neither write, nor read)
Accounted worthy (though I say it) and able
To preach the Gospel at our holy Table.

CAN. But say, what strange mischance was that, did move thee
To flee thy native soil? What mischief drove thee?
What dire dysaster urged thy skillful hand
To find employment in a forain Land?

ANAR. Surely, I was, when that mischance befell,
But poor in purse, and was constrained to sell
Cadice and Inckle; now because my trade
Required an help, I entertained a Maid;
An able Christian; (though I say it) Begot
Of holy Parents; (though the nuptial knot
Of ceremonious Marriage never tied
Their joined hands) She was a Sanctified
And undefiled Vessel; She would pray,
When others slept; and work when others play:
She was of exc'lent knowledge; and, indeed,
She could expound, and preach too, for a need:
She was my servant, and set up my trade
With her own hands; her skillful fingers made
The Tape and Inckle, where withal she stored
My thriving shop; whereby, I did afford
My Brethren better pennyworths; nay, more,
She had a gift, (was all the City ore
Well known) in making Puddings, whose mere view
Would make a Proselyte, and convert a Jew;
Whose new Religion would proclaim our Hogs
As clean and holy as their Synagogues;
These would she bear from house to house, and sell
To holy Brethren, who would please her well;
For under that pretense, she often repeated
Some close preached Sermon; oftentimes entreated
Of holy Discipline; sometimes gave warning
Of some rare Lecture held next Thursday morning:
I know not how, (frail flesh and blood ye know
Can do no more then flesh and blood can do)
But to be short, she would so often fig
From place to place, that she was grown too big
To be concealed from wicked neighboring eyes;
To Avoid the scandal, I thought good t'arise,
And flee to Amsterdam, till I could gather,
By information, the reputed Father.

CAN. A wholesome History! able to transform
Abused Religions sunshine to a storm
Of direful Thunderbolts, to overthrow
All Christian Rulers, that dare longer ow
Confusion to the Varlets, and not grind them
To dust, and send them to the place designed them:
Had thou that impudence, that brazen face,
In the fag end of thy unsav'ry, base,
Triobular trades (foul beast;) nay, piping hot
From thy close Strumpet, thus to soil, and blot
The beauty of Religion, and to wrong
The Gospels name with thy illiterate tongue?

ANAR. Were not the Apostles Fishers, and not fly
Their trades, and preached the word as well as I?

CAN. Avoid, presumptuous Varlet; urge no more
My tired patience; Go, seek out thy Whore,
Thy fit Compere, and exercise thy trade
Upon her ruined stockings, much decaid
With long pursuit, and trudging all about
To find the Father of her Bastard out;
Whilst I remove my Zenith, and go hence,
To wail this fruitless hours misexpence,
And pray to heaven, that heaven would please to keep
Such Goats still separated from my sheep.

EGLOGVE IX.
Iudex. Romastix. Flambello.
JUD. THis is the place, the hour; this the tree,
Beneath whose hospitable shades, must be
This challenged combat; But the champions stay
Exceeds their limits; It Is an equal lay
That neither come: they were so hot last night,
It Is like their quarrel ended with the light:
But who comes yonder? Look, methinks't should be,
By's gate, Romastix; No, it is not; it is he:
Me thinks his posture prophecies of Palms
Before the encounter; see, how sweat imbalmes
His varnisht Temples! How each envious pace
Vies to be first, and eches for the place!
He Is near at hand; Champion let fair applause
Crown your intended combat, let your Cause
Thrive as it merits; let this morning jarre
Bring forth an Evening peace, the Child of war;
Let Truth prevail, at last, and let heaven send,
First, a fair Enemy; next, a faithful Friend.

ROMANS Thanks, gentle Iudex; for the last, I durst
Assure my self in thee: but where is the first?
Where Is our brave Enemy? whose very breath,
Last night, could puff an Heretic to death,
Then by the virtue of St. Francis name,
Could snatch a well broyl'd soul from the sad flame
Of Purgatory, from the sulfurous flashes
Of hells hot Suburbs, and inspire his ashes
With a new Catholic soul; whose knee shall gain
Salvation from a Puppit, for the pain
Of twenty Pater nosters, and thrice seven
Repeated Ave's to the Queen of heaven:
But look; Am I deceived? Or do I see
Our Boanarges coming?

JUD. Sure it is he.


ROMANS It Is he, Heaven grant that his discourse may trace
A measure, but as sober as his pace:
Lord, how his tongue last evening shot at rover!
Sometimes, how wide it shot! How, sometimes, over!
How like a new broke Colt, he pranc'd about!
Sometimes stepped orderly; sometimes flew out:
His hot-mouth'd argument, would for a space
Srike a good stroke; then straight forsake his pace:
How his discretion sunk, while his tongue floted!
His wit falsegallop'd, while his judgment trotted.
But here he comes.

JUD. The blessings of the day
Greets thee.

FLAM. And let the glory of the fray
Crown my triumphant Brows with conquest.

ROMANS stay,
Take my God-morrow, first, and then inherit stay,
The Crown that shall be purchased by thy merit,
And justness of thy well defended cause.

FLAM. The like to thee.


JUD. But let the chief applause
Be given to Truth; which must and will prevail,
How ever you defend, or he assail:
She does not like a thredbare Client, sue
For help, nor does her cause subsist by you:
But like a Queen, sits in her Palace royal,
To judge betwixt the Rebel and the Loyal:
Then quit your selves, and let the day proclaim,
Who Is the true Subject: Truth is still the same:
Romastix this your first arrival here,
Gives you precedence: you shall truly swear,
No private grudge; nor no malicious end
Of base revenge did move you to contend
In these fair lists, no itch of vain applause,
But a true thirst, to advance the public cause.

ROMANS I do.


JUD. And you Flambello too, shall swear,
You try this combat, with a conscience clear
From by-respects of preadvised hate,
Or spleen, of later, or of elder date;
And that you aim not at a private foe,
But at the glory of the Truth.

FLAM. I do.


JUD. Then Champions, to it; you cannot be too stern,
In Truths behalf; it is best to be altern;
For mutual language works a fair conclusion:
Truth is the Queen of order; not confusion.

ROMANS I here appeach Flambello, as a High-
Traitor to the sacred Crown, and dignity
Of Sovereign Truth, a Rebel to her Laws,
A private Judas to the public Cause.

FLAM. Blisters oth' tongue that speaks it! He that durst
Proclaim, and not maintain it, be accursed.

ROMANS They Are Traitors, rob their Sovereign of their due;
You do the same; and therefore such are you.

FLAM. You argue with less Charity, then Art;
Your halting Minor's false as your own heart.

ROMANS He that invests another in the Throne
Of Truth; or owns a Prince, but Truth alone,
Robs his own Sovereign; But such are you,
You therefore rob your Sovereign of her due.

FLAM. You plead for Truth; and yet you speak beside
The Text of Truth: your Minor is denied.

ROMANS They that prefer their own brain-bred Traditions
Before her perfect Laws; make, here, additions;
And, there, Abstractions from her sacred hests,
Depose the old, and a new Prince invests;
But you prefer Traditions; therefore you
Depose the old Prince, and invest a new.

FLAM. The selfsame Spirit that inspired the words
Of holy Prophets, in old time affords
Undoubted Truth to the most just Traditions
Of holy Councels, whose divine Commissions
Make it a perfect Truth, which they aver
Confirmed by a Head that cannot err.

ROMANS Admit all this! Can very Truth take place
Of very Truth? Has Truth a double face?
How can the wavering will of man be guided
Betwixt two Spirits; at least, one Sp'rit divided?
But say; upon what shoulders grows that Head
That cannot err: that cannot be misled?
What is he? Where is his abode? That I
May bow my knees, and worship ere I dye.

FLAM. It is our holy Father; He, that keeps
The keys of heaven, and of the Infernal deeps;
He that has power, with those sacred keys,
To open heaven, and lock it when he please;
To open Hels broad portals, and let out
His dire Anathemaes to scourge the stout
Rebellious heart; and Legions, to devour
All such as will not prostrate to his Power,
And high Omnipotency, but rebel
Against the Chamberlain of Heaven:

ROMANS And Hell:
But tell me to what sort of souls does he
Expand the Gates of heaven?

FLAM. To such as be
Obedient to his laws; whose purged hearts
Have felt the flames of Purgatory, and smarts
Of holy Penance, that observe and do
All things his Holiness enjoins them to:
The Gates of Heaven stand open for such as these.

ROMANS If he be paid for turning of the keys:
What sort of sins unlock the gates of Hell?

FLAM. The disobedient hearts, that puff and swell
Against his Government; To such as dare
Question the Councels of our holy Chair:
To Heretics; and such as plot revenge;
These are the Card'nall sins, that greaze the henge.

ROMANS But what betides to riotous Gluttons, then,
Hell-tutor'd Sorcerers, and incestuous men?
Unnat'rall Sodomites, and the brasse-brow'd Liar?
Those that give false Commissions, nay, and hyer
Perverted subjects to dissolve their bands
Of abjured Loyalty, and lay violent hands
On their own Princes? Are the Infernal keys
Less nimble to unlock Hels gate for these?

FLAM. These break the doors, and rend the Portals open,
Unless the grace of our Lord God the Pope
Give former Dispensation; or at least
An after Pardon.

ROMANS I conceived, the best
Your All-sufficient Popes could do, had bin,
God-like to pardon a forsaken sin,
But to afford a Dispensation too
For after crimes, is more then heaven will do:
No wonder, then, the Councels of your Chair
Claim the right hand, and your Traditions dare
Take place of Scripture, when that God of yours,
That cannot err, is stronger armed, then ours.

FLAM. It stands not with obedience to aspire
Unto such holy heights, as to enquire
Into the sacred secrets of the Chair;
All Champions must lay down their weapons, there:
Doubts cool devotion; And the good digestion
Of Catholics faith is hindered, where we question.

ROMAST. Such dainty stomachs, as are daily filled
With costly delicates, are easily chilled;
When faith can feed upon no lower things
Then Crowns dissolved, and drink the blood of Kings,
Experience tells, that oftentimes digestion
Finds strange obstructions, where Indictments question:
But since your guilt (beneath the fair pretense
Of filial silence) leaves ye no defense
From your reposed weapons; breathe a space
And take up new ones, which may plead your case
(With the quick spirit of a keener edge)
Against the foul reproach of Sacrilege:
That Bread of life; which, with a lib'rall hand,
Heaven made a common gift, you countermand;
And what his bounty carved to every one,
You falsely challenge to your selves alone;
He gives his children loaves; where you afford
But crumbs, being fed, like dogs, beneath your board;
That holy draught, that Sacramental Cup,
Which heaven divides among them, you drink up:
You are Impostors, and delude poor souls,
And what your pampered Prelates swill in Bowls,
Like fools, you send them to exhaust from dead
And pallid veins of your Incarnate Bread.

FLAM. First, for the Bread, which your false tongues aver
We ravish from the childrens lips, you err:
Your censures misinterpret our intent;
We do but dress the Grist, that heaven has sent;
And, by our mixture, raise a sweeter Paste,
To add a pleasure to the childrens taste:
Next; for that sacred Blood, you grossly term,
By the name of Wine; which, rudely you affirm,
Our pampered Prelates swill in lusty Bowls,
And after, send our poor deluded souls
To suck; to suck in vain from out the dead
And pallid veins of our Incarnate Bread;
You show your wisdoms: It is living Flesh,
Wherein are living Streams, that do refresh
The drooping soul; A perfect Sacrifice
Of perfect Flesh and Blood, in Breads disguise.

ROMANS Your double answer wants a single force:
And is the Grist of heaven become so course
To need your sifting? Can your mixtures add
A sweetness to it, which it never had?
Your Chair (whose brow has brass enough, to call
Saint Paul's Epistles, Heresies, and Saint Paul
A hare-brain'd Schismatic, and once projected,
To have his Errors purged, and Text corrected)
May easily tax, and censure all the rest,
Being all indicted by the selfsame breast:
But is that Body living, that ye tear
With your rank teeth? How worse do you appear
Then Canibals, to be an Undertaker
In that foul act, to eat, to grind your Maker!
Your double answer does abridge the story
Of the true Passion of the Lord of glory;
Your first condemns him; and, (the sentence past)
You boldly crucify him, in your last:
But is it real Flesh, ye thus devour;
Timber'd with bones; and like this flesh of our?
Say; do you eat, and grind it, Flesh and Bone?
Or like an unchew'd Pill, but swallow't down?
If only swallow; Champion, you complete not
Your work: You take the Body, but you eat not:
If eat; you falsify what heaven has spoken;
Can you eat bones, and yet a bone not broken?
But tell me, tell me, what was he that first
Did make so bold, to make himself accursed,
To rob the Decalogue, and to withdraw
The second Statute from the Moral law?
Why was that Statute thought a worse offense
Then all the rest? Could not your Chair dispense
With that as safely as with all the rest?
What has that Statute done? wherein transgrest,
That you have made the Tables too too hot
To hold it? Champion, speak; why speakst thou not?

FLAM. Superior powers, that have large Commission
To judge, conceive it but a repetition
Of the first Statute, and thought fit to take
It thence for brevity, for corruption sake.

ROMANS Corruption sake? Did never word disclose
From Roman lips more true: what tongue ere chose
A term more proper, that more full expressed
The Idea of a well-composed breast?
I wish no greater Conquest, or Concession
Of a fair truth, then from a foes Confession.

FLAM. You boast too soon: Take heed your vain conceit
Befools you not with a false Antidate:
Ill-grounded triumphs are but breaths expense;
Fools catch at words; but wise men at the sense.

ROMANS Content thee, Champion; every gamester knows,
That Falsifies are Play, as well as blows:
But tell me now; If each Abstraction draws
A curse upon the Abstractor from those laws,
How can your Councels escape this judgment then,
That have exiled the Second from the Ten?

FLAM. Their number's nere the less; for where we smother
One Statute, we dichotomize another.

ROMANS Then, Champion; there is a double curse, you know:
One, for abstracting; one, for adding to:
But to proceed; what law of God denies
The bands of marriage? What exceptionties
That undefiled, that honorable life
From Priestly Orders? Aaron had his wife;
And he, from whom ye claim (but claim amiss)
The free succession of your keys, had his.
Heavens Statute qualifies all sorts of men;
How came ye to repeal that Statute then?

FLAM. Marriage is but an Antidote for lust,
It is ordained for such as dare not trust
The frailty of their bodies, or want art
To quench the roving tempters fiery dart:
But such, whose vessels Prayer, and Fasting keeps
Unsoild and pure, where idle blood nere creeps
Into their wanton veins; that can restrain
Base lust; to such, this Antidote is vain:
Such be our sacred Priests, whose horned knees
Are seldom straight, but pay their howrely fees
To the worn ground, whose Emb'ring lips send up
Perpetual vows; whose wine-abjuring Cup
Yields no delight; whose stomachs are content
To celebrate an everlasting Lent.

ROMANS Say, Champion then, for what respects? for whom,
Are Brothels licensed by the laws of Rome?
Laymen may wed; there, license is unjust,
Where Law allows a remedy for lust:
But if your Priesthood be so undefiled
How came that pampered Pope, (the only child
Of his long since deceased Sire) to own
So many jolly Nephews, whose unknown
And doubtful Parentage, truth feared to blaze,
Until the next succeeding Prelates days?
How is it such vaulted Entries have been found,
Affording secret passage, under ground,
(With paths deluding Argus thousand eyes)
Betwixt your Abbeys, and your Nunneries?
How come the depths of your deep throated Wells,
(Where utter shades, and empty horror dwells)
To yield such Relics; and in stead of stones,
To be impav'd with newborn Infants bones?

FLAM. Plagues, Horror, Madness, and the Infernal troops
Of hells Anathema's; the schreeching whoops
Of damned souls; this present worlds disdain,
And that worse world to come's eternal pain;
Our holy Vrbans execrable curse,
Or (if unthought on) any plague be worse,
Confound these base, these upstart Luth'ran tongues,
That spit such poison, and project these wrongs
Against our Church.

ROMANS A Curse sufficient! hold,
And lend my tongue your patience, to unfold
Your Catholic Church; and when my words shall end,
Speak you your pleasure, while mine ears attend:
Your Church is like a Market; where, for Gold,
Both Sins and Pardons, may be bought and sold:
It is a Jugglers shop, whose Master shows
Fine tricks at Fast and Loose, with Oaths and vows:
It is a Mill; wherein, the Laity grind
For the fat Clergy, being still kept blind:
It is a School, whose Scholars, ill directed,
Are once a year, by their own hands corrected:
It is a Magazine, wherein are laid
More choice of Scriptures, then their Maker made:
It is a Church, depraves the Text; and then,
Pins the Authority on the sleeves of men:
It is a slaughterhouse, where Butchers bring (...)
All sorts of men; and now and then, a King:
It is a sort of people, do unthrone
The living God, and deifie a stone:
It is a Woman, that in youth, has bin
A Whore; and now in age, a Baud to sin:
It damnes poor Infants, to eternal fire,
For want of what they lived not to desire:
It dare assure us sound before the cure,
And bids despair, where we should most assure:
It leads poor Women captive, does contrary
The lawful use of Meats; forbids to marry.

JUD. Hold, Champions, hold; It Is needless to renew
Your fight; The day grows hot, as well as you:
It is against the course of Martial Laws
To deal a blow in a decided Cause:
Sheath up your sanguine blades; These wars have cost
Much blood and sweat: The field is won and lost;
And we adjudge the Palms triumphant Bow
Of Conquest to renowned Romastix brow;
And, with our shrill-mouth'd Trumpet we proclaim
Eternal honor to his honored name,
Who shall be styled, to his perpetual praise,
Truths faithful Champion till the last of days:
Queen Truth shall prosper, when her Pleader fails:
Great is the Truth; and that great Truth prevails.

EGLOGVE X.
Orthodoxus. Catholicus. Nuncius.
ORTH. WHat news, Catholicus? You lately came
From the great City: what is the voice of Fame?

CATH. The greatest part of what my sense receives,
Is the least part of what my Faith believes:
I search for none: If ought, perchance, I hear
Unaskt, it often dies within my ear,
Untold; What this man, or what that man says,
Can hardly make a Packhorse on my Faith:
But, now I think on it; There Is great talk about
A strange predictious Star, long since, found out
By learned Ticho-brachy, whose portents
Reach, to these Times, they say, and tells the events
Of strange adventures, whose success shall bring
Illustrious fame, to a victorious King,
Born in Northern parts; whose glorious arm
Shall draw a sword, a sword that shall be warm
With Austrian blood, and whose loud beaten drum
Shall send, beyond the walls of Christendom,
Her royall-conquering Marches, to control
(Even from the Artick, to the Antartick pole)
The spaun of Antichrist, and to engore
Those Bald-pate Panders of proud Babels Whore.

ORTH. May these portents be sure, as they are great;
And may that drum never sound her faint retreat,
Till these things take effect: But tell me, Swain,
How hapt this lucky Comet to remain
So long in silence, and, at length, to blaze
With us, and be the rumor of our days.

CATH. There is a Prince, new risen from the North,
Of mighty spirit, and renowned worth;
Prudent and pious; for heroic deeds,
At least a Caesar; in whose heart, the seeds
Of true Religion were so timely sown,
That they are sprung to height, and he is grown
The wonder of his days; whose louder name
Has blast enough to split the Trump of Fame:
Have thou beheld the heavens greater eye,
Maskt in a swarthy cloud, how, by and by,
It breaks forth; and, with his glorious ray,
Gives glory to the discontented day?
So this illustrious Prince, scarce named among
The rank of common Princes, bravely sprung
From his dark Throne; and with his brighter story
Have soiled the luster of preceding glory:
This is that Man, on whom the common eye
Is turned; on his adventure does rely
The worlds discourse; this is that flame of fire
We hope shall burn (we hope as we desire)
Proud Babel: this, the arm that shall unhenge
The incestuous gates of Sodom, and revenge
The blood of blessed Martyrs spilt, and frying
In flames; (blood, that has been this age a crying
For slow-paced vengeance) this is he, whose Throne
This blazing Prophet bent his eye upon.

ORTH. And well it may; The calendar, whereby
We rural Shepherds calculate, and forespy
Things future, Good or Evil, has late descried
That evil affected planet Mars, allied
To temporizing Mercury, conjoined
In The house of Death; whereby we Shepherds find
Strange showers of blood, arising from the North,
And flying Southward, likely to break forth
Upon the Austrian parts, and raise a flood,
To overwhelm that bloody House, with Blood:
That House; which like a Sun in this our Orb,
Whiffes up the Belgic fumes, and does absorbe
From every Soil rich vapors, and exhale
From Sea and Land, within our Christian pale;
A Sun, the beams of whose Meridian glory
Fill eyes with wonder, and all tongues with story.

CATH. But there is a Vial, to be emptyed out
Upon this glorious Planet; which, no doubt,
Thine eye and mine shall see, within these few
Approaching days; (if Shepherds signs be true)
No doubt, the lingering times are sliding on,
Wherein, this House shall flame, and this bright Sun
Shall lose his light, shall lose his light, and never
Shine more, but be eclipsed, eclipsed for ever:
O Shepherd; If the prayers of many a Swain
Have audience, and our hopes be not in vain,
This is that Prince, whose conquering Drum shall beat
Through the proud streets of Room, and shall unseat
The Man of sin; and, with his sword unthrone
The Beast, and trample on his triple Crown:
This is that Angel, whose full hand does grasp
That threatened Vial, and whose fingers clasp
This flaming Fauchin, which shall hew and burn
The lims of Antichrist, and nere return
Into his quiet sheath, till that proud Whore,
That perks so high, lie grovelling on the Flore.

ORTH. Shepherd; Me thinks, when my glad ears attends
Upon his fair success, his Actions, Ends,
His Valor, Wisdom, Piety, when I scan
All this, me thinks, I think on more then Man:
O, how my soul lies down before the feet
Of this brave Prince! O, how my blessings greet
Each obvious action, whose loud breath I dare
Not hear, unprosper'd with my better prayer:
I must forget the peace of Sion, when
I cease to honor this brave Man of men:
Had Plutarch lived till now, to blazon forth
His life, (as sure he would) what Prince of worth,
Or Greek, or Roman, had his single story
Selected out to parallel his Glory?

CATH. O Shepherd, he, whose service is employed
In heavens high battles, can do nothing void
Of fame, and wonder; nothing, less then glorious:
Heavens Champion must prevail; must be victorious:
But, O, what hap! what happiness have we,
The last, and dregs of Ages, thus to see
These hopeful Times; nay more, of sit beneath,
Beneath our quiet Vines, and think of death
By leisure, when Spring-tides of blood o'rewhelms
The interrupted peace of forain Realms!
Our painful Oxen plough our peaceful grounds;
Our quiet streets nere startle at the sounds
Of Drums or Trumpets; neither Wolf, nor Fox
Disturb the Folds of our increasing Flocks:
Our Kids, and sweet-fac'd Lambs can frisk, and feed
In our fresh Pastures, whilst our Oaten Reed
Can breath her merry strains, and voice can sing
Her frolic Past'rals to our Shepheard-King.

ORTH. It Is not for our deserts; or that our ways
Are more upright, then theirs of former days:
We lay the Pelion of our new Transgressions
Upon our Fathers Ossa: The Confessions
Of our offenses; nay, our very prayers
Are more corrupt then the worst sins of theirs:
Sure, Swain, the streams of Mercy run more clear
Then they were wont; Her smiling eyes appear
More gracious now, in these our Borean climes,
Then other Nations, or in former times.

CATH. Shepherd; Perchance, some fifty righteous men,
Perchance, but thirty; Peradventure, ten
Have made our peace: Perchance, the Almighties ear
Has found a Moses, or some Phineas, here.

ORTH. Vengeance, that threatened sinful Isreal's crime,
For David's sake, nere stirred all David's time:
'Twas David's piety did suspend the blow
Of Vengeance: Have not we a David too?
A Prince; whose worth, what our poor tongues can scatter,
May rather wrong for want of height, then flatter;
A pious Prince; whose very Actions preach
Rare Doctrines; does, what others do but teach:
A Prince; whom neither flames of youth can fire,
Nor beauty add the least to his desire;
Whose eyes are like the eyes of Turtles, chaste;
Can view ten thousand dainties, and yet taste
But one; but in that dainty, can digest
The perfect Quintessence of all the rest:
A Prince, that (briefly to characterize him)
Wants nothing, but a People, how to prize him.
Evil Princes, often, draw plagues upon the Times,
Whereas good Princes salve their peoples Crimes.

CATH. Thou have not spoken many things, but much;
Such is our People, and our Prince is such:
Such fierce temptations still attend upon
The glittering Pomp of the Imperial Throne,
I, either wonder Princes should be good,
Or else conceive them not of Flesh and Blood:
What change of pleasure can his soul command,
And not obtain, being Lord of all the Land?
What bold? what ventrous spirit dare enquire
Into the lawfulness of his desire?
What Crown-controlling Nathan dare begin
To question Vice? or call his sin, a sin?
Who is it, that will not undertake to be
His sins Attorney? Nay, what man is he
That will not temporize, and fan the fire
TO increase the flames of his unblown desire?
What place may not be secret? or what eye
Dare (under pain of putting out) once pry
Into his Closet? or what season will
Not wait upon his pleasure, to fulfill
His royal lust? what chaste Sophronia would
Wound her own heart, for fear her Soverain should?
O Shepherd, what a Prince have we, that can
Continue just, and yet continue Man!
No doubt, but vengeance would confound these times,
Were not his Goodness far above our crimes:
Alas; Our happy Age (that has enjoyed
The best, the best of Princes, and is cloyed
With prosperous Plenty, and the sweet increase
Of right hand Blessings) in this glut of peace,
Loathes very Quails and Manna; we are strangers
To those hard evils, to those continual dangers
That cleave to States, wherein poor subjects groan
Beneath the Vices of the Imperial Throne:
They cannot prize good Princes, that nere had
The too too dear experience of a bad:
Who knows not Pharoh? Or the plagues, that brake
Upon the people for hard Pharohs sake?

ORTH. The Acts of Princes mount with Eagle-wings:
Few know the Alliance between God and Kings.

CATH. Look, Shepherd, look! Whose hasty feet are they
That trace the Plains so quick? They bend this way.

ORTH. His steps divide apace; Pray God, his have
Be good: Good tidings seldom come so fast.

CATH. I think it is Nuncius.


ORTH. Nuncius never uses
To come unnews'd.

CATH. I wonder what the news is?


ORTH. See, how he strikes his breast!


CATH. Good Lord, how sad
His countenance seems!

ORTH. What, Nuncius, good or bad?


CA^H. Bad! Worse! The worst of worsts! The heaviest news
That lips ere broached, or language can diffuse!
O, earths bright Sun's eclipsed! Ah me! is drenched
In blood! His flames are quenched, for ever quenched:
That light, which wondering Shepherds did adore,
Is out; will never shine on Shepherd more:
Expect no Sunshine from the beams of Suede;
Sueden, the glory of the world, is dead:
Our strength is broke, and all our hopes are vain;
Sueden, the glory of the world, is slain:
Our Sun is set, and earth now wants a Sun;
Sueden, the glory of the earth is gone:
Gone, gone for ever to eternal night;
Earth wants her Sueden; and the world, her light.

CATH. Fond hopes! why damp ye not my dull belief,
To lend a little respite to my grief?
What ailes my passion to believe so soon
The Evil it fears? Can Phoebus, in the noon
Of his Meridian glory, cease to shine,
Before his Solstice leaves him to decline
The least degree? Can brave Adolphus fall,
And heaven not give us warning? none at all?
There was no Comet blazed: no apparition
Of kindled Meteors, lent the least suspicion:
Me thinks, the heavens should flame, and earths foundation,
Should shake, against so great an alteration.

ORTH. But is it certain, Nuncius?


NUN. I, too sure:
The wounds of death admit no hopes of cure:

ORTH. God knows his own designs: His sacred breast
Knows where to propagate his glory best:
His hidden ways agree not with our eyes:
His wars must prosper, though his Champion dies:
We must not question Fate: where heaven thinks fit
To do, we must be silent, and submit:
We must not look too near; we must not prye;
Perhaps, young Joshuah lives, though Moses dye:
Give Suede his honor, and enroll his name
Among the Worthies, in the book of Fame:
Give him the honor of his double story,
Begun in Grace, and perfected in Glory:
But let our fond Indulgence be adviz'd,
In hon'ring Sueden, heaven be not dispriz'd:
We must not languish, in a moral thirst,
TO advance the second Cause, and slight the first;
We must not droop, for want of Suedes Alarm,
As if that heaven were bound to Suedens Arm:
That God, that has recalled our Sueden, can
Make a new Sueden of a common Man.

CATH. But see! The drooping day begins to do'n
His mourning weeds; The sullen night draws on:
It Is time to fold our sheep; They little know,
Or feel those sorrows, their poor Shepherds do:
Shepherds, farewell; Perchance the morrow light
May shine forth better news:

ORTH. God night.


NUN. God night.


FINIS.
EGLOGVE XI.
Philarchus. Philorthus. Anarchus.
PHILAR. Shepherd, ah Shepherd, what sad days have we
(More sad then these sad days) survived to see!
How is the guilt of our forefathers crimes,
Revenged on us in these distracted times!
How is the Shepherds honor that while ere
Shone like the morning Star; and did appear
To all the world, like Heralds to make known
The approaching Glory of the rising Sun!
How is that honor dim! how is her light
Clouded in shades of Ignorance and night!
How is our Calling slighted, and that power
Our Master lent us, threatened every hour!
How are our worried Names become the scorn
Of every base Mechanic! rent and torn
In every vulgar mouth? reproacht and made
Delinquents judged by every trivial Trade!
How are our persons scorned, contemned, reviled,
Nay, even by him, whose schoole-instructed child
Ieers at his ignorance; and often by him,
Whose sinking fortunes teaches how to swim
With zealous Bladders, being apt to steal
Advantage from the times, and trade in zeal!
How are we grown the Byword of the land,
Commanded now, where late we did command!
Pressed like a Vintage, banded like a Ball!
Despised of many, and dispris'd of all!

PHILOR. True my Philarchus; Shepherds never found
So hard a time, Ah, fortune never frowned
So stern till now; Presumptuous Ignorance
Had nere till now the boldness to advance
Her beetle brows; or once to tread the Stage
Of this blessed Island in so bright an Age.
But ah! when Lights grow dim and dull, what hand
Can keep out darkness? who can countermand
The melancholy shades of ugly night,
When heaven wants Lamps, or when those Lamps want light?
Come Shepherd, come, (here is none but Thee and I)
We tax the Times, but could the Times reply
They Would vindicate their evils, and lay their crimes
On us poor Shepherds that thus tax the Times.
Had we burnt bright, had our refulgent Rays
Given luster to the world, and filled our days
With glorious brightness, how had darkness found
A place for entrance? where could shadows ground
Their ayery errands? or what soul could taint
Our Sun-bright names? what evil could cause complaint?
How blessed! how more then blessed, had Shepherds been
Had Shepherds been so happy to have seen
But their own happiness; Had the waxen wings
Of their ambitious thoughts not aimed at things
Beyond their pitch; Had they been wise to move
In their own Orbs, and not like Phaeton rove
Through the wild Labyrinth of the Olympic tower
And searched the secrets of too vast a power,
Their Glory had not found so short a Date,
Nor caused combustion in so calm a State.

PHILAR. Admit all this Philorthus, (for who can
Consider frailty, and not think of Man?)
Shall some few stains in the full Lamp of night
Cry down the Moon, and woo the Stars for light?
What if thy too neglected Soil abound
With noisome Weeds? will thou disclaim the ground?
Or would thou dry the earths full breast, that feeds
Thy fragrant Flowers, because it fosters Weeds?
Ah my Philorthus, thus the cause now stands
With us poor Swaynes; The power of our hands
Entrusted there by our all-wise God Pan,
(To whom the frailties of collapsed Man
Was known too well) for some disorders grown
Among us Swains is cried, is voted down;
And that fair Livelihood that late maintained
Those love-preserving Festivals which chained
Our mutual hearts in links of love; which clad
The naked Orphan, and relieved the sad
Afflicted widow, and released the bands
Of the lean Prisoner gripped with the hard hands
Of his too just oppressor; this they say
Is to be shortened, if not snatched away.

PHILOR. Ah, gentle Shepherd, heaven, ah, heavens forefend,
Those Tides should ebb that flow to such an end;
But some we fear bin more corrupt then so;
They Are two things, what they should, and what they do.

PHILAR. True my Philorthus, some lewd Swains there be
That have more Bags then Bowels, that can see
Pale misery panting at their Lordly gates,
Answered with Statutes, and repulsive Rates;
Whose hard, whose Adamantine ear can brook
The sad Complaints of those (who cannot look
Beyond the Prospect of consuming Grief)
Without Remorse at all, without Relief;
Whose wanton tables, decked with costly fare,
Pamper their idle bodies, and prepare
Oil for their lust, whose craving thoughts, made poor
With too much wealth, condemn themselves to more;
And such they be Philorthus whose lewd fames
And lives have poisoned the illustrious names
Of reverend Shepherds, whose ambitious pride
Has brought contempt, and made the world deride
What late it honored, now disdained, abhorred
By whom they were as much, ere while, adored.
Ah Shepherd, these are they whose vain ambition
Made us sad Partners in the worlds derision;
But that which wounds my soul beyond redress,
And aggravates my grief above excess,
Those Past'rall staves wherewith those reverend Sages
Of former times have ruled so many ages,
And by a settled Government, exilde
Confused disorder, the prodigious Child
Of factious Anarchie, Those Rods of power
That ruled our Swains by day, and did secure
Their Folds by night, are threatened from our hands,
And all our Flocks to bow to new Commands.

PHILOR. It cannot be, the great Assembly's wise;
Has many Heads, and twice as many Eyes,
Eyes bright as day, that view both things and times,
Fast closed to persons, open to their crimes:
Judgment, nor Fancy, moves in that bright Sphere;
There are no Ends, no by-Respects are there:
The care of Truth, and zeal of public Rest
Rests in their restless, their united breast:
Heaven be their Guide, and may their pains increase
Heavens glory, and this glorious Islands peace;
Ah, think thou Shepherd, their heav'n-guided heart
Will venture to decline his ways, or start
From Heavens Example? Heaven was pleased to bear
With very Sodom, had but ten been there
That had been righteous; loath to mix the blood
Of guilty thousands, with some few of good:
No question, Shepherd, but the enormous crimes
Of our Profession, heightened with the times,
Are foul enough; nor could such Actions lie
Concealed and closed before so clear an Eye;
And being seen, how could they choose but grate
The groaning Feoffees of our tottering State?
How could our growing greatness choose but blow
And quicken up their zealous flames? or how
Could our untamed Ambition hope to stand
Against the power of so great a hand?
But they are just and wise, and wisdom still
Shows rather what it can, then what it will.
When public Justice threatens, it propounds
Way for amendment, rather then confounds:
And far less cost and damage will ensue
To weed old Gardens, then to dig a new.

PHILAR. True, Shepherd, But they plead for want of dressing
Our Garden's forfeited, and they are pressing
Hard for Reentry; They have sealed a Deed
Upon the ground, intending to proceed
Next Term t'Ejectment, by which means they will stand
A new possessed and re-enjoy the Land.

PHILOR. Shepherd, we hold in Term from great god Pan;
His Counsel drew the Lease; If wiser Man
Can find a flaw, our weakness must appeal
To Pan's Vicegerent; He will vouch the seal
Fair and authentic: If the Common Laws
Condemn our Right, by virtue of that Clause
Of heedlesse Forfeiture, O then we fly
To be relieved in the high Chancery,
That uncorrupted Court that now does rest
In the great Chamber of the Assemblies breast:
There Is Judgment there, which idle heaps of gold
Despaires to bribe, and Conscience there unsold:
Poor Shepherds, there, shall find as fair access,
As Peers, as Princes, and as just redress.

PHILAR. Heaven be our great Protection, and close
Their suits-attending ears against all those,
Whom railing Ignorance, and frantic Zeal
Has only taught the way to say, and seal,
And set their marks, not having skill to shape
A Letter; or, without a Lie, to escape
The danger of Non legit, whose profession
Is only to scorn Lambeth, and discretion:
These be fit men, Philorthus, to descend
Into these Lists, sweet Champions to contend
About these Myst'ries, likely to confound
Those famous Worthies that have searched the ground
Of sage Antiquity; wherein of old,
The Government was wrapped, and still enrolled.

PHILAR. Come Shepherd, come, our great Assemblie's wise,
And for a while, in policy complies
With the rude Multitude, who must have day,
To breath their humors, which would else break way,
Like earth-imprisoned Air, whose sudden birth
Startles the world, and shakes the shivering earth:
It is the nature of the vulgar breast
Still to mislike, and count that State the best
Which they enjoy not; Pleased with Novelties,
They grow impatient of the old, and prize
What Is next in hope; more happy in expectation
Then when possessed; all fire to Alteration:
But Shepherd know; our grave Assembly pryes
Where they nere viewed, and looks with clearer eyes;
Their wisdoms know, what sudden Change portends:
Things rash begun, too often in danger ends;
But unavoided ruin daily waits
On sudden change of fundamental States.

PHILAR. I, but Philorthus, whilst the State complies
With the tumultuous Vulgar, tumults rise,
And rude disorder creeps into our plains,
Swains will be Shepherds, Cobblers will be Swains;
Flocks are disturbed, and pastures are defaced;
Swains are despised, and Shepherds are disgraced,
Orders are laughed to scorn; and, in conclusion,
Our Kingdome's turned a Chaos of confusion.

PHILOR. Why Shepherd, there is the Plot: the surest way
To take the Fish, is give her leave to play,
And yield her Line; He best can cure the Cause
That marks the effect; Evil manners breed good Laws:
The wise Assembly knowing well the length
Of the rude popular foot, with what a strength
The vulgar fancy still pursues the Toy
That Is last presented, leaves them to enjoy
Their uncontrolled wills, until they tire
And quickly surfeit on their own desire,
Whose wild disorders secretly confess
Needful support of what they would most suppress:
But who comes here? Anarchus?

PHILAR. It Is the same;


PHILOR. How like a Meteor made of zeal and flame
The man appears?

PHILAR. Or like a blazing Star,
Portending change of State, or some sad War;
Or death of some good Prince.

PHILAR. He is the trouble
Of three sad Kingdoms.

PHILAR. Even the very Bubble,
The froth of troubled waters.

PHILOR. He Is a Page
Filled with Errata's of the present Age;

PHILAR. The Churches Scourge;


PHILOR. The devils Enchiridion.


PHILAR. The Squib, the Ignis fatuus of Religion:
But hee' at hand: Anarchus what is the news?

PHILOR. In a Brown study?


PHILAR. Speechless?


PHILOR. In a Muse?


ANAR. Man, if thou be'st a Babe of Grace,
And of an holy Seed,
I will reply incontinent,
And in my words proceed;
But if thou art a Child of wrath,
And lewd in conversation,
I will not then converse with thee,
Nor hold communication.

PHILOR. I trust Anarchus, we all three inherit
The self same Gifts, and share the self same Spirit.

ANAR. Know then my brethren, heaven is clear,
And all the Clouds are gone;
The Righteous now shall flourish, and
Good days are coming on;
Come then, my Brethren, and be glad,
And eke rejoice with me;
Lawn Sleeves and Rochets shall go down,
And, hey! then up go we.
We Will break the windows which the Whore
Of Babylon has painted,
And when the Popish Saints are down,
Then Barow shall be Sainted;
There Is neither Cr^sse nor Crucifixe
Shall stand for men to see;
Romes trash and trump'ries shall go down,
And, hey! then up go we.
What ere the Popish hands have built
Our Hammers shall undo;
We Will break their Pipes and burn their Copes,
And pull down Churches too:
We Will exercise within the Gr^ves,
And teach beneath a Tree;
We Will make a Pulpit of a Cart,
And, hey! then up go we.
We Will down with all the Varsities,
Where Learning is professed,
Because they practice and maintain
The Language of the Beast:
We Will drive the Doctors out of doors,
And Arts what ere they be,
We Will cry both Arts, and Learning down,
And, hey! then up go we.
We Will down with Deans and Prebends too,
But I rejoice to tell ye,
How then we will eat Pig our fill,
And Cap^n by the belly:
We Will burn the Fathers witty Tomes,
And make the Schoolmen flee,
We Will down with all that s^els of wit,
And, hey! then up go we.
If once that Antichristian crew
Be crushed and overthrown,
We Will teach the Nobles how to croutch,
And keep the Gentry down;
Good manners have an evil report,
And turns to pride we see;
We Will therefore cry good manners down,
And, hey! then up go we.
The name of Lord shall be abhorred,
For every man's a brother,
No reason why in Church or State,
One man should rule another:
But when the change of Government
Shall set our fingers free,
We Will make the wanton Sisters stoop,
And, hey! then up go we.
Our Cobblers shall translate their souls
From Caves obscure and shady,
We Will make Tom T -- as good as my Lord,
And Joan as good as my Lady.
We Will crush and fling the marriage ring
Into the Roman See;
We Will ask no bands, but even clap hands
And, hey! then up go we.

PHILAR. Heaven keep such vermin hence; If sinful dust
May boldly choose a punishment, and trust
Their own desires, let Famine, Plague or Sword,
A treacherous friend, or (what is more abhorred)
A foolish, false, contentious wife, first seize
On our sad souls, then such wild beasts as these.

ANAR. Surely thou art an Hypocrite,
A lewd false-hearted Brother;
I find thou art a Child of Rome,
And smell the whore thy Mother.

PHILOR. Away false varlet; come not nere my flocks;
Thou taint'st my pastures; Neither Wolf nor Fox
Is half so furious; They, by stealth, can prey,
Perchance, upon a Lamb, and so away;
But thy blood-thirsty malice is so bold,
Before my face to poison all my fold:
I warn thee hence, come not within my list;
Be still, what thou art thought, a Separatist.

ANAR. Thou art the spawn of Antichrist,
And so is this thy Brother;
Thou art a man of Belial,
And he is such another:
I say thou art a Priest of Baal,
And surely I defy thee;
To Satan I will leave thy soul,
And never more come nigh thee.

PHILAR. A gentle riddance: O may never cross
Fall heavier on this Land, then such a loss!

PHILOR. But think thou Swain, the great Assemblies eye
Beholds not these base Sycophants that lie
Close gnawing at the root, as well as those,
That with the Romish Axe, strike downright blows
On the main body of Religions tree?
Think thou their sharp eyed Providence can see
The Chamber Councels, and the close designs
Of forain Princes, and their secret Mines
Of State Invention? Can their wisdoms rome
Through all the world, and yet be blind at home?
No, no; Philarchus, the Assemblies hand
Feels but, as yet, the Pulses of the Land,
Seeks out the ev'll; and, with a skillful eye,
Enquiers where the peccant humors lie;
But when the apparent Symptoms shall disclose
The certain griefs that vex and discompose
Our universal Body; then, no doubt,
Their active Wisdoms soon will cast about,
To make a glorious Cure, which shall enhance
Heavens greater glory, settle and advance
The rest of groaning Sion, to the increase
Of their own honor, and great Britains peace.

PHILAR. My bended knee shall never rise till then.


PHILOR. Heaven nere shall rest, till Heaven shall say Amen.


FINIS.

