THE QUAKERS ADDRESS TO THE House of Commons.
Declaring their Suffering Case, Relating To oaths and Swearing, As it was
Presented by George Whitehead, Capt. William Mead, and other Eminent Quakers,
on Friday Last, the 12th. Instant.
IT is not unknown to this Nation, that ever since we were a People, it has
been our Principle not to Swear, make, or take Oaths, which He who is the
searcher of all Hearts knows, is no other than a Case of pure Conscience, in
tender Obedience to the Mind of Our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as
we are fully persuaded, according as many Eminent Martyrs, and Men of Wisdom
and Renown were, who Testified against Oaths and Swearing in the Gospel-Day,
and not any Obstinacy, Disaffection or Worldly Interest whatsoever on our
parts: We being really Willing and Desirous to Answer the Just and Good Ends of
Law and Government, as a peaceable People fearing God, and for this Cause of
not Swearing we have been Exposed to great Sufferings and Inconveniences in
our Persons and Estates, by tedious Imprisonments, and Disabled from Receiving
Our due Debts, or defending Our Just Titles and Properties; not suffered to
give Evidence in Courts of Judicature at Common or Civil Law, nor to Answer in
Chancery or Exchequer, prove Wills and Testaments, or take Administrations, or
to proceed in our Trades at Custom-House, or be admitted to our Lands, or
Trusted in our Duties, and Services in Courts Leet, and Courts Baron; but great
Advantage is taken against us, because we so fear an Oath, as that we dare not
Swear: For which cause also, our Children and Young Men are not allowed their
Freedoms in Cities or Corporations, when they have Faithfully served out their
Apprenteships. Nor admitted to give our Voices in Elections of Magistrates, and
Parliament Members in diverse Places, tho known to have Right thereunto as
Freeholders, etc.

Wherefore Our Request is, That in all Cases where OATHS are imposed, and
Swearing Required, Our Word, that is, our Solemn Affirmation or Denial as in
the fear and presence of God may be accepted instead of an OATH, for which we
Humbly Offer, and Freely Submit, That if any under the same Profession among
us, break their Word, or be found false in such their Affirmation or Denial, or
guilty of Falsehood in any Vnsworn Testimony, Evidence, or Answers, That then
such Penalty be inflicted on the Person so Offending, as Law and Justice
Require in Case of False Swearing or Perjury.

This may be Printed, James Fraser.

LONDON, Printed for W. H. 1689.


