HOSANNA, OR DIVINE POEMS ON THE PASSION OF CHRIST.

BY FRANCIS QUARELES.

LONDON, Printed for John Benson, and are to be sold at his shop in Chancery
Lane near the Roules. 1647.

UPON THE DAY OF OUR SAVIOVRS NATIVITY.
THis day's a riddle for the God that made
This day, this day from his own Creature had
His making too; his flesh, and bone, and lim
And breath from her, that had her breath from him.
Th'unbribed Judge of Man's eternal doom
This day was Prisoner in a Virgins womb:
And the Lord Paramount of all the Earth
Was wanting a poor Tenement at his birth,
Into the Inn this mean guest must not come.
Strange, he that fills all rooms should have no room*
The Sun dropped from his sphere, and did decline
His unshorne head to the Earth; his radiant shine
Peeped from the windores of the East, to breath
New life on People in the shades of Death.
Dear Sun since from thy sphere thou once were sent,
Here is a Soul, make it thy firmament.
Borne of a Virgin.
ALthough the eye of Faith, not reason can
Behold a Virgin Mother of a Man,
Yet Natralists affirm some things may breed
And have their propagation without seed.
As that rich crop of Pease which Story says
Made Orford famous in our Gransires days
The admired Phoenix which admits no pair
In her perfumed ashes leaves an heir.
And this Maiola dares to justify
To be no false, but true history.
By seminall commixtion, I had bin
Distained, and soiled with original sin,
Pure must the Pipe, pure must the Conduit be
That must convey water of-life to me.
Our Sun of righteousness when he would-shine
Upon the world, choose Virgo for his sign.
Borne in Augustus time.
NOw was the man of men great Julius slain,
And with his blood had died the chair in grain
He sat in, in the Senate: and the flood
Which streamd from civil war dried in his blood;
And now the mild Augustus sat above
The Sphere of Rome like a propitious Jove.
And with a milder influence cleared the skies,
And purged these exhalations which did rise
From so much blood effused: or was sent
Like some Apollo to Romes firmament;
For in his sunnie days was learnings spring,
All the Arts flourished, and each Muse did sing
The fullness of all time, who will not think?
When Peace and Learning were so fairly linked?
When Wisdom hadits flourish on the earth,
Then had the Wisdom of the Father birth.
And when the Olive branch of Peace was shown
Then, not before, the Prince of Peace came down!
Borne in Winter.
Phlegmatic Winter on a bed of Snow
Lay spitting full of rhewme; the Sun was now
Inn'd at the Goat; the melancholique Earth
Had her womb bound, and hopeless of the birth
Of one poor flower, the fields, wood, meads, and all
Feared in this snowie sheet a funeral,
Nor only senseless Plants were in decay
Man, who is a Plant reversed, was worse then they*
He had a spiritual Winter, and bereft
Not of his leaves, but juice, nay, nothing less*
His passive power to live was so abated
He was not to be raised, but new created.
When all things else were perished, and when
No flowers were, but in their causes, then
This wondrous Flower it self to act did bring,
And Winter was the Flower lesses spring.
Borne in the Night.
THe hav'ns was now but masked, and now forbids
His eyelike stars to look out of their lids,
For it had been a shame unto the night
If but one star had missed so great asight.
Or else it wa^ muffled in silent shade,
And dressed in sullen blacks, and was afraid
To let one star gaze out, for had it seen
This sight, it had for ever blinded been.
There was a double night, a night of sin,
Dark Heaven designed the darkness we were in
The darkness, which through heaven with silence roules
Was the sad Emblem of our darkened souls.
Now when the Sun, which daily rounds the skies
Was gone to bed, this other Sun did rise;
For happy 'twas not fit there should appear
Two Suns at once, in the same Hemisphere.
The Angels tell it to the Shepherds.
THere is a point of happiness a time se^
Wherein felicity either must be met
Or missed for ever; and that certain now
Is, when we are at our Calllngs; from the Plow
Rome painful Quintus her Dictator makes.
While Matthew gathers toule, and custom takes
He Is called to write a Gospel. At their Net
The sons of Zebedee their conversions met.
And while these men stand Centinells and keep
Strict watd, and watch about their charge their sheep,
They from themselves are rapt with sacred Hymns;
And ravished with a noise of Chernbimes.
That sung this infants lullabie. The story
Has some proportion with the Auditorie,
They Shepherds were, to them the tidings came*
And the first Gospel of the Holy Lamb.
Of the Stars that appeared to the wise men.
Astrology has this rule; Heavens seldom shine
With idle fires; like Prophets they devine
Stupendous events; That spark'ling beam
That did so long in Cassiopia stream,
And shot upon the world an angery glance,
Showed in its looks the Massacree of France
This Star whose coming Balaam had professed,
From some wise men, think these wise men were guest
Not framed by Natures fingers, but the hand
That framed Nature did not move and stand
A non significant, but it self a wonder,
Sew`d that a greater miracle lay under.
How was the eternal Son obscured here
A Stable was his Heaven, a Crib his sphere*
Never had Sun such an Eclips as this,
To want a Star to show ^en where it is.
Of the wise men.
LEt them not boast, that they first saw this Star,
A brawnie brainlesse Clown might go as far,
The Star in Cassiopea as I find.
Ticho confess, was showed him by a Hind,
Wise though they were, they would gone they knew not whether
Had this Star then been sent to lead them thither.
So that the Star which did before them go
Both showed them light, and showed their blindness too.
But why a Star? when God does mean to woe us,
He uses means that are familiar to us.
Peter a fisher was, and with a draught
Of many fishes was the fisher caught:
These men were versed in Stars and well could read them
Therefore a Star is chose ^^out to lead them.
How are men drawn to heaven the way they please,
A fish to^^^ Peter, and a Star takes these.
Of the Innocents.
Hark what is that I hear? O it is the sound
Of Rachel! cause her children can'nt be found.
Herod that Fox: so is his title good
He slayes the tender Lambs, and sucks their blood.
Strange tempered hearts whose edges would not yield
Suppled with all the tears that day were spild;
Hearts of the Rock which like to Diamonds must
Be cut, or never be cut, with their own dust.
There a child giving death a lovely look
Smiles on his executioner; there an other
Asleep is slain; Sleep changed to death his brother
Dennis who sweats to put on rank and file
Heavens Spirits by nine orders; does beguile
Himself and me; his memory was too blame
This order of the Innocents not to name.
Of St. Stephen.
SOme names are ominous, wherein wise fate
Writes in fare Characters men's future state
Hippolitus who scorned incestuou^ sports
Was torn with horses, as his name imports.
Stephen was a Crown, which showed in time to come
He should put on the Crown of Martyrdom.
A Crown enchas'd with stones, nay such a one
Earth cannot boast, 'twas all of precious stone;
The storm of stones which at this Martyr flew
Recoild, enriched with an Orient hue.
The meanest flint which at this Saint was thrown,
Reflects a Rubie, or some richer stone*
The stones advanced to a heap, become
As first our Martyrs Crown, so now his tomb.
Muse, make a Pagan wonder: thus set down,
Here lies a man intombed in his crown.
Of our Saviors Circumcision, or New-yeares day.
THe seventh day from his birth, he did begin
Obedience to the Law and pawnd his s^^n,
He would fulfill it; when Ziskas hour was come
He should expire, he bad them make a Drum
Ofs' skin, conceited it would scare the foe
'Twas strange antipothie, if it would do so.
But this small piece of skin was such a spell
It scared the sootie Regimen^s of Hell.
He as a Prince a Crown like Princes wears,
And Thorns are the Emblemes of a Princes cares:
The Church a Lilly amongst Thorns does grow,
And as the Churches head himself does so.
When Romes Dictators did a Conquest bring
From some sacked Town, or from some petty King
Triumphing Palm, and Temples crowning Bays
Circling their brows shot from their head like rays.
Here Hell was captive, Death it Triumph borne.
And yet Victors head but crowned with Thorn:
Peace; 'twas (...) his blood had did the twigs
And changed (...) of Corrall sprigs,
Or stained the buds, so (...) blush
Out-vied the English or the Province bush.
They gave him Vinegar and Gall, Mat. 27. And Wine mingled with Myrrh, Mark 15.
WHen one was on the cursed tree to die,
They gave Narcotick drink to stupifie
And dull the motion of the active sense
So to allay the racking violence
Of his sharp tortures, and the Rabbis say
That these compounded potions were they
Give Wine to men ready to quit their breath,
Vinegar is his preparative to Death;
He must have naught but Vinegar who has
Trod in the Wine Press of his Fathers wrath.
Those lips that once like honey combs distilled
Are now with gall in stead of honey filled.
And he is presented with a draught of gall,
Whose innocence before had none at all.
One of the Wisemen that to Betblem went
To do him homage, did him Myrh present.
So they did here, but in a different case
'Twas there in honor, here in his disgrace.
They compelled Simon of Syrene to bear his Cross.
HE could not bear his cross, his cross must try
To bear the burden of his Majesty,
A burden which the Legendaries write
Made Christopher to stoop, maugre his might,
Which mazed him, till 'twas whispered in his ear
He had borne him, that all the world did bear.
His Yoke is easy; yet on him they lay
A heavy cross to carry; who dares say
That this was just? yet thus we men requite
Him, who professed that his burthen's light,
But this 'twas made it heavy, there came in
His Fathers wrath to boot, and the worlds fin.
Poor Simon then coming out of the field
Where happily he had plowed, not used a Shield;
Receives the cross for's arms; no Herald can
Produce me such another Gentleman.
So he walks on to Golgotha, where he
Commends his Savior to the fatal Tree
Where Death and Life were wond in mutual strife,
It was his tree of death, our tree of life.
Crucified.
THose hands, which Heaven like to a curten spread,
Are spread upon the Cross: those hands which did
Consolidate the metals in the ground,
One of those metals gave those hands the wound:
See his hands spread, as if he meant to grace
His Executioners with his last embrace,
Nay, all the world: for if his fist can hold
The winds, his arms can all the world enfold.
See there Longinus with his ruder spear
Pierce his Diviners side, from whence appear
Water and blood, whose white and red present
Th'admitting and confirming Sacrament.
See here his feet nailed to the Cross, which done
Those feet with streams of purple did so run,
That in one sense it might be understood
Our Saviors feet were swift to shed blood:
His hands and feet thus forced to obey
The cruel nails command; may we not say
The Star that out of Jacob shined so far
Was then, or never made a fixed Star?
Crucified between two Thieves.
What, reckoned amongst rogues? mixed with the rabble
D^svail'd like the jewel in the fable
Cast in the count amongst thieves? what coin is he
In Jury stamped, yet there not current be?
They should not for inscription sake refuse
Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews;
A Piece so rich, no Angel that could make it
So good, the Devil was content to take it.
When man's arreareages for sin were paid,
And the whole ransom of the world defraid
Those Moralists who anciently did dream
Virtue was not a meant, but an extreme,
If they had seen him placed thus, would swear
Virtue was in the midst, for he was there,
And by his presence made it plain to try
How Virtue looked set by her contrary.
And yet his glory had not an addition
Of luster lent it by this opposition;
To set him off, he stood in need of none
No foil was needful for so rich a Stone.
The Earth did quake.
REst is the property her creator gave her,
But now a Palsy makes her veins to quaver:
How cannot to pass, that wind cholique strove
In the Earths bowels, and did make her move.
She once was built so firmly on her base
She need not fear a shouldering from her place,
It Is true; but wa'st not time to stir, when he
That fastened her, was fastened to a tree.
When he was in his lowest declination,
Then dust and ashes had their exaltation.
And the Earth roused lier self, as if she meant
To be no more the lowest element.
Or since his deaths-men did so bouldly dare,
She taught them by example how to fear.
The Earth did put on man, and trembling shook,
Man put on earth, and no amazement took;
Sure this will aggravate those men's offense
The Earth showed reason, and the men no sense.
The Sun was in a total Eclips, and not as naturally it should have been in
the Sign with the Moon.
TWo Suns were seen, when Charles the Great deceast
Whose mighty wings ore-shaded all the West.
But when this mightier King of Kings did die
Not one appeared to beautify the sky:
For when Great Charles did undergo his doom
One Sun seemed added to supply his room.
But when the God of Natures self was gone
Into a Passion, there was use for none.
Nay, when the Sphere of light was pussed out
How could the Sun poor Taper look about?
Horrid Eclipse; for now the Moon by right
Was not in the Sunes sign, but opposite;
And the same way our sins eclipsed that Sun
Upon the Cross* by opposition.
Miraculous Eclipse, how could the small
And less circumference of the Moon hide all
The larger Sun, but that our darker sin
To aid the Moon, did bring her forces in.
The Graves opened, and many of the Saints arose.
THere was no Trumpet here to raise the dead,
And call them from their graves, nor was there need,
Though no Arch-Angell with a Trumpet cried,
Yet now the Angel of the Covenant died.
And dying cried with a loud voice; and those
Mistook it for the Trumpet, and arose.
They rose, as if it had been theit intents
To give him choice of all their Monuments.
And seeing that he must interment have,
Each Saint did seem to cry, pray take my grave.
When he bowed down his head, the dead raised theirs
And looked out of their frighted Sepulchers.
The souls shot out of heaven in to the dead,
And did a second time their bodies wed.
And though they had not left their blessed thrones
To reassume their ancient flesh and bones:
Yet his last gasp had been enough to have hurled
Souls into all the bodies of the world.
Buried in a Garden.
AFter his spiritual death, first Adam's cast
Out of the Garden, where he had been placed.
After his Corporal, second Adam's put
Into a Garden, and there closely shut.
The first had not gone out but for his sin,
And but for ours, the second not come in.
He Is in a Garden laid* not as one dead,
But as a living Plant set in a bed:
Set in the Spring, and without aid of showers
Sprung in the springtime, like to other flowers
To which he gave the beauty that they have,
And that is the reason, that the spring's so brave,
Nay, wholesome as it is brave; for in that place
Sprung up (if ever) that rich herb of grace.
Our Herbalists have writ that Serpents fear
The virtue of that herb, nor dare come near
Her sovereign power; I care not though they miss
I Am sure the old Serpent dares not come near this.
Buried in a new Tomb hewn out of a Rock.
When Emperors were crowned, Tomb-makers brought
Several stones, and what the Emperor thought
Rest in his choice, that stone was laid aside
To be the Emperors Tombstone when he died.
^his Emperor was crowned but choose no stone,
^seph supplies that want, and chooses one,
and such a one, as might be censured fit
^or him that was to be enclosed in it.
that wondrous stone, which Daniel says was cut
Out of the Rock, that stone it self was put
unto a stone, which lately had forsaken
The rockie Quarrie, whence it had been taken.
That for his Epitaph it might be read,
Here in a stone, a stone lies buried.
'Twas a new Tomb, and was it not most fit
For that pure body which was put in it?
How like his Tomb and maiden Mother is,
Man never lay with her, nor man in this.
He that was taken from a Virgin Womb
Where should he lie but in a Virgin Tomb.
The Mount of Olives.
He Is humble; and that humbleness will show
By the Emblem; Nature plants the Olive low.
But as presaging that from hence should be
The starting of a great ascension, she
Set those upon a Hill, as if she meant
They should have theirs, where he had his ascent,
He Is a King, and his Majesty will show
By th'Emblem; Oil annoints the royal brow
Not liquors, unguents, nor rich Palms we try,
But Oil; for Oil denotes Sovereignty.
Blended with other liquors it will move
In an ambition till it flows above.
In the compounding of a Majesty,
A chief ingredient is humility.
The heightened spirits would be too elate
^f humbleness should not a^ temper state.
In him like friended Elements they do
Commix; he was a Lamb, yet Lion too.
Whit-Sunday: There was a noise from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind.
WHen sad Elijah did by Horeb lie,
A roaring wind so buffeted the sky
As if the musterd vapors had combind
To make one storm; God was not in the wind.
But when the Apostles by consent were met,
After their parture from Mount Olivet
A bellowing tempest vollied from the Sphere,
And filled all the room* and God was there.
The spirit and the wind may seem to be
Employed in consort for their simpathie
When the universe was made, and darkness strove
For place, the spirit did on the waters move;
When the drowned world was to be made again
The wind did move upon the waters then.
Now when the eternal Spirit was to blow
And breath on them, he sent a wind, as though
The uncreated Spirit had assigned
The Other created spirit of the wind
To usher him the way as he should come,
Or be his Harbinger to take his room.
There appeared unto them Tongues.
WHen Babel first reared her ambitious crest
Upon the Plain of Shinar, to contest
With heaven; a different language did beguile
The Founders hopes, and stay the rising Pile,
So when the Church was to be edified,
The builders language was diversified;
But difference of tongues had different power,
It raised the Church and ruined the Tower.
The Apostles were Ambassadors assigned
By the King of Heaven to go to all Mankind;
And 'twas both reason, and their Kings intent
That they should know the tongues before they went
Yet they had none, but as the haste required
Their language was infused, not acquired.
Unlettered souls, poor Fishermen that spoke
Hardly more tongues, then the mute fish they took.
He who is the Fathers word, a promise gave
That he should send, and they a present have.
This mission did the miracle afford,
He sent the Tongues, who was himself the Word.
Tongues of fire, and sat upon each of them.
When fire like the Postilian was past
Elijah; a soft language came at last.
But here was no precedencie in either,
The fire and language did come both together,
For he who Father of all language is,
Was in the Apostles fire, but not in his.
That fierce apparition which did flame
In Moses bush, and not enfire the same,
Helped not his tongues defect, nor did him store
With any dialects unknown before.
Here it did both, here the divided blaze
Refined their style, and varied their phrase
The Prophet had not power to forbear
Because it was fite in his bones; 'twas here
Fire in their tongues; they needs must silence break
Tongues tipped with fire, how can they choose but speak?
The Prophets tongue once with a ^oale had bin
Touched at the Altar by a Cherubin;
But here it were superfluous to require
Coals for these tongues, these tongues themselves were fire,
These tongues the Spirir would not represent
In the dry, cold, or the moist Element,
That temper were too languishing and weak,
So powerful an Embassy to speak.
They must be fire, whose doctrine must be hurled
Swift as the wings of lightning through the world,
And work the effects of lightning; will not hit
A heart of flesh, but gently pass by it.
But grindes these hearts to dust, whose hardness dare
Provoke a Nether Millstone to compare,
And like the lightnings uncontrouled stroke
Slides by a Reed, but ruinates an Oak;
Like fire they were to separate the gold
From the admixture of the impurer mould,
To take the mass of the whole rational creature
To fine, and quintessentiate their nature,
And with the Alchimie of heavenly fire.
Make the extracted spirits to aspire,
Which with repeated heates they so refined
That they drew out the Elixar of Mankind.
Steele-temper'd consciences, and hearts conflate
Of sturdiest metals, as unmoved as fate
Were by the working of the fire made fit,
Celestial forms, and notions to admit.
Their Sermons were not only heard but felt
And made a leaden Auditory melt.
Which being so dissolved they impressed
Divine Ideas in the softened breast
Those parted blazes fixed on them did shine
Like pretty Commets, whence one might divine*
Some alteration; and there was; for then
There was the change of souls, and change of men.
Or else like Stars these little flames did slide
With which the Apostles were all stellified,
And turned to the twelve Signs, through which the Sun
Of Righteousness should as his Zodiac run,
Or from the Phantasme which did then appear*
There was some order instituted there.
The badge was fiery tongues, and they may bost
Themselves of the Order of the Holy Ghost.
FINIS.

