Enchiridion: Containing INSTITVTIONS,

DIVINE Contemplative. Practical.

MORAL Ethicall. Oeconomicall. Political.

WRITTEN BY Fra: Quarles.

LONDON, Printed for R. F. 1644.

To the glorious object of our expe^^^ CHARLES Prince of WALES
When subjects bring presents to their Princes, it is not because their Princes
want them; but that subjects want better ways to express the bounty of their
unknown affections; I know your Highness wants not the best means that all
the world affords, to ground and perfect you in all those Princely Qualities,
which befit the hopeful Son of such a royal Father; yet the boldness of my
zeal is such, that nothing can call back mine arm, or stay the progress of
my Quill, whose emulous desire comes short of none in the expressions of most
loyal and un^^ign'd affection. To which end, I have presumed to consecrate
these few lines to your illustrious Name, as Rudiments to ripen (and they will
ripen) with your growing youth, if they but feel the Sunshine of your gracious
eye. My service in this subject were much too early for your Princely view, did
not your apprehension as much transcend the greenesse of your years; the
forwardness of whose Spring thrusts forth these hasty leaves, Your Highness
is the expectation of the present Age, and the point of future Hopes: and
cursed be he that both with Pen and Prayers shall not be studious to advantage
such a high prized Blessing: Live long our Prince: And when your royal Father
shall convert his ^Regall Diadem into a Crown of Glory, inherit his Virtues
with his Throne and prove another Phoenix to succeeding Generations: So

Prayed for, and Prophesied, by Your Highness most Loyal and most Humble
servant, FRA. QUARLES.
TO The Reader.
ALl rules are not calculated for the Meridian of every State. If all bodies
had the same Constitution; or all Constitutions the same Alteration; and all
Alterations the same Times, the Emperick were the best Physician. If all States
had the same Temper^ and Distempers, and both the same Conservatives, and the
same Cures, Examples were the best directions, and Rules digested from those
Examples, were even almost infallible. The subject of Policy is Civil
Government; the subject of that Government is Men; the variableness of those
Men disabsolutes all Rules, and limits all Examples. Expect not therefore, in
these, or any of the like nature, such impregnable Generals, that no exceptions
can shake. The very discipline of the Church^ established, and confirmed by the
infallible choice, is not ty^d to all times, or to all places. What we here
present you with, as they are no Rocks to build perpetuity upon, so^ they are
not Rocks to split belief upon: It is less danger to rely upon them, then to
neglect them: Nor let any think (in these Pamphleting days, and audacious
times of unlicens'd Pasque^ls) I secretly reflect upon particulars, or look
through a Mask upon the passages of these distempered Times; Far be it off
from my intention, or your imaginations; My true ambition is to present these
few political Observations to the tender youth of my thrice-hopefull Prince,
which like an Introduction may lead him to the civil happiness of more
refined days, and ripen him in the glorious virtues of his renowned Father,
when heaven and the succeeding age shall style him with the name of Charles the
second.

A Table of the Heads of the first CENTURY.
Cent. 1. Chap. ALteration^ 6 Auxiliar. 49 Ambitious men 79 Ambitiousnatures 59
Assault 88 Advice 72 Conquest 3 Climatical advantage 11 Calumny 12 Composition
13 Conspiracy. 19 Correspondency 21 Custom 35 Conquest 36 Civil commotion 37
Courage 43 Castles 45 Clergy 54 Covetousness 90 Counselors 60 Commanders 65
Clemency and severity 70 Commission 83 Church govern. 89 Confidence 94 Clemency
and severity 81 Commander 98 Counselors 24 Demeanor 15 Deliberation 16
Disposition 29 Discovery 31 Design 41 Debt 64 Discontents 67 Delay 68 Deserts
92 Experiments 26 Exaction 28 Exuls 50 Encouragement 71 Fortress 30 Foilish
confiden. 38 Fortress 62 Foreign King. 66 Foreign humors 85 Foreign
inclination 99 Hearts of Sub. 42 Hierarchy 61 Hunting 80 Invasion 2 Just war
20 Idleness 22 Liberality 17 League 76 Love and Fear 95 Mixed governm. 7 Money
10 Manufacture 47 Neutrality 23 Nobility 25 Necessity 69 New Gentry 77 Nobility
58 Opinion 75 Order and fury 93 Piety and Policy 1 Peace 40 Pillars of State 46
Prevention 52 Pleasures 56 Peace 63 Popular Sects 84 Power 86 Quo waranto 100
Rebel 4 Rewards and punishments 14 Reformation 39 Religion 48 Resolution 55
Religion 57 Repute 97 Strength of parts 5 Successor 27 Strength to keep 37
Scandal 44 State-change 51 Secrecy 74 Scruples 78 Situation 81 Sudden
resolution 87 Times 8 Timely war 18 True temper 32 Treachery 73 Variance 53
Virtue 91 War in league 9 War offensive and defensive 33 Weighty service 96
A Table of the Heads contained in the second Century.
Cent 2. Chap. ACtion 4 Action 5 Affections 16 Affections 25 Affliction 36
Affliction 38 Anger 37 Acquaintance 44 Acquaintance 45 Advancement 49 Advantage
54 Anger 60 Avarice 64 Anger 67 Apparel 79 Affection 94 Action 98 Brother 42
Charity 2 Care 24 Company 29 Custom 65 Charity 70 Confession 76 Censure 81
Child 87 Ceremonies 88 Child 97 Daughter 56 Death 100 Death 84 Evil 40 Enemy
68 Evil 78 Faith 11 Fancy 15 Friendship 26 Friend 52 Faith 59 Fast 89 God 28
God 30 Gift 63 Grace 65 Giver 85 Honor 21 Honor 47 Honor 72 Honor 82
Happiness 83 Heaven 99 Ignorance 8 Ignorance 92 Love 7 Love 14 Loss 53 Luxury
74 Money 10 Money 55 Moderation 73 Mysteries 90 Mother 95 News 51 Oppression
61 Promise 1 Pleasing 6 Pride 9 Possession 20 Passion 32 Prosperity 33 Passions
39 Popularity 41 Passion 46 Prosperity 57 Prayer 62 Puritan 91 Pride 96 Riches
17 Reason 19 Reason 22 Religion 31 Recreation 80 Redemption 75 Sinful custom
Souls progress Sin Swearer Sin 71 Servant 93 Time 27 Trembling 34
Theology 35 Thy self 43 Treasure 77 Undertaking 3 Vow 23 Valor 59 Work 13
Wrong 69 Wrong 86
A Table of the Heads contained in the third Century.
Cent. 3. Chap. ARguument 22 A^mes 38 Actions 48 Apparel 67 Argument 69
Adversity 89 Adversity 97 Banishment 7 Beauty 9 Brother 45 Censure 13 Child 18
Children 37 Conversation 47 ^^^y-book 58 ^^arity 71 Censure 78 Conscience 90
Consideration 94 Discourse 5 ^^^^kennesse 14 ^^^^rse 55 Danger 64 Doubt and
opinion 86 Eucharist 39 Esteem 87 Exercise 91 Familiars 27 Fasting 79 Festival
83 Gift 61 God 63 God 92 Harlot 26 Heir 28 Honor 51 Hope 62 Hope and Fear 77
Idiot 16 Journey 30 Intention 36 Justice 74 Innocence and Wisdom 82 Knowledge
73 Knowledge 81 Laughter 3 Lier ^4 Law and Physic 19 Love 46 Library 85 Love
95 Mysteries 20 Mercy 23 Money 31 Multitude 41 Mirth 44 Merit 54 Magistrate 65
Magistrate 88 Obloquie 17 Pains 1 Poor 15 Poor 21 Priest 24 Patience 34
Pal^t 75 Providence and experience 88 Repentance 25 Reso^^tion 35 Reproof 42
Rest 49 Riches 50 Reproof 52 Savior 6 Sin 12 Silence 57 Servant 60 Sabbath
76 Soldier 84 Silence 93 Treasure 29 Tongue 32 Traffiique 40 Theft 56 Table 66
Theology 72 Truth 99 Virtue 8 Vanity 33 Undertaking 53 Virtue 59 Wife 2 Wedlock
11 Weldoing 43 Words 68 Wages 70 Wisdom 80 Wisdom 100
A Table of the Heads contained in the 4th. Cent.
Cent. 4. Chap. Action 12 Affection 61 Banquet 70 Co^tentednesse 10 Conten^
13.^0 Church 33 Confession 35 Cross 41 Commendations 58 Calling 74
Circumspection 77 Common place-books 78 Complaint 94 Child 99 De^^^^ ^
Drunkenness 2 Death 37 Death 53 De^eanour 56 Discourse 73 ^^^^^tion 85 Envy 24
Example 66 Exercise 81 Estimation 88 ^^^re 15 ^^lly 22 Fear 38 Forgiveness 64
Frugality 75 Friend 100 God ^6 Giver ^8 Glory ^7 Gift 52 Give and (...) 57
Gaming 59 Humiliation 11 Heaven 30 Humility 54 Humane writings 65 H^ire 98
Infamy 5 Impropriations ^9 Ig^orance 23 Idleness 27 ^^^t 83 ^^^wledge 4
^^^wledge 62 ^^^^ledge 26 (...) 67 (...) 71 ^^^t^rs 80 ^^^guage 36 Last ^^^ne
^0 Magistracy 6 Man 21 Marriage 40 Magnanimity 42 Misery 48 Mysteries 91 Name
92 Obedience 29 Obedience 41 Obsceannesse 76 Opinion 84 Painting 28 Praise 3^
Prayer 39 Practice 43 Place 44 Philosophy 46 Praise and censure 50 Reputation
25 Repentance 31 Repentance 45 Recreations 49 Rules 72 Reversion 87 Sin 3
Security 60 Safety 63 Superstition 69 Scoffs 68 Scripture 89 Scripture 93
Style 97 Truth 9 Theft 14 Tap^r 55 Temperance 79 Tuition 82 To day 45 Times 96
Virgin 7 Vainglory 16 Use of creatur^ 17 Wicked 18 W^^ ^^
Enchiridion. Cent. 1.
CHAP. I.
PIety and Policy, are like Martha, and Mary, Sisters: Martha fails, if Mary
help not: and Mary suffers, if Martha be idle: Happy is that Kingdom where
Martha complains of Mary; but most happy where Mary complies with Martha:
Where Piety and Policy, go hand in hand, there War shall be just; and Peace,
honourable^

CHAP. II.
LEt not civil discords in a foreign Kingdom, encourage thee to make
invasion. They that are factious among themselves, are jealous of one another,
and more strongly prepared to encounter with a common Enemy: Those whom civil
commotions set at variance, foreign Hostility reconciles. Men rather affect
the possession of an inconvenient Good, then the possibility of an uncertain
Better.

CHAP. III.
IF thou have made a Conquest with thy Sword, think not to maintain it with
thy Scepter: Neither conceive, that new favors can cancel old injuries: No
Conqueror sits secure upon his new got Throne, so long as they subsist in
power, that were dispoil'd of their possessions by his Conquest.

CHAP. IV.
LEt no price nor promise of Honor bribe thee to take part with the Enemy of
thy natural Prince: Assure thy self who ever wins, thou art lost: If thy
Prince prevail, thou art proclaimed a Rebel, and branded for death: If the
Enemy prosper, thou shall be reckned but as a meritorious Traitor, and not
secure of thy self: He that loves the Treason hates the Traitor.

CHAP. V.
IF thy strength of parts has raised thee to eminent place in the
Commonwealth, take heed thou sit sure: If not, thy fall will be the greater:
As Worth is fit matter for Glory; so Glory is a fair mark for Envy. By how
much the more thy Advancement was thought the Reward of Desert; by so much thy
fall will administer matter for disdain: It is the ill fortune of a strong
brain, if not to be dignified as meritorious, to be deprest as dangerous.

CHAP. VI.
IT is the duty of a Statesman, especially in a free State, to hold the
Commonwealth to her first frame of Government, from which the more it swerves,
the more it declines: which being declined is not commonly reduced without that
extremity, the danger whereof, rather ruins then rectifies. Fundamental
Alterations bring inevitable perils.

CHAP. VII.
THere be three sorts of Government; Monarchical, Aristocraticall,
Democraticall; and they are apt to fall three several ways into ruin: The
first, by Tyranny; the second, by Ambition; the last, by Tumults A
Commonwealth grounded upon any one of these, is not of long continuance; but
wisely mingled, each guard the other, and make that Government exact.

CHAP. VIII.
LEt not the proceedings of a Captain, though never so commendable, be
confined to all Times: As these alter, so must they: If these vary, and not
they, ruin is at hand: He least fails in his design, that meets Time in its
own way: And he that observes not the Alterations of the Times, shall seldom
be victorious but by chance: but he that cannot alter his course according to
the Alterations of the Times shall never be a Conqueror: He is a wise
Commander, and only He, that can discover the change of Times, and changes his
Proceedings according to the Times.

CHAP. IX.
IF thou desire to make war with a Prince, with whom thou have formerly
ratified a league; assail some Ally of his, rather then himself: If he resent
it, and come, or send in aid, thou have a fair Gale to thy desires: If not,
his infidelity in not assisting his Ally, will be discovered: Hereby thou shall
gain thy self advantage, and facilitate thy designs.

CHAP. X.
BEfore thou undertake a War, let thine Eye number thy forces, and let thy
judgment weigh them: if thou have a rich Enemy, no matter how poor thy
Soldiers be, if courageous and faithful: Trust not too much the power of thy
Treasure, for it will deceive thee, being more apt to expose thee for a Prey
then to defend thee: Gold is not able to find good Souldies; but good
Soldiers are able to find out Gold.

CHAP. XI.
IF the Territories of thy Equal Enemy are situated far South from thee, the
advantage is thine, whether he make offensive, or defensive war; If North, the
advantage is his: Cold is less tolerable then heat: This is a friend to
Nature; that, an Enemy.

CAAP. XII
IT is not only uncivil, but dangerous for Soldiers, by reproachful^ words,
to throw disgrace upon the Enemy. Base Terms are Bellows to a slaking Fury,
and Goads to quicken up revenge in a fleeing Foe: He that objects Cowardice
against a failing enemy, adds spirit to him, to disprove the aspersion, at his
own cost: It is therefore the part of a wise Soldier to refrain it; or of a
wise Commander, to punish it.

CHAP. XIII.
IT is better for two weak Kingdoms rather to compound an injury (though to
some loss) then seek for satisfaction by the sword; lest while they two
weaken themselves by mutual blows, a third decide the Controversy to both
their Ruins. When the Frog and the Mouse could not take up the quarrel, the
Kite was Umpire.

CHAP. XIV
LEt that Commonwealth which desires to flourish, be very strict, both in her
punishments, and Rewards, according to the merits of the Subject, and offense
of the Delinquent: Let the Service of the Deserver be rewarded, lest thou
discourage worth; and let the Crime of the offender be punished, lest thou
encourage Vice: the neglect of the one weakens a Commonwealth; the omission of
both ruins it.

CHAP. XV.
IT is wisdom for him that sits at the Helm of a settled State, to demean
himself toward his subjects at all times, so, that^ upon any evil accident,
they may be ready to serve his occasion: He that is only gracious at the
approach of a danger, will be in danger, when he expects deliverance.

CHAP. XVI.
IN all designs, which require not sudden Execution, take mature deliberation,
and weigh the convenients, with the inconvenients, and then resolve; after
which, neither delay the execution, nor bewray thy intention. He that discovers
himself, till he has made himself Master of his desires, lays himself open
to his own Ruin, and makes himself prisoner to his own tongue.

CHAP. XVII.
LIberality in a Prince is no Virtue, when maintained at the Subjects unwilling
Cost. It is less reproach, by miserableness, to preserve the popular love,
then by liberality to deserve the private thanks.

CHAP. XVIII.
IT is the excellent property of a good and wise Prince, to use War as he does
Physic, carefully, unwillingly, and seasonably,^ either to prevent
approaching dangers, or to correct a present mischief, or to recover a former
loss. He that declines Physic till he be accosted with the danger, or
weakened with the disease, is bold too long, and wise too la^e. That Peace is
too precise, that limits the justness of a War to a sword drawn, or a Blow
given.

CHAP. XIX.
LEt a Prince that would beware of Conspiracies, be rather jealous of such whom
his extraordinary Favors have advanced, then of those whom his pleasure has
discontented: These want means to execute their pleasures; but they have
means at pleasure to execute their desires: Ambition to rule is more vehement,
then Malice to Revenge.

CHAP. XX.
BEfore thou undertake a War, cast an impartial Eye upon the Cause: If it be
just, prepare thy Army; and let them all know, they fight for God and thee: It
adds fire to the spirit of a Soldier, to be assured, that he shall either
prosper in a fair War, or perish in a just Cause.

CHAP. XXI.
IF thou desire to know the power of a State, observe in what correspondence it
lives with her neighboring State: If She make Alliance with the Contribution
of Money, it is an evident sign of weakness: If with her valor, or repute of
forces, it manifests a native strength: It is an infallible sign of power, to
sell friendship; and of weakness to buy it: That which is bought with Gold,
will hardly be maintained with Steel.

CAAP. XXII.
IN the Calmes of Peace it is most requisite for a Prince, to prepare against
the storms of War, both Theorically, in reading Heroic Histories; and
practically, in maintaining Martial discipline: Above all things, let him
avoid Idleness, as the Bane of Honor; which in Peace, indisposes the Body;
and in War, effeminates the Soul: He that would be in War victorious, must
be in Peace laborious.

CHAP. XXIII.
IF thy two neighboring Princes fall out, show thy self, either a true
Friend, or a fair Enemy; It is indiscretion, to adhere to him whom thou have
least cause to fear, if he vanquish: Neutrality is dangerous, whereby thou
becomest a necessary Prey to the Conqueror.

CHAP. XXIV
IT is a great argument of a Princes wisdom, not only to choose, but also to
prefer wise Counselors: And such are they, that seek less their own
advantages, then his; whom wise Princes ought to reward, lest they become their
own Carvers; and so, of good Servants, turn bad Masters.

CHAP. XXV.
IT much conduces to the dishonor of a King, and the ilfare of his Kingdom,
to multiply Nobility, in an overproportion to the Common people: Cheap Honor
darkens Majesty; and a numerous Nobility brings a State to necessity.

CHAP. XXVI.
IT is very dangerous, to try experiments in a State, unless extreme
necessity be urgent, or popular utility be palpable: It is better for a State
to connive a while, at an inconvenience, then too suddenly to rush upon a
Reformation.

CHAP. XXVII.
IF a valiant Prince be succeeded by a weak Successor, he may for a while,
maintain a happy State, by the remaining virtue of his glorious Predecessor:
But if his life be long; or dying he be succeeded by one less valiant then the
first, the Kingdom is in danger to fall to ruin. That Prince is a true Father
to his Country, that leaves it the rich inheritance of a brave Son. When
Alexander succeeded Philip, the world was too little for the Conqueror.

CHAP. XXVIII.
IT is very dangerous for a Prince, or Republike, to make continual practice
of cruel exaction: For, where the Subject stands in sense, or expectation of
evil, he is apt to provide for his safety, either from the evil he feels, or
from the danger he fears; and growing bold in Conspiracy, makes Faction; which
Faction is the Mother of Ruin.

CHAP. XXIX.
BE careful to consider the good, or ill disposition of the people toward
thee upon ordinary occasions: if it be good, labor to continue it; if evil,
provide against it: As there is nothing more terrible then a dissolute
Multitude without a Head; so there is nothing more easy to be reduced; (if
thou can endure the first shock of their fury;) which if a little appeased,
every one begins to doubt himself, and think of home, and secure themselves,
either by flight, or Agreement.

CHAP. XXX.
THat Prince who stands in fear more of his own people, then strangers, ought
to build Fortresses in his Land: But he that is more afraid of Strangers then
his own People, shall build them more secure in the Affections of his Subjects.

CHAP. XXXI.
CArry a watchful Eye upon dangers before they come to ripeness, and when
they are ripe, let loose a speedy hand: He that expects them too long^ or meets
them too soon, gives advantage to the evil: Commit their beginnings to Argus
his hundred Eyes, and their ends to Briareus his hundred Hands, and thou art
safe.

CHAP. XXXII.
OF all the difficulties in a State, the Temper of a true Government most
felicifies and perpetuates it: Too sudden Alterations distemper it. Had Nero
turned his Kingdom as he did his Harp, his Harmony had been more honorable,
and his Reign more prosperous.

CHAP. XXXIII.
IF a Prince, fearing to be assailed by a foreign Enemy, has a wellarm'd
people, well addressed for War, let him stay at home, and expect him, there: But
if his subjects be unarmed, or his Kingdom unacquainted with the stroke of
War, let him meet the enemy in his Quarters. The farther he keeps the War
from his own Home, the less danger. The Seat of War is always miserable.

CHAP. XXXIV.
IT is a necessary wisdom for a Prince to grow in strength, as he increases in
Dominions: it is no less virtue to keep, then to get: Conquests not having
power answerable to their greatness, invite new Conquerors to the ruin of the
old.

CHAP. XXXV.
IT is great prudence in a statesman, to discover an inconvenience in the
birth; which, so discovered, is easy to be suppressed: But if it ripen into a
Custom, the sudden remedy thereof is often worse then the disease: in such a
Case, it is better to temporize a little, then to struggle too much. He that
opposes a full-ag'd inconvenience too suddenly, strengthens it.

CHAP. XXXVI.
IF thou have conquered a Land, whose Language differs not from thine, change
not their Laws and Taxes, and the two Kingdoms will in a short time
incorporate, and make one body: But if the Laws and Language differ, it is
difficult to maintain thy Conquest; which that thou may the easier do,
observe three things: First, to live there in person, (or rather send
Colonies:) Secondly, to assist the weak inhabitants, and weaken the mighty:
Thirdly, to admit no powerful Foreigner to reside there: Remember Lewis the
thirteenth of France; How suddenly he took Milan, and how soon he lost it.

CHAP. XXXVII.
IT is a gracious wisdom in a Prince, in civil Commotions, rather to use
Iuleps, then Phlebotomy; and better to breath the distemper by a wise delay,
then to correct it with too rash an Onset: it is more honorable, by a slow
preparation to declare himself a gracious Father, then by a hasty War to
appear a furious Enemy.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
IT is wisdom for a Prince in fair weather to provide for Tempests: He that
so much relies upon his peoples faith, to neglect^ his own preparation,
discovers more Confidence then wisdom: He that ventures to fall from above,
with hopes to be caught below, may be dead ere he come to ground.

CHAP. XXXIX.
HE that would reform an ancient State in a free City^ buys convenience with a
great danger: To work this Reformation with the less mischief, let such a one
keep the shadows of their ancient Customs, though in substance they be new:
Let him take heed when he alters the natures of things, they bear at least the
ancient names. The Common people, that are naturally impatient of innovations,
will be satisfied with that which seems to be as well as that which is.

CHAP. XL.
Upon any difference between foreign States, it is neither safe nor
honorable for a Prince, either to buy his Peace, or to take it up at interest:
He that has not a Sword to command it, shall either want it, or want Honor
with it.

CHAP. XLI.
IT is very requisite for a Prince, not only to weigh his designs in the
flower, but likewise in the fruit: He is an unthrift of his honor that
enterprises a design, the failing wherein may bring him more Disgrace, then
the success can gain him Honor.

CHAP. XLII.
IT is much conducible to the happiness of a Prince, and the security of his
State, to gain the hearts of his Subjects: They that love for fear, will
seldom fear for love: it is a wise Government which gains such a Tie upon
the Subject, that he either cannot hurt, or will not: But that Government is
best and most sure, when the Subject joys in his obedience.

CHAP. XLIII.
LEt every Soldier arm his mind with hopes, and put on courage: Whatsoever
disaster falls, let not his heart sink. The Passage of providence lies through
many crooked ways; A despairing heart is the true Prophet of approaching evil:
his actions may weave the webs of fortune, but not break them.

CHAP. XLIV.
IT is the part of a wise Magistrate to vindicate a man of power or
State-imployment from the malicious scandals of the giddy-headed multitude, and
to punish it with great severity: Scandal breeds Hatred; Hatred begets
Division; Division makes Faction, and Faction brings Ruin.

CHAP. XLV.
THe strongest Castles a Prince can build, to secure him from Domesticke
commotions, or foreign Invasions, is in the hearts of his Subjects; And the
means to gain that strength is, in all his actions to appear for the public
good, studious to contrive, and resolute to perform.

CHAP. XLVI.
A Kingdom is a great building, whose two maine supporters are the Government
of the State, and the Government of the Church: It is the part of a wise Master
to keep those Pillars in their first posture, irremoveable: If either fail,
it is wisdom rather to repair it, then remove it: He that pulls down the
old, to set up a new, may draw the roof upon his head, and ruin the
foundation.

CHAP. XLVII.
IT is necessary wisdom in a Prince to encourage in his Kingdom, Manufacture,
Merchandise, Arts, and Arms In Manufacture lie the vital spirits of the body
politic: In Merchandise, the spirits natural; In Arts and Arms, the
Animal: If either of these languish, the Body droopes: As these flourish, the
Body flourishes.

CHAP. XLVIII.
TRue Religion is a setler in a State, rather then a Stickler; While she
confirms an established Government, she moves in her own Spheer: But when she
endeavors to alter the old, or to erect a new, she works out of her own
Vineyard: When she keeps the Keys, she sends showers of Milk: But when she
draws the Sword, she sails in Seas of Blood: Labor therefore to settle
Religion in the Church; and Religion shall settle Peace in thy Land.

CHAP. XLIX.
IF thou entertain any forraig^e Soldiers into thine Army let them bear thy
Colors, and be at thy Pay, lest they interest their own Prince: Auxiliary
Soldiers are the most dangerous: A foreign Prince needs no greater
invitation to seize upon thy City, then when he is required to defend it.

CHAP. L.
BE cautious in undertaking a design, upon the report of those that are
banished their Country, lest thou come off with shame or loss, or both. Their
end expects advantages from thy Actions, whose miseries lay hold of all
opportunities, and seek to be redrest by thy Ruin.

CHAP. LI.
IF thou endeavourest to make a Republique in a Nation where the Gentry
abounds, thou shall hardly prosper in that design: And if thou would erect
a Principality in a Land, where there is much equality of people, thou shall
not easily effect it. The way to bring the first to pass, is to weaken the
Gentry: The means to effect the last, is to advance and strengthen ambitious,
and turbulent spirits; so that being placed in the midst of them, their forces
may maintain thy power; and thy favor may preserve their Ambition: Otherwise
there shall be neither proportion nor continuance.

CHAP. LII.
IT is more excellent for a Prince to have a provident Eye for the preventing
future mischiefs, then to have a potent Arm for the suppressing present
evils: Mischiefs in a State are like Hectique Fevers in a body: In the
beginning hard to be known, but easy to be cured; but, let it alone a while,
it becomes more easy to be known, but more hard to be cured.

CHAP. LIII.
IF a Kingdom be apt to Rebellion, it is wisdom to preserve the Nobility and
Commons at variance: Where one of them is discontented, the danger is not
great: The Commons are slow of motion, if not quickened with the Nobility; the
Nobility is weak of power, if not strengthened by the Commons: Then is danger,
when the Commonalty troubles the water, and the Nobility steps in.

CHAP. LIVE.
IT is very requisite for a Prince to have an Eye that the Clergy be elected,
and come in, either by collation from him, or particular patrons, and not by
the People; and that their power hold dependence upon home, and not foreign
Authority: It is dangerous in a Kingdom, where the Crosiars receive not their
power from the Regal Sword.

CHAP. LV.
IT is a perilous weakness in a State, to be slow of resolution in the time
of War: To be irresolute in determination is both the sign, and the ruin of
a weak State: such affairs attend not Time: Let the wise Statesman therefore
abhor delay, and resolve rather what to do, then advise what to say: Slow
deliberations are symptoms, either of a faint courage, or weak Forces, or
false Hearts.

CHAP. LVI.
IF a Conqueror has subdued a country, or a city abounding with pleasures,
let him be very circumspect to keep himself and his soldiers temperate.
Pleasures bring effeminacy; and effimenacy fore-runs ruin: such conquests,
without blood or sweat, sufficiently do revenge themselves upon their
intemperate conquerours.

CHAP. LVII.
IT is an infallible sign of approaching ruin in a Republike, when Religion
is neglected, and her established ceremonies interrupted: let therefore that
Prince that would be potent, be pious; and that he may punish looseness the
better, let him be religious: the joy of Jerusalem depends upon the peace of
Sion.

CHAP. LVIII.
LEt that Prince that desires full sovereignty, temper the greatness of too
potent a Nobility: a great and potent Nobility quickens the people, but presses
their fortunes: it adds Majesty to a Monarch, but diminishes his power.

CHAP. LIX.
IT is dangerous for a Prince to use ambitious Natures, but upon necessity,
either for his Wars, or to be Skreens to his dangers, or to be instruments
for the demolishing insolent greatness: and that they may be the less
dangerous, let him choose them rather out of mean births then noble; and out of
harsh natures, rather then plausible. And always be sure to balance them with
those that are as proud as they.

CHAP. LX.
LEt Princes be very circumspect in the choice of their Councillors, choosing
neither by the greatness of the beard, nor by the smoothness of the face: let
him be wise, but not crafty: active, without private ends: courageous, without
malice: religious, without faction: secret without fraud; one better read in
his Princes business, then his Nature: and a riddle only to be read above.

CHAP. LXI.
IN a mixed Monarchy, if the Hierarchy grow too absolute, it is wisdom in a
Prince, rather to depresse it then suppress it: all alterations in a
fundamental Government bring apparent dangers; but too sudden alteration
threatens inevitable ruin: when Aaron made a moulten Calfe, Moses altered not
the Government, but reproved the Governor.

CHAP. LXII.
BEfore thou build a Fortress, consider to what end: if for resistance against
the Enemy, it is useless; a valiant Army is a living Fortress: if for
suppressing the subject, it is hurtful: it breeds Jealousies, and Jealousies
beget hatred: if thou have a strong Army to maintain it, it adds nothing to thy
strength: if thy Army be weak it conduces much to thy danger: the surest
Fortres^e is the hands of thy soldiers, and the safest Citadell is the hearts
of thy subjects.

CHAP. LXIII.
IT is a Princely Alchymie, out of a necessary War to extract an honorable
Peace, and more beseeming the Majesty of a Prince to thirst after Peace, then
conquest: blessedness is promised to the Peacemaker; not to the conqueror: it
is a happy State, whose Prince has a peaceful Hand, and a Martial Heart,
able both to use Peace, and to manage War.

CHAP. LXIV.
IT is a dishonorable thing for a Prince to ^unne in debt for Stateservice;
but to pay it in the pardon of a Criminal Offense, is most dangerous. To
cancel the faults of subjects, with their deserts, is not only the symptom
of a disordered Commonwealth, but also of her Ruin.

CHAP. LXV.
LEt not a Commander be too forward to undertake a War, without the person of
his Prince: it is a thanklesse imploiment, where mischief attends upon the
best success; and where (if a Conqueror) he shall be in danger, either
through his own Ambition, or his Princes suspicion.

CHAP. LXVI
IT is a great oversight in a Prince, for any respects, either Actively, or
Passively to make a foreign Kingdom strong: he that gives means to another
to become powerful, weakens himself, and enables him to take the advantage of
his own weakness.

CHAP. LXVII.
When the humors of the people are stirred by discontents, or popular grief,
it is wisdom in a Prince to give them moderate liberty to evaporate: he that
turns the humor back too hastily makes the wound bleed inwardly, and fil^
the body with malignity.

CHAP. LXVIII.
IF having levied an Army, thou find thy self too weak, either through the
want of men or money; the longer thou delayst to fight, the greater thy
Inconvenience grows: if once thy Army falls as^nder, thou certainly loosest by
thy delay: where hazarding thy fortunes betimes, thou have the advantage of thy
men, and may by fortune wi^^e the day: it is less dishonor to be overcome
by force then by flight.

CHAP. LXIX.
IT is the part of a wise Commander in Wars, either Offensive or Defensive,
to work a necessity of fighting into the breasts of his Soldiers: Necessity of
action takes away the fear of the Act, and makes bold Resolution the favorite
of Fortune.

CHAP. LXX.
CLemency and mildness is most proper for a Principality, but reservednesse
and severity for a Republique; but moderation in both: Excess in the one
breeds contempt: in the other, Hatred; when to sharpen the first, and when to
sweeten the the last, let Time and Occasion direct thy judgment.

CHAP. LXXI.
IT is very requisite for a Prince that desires the continuance of Peace, in
time of Peace to encourage, and respect his Commanders: When brave Spirits
find neglect to be the effect of quiet times, they devise all means to remove
the Cause, and by suggesting inducements to new Wars, disturb and unsettle
the old Peace, buying private honor with public danger.

CHAP. LXXII.
BE not covetous for priority in advising thy Prince to a doubtful Attempt,
which concerns his State: if it prosper, the Glory must be his; if it fail,
the dishonor will be thine: When the Spirit of a Prince is stopped in the
discharge, it will recoyle and wound the first adviser.

CHAP. LXXIII.
IF being the Commander of an army, thou espiest a gross and manifest error in
thine Enemy, look well to thy self, for treachery is not far off: He whom
desire of victory binds too much, is apt to stumble at his own Ruin.

CHAP. LXXIV.
IT is the height of a provident Commander not only to keep his own designs
indiscoverable to his Enemy; but likewise to be studious to discover his: He
that can best do the one, and nearest guess at the other, is the next step to
a conqueror. But he that fails in both, must either ascribe his Overthrow to
his own Folly, or his victory to the Hand of Fortune.

CHAP. LXXV.
IF thou be ambitious of Honor, and yet fearful of the Canker of Honor,
Envy; so behave thy self, that Opinion may be satisfied in this, that thou
seek Merit, and not ^^me; and that thou attribute^t thy Preferment rather to
Providence, then thy own Virtue: Honor is a due debt to the deserver; and who
ever envied the payment of a debt? a just advancement is a providentiall act,
and who ever envied the act of Providence?

CHAP. LXXVI.
IT behooves a Prince to be very circumspect before he make a League; which,
being made, and then broke, is the forfeiture of his Honor: He that obtaines a
Kingdom with the rupture of his faith, has gained the Glory of a Conquest,
but lost the honor of a Conqueror.

CHAP. LXXVII.
LEt States that aim at greatness, beware lest new Gentry multiply too fast,
or grow too glorious; Where there is too great a disproportion betwixt the
Gentry and the common Subject, the one grows insolent; the other slavish: When
the body of the Gentry grows too glorious for a Corslet, there the heads of
the vulgar wax too heavy for the Helmet.

CHAP. LXXVII.
Upon the beleaguering of a city, let the Commander endeavor to take from the
Defendants, all scruples which may invite them to a necessity of defense: Whom
the fear of slavery necessitates to fight, the boldness of their resolution
will disadvantage the assaylants, and difficilitate their design: Sense of
necessity justifies the War; and they are hopeful in their arms, who have
no other hope but in their arms.

CHAP. LXXIX.
IT is good for States and Princes (if they use ambitious men for their
advantage) so to order things, that they be still progressive, rather then
retrograde: When ambitious men find an open passage, they are rather busy
then dangerous; and if well watched in their proceedings, they will catch
themselves in their own snare, and prepare a way for their own destruction.

CHAP. LXXX.
OF all Recreations, Hunting is most proper to a Commander; by the frequency
whereof he may be instructed in that necessary knowledge of situation, with
pleasure; which, by earnest experience, would be dearly purchased. The Chase is
a fair Resemblance of a hopeful War, proposing to the Pursuer a flying
Enemy.

CHAP. LXXXI.
EXpect the army of thy Enemy on plain and easy ground, and still avoid
mountainous and rocky places, and straight passages, to the utmost of thy
power: it is not safe to pitch any where, where thy forces cannot be brought
together: He never deserved the name of good Gamster, that hazards his whole
Rest, upon less then the strength of his whole Game.

CHAP. LXXXII.
IT matters not much whether in government, thou tread the steps of severe
Hannibal, or gentle Scipio, so thy actions be honorable, and thy life
virtuous: Both in the one, and the other, there is both defect and danger, if
not corrected, and supported by the fair Repute of some extraordinary
Endowments: No matter, whether black or white, so the Steed be good.

CHAP. LXXXIII
IT is the safest way in a Martial expedition, to commit the maine charge to
one: Companions in command beget confusion in the Camp: When two able
Commanders are joined in equal Commission, each is apt to think his own way
best, and by mutual thwarting each other, both give opportunity to the Enemy.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
IT is a high point of Providence in a Prince to observe popular Sects in their
first Rise, and with ^ severe hand, to nippe them in the Budde: But being once
full aged, it is wisdom not to oppose them with too strong a hand; lest in
suppressing one, there arise two: a soft Current is soon stopped; but a strong
stream resisted, breaks into many, or overwhelmes all.

CHAP. LXXXV.
IT makes very much to thy advantage to observe strictly the National virtues,
and vices, and humors of foreign Kingdoms, whereby the times past shall read
useful Lectures to the times present: He that would see what shall be, let him
consider what has been.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
IF, like Manlius, thou command stout and great things, be like Manlius stout
to execute great commands: it is a great blemish in Sovereignty when the Will
roares, and the Power whispers: if thou can not execute as freely as thou
commandst, command no more then what thou may as freely execute.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
IF one Prince desire to obtain any thing of another, let him (if occasion
will bear it) give him no time to advise: Let him endeavor to make him see a
necessity of sudden resolution, and the danger either of Denial, or Delay; He
that gives time to resolve, gives leisure to deny, and warning to prepare.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
LEt not thine army at the first encounter be too prodigal in her assaults but
husband her strength for a dead lift: When the enemy has abated the fury of
his first heat; let him then feel thou have reserved thy forces for the last
blow; So shall the honor he has gained by his valor increase the glory of
thy victory: Fore-games when they prove are speediest, but after-games, if
wisely played, are surest.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
IT is very requisite for a Prince to keep the Church always in proportion to
the State. If the Government of the one be Monarchical, and the other
Democraticall, they will agree, like Metal joined with clay, but for a while.
Durable is that State, where Aaron commands the people, and where Moses
commands Aaron: But most happy in the continuance, where God commands both.

CHAP. XC.
LEt not the Covetousness of a Captain purloyne to his own use, or any way
bereave his soldiers of any profit due unto their service, either in their
means or spoils: Such injuries (being quickn'd by their daily necessities)
are never forgot: What Soldiers earne with the hazard of their lives, (if not
enjoyed) prophesies an overthrow in the next Battle.

CHAP. XCI.
IF a Prince expect virtuous Subjects, let his Subjects have a virtuous prince;
So shall he the better punish the vices of his degenerate Subjects; So shall
they trulier prize virtue, and follow it, being exemplified in their Prince.

CHAP. XCII.
IT is the property of a wise Commander, to cast an eye rather upon Actions,
then upon persons; and rather to reward the merits of men then to read the
Letters of Ladies: He that for favor, or reward, preferres a worthless
Soldier, betrays a Kingdom, to advance a Traitor.

CHAP. XCIII.
Where Order and Fury are well acquainted, the War prospers, and Soldiers
end no less men then they begun: Order is quickened by Fury, and Fury is
regulated by Order: But where Order is wanting Fury runs her own way, and being
an unthrift of its own strength, failing in the first assault, cravens; and
such beginning more then men, end less then women.

CHAP. XCIV.
IT is the quality of a wise Commander, to make his Soldiers confident of his
wisdom, and their own strength: if any danger be, to conceal it; if manifest,
to lessen it: Let him possess his army with the justness of the War, and
with a certainty of the victory. A good cause makes a stout heart, and a strong
arm. They that fear an overthrow, are half conquered.

CHAP. XCV.
IT is requisite in a General to mingle love with the severity of his
Discipline: they that cannot be induced to fear for love, will never be
enforced to love for fear: Love opens the heart, Fear shuts it: That
encourages, This compelles: And victory meets encouragement, but flees
Compulsion.

CHAP. XCVI.
IT is the part of a well advised State never to entrust a weighty service,
unto whom a noted injury or dishonor has been done; He can never be zealous
in performance of Service, the height of whose expectation can rather recover a
lost name, then gain a fresh honor.

CHAP. XCVII.
THree ways there be to begin a Repute, and gain dignities in a Commonwealth:
The first by the virtue of glorious Parents, which, till thou degenerate too
much, may raise thee upon the wings of Opinion: The second is by associating
with those, whose actions are known eminent: The third, by acting some exploit,
either public or private, which in thy hand has proved honorable. The two
first may miss, being founded on Opinion: the last seldom fails, being
grounded upon Evidence.

CHAP. XCVIII.
IF thou art called to the Dignity of a Commander, dignify thy place by thy
Commands: and that thou may be the more perfect in commanding others,
practice upon thy self: Remember, thou art a servant to the public weal, and
therefore forget all private respects, either of kin or friend: Remember thou
art a Champion for a Kingdom; forget therefore all private affections either
of Love or Hate: He that would do his Country right, must not be too sensible
of a personal wrong.

CHAP. CXIX.
IT is the part of a wise Commander to read Books, not so much as Men; nor men
so much as Nations: He that can discern the inclinations, conditions, and
passions of a Kingdom, gains his Prince a great advantage both in Peace and
War.

CHAP. C.
ANd you most High and Mighty Princes of this lower World, who at this
intricate and various game of War, vye Kingdoms, and win Crowns; and by
the death of your renowned Subjects, gain the lives of your bold-hearted
Enemies; Know there is a Quo Warranto, Whereto you are to give account of your
Eye-glorious actions, according to the righteous rules of Sacred Justice: How
warrantable it is to rend imperial Crowns from off the Sovereign heads of
their too weak possessours; or to snatch Scepters from out the conquered hand
of heaven-anointed Majesty, and by your vast ambitions still to enlarge your
large Dominions, with Kingdoms ^avisht from their natural Princes, judge you.
O let your brave designs, and well-weighed actions, be as just as ye are
glorious; and consider, that all your Wars, whose ends are not to defend your
own Possessions, or to recover your dispossessions ^a^e but Princely injuries,
which none but heaven can right. But where necessity strikes up her hard
Alarmes, or wronged Religion, beats her zealous Marches, Go on, and prosper,
and let both Swords and Stratagems proclaim a victory, whose noys'd renown may
fill the world with your eternal Glory.

The End of the first Century.
ENCHIRIDION. The Second Book.
To the fair Branch of growing Honor, and true virtue, Mrs Elizabeth Usher,
only Daughter and Heir apparent to the most Reverend Father in God, JAMES,
Archbishop of Armagh, Lord Primate of all Ireland, His GRACE.
SWEET LADY,
I Present your fair hands with this my Enchiridion, to begin a new Decade of
our blessed Account: If it add nothing to your well-instructed Knowledge, it may
bring somewhat to your well-dispos'd Remembrance: If either, I have my end; and
you, my endeavor: The service which I owe, and the affection which I bear your
most incomparable Parents, challenges the utmost of my ability; wherein, if I
could light you but the least step toward the happiness you aim at, how
happy should I be? Go forward in the way which you have chosen: wherein, if my
Hand cannot lead you, my Heart shall follow you; and where the weakness of my
power shows defect, there the vigor of my Will shall make supply.

W^oam covetous of your happiness in both Kingdoms and Worlds. FRA. QUARLES.
Enchiridion. Cent. 2.
CHAP. I.
A Promise is a child of the understanding and the will: the understanding
begets it, the will brings it forth: he that performs it, delivers the mother:
he that breaks it, murders the child. If he be begotten in the absence of the
understanding, it is a Bastard; but the child must be kept. If thou mistrust
thy understanding, promise not; if thou have promised, break it not: it is
better to maintain a Bastard then to murder a child.

CHAP. II.
CHarity is a naked child, giving honey to a Be without wings: naked, because
excuselesse and simple; a child, because tender and growing: giving honey,
because honey is pleasant and comfortable: to a Be, because a Be is laborious
and deserving; without wings, because helpless, and wanting. If thou deniest
to such, thou killest a Be; If thou giv'st to other then such, thou preserv'st
a Drone.

CHAP. III.
BEfore thy undertaking of any design, weigh the glory of thy action with the
danger of the attempt: if the glory outweigh the danger, it is cowardice to
neglect it: if the danger exceed the glory, it is rashness to attempt it: if
the Balances stand poised, let thy own Genius cast them.

CHAP. IV.
Would thou know the lawfulness of the action which thou desire to
undertak? let thy devotion recommend it to divine blessing: if it be lawful,
thou shall perceive thy heart encouraged by thy prayer: if unlawful, thou
shall find thy prayer discouraged by thy heart. That action is not
warrantable, which either blushes to beg a blessing, or having succeeded,
dares not present thanksgiving.

CHAP. V.
IF evil men speak good, or good men evil of thy conversation, examen all
thy actions, and suspect thy self. But if evil men speak evil of thee, hold
it as thy honor, and by way of thankfulness, love them, but upon condition,
that they continue to hate thee.

CHAP. VI.
IF thou hope to please all, thy hopes are vain; if thou fear to displease
some, thy fears are idle. The way to please thy self is not to displease the
best; and the way to displease the best, is to please the most: if thou can
fashion thy self to please all, thou shall displease him that is All in All.

CHAP. VII.
IF thou neglectest thy love to thy neighbor, in vain thou professest thy love
to God: for by thy love to God, the love to thy neighbor is begotten, and by
the love to thy neighbor, thy love to God is nourisht.

CHAP. VIII.
THy ignorance in unrevealed Mysteries, is the mother of a saving Faith; and
thy understanding in revealed Truths, is the mother of a sacred Knowledge:
understand not therefore that thou may believe, but believe that thou may
understand: understanding is the wages of a lively Faith, and Faith is the
reward of an humble ignorance.

CHAP. IX.
PRide is the ape of charity; in show, not much unlike; but somewhat fuller of
action. In seeking the one, take heed thou light not upon the other: they are
two Parallels; never but a ^under: charity feeds the poor, so does pride:
charity builds an Hospital, so does pride: in this they differ: charity gives
her glory to God; pride takes her glory from man.

CHAP. X.
Have thou lost thy money, and do thou mourn? another lost it before
thou-hadst it; be not troubled: perchance if thou had not lost it now, it had
lost thee for ever: think therefore what thou rather have escaped then lost:
perhaps thou had not been so much thy own, had not thy money been so little
thine.

CHAP. XI.
FLatter not thy self in thy faith to God, if thou wantst charity for thy
neighbor; and think not thou have charity for thy neighbor, if thou want
faith to God; where they are not both together, they are both wanting; they are
both dead, if once divided.

CHAP. XII.
BE not too ^low in the breaking of a sinful custom: a quick courageous
resolution is better then a graduall deliberation: in such a combat, he is the
bravest soldier that lays about him without fear or wit. Wit pleades; fear
disheartens; he that would kill Hydra, had better strike off one neck then
five heads: fell the Tree, and the Branches are soon cut off.

CHAP. XIII.
BE careful rather of what thou do, then of what thou have: for what thou
have is none of thine, and will leave thee at thy death, or thou the pleasure
of it, in thy sickness. But what thou do, is thine, and will follow thee to
thy grave, and plead for thee or against thee at thy Resurrection.

CHAP. XIV
IF thou enjoyest not the God of love, thou can not obtain the love of God,
neither until then can thou enjoy a desire to love God, nor relish the love
of God: thy love to God is nothing but a faint reflection of Gods love to thee:
till he please to love thee, thy love can never please him.

CHAP. XV.
LEt not thy fancy be guided by thine eye; nor let thy will be governed by thy
fancy: thine eye may be deceived in her object, and thy fancy may be deluded in
her subject: let thy understanding moderate between thine eye, and thy fancy;
and let thy judgment arbitrate between thy fancy and thy will; so shall thy
fancy apprehend what is true: so shall thy will elect what is good.

CHAP. XVI.
Endeavor to subdue as well thy irascible, as thy concupiscible affections: to
endure injuries with a brave mind, is one half of the conquest; and to
abstain from pleasing evils with a courageous spirit is the other: the sum
of all humanity, and height of moral perfection, is Bear, and Forbear.

CHAP. XVII.
IF thou desire not to be too poor, desire not to be too rich: He is rich, not
that possesses much, but he that covets no more: and he is poor, not that
enjoyes little, but he that wants too much: the contented mind, wants nothing
which it has not: the covetous mind wants not only what it has not, but
likewise what it has.

CHAP. XVIII.
THe outward senses are the common Cinque Ports where every subject lands
toward the understanding. The ear hears a confused noise, and presents it to
the common sense. The common sense distinguishes the several sounds, and
conveys it to the fancy: the fancy wildly discants on it: the understa^ding
(whose object is truth) apprehending it to be Music, commends it to the
judgment. The judgment severally and jointly examines it, and recommends it
to the will: the will (whose object is good) approves it, or dislikes it; and
the memory records it, And so in the other senses according to their subjects
Observe this progress, and thou shall easily find where the defect of every
action lies.

CHAP. XIX.
THe way to subject all things to thy self, is to subject thy self to Reason:
thou shall govern many, if Reason govern thee: would thou be crowned the
Monarch of a little world? command thy self.

CHAP. XX.
THough thou give all thou have for charity sake, and yet retainest a secret
desire of keeping it for thy own sake, thou rather leavest it then forsakest
it: He that has relinquisht all things, and not himself, has forsaken
nothiug; he that sets not his heart on what he possesses, forsakes all things,
though he keep his possessions.

CAAP. XXI.
SEarch into thy self before thou accept the ceremony of honor: if thou art a
Palace, honor (like the Sunbeams) will make thee more glorious: if thou art
a Dunghill, the Sun may shine upon thee, but not sweeten thee. Thy Prince may
give thee honor, but not make the honorable.

CHAP. XXII.
EVery man is a King in his own Kingdom. ^f Reason command, and passion obey,
his government speaks a good King: if thine inordinate affection rules, it
shows a proud Rebel; which; if thou destroy not, will depose thee: there is no
mean between the death of a Rebel, and the life of a Prince.

CHAP. XXIII.
A Vow, a promise, and a resolution, have all one object, only differ in
respect of the persons to whom they are made; the first is between God and
man. The second, between man and man; the third, between man and his own
soul; they all bind, if the object be lawful, to necessity of performance: if
unlawful, to the necessity of sin: they all take thee prisoner: if the
object be lawful, thy performance has redeemed thee; if unlawful, blood and
tears must ransom thee.

CHAP. XXIV.
IF thou have any business of Consequence in agitation, let thy Care be
reasonable, and seasonable: continual standing bent weakens the Bow: too hasty
drawing breaks it. Put off thy cares with thy clothes: so shall thy Rest
strengthen thy labor; and so shall thy labor sweeten thy Rest.

CHAP. XXV.
When thy inordinate affections do flame toward transitory happiness, quench
them thus: think with thy self; if my Prince should give me what honor he
has to bestow, or bestow on me what wealth he has to give, it could not stay
with me, because it is transitory; nor I with it, because I am mortal: then
revise thy affections; and weigh them with their object, and thou will either
confess thy folly, or make a wiser choice.

CHAP. XXVI.
With three sorts of men enter no serious friendship: the ^ngratefull man; the
Multiloquious man; the Coward: the first cannot prize thy favors; the second
cannot keep thy Counsel; the third dare not vindicate thy Honor.

CHAP. XXVII.
IF thou desire the time should not pass too fast, use not too much pastime:
thy life in Jollity blazes like a Tapour in the wind: the blast of honor wastes
it, the heat of pleasure melts it; if thou labor in a painful calling, thou
shall be less sensible of the flux of Time, and sweetlier satisfied at the
time of Death.

CHAP. XXVIII.
GGd is Alpha and Omega, in the great world; endeavor to make him so in the
little world; make him thy evening Epilogue, and thy morning Prologue; practice
to make him thy last thought at night when thou sleep; and thy first thought
in the morning when thou awakest: so shall thy fancy be sanctified in the
night, and thy understanding rectified in the day; so shall thy rest be
peaceful, thy labors prosperous, thy life pious, and thy death glorious.

CHAP. XXIX.
BE very circumspect in the choice of thy company. In the society of thine
equals thou shall enjoy more pleasure; in the society of thy superiors thou
shall find more profit: to be the best in the company, is the way to grow
worse: the best means to grow better, is to be the worst there.

CHAP. XXX.
Think of God (especially in thy devotion) in the abstract, rather then the
concrete: if thou conceive him good, thy finite thoughts are ready to terminate
that good in a conceived subject; if thou think him great, thy bounded
conceit is apt to cast him into a comprehensible figure: conceive him
therefore, a diffused goodness without quality, and represent him an
incomprehensible greatness without quantity.

CHAP. XXXI.
IF thou and true Religion be not as yet met; or met, unknown; by these marks
thou shall discover it. First, it is a Religion that takes no pleasure in the
expense of blood. Secondly, it is a Religion whose Tenants cross not the book
of Truth. Thirdly, it is a Religion, that takes most from the creature, and
gives most to the creator: if such a one thou meet with, assure thy self it
is the right, and therefore profess it in Life, and protect it to thy Death.

CHAP. XXXII.
LEt another passion be a lecture to thy reason, and let the Ship-wracke of
his understanding be a Seamarke to thy passion: so shall thou gain strength
out of his weakness; safety out of his danger; and raise thy self a building
out of his ruins.

CHAP. XXXIII.
IN the height of thy prosperity expect adversity, but fear it not; if it come
not, thou art the more sweetly possessed of the happiness thou have, and the
more strongly confirmed; if it come, thou art the more gently dispossessed of the
happiness thou had, and the more firmly prepared.

CHAP. XXXIV.
TO tremble at the sight of thy sin, makes thy faith the less apt to
tremble: the Devils believe, and tremble, because they tremble at what they
believe; their belief brings trembling: thy trembling brings belief.

CHAP. XXXV.
AUthology is the way to Theology: until thou see thy self empty, thou will
not desire to be filled: he can never truly relish the sweetness of Gods mercy,
that never tasted the bit^ernesse of his own Misery.

CHAP. XXXVI.
IS any outward affliction fallen upon thee, by a temporary loss? advise with
thy self, whether it be recoverable, or not: if it be, use all such lawful
and speedy means (the violence and unseasonablenesse whereof may not
disadvantage thee in the pursuit) to recover it; if not recoverable, endure
with patience what thou can not recure with pains: he that carnally afflicts
his soul for the loss of a transitory good, casts away the kirnell, because he
has lost the shell.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Natural anger glances into the breasts of wisemen, but rests in the bosom of
fools: in them, it is infirmity; in these, a sin: there is a natural anger;
and there is a spiritual anger; the common object of that, is the person; of
this, his vice: he that is always angry with his sin, shall seldom sin in
his anger.

CHAP. XXXVIII
IF any hard affliction has surprised thee, cast one eye upon the hand that
sent it; and the other, upon the sin that brought it; if thou thankefully
receive the message, he that sent it will discharge the messenger.

CHAP. XXXIX.
ALl passions are good or bad, according to their objects: where the object is
absolutely good, there the greatest passion is too little: where absolutely
evil, there the least passion is too much: where indifferent, there a little
is enough.

CHAP. XL.
WHen thou do evil that good may come thereby, the evil is surely thine: if
good should happen to ensue upon the evil which thou have done; the good
proceeds from God; if therefore thou do evil, thereby to occasionate a good,
thou la^^t a bad foundation for a good building; and ^ervest the Devil that
God may serve thee: where the end of evil is good in the intention, there the
end of that good is evil in the extention.

CHAP. XLI.
BE as far from desiring the popular love, as fearful to deserve the
popular hate: ruin dwells in both: the one will hug thee to death; the other
will crush thee to destruction: to escape the first, be not ambitious; to avoid
the second, be not seditious.

CHAP. XLII.
When thou see misery in thy brothers face, let him see mercy in thine eye;
the more the oil of mercy is powered on him by thy pity, the more the oil in
thy Cruse shall be increased by thy Piety.

CHAP. XLIII.
Read not books alone, but men, and amongst them chiefly thy self: if thou
find any thing questionable there, use the Commentary of a severe friend,
rather then the gloss of a sweet-lipt flatterer: there is more profit in a
distasteful truth, then deceitful sweetness.

CHAP. XLIV.
IF the opinion of thy worth invite any to the desire of thy acquaintance,
yield him a respect suitable to his quality: too great a reservation will expose
thee to the sentence of Pride; too easy access will condemn thee to the
censure of Folly: things, too hardly endeavored, discourage the seeker: too
easily obtained disparage the thing sought for: too easily got, is lowly
prized, and quickly lost,

CHAP. XLV.
When convenience of time has ripened your acquaintance, be cautious what
thou say, and courteous in what thou do: observe his inclination: if thou
find him weight, make him thine own, and lodge him in a faithful bosom: be
not rashly exceptio^s, nor rudely familiar: the one will breed contention; the
other contempt.

CHAP. XLVI.
When Passion is grounded upon Fancy, it is commonly but of short
continuance: Where the foundation is unstable, there the building is not
lasting; He that will be angry for any Cause, will be angry for no Cause; and
when the understanding perceives the cause vain, then the judgment proclaims
the the effect void.

CHAP. XLVII.
IF thou desire to purchase Honor with thy wealth; consider first how that
wealth became thine: if thy labor got it, let thy wisdom keep it: if
Oppression found it, let Repentance restore it: if thy parent: left it, let thy
virtues deserve it: let thy virtues deserve it: So shall thy honor be safer,
better, and cheaper.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Sin is a Basitiske whose eyes are full of Venom, if the eye of thy soul
see her first, it reflects her own poison and kills her: if she see thy soul,
unseen, or seen too late, with her poison, she kills thee: Since therefore thou
can not escape thy Sin, let not thy Sin escape thy observation.

CHAP. XLIX.
IF thou expect'st to rise by the means of Him whom thy Fathers greatness
raised from his service to Court preferment, thou will be deceived: For the
more in esteem thou art, the more sensible is He of what he was, whose former
servitude will be Chronicled by thy advancement, and glory obscured by thy
greatness: However he will conceive it a dead service, which may be interpreted
by thee, as a merited Reward, rather then a meritorious benefit.

CHAP. L.
TRust not to the promise of a common swearer, for he that dare sin against his
God, for neither profit nor pleasure, will trespass against thee for his own
advantage. He that dare break the precepts of his Father, will easily be
persuaded to violate the promise unto his Brother.

CHAP. LI.
LEt the greatest part of the news thou hear be the least part of what thou
beleevest, lest the greatest part of what thou beleevest be the least part of
what is true. Where lies are easily admitted, the Father of lies will not
easily be excluded.

CHAP. LII.
DEliberate long, before thou consecrate a Friend; and when thy impartial
judgment concludes him worthy of thy bosom, receive him joyfully, and
entertain him wisely: impart thy secrets boldly, and mingle thy thoughts with
his: He is thy very self; and use him so: if thou firmly think him Faithful,
thou make him so.

CHAP. LIII.
AS there is no worldly gain, without some loss, so there is no worldly loss
without some gain. If thou have lost thy wealth, thou have lost some trouble
with it: if thou art degraded from thy Honor thou art likewise freed from the
stroke of envy; if sickness has blurred thy beauty, it has delivered thee
from pride, Set the allowance against the loss, and thou shall find no loss
great; He loses little or nothing, that reserves himself.

CHAP. LIVE.
IF thou desire to take the best advantage of thy self (especially in matters
where the Fancy is most employed) keep temperate diet, use moderate exercise,
observe seasonable, and set hours for Rest; Let the end of thy first sleep
raise thee from thy Repose: Then has thy Body the best temper; Then has thy
Soul the least incumberance: Then no noise shall disturb thy Ear; No object
shall divert thine Eye: Then, if thy sprightly Fancy transport thee not beyond
the common pitch, and show thee not the Magazin of high invention, return thee
to thy wanton Bed, and there conclude thy self more fit to wear thy Mistresses
Favor, then Apolloes Bays.

CHAP. LV.
IF thou art rich strive to command thy money, lest she command thee: if thou
know how to use her, she is thy Servant: if not, thou art her Slave.

CHAP. LVI.
BRing thy daughter a husband of her own Religion, and of no hereditary
disease; Let his wisdom outweigh his wealth: Let his parentage excel his
person, and let his years exceed hers: Let thy prayers recommend the rest to
providence: if he prove, thou have found a Son: if not, thou have lost a
Daughter.

CHAP. LVII.
SO use Prosperity, that Adversity may not abuse thee: if in the one, Security
admits no fears; in the other, Despair will afford no hopes: He that in
Prosperity can foretell a danger, can in adversity foresee deliverance.

CHAP. LVIII.
IF thy faith have no doubts, thou have just cause to doubt thy faith; and if
thy doubts have no hope, thou have just reason to fear despair; When therefore
thy doubts shall exercise thy faith, keep thy hopes firm to qualify thy
doubts; So shall thy Faith be secured from doubts: So shall thy doubts be
preserved from despair.

CHAP. LIX.
IF thou desire to be truly valiant, fear to do any injury: He that fears
not to do evil, is always afraid to suffer evil: He that never fears is
desperate: And he that fears always, is a Goward: He is the true valiant man,
that dares nothing but what he may, and fears nothing but what he ought.

CHAP. LX.
ANger may repast with thee for an hour, but not repose for a night: The
continuance of Anger is Hatred, the continuance of Hatred turns Malice. That
anger is not warrantable, which has seen two Suns.

CHAP. LXI
IF thou stand guilty of oppression, or wrongfully possessed of another Right;
see, thou make Restitution before thou give an Alms: if otherwise, what art
thou but a Thief, and make God thy Receiver?

CHAP. LXII.
When thou pray'st for spiritual Graces let thy prayer be absolute; When, for
temporal Blessings, add a Clause of Gods pleasure: in both, with Faith, and
Humiliation: So shall thou undoubtedly receive what thou desire, or more, or
better; Never prayer rightly made, was made unheard, or heard, ungranted.

CHAP. LXIII.
He that gives all, though but little, gives much; because God looks not to
the quantity of the Gift, but to the quality of the Givers: He that desires to
give more then he can, has equaled his Gift to his desire, and has given
more then he has.

CHAP. LXIV.
Be not too greedy in desiring Riches, nor too eager in seeking them: nor too
covetous in keeping them; nor too passionate in losing them: the first will
possess thy soul of discontent; The second will dispossess thy body of Rest;
The third will possess thy wealth of thee; The last will dispossess thee of
thy self: He that is too violent in the concupiscible; will be as violent in
the irascible.

CHAP. LXV.
Be not too rash in the breaking of an inconvenient custom: As it was gotten,
so leave it by degrees. Danger attends upon too sudden Alterations: He that
pulls down a bad building by the great, may be ruined by the fall: But he that
takes it down Brick by Brick, may live to build a better.

CHAP. LXVI.
IF thou desire that inestimable Grace of saving Faith, detest that insatiable
vice of damnable Covetousness: it is impossible, one heart (though never so
double) should lodge both: Faith possesses thee of what thou have not;
Covetousness dispossesses thee of what thou have: Thou can not serve God,
unless Mammon serve thee.

CHAP. LXVII.
BEware of him that is slow to Anger: Anger when it is long in coming, is the
stronger when it comes, and the longer kept. Abused patience turns to fury:
When Fancy is the ground of passion, that understanding which composes the
Fancy qualifies the passion; But when judgment is the ground the Memory is the
Recorder.

CHAP. LXVIII.
He that professes himself thy open enemy, arms thee against the evil he
means thee, but he that dissembles himself thy secret Friend, strikes beyond
Caution, and wounds above Cure: From the first, thou may deliver thy self:
From the last, good Lord deliver thee.

CHAP. LXIX.
IF thou have wronged thy brother in thought, reconcile thee to him in thought;
if thou have offended him in words, let thy reconciliation be in words: if thou
have trespassed against him in deeds, by deeds be reconciled to him: That
Reconciliation is most kindly which is most in kind.

CHAP. LXX.
NOt to give to the poor is to take from him: Not to feed the hungry, if thou
have it, is the utmost of thy power to kill him: That therefore thou may
avoid both Sacriledg and Murder, Be Charitable.

CHAP. LXXI.
SO often as thou remembrest thy sins without Grief, so often thou repeatest
those sins for not grieving: He that will not mourn for the Evil which he
has do^e, gives earnest for the Evil he means to do; Nothing can assuage
that fire which Sin has made, but only that Water which Repentance has
drawn.

CHAP. LXXII.
LOok well before thou leap into the chair of Honor: The higher thou climbest
the lower thou fallest: if Virtue prefer thee, Virtue will preserve thee: if
Gold or Favor advance thee, thy Honor is pinned upon the wheel of Fortune:
When the wheel shall turn, thy Honor falls, and thou remain'st an
everlasting Monument of thy own ambitious folly.

CHAP. LXXIII.
We are born with our temptations: Nature sometimes presses us to evil,
sometimes provokes us unto good; if therefore thou give her more then her
due, thou nourishest an enemy; if less then is sufficient, thou destroyest a
friend: Moderation will prevent both.

CHAP. LXXIV.
IF thou scorn not to serve Luxury in thy Youth, Chastity will scorn thy
service in thy Age; and that the Will of thy green years thought no Vice in
the acting, the necessity of thy gray hairs makes no Virtue, in the
forbearing: Where there is no Conflict, there can be no Conquest; where there
is no Conquest, there is no Crown.

CHAP. LXXV.
THou did nothing toward thy own Creation, for thou were created for thy
Creators glory; Thou must do something toward thy own Redemption, for thou
were redeemed for thy own good: He that made thee without thee, will not save
thee without thee.

CHAP. LXXVI.
WHen thy tongue and heart agree not in confession, that confession is not
agreeable to Gods pleasure: He that confesses with his tongue, and wants
confession in his heart, is either a vain man, or an Hypocrite: He that has
confession in his heart, and wants it in his tongue, is either a proud man, or
a timorous.

CHAP. LXXVII.
GOld is Caesar's Treasure, Man is Gods: Thy Gold has Caesar's image, and thou
have Gods; Give therefore those things unto Caesar which are Caesar's; and unto
God, which are Gods.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
IN the Commission of evil, fear no man so much as thy own self: Another is
but one witness against thee: Thou art a thousand: Another thou may avoid,
but thy self thou (...) not; Wickedness is its own punishment.

CHAP. LXXIX.
IN thy Apparel avoid Singularity, Pro^usenesse and Gaudinesse; Be not too
early in the fashion; nor too late: Decency is the half way between
Affectation and Neglect: The Body is the shell of the Soul; Apparel is the
Husk of that Shell; The Husk often tells you what the Kirnell is.

CHAP. LXXX.
LEt thy recreation be manly, moderate, seasonable, lawful; if thy life be
Sedentary, more tending to the exercise of thy Body; if active, more to the
refreshing of thy mind: The use of Recreation is to strengthen thy Labor, and
sweeten thy Rest.

CHAP. LXXXI.
Be not censorious, for thou know not whom thou judge; it is a more
dextrous error to speak well of an evil man, then ill of a good man. And
safer for thy judgment to be missed by simple Charity, then uncharitable
Wisdom: He may tax others with privilege, that has not in himself, what
others may tax.

CHAP. LXXXII.
TAke heed of that Honor which thy wealth has purchased thee, for it is
neither lasting, nor thine own. What money creates, money preserves: if thy
wealth decays, thy Honor dies; it is but a slippery happiness which ^ortunes
can give and Frowns can take; and not worth the owning which a nights Fire can
melt, or a rough Sea can drown.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
IF thou can desire any thing not to be repented of, thou art in a fair way
to Happiness; if thou have attained it, thou art at thy ways end; He is not
happy who has all that he desires, but that desires nothing but what is good;
if thou can not do what thou need not repent, yet endeavor to repent what
thy necessity has done.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
SPend a hundred years in Earths best pleasures; and after that, a hundred
more; to which being spent, add a thousand; and to that, ten thousand more;
the last shall as surely end, as the first are ended, and all shall be
swallowed with Eternity: He that is born to day, is not sure to live a day; He
that has lived the longest, is but as he that was born yesterday: The
Happiness of the one is, That he has lived; the Happiness of the other is,
That he may live; and the lot of both is, That they must dye: it is no
happiness to live long, nor unhappiness to dye soon: Happy is he that has
lived long enough, to dye well.

CHAP. LXXXV.
BE careful to whom thou give, and how: He that gives him that deserves not,
loses his gift, and betrays the giver. He that conferres his gift upon a
worthy receiver, makes many debtors, and by giving, receives. He that gives for
his own ends, makes his gift a bribe, and the receiver a prisoner: He that
gives often, ^eaches requittance to the receiver, and discovers a crafty
confidence in the giver.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
Has any wronged thee? Be bravely revenged: Slight it, and the work's begun;
Forgive it, and it is finished: He is below himself that is not above an injury.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
LEt not thy passion miscall thy Child, lest thou prophecy his fortunes: Let
not thy tongue curse him, lest thy curse return from whence it came: Curses
sent in the room of blessings are driven back with a double vengeance.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
IN all the Ceremonies of the Church which remain indifferent, do according
to the constitution of that Church where thou art: The God of Order and Unity,
who created both the Soul and the Body, expects Unity in the one, and Order in
both.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
LEt thy religious Fast be a voluntary abstinence, no^ so much from Flesh, as
Fleshly thoughts: God is pleased with that Fast which gives to another, what
thou deniest to thy self; and when the afflicting of thy own Body, is the
repairing of thy Brothers. He fasts truly that abstains sadly, grieves really,
gives cheerfully, and forgives charitably.

CHAP. XC.
IN the hearing of Mysteries keep thy tongue quiet: five words cost Zacharias
forty weeks silence: In such heights, convert thy Questions into Wonders; and
let this suffice thee, The Reason of the Deed, is the power of the Doer.

CHAP. XCI.
DEride not him whom the looser world calls Puritan, lest thou offend a little
one: if he be an Hypocrite, God, that knows him, will reward him; if zealous,
that God that loves him, will revenge him: if he be good, he is good to Gods
Glory: if evil, let him be evil at his own charges: He that judges, shall be
judged.

CHAP. XCII.
SO long as thou art ignorant, be not ashamed to learn: He that is so fondly
modest, not to acknowledge his own defects of knowledge, shall in time, be so
foully impudent to justify his own ignorance: ignorance is the greatest of all
infirmities; and, justified, the chiefest of all Follies.

CHAP. XCIII.
IF thou be a Servant, deal just by thy Master, as thou desire thy Servant
should deal with thee: Where thou art commanded, be obedient; where, not
commanded, be provident: Let diligence be thy Credit; Let faithfulness be thy
crown: Let thy Masters credit be thy care, and let his welfare be thy content:
Let thine Eye be single, and thy heart, humble: Be Sober, that thou may be
circumspect: He that in Sobriety is not his own man, being drunk, whose is he?
Be neither contentious, nor Lascivious: The one shows a turbulent Heart; The
other an idle Brain. A good Servant is a great Master.

CHAP. CXIV.
LEt the Foundation of thy Affection be Virtue, then make the Building as rich,
and as glorious as thou can: if the Foundation be Beauty, or Wealth, and the
building Virtue, the Foundation is too weak for the Building; and it will fall:
Happy is he, the Palace of whose affection is founded upon Virtue, wal'd with
Riches, glazed with Beauty, and Roof'd with Honor.

CHAP. XCV.
IF thy mother be a widow, give her double honor, who now acts the part of a
double Parent. Remember her nine mone^hs burden, and her tenth months
travel: forget not her indulgence, when thou did hang upon her tender
breast. Call to mind her prayers for thee before thou came into the world;
and her cares for thee when thou were come into the world. Remember her secret
Groans, her affectionate tears, her broken slumbers, her daily fears, her
nightly frights. Relieve her wants; cover her imperfections; comfort her age:
and the widows husband, will be the Orphans Father.

CHAP. XCVI.
AS thou desire the love of God and man, beware of Pride: it is a tumor in
thy mind that breaks and poisons all thy actions; it is a worm in thy
treasure which eats and ruins thy estate: it loves no man; is beloved of no
man; it disparages virtue in another by detraction; it disrewards goodness in
it self, by vain glory: the friend of the flatterer, the mother of envy, the
nurse of fury, the baud of luxury, the sin of devils, and the devil in
mankind: it hates superiors, it scorns inferiors, it owns no equals: in
short, till thou hate it, God hates thee.

^HAP. XCVII.
SO behave thy self among thy children, that they may love and honor thy
presence: be not too fond, lest they fear thee not: be not too bitter, lest
they fear thee too much; too much familiarity will embolden them; too little
countenance will discourage them: so carry thy self, that they may rather
fear thy displeasure, then thy correction; when thou reprov'st them, do^ it in
season; when thou correct'st them, do it not in passion: as a wise child makes
a happy father, so a wise father makes a happy child.

CHAP. XCVIII,
When thy hand has done a good act, ask thy heart if it be well done: the
matter of a good action is the deed done; the form of a good action is the
manner of the doing: in the first, another has the comfort, and thou the
glory; in the other, thou have the comfort, and God the glory: that deed is ill
done wherein God is no sharer.

CHAP. XCIX.
Would thou purchase Heaven? advise not with thy own ability. The pr^ze of
Heaeen is what thou have; examine not what thou have, but what thou art: give
thy self, and thou have bought it: if thy own vileness be thy fears, offer
thy self and thou art precious.

CHAP: C.
THe Birds of the air dye to sustain thee; the Beasts of the field die to
nourish thee; the Fishes of the Sea dye to feed thee. Our stomachs are their
common Sepulcher. Good God! with how many deaths are our poor lives patcht up!
How full of death is the miserable life of momentary man!

The (...) of the second Century.
THE Third Century.
CHAP. I.
IF thou take pains in what is good, the pains vanish, the good remains: If
thou take pleasure in what is evil, the evil remains, and the pleas^^e
vanishes: what art thou the worse for pains, or the better for pleasure, when
both are past?

CHAP. II.
IF thy fancy, and judgment have agreed in the choice of a fit wife, be not
too fond, lest she surfeit, nor too peevish, lest she languish: love so, that
thou may be feared; rule so, that thou may be honored: be not too
diffident, lest thou teach her to deceive thee, nor too suspicious, lest thou
teach her to abuse thee: if thou see a fault, let thy love hide it; if she
continue it, let thy wisdom reprove it: reprove her not openly, lest she grow
bold: rebuke her not tauntingly, lest she grow spiteful: proclaim not her
beauty, lest she grow proud: host not her wisdom, lest thou be thought
foolish; show her not thy imperfections, lest she disdain thee: pry not into
her Dairy, lest she desprise thee: profane not her ears with loose
communication, lest thou defile the sanctuary of her modesty? an understanding
husband, makes a discreet wife; and she, a happy husband.

CHAP. III.
WRinckle not thy face with too much laughter, lest thou become ridiculous;
neither wanton thy heart with too much mirth, lest thou become vain: the
suburbs of folly is vain mirth, and profuseness of laughter, is the City of
fools.

CHAP. IV.
LEt thy tongue take counsel of one eye, rather then of two ears; let the
news thou reportest be rather stale then false, lest thou be branded with the
name of liar. It is an intolerable dishonor to be that which only to be
called so, is thought worthy of a Stabbe.

CHAP. V.
LEt thy discourse be such, as thy judgment may maintain, and thy company may
deserve. In neglecting this, thou losest thy words; in not observing the other,
thou losest thy self. Give wash to swine, and wort to men; so shall thou
husband thy gifts to the advantage of thy self, and shape thy discourse to the
advancement of thy hearer.

CHAP. VI.
Do thou roar under the Torments of a Tyrant? weigh them with the sufferance
of thy S^viour, and they are no plague. Do thou rage under the Bondage of a
raving Conscience? compare it to thy Saviors passion, and it is no pain Have
the tortures of Hell taken hold of thy dispairing soul? compare it to thy
Saviors torments, and it is no punishment: what sense unequally compares, let
faith enterchangeably apply; and thy pleasures have no comparison. Thy sins
are the Authors of his sufferings; and his hell is the price of thy heaven.

CHAP. VII.
ARt thou banished from thy own Country? thank thy own folly: had thou
chosen a right home, thou had been no Exul: had thou commanded thy own
Kingdom, all Kingdoms had been thy own: the fool is banished in his own
Country; the wiseman is in his own Country, though banished: the fool wanders
the wiseman travels.

CHAP. VIII.
IN seeking virtue, if thou find poverty, be not ashamed: the fault is none of
thine. Thy honor, or dishonor is purchased by thy own actions. Though virtue
give a ragged livery, she gives a golden Cognizance: If her service make thee
poor, blush not. Thy poverty may disadvantage thee, but not dishonor thee.

CHAP. IX.
GAze not on Beauty too much, lest it blast thee: nor too long, lest it blind
thee; nor too near, lest it burn thee: if thou like it, it deceives thee; if
thou love it, it disturbs thee; if thou lust after it, it destroies thee: if
virtue accompany it, it is the hearts paradise; if vice associate it, it is the
souls purgatory: it is the wisemans Bonefire, and the fools Furnace.

CHAP. X.
IF thou would have a good servant, let thy servant find a wise master: let
his food, rest, and wages be seasonable: let his labor, recreations, and
attendance depend upon thy pleasure: be not angry with him too long, lest he
think thee malicious; nor too soon, lest he ^onceive thee rash; nor too
often, lest he count thee humorous. Be not too fierce lest he love thee not;
nor too remiss, lest he fear thee not; nor too familiar, lest he prize thee
not. In brief, whilst thou giv'st him the liberty of a servant, beware thou
losest not the Majesty of a Master.

CHAP. XI.
IF thou desire to be chaste in Wedlock, keep thy self chaste before thou
wedd'st: he that has known pleasure unlawf^lly, will hardly be restrained
from unlawful pleasure. One woman was created for one man. He that straies
beyond the limits of liberty, is brought into the verge of Slavery. Where one
is enough, two is too many, and three is too few.

CHAP. XII.
IF thou would be justified acknowledge thy injustice: he that confesses his
sin, begins his journey toward salvation: he that is sorry for it, mends his
pace: he that forsakes it, is at his journies end.

CHAP. XIII.
BEfore thou reprehend another, take heed thou art not culpable in what thou
go about to reprehend. He that cleanses a blot with blotted fingers, makes a
greater blur.

CHAP. XIV.
BEware of drunkenness, ^lest all good men beware of thee; where drunkenness
reigns, there reason is an Exul; virtue, a stranger; God an Enemy; Blasphemy is
wit, Oaths are Rhetoric, and Secrets are Proclamations. Noah discovered that
in one hour, drunk, which sober, he kept secret six hundred years.

CHAP. XV.
WHat thou give to the poor, thou securest from the Thief, but what thou
withhold'dst from his necessity, a Thief possesses. Gods Exchequer is the
poor man's Box: when thou strik'st a Tally, he becomes thy debtor.

CHAP. XVI.
TAke no pleasure in the folly of an Idiot, no^ in the fancy of a Lunaticke,
nor in the frenzy of a Drunkard. Make them the object of thy pity, not of thy
pastime; when thou behold'st them, behold how thou art beholding to him that
suffered thee not to be like them. There is no difference between thee and them
but Gods favor.

CHAP. XVII.
IF being in eminent place, thou have incur^'d the Obloquy of the multitude,
the more thou endeavourest to stop the stream, the more it over^owes^ wisely
rather divert the co^^e of the vulgar humor, by divulging and spreading some
ridiculous novelty, which may present new matter to their various fancy, and
stave their tongues from off thy worried name. The first subject of the common
voice, is the last news.

CHAP. XVIII.
IF thou desire to see thy child virtuous, let him not see his fathers vices:
Thou can not rebuke that in them, that they behold practiced in thee; till
reason be ripe, examples direct more then precepts: Such as thy behavior is
before thy childrens faces, such commonly is theirs behind their parents backs.

CHAP. XIX.
Use Law and Physic only for necessity; they that use them otherwise, abuse
themselves into weak bodies, and light purses: they are good remedies, bad
businesses, and worse recreations.

CHAP. XX.
BE not over curious in prying into mysteries; lest, by seeking things which
are needless, thou omittest things which are necessary: it is more safe to
doubt of uncertain matters, then to dispute of undiscovered Mysteries.

CHAP. XXI.
IF what thou have received from God thou sharest to the poor, thou have
gained a blessing by the hand; if what thou have taken from the poor, thou
give to God, thou have purchased a Curse into the Bargain. He that puts to
pious uses, what he has got by impious Usury, robs the Spittle to raise an
Hospital; and the cry of the one, will out-plead the prayers of the other.

CHAP. XXII.
LEt the end of thy argument be rather to discover a doubtful Truth, then a
commanding Wit; In the one, thou shall gain substance; in the other, Froth:
that flint strikes the steel in vain, that propagates no sparkles; covet to
be Truths champion, at least to hold her colors: he that pleads against the
truth, takes pains to be overthrown; or, if a conqueror, gains but vainglory
by the conquest.

CHAP. XXIII.
TAke no pleasure in the death of a creature; if it be harmless or useless,
destroy it not: if useful, or harmefull destroy it mercifully: He that
mercifully made his Creatures for thy sake, expects thy mercy upon them for his
sake. Mercy turns her back to the unmercifull.

CHAP. XXIV.
IF thou are called to the dignity of a Priest, the same voice calls thee to the
honor of a Judge; if thy life and doctrine be good, thou shall judge others:
if thy doctrine be good, and thy life ba^^, only thy self: if both be good,
thou reachest thy people to escape condemnation: if this be good, and that bad,
thou reachest God to condemn thee:

CHAP. XXV.
IF thou be not a Prometheus to advise before thou do; be an Ep^metheus to
examine when thou have done: when the want of advise has brought forth an
improvident act, the act of examination may produce a profitable Repentance.

CHAP. XXVI.
IF thou desire the happiness of thy soul, the health of thy body, the
prosperity of thy estate, the preservation of thy credit, converse not with a
Harlot: her eyes run thy reputation in debt; her lips demand the payment: her
breasts arrests thee; her arms imprison thee; from whence, believe it^ thou
shall hardly get forth till thou have either ended the days of thy credit, or
paid the utmost farthing of thy Estate.

CHAP. XXVII.
CArry a watchful eye upon those familiars that are either silent at thy
faults, or sooth thee in thy frailties, or excuse thee in thy follies; for such
are either cowards, or flatterers, or fools: if thou entertain them in
prosperity, the Coward will leave thee in thy dangers, the Flatterer will quit
thee in thy adversity: but the fool will never forsake thee.

CHAP. XXVIII.
IF thou have an Estate, and a son to inherit it, keep him not too short,
lest he think thou live too long; what thou allowest him, let him receive
from thy hand, as gift; not from thy Tenants, as Rent: keep the reins of thy
Estate in thy own hand, lest thou forsaking the sovereignty of a father, he
forget the reverence of a child: let his liberty be grounded on thy permission,
and keep him within the compass of thy instruction: let him feel, thou have
the Curb, though occasion urge thee not to check. Give him the choice of his
own wife, if he be wise. Counsel his affection rather then cross it, if thou
be wise; lest his marriage bed be made in secret, or depend upon thy grave.
If he be given to lavish company, endeavor to stave him off with lawful
recreations: be cheerful with him, that he may love thy presence; and wink at
small faults, that thou may gain him: be not always chiding, lest thou harden
him; neither knit thy brow too often, lest thou dishearten him: remember, the
discretion of a father often times prevents the destruction of a child.

CHAP. XXIX.
IF thou hide thy Treasure upon the Earth, how can thou expect to find it in
Heaven? Can thou hope to be a sharer where thou have reposed no stock? What
thou give to Gods glory, and thy souls health, is laid up in Heaven, and is
only thine; that alone, which thou exchangest, or hidest upon Earth is lost.

CHAP. XXX.
REgard not in thy Pilgrimage how difficult the passage is, but whither it
tends; nor how delicate the journey is, but where it ends: If it be easy,
suspect it; if hard, endure it: He that cannot excuse a bad way, accuses his
own sloth; and he that sticks in a bad passage. can never attain a good
journies end.

CHAP. XXXI.
MOney is both the generation and corruption of purchased honor: honor is
both the child and slave of potent money: the credit which honor has lost,
money has found: When honor grew mercenary, money grew honorable. The way to
be truly Noble, is to contemn both.

CHAP. XXXII.
GIve not thy tongue too great a liberty, lest it take thee prisoner: A word
unspoken is like the sword in thy scabberd, thine; if vented, thy sword is in
another hand: if thou desire to be held wise, be so wise as to hold thy tongue.

CHAP. XXXIII.
IF thou be subject to any great vanity, nourish it not: if it will be
entertained, encourage it not: if it grow strong, more strongly strive against
it; if too strong, pray against it; if it weaken not, join fasting to the
Prayer; if it shall continue, add perseverance to both; if it decline not,
add patience to all, and thou have conquered it.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Has any wounded thee with Injuries? meet them with patience; hasty words
ranckle the wound, soft language dresses it, forgiveness cures it, and
oblivion takes away the scarre. It is more noble, by silence to avoid an
injury, then by argument to overcome it.

CHAP. XXXV.
BE not instable in thy resolutions, nor various in thy actions, nor inconstant
in thy affections: so deliberate, that thou may resolve; so resolve, that
thou may perform; so perform, that thou may persevere: Mutability is the
badge of Infirmity.

CHAP. XXXVI.
LEt not thy good intention flatter thee to an evil action; what is
essentially evil, no circumstance can make good; it matters not with what mind
thou did that, which is unlawful, being done: if the act be good, the
intention crowns it; if bad, it deposes thy intention: no evil action can be
well done.

CHAP. XXXVII.
LOve not thy children too unequally; or, if thou do, show it not, lest thou
make the one proud, the other envious, and both Fools: if Nature has made a
difference, it is the part of a tender Parent to help the weakest. That trial
is not fair, where affection is the judge.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
IN giving of thy alms, enquire not so much into the person, as his necessity:
God looks not so much upon the merits of him that requires, as into the manner
of him that releives: if the man deserve not, thou have gien it to Humanity.

CHAP. XXXIX.
IF thou desire the Eucharist should be thy Supper, let thy life be thy
Chaplain; if thy own worthiness invites thee, presume not to come; if the
sorrowful sense of thy own sins forbid thee, presume not to forbear: if thy
faith be strong, it will confirm it; if weak, it will strengthen it: He only
that wants Faith is the forbidden guest.

CHAP. XL.
Would thou traffic with the best advantage, and Crown thy virtues with the
best return? Make the poor thy Chapman, and thy purse thy Factor: So shall thou
give trifles which thou could not keep, to receive treasure which thou can
not lose: There Is no such Merchant as the charitable man.

CHAP. LXI.
FOllow not the multitude in the evil of sin, lest thou share with the
multitude in the evil of punishment: The number of the Offenders diminishes
not the quality of the offense: As the multitude of Suitors draws more favor
to the Suite; So the multitude of Sinners draws more punishment on the Sin:
The number of the Faggots multiplies the fury of the Fire.

CHAP. LXII.
IF thou be angry with him that reproves thy Sin, thou secretly confessest
his reproof to be just: if thou acknowledge his Reproof to be just, thou
secretly confessest thy anger to be unjust. He that is angry with the just
Reprover, kindles the fire of the just Revenger^

CHAP. XLIII.
Do well while thou may, lest thou do evil when thou would not: He that
takes not advantage of a good Power, shall lose the Benefit of a good Will.

CHAP. XLIV.
LEt not mirth be thy profession, lest thou become a Make-sport. He that has
but gained the Title of a jester, let him assure himself, The Fool's not far
off.

CHAP. XLV.
IN every Relative action, change conditions with thy brother; Then ask thy
conscience what thou would be done to; Being truly resolved exchange again,
and do thou the like to him, and thy Charity shall never err: it is injustice
to do, what without impatience thou can not suffer.

CHAP. XLVI.
LOve thy neighbor for Gods sake, and God for his own sake, who created all
things for thy sake, and redeemed thee for his mercy sake: If thy love have any
other Object, it is false love: if thy object have any other end, it is
self-love.

CHAP. XLVII.
LEt thy conversation with men, be sober and sincere: Let thy devotion to God
be dutiful and decent: Let the one be hearty, and not haughty; Let the other
be humble, and not homely: So live with men, as if God saw thee; So pray to
God, as if men heard thee.

CHAP. XLVIII.
GOds pleasure is the wind our actions ought to say (...): Man's will is the
Stream that Tides them up and down; if the wind blow not, thou may take the
advantage of the Tide; if it blow, no matter which way the Stream runs, if
with thee, thy voyage will be the shorter; if against thee, the Sea ^ill be
the rougher: it is safer to strive against the Stream, then to sail against
the Wind.

CHAP. XLIX.
IF thou desire much Rest. desire not too much: there is no less trouble in
the preservation, then in the acquisition of abundance; Diogenes found more
rest in his Tub then Alexander on his Throne.

CHAP. L.
Would thou multiply thy riches? Diminish them wisely: Or would thou make
thy Estate entire? divide it charitably: Seeds that are scattered, increase;
but hoarded up they perish.

CHAP. LI.
HOw came thou by thy Honor? By Money: How came thou by thy Money? By
Extortion: Compare thy penny worth with the price, and tell me truly, how truly
(...) u^able thou art? It is an ill purchase that is encumbred with a curse, and
that Honor will be ruinous that is built on Ruins.

CHAP. LI.
IF thy Brother has privately offended thee, reprove him privately, and having
lost himself in an injury, thou shall find him in thy forgiveness: He that
rebukes a private fault openly, betrays it, rather then reproves it.

CHAP. LIII.
WHat thou desire, inspect througly before thou prosecute: Cast one eye upon
the inconveniences, as well as the other upon the Conveniences. Weigh the
fullness of the Barn with the Charge of the Plough: Weigh Honor with her
Burden, and Pleasure with her Dangers; So shall thou undertake wisely what
thou desire; or moderate thy desires in undertaking.

CHAP. LIVE.
IF thou owe thy whole self to thy God for thy Creation, what have thou left
to pay for thy Redemption, that was not so cheap as thy Creation? In thy
Creation, he gave thee thy self, and by thy self to him: In thy Redemption
he gave himself to thee, and through him restored thee to thy self: Thou art
given and restored: Now what owe thou unto thy God? if thou have paid all thy
debts, give him the Surplusage, and thou have merited.

CHAP. LV.
IN thy discourse take heed what thou speak, to whom thou speak, how thou
speak, and when thou speak: What thou speak, speak truly; when thou
speak, speak wisely. A Fools heart is in his Tongue; but a Wise man's Tongue
is in his heart.

CHAP. LVI.
BEfore thou act a Theft, consider what thou art about to do: if thou take it,
thou losest thy self; if thou keep it, thou disenablest thy Redemption; Till
thou restor^st it, thou can not be restored; When it is restored, it must
cost thee more pain, and sorrow, then ever it brought thee pleasure or profit.
It is a great folly to please the P^late with that which thou know, must
either be vomited, or thy death.

CHAP. LVII.
SIlence is the highest wisdom of a Fool, and Speech is the greatest criall of
a Wise man; if thou would ^e known a Wise man, let thy words show thee so;
if thou doubt thy words, let thy silence seign thee so. It is not a greater
point of Wisdom to discover knowledge, then to hide ignorance.

CHAP. LVIII.
THe Clergy is a Copy book their Life is the Paper, whereof some is purer, some
Courser: Their Doctrine is the Copies, some written in a plain Hand, others in
a Flourishing Hand, some in a Text Hand, some in a Roman Hand, others in a
Court Hand, others in a Bastard Roman: if the choice be in thy power, choose a
Book that has the finest Paper, let it not be too straight nor too loosely
bound, but easy to lie open to every Eye: follow not every Copy, lest thou be
good at none: Among them all choose one that shall be most Legible and Vse^ill,
and fullest of instructions. But if the Paper chance to have a Blot, remember,
the Blot is no part of the Copy.

CHAP. LIX.
Virtue is nothing but an act of loving that which is to be beloved, and that
act is Prudence^ from whence not to be removed by co^^ straint is ^ ortitude;
not to be allu^^d by enticements is Temperance; not to be diverted by Pride is
justice. The declining of this act is Vice.

CHAP. LX.
REbuke thy Servants fault in private: public reproof hardens his shame: if
he be past a youth, strike him not: he is not fit for thy service, that after
wise reproves will either deserve thy strokes, or digest them.

CHAP. LXI.
TAke heed rather what thou receivest, then what thou give; What thou give
leaves thee, what thou take, sticks by thee: He that presents a gift buys
the Receiver, he that takes a gift sels his liberty.

CHAP. LXII.
THings Temporal, are sweeter in the Expectation: Things Eeternall are sweeter
in the Fruition: The first shames thy Hope, the second crowns it: it is a vain
Journey, whose end affords less pleasure then the way.

CHAP. LXIII.
KNow thy self that thou may Fear God: Know God, that thou may Love him;
in this, thou art initiated to wisdom; in that, perfected: The Fear of God is
the beginning of Wisdom: The Love of God is the fulfilling of the Law.

CHAP. LXIV.
IF thou have Providence to foresee a danger, let thy Prudence rather prevent
it, then fear it. The fear of future evils, brings oftentimes a present
mischief: Whilst thou seek'st to prevent it, practice to bear it. He is a
wise man can avoid an evil; he is a patient man that can endure it; but he is
a valiant man can conquer it.

CHAP. LXV.
IF thou have the place of a Magistrate, deserve it by thy Justice, and
dignifie it with thy Mercy: Take heed of early gifts: an open hand makes a
blind eye: be not more apt to punish Vice, then to encourage Virtue. Be not too
severe, lest thou be hated, nor too remiss, lest thou be slighted: So execute
Justice, that thou may be loved: so execute mercy, that thou may be feared.

CHAP. LXVI.
LEt not thy Table exceed the fourth part of thy Revenue: Let thy provision be
solid, and not far fetched, fuller of substance then Art: Be wisely frugall in
thy preparation, and freely cheerful in thy entertainment: If thy guests be
right, it is enough; if not, it is too much: Too much is a vanity; enough is a
Feast.

CHAP. LXVII.
LEt thy apparel be decent, and suited to the quality of thy place and purse:
Too much punctualitie, and too much morositie, are the two Poles of Pride: Be
neither too early in the Fashion, nor too long out of it, nor too precisely in
it: what custom has civilized, is become decent, till then, ridiculous: Where
the Eye is the Jury, thy apparel is the evidence.

CHAP. LXVIII.
IF thy words be too luxuriant, confine them, lest they confine thee: He that
thinks he never can speak enough, may easily speak too much^ A full tongue,
and an empty brain, are seldom parted.

CHAP. LXIX.
IN holding of an argument, be neither choleric, nor too opinionate; The one
distempers thy understanding; the other abuses thy judgment: Above all things
decline Paradoxes and Mysteries: Thou shall receive no honor, either in
maintaining rank falsehoods, or meddling with secret truths; as he that pleads
against the truth, makes wit the mother of his Error: so he that argues beyond
warrant, makes wisdom the midwife of his folly.

CHAP. LXX.
Detain not the wages from the poor man that has earned it, lest God withhold
thy wages from thee: If he complain to thee, hear him, lest he complain to
Heaven, where he will be heard: if he hunger for thy sake, thou shall not
prosper for his sake. The poor man's penny is a plague in the rich man's purse.

CHAP. LXXI.
BE not too cautious in discerning the fit objects of thy Charity, lest a soul
perish through thy discretion: What thou give to mistaken want, shall return
a blessing to thy deceived heart: Better in relieving idleness to commit an
accidental evil, then in neglecting misery to omit an essential good: Better
two Drones be preserved, then one Be perish.

CHAP. LXII.
THeology is the Empress of the world; Mysteries are her Privy Council;
Religion is her Clergy; The Arts her Nobility; Philosophy her Secretary; The
Graces her Maids of Honor; The Moral virtues, the Ladies of her Bedchamber;
Peace is her Chamberlain; True joy, and endless pleasures are her Courtiers;
Plenty her Treasurer; Poverty her Exchequer; The Temple is her Court: If thou
desire access to this great Majesty, the way is by her Courtiers; if thou have
no power there, the common way to the Sovereign is the Secretary.

CHAP. LXXIII.
IT is an evil knowledge to know the good thou should embrace, unless thou
likewise embrace the good thou know: The breath of divine knowledge, is the
bellows of divine love, and the flame of divine love, is the perfection of
divine knowledge.

CHAP. LXXIV.
IF thou desire rest unto thy soul, be just: He that does no injury, fears not
to suffer injury: The unjust mind is always in labor: It either practices the
evil it has projected, or projects to avoid the evil it has deserved.

CHAP. LXXV.
Accustom thy palate to what is most usual: He that delights in rarities, must
often feed displeased, and sometimes lie at the mercy of a dear market: common
food nourishes best, delicates please most: The sound stomach preferres
neither. What a^t thou the worse for the last years plain diet, or what now
the better for thy last great Feast?

CHAP. LXXVI.
Who ever thou art, thou have done more evil in one day, then thou can
expiate in six; and can thou think the evil of six days, can require less
then one? God has made us rich in days, by allowing six, and himself poor
by reserving but one; and shall we spare our own flock, and sheare his Lamb?
He that has done nothing but what he can justify in the six days, may play
the seventh.

CHAP. LXXVII.
HOpe and Fear, like Hippocrates Twins, should live and dye together: If hope
depart from fear, it travels by security, and lodges in presumption; if fear
depart from hope, it travels to infidelity, and Innes in despair, the one
shuts up heaven, the other opens hell; the one makes thee insensible of Gods
frowns, the other, incapable of Gods favors; and both teach God to be
unmercifull, and thee to be most miserable.

CHAP. LXXVIII
CLose thine ear against him that shall open his mouth secretly against
another: If thou receive not his words, they fly back, and wound the Reporter:
if thou receive them, they flee forward, and wound the receiver.

CHAP. LXXIX.
IF thou would preserve a sound body, use fasting and walking; if a
healthful soul, fasting and praying; Walking exercises the body, praying
exercises the soul, fasting cleanses both.

CHAP. LXXX.
Would thou not be thought a fool in another conceit? Be not wise in thine
own: He that trusts to his own wisdom, proclaims his own folly: He is
truly wise, and shall appear so, that has folly enough to be thought not
worldly wise, or wisdom enough to see his own folly.

CHAP. LXXXI.
DEsir'st thou knowledge? know the end of thy desire: Is it only to know? Then
it is curiosity: Is it because thou may be known? then it is vanity: If
because thou may edefie, it is charity: If because thou may be edefied, it
is wisdom. That knowledge turns to mere excrement, that has not some heat
of wisdom to digest it.

CHAP. LXXXII.
Wisdom without innocence is knavery; Innocence without wisdom is foolery:
Be therefore as wise as serpents, and innocent as doves: The subtilty of the
serpent, instructs the innocence of the dove: The innocence of the dove,
corrects the subtilty of the serpent: What God has joined together, let no man
separate.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
THe more thou imitatest the virtues of a Saint departed, the better thou
celebrat'st that Saints day. God is not pleased with surfeiting for his sake,
who with his fasting so often pleased his God.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
Choose not thy serv'ceable soldier out of soft apparel, lest he prove
effeminate, nor out of a full purse, lest he grow timorous: They are more fit
for action, that are fiery to gain a fortune abroad, then they that have
fortunes to lose at home. Expectation breeds spirit; Fruition brings fear.

CHAP. LXXXV.
GOd has given to mankind a common Library, his creatures; and to every man a
proper book, Himself, being an abridgement of all the others: If thou read
with understanding, it will make thee a great master of Philosophy, and a true
servant to the divine Authou^: If thou but barely read, it will make thee thy
own Wise man, and the Authors fool.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
DOubt is a weak child lawfully begotten between an obstructed judgment, and
a fair understanding. Opinion is a bold bastard gotten between a strong
fancy, and a weak Judgment; it is less dishonorable to be ingenuously
doubtful, then rashly opinionate.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
AS thou art a moral man, esteem thy self not as thou art, but as thou art
esteemed. As thou art a Christian, esteem thy self as thou art, not as thou
art esteemed: Thy price in both rises and falls as the market goes. The market
of a moral man is wild opinion. The market of a Christian is a good conscience.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
PRovidence is an exercise of reason; experience an act of sense: by how much
reason excels sense, by so much providence exceeds experience. Providence
prevents that danger, which experience repents: Providence is the rational
daughter of wisdom: experience the Empiricall mistress of fools.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
Has fortune dealt the ill Cards? let wisdom make thee a good Gamester: in a
fair Gale, every fool may sail; but wise behavior in a storm commends the
wisdom of a Pilot: To bear adversity with an equal mind, is both the sign
and glory of a bave Spirit.

CHAP. XC.
IF any speak ill of thee, flee home to thy own conscience, and examine thy
heart: if thou be guilty, it is a just correction: if not guilty, it is a fair
instruction: make use of both, so shall thou distill Honey out of Gall, and out
of an open enemy, create a secret friend.

CHAP. XCI.
AS the exercise of the body natural is moderate recreation, so the exercise
of the body politic, is military discipline: by that the one is made more
able, by this, the other is made more active: Where both are wanting, there
wants no danger to the one, through a humorous superfluity, to the other, by a
negligent security.

CHAP. XCII.
GOd is above thee, Beasts are beneath thee: acknowledge him that is above
thee, and thou shall be acknowledged by them that are under thee: Whilst
Daniel acknowledged God to be above him; the Lions acknowledged Daniel ^o be
above them.

CHAP. XCIII.
TAke heed whilst thou she west wisdom in not speaking, thou betrayest not
thy folly in too long silence: if thou art a fool, thy silence is wisdom; if
a wise man, too long silence is folly; As too many words from a fools mouth,
gives a wise man no leave to speak; so too long silence in a wise man, gives a
fool the opportunity of speaking, and makes thee guilty of his folly.

CHAP. XCIV.
COnsider what thou were, what thou art, what thou shall be: What Is within
thee, what is above thee, what is beneath thee, what is against thee: what was
before thee, what shall be after thee; and this will bring to thy self
humility, to thy neighbor charity, to the world contempt, to thy God
obedience: He that knows not himself Positively, can not know himself
Relatively.

CHAP. XCV.
Think not thy love to God merits Gods love to thee: his acceptance of thy
duty crowns his own gifts in thee: Man's love to God is nothing but a faint
reflection of Gods love to man.

CHAP. XCVI.
BE always less willing to speak then to hear; what thou hear thou
receivest; what thou speak thou give. It is more glorious to give, more
profitable to receive.

CHAP. XCVII.
See thou good days? prepare for evil times: No Summer but has his Winter:
He never reaped comfort in adversity, that sowed it not in prosperity.

CHAP. XCVIII.
IF being a magistrate, thou connivest at vice, thou nourishest it; if thou
sparest it; thou committest it: What is not, by thee, punished in others, is
made punishable in thee. He that favors present evils, en^tayles them upon his
posterity: He that excuses the guilty, condemns the Innocent.

CHAP XCIX.
TRuth haunts no corners, seeks no by-ways: if thou profess it, do it openly:
if thou seek it, do it fairly: he deserves not to profess Truth, that
professes it fearfully: he deserves not to find the Truth that seeks it
fraudulently.

CHAP. C.
IF thou desire to be wiser yet, think not thy self yet wise enough: and if
thou desire to improve knoweledge in thy self despise not the instructions of
another: He that instructs him that thinks himself wise enough, has a fool
to his scholar: He that thinks himself wise enough to instruct himself,
has a fool to his master.

The End of the Third Century.
THE Fourth Century.
CHAP. I.
Demean thy self more war^y in thy study, then in the street. If thy public
actions have a hundred witnesses, thy p^i^^t have a thousand. The mul^^^^de
looks but upon thy actions^ (...) conscience looks into them (...) multitude
may chance to excuse thee, i^ not acquit thee, thy conscience will accuse thee,
if not condemn thee.

CHAP. II.
OF all vices take heed of Drunkenness; Other vices are but fruits of
disordered affections: this disorders, nay, banishes reason: Other vices but
impair the soul, this demolishes her two chief faculties; the Understanding,
and the Will: Other vices make their own way; this makes way for all vices:
He that is a Drunkard is qualified for all vice.

CHAP. III.
IF thy sin trouble thee, let that trouble comfort thee; as pleasure in the
remembrance of sin exasperates Justice, so sorrow in the repentance of sin
mollifies mercy: it is less danger to commit the (...) we delight in, then to
delight in the sin we have committed, and more joy is promised to Repentance,
then to Innocence.

CHAP. IV.
THe way to God is by thy self; The way to thy self is by thy own
corruptions: he that baulkes this way, erres; he that travels by the creatures,
wanders. The motion of the Heavens shall give thy soul no rest: the virtue of
Herbs shall not increase thine. The height of all Philosophy, both natural and
moral, is to know thy self, and the end of this knoweledge is to know God.

CHAP. V.
INfamy is where it is received: if thou art a Mudde-wall, it will stick; if
Marble, it will rebound: if thou storm at it, it is thine: if thou contemn it,
it is his.

CHAP. VI.
IF thou desire Magistracy, learn to forget thy self; if thou undertake it,
bid thy self farewell; he that looks upon a common cause with private eyes,
looks through false Glasses. In the exercise of thy politic office, thou
must forget both Ethickes and Oeconomickes. He that puts on a public Gown,
must put off a private Person.

CHAP. VII.
LEt the words of a Virgin, though in a good cause, and to as good purpose, be
neither violent, many, nor first, nor last: it is less shame for a Virgin to
be lost in a blushing silence, then to be found in a bold Eloquence.

CHAP. VIII.
ARt thou in plenty? give what thou will: Art thou in poverty? give what thou
can: as what is received, is received according to the manner of the
receiver; so what is given, is prized according to the measure of the giver: he
is a good workman that makes as good work as his matter will permit.

CHAP. IX.
GGd is the Author of Truth, the Devil the Father of Lies: If the telling of a
truth shall endanger thy life, the author of Truth will protect thee from the
danger, or reward thee for thy damage. If the tell (...) Lie may secure thy
life, the father of Lies will beguile thee of thy gains, or traduce the
security. Better by losing of a life to save it, then by saving of a life to
lose it. However, better thou perish then the Truth.

CHAP. X.
COnsider not so much what thou have, as what others want: what thou have, take
heed thou lose not. What thou have not, take heed thou covet not: if thou have
many above thee, turn thy eye upon those that are under thee: If thou have no
Inferiors, have patience a while, and thou shall have no Superiors. The grave
requires no marshall.

CHAP XI.
IF thou ^eest any thing in thy self, which may make thee proud, look a little
further, and thou shall find enough to humble thee; if thou be wise, view the
Peacocks feathers with his feet, and weigh thy best parts with thy
imperfections. He thar would rightly prize the man, must read his whole Story.

CHAP. XII.
LEt not the sweetness of contemplation be so esteemed, that action be
despised, Rachel was more fair, Lea more fruitful: as contemplation is more
delightful, so is it more dangerous: Lot was upright in the City and wicked in
the Mountain.

CHAP. XIII.
IF thou have but little, make it not less by murmuring: if thou have enough,
make it not too much by unthankefulnesse: He that is not thankfully contented
with the least favor he has received, has made himself incapable of the
least favor he can receive.

CHAP. XIV.
What thou have taken unlawfully, restore speedily, for the sin in taking
it, is repeated every minute thou keep'st it: if thou can, restore it in
kind: if not, in value; if it may be, restore it to the party; if not, to God:
the Poor is Gods Receiver.

CHAP. XV.
LEt the fear of a danger be a spur to prevent it: He that fears otherwise,
gives advantage to the danger: It is less folly not to endeavor the
prevention of the evil thou fear, then to fear the evil which thy
endeavor cannot prevent.

CHAP. XVI.
IF thou have any excellence which is thine own, thy tongue may glory in it
without shame; but if thou have received it, thy glory is but usurpation; and
thy pride is but the prologue of thy shame: Where vainglory commands, there
folly counsels; where pride Rides, there shame Lacquies.

CHAP. XVII.
GGd has ordained his creatures, not only for necessity, but delight; si^ce
he has carved thee with a bountiful hand, fear not to receive it with a
liberal heart: He that gave thee water to allay thy thirst, gave thee wine to
exhilarate thy heart. Restore him for the one, a necessity of thanks, return
him for the other, the cheerfulness of praise.

CHAP. XVIII.
IF the wicked flourish and thou suffer, discourage not: they are fatted for
destruction; thou art Dieted for health; they have no other Heaven but the
hopes of a long Earth; thou have nothing on Earth but the hopes of a quick
Heaven: if there were no journies end, the travel of a Christian were most
comfortless.

CHAP. XIX.
IMpe not thy wings with the Churches feathers, lest thou fly to thy own
Ruin: impropriations are bold Metaphors; which continued, are deadly
Allegories: one foot of land in Capite, encumbers the whole estate: The Eagle
snatched a coal from the Altar, but it fired her Nest.

CHAP. XX.
LEt that table which God has pleased to give thee, please thee: He that made
the Vessel knows her b^rthen, and how to ballast her; He that made all things
very good, cannot but do all things very well; If thou be content with a
little, thou have enough: if thou complainest thou have too much.

CHAP. XXI.
Would thou discover the true worth of a man? Behold him naked: distreasure
him of his ill-got Wealth, degrade him of his dear bought honour^ disrobe him
of his purple Habit^ Discard his pampered body; then look upon his soul, and
thou shall find how great he is, Natural sweetness is never sented but in
the absence of artificial.

CHAP. XXII.
IF thou art subject to any secret folly blab it not, lest thou appear
impudent; nor boast of it, lest thou seem insolent. Every man's vanity ought to
be his greatest shame: and every man's folly ought to be his greatest secret.

CHAP. XXIII.
IF thou be ignorant, endeavor to get knowledge, lest thou be beaten with
stripes: if thou have attained knowledge, put it in practice, lest thou be
beaten with many stripes. Better not to know what we should practice, then not
to practice what we know; and less danger dwells in unaffected ignorance, then
unactive knowledge.

CHAP. XXIV.
TAke heed thou harbor not that vice called Envy, lest another happiness be
thy torment, and Gods blessing become thy Curse: virtue corruted with
vainglory, turns Pride: Pride poisoned with malice, becomes Envy: join
therefore Humility with thy Virtue, and Pride shall have no footing, and Envy
shall find no entrance.

CHAP. XXV.
IF thy endeavor cannot prevent a Vice, let thy Repentance lament it: the more
thou remembrest it without hearts grief; the deeper it is rooted in thy heart:
take heed it please thee not, especially in cold blood. Thy pleasure in it
makes it fruitful, and her fruit is thy destruction.

CHAP. XXVI.
THe two knowledges, of God, and thy self, are the high way to thy Salvation;
that breeds in thee a filial love; this a filial fear. The ignorance of thy
self is the beginning of all sin, and the ignorance of God is the perfection
of all evil.

CHAP. XXVII.
RAther do nothing to the purpose, then be idle, that the Devil may find thee
doing: the Bird that sits is easily shot, when fliers escape the Fowler:
idleness is the dead Sea that swallows all Virtues, and the Selfe-made
Sepulcher of a living man: the idle man is the Devils hir^ling; whose livery is
rags^ whose diet and wages are famine, and diseases.

CHAP. XXVIII.
BE not so mad as to alter that Countenance which thy Creator made thee:
Remember it was the work of his Hands; if it be bad, how dare thou mend it?
If it be good, why do thou mend it? art thou ashamed of his work, and proud
of thy own? he made thy face to be known by, why desire thou to be known
by another: it is a shame to adulterate modesty, but more to adulterate nature.
Lay by thy art, and blush not to appear, what he blushes not to make thee. It
is better to be his Picture then thy own.

CHAP. XXIX.
LEt the ground of all thy Religious actions be obedience: examine not why it
is commanded, but observe it, because it is commanded. True obedience neither
procrastinates, nor questions.

CHAP. XXX.
IF thou would buy an inheritance in Heaven, advise not with thy Purse, les^ in
the mean while thou love thy purchase: The Widow bought as much for two mites,
as Zaccheus did for half his estate: the prize of that purchase is what thou
have, and is not lost for what thou have not, if thou desire to have it.

CHAP. XXXI.
With the same height of desire thou have sinned, with the like depth of
sorrow thou must repent: thou that have sinned to day, defer not thy
repentance till to morrow: he that has promised pardon to thy Repentance, has
not promised life till thou repent.

CHAP. XXXII.
TAke heed how thou receivest praise from men: from good men neither avoid it,
nor glory in it. From evil men, neither desire it, nor expect it: To be
praised of them that are evil, or for that which is evil, is equal
dishonor: He is happy in his worth, who is praised by the good, and imitated
by the bad.

CHAP. XXXIII.
PRoportion thy charity to the strength of thy estate, lest God proportion thy
estate to the weakenes^e of thy charity: Let the lips of the poor be the
trumpet of thy gift, lest in seeking applause, thou lose thy Reward. Nothing is
more pleasing to God then an open hand, and a close mouth.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Do thou want things necessary? Grumble not: perchance it was a necessary
thing thou should want: Endeavor lawfully to supply it; if God bless not
thy endeavor, bless him that knows what is fittest for thee. Thou art Gods
Patient: Prescribe not thy Physician.

CHAP. XXXV.
IF another death, or thy own depend upon thy confession, if thou can, say
nothing: if thou must, say the Truth: it is better, thou loose thy life, then
God, his Honor: it is as easy for him to give thee life, being condemned; as
repentance, having sinned: it is more wisdom to yield thy Body, then hazard
thy Soul.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Cloth not thy language, either with Obscurity, or affectation: in the one
thou discover'st too much darkness, in the other, too much lightness: He that
speaks from the understanding, to the understanding, is the best interpreter.

CHAP. XXXVII.
IF thou expect death as a friend, prepare to entertain it: If thou expect
death as an enemy, prepare to overcome it: Death has no advantage, but when it
comes a stranger.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Fear nothing, but what thy industry may prevent: Be confident of nothing but
what fortune cannot defeat: it is no less folly to fear what is impossible to
be avoided, then to be secure when there is a possibility to be deprived.

CHAP. XXXIX.
LEt not the necessity of Gods decree discourage thee to pray, or dishearten
thy prayers; do thou thy duty, and God will do his pleasure: if thy prayers
make not him sound that is sick, they will return, and confirm thy health
that art sound: If the end of thy prayer be to obtain thy request, thou
confinest him that is infinite: if thou have done well, because thou were
commanded, thou have thy reward in that thou have obeyed. Gods pleasure is the
end of our prayers.

CHAP. XL.
MArry not too young, and when thou art too old, marry not, lest thou be fond
in the one, or thou dote in the other, and repent for both: let thy liking
ripen before thou love: let thy Love advise before thou choose; and let thy
choice be fixed before thou marry: Remember that the whole happiness or
unhappiness of thy life depends upon this one Act. Remember nothing but death
can dissolve this knot. He that weds in haste, repents ofttimes by leisure: And
he that repents him of his own act, either is, or was a fool by confession.

CHAP. XLI.
IF God has sent thee a Cross, take it up and follow him: use it wisely, lest
it be unprofitable; Bear it patiently, lest it be intolerable: Behold in it
Gods anger against sin, and his love toward thee; in punishing the one, and
chastening the other: if it be light, slight it not; if heavy murmr not: Not
to be sensible of a judgment is the symptom of a hardened heart; and to be
displeased at his pleasure, is a sign of a rebellious will.

CHAP. XLII.
IF thou desire to be magnanimous, undertake nothing rashly, and fear nothing
thou undertak'st: Fear nothing but infamy: Dare any thing but injury; the
measure of magnanimity, is neither to be rash, nor timorous.

CHAP. XLIII.
Practice in health, to bear sickness, and endeavor in the strength of thy
life to entertain death: He that has a will to die, not having power to live,
shows necessity not virtue: It is the glory of a brave mind to embrace pangs
in the very a^mes of pleasure: What name of virtue merits he, that goes when he
is driven?

CHAP. XLIV.
BE not too punctual in taking place: If he be thy superior, it is his due; if
thy inferior, it is his dishonor: It is thou must honor thy place; thy Place,
not thee. It is a poor reward of worth that consists in a right hand, or a
brick-wall.

CHAP. XLV.
PRay often, because thou sinn'st always: Repent quickly, lest thou die
suddenly. He that repents it, because he wants power to act it, repents not of
a sin, till he forsakes not: He that wants power to actuate his sin, has not
forsaken his sin, but his sin him.

CHAP. XLVI.
MAke Philosophy thy journey, Theology thy journeyes end: Philosophy is a
pleasant way, but dangerous to him that either tires or retires: in this
journey it is safe, neither to loyter, nor to rest, till thou have attained thy
journeyes end: He that sits down a Philosopher, rises up an Atheist.

CHAP. XLVII.
Fear not to sin, for Gods sake, but thy own; Thy sin overthrowes not his
glory, but thy good: He gains his Glory not only from the salvation of the
Repentant, but also from the confusion of the Rebellious: There be vessels for
honor, and vessels for dishonor, but both for his honor. God is not grieved
for the glory he shall lose for thy improvidence, but for the horror thou shall
find for thy impenitence.

CHAP. XLVIII.
INsult not over misery, nor deride infirmity, nor despise deformity. The
first, shows thy inhumanity: the second, thy folly; the third, thy pride: He
that made him miserable, made thee happy to lament him: He that made him weak,
made thee strong to support him: He that made him deformed, gave thee favor to
be humbled: He that is not sensible of another unhappiness, is a living
stone; but he that makes misery the object of his triumph is an incarnate
Devil.

CHAP. XLIX.
MAke thy recreations, servants to thy businesses, lest thou become slave to
thy recreations: When thou go up into the Mountain, leave this servant in
the Valley: When thou go to the City, leave him in the Suburbs. And
remember, The servant must not be greater then his Master.

CHAP. L.
PRaise no man too liberally before his face, nor censure him too lavishly
behind his back, the one favors of flattery; the other, of malice; and both
are reprehensible: The true way to advance another virtue, is to follow it;
and the best means to cry down another vice, is to decline it.

CHAP. LI.
IF thy Prince command a lawful act, give him all active obedience: if he
command an unlawful act, give him passive obedience. What thy well-grounded
conscience will suffer, do cheerfully without repining; where thou may not
do lawfully, suffer courageously without Rebellion: Thy life and livelihood is
thy Princes, Thy conscience is thy own.

CHAP. LII.
IF thou give, to receive the like, it is Exchange: if to receive more, it is
covetousness: if to receive thanks, it is vanity: if to be seen, it is
vainglory; if to corrupt, it is Bribery; if for Example, it is formality; if
for compassion, it is Charity; if because thou art commanded, it is obedience.
The affection in doing the work, gives a name to the work done.

CHAP. LIII.
FEar death, but be not afraid of Death. To fear it, whets thy expectation: To
be afraid of it, duls thy preparation: if thou can endure it, it is but a
fleight pain; if not, it is but a short pain: to fear death is the way to live
long; to be afraid of Death, is to be long a dying.

CHAP. LIVE.
IF thou desire the love of God and man, be humble; for the proud heart, as it
loves none but it self, so it is beloved of none, but by it self: The voice of
humility is Gods music, and the silence of Humility is Gods Rhetoric.
Humility enforces, where neither virtue nor strength can prevail, nor Reason.

CHAP. LV.
LOok upon thy burning Taper, and there see the Emblem of thy Life: The flame
is thy Soul; The wax, thy Body, and is commonly a span long; The wax, (if
never so well tempered) can but last his length; and who can lentghen it? If il
tempered, it shall wast the faster, yet last his length; an open window shall
hasten either; an Extinguisher shall put out both: Husband them the best thou
can, thou can not lengthen them beyond their date: leave them to the injury
of the Wind, or to the mercy of a wastfull hand, thou hastnest them, but still
they burn their length: But puff them out, and thou have shortened them, and
stopped their passage, which else had brought them to their appointed end. Bodies
according to their constitutions, stronger or weaker, according to the
eequality or inequality of their Elements, have their dates, and may be
preserved from shortning, but not lengthened. Neglect may wast them, ill diet
may hasten them unto their journies end, yet they have lived their length; A
violent hand may interrupt them; a sudden death may stop them, and they are
shortened. It lies in the power of man, either permissively to hasten, or
actively to shorten, but not to lengthen or extend the limits of his natural
life. He only, (if any) has the art to lengthen out his Taper that puts it to
the best advantage.

CHAP. LVI.
DEmean thy self in the presence of thy Prince, with reverence and
cheerfulness. That, without this, is too much sadness; This without that is too
much boldness: Let thy wisdom endeavor to gain his opinion, and labor to
make thy loyalty his confidence: Let him not find thee false in words, unjust
in thy actions, unseasonable in thy suits, nor careless in his service: cross
not his passion, question not his pleasures, Press not into his Secrets; Pry
not into his Prerogative: Displease him not, lest he be angry; appear not
displeased, lest he be jealous: the anger of a King is implacable: the jealousy
of a Prince is incurable.

CHAP. LVII.
GIve thy heart to thy Creator, and Reverence to thy Superiors: Give diligence
to thy Calling, and ear to good Counsel: Give Alms to the poor, and the
Glory to God: Forgive him that ignorantly offends thee, and him that having
wittingly offended thee, seeks thee. Forgive him that has forcibly abused thee
and him that has fraudulently betrayed thee: Forgive all thine enemies, but
least of all, thy self: Give, and it shall be given thee; Forgive, and it
shall be forgiven thee; The sum of all Christianity is, Give, and Forgive.

CHAP. LVIII.
Be not too great a niggard in the commendations of him that professes thy own
quality: if he deserve thy praise, thou have discovered thy Judgment; if not,
thy modesty: Honor either returns, or reflects to the Giver.

CHAP. LIX.
IF thy desire to raise thy Fortunes, encourage thy delights to the casts of
Fortune, be wise betimes, lest thou repent too late; What thou gettest, thou
gainest by abused Providence; what thou losest, thou losest by abused Patience;
What thou winnest is prodigally spent; what thou losest is prodigally lost: it
is an evil trade that prodigality drives: and a bad voyage where the Pilot is
blind.

CHAP. LX.
Be very wary for whom thou becomest Security, and for no more then thou art
able to discharge, if thou love thy liberty. The borrower is a slave to the
lender: The Security is a slave to both: Whilst the Borrower and Lender are
both eased, the Security bears both their burdens: He is a wise security that
secures himself.

CHAP. LXI.
LOok upon thy affliction as thou do upon thy Physic: Both imply a disease,
and both are applied for a Cure; That, of the Body; This of the Soul: If they
work, they promise health health: if not, they threaten death: He is not happy
that is not afflicted, but he that finds happiness by his affliction.

CHAP. LXII.
IF the Knowledge of Good whet thy desire to good, it is a happy Knowledge: if
by thy ignorance of Evil, thou art surpised with Evil, it is an unhappy
ignorance. Happy is he that has so much Knowledge of Good, as to desire it,
and but so much Knowledge of evil, as to fear it.

CHAP. LXIII.
WHen the flesh presents thee with delights, then present thy self with
dangers: Where the world possesses thee with vain Hopes, there possess thy
self with true fear: When the Devil brings thee Oil, bring thou Vinegar.
The way to be safe, is never to be secure.

CHAP. LXIV.
IF thy brother has offended thee, forgive him freely, and be reconciled: To
do Evil for Evil, is humane corruption: To do Good for Good is civil
retribution: To do Good for Evil is Christian perfection: The act of
Forgivness is Gods Precept: The manner of Forgiveness is Gods President.

CHAP. LXV.
REverence the Writings of holy Men, but lodge not thy Faith upon them, because
but men: They are good Pooles, but no ^ountaines. Build on Paul himself no
longer then he builds on Christ: if Peter renounce his Master, renounce Peter.
The word of man may convince Reason; But the word of God alone can compel
conscience.

CHAP. LXVI.
IN civil things follow the most; in matters of Religion, the fewest; in all
things follow the best: So shall thy ways be pleasing to God; so shall thy
behavior be plausible with men.

CHAP. LXVII.
IF any loss or misery has befalne to thy brother, dissemble it to thy self:
and what counsel thou give him, register carefully; and when the Case is
thine, follow it: So shall thy own Reason convince thy passion, or thy passion
confess her own unreasonablnes.

CHAP. LXVIII.
WHen thou go about to change thy moral Liberty into a Christian Servitude,
prepare thy self to be the worlds laughing stock: if thou overcome her Scoffs,
thou shall have double Honor: if overcome, double Shame: He is unworthy of a
good Master, that is ashamed of a bad Livery.

CHAP. LXIX.
LEt not the falling of a Salt, or the crossing of a Hare, or the crying of a
Cricket trouble thee. They portend no evil, but what thou fear: He is ill
acquainted with himself; that knows not his own Fortunes more then they. If
evil follow it, it is the punishment of thy Superstition; not the fulfilling
of their Portent: All things are lucky to thee, if thou will, nothing but is
ominous to the Superstitious.

CHAP. LXX.
SO behave thy self in thy course of life, as at a banquet. Take what is
offered with modest thankfulness: And expect what is not as yet offered with
hopeful patience: let not thy rude Appetite press thee, nor a slight
carfulness indispose thee, nor a sullen discontent deject thee, Who desires
more then enough, has too much: And he that is satisfied with a little has no
less then enough: Be^^ ^st cui Deus obtulit parca, quod sat is est, manu.

CHAP. LXXI.
IS thy Child dead? He is restored, not lost: is thy treasure stolen? it is not
lost, it is restored: He is an ill debtor, that counts repayment loss. But it
was an evil chance that took thy child, and a wicked hand that stole thy
Treasure: What is that to thee? it matters not by whom he requires the things
from whom he lent them: What goods are ours by loan, are not lost when
willingly restored, but when unworthily received.

CHAP. LXXII.
CEnsure no man, detract from no man: Praise no man before his face; traduce no
man behind his back. Boast not thy self abroad, nor flatter thy self at
home: if any thing cross thee, accuse thy self: if any one extol thee, humble
thy self. Honor those that instruct thee, and be thankful to those that
reprehend thee. Let all thy desires be subjected to Reason, and let thy reason
be corrected by Religion. Weigh thy self by thy own Balances, and trust not
the voice of wild opinion: Observe thy self as thy greatest enemy, so shall
thou become thy greatest friend.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Endeavor to make thy discourse such, as may adminster profit to thy Self, or
Standers by, thou incur the danger of an idle Word: Above all Subjects, avoid
those which are Seurrilous, and obscene; Tales that are impertinent, and
improbable, and dreams.

CHAP. LXXIV.
IF God has blessed thee with a son, bless thou that son with a lawful
calling: choose such employment, as may stand with his Fancy, and thy
Judgment: His country claymes his ability toward the building of her honor.
If he cannot bring a Cedar, let him bring a shrub. He that brings nothing
usurps his life, and robs his country of a Servant.

CHAP. LXXV.
AT the first entrance into thy Estate, keep a low sail: Thou may rise with
Honor; Thou can not decline without shame: He that begins as his Father
ended, shall end as his Father begun.

CHAP. LXXVI.
IF any Obscene Tale should chance to slip into thine Ears, among the varieties
of Discourse (if opportunity admit) reprove it: if otherwise, let thy silence,
or change of countenance interpret thy dislike: the smiling Ear is Baud to the
lascivious Tongue.

CHAP. LXXVII.
Be more circumspect over the works of thy Brain, then the Actions of thy
Body: These have infirmity to plead for them: but they must stand upon their
own bottomes: These are but the objects of few; They, of all: These will have
Equals to defend them: they have Inferiors to envy them; Superiors, to deride
them; al to censure them: It is no less danger for these to be proclaimed at
Paul's Cross, then for them to be protested in Paul's Churchyard.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
Use Common place-Books, or Collections, as Indexes to lig^ thee to the
Authors, lest thou be^ bus'd: He that takes Learning up on trust, makes him a
fair Cup-board with another Plate. He is an ill advised purchaser, whose
title depends more on Witnesses then Evidences.

CHAP. LXXIX.
IF thou desire to make the best advantage of the Muses, either by Reading to
benefit thy self, or by Writing, others, keep a peaceful soul in a temperate
body: A full belly makes a dull brain; and a turbulent Spirit, a distracted
Judgment: The Muses starve in a Cooks shop, and a Lawyers Study.

CHAP. LXXX.
When thou communicates thy self by Letters, heighten or depresse thy style
according to the quality of the party and business; That which thy tongue
would present to any, if present, let thy Pen represent to^ him, Abse^t: The
tongue is the minds Interpreter, and the Pen is the Tongues Secretary.

CHAP. LXXXI.
KEep thy soul in exercise, lest her faculties rust for want of motion: To
eat, sleep, or sport too long stops the natural course of her natural
actions: To dwell too long in the employments of the body, is both the cause,
and sign of a dull Spirit.

CHAP. LXXXII.
BE very circumspect to whose Tuition thou committ'st thy child: Every good
Scholar is not a good Master. He must be a man of invincible patience, and
singular observation: he must study children that will teach them well, and
reason must rule him that would rule wisely: he must not take advantage of an
ignorant father, nor give too much ^ar to an indulgent Grandmother: the common
good must outweigh his private gains, and his credit must out-bid Gratuities:
he must be deligent, and sober, not too familiar, nor too reserved, neither
amorous nor phantasticke: Just, without fierceness, merciful, without
fondness: if such a one thou meet with, thou have found a Treasure, which, if
thou know how to value, is invaluable.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
LEt not thy laughter handsell thy own jest, lest whilst thou laugh at it,
others laugh at thee: neither tell it often to the same hearers, lest thou be
thought forgetful, or barren. There is no sweetness in a Cabage twice sod, or
a tale twice told.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
IF opinion has lighted the Lamp of thy Name, endeavor to encourage it with
thy own Oil, lest it go out and stink: The Chronicall disease of Popularity
is shame: If thou be once up, beware: From Fame to Infamy is a beaten Road.

CHAP. LXXXV.
Cleanse thy morning soul with private and due Devotions; till then admit no
business: The firstborn of thy thoughts are Gods, and not thine, but by
Sacrilege: think thy self not ready till thou have praised him, and he will
be always ready to bless thee.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
IN all thy actions think God sees thee; and in all his actions labor to see
him; that will make thee fear him; this will move thee to love him; The fear
of God is the beginning of Knowledge, and the Knowledge of God is the
perfection of Love.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
LEt not the expectation of a reversion entice thy heart to the wish of the
possessours death, lest a judgment meet thee in thy expectation, or a Curse
overtake thee in thy fruition: Every wish makes thee a murderer, and moves God
to be an Accessory; God often lengthens the life of the possessour with the
days of the Expectour.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
PRize not thy self by what thou have, but by what thou art; he that values a
Jewel by her golden frame: or a Book by her silver claspa, or a man by his
vast estate, erres: if thou art not worth more then the world can make thee,
thy Redeemer had a bad penny worth, or thou an un^^rious Redeemer.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
LEt not thy Fathers, nor the Fathers, nor the Church thy Mothers belief, be
the ground of thine: The Scripture lies open to the humble he^^^^ but locked
against the proud Inquis^^^^ he that believes with an implicate Faith is a mere
Empericke in Religion.

CHAP. XC.
OF all sins, take greatest heed of that which thou have last, and most
repented of: He that was last thrust out of doors, is the next readiest to
crowd in again: and he that thou have forest baffled, is likeliest to call
more help for a revenge: it is requisite for him that has cast one devil
out, to keep strong hold lest seven return.

CHAP. XCI.
IN the meditation of divine Mysteries, keep thy heart humble; and thy thoughts
holy; let Philosophy not be ashamed to be confuted, nor Logic blush to be
confounded; what thou can not prove, approve; what thou can not comprehend,
believe; and what thou can believe, admire; so shall thy ignorance be
satisfied in thy Faith, and thy doubts swallowed up with wonders: the best way
to see daylight, is to put out thy candle.

CHAP. XCII.
IF opinion has cried thy name up let thy modesty cry thy heart down, lest
thou ceceiveit; or it thee: there is no less danger in a great name then a
bad; and no less honor in deserving of praise, then in the enduring it.

CHAP. XCIII.
Use the holy Scriptures with all reverence; let not thy wanton fancy carve it
out in jests, nor thy sinful wit make it an advocate to thy sin: it is a
subject for thy faith, not fancy; where Wit and Blasphemy is one Trade, the
understanding's Banckrupt.

CHAP. XCIV.
Do thou complain that God has forsaken thee? it is thou that have forsaken
him: it is thou that art mutable: in him there is no shadow of change, in his
light is life; if thy Will drive thee into a Dungeon, thou make thy own
darkness, and in that darkness dwells thy death; from whence, if he redeem
thee, he is merciful; if not, he is just; in both, he receives glory.

CHAP. XCV.
MAke use of Time, if thou love Eternity: know, yesterday cannot be recalled,
to morrow cannot be assured: to day is only thine; which if thou
procrastinate, thou losest, which lost, is lost for ever: One to day, is worth
two to morrows.

CHAP. XCVI.
IF thou be strong enough to encounter with ^he times, keep thy Station; if
not, shift a foot to gain advantage of the Times. He that acts a Beggar to
prevent a Thief, is never the poorer; it is a great part of wisdom,
sometimes to seem a fool.

CHAP. XCVII.
IF thou intend thy writings for the public view, lard them not too much with
the choice lines of another Author, lest thou lose thy own Gravy: what thou
have read and digested being delivered in thy own Style becomes thine: it is
more decent to wear a plain suit of one entire cloth, then a ga^dy garment
checkered with diverse richer fragments.

CHAP. XCVIII.
IF God has blessed thee with inheritance, and children to inherit, trust not
the staff of thy family to the hands of one. Make not many Beggars in the
building up of one great heir, lest if he miscarry through a prodigal Will,
the rest sink through a hard necessity. Gods allowance is a double portion:
when high blood, and generous breeding break their fast in plenty, and dine in
poverty, they often sup in Infamy: if thou deny them Faulcons wings to prey on
Fowl, give them Kites stomachs to seize on Garbage.

CHAP XCIX.
BE very vigilant over thy child in the April of his understanding, lest the
frosts of May nippe his Blossoms. While he is a tender Twig, strengthen him;
whilst he is a new Vessel, season him; such as thou make him, such commonly
thou shall find him. Let his first lesson be Obedience, and the second shall
be what thou will. Give him Education in good Letters, to the utmost of thy
ability, and his capacity. Season his youth with the love of his Creator, and
make the fear of his God the beginning of his knowledge: If he have an active
spirit, rather rectify then curb it; but reckon idleness among his chiefest
faults. Above all things, keep him from vain, lascivious and amorous Pamphlets,
as the Primmers of all Vice. As his judgment ripens, observe his inclination,
and tender him a Calling, that shall not cross it: Forced Marriages and
Callings seldom prosper; show him both the Mow, and the Plough; and prepare
him as well for the danger of the Skirmish, as possess him with the honor of
the prize. If he choose the profession of a Scholar, advise him to study the
most profitable arts: Poetry, and the Mathematics, take up too great a
latitude of the soul, and moderately used, are good Recreations, but bad
Callings, being nothing but their own Rewrd: if he choose the profession of a
Soldier, let him know, withal, Honor must be his greatest wages, and his
enemies his surest Paymaster. Prepare him against the danger of a War, and
advise him of the greater mischiefs of a Garrison; let him avoid Debauchnesse,
and Duels to the utmost of his power, and remember he is not his own man, and
(being his Countries servant) has no estate in his own life. If he choose a
Trade, teach him to forget his Fathers House, and his Mothers Wing: Advise him
to be conscionable, careful, and constant: This done, thou have done thy part,
leave the rest to Providence, and thou have done it well.

CHAP. C.
COnvey thy love to thy Friend, as an Arrow to the Mark, to stick ^here, not
as a Ball against the Wall, to rebound back to thee: that friendship will not
continue to the End that is begun for an End.

MEditation is the life of the soul; Action is the soul of Meditation, Honor
is the reward of action: So meditate, that thou may do; So'do, that thou
may purchase Honor: For which purchase, give God the Glory.

FINIS.

