THE Quakers Creed: CONTAINING TWELVE ARTICLES OF THEIR Antichristian Doctrine,
For which many have Denied them.

Published by some, who have Joined with Mr. George Keith, in the City of
London, and did formerly meet with Him at Turners-Hall, and in diverse parts of
the Country, as Huntington, Reading, Bedford, and Colchester.

2 Pet. II. 1. But tbere were False Prophets among the People, even as there
shall be False Teachers among you, who Privily bring in Damnable Heresies, even
Denying the Lord that Bought them, and bring upon themselves swift Destruction.
Proverbs XIV. 15. The Simple Beliveth every Word; but tbe Prudent Man looks
well to his going. LONDON, Printed for John Gwillim, against Crossby-Square, in
Bishopsgate-Street, 1700.

THE INTRODUCTION.
FOR the Information of any Sober Inquirer, who may ask, Why so many People,
who for the space of Forty Years past, some more, and some less, who have been
both Born and Bred Quakers, have now left the Society of that People?

In Answer to which, you may hereby understand, That its true such was the
unhappiness of the Age wherein we Lived, that too too many were both Born and
Bred up, yea overwhelmed in the Gulpb of Quakerism, for the aforesaid space of
Time, whereby we became as it were fast rooted and grounded on that Foundation,
by imbibing many hurtful Antichristian Principles, which were instilled into us
by our Leaders and Teachers; of whom we may as justly complain in one sense, as
the Prophet of the Lord, did from his Mouth, Isaiah 9.16. The Leaders of my
People have caused them to Err. (By their Lies and Lightness,) yet such has
been the merciful Providence of God Almighty to many of His poor sinful
Creatures, that for some considerable time past, He of His own good pleasure,
opened the Eyes of many of our Understandings, whereby we began to receive from
him (Instrumentally) some small glance of Light, which we readily embracing,
and by our daily conversing with the Holy Scriptures of Truth, (which formerly
we have been taught to Slight and Undervalue, by our Leaders, their Books and
Preachments; and do attribute that to be the great reason, or means, that we
should remain so long in Ignorance) our Minds became more and more Enlightened
thereby, giving us a true sight of our Errors and Mistakes, plainly declaring
unto us the great Necessity there was for us to embrace the Doctrine of Christ
Crucified, and to be obedient to his Holy Institutions, if ever we intended to
be Christians; A Doctrine that we were strangers unto, by reason of our
Education, aforesaid, and taking the Advice of the Apostle St. Paul to the
Thessalonians, I These. 5. 21. (who said) Prove all things, hold fast that which
is Good. As also the Apostle St. John, in his first Epistle 4. 5. Beloved,
Believe not every Spirit, but Try the Spirits; because many false Prophets are
gone out into the World.

When we began to Prove the Spirits of many, and to Try their Doctrines, and
bring them to the Trial of the Scripture, we found a great incoherence therein,
both as to Doctrine and Practice: Also Contradicting the Testimony of the
Scriptures. Where its said, Cursed is he that adds or diminishes. Upon which a
Religious Concern came upon many, in diverse parts of this Nation, who used
their utmost endeavors, according to the Abilities given them of God, not only
to inform their Brethren of their Vile Errors in Fundamentals, but would
willingly have been helpful to reclaim them; but instead of their Harkening to
wholesome Admonition, they turned a deaf Ear; and it may be said of them, as it
was said in days past by Those that regarded not the Cry of the City, nor the
Noise of the Driver, who would not hearken to the Voice of the Charmer, although
he Charmed never so wisely: But instead thereof, they persist in all their
abominable Errors, Crying out, to deceive the Simple, All is Lies, we are
Wronged; and yet dare not to appear to Vindicate themselves, unless it be with
manifest Contradictions to themselves, by bringing themselves in competition
with God Almighty; Saying, As God is One, his Truth and People One, so we are
One; the same that ever we were, ever since we were called to be a People, and
are not Changed nor Deviated in one Point. Although, as George Whitehead says,
We see cause otherwise to Word the matter (then formerly) yet our Intentions are
still the same.

Pray what Consequence can there be inferred, but that they wilfully take on
them the Guilt of all their Antichristian Errors? Then to what purpose so many
particular Persons giving forth Creeds, Paipably Contradicting the former
Creeds, and Books, if we allow them otherwise to Word the matter, and their
Intentions still the same; whose Intentions, as by their Books manifestly
appear, as can be proved in many Hundred Quotations, evidently tend to the
overthrowing of the true Christian Faith; which Doctrine, as contained in their
Books, are Repugnant to all Protestant Christians, by opposing Faith in Christ
Crucified, and his holy Institutions.

Give us leave, by the way, to tell thee, That whatsoever the high Pretentions
of any may be to Christianity, yet in their bold opposing the positive Commands
of Christ, they plainly demonstrate themselves to be no Christians, and from
such every sincere Person ought to withdraw, and come out from their Communion.

If any Quaker, or other Person, shall question the Truth of what follows, we
Offer, for the Conviction of the former, or Satisfaction of the latter, to give
them a Sight of the Originals from whence they are Quoted; and fully prove the
whole against them, before any Impartial Auditory.

THE Quakers Creed, etc.
THE Particular Reasons which we give for Leaving of the Quakers are as follow,
notwithstanding we could give abundance more, but we think it not material to
trouble the Reader with a multiplicity, seeing these few are material, against
the very Foundation of the Christian Religion; as we could also give many
hundred of Quotations out of their several Writers, being as so many Proofs of
these and other their Errors, and Antichristian Principles, viz.

1. Their Denial of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity.

2. The Blood of Christ outwardly shed, undervalued by the Quakers.

3. God and Christ in Heaven.

4. Justification by the Righteousness of Christ.

5. Their Equality with God

6. The Death and Sufferings of Christ.

7. The Resurrection of the Body.

8. Jesus of Nazareth, Denied to be the Son of God.

9. The Holy Scriptures.

10. The Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper.

11. They call all false Ministers that Preach Faith in Christ without.

12. Their Blasphemous Adorations, given to George Fox, and vindicated by other
Quakers.

Sect. I.
The Quakers Deny the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity.
NO Errors are more Dangerous, Then to deny the Lord that bought us, for such
are Damnable, and those that hold them, are Guilty of Heresy, and bring upon
themselves swift Destruction. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2.

The Scriptures do not tell People of a Trinity, G. Fox's great Mist. page 246.
nor Three Persons; but the Common Prayer Mass Book speaks of Three Persons,
brought in by the Father the Pope.

Another Proof of the Denial of the Trinity, by George Whitehead, and Three
more of his Brethren.

Here is the Three Persons thou Dreamest of, In their Book called Ishmael and
his Mother cast out. Page 10.
which thou would divide out of One, like a Conjurer, he is shut up with the
Three Persons [i. e. Mr. Tounsend, a Minister in Norwich] in perpetual
Darkness, for the Lake and the Pit.

Another Proof out of W. Pen's Sandy-foundation.

If God, Sandy Founda. p. 12, 13, 15.
as the Scriptures testifies, has never been declared, or belived, but as the
Holy One, then will it follow, That God is not a Holy Three, nor does subsist
in three Distinct and Separate Holy Ones; and since the Father is God, the Son
is God, and the Spirit is God; then, unless the Father, Son, and Spirit, are
three distinct Nothings, they must be three distinct Substances, and
Consequently three distinct Gods.

That frequent, W. Pen, his Sandy Foundation. page 12. 15
but impertinent Distinction, that God is one Substance, but three in Persons,
or Subsistances; a most absurd Blasphemy; they the Trinitarians must
necessarily conclude their kind of Trinity a Fiction.

Sect. II.
The Blood of Christ Outwardly Shed, Undervalued by some Quakers.
THE Blood of Christ, S. Eccles's Letter to R. Porter, Vindicated by G.
Whithead in his Light and Life.
no more than the Blood of another Saint: (Who also, in the same Letter,
farther says) viz. That the Baptists, and Independants, and Presbyterians, and
Pope, are all of one ground, and none of you understand the Blood of Jesus
Christ, no more than a Brute Beast, etc.

The Quakers see no need of directing Men to the Type, Ibid p. 38.
for the Antitipe, viz. Neither to the Outward Temple, nor yet to Jerusalem,
either to Jesus Christ, or His Blood. And where does the Scriptures say, The
Blood was there Shed for Justification?

The Sheding of that Blood, Page 64.
let out by the Spear, was an Act of a Wicked Man, and the Spear an Instrument
of Cruelty; which to lay the Meritorious Cause, or Stress of Justification
upon, its false Doctrine, says George Whitehead.

Sect. III.
That God and Christ are in Heaven is Denied by some Quakers.
IF there be any other Christ, George Fox, his great Mystery Page. 206.
but he that was Crucified within, he is the false Christ, Devils and
Reprobates make a Talk of him without.

Reader, observe its not long since one of their Preachers was heard to pray at
a solemn meeting, viz. O God, who was Crucified, Dyed, and rose again in us,
etc.

Your Imagined God beyond the Stars, Christoper Atkinsons Sword of the Lord
drawn. page. 5.
and your Carnal Christ, is utterly Denied: To say this Christ is God and Man,
in one Person, it is a Lie.

Observe Reader, this Christopher Atkinson was a Preacher of great Fame among
the Quakers, and a Companion with George Whitehead; although they have told some
of us of late, Serious Apology by W. Pen. page 1^6.
that he was Hanged for Felony.

But that the outward Person, which suffered, was properly the Son of God, we
utterly Deny.

Sect. IV.
Justification by the Righteousness of Christ, Denied.
W. Pen says, Sandy Foundation. p. 16, 18, 21, 22.
The Justice offended being Infinite, his Satisfaction ought to bear a
Proportion therewith; which Jesus Christ, as Man, could never pay, he being
Finite; and from a Finite Cause, could not proceed an Infinite Effect: Since
Christ could not Pay what was not his own, it follows, that in the Payment of
his own, the Case still remains equally: Since the Debt is not hereby absolved
or Forgiven, but Transferred only; and by Consequence we are no better provided
for Salvation.

Justification by Christ's imputative righteousness; Another Proof see W. Pen,
his Serious Apology. p. 148.
and wholly without us, and indeed this we Deny, and boldly affirm it, in the
Name of the Lord, to be the Doctrine of Devils, an Arm of the Sea of
Corruption, which does now Deluge the whole World.

Note Reader, Here is Justification by the Active and Passive Obedience of
Christ, as the meritorious and fundamental Cause thereof, before God, plainly
Denied, for that was and is wholly without us.

Sect. V.
The Quakers Account themselves Equal with God.
THey that have the Spirit of God, Francis Howgills Works. p. 232.
are equal with God. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit; there is
Unity, and the Unity stands in Equality it self.

He that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus from the Dead, George Fox,
his Readiness Errand p. 8.
is equal with God.

Sect. VI.
The Death and Sufferings of Christ Undervalued by the Quakers.
THE way to recover the Deceived is to lay open and discover the Deceivers;
whilst they pretend to own him to be the Christ, the Man Christ, even Jesus of
Nazareth, who died on the Cross, W. Pen's Christian Quaker, p. 97, 98.
it may evidently appear they mean no such matter; for they own no other thing
to be Christ, but that Light which is in all Men, the same in Turks and Pagans,
as those called Christians, which is no Body of Flesh. True it is, they own
that which Died was his Body, i. e. Christ Dwelt Eminently in him.

But that Body, says William Pen, is in no Man, Ergo that cannot be the Christ
in his Sense, which is incapable to dwell in Men.

Sect. VII.
The Resurrection of the Body Denied, etc.
I do utterly deny that this Text, Willi. Pen in his invalidity of J. Faldoes
Vindication, Page 369, 370
1 Cor. 15 and 44, is concerned in the Resurrection of man's carnal Body at all:
But the two States of Men, under the first and second Adam; Men are sown into
the World Natural, but they are raised Spiritually, through him, who is the
Resurrection and the Life, and so they are the Sons of the second Adam.

They say they own the Resurrection of the Dead, yet deny that that Body which
is Buried in the Grave, shall ever Rise again, as is proved above. What shall
we say? They mean other things like the Papists, having their Equivocations and
mental Reservations, which is sufficiently demonstrated by their otherwise
wording of the matter; but if what these Men say be true, then Christ did not
Die, for that could not be the Christ that Dyed, because that Body could not be
in any Man, Christ being only a Spirit in their Judgment. However the Apostle
St. Paul says Christ Died according to the Scriptures, and that he Died for our
Sins, and he that Died was the Son of God; because his Humane and Divine Nature
made but one Person. Now I would farther query with the Quakers, or any in
their behalf, Did the Light within Die? Did that bear our Sins on its Body, on
the Tree of the Cross? Did the Light within shed it is Blood to satisfy the
Justice of God? Was the Light within conceived and Born of the Virgin Mary,
Crucified, Dead, Buried and Raised again? Did the Light within ascend to
Heaven, and Sit on the Right Hand of God, to make intercession for us? All this
is affirmed in the Holy Scriptures concerning the Christ of God, then
consequently, the Quakers Christ is none of the Christ of God.

Sect. VIII.
Jesus of Nazareth Denied to be the Son of God.
THE Light within sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, George
Whitehead his Antidote, page 28th.
viz. Without the Man Christ Jesus, and Faith in him. If what G. Whitehead has
asserted be a Truth, then we may bid adieu to Jesus of Nazareth

The Quakers say they own him to be the Christ that was Born of the Virgin, yet
affirm the True Christ is the Light within all Men, and that he was never seen
with any outward Bodily Eyes; and that Body was called Christ, because the true
Christ was in him. To use an expression of their own, Oh the Nonsense and
Confusion of their Dark Spirits! was there ever such contradictions as they are
now found in, notwithstanding they would insinuate to the People, as if they
were the most Orthodox Christians extant, by their seeming confessions to Jesus
of Nazareth; well, its only their otherwise Wording the matter then formerly,
although they now say, and often declare, what good can a Christ without do us?
let us mind the Light within, that is enough for us, and not Trouble our Selves
with a Christ without. Very True, its not well said, but Wickedly said, what
good can Christ do us without, seeing we have i. e. the Quakers, so often and
open publicly denied him, as may evidently appear to the World (by our Books)
why then should any expect that they should make Christ without to be the
Object of their Faith, seeing they tell the World at this Day, they are not
changed, they are the same that ever they were, and do still adhere to their
former Principles, etc. Then consequently they take upon themselves the Guilt
of all their Antichristian Errors.

Sect. IX.
The Holy Scriptures Denied by Quakers.
THE Scriptures are not the Word of God. George Fox, great Mist. p. 246.
Ibid page 225. [yet he says of his own Writings] to you all, This is the Word
of the Lord.

Your Original, George Fox, his News out of the North. p. 14
is Carnal, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; and your Word is Carnal, the Letter;
their Original is Dust, which is the Letter, which is Death, and their Gospel
is but Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John; which is the Letter.

How can, Mean Tekel. p. 22.
or dare any Say, without the highest Blasphemy, that the Scriptures is the
Word of God?

If ever you own the Prophets, G. Fox's Answer West. Pet. p. 30.
Christ, or the Apostles, you will own our Writings, which are given forth by
the same Spirit and Power.

That which is spoken by the Spirit of Truth in any, William Pen and George
Whitehead their Serious Apology p. 49.
is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater.

Christ left nothing in Writing, William Pen his Christian Quaker p. 142. 144.
as the Rule, that we hear of; and doubtless had he intended the Rule of his
followers to have been a Written Rule, he would have left it upon record withal
particularity, This must be belived, and that done, on Pain of Eternal Death;
if the Scriptures were the Rule of Faith and Life, etc. then because they
cannot be the Rule to far the greatest part of Mankind, indeed to none but unto
Learned Men, they say they believe the Scriptures to be of divine Authority,
yet Deny them to be the Rule of our Faith and Practice

Sect. X.
The Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper Denied
YOur Baptism and Sacraments, as you call it, and all your Ordinances, and
Churches, and Teachings, it is Cain's Sacrifice.

Their Communion, Bread and Wine, is the Table of Devils, and Cup of Devils.

News out of the North, written from the Mouth of the Lord, from one who is
Naked, and stands Naked before the Lord, Clothed with Righteousness, whose
Name is not known in the World, Risen up out of the North, which was prophesied
of, but now is fullfilled, George Fox, page. 14.

To say that Sprinkling infants with Water, E. Burough's Works. p. 109, 191.
is Baptism into the Faith of Christ; this is the Doctrine of Devils.

I affirm, William Pen his Reason against Railing. p. 108. 109.
That Circumcision is as much of force, as Water Baptism, and the Paschal Lamb,
as the Bread and Wine; and we can testify from the same Spirit, by which Paul
renounced Circumcision, that they are to be rejected, as not now required.

They say, where they otherwise Word the Matter, They own Baptism, and the
Lords Supper; yet deny Water Baptism, and Condemn Breaking of Bread, and
Drinking of Wine, in Remembrance of Christ's Death, and call both Carnal and
Beggarly Elements.

Sect. XI.
They call all false (Ministers) that Preach Faith in a Christ without.
THEY that are false (Ministers) Preach Christ without, and bid People believe
in him, as he is in Heaven above.

The Quakers are the only Ministers of Christ.

Come Protestants, Presbyterians, Independants, and Baptists, etc. The Quakers
denies you all.

The Quakers are in the Truth, and none but they.

Is it not great Uncharitableness for them to thus applaud themselves, and to
give other People such Unchristian Language? As you may hear see by what
follows under their Title, viz

The Priests of the World are, A Brief Discovery of a Threefold Estate of
Antichrist, etc. P. 7, 8, 9, 10.
1. Conjurers, raising dead Doctrine, dead Uses, dead Motives, dead Reasons out
of the Letter, which is Death; raising Death out of Death, notable Conjurers.
2. Thieves and Robbers. 3. Antichrists, the Priests of Baal, cannot show any
Scripture for their Heathenish ways, and Bestial Worships. 4. Witches, blind
Guides. 5. Devils, the Serpent is Head in them. 6. Liars, the Commission and
Call of Baal's Priests, come from Oxford and Cambridge, which they call the
Wellhead of Divinity; corrupt Streams issue from thence I can witness
[fetching the same Commodities] drinking a Cup of the same Poisonous Fountain;
the Fountain is bitter, the Streams are no better. Even the Sir Symons of the
Age run to Oxford and Cambridge: These are not Ministers of Christ, but
Stewards of the Devil's Magazine, Dissemblers and Liars. 7. A Viperous and
Serpentine Generation, going about to Murder and Strangle the Child Jesus,
holding a Worm-eaten, Beastly Form. 8. Blasphemers, yea, of the Devil, fearful
Blasphemers. 9. Scarlet-colored Beasts: A Harlot full of Abominations and
Filthiness. 10. Babylon's Merchants, Selling Beastly Wares for a large Price;
the Letter, which is Dust and Death: The day is coming when these Idol
Merchants, these costly Sermon-makers, shall cry, etc. 11. Whited Walls,
professing nothing but Poisonous stuff. 12. Ravenous Wolves* 13. Greedy Dogs,
really they are Bloodhounds, still hunting and gasping after their Prey, like
the mouth of Hell; barking and raging like Sodomites. 14. Eminent and Ambitious
Pharisees of the Devil; woe, woe, woe, was the Portion of these Pharisees then,
and woe, woe, woe, is their Portion now: And woe and misery is the Portion of
the upholders of that Treacherous and Deceitful Generation, etc.

See also the abusive Language they have given to their own Friends, who
Dissented from them only about Women's Meetings, and their Church Government
among themselves, etc.

That John Story, Answer to W. Rogers Postscript.
John Wilkinson, and that Party, were Ministers of the Devil, and Ministers of
Antichrist; and that a cursed Spirit was entered into their Hearts and Souls.

And charged William Rogers, Epistle of Caution. p. 4. Printed 1682.
in particular, to be Sealed down under Eternal Judgment and Condemnation from
God for ever, except he Repented. And also said, In this State, (except thou
(William Rogers) can find a place of Repentance) thou art reserved in Chains
of Darkness unto the Judgment of the Great Day.

And that the said William Rogers, Answer to W. Rogers p. 4* 16. Printed 82
and others of his Friends, were Betraying Judas' s, Wolves, Dogs, and Devils
Incarnat.

And that he, G. Whitehead Judgment fixed.
and they, were Heathens, Atheists, and the like.

Its a true saying, The Tree is known by its Fruits, so let the Reader judge
what Spirit these Quakers, vain Bosters, and high Pretenders to Christianity,
W. Pen's Adress to Protestants* p. 242.
are Acted by.

To call Names for, or about Religion, are no Christians of Christ's Making.

Observe, Reader, would you not think, by the foregoing Citation of William
Pen's, that he was a sober Christian, and abhorred the calling of People Names,
or Ill-bred Language, for, or about Religion? But see how he contradicts
himself in another of his Books, and particularly The Clergy of the Church of
England, etc.

The idle gormandizing Priests of England run away with One hundred and fifty
thousand Pounds a Year, W. Pen's Guide Mistaken. p. 18.
under pretense of Gods Ministers: No sort of People have been so Universally,
through Ages, the very Bane of Soul and Body of the Universe, as that abominable
Tribe, (of Priests) for whom the Theater of Gods most dreadful Vengance is
reserved, to Act their Eternal Tragedy upon.

An Ill-bred pedantick crew, His Language to the Dissenters, in his New
NickName. page 165.
the Bane of Religion, and Pest of the World, the old Incendiaries to mischief;
and the best to be spared of Mankind; against whom the boiling Vengance of an
Irritated God is ready to be powered forth.

If the Quakers Expressions had been ten thousand times more significant, His
Serious Apology. p. 156.
earnest, and sharp against that cursed bitter stock of Hirelings, they had
been but enough.

Now, by William Pen' s Sentiments, in his Address to Protestants, as above, of
whose making is he, and his Brethren, of Christ's, or the Devils? And Remember
by the way, 1 Cor. vi. 10. That Revilers shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God.
And James 1. 26. If any Man among you seem to be Religious, and brideleth not
his Tongue, -- this Man's Religion is vain.

Sect. XII.
Their Blasphemous Adorations given to George Fox, and Vindicated by other
Quakers.
WE shall conclude the Quakers Creed with this Section, which contains Two
Blasphemous Letters, Written to Gesrge Fox, which he did not reprove, and has
been since Vindicated, by William Pen, and others, and to this day never
Retracted.

DEar George Fox, Josiah Cole's Letter from Barbados to G. Fox. 21 of the
Twelfth Month. 1658.
who art the Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached through us thy
Children, even to the Isles afar off, to the begetting many again to a lively
hope, for which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed; whose Being and
Habitation is in the Power of the Highest, in which thou Rules and Governs in
Righteousness: And thy Kingdom is Established in Peace, and the Increase
thereof is without End.

Dear and presious one in whom my life is bound up and may strenth in thee
stands, John Audland' s Letter to G. Fox.
by thy breathings I am nurished and refreshed: and by thee my strenth is
renewed: blessed art thou for Ever more: and blessed are all they that Enjoy
thee: life and strenth comes from thee holy one: and thou art the blessed of
the lord for Ever more, dear dear reach unto me, that I may be strenthened, to
stand in the mighty power and dread of the lord, for the sarvisse is very
great, my travel and burden was never, so as now since I saw thee: but daily
do I find thy Presence with me, which does exceedingly Preserve me; for I
cannot reane but in thy presence and power: pray for me that I may stand in thy
dread for Ever more: dear my dear brother John Came has been Exceeding sick
and he is very weak I can say little of his recovery as yet his wife is with
him she is dear and preciously kept; their dear love is to thee, oh reach
through all in thy mighty power to him this bearer can declare to thee of the
work this way: Jo: Willkinson and Jo: Storey is hear, their love is dearly to
thee: dear heart there is one thing that lies upon me: This Letter is Spelt
and Printed according to the Original, to prevent the Quakers Caveling at their
being wronged
I shall lay it before thee: as tuching thy comeing into Wiltshire: I was there
at Justice Stoks house: and his famaley is all pretty loveing and convinced: and
he is a sober wise man and there is honesty in him which will stand: and there
is a pretey people that way: it has laid Exceeddingly upon me these 3 days of
thy being at that place: I know not such another place in all the Counterey:
for thee: dear: I was much wounded to know that thou was in such a rude place
and suffers so amongst them: and this was I moved to lay before thee: and
great is my disere that it may be so: the Place is about 20 miles from brestol
in wiltshire one mile from chipenam a markete town Justice: stocks house, Jo:
Came told me that the Justice he was with was a very Loving and pretty man: this
bearer was there he can declare to thee more: but oh that thou wear but at
that place I mention: it is free and suitable for friends coming to thee: it
lies much upon me: and if thou find moveings strike over thither I shall say no
more of it: the work is great hear away pray for us all that in thy Power we
may abide for Evermore: I am thine begoten and nurished by thee and in thy
Power am I preserved glory unto thee holy one for Ever:

John Audland.

FINIS.

