THE SUPREMACY DEBATED: OR, The Authority of Parliaments (formerly owned by
Romish Clergy) to be the Supreamest Power.
IN case the Owning of the Authority of a Parliament to be the supreamest Power
in a Kingdom be traitorous or heretical amongst Papists, Rome's own Church was
the first Founder of this Doctrine, and frequently practiced the same, both
before, and until the Reformation of Religion within this Realm:

For Henry de Bracton, one of their famous Lawyers of this Nation, who
flourished Anno 1260. in the Reign of King Henry III. resolves thus:

The King has a Superior, to wit, God; also the Law, by which he is made a
King; II. Bracton his Words touching the Supreme Power.
likewise his Court, namely, the Earls and Barons; because they are called
Comites, as being the King's Fellows (or Companions:) And he who has a Fellow
(or Associate) has a Master. And therefore, if the King shall be without a
Bridle, that is, without Law, they ought to impose a Bridle on him, unless they
themselves, with the King, shall be without Bridle; and then the Subject shall
cry out, and say, O Lord Jesus Christ, do thou bind their Jaws with Bitt and
Bridle, etc.

Here is a true Resolution, that the Law, with the Earls and Barons assembled
in Parliament, are above the King, and ought to bridle him when he exorbitates
from the Law; which this famous Lawyer also seconds, in some sort, lib. 3. cap.
9. fol. 107.

This Law was so authentic in those Days, and in After-Ages, that in their
great Council of Basil. Anno 1431. when this mighty Question was debated,
whether a Pope were above a General Council, or a Council above him; at last it
was resolved, such a Council was above the Pope; upon this Reason, among others,

The Pope is in the Church, as a King in his Kingdom; The Reason that was given
at the Council of Basil, for a General Council to be above the Pope, serves
for a Parliament to be above a King.
and for a King to be of more Authority than his Kingdom, it were too absurd:
Ergo, Neither ought the Pope to be above the Church. In every well ordered
Kingdom it ought especially to be desired, that the whole Realm should be of
more Authority than the King; which, if it happened contrary, were not to be
called a Kingdom, but a Tyranny. And like as oftentimes Kings which do wickedly
govern the Commonwealth, and express Cruelty, are deprived of their Kingdoms;
even so it is not to be doubted, but that the Bishop of Rome may be deposed by
the Church; that is to say, by the General Council. At the Beginning (as
Cicero, in his Offices, says) it is certain, there was a Time when as the
People lived without Kings: But afterward, when Lands and Possessions began to
be divided, according to the custom of every Nation, then were Kings ordained,
for no other Causes, but only to execute Justice; for when, at the Beginning,
the Common People were oppressed by rich and mighty Men, they ran by and by to
some virtuous and good Man, which should defend the Poor from Injury, and
ordain Laws whereby the Rich and Poor might dwell together. But when as yet,
under the Rule of Kings, the Poor were oftentimes oppressed, Laws were ordained
and instituted; the which should judge, neither for Hatred, nor Favor; and
give like Ear to the Poor, as Rich: Whereby we understand and know, not only
the People, but also the King to be subject to the Law; for if we do see a King
to contemn and despise the Laws, violently rob and spoil his Subjects, destowr
Virgins, ravish Matrons, and do all things licentiously and temeriously; do not
the Nobles of the Kingdom assemble together, deposing him from his Kingdom, set
up another in his place, which shall swear to rule and govern uprightly, and be
obedient unto the Laws? Verily, As Reason does persuade, even so does the Use
thereof also teach us. It seems also agreeable unto Reason, that the same
should be done in the Church, that is in the Council; which is done in any
Kingdom. And so is this sufficiently apparent, that the Pope is subject unto
the Council.

Thus the Bishop of Burgen, Ambassador of Spain, the Abbot of Scotland, and
Thomas de Carcellis, a famous Divine, reasoned in this Council, which voted
with them.

Here you have a full Resolution of this great Council (which the Papists call
a General One, being approved of by the Grecian and Roman Emperors, and most
Christian Kings and States, and our King amongst others) That the Kingdom, in
Parliament assembled, is above the King, as a General Council is paramount the
Pope; which Aeneas Silvius (who afterward became Pope) and Surius (one of
Rome's Jesuits) do manifest by these five Reasons.

First, Because Kings were first created and instituted by their Kingdoms and
People; Five Reasons showing a Parliament to be above a King.
not their Kingdoms and People by them.

Secondly, Because they were ordained only for Kingdoms and People's Service
and Welfare, not their Kingdoms and People for them.

Thirdly, Because their Kingdoms and People, as they at first created, so they
still limit and confirm their Royal Jurisdiction by Laws; to which they are,
and ought to be subject.

Fourthly, Because they oblige them by solemn Oath to rule accordingly, and to
be obedient unto the Laws.

Lastly, Because they have power to depose their Kings, in case they contemn
the Laws, and violently rob and spoil their Subjects.

Now it is to be wondered why Papists will blame Protestants to defend their
Laws and Liberties, this being their own Doctrine, concerning the Power,
Superiority and Privilege of Parliaments, Peers and Kingdoms over their Kings;
they having least ground, of all others, to tax our Lords and Commons with
Usurpation upon the Crown, it having been the ancient Course of this Kingdom,
to examine the Acts of their Kings and Princes, whether they ruled according to
the Laws established, or no.

For instance-sake, Kings before the Conquest deposed for irregular Government.
we shall give you a short Touch, Anno 454. King Vortigern, when he had reigned
six Years, for his Negligence, and evil Government (for which Wostine, then
Archbishop of London, told him, he had endangered both his Soul and Crown) was
deposed from his Crown by his Subjects (the Britains) general Consent,
imprisoned; and his Son Vortimer chosen, and crowned King in his stead: After
whose untimely Death (being poisoned by Rovena) Vortigern was again restored by
them to the Crown; yet, at last, for his notorious Sins, by the just, revenging
Hand of God, consumed to Ashes by Fire, kindled by Augelius and Vter, as
Heaven's Ministers to execute its Wrath.

Sigibert King of the West Saxons, setting aside all Laws, and Rules of true
Piety, wallowing in all sensual Pleasures, using Exactions and Cruelties upon
his Subjects, and slaying the Earl Cumbra, his faithful Counselor, for
admonishing him friendly of his vicious Life; the Peers and Commons thereupon,
seeing their State and Lives in danger, and the Laws broken by him, assembled
and rose up in Arms against him, and deposed him; who after died in a Wood,
where he fled, being slain by his Swine Herd: So Kenwolfe was made King in his
stead, Anno 756.

Ofred King of Northumberland, for his evil Government, was expelled by his
Subjects, and deprived of all Kingly Authority, in the Year 789.

So Ethelred (the Son of Molo) his next Successor, being revoked from Exile,
and restored to the Crown, of which he was formerly deprived; thereupon
murdering diverse of his Nobles and Subjects, to secure his Crown, did so
offend his Subjects thereby, that in the Year 794. they rose up in Arms against
him, and slew him at Cobre.

Ceolwolfe King of Merica, Anno 820. (after one Year's Reign) was, for his
Mis-Government, expulsed by his People; abandoning his Crown and Country, for
the safety of his Life.

The Crown of England has oftentimes been settled upon those, who were not next
Heirs to it: Witness the Electing and Crowning of Edward, who was illegitimate;
and putting by Ethelred, the right Heir, after Edgar's Decease, Anno 975.

The Electing and Crowning of Canutus, a mere Foreigner, in opposition to
Edward, the right Heir to King Ethelred, Anno 1016.

Also the Electing of Harold and Hardiknute, both elected and crowned Kings
successively, without Title; Edmond and Alfred, the right Heirs, being
dispossessed; the latter imprisoned, and tormented to death, An. 1036. and
1040. yet after Hardiknute's Decease, Edward (surnamed the Confessor) was
chosen King by Consent of Parliament; and the English Nobility, upon the Death
of King Harold, enacted, that none of the Danish Blood should any more reign
over them.

After this King's Death, Edgar Etheling, who had the best Title, was rejected,
and Harold elected and crowned King.

So, Kings after the Conquest not successively succeeding.
after William the Conqueror's Decease, Anno 1087. Robert, the elder Brother,
was put aside, and William Rufus elected and crowned.

After whose Death, Henry I. his younger Brother (though not next Heir) was
elected King by the Clergy, Nobles and Commons (who refused to admit of any
King, but with Capitulations and Caveats to their own liking) upon fair
Promises for reforming bad and rigorous Laws, Remission of Taxes exacted on the
Subjects, and Punishments of the chief Causers of them; and a solemn Oath to
frame good Laws, and ratify St. Edward's Laws: All which he really performed.

So, after the Death of Richard I. John Earl of Morton was elected and crowned
King, his Nephew Arthur, the right Heir, dis-inherited.

He dying, his Son Henry III. was elected and crowned, and Lewis (made King in
his Father's Life by the Barons) removed.

Edward II. King Edw. II. deposed.
their natural King of England, was deposed by Bishops, Peers and Commons in
Parliament, Anno 1327.

King Richard II. King Rich. II. deposed.
for sundry Misdemeanors objected against him in Parliament, and for the
Breach of his Coronation Oath, was deposed by Parliament, and Henry IV. placed
in his stead, Anno 1392.

Henry VI. King, Queen, and Prince of Wales put aside by Parliament.
Queen Margaret, and Prince Edward their Son, were by a Parliament put by, and
Edward IV. made King: After which, King Henry was by another Parliament
re-crowned, and re-established in his Kingdom, and Edward IV. declared a
Traitor: But Edward (not long after) taking King Henry Prisoner, caused him to
be murdered in the Tower. Another Parliament, Anno 1472. abrogated King
Henry's Laws, and re-established King Edward.

All which have Parliaments (before the Reformation in this Kingdom) done, none
daring to question their Authority, but complying with them.

By W. R. Gent.
With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller, at the Gilded Acron in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

Where Gentlemen, and others, may be furnished with most sorts of Acts of
Parliament, and other State-Matters: As also Books of Divinity,
Church Government, and Sermons on most Occasions, etc.


