I Will sing of Judgment and Mercy Ps: 101:1. BOANERGES and BARNABAS Or
Judgment and Mercy for afflicted Souls

Printed for R: Lowndes at the Unicorn on Ludgat hill over against Bell Savage
1646



BOANARGES AND BARNABAS: OR Judgment and Mercy for afflicted Souls.
Consisting of Meditations. Soliloquies. and Prayers. By FRANCIS QUARLES.

London, Printed by Rich. Cotes for Richard Royston, and Richard Lownes, and
are to be sold at the Unicorn on Ludgate Hill over against. Bell savage, 1646.

TO My most Gracious SOVEREIGN King CHARLES.
SIR,
I Believe you to be such Patron of Virtue, that if this Treatise had the
least probability of cherishing Vice, my Conscience durst not admit a thought
of this Dedication to your Majesty.

But my own Reason (seconded by better approbations) assures me these
Disquisitions and Prayers are like to beget grace in those where it was not,
and confirm it where it was.

And being so useful, I dare not doubt your Patronage of this child, which
survives a Father whose utmost abilities were (till death darkened that great
light in his soul) sacrificed to your service.

But, if I could question your willing protection of it, I might strengthen my
Petition for it, by an unquestionable commendation of the Authors published
Meditations, in most of which (even those of Poetry begun in his youth) there
are such tinctures of Piety, and Pictures of devout Passions, as gained him
much love, and many Noble Friends.

One of that number (which is not to be numbered) was the Religious, Learned,
Peaceable, Humble Bishop of Armagh; whom I beseech God to bless, and make your
Majesty and him, in these bad, sad times, instruments of Good to this
distracted, distempered Church and State.

This is my unfeigned Prayer; and I doubt not but all that wish well to Sion,
will seal it with their Amen.

Your Majesty's Poor and most Faithful Subject, RICHARD ROYSTON.

The Preface.
Reader,
IT is thought fit to say this little, and but this little, of the Author and
his Book.

He was, (for I speak to those that are strangers to his extraction and
breeding) a branch of a deserving family, and the son of a worthy father: his
education was in the Universities, and Innes of Court, but his inclination was
rather to divine studyes then the law.

This appears in most of his published books, (which are many) but I think in
none more then this, which was finished with his life.

Wherein the Reader may behold (according to the arguments undertaken by the
Author) what passions, and in what degrees those passions have possessed his
soul, and whether, grace have yet allayed, or expelled them, (those that are
inconsistible with virtue) from the strong hold of his affections. Such this
Treatise is, and being such, I commend it to the Reader, and this wish with it,
that those many (too many) writers who mistake malice for zeal, and (being
transported) speak evil of government, and meddle with things they understand
not, Iud 8, 10. forgetting there is such sins as sedition and heresy, (sins
which Saint Paul, Gal. 5. 20. 21 parallels with murder and witchcraft) would
change their disputes into devout meditations, such as these be; in which the
pious man shall see virtue adorned with beautiful language, and vice so
presented as it is not like to infect the mind, nor corrupt the conscience.

The method, the arguments, the style, all speak M. Quarles the Author of the
Book, and the book speaks his commendations so much, that I need not commend
it* but I do thee to God.

Farewell
The Table.
Meditation I. The Sensual man's Solace. Page 9. His Sentence. 12 His Proofs.
13 His Soliloquie. 14 His Prayer. 16
Meditation II. The Vainglorious man's Vaunt, etc. 19 Meditation III. The
Oppressors Plea, etc. 29 Meditation IV. The Drunkards Jubilee, etc. 40
Meditation V. The Swearers Apology, etc. 50 Meditation VI. The Procrastinat^rs
Remora's, etc. 60 Meditation VII. The Hypocrites Prevarication, etc. 70
Meditation VIII. The ignorant man's Faultering, etc. 80 Meditation IX. The
Slothful man's slumber, etc. 90 Meditation X. The proud man's Ostentation, etc.
109 Meditation XI. The Covetous man's Care, etc. 119 Meditation XII. The
Self-lovers Self-fraud, etc. 130 Meditation XIII. The Worldly man's Verdour,
etc. 141 Meditation XIIII. The Lascivious man's Heaven, etc. 151 Meditation XV.
The Sabbath Breakers Profanation, etc. 161 Meditation XVI. The Censorious man's
Crimination, etc. 172 Meditation XVII. The Liers fallacies, etc. 182 Meditation
XVIII. The Revengeful man's rage, etc. 193 Meditation XIX. The Secure man's
Triumph, etc. 204 Meditation XX. The Presumptuous man's Felicities, etc. 215
The sensual Man's solace.
COme, let us be merry, and rejoice our souls in frolic and in fresh delights:
Let Us skrue our pampered hearts a pitch beyond the reach of dulbrowd sorrow:
Let Us pass the slow-paced time in melancholy-charming mirth, and take the
advantage of our youthful days: Let Us banish care to the dead Sea of
Phlegmatic old age: Let a deep sigh be high Treason, and let a solemn look
be adjudg'd a Crime too great for Pardon. My serious studies shall be to draw
mirth into a Body, to analyze laughter, and to paraphrase upon the various
Texts of all delights. My recreations shall be to still pleasure into a
Quintessence, to reduce Beauty to her first principles, and to extract a
perfect innocence from the milk-white Doves of Venus. Why should I spend my
precious minutes in the sullen and dejected shades of sadness? or ravell out
my short lived days in solemn and heartbreaking Care? Hours have Eagles
wings, and when their hasty flight shall put a period to our numbered days, the
world is gone with us, and all our forgotten joys are left to be enjoyed by
the succeeding generations, and we are snatched we know not how, we know not
whither; and wrapped in the dark bosom of eternal night. Come then my soul; be
wise, make use of that which gone, is past recalling, and lost, is past
redemption: Eat thy bread with a merry heart, and gulp down care in frolique
cups of liberal wine. Beguile the tedious nights with dalliance, and steep
thy stupid senses in unctious, in delightful sports. It Is, all the portion
that this transitory world can give thee: Let Music, Voices, Masks and
midnight Revels, and all that melancholy wisdom censures vain, be thy
delights. And let thy care-abjuring soul clear up and sweeten the short days
of thy consuming youth. Follow the ways of thy own heart, and take the
freedom of thy sweet desires: Leave not delight untryed, and spare no cost to
heighten up thy lusts. Take pleasure in the choice of pleasures, and please thy
curious eyes with all varieties, to satisfy thy soul in all things which thy
heart desires. I, but my soul, when those evil days shall come wherein thy
wasting pleasures shall present their Items to thy bedrid view, when all
diseases and the evils of age shall muster up their Forces in thy crazie bones,
where be thy comforts then?

His Sentence.
COnsider O my soul, and know that the day will come, and after that another,
wherein for all these things

God will bring thee to judgment, Eccles. 11. 9. Prove. 14. ^3. Even in laughter
the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. Eccles. 2. 2.
I said in my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, and therefore
enjoy pleasure, and behold this also is vanity; I said of laughter, it is mad;
and of mirth, what does it? St. James. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth
and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts as in the day of slaughter.
Eccles. 7. 4. The heart of the wise man is in the house of mourning; but the
heart of fools is in the house of mirth. His Proofs.
Isid. in Synonymis. Pleasure is an inclination to the unlawful objects of a
corrupted mind, allured with a momentary sweetness. Hugo. Sensuality is an
immoderate indulgence of the flesh, a sweet poison, a strong plague, a
dangerous potion which effeminates the body, and enerves the soul. Cass. Lib.
4. Ep. They are more sensible of the burden of affliction, that are most taken
with the pleasures of the flesh. His Soliloquy.
What have thou now to say O my soul, why this judgment, seconded with divine
proofs, backed with the harmony of holy men, should not proceed against thee?
Dally no longer with thy own salvation, nor flatter thy own corruption:
Remember, the wages of flesh are sin, and the wages of sin, death: God has
threatened it, whose judgments are terrible; God has witnessed it, whose words
are Truth. Consider then my soul, and let not momentarie pleasures flatter thee
into eternity of torments: How many, that have trod thy steps, are now roaring
in the flames of hell! and yet thou triflest away the time of thy repentance. O
my poor deluded soul, presume no longer, repent to day, lest to morrow come too
late: Or could thou ravell out thy days beyond Methusalem, tell me alas,
what will eternity be the shorter for the deduction of a thousand years? Be
wisely provident therefore O my soul, and bid vanity, the common sorceresse of
the world farewell; life and death are yet before thee: Choose life, and the God
of life will seal thy choice. Prostrate thy self before him who delights not in
the death of a sinner, and present thy petitions to him who can deny thee
nothing in the name of a Savior.

His Prayer.
O God, in the beauty of whose holiness is the true joy of those that love
thee, the full happiness of those that fear thee, and the only rest of those
that prize thee; In respect of which, the transitory pleasures of the world are
less then nothing, in comparison of which the greatest wisdom of the world is
folly, and the glory of the earth but dross and dung; How dare my boldness
thus presume to press into thy glorious presence? What can my prayers expect
but thy just wrath and heavy indignation? O what return can the tainted breath
of my polluted lips deserve, but to be bound hand and foot, and cast into the
flames of Hell? But Lord the merits of my Savior are greater then the offenses
of a sinner, and the sweetness of thy mercy exceeds the sharpness of my
misery: The horror of thy judgments have seized upon me, and I languish
through the sense of thy displeasure; I have forsaken thee the rest of my
distressed soul, and set my affections upon the vanity of the deceitful
world. I have taken pleasure in my foolishness, and have vaunted my self in
mine iniquity, I have flattered my soul with the honey of delights, whereby I
am made sensible of the stink of my affliction; wherefore I loath, and utterly
abhor my self, and from the bottom of my heart repent in dust and ashes. Behold
O Lord, I am impure and vile, and have wallowed in the puddle of mine own
Corruptions; The Sword of thy displeasure is drawn out against me, and what
shall I plead O thou preserver of mankind? Make me a new Creature O my God, and
destroy the Old man within me. Remove my affections from the love of transitory
things, that I may run the way of thy Commandments. Turn away mine eyes from
beholding vanity, and make thy testimonies my whole delight. Give me strength
to discern the emptiness of the creature, and inebriate my heart with the
fullness of thy joys. Be thou my portion O God, at whose right hand stand
pleasures for ever more. Be thou my refuge and my shield, and suffer me not to
sink under the corruptions of my heart; let not the house of mirth beguile me,
but give me a sense of the evil to come. Accept the free will offerings of my
mouth, and grant my petitions for the honor of thy Name, then will I magnify
thy mercies O God, and praise thy name for ever and ever.

The Vainglorious man's vaunt.
What tell thou me of Conscience, or a pious life? They are good trades for
a leaden spirit that can stand bent at every frown, and want the brains to
make a higher Fortune, or courage to archieve that honor which might glorify
their names, and write their memories in the Chronicles of Fame. It Is true,
Humility is a needful gift in those that have no quality to exercise their
pride; and patience is a necessary grace to keep the world in peace, and him
that has it, in a whole skin, and often proves a virtue born of mere
necessity. And civil honesty is a fair pretense for him that has not wit to
act the Knave, and makes a man capable of a little higher style then Fool. And
blushing modesty is a pretty innocent quality, and serves to vindicate an easy
nature from the imputation of an il-breeding. These are inferior Graces that
have got a good opinion in the dull wisdom of the world, and appear like
water among the elements to moderate the body Politic, and keep it from
combustion, nor do they come into the work of honor. Virtue consists in
Action, and the reward of action is Glory. Glory is the great soul of the
little world, and is the Crown of all sublime attempts, and the point whereto
the crooked ways of policy are all concentrick. Honor consults not with a
pious life. Let those that are ambitious of a Religious reputation, abjure all
honorable Titles, and let their doughbak'd spirits take a pride in suf-ferance,
(the Anvile of all injuries) and be thankfully baffled into a quiet
pilgrimage. Rapes, murders, treasons, dispossessions, riots, are venial
things to men of honor, and often co-incident in high pursuits. Had my dull
Conscience stood upon such nice points; that little honor I have won had
glorified some other arm, and left me begging Morsells at his Princely gates.
Come, come, my soul, Id factum juvat quod fieri non licet. Fear not to do,
what crowns thee being done. Ride on with thy Honor, and create a name to
live with fair Eternity. Enjoy thy purchased Glory as the merit of thy
renowned Actions, and let thy memory entaile it to succeeding Generations. Make
thy own game, and if thy conscience correct thee, check thy saucy Conscience,
till she stand as mute as metamorphos'd Niobe. Fear not the frowns of
Princes, or the imperious hands of various Fortune. Thou art too bright for the
one to obscure, and too great for the other to cry down.

His Verdict.
BUt hark my soul, I hear a voice that thunders in mine ear

I will change their glory into shame, Hos. 4. 7. Psalm. 49. 20. Man that is
born in honor, and understands not, is like the beasts that perish. Prove.
25. 27. It is not good for to eat too much boney, so for men to search their
own glory, is not glory. Jer. 9. 23. Thus says the Lord: Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, nor let the
rich man glory in his riches: But let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knows me that I am the Lord. Gal. 5. 26. Let us not be
desirous of vainglory, etc. His Proofs.
St. August. The vain glory of the world is a deceitful sweetness, an
unfruitful labor, a perpetual fear, a dangerous bravery, begun without
providence, and finished not without repentance S. Greg. He that makes
transitory honor the reward of a good work, sets eternal glory at low rate.
His Soliloquie.
Vainglory is a Froth, which blown off, discovers a great want of measure:
Can thou O my soul, be guilty of such an emptiness, and not be challenged?
Can thou appear in the searching eye of heaven, and not expect to be cast
away? deceive not thy self O my soul, nor flatter thy self with thy own
greatness. Search thy self to the bottom, and thou shall find enough to
humble thee: Do thou glory in the favor of a Prince? The frown of a Prince
determines it. Do thou glory in thy strength? A poor Ague betrays it. Do
thou glory in thy wealth? the hand of a thief extinguishes it. Do thou glory
in thy friends? One cloud of adversity darkens it. Do thou glory in thy
parts? thy own pride obscures it. Behold my soul, how like a Bubble thou
appearest, and with a sigh break into sorrow; the gate of heaven is strait;
can thou hope to enter without breaking? The Bubble that would pass the
Floodgates must first dissolve: My soul melt then in tears, and empty thy self
of all thy vanity, and thou shall find divine repletion; evaporate in thy
Devotion, and thou shall recruit thy greatness to eternal Glory.

His Prayer.
ANd can I choose O God but tremble at thy judgments, or can my stony heart
not stand amazed at thy threatenings? It is thy voice O God, and thou have
spoken it: It is thy voice O God, and I have heard (...) Had thou so dealt by
me, as thou did by Babels proud King, and driven me from the sons of Men,
thou had but done according to thy righteousness, and rewarded me according
to my deservings: What could thou see in me less worthy of thy vengeance
then in him, the example of thy justice? Or Lord, wherein am I more incapable
of thy indignation? There is nothing in me to move thy mercy but in misery. Thy
goodness is thy self, and has no ground but what proceeds from it self, yet
have I sinned against that goodness, and have thereby heaped up wrath against
the day of wrath; that insomuch, had not thy Grace abounded with my sin, I had
long since bin confounded in my sin, and swallowed up in the gulf of thy
displeasure. But Lord, thou take no delight to punish, and with thee is no
respect of persons: thou take no pleasure in the confusion of thy creature,
but rejoycest rather in the conversion of a sinner. Convert me therefore O
God, I shall be then converted: make me sensible of my own corruptions, that I
may see the vileness of my own condition. Pull down the pride of my ambitious
heart; humble me thou O God, and I shall be humbled: Weane me from the
thirst of transitory honor, and let my whole delight be to glory in thee:
Touch thou my conscience with the fear of thy name, that in all my actions I
may fear to offend thee: endue me O Lord with the spirit of meekness, and
teach me to overcome evil with a patient heart: moderate and curb the
exorbitances of my passion, and give me temperate use of all thy creatures.
Replenish my heart with the graces of thy Spirit, that in all my ways I may be
acceptable in thy sight. In all conditions give me a contented mind, and upon
all occasions grant me a grateful heart, that honoring thee here in the
Church militant before men, I may be glorified hereafter in the Church
triumphant before thee and Angels, where filled with true glory according to
the measure of grace thou shall be pleased to give me here, I may with Angels
and Archangels praise thy Name for ever and ever.

The Oppressors Plea.
I Seek but what is my own by Law: It was his own free Act and Deed: The
execution lies ^ for goods or body, and goods or body I will have, or else my
money. What if his beggarly children pine, or his proud wife perish? They
perish at their own charge, not mine, and what is that to me? I must be paid,
or he lie by it until I have my utmost farthing, or his bones. The Law is just
and good, and being ruled by that, how can my fair proceedings be unjust?
What Is thirty in the hundred to a man of Trade? Are we born to thrum Caps, or
pick straws? and sell our livelihood for a few tears, and a whining face? I
thank God they move me not so much as a howling Dog at midnight: I Will give no
day, if heaven it self would be security; I must have present money, or his
bones. The Commodities were good enough, as wares went then, and had he had but
a thriving wit, with the necessary help of a good merchantable Conscience, he
might have gained perchance as much as now he lost; but howsoever, gain, or
not gain, I must have my money. Two tedious Terms my dearest gold has lain
in his unprofitable hands. The cost of Suit, has made me bleed above a score
of Royals, besides my Interest, travel, half pints, and bribes; all which does
but increase my beggarly defendants damages, and sets him deeper on my score;
but right's right, and I will have my money, or his bones. Fifteen shillings in
the pound composition? I Will hang first. Come, tell not me of a good Conscience,
a good conscience is no parcel of my Trade; it has made more Bankrupts, then
all the loose wives in the universal City. My conscience is no fool. It tells
me that my owne's my own, and that a well-cramm'd bag is no deceitful
friend, but will stick close to me, when all my friends forsake me: If to
gain a good Estate out of nothing, and to regaine a desperate debt, which is
as good as nothing, be the fruits and sign of a bad conence, God help the good.
Come, tell not me of griping and Oppression. The world is hard, and he that
hopes to thrive, must gripe as hard: What I give, I give; and what I lend, I
lend: If the way to heaven be to turn beggar upon earth, let them take it
that like it, I know not what ye call Oppression. The Law is my direction; but
of the two, it is more profitable to oppress, then to be oppressed. If debtors
would be honest and discharge, our hands were bound; but when their failing
offends my bags, they touch the Apple of my eye, and I must right them.

His Punishment.
BUt hah! what voice is this that whispers in mine ear, The Lord will spoil
the soul of the Oppressors, Prove. 22. 23.

Pro. 21. 22. Rob not the poor, because he is poor, neither oppress the
afflicted in the gates, for the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the
soul of those that have spoiled him. Ezekiel. 22. 19. The people of the land have
used oppression, and exercised Robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy; yea,
they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully. Therefore I have poured out my
indignation upon them, I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath. Zach. 7.
9. Execute true judgment, and show mercy and camp^ssion on every man to his
brother, and oppress not the widow nor the fatherless, nor the stranger, nor
the poor, and let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his
brother. But they refused to hearken; therefore came a great wrath from the
Lord of Hosts. His Proofs.
Bernard, p. 1691. We ought so to care for our selves, as not to neglect the
due regard of our neighbor. Bern. ibid. He that is not merciful to another,
shall not find mercy from God; but if thou wil'st be merciful and
compassionate, thou shall be a benefactor to thy own soul. His Soliloquy.
IS it wisdom in thee O my soul to covet a happiness, or rather to account it
so, that is sought for with a judgment, obtained with a Curse, and punished
with damnation; And to neglect that good which is assured with a promise,
purchased with a blessing, and rewarded with a Crown of Glory? Can thou hold
a full estate, a good pennyworth, which is bought with the dear price of thy
Gods displeasure? Tell me, what continuance can that Inheritance promise that
is raised upon the ruins of thy Brother? Or what mercy can thou expect from
heaven, that have denied all mercy to thy Neighbor O my hard-hearted soul
consider, and relent: Build not an house whose posts are subject to be rotted
with a curse: Consider what the God of truth has threatened against thy
cruelty; Relent, and turn compassionate, that thou may be capable of his
compassion on. If the desire of Gold has hardened thy heart, let the tears of
true Repentance mollify it; soften it with Aarons ointment, until it become
wax to take the impression of that seal which must confirm thy Pardon.

His Prayer.
BUt will my God be now entreated? Is not my crying sin too loud for pardon?
am I not sunk too deep into the jaws of Hell, for thy strong arm to rescue?
Has not the hardness of my heart made me incapable of thy compassion? O if my
tears might wash away my sin, my head should turn a living Spring: Lord I
have heard thee speak and am afraid; the word is past, and thy judgments
have found me out. Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and the Jaws
of hell have overwhelmed me: I have oppressed thy poor, and added affliction
to the afflicted, and the voice of their misery is come before thee. They
besought me with tears, and in the anguish of their souls, but I have stopped
mine ears against the cry of their complaint. But Lord, thou walk not the
ways of man, and remembrest mercy in the midst of thy wrath, for thou art
good and gracious, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in compassion to all
that shall call upon thee. Forgive me O God my sins that are past, and deliver
me from the guilt of my Oppression: Take from me O God this heart of stone,
and create in my breast a heart of flesh: Assuage the vehemence of my desires
to the things below, and satisfy my soul with the sufficiency of thy Grace.
Inflame my affections, that I may love thee with a filial love, and incline me
to rely upon thy fatherly providence: Let me account godliness my greatest
gain, and subdue in me my lusts after filthy lucre. Preserve me O Lord from
the vanity of self-love, and plant in my affections the true love of my
neighbors: Endue my heart with the bowels of compassion, and then reward me
according to thy righteousness: Direct me O God in the ways of my life, and
let a good Conscience be my continual comfort. Give me a willing heart to make
restitution of what I have wrongfully gotten by oppression. Grant me a lawful
use of all thy Creatures, and a thankful heart for all thy benefits. Be
merciful to all those that groan under the burden of their own wants, and
give them patience to expect thy deliverance: Give me a heart that may
acknowledge thy favors, and fill my tongue with praise and thanksgiving, that
living here a new life, I may become a new creature, and being ingraffed in
thee by the power of thy grace, I may bring forth fruit to thy honor and glory.

The Drunkards Jubilee.
What Complement will the severer world allow to the vacant hours of
frolique-hearted youth! How shall their free, their joviall spirits entertain
their time, their friends! What Oil shall be infused into the lamp of dear
society, if they deny the privilege of a civil rejoicing Cup? It is the life,
the radical humor of united souls, whose love-digested heat even ripens and
ferments the green materials of a plighted faith; without the help whereof
new married friendship falls into divorce, and joined acquaintance soon resolves
into the first Elements of strangeness. What mean these strict Reformers thus
to spend their hou^e-glasses, and bawle against our harmless Cups? to call our
meetings Riots, and brand our civil mirth with styles of loose Intemperance?
where they can sit at a sisters Feast, devour and gurmundize beyond excess,
and wipe the guilt from off their marrowed mouths, and cloth their surfeits in
the long fustian robes of a tedious Grace: Is it not much better in a fair
friendly Round (since youth must have a swing) to steep our soule-afflicting
sorrows in a chirping Cup, then hazard our estates upon the abuse of providence
in a foolish cast at Dice? Or at a Cockpit leave our doubtful fortunes to the
mercy of unmercifull contention? Or spend our wanton days in sacrificing
costly presents to a fleshly Idol? Was not Wine given to exhilarate the
drooping hearts, and raise the drowzie spirits of dejected souls? Is not the
liberal Cup the Sucking-bottle of the sons of Phoebus, to solace and refresh
their palats in the nights of sad Invention? Let dry-brain'd Zelots spend their
idle breaths, my cups shall be my cordialls to restore my care-befeebled heart
to the true Temper of a well-complexioned mirth: My solid Brains are potent,
and can bear enough, without the least offense to my distempered Senses, or
interruption of my boon companions: My tongue can in the very Zenith of my Cups
deliver the expressions of my composed thoughts with better sense, then these
my grave Reformers, can their best advised prayers, My Constitution is
potproofe, and strong enough to make a fierce encounter with the most
stupendous vessel that ever sailed upon the tides of Bacchus. My reason
shrinks not; my passion burns not.

His Judgment.
O But my soul, I hear a threatening voice that interrupts my language,

Woe be to them that are mighty to drink Wine, Esa. 5. 22. Prove. 20. 1. Wine
is a mocker, strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not
wise. Esaias 5. 11. Woe be to them that rise up early in the morning to follow
strong drink that continue till night, until wine inflame them. Prove. 23. 20.
Be not amongst wine-bibbers. 1 Cor. 5. 1. Now I have written unto you, not to
keep company, if any that is called a brother be a drunkard, with such a one,
no not to eat. His Proofs.
Aug. in lib. pen. Whilst the drunkard swallows wine, wine swallows him; God
disregards him, Angels despise him, Men deride him, virtue declines him, the
devil destroys him. Aug. ad sac. virg. Drunkenness is the mother of all
evil, the matter of all mischief, the wel-spring of all vices, the trouble of
the senses, the tempest of the tongue, the shipwreck of chastity, the
consumption of time, a voluntary madness, the corruption of manners, the
distemper of the body, and the destruction of the soul, His Soliloquy.
MY soul, it is the voice of God digested into a judgment: There is no kicking
against Pricks, or arguing against a divine Truth: Pleadest thou Custom?
Custom in finne multiplies it: Pleadest thou society? Society in the offense,
aggravates the punishment: Pleadest thou help to invention? Woe be to that
barennesse that wants such shouers: Pleadest thou strength to bear much wine
Woe to those that are mighty to drink strong drink: My soul, thou have
sinned against thy Creator in abusing that creature he made to serve thee:
Thou have sinned against the creature, in turning it to the Creators dishonor:
Thou have sinned against thy self, in making thy comfort thy confusion. How
many want that blessing thou have turned into a curse? How many thirst, whilst
thou surfeitest? What satisfaction will thou give to the Creator, to the
Creature, to thy self; against all whom thou have transgrest? To thy self, by
a sober life; to the Creature, by a right use; to thy Creator, by a true
repentance; the way to all which, is Prayer and Thanksgiving.

His Prayer.
HOw truly then, O God, this heavy woe belongs to this my boasted sin? How
many judgments are comprised and abstracted in this woe, and all for me, even
me O God, the miserable subject of thy eternal wrath; Even me O Lord, the
mark whereat the shafts of thy displeasure level? Lord, I was a sinner in my
first conception, and in sin has my mother brought me forth; I was no
sooner, but I was a slave to sin, and all my life is nothing but the practice
and the trade of high rebellion: I have turned thy blessings into thy dishonor,
and all thy graces into wantonness: Yet have thou been my God even from the
very womb, and did sustain me when I hung upon my mothers breast: Thou
have washed me O Lord from my pollution, but like a Swine I have returned to
my mire. Thou have glaunced into my breast the blessed motions of thy holy
Spirit, but I have quenched them with the springtides of my born corruption. I
have vomited up my filthiness before thee, and like a dog have I returned to
my vomit. Be merciful O God unto me, have mercy on me O thou son of David; I
cannot O Lord expect the childrens bread, yet suffer me to lick the crumbs that
fall beneath their table; I that have so often abused the greatest of thy
blessings am not worthy of the meanest of thy favors. Look, look upon me
according to the goodness of thy mercy, and not according to the greatness of
my offenses. Give me O God a sober heart, and a lawful moderation in the
enjoyment of thy Creatures. Reclaim my appetite from unseasonable delights,
lest I turn thy blessings into a curse: In all my dejections be thou my
comfort, and let my rejoicing be only in thee. Propose to mine eyes the
evilnesse of my days, and make me careful to redeem my time: Wean me from the
pleasure of vain society, and let my companions be such as fear thee; Forgive
all such as have been partners in my sin, and turn their hearts to the
obedience of thy laws. Open their ears to the reproofs of the wise, and make
them powerful in reformation. Allay that lust which my intemperance has
inflamed, and cleanse my affections with the grace of thy good Spirit; make me
thankful for the strength of my body, that I may for the time to come return
it to the advantage of thy glory.

The Swearers Apology.
Will Boanarges never cease? And will these Plague- denouncers never leave to
thunder judgments in my trembling ear? Nothing but plagues? Nothing but
judgments? Nothing but damnation? What have I done to make my case desperate?
And what have they not done to make my soul despair? Have I set up false Gods
like the Egyptians? or have I bowed before them like the Israelites? Have I
violated the Sabbath like the Libertines? Or like cursed Cham, have I
discovered my Fathers nakedness? Have I imbrued my hands in blood like
Barabbas? Or like Absolon defiled my fathers bed? Have I like Jacob supplanted
my elder brother? Or like Ahab intruded into Nabals vineyard? Have I born false
witness like the wanton Elders? Or like David coveted Vriahs wife? Have I not
given tithes of all I have? Or has my purse been hidebound to my hungry
brother? Has not my life been blameless before men? and my demeanor
unreprovable before the world? Have I not hated Vice with a perfect hatred? and
countenanced Virtue with a due respect? What mean these strict observers of my
life, to ransack every action, to carp at every word, and with their sharp
censorious tongues to sentence every frailty with damnation? Is there no
allowance to humanity? No grains to flesh and blood? Are we all Angels? Has
mortality no privilege to supersede it from the utmost punishment of a little
necessary frailty? Come, come, my soul, let not these judgement-thunderers
fright thee: Let not these qualmes of their exuberous zeal disturb thee: Thou
have not cursed like Shimei, nor railed like Rabshekah, nor lied like Ananias,
nor slandered like thy accusers. They that censure thy gnats swallow their own
camels. what if the luxuriant style of thy discourse do chance to strike upon
an obvious Oath, art thou straight hurried into the bosom of a Plague? What if
the custom of a harmless oath should captivate thy heedlesse tongue, can
nothing under sudden judgment seiz upon the? what if another diffidence should
force thy earnest lips into a hasty oath, in confirmation of a suffering truth,
must thou be straight ways branded with damnation? was Joseph marked for
everlasting death, for swearing by the life of Egypts King? was Peter when he
so denied his master, straight damned for swearing, and forswearing? O flatter
not thy self my soul, nor turn thou Advocate to so high a sin: Make not the
slops of Saints a precedent for thee to fall.

His Arraignment.
IF the rebukes of flesh may not prevail, hear then the threatening of the
Spirit which says, The Plague shall not depart from the house of the swearer.

Exodus 20. 7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain. Zach. 5. 3.
And every one that swears shall be (...) off. Swear not at all, neither by
heaven, for it is Gods throne, nor by the earth, for it is his foot stool: But
let your communication be yea, yea, nay nay, for whatsoever is more then these,
comes of evil, Mat. 5. 34. Jer. 23. 10. Because of swearing the Land
mourns. His Proofs.
Aug. in Ser. The murderer kills the body of his brother, but the swearer
murders his own soul. Aug. in Psalm. 88. It Is well that God has forbidden man
to swear, lest by custom of swearing (in as much as we are apt to mistake)
we commit perjury: there is none but God can safely swear, because there is no
other but may be deceived. August, de Mendacio. I say unto you, Swear not at
all, lest by swearing ye come to a facility of swearing; from a facility to a
custom, and from a custom ye fell into perjury. His Soliloquie.
OWhat a judgment is here* How terrible! How full of Execution! The Plague?
the extract of all diseases? none so mortal, none so comfortless! It makes
our house a Prison, our friends strangers; No comfort but in the expectation of
the months end: I, but this judgment excludes that comfort too, The plague
shall never depart from the house of the swearer; What never? death will give it
a period: No, but it shall be entailed upon his house, his family: O
detestable! O destructive sin! that leaves a Cross upon the doors of
Generations, and lays whole families upon the dust: A fin whereto, neither
profit incites, nor pleasure allures, nor necessity compels, nor inclination of
nature persuades; a mere voluntary, begun with a malignant imitation, and
continued with an habitual presumption. Consider O my soul, every Oath has
been a nail to wound that Savior, whose blood (O mercy above expression!)
must save thee: Be sensible of thy Actions, and his sufferings: Abhor thy self
in dust and ashes, and magnify his mercy that has turned this judgment from
thee. Go wash those wounds which thou have made, with tears, and humble thy
self with prayer and true repentance.

His Prayer.
Eternal and omnipotent God, before whose glorious name Angels, and Archangels
bow and hide their faces, to which the blessed Spirits and Saints of thy
triumphant church sing forth perpetual Hallelujah's, I a poor Sprig of
disobedient Adam do here make bold to take that holy name into my sin-polluted
lips: I have hainously sinned O God against thee, and against it; I have
disparaged it in my thoughts, dishonored it in my words, profaned it in my
actions, and I know thou art a jealous God, and a consuming fire, as faithful
in thy promises, so fearful in thy judgments, I therefore fly from the
dreadfufll Name of Jehovah, which I have abused, to that gracious name of
Jesus, wherein thou art well pleased; in that most sacred name O God, I fall
before thee, and for his beloved sake O Lord I come unto thee. Cleanse thou my
heart O God, and then my tongue shall praise thee: Wash thou my soul, O Lord,
and then my lips shall bless thee. Work in my heart a fear of thy
displeasure, and give me an awful reverence of thy Name. Set thou a watch
before my lips, that I offend not with my tongue; Let no respects entice me to
be an instrument of thy dishonor; and let thy attributes be precious in mine
eyes, teach me the way of thy Precepts, O Lord, and make me sensible of all my
offenses: let not my sinful custom in finning against thy Name take from my
guilty soul the sense of my sin: Give me a respect unto all thy
Commandments, but especially preserve me from the danger of this my bosom
sin. Mollify my heart at the rebukes of thy servants, and strike into my
inward parts a fear of thy judgments: Let all my communication be ordered as
in thy presence, and let the words of my mouth be governed by thy Spirit.
Avert those judgments from me which thy Word has threatened, and my sin has
deserved, and strengthen my resolution for the time to come; Work in me a true
godly sorrow, that it may bring forth in me a newness of life. Sanctify my
thoughts with the continual meditation of thy Commandments, and mortify those
passions which provoke me to offend thee. Let not the examples of others
induce me to this sin, nor let the frailties of my flesh seek figleaves to
cover it. Seal in my heart the full assurance of thy reconciliation, and look
upon me in the bowels of compassion, that crowning my weak desires with thy
all-sufficient power, I may escape this judgment which thy justice has
threatened here, and obtain that happiness thy mercy has promised hereafter.

The Procrastinators Remora's.
TEll me no more of fasting, prayer, and death; they fill my thoughts with
dumps of Melancholy. These are no subjects for a youthful ear, no contemplation
for an active soul: Let them whom sullen Age has weaned from aerie pleasures,
whom wayward fortun^ has condemned to sighs and groans, whom sad diseases
have beslaved to drugs and diets; let them consume the remnant of their
wretched days in dull devotion: Let them afflict their aching souls with the
untunable discourses of mortality; Let them contemplate on evil days, and
read sharp Lectures of their own experience: For me, my bones are full of
unctious marrow, and my blood of sprightly youth: My fair and free estate
secures me from the fears of fortunes frown. My strength of constitution has
the power to grapple with sorrow, sickness, nay, the very pangs of death, and
overcome. It Is true, God must be sought; What impious tongue dare be so basely
bold to contradict so known a truth? and by repentance too: What strange
impiety dare deny it? Or what presumptuous lips dare disavow it? But there is a
time for all things, yet none p^efixt for this, no day designed, but, At what
time soever: If my unseasonable heart should seek him now, the work would be
too serious for so green a seeker. My thoughts are yet unsettled, my fancy yet
too too gamesome, my judgment yet unsound, my Will unsanctified; to seek him
with an unprepared heart is the high way not to find him, or to find him with
unsettled resolution is the next way to lose him; and indeed it wants but little
of profaneness, to be unseasonably religious. What is once to be done, is
long to be deliberated. Let the boiling pleasures of the rebellious flesh
evaporate a little, and let me draine my boggy soul from those corrupted,
inbred humors of collapsed nature, and when the tender blossoms of my
youthful vanity shall begin to fade, my settled understanding will begin to
knot, my solid judgment will begin to ripen, my rightly guided will be
resolved, both what to seek, and when to find, and how to prize: till then, my
tender youth, in her pursuit, will be disturbed with every blast of honor,
diverted with every f^ash of pleasure, misled by Counsel, turned back with
fear, puzzled with doubt, interrupted by passion, withdrawn with prosperity,
and discouraged with adversity.

His Repulse.
TAke heed my soul, when thou have lost thy self in thy journey, how will thou
find thy God at thy journeys end? Whom thou have lost by too long delay, thou will hardly find with too late a diligence. Take time while time shall serve,
that day may come wherein

Thou shall seek the Lord, but shall not find him, Hos. 5. 6. Esaias 55. 6. Seek
the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while ne is near. Heb. 12. 17.
He found no place for repentance, though he sought it with tears carefully.

Thou fool, this night will I take thy soul from thee.

Revel. 2. 21. I gave her a space to repent, but she repented not; Behold
therefore I will cast her. His Proofs.
Greg. lib. Mor. Seek God whilst thou can not see him, for when thou see
him, thou can not find him; seek him by hope, and thou shall find him by
faith: In the day of grace he is invisible, but near; in the day of judgment
he is visible, but far off. Ber. Ser. 24. If we would not se^k God in vain,
let us seek him in truth, often, and constantly, let us not seek another in
stead of him, nor any other thing with him, nor sor any other thing, leave him.
His Soliloquie.
O My soul, thou have sought wealth, and have either not found it, or cares
with it; thou have sought for pleasure, and have found it, but no comfort in
it: Thou soughtest honor and have found it, and perchance fallen with it; Thou
soughtest friendship, and have found it false; society, and have found it
vain; And yet thy God, the fountain of all wealth, pleasure, honor,
friendship and society, thou have slighted as a toy not worth the finding: Be
wise my soul, and blush at thy own folly. Set thy desires on the right obj^ct:
Seek wisdom, and thou shall find knowledge, and wealth, and honor, and length
of days: Seek heaven, and earth shall seek thee; and defer not thy Inquest,
lest thou lose thy opportunity: to day thou may find him, whom to morrow thou
may seek with tears and miss: Yesterday is too late, to morrow is
uncertain, to day is only thine: I, but my soul, I fear my too long delay
has made this day too late; fear not my soul, he that has given thee his Grace
to day, will forget thy neglect of yesterday, seek him therefore by true
repentance, and thou shall find him in thy Prayer.

His Prayer.
O God, that like thy precious Word art hid to none, but who are lost, and yet
art found by all that seek thee with an upright heart, cast down thy gracious
eye upon a lost sheep of Israel, strayed through the vanity of his unbridled
youth, and wandered in the wilderness of his own invention. Lord, I have too
much delighted in mine own ways, and have put the evil day too far from me; I
have wallowed in the pleasures of this deceitful world, which perish in the
using, and have neglected thee my God, at whose right hand are pleasures for
^vermore: I have drawn on iniquity, as with cartropes, and have committed evil
with greediness: I have quenched the motions of thy good spirit; and have
delayed to seek thee by true and unfeigned repentance: In stead of seeking thee
whom I have lost, I have withdrawn my self from thy presence when thou have
sought me. It were but justice therefore in thee to stop thine ears at my
petitions, or turn my Prayers as sin into my bosom: But Lord, thou art a
gracious God, and full of pity and unwearyed compassion, and thy loving kindness
is from generation to generation: Lord, in not seeking thee, I have utterly
lost my self, and if thou find me not, I am lost for ever, and if thou find me,
thou can not but find me in my sins, and then thou find'st me to my own
destruction. How miserable O Lord is my condition! How necessary is my
confusion! that have neglected to seek thee, and therefore am afraid to be
found of thee. But Lord, if thou look upon the all-sufficient merits of thy
Son, thy justice will be no loser in showing mercy upon a sinner; In his name
therefore I present my self before thee; in his merits I make my humble
approach unto thee; in his name I offer up my feeble Prayers; for his merits
grant me my petitions. Call not to mind the rebellions of my flesh, and
remember not O God the vanities of my youth; Inflame my heart with the love of
thy presence, and relish my meditations with the pleasure of thy sweetness.
Let not the consideration of thy justice overwhelm me in despair, nor the
meditation of thy mercy persuade me to presume. Sanctify my will by the
wifdome of thy Spirit, that I may desire thee as the chiefest good. Quicken my
desires with a fervent zeal, that I may seek my Creator in the days of my
youth; ^each me to seek thee according to thy will, and then be found
according to thy promise, that living in me here by thy grace, I may hereafter
reign with thee in glory.

The Hypocrites prevarication.
THere is no such stuff to make a cloak on as Religion; nothing so
fashionable, nothing so profitable; it is a Livery, wherein a wise man may
serve two Masters, God and the world, and make a gainefull service by either: I
serve both, and in both my self, in prevaricating with both. Before man none
serves his God with more severe devotion, for which, among the best of men I
work my own ends, and serve my self. In private I serve the world, not with so
strict devotion, but with more delight, where fulfilling of her servants lusts
I work my end, and serve my self; The house of Prayer who more frequents then
I? in all Christian duties who more forward then I? I fast with those that
fast, that I may eat with those that eat: I mourn with those that mourn: No
hand more open to the Cause then mine; and in their families none prays longer
and with louder zeal: Thus when the opinion of a holy life has cried the
goodness of my Conscience up, my trade can lack no custom, my wares can want
no price, my words can need no credit, my actions can lack no praise. If I am
covetous, it is interpreted providence; if miserable, it is counted temperance;
if melancholy, it is construed godly sorrow; if merry, it is voted spiritual
joy; if I be rich, it is thought the blessing of a godly life; if poor,
supposed the fruit of conscionable dealing; if I be well spoken of, it is the
merit of holy conversation; if ill, it is the malice of Malignants; thus I sail
with every wind, and have my end in all conditions. This Cloak in Summer
keeps me cool, in winter warm, and hides the nasty Bag of all my secret
lusts: Under this Cloak I walk in publik fairly, with applause, and in private
sin-securely, without offense, and officiate wisely without discovery; I
compass sea and land to make a Proselyte, and no sooner made, but he makes
me. At a Fast I cry Geneva, and at a Feast I cry Rome. If I be poor, I
counterfeit abundance to save my credit; if rich, I dissemble poverty to save
charges. I most frequent Schismatic Lectures, which I find most profitable,
from whence learning to divulge and maintain new doctrines, they maintain me
in suppers thrice a week; I use the help of a lie, sometimes as a Religious
stratagem to uphold the Gospel, and I color oppression with Gods judgment
executed upon the wicked. Charity I hold an extraordinary duty, therefore not
ordinarily to be performed. What I openly reprove abroad for my own profit,
that I secretly act at home, for my own pleasure.

His Woe.
BUt stay, I see a handwriting in my heart damps my soul, it is charactered in
these sad words, Woe be to you hypocrites, Mat. 23. 13. The triumphing of the
wicked is short, and the joy of the bypocrite is but for a moment, Job 20. 5.

Job 15. 34. The congregation of the hypocrites shall be desolate. Psalm. 11. 9.
An hypocrite with his mouth destroys his neighbor, but through knowledge
shall the just be delivered. Luke 12. 1. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisc^s,
which is hypocrisy. Job 36. 13. The hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, they
die in their youth, and their life is amongst the unclean. His Proofs.
Salvian. de Gubern. Dei. l. 4. The hypocrites love not those thing* they
profess, and what they pretend in words, they disclaim in practice; their sin
is the more damnable, because ushered in with pretense of piety, having the
greater guilt, because it obtaines a goodly repute. Hieron. Ep. Endeavor
rather to be, then to be^ thought holy; for what profits i^ thee to be thought
to be what th^^ art not? and that man doubles hi^ guilt, who is not so holy as
the world thinks him, and counterfeit^ that holiness which he has not. His
Soliloquie.
HOw like a living Sepulcher did I appear! without, beautified with gold and
rich inventions; within, nothing but a loathed corruption; so long as this fair
Sepulcher was closed, it past for a curious Monument of the Builders Art, but
being opened by these spiritual Keys, it is nothing but a Recepta^le of
offensive putrefaction: In what a nasty dungeon have thou my soul, so long
remained unstifled? How were thou wedded to thy own corruptions, that could
endure thy unsavory filthiness? The world hated me, because I seemed good;
God hated me, because I only seemed good: I had no friend but my self, and
this friend was my bosom enemy: O my soul, is there water enough in Jordan to
cleanse thee? Has Gilead Balm enough to heal thy superannuated sores? I have
sinned, I am convinced, I am convicted; Gods mercy is above Dimensions, when
sinners have not sinned beyond repentance: art thou my soul truly penitent for
thy sin? Thou have free interest in his mercy; fall then my soul before his
Mercy seat, and he will crown thy penitence with his pardon.

His Prayer.
O God! before the brightness of whose All-discerning eye, the secrets of my
hearts appear, before whose clear omniscience the very entralls of my soul
lie open, who art a God of righteousness and truth, and love uprightness in
the inward parts: How can I choose but fear to thrust into thy glorious
presence, or move my sinful lips to call upon that Name which I so often have
dishonored, and made a Cloak to hide the baseness of my close
transgressions? Lord, when I look into the progress of my filthy life, my
guilty conscience calls me to so strict account, and reflects to me so large
an Inventory of my presumptuous sins, that I commit a greater sin in thinking
them more infinite then thy mercy. But Lord, thy mercies have no date, nor is
thy goodness circumscribed. The gates of thy compassion are always open to a
broken heart, and promise entertainment to a contrite spirit; the burden of my
sins is grievous, and the remembrance of my hypocrisy is intolerable: I have
sinned against thy Majesty with a high hand, but I repent me from the bottom
of an humble heart: As thou have therefore given me sorrow for my sins, so
crown that gift in the freeness of remission: Be fully reconciled to me,
through the all-sufficient merits of thy Son my Savior, and seal in my
afflicted heart the full assurance of thy gracious favor: Be thou exalted O
God above the heavens, and let me praise thee with a single heart; cleanse
thou my inward parts O God, and purify the closet of my polluted soul; fix
thou my heart O thou searcher of all secrets, and keep my affections wholly to
thee. Remove from me all by and base respects, that I may serve thee with an
upright spirit: take not the word of truth out of my mouth, nor give me over
to deceitful lips: Give me an inward reverence of thy Majesty, that I might
openly confess thee in the truth of my sincerity. Be thou the only object, and
end of all my actions, and let thy honor be my great reward: Let not the hopes
of filthy lucre, or the praise of men incline me to thee, neither let the
pleasures of the world, nor the fears of any loss entice me from thee. Keep
from me those judgments my hypocrisy has deserved, and strengthen my
resolution to abhor my former life: Give me strength O God to serve thee
with a perfect heart in the newness of life, that I may be dellvered from the
old man, and the snares of death: then shall I praise thee with my entire
affections, and glorify thy name for ever and e^r.

The Ignorant man's faltering.
YOu tell me, and you tell me that I must be a good man, and serve God, and
do his will; and so I do for ought I know: I am sure I am as good as God has
made me, and I can make my self no better, so I cannot: And as for serving
God, I am sure I go to Church as well as the best in the Parish, though I be
not so fine; and I make no question, if I had better clothes, but I should do
God as much credit as another man, though I say it: And as for doing Gods will,
I befhrew me, I leave that to them that are booke-learn'd, and can do it more
wisely: I believe the Vicar of our Parish can do it, and has done it too, as
well as any within five miles of his head, and what need I trouble my self to
do what is so well done already? I hope he being so good a Churchman, and so
great a Schollard, and can speak Latin too, would not leave that to so simple
a man as I. It is enough for me to know, that God is a good man; and that the
ten Commandments are the best prayers in all the book, unless it be the
Creed. And that I must love my neighbor as well as he loves me, and for all
other Quilicoms, they shall never trouble my brains, an grace a God. Let me
go a sundays and serve God, obey the King, (God bless him) do no man no
wrong, say the Lords Prayer every morning and evening; follow my work, give a
Noble to the poor at my death, and then say Lord have mercy upon me, and go
away like a Lamb, I make no question but I shall deserve heaven as well as he
that wears a gayer coat: But yet I am not so ingrant neither, nor have not
gone so often to Church, but I know Christ died for me too, as well as for any
other man: I Would be sorry else; and that, next to our Vicar, I shall go to
heaven when a I am dead as soon as another; nay more, I know there be two
Sacraments, bread and wine, and but two, (though the Papists say there be six
or seven) and that I verily believe I shall be saved by those Sacraments, and
that I love God above all, or else 'twere pity of my life, and that when I am
dead and rotten (as our Vicar told me) I shall rise again and be the same man
I was. But for that, he must excuse me, till I have better sartifaction; for
all his learning, he cannot make me such a fool, unless he show me a better
reason for it, then yet he has done.

His Award.
BUt one thing he told me, now I think on it, troubles me woundly, namely,
that God is my Master, all which I confess; and that I must do his will
(whether I know how to do it or no) or else it will go ill with me: I Will read
it (he said) out of Gods Bible, and I shall remember the words so long as I
have a day to live, which are these,

He that knows not his masters will, and does things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes, Luke 12. 48. 1 Cor. 14. 20. Brethren be not
children in understanding, howbeit in malice be ye children, but in
understanding be men. His Proofs.
1 Cor. 15. 34. Awake to righteousness and sin not, for some have not the
knowledge of God, I speak it to your shame. Ephesians 4. 18. Walk not in the vanity
of your minds having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life
of God, through the Ignorance which is in you, because of the blindness of
your hearts. Levit. 5. 17. And if a soul sin and commit any of these things
which are forbidden to be done by the Commandments of the Lord, though be wis^
it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity. 2 These. 1. 7, 8. The
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God. Greg. Mag. Moral. It is good
to know much, and to live well; but if we cannot attain both, it is better to
desire piety then wisdom, for knowledge makes no man happy, nor does
blessedness consist in intellectuals. The only brave thing is a religious
life. Just. Mart. Resp. ad orthod. To sin against knowledge, is so much the
greater offense then an ignorant trespass, by how much the crime which is
capable of no excuse* is more heinous then the fault which admits a tolerable
plea. His Soliloquie.
HOw well it had been for thee O my soul, if I had bookelarnd; Alas I cannot
read, and what I hear, I cannot understand; I cannot profit as I should; and
therefore cannot be as good as I would, for which I am right sorry: That I
cannot serve as well as my betters, has bin often a great grief to me, and
that I have been so ignorant in good things, has been a great heartbreaking
unto me: I can say no prayers for want of knowledge to read, but Our Father,
and the Creed: But the comfort is, God knows my heart, but I trust in God [ Our
Father] being made by Christ himself, will be enough for me that know not how
to make a better. I endeavor to do all our Vicar bids me; and when I receive
the Communion, I truly forgive all the world for a fortnight after, or such a
matter, but then some old injury makes me forget my self, but I cannot help
it, an my life should lie ont. O my ingrant soul, what shall I do to be
saved? All that I can say, is, Lord have mercy upon me; and all that I can do,
is, but to do my good will, and that I Will do with all my heart, and say my
prayers too as well as God will give me leave, an grace a God.

His Prayer.
O God the Father of heaven have mercy upon me miserable sinner; I am, as I
must needs confess, a sinful man, as my forefathers were before me: I have
heard many Sermons, and have had many good lessons from the mouths of painful
Ministers, but through the dullness of my understanding, and for want of
learning I have not profited so much as else I should have done: spare me
therefore O God, spare me whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, and
be not angry for ever: I must confess the painfulnesse of my calling, and the
heaviness of my own nature has taken from me the delight of hearing thy
Word, and the ignorance of learning which I was never brought up to, has kept
me from reading it, that insomuch, in stead of growing better I fear I have
grown worse and worse; and have bin so far from doing thy will, that I do not
understand what thy will is very well. But thou O merciful God that did
reveal thy self to poor Shepherds and Fishermen that had no more learning
then I, have mercy upon me for Jesus Christ his sake. Thou that have promised
to instruct the simple, and to lead the ignorant into thy way, be good and
merciful to me I beseech thee; Thou that drawest the needy out of the dust,
and the poor out of the dunghill, give me the knowledge of thy will, and teach
me how to serve thee: Take from me the drowzinesse of my heart, open mine eyes
that I may see the truth, and mine ears that I may understand thy Word, and
strengthen my memory that I may lay it up in my heart, and show it in my life
and vocation, to thy glory and my comfort, and the comfort of my friends. Lord
write thy will in my heart, that when I know it, I may do it willingly: O teach
me what thy pleasure is, that I may do my best to perform it. Give me faith
to lay hold of Christ, who died for me, that after I am dead, I may arise
again, and live with him. Give me a good heart that I may deal honestly with
all men, and do as I would be done to. Bless me in my calling, and prosper the
labor of my hands, that I may have enough to feed me and cloth me, and to
give to the poor. Mend all that is amiss in me, and expect from me according
to the measure thou have given me. Forgive me all my sins, and make me
willing to please thee, that living a good life, I may make a gracious death,
and so at last I may come to heaven and live for ever, for Jesus Christ his
sake, Amen.

The slothful man's slumber.
O What a world of Curses, the eating of the forbidden fruit has brought upon
mankind! and unavoidably entailed upon the sons of men! Among all which no one
appears to me more terrible and full of sorrow, and bewraying greater wrath,
then that insufferable, that horrible punishment of labor, and to purchase
Bread with so extreme a price as sweat: But O what hap, what happiness have
they, whose dying Parents have procured a quiet fortune for their unmolested
Children, and conveyed descended rents to their succeeding heirs, whose easy
and contented lives may sit and suck the sweetness of their cumberless
estates, and with their folded hands enjoy the delicates of this toilsome
world! How blessed, how delicious are those easy morsells, that can find the
way to my soft palate, and then attend upon the wanton leisure of my silken
slumbers, without the painful practice of my bosome-folded hands, or sad
contrivement of my studious and contracted Brows! Why should I tire my tender
youth, and torture out my groaning days in toil and travel? and discompose
the happy peace of my harmonious thoughts with painful grinding in the common
mill of dull mortality? Why should I rob my craving eyelids of their
delightful rest, to cark and care and purvey for that Bread which every
work-abhorring vagabond can find of Alms at every good man's door? Why should
I leave the warm protection of my care-beguiling Down, to play the droyling
drudge for daily food, when the young empty Ravens (that have no hands to
work, nor providence, but heaven) can call and be supplied? The pale faced
Lilly, and the blushing Rose, neither spinnes nor sows, yet Princely Solomon
was never robed with so much glory. And shall I then afflict my body, and
beslave my heaven-born soul to purchase Rags to cloth my nakedness? Is my
condition worse then Sheep, ordained for slaughter, that crop the springing
grass, clothed warm in soft Arrayment, purchased without their Providence or
pains? Or shall the Pampered Beast that shines with fatness, and grows wanton
through his careful Grooms indulgence, find better measure at the worlds too
partial hands then I? Come, come, let those take pains that love to leave
their names inrol'd in memorablemonuments of parchment; the day has grief
enough without my help; and let To morrowes shoulders bear to morrows
burdens.

BUt stay my soul, O stay thy rash resolves, take heed whilst thou avoid the
punishment of sin, labor, thou meet not the reward of idleness, a judgment;
The idle foul shall suffer hunger, Prove. 19. 15.

Eccles. 10. 18. By much slothfulnes the building decays, and through
idleness of the hands the house droppeth thorough. Exodus 16. 49. Behold, this
was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fullness of Bread, and abundance
of idleness was in her, and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the
hand of the poor and needy. Prove. 6. 6, 7, 8. Go to the Pismire O sluggard,
behold her ways, and be wise.

For she having no guide, governor, nor ruler, prepares her meat in Summer,
and gathers her food in harvest.

His Proofs.
Nilus in Paraenes. Idleness is the womb or fountain of all wickedness; for
it consumes and wastes the riches and virtues which we have already, and
disinables us to get those we have not. Nilus in Paraen. Woe be to the idle
soul, for he shall hunger after that which his riot consumed. His Soliloquy.
HOw presumptuously have thou my soul, transgrest the express Commandment of
thy God! How have thou dashed thy self against his judgments! How has thy
undeserving hand usurpt thy diet, and wearest on thy back the wages of the
painful soul! Art thou not condemned to Rags, to Famine, by him whose law
commanded thee to labor? And yet thou pamper'st up thy sides with stolen
food, and yet thou deck'st thy wanton body with unearn'd ornaments; whiles they
that spend their daily strength in their commanded callings (whose labor gives
them interest in them) want Bread to feed, and Rags to cloth them. Thou art no
young Raven my soul, no Lilly: Where ability to labor is, there providence
meets action, and crowns it: He that forbids to cark for to morrow, denies
Bread to the Idleness of to day: Consider, O my soul thy own delinquency,
and let employment make thee capable of thy Gods protection: The Bird that
sits, is a fair mark for the Fowler, while they that use the wing escape the
danger; follow thy calling, and heaven will follow thee with his Blessing: What
thou have formerly omitted, present repentance may redeem, and what judgments
God has threatened, early Petitions may avert.

His Prayer.
MOst great and most glorious God, who for the sin of our first parents have
condemned our frail bodies to the punishment of labor, and have commanded
every one a Calling and a Trade of life, that hate idleness as the root of
evil, and threatnest poverty to the slothful hand; I thy poor suppliant
convicted by thy judgments and conscious of my own transgression, fly from my
self to Thee, and humbly appeal from the high Tribunal of thy Justice, and
seek for refuge in the Sanctuary of thy Mercy: Lord, I have led a life
displeasing to thee, and have been a scandal to my profession; I have slighted
those Blessings which thy goodness has promised to a conscionable calling,
and have swallowed down the Bread of idleness; I have impaired the Talent
thou gave me, and have lost the opportunity of doing much good^ I have filled
my heart with idle imaginations, and have laid my self open to the lusts of
the flesh^ I have abused thy favors in the misexpending of my precious time,
and have taken no delight in thy Sabbaths; I have doted too much on the
pleasures of this world, and like a Droane have fed upon the honey of Bees. If
thou O God should be extreme to search my ways with too severe an eye, thou
could not choose but whet thy indignation, and power the vialls of thy wrath
upon me: look therefore not upon my sins, O Lord, but through the merits of my
Savior, who has made a full satisfaction for all my sins: what through my
weakness I have failed to do, the fullness of his sufferings has most
exactly done; In him O God in whom thou art well pleased, and for his sake be
gracious to my sin; Alter my heart and make it willing to please thee, that in
my life I may adorn my profession: Give me a care and a conscience in my
calling, and grant thy blessing to the lawful labors of my hand; Let the
fidelity of my vocation improve my Talent, that I may enter into my Masters
joy; Rouse up the dullness and deadness of my heart, and quench those flames
of lust within me. Assist me O God in the redemption of my time, and deliver
my soul from the evilnesse of my days; Let thy Providence accompany my
moderate endeavors, and let all my employments depend upon thy Providence,
that when the labors of this sinful world shall cease, I may feel and enjoy
the benefit of a good conscience, and obtain the rest of new Jerusalem in the
Eternity of glory.

The proud man's Ostentation.
I Will make him feel the weight of displeasure, and teach him to repent his
saucy boldness: How dare his baseness once presume to breath so near my
person, much more to take my name into his dunghill mouth? me thinks the luster
of my sparkling eye might have had the power to astonish him into good manners,
and sent him back to cast his mind into a fair Petition, humbly presented
with his trembling hand. But thus to press into my presence, to press so near
my face, and then to speak, and speak to me, as if I were his equal, is more
then sufferable: The way to be contemned is to digest contempt, but he that
would be honored by the vulgar must wisely keep a distance: A countenance
that's reserved breeds fear and observation: but affability and too easy an
access makes fools too bold, and reputation cheap: What price I set upon my
own deserts, instructs opinion how to prize me: That which base ignorance
miscalls thy pride, is but a conscious knowledge of thy merits: dejected souls
craven'd with their own distrusts, are the worlds Footballs to be kicked and
spurnd; but brave and true heroic spirits, that know the strength of their
own worth, shall baffold baseness, and presumption into a reverentiall
silen^e, and spi^e of envy flourish in an honorable repute Come then my soul
advance thy noble, thy ub^imer thoughts, and prize thy ^elf according to those
parts, which all may wonder at, ^ew imitate, but none can equal: Let not the
insolent affronts of vassals interrupt thy Peace, nor seem one scruple less
then what thou art: Be thou thy self, respect thy self, receive thou honor
from thy self, Rejoice thy self in thy self, and prize thy self for thy
self; Like Caesar admit no equal and like Pompey acknowledge no superior. Be
covetous of thine own Honor, and hold another glory as thy injury. Renounce
humility as an Heresy in reputation, and meekness as the worst disease of a
true-bred noble Spirit; Disparage worth in all but in thy self, and make
another infamy a foyl to magnify thy glory. Let such as have no reason to be
proud, be humbled of necessity, and let them that have no parts to value, be
despondent. But as for thee, thy Cards are good, and having skill enough to
play thy hopeful Game, vie boldly, conquer and triumph.

His Desolation.
BUt stay my soul, the Trump is yet unturned, boast not too soon, nor call it
a fair day till night, the turning of a hand may make such alterations, in thy
flattering fortunes, that all thy glorious expectations may chance to end in
loss, and unsuspected ruin. That God which thrust that Babylonian Prince from
his Imperial Throne, to graze with beasts, has said,

The Lord will destroy the house of the proud, Prove. 15. 25. Prove. 11. When
pride comes, then comes shame, but with the lowly is wisdom. Ier. 11. 15.
Hear ye, and give ear, and be not proud, for the Lord has spoken. Esaias 2.
12. The day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud, and
lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. Prove.
16. 5. Every one that is proud in heart is abomination to the Lord. St. James.
God rejects the proud, and gives grace to the simple. His Proofs.
Isidor. Hispal. Pride made Satan fall from the highest heaven, therefore they
that pride themselves in their virtues, imitate the Devil; and fall more
dangerously, because they aspire and climb to the highest pitch, from whence
is the greatest fall. Greg. Mor. Pride grows stronger in the root whilst it
braves it self with presumptuous advances, yet the higher it climbes the lower
it falls: for he that heightens himself by his own pride, is always destroyed
by the judgment of God. His Soliloquy.
HOw were thou muffled O my soul! How were thine eyes blinded with the
corruption of thine own heart! When I beheld my self by my own light, I
seemed a glorious thing; My sun knew no eclipse. and all my imperfections
were gilded over with vainglory: But now the dayspring from above has shind
upon my heart, and the diviner light has driven away those foggy mists; I
find my self another thing: My Diamonds are all turned Pebbles, and my glory
is turned to shame. O my deceived soul, how great a darkness was thy light?
The thing that seemd so glorious, and sparkled in the night, by day appears
but rotten wood: and that bright Glow-worme, that in darkness out shined the
Chrysolue, is by this newfound light no better then a crawling worm: How
inseparable O my soul is pride and f^lly which like Hippocrates twins still
live and die together? It blinds the eye, befools the judgment, knows no
superiors, hates equals, disdaines inferiors, the wisemans scorn, and the
fools Idol; Renounce it O my soul, lest thy God renounce thee; He that has
threatened to resist the proud, has promised to give grace to the humble and
what true Repentance speaks, free mercy hears and crowns.

His Prayer.
O God the fountain of all true Glory, and the giver of all free grace, whose
Name is only honorable, and whose works are only glorious, that show thy
ways to be meek, and take compassion upon an humble spirit, that hate the
presence of a lofty eye, and destroyest the proud in the imaginations of their
hearts, vouchsate, O Lord, thy gracious ear and hear the sighing of a contrite
heart: I know O God the quality of my sin can look for nothing but the
extremity of thy wrath: I know, the crookedness of my condition can expect
nothing but the Furnace of thy indignation; I know, the insolence of my
corrupted nature can hope for nothing but the execution of thy judgments: Yet
Lord, I know withal, thou art a gracious God, of evil repenting thee, and
slow to wrath; I know thy nature and property is to show compassion; apt to
conceive but readier to forgive: I know thou take no pleasure in destruction
of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live: In confidence and full
assurance whereof I am here prostrate on my bended knees, and with an
humbleheart: Nor do I press into thy holy presence, trusting in my own
merits, lest thou should deal by me as I have dealt by others, but being
encouraged by thy gracious invitation, and heavy laden with the burden of my
sins, I come to thee O God, who art the refuge of a wounded soul, and the
Sanctuary of a broken spirit: Forgive, O God, forgive me, what is past
recalling, and make me circumspect for the time to come: Open mine eyes that I
may see how vain a thing I am, and how polluted from my very birth: Give me an
insight of my own corruptions, that I may truly know, and loath my self. Take
from me all vainglory, and self love, and make me careless of the worlds
applause: Endue me with an humble heart, and take this haughty spirit from me;
Give me a true di^covery of my own merits, that I may truly fear and tremb^e
at thy judgments. Let not the worlds contempt deject me, nor the disrespects
of man dismay me. Take from me O God a scornful eye and curb my tongue that
speaks presumptuous things: Plant in my heart a brotherly love, and cherish in
me a charitable affection; Possess my my soul with patience O God. and
establish my heart in the fear of thy name, that being humbled before thee in
the meekness of my spirit, I may be exalted by thee through the freeness of
thy Grace, and crowned with thee in the Kingdom of Glory.

The Covetous Man's care.
Believe me, the Times a^e hard and dangerous: Charity is grown cold, and
friends uncomfortable; an empty Purse is full of sorrow, and hollow Bags make a
heavy heart: Poverty is a civil Pestilence, which frights away both friends
and kindred, and leaves us to a Lord have mercy upon us: It is a sickness very
catching and infectious, and more commonly abhord then cured: The best Antidote
against it is Angelico, and Providence, and the best Cordial is Aurum
potabile. Gold-taking fasting is an approved sovereign. Debts are all humors,
and turn at last to dangerous obstructions; Lending is a mere consumption of
the radical humor, and if consumed, brings a patient to nothing. Let others
trust to Courtiers promises, to friends performances, to Princes favors; Give
me a Toy called Gold give me a thing called Money. O blessed Mammon, how
extremely sweet is thy all-commanding presence to my thriving soul! In
banishment thou art my dear companion; In captivity, thou art my precious
ransom. In trouble and vexation thou art my dainty rest. In sickness, thou art
my health; In grief, my only joy; in all extremity, my only trust: Virtue must
veil to thee; Nay Grace it self not relisht with thy sweetness would even
displeas the righteous palates of the sons of men. Come then my soul, advise,
contrive, project: Go, compass Sea, and Land: leave no exploit untryed, no
path untrod, no time unspent; afford thine eyes no sleep, thy head no rest:
Neglect thy ravenous belly, uncloath thy back; deceive, betray, swear and
forswear to compass such a friend, If thou be base in birth, 'twill make thee
honorable; If weak in power, it will make thee formidable: Are thy friends few?
It will make them numerous. Is thy cause bad? It will make thee Advocates. True
wisdom is an excellent help, in case it bend this way; and learning is a
gentile Ornament if not too chargeable: yet by your leave they are but estates
for term of life: But everlasting Gold, if well advantaged will not only
bless thy da^es, but thy surviving children from generation to g^neration.
Come come et others fill their br^ines with dear bought wit, turn their pence
in^o expence^ull charity, and store their bosoms with unprofitable p^ety, let
them lose all to save their ^maginary consciences, and beggar themselves at
home to be thought honest abroad; Fill thou thy ^agg^s and barnes, and ay up
for many ye^rs and take thy rest.

His Proofs.
BUt O my soul, what follows, wounds my heart and strikes me on my knees.

Thou fool, this night will I take thy soul from thee, Luke 12, 20. Matthew. 6.
24. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Job 20. 15. He has swallowed down riches,
and he shall vomit them up again: God shall cast them out of his belly. Prove.
15. 17. He that is greedy of gain troubles his own house, but he that hates
gifts shall live. 2 Pet. 2. 3. Through covetousness they shall with feigned
wo^ds make merchandise of you, whose judgment now of a long time ling^eth not,
and whose damnation slumbreth not. Nilus in Paraenes. Woe to the covetous, for
his riches forsake him, and hell fire takes him. Augustine O thou covetous man,
why do thou treasure up such hidden mischief? why do thou dote on the
Image of the King stamped on coin, and hate the Image of God that shines in
men? Augustine. The riches which thou treasurest up are lost, those thou
charitably bestowest, are truly thine. His Soliloquy.
What think thou now my soul? If the judgment of holy men may not inform
thee, let the judgments of thy angry God en^orce thee: Weigh thy own carnal
effections with the sacred Oracles of heaven, and light and darkness are not
more contrary. What thou approvest, thy God condemns; What thou desire, thy
God forbids: Now my soul, if Mammon be God, follow him; if God be God, adhere
to him; Thou can not serve God and Mammon. If thy conscience feel the hook,
nibble no longer. Many sins leave thee in the way, this follows thee to thy
lives end; the root of evil, the canker of all goodness: It blinds Justice,
poisons Charity, strangles Conscience, beslave^ the affections, betrays
friendship, breaks all relations: It is a root of the Devils own planting;
pluck it up: Think not that a pleasure which God has threatened; nor that a
blessing which heaven has cursed: Devour not that which thou or thy heir
must vomit up: Be no longer possessed with such a Devil, but cast him out: and
if he be too strong, weaken him by Fasting, and exorcize him by Prayer.

His Prayer.
O God that art the fullness of all riches, and the magazeen of all treasure in
the enjoyment of whose favor the smalest morsel is a rich inheritance, and
the coursest poulse is a large portion; without whose blessing the greatest
plenty enriches not, and the highest diet nourishes not: How have I (an
earthworm and no man) fixed my whole heart upon this transitory world, and
neglected thee the only desirable good! I blush O Lord, to confess the
baseness of my life, and am utterly ashamed of my own foolishness: I have
placed my affections upon the nasty Rubbish of this world, and have slighted
the inestimable Pearl of my Salvation; I have wallowed in the mire of my
inordinate desires, and refused to be washed in the streams of thy compassion;
I have put my confidence in the faithfulness of my servant, and have doubted
the providence of thee my gracious Father; I have served unrighteous Mammon
with greediness, and have preferred dross and dung before the pearly gates of
New Jerusalem. Thou have promised to be all in all to those that fear thee, and
not to fail the soul that trusts in thee; but I refused thy gracious offer, and
put my confidence in the vanity of the Creature: But gracious God* to whom true
Repentance never comes unseasonable, that find an ear when sinners find a
tongue regard the contrition of a bleeding heart, and withdraw not thy mercy
from a pensive soul. Give me new thoughts O God, and with thy holy Spirit new
mould my desires: inform my will and sanctify my affections, that they may
relish thy sweetness with a full delight: Create in me O God a spiritual
sense, that I may take pleasure in things that are above: Give me a contented
thankfulness for what I have, that I may neither in poverty forsake thee, nor
in plenty forget thee; Arm me with a continual patience, that I may cheerfully
put my trust in thy providence: Moderate my care for momentary things, that I
may use the world as if I used it not: Let not the loss of any earthly good
too much deject me, lest I should sin with my lips, and charge thee
foolishly: Give me a charitable hand O God, and fill my heart with brotherly
compassion, that I may cheerfully exchange the corruptible treasure of this
world into the incorruptible riches of the world to come, and proving a
faithful steward in thy spiritual household, I may give up my account with
joy, and be made partaker of thy eternal joy in the Kingdom of thy glory.

The Self-lovers Self-fraud.
GOd has required my heart, and he shall have it: God has commanded truth in
the inward parts, and he shall be obeyed: My soul shall praise the Lord, and
all that is within me, and I will serve him in the strength of my desires. And
in common Cases the tongues profession of his Name is no less then necessary:
But when it lies upon a lise, upon the saving of a livelihood, upon the flat
undoing of a reputation, the case is altered: My life is dear, my fair
possessions precious, and my reputation is the very Apple of mine eye. To save
so great a stake, me thinks equivocation is but venial, if a sin. ^f the
true loyalty of mine heart stands sound to my Religion and my God; my
well-informed Conscience tells me that in such extremities my frighted tongue
may take the privilege of a Salvo or a mental reservation, if not in the
expression of a fair compliance. What? shall the real breach of a holy
Sabbath, dedicated to Gods highest glory, be tolerated for the welfare of an
Ox? May that breach be set upon the score of mercy, and commended above
sacrifice for the savegard of an Ass? And may I not dispense with a bare lip
denial of my urged Religion for the necessary preservation of the threatened
life of a man? for the saving of the whole livelihood and subsistence of a
Christian? What? shall I perish for the want of ^ood, and die a Martyr to that
foolish conscience which forbids me to rub the ears of a little standing
Corn? Jacob could purchase his sick fathers blessing with a downright lie,
and may I not dissemble for a life? The young man's great possessions taught his
timorous tongue to shrink from and decline his hearts profession, and who could
blame him? Come, if thou freely give thy house, can thou in conscience be
denied a hiding room for thy protection? The Syrian Captain (he whose heart was
fixed on his now firm resolved, and true devotion) reserved the house of Rimmon
for his necessary attendance, and yet went in peace. Peter (upon the rock of
whose confession, the Church was grounded) to save his liberty, with a false,
nay with a perjured tongue; nay more, at such a time when as the Lord of life
(in whose behalf he drew his sword) was questioned for his innocent life,
denied his Master; and shall I be so great an unthrift of my blood, my life, to
lose it for a mere lippe-deniall of that Religion which now is settled and
needs no blood to seal it?

His Retribution.
BUt stay! my conscience checks me, there is a judgment thunders; Hark;

He that denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father which is in
heaven, Matthew. 10. 33. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. Know that in the latter days perilous
times shall come:

For men shall be lovers of their own selves.

Isai. 45. 23. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, and
every tongue shall swear. Romans 10. 10. With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation. Luke 9. 26.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my words, of him shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he shall come in Glory. His Proofs.
Augustine. The love of God and the world are two different things* if the love
of this world dwell in thee, the love of God forsakes thee; renounce that, and
receive this, it is fit the more noble love should have the best place and
acceptance. Theoph. It is not enough only to believe with the heart, for God
will have us confess with our mouth; every one that confesses Christ is God,
shall find Christ professing to the Father that that man is a faithful
servant; but those that deny Christ shall receive (that fearful doom Nescio
vos) I know you not. His Soliloquy.
MY soul, in such a time as this when the civil Sword is warm with
slaughter, and the wasting kingdom welters in her blood, would thou not give
thy life to ransom her from ruin? Is not the God of heaven and earth worth
many kingdoms? Is thy welfare more considerable then his glory? dare thou
deny him for thy own own ends, that denied thee nothing for thy good? Is a
poor clod of earth we call Inheritance, prizable with his greatness? Or a
puff of breath we call life, valuable with his honor, in comparison of whom
the very Angels are impure? Blush O my soul at thy own guilt: He that
accounted his blood, his life not worth the keeping to ransom thee a wretch,
lost by thy own rebellion, deserves he not the abatement of a lust, to keep him
from a new crucifying? My soul, if Religion bind thee not, if judgments
terrify thee not, if natural affection incline thee not, yet let common
reason persuade thee to love him above a trifle, that loved thee above his
life: And thou that have so often denied him, deny thy self for ever, and he
will own thee; repent and he will pardon thee, pray to him and he will hear thee

His Prayer.
O God, whose glory is the end of my creation, and whose free mercy is the
cause of my redemption, that gave thy Son, thy only Son to die for me,
who else had perished in the common deluge of thy wrath; What shall I render
for so great a mercy? What thankfulness shall I return ^or so infinite a
love? Alas the most that I can do is nothing, the best that I can present is
worse then nothing, sin: Lord, if I yield my body for a sacrifice, I offer
nothing but a lump of filth, and loathsome putrefaction; or if I give my soul
in contribution, I yield thee nothing but thy Image quite defaced and polluted
with my lusts; or if I spend the strength of the whole man, and with both heart
and tongue confess and magnify thy Name; how can the praises of my sinful
lips, that breath from such a sink, be pleasing to thee? But Lord, since thou
art pleased in thy well-pleasing Son to accept the poverty of my weak
endeavors, send down thy holy Spirit into my heart, cleanse it from the filth
of my corruptions, and make it fit to praise thee: Lord open thou my mouth, and
my lips shall show forth thy praise Put a new song into my mouth, and I will
praise thee and confess thee all day long; I will not hide thy goodness in my
mouth, but will be showing forth thy truth, and thy salvation; Let thy praises
be my honor, and let thy goodness be the subject of my undaunted Song. Let
neither reputation, wealth nor life be precious to me in comparison with thee:
Let not the worlds derision daunt me nor examples of infirmity deject me: Give
me courage and wisdom to stand for thy honor; O make me worthy, able and
willing to suffer for thy Name. Lord teach me to deny my self, and to resist
the motions of my own corruptions; create in me O God a single heart, that I
may love the Lord Jesus in sincerity; remember not O Lord the sins of my
fear, and pardon the hypocrisy of my self-love. Wash me from the stains and
guilt of this my heinous offense, and deliver me from this fearful judgment
thou have threatened in thy Word: Convince all the Arguments of my unsanctified
wit, whereby I have become an advocate to my sin. Grant that my life may
ador^e my profession, and make my tongue an instrument of thy glory. Assist me
O God that I may praise thy goodness, and declare thy wonders among the
children of men: Strengthen my faith that it may trust Thee; and let my works
so shine that men may praise thee; That my heart believing unto righteousness,
and my tongue confessing to salvation, I may be acknowledged by thee here, and
glorified by thee in the Kingdom of glory.

The Worldly Man's Verdour.
FOr ought J see the case is even the same with him that prays, and him that
does not pray; with him that swears and him that fears an o^th: I see no
difference; if any, those that they call the wicked have the advantage. Their
crops are even as fair, their flocks as numerous as theirs that wear the
ground with their religious knees, and fast their bodies to a skelliton; nay in
the use of blessings (which only makes them so) they far exceed; they term
me reprobate, and style me unregenerate: It Is true, I eat my labors with a
jolly heart; drink frolic cups; sweeten my pains with time-beguiling sports,
make the best advantage of my own, pray when I think on it, swear when they
urge me, hear Sermons at my leisure; follow the lusts of my own eyes, and take
the pleasure of my own ways; and yet, God be thanked, my Barnes are furnished,
my sheep stand sound, my Cattle strong for labor, my pastures rich and
flourishing my body healthful, and my bags are full: whilst they that are so
pure, and make such conscience of their ways, that run to Sermons, fig to
Lectures, pray thrice a day by the hour, hold faith and tr^th profane, and
drinking healths a sin, do often find lean harvests, easy flocks, and
empty purses: Let them be godly that can live on Air and Faith; and eaten up
by Zeal, can whine themselves into an Hospi^all, or bless their lips with
charitable scrapps. If godliness have this reward, to have short meals for
long prayers, weak estates for strong faiths, and good consciences upon such
bad conditions, let them boast of their pennyworths, and let me be wicked
still, and take my chance as falls. Let me have judgment to discover a
profitable Farm, and wit to take it at an easy Rent, and Gold to stock it in
a liberal manner, and skill to manage it to my best advantage, and luck to
find a good increase, and providence to husband wisely what I gain, I seek no
further, and I wish no more. Husbandry and Religion are two several
occupations, and look two several ways, and he is the only wise man can
reconcile them.

His Withering.
BUt stay, my soul, I fear thy reckoning fails thee; If thou have judgment
to discover; wit, to bargain; Gold, to employ; skill, to manage; providence to
dispose; can thou command the Clouds to drop? or if a wet season meet thy
Harvest, and with open sluices overwhelme thy hopes; can thou let down the
floodgates, and stop the watery Flux? Can thou command the Sun to shine?
Can thou forbid the Mildewes, or control the breath of the Malignant East?
Is not this Gods sole Prerogative? And has not that God said,

When the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed
for ever, Psalm. 92. 13. Job. 21. 7. Wherefore do the wicked live, become old,
ye are mighty in power?

8. Their seed is established in their sight, and their offspring before their
eyes.

9. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the wrath of God upon them.

10. Their Bull gendereth, and fails not, their Cow calveth, and casts not
her Calfe.

21. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance.

12. They take the Timbrell, and the Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the
Organ.

13. They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down to the
Grave.

His Proofs.
Nil. in Paraenes. We be to him that pursues empty and fading pleasures:
because in a short time he fats, and pampers himself as a Calf to the
slaughter. Bernard. There is no misery more true and real, then false and
counterfeit pleasure. Hierom. It Is not only difficult, but impossible to have
heaven here and hereafter: To live in sensual lusts, and to attain spiritual
bliss; to pass from one paradise to another, to be a mirror of felicity in
both worlds, to shine with glorious rays both in this globe of earth, and the
orb of heaven. His Soliloquy.
HOw sweet a feast is, till the reckoning come! A fair day ends often in a cold
night, and the road that is pleasant, ends in Hell: If worldly pleasures had the
promise of continuance, prosperity were some comfort; but in this necessary
vicissitude of good and evil, the prolonging of adversity sharpens it: It is
no common thing, my soul, to enjoy two heavens: Dives found it in the present,
Lazarus in the future: Has thy increase met with no damage? thy reputation
with no scandal? thy pleasure, with no cross? thy prosperity, with no
adversity? Presume not: Gods checks are symptoms of his mercy: but his silence
is the Harbinger of a judgment. Be circumspect, and provident my soul: Have
thou a fair Summer? provide for a hard Winter: The worlds River ebbes alone;
it flows not: He that goes merrily with the stream must hale up: Flatter thy
self therefore no longer in thy prosperous sin, O my deluded soul! but be
truly sensible of thy own presumption: Look seriously into thy approaching
danger, and humble thy self with true contrition: If thou procure sour Herbs,
God will provide his Passover.

His Prayer.
HOw weak is man O God, when thou forsakest him! How foolish are his Counsels,
when he plots without thee! How wild his progress, when he wanders from thee!
How miserable till he return unto thee! How his wit fails! How his wisdom
falters! How his wealth melts! How his providence is befooled! and how his
soul beslav'd! Thou strik'st off the Chariot wheels of his Inventions, and he
is perplexed: Thou confoundest the Babel of his imaginations, and he is
troubled: Thou crossest his designs that he may fear thee, and thou stopst
him in his ways that he may know thee. How merciful art thou O God, and in
thy very judgments Lord how gracious! Thou might have struck me into the
lowest pit as easily as on these bended knees, and yet been justified in my
confusion: But thou have threatened like a gentle father, as loath to punish thy
ungracious child. Thou know the crooked thoughts of man are vain, still
turning point to their contrivers ruin; Thou saw me wandering in the maze of
death, whilst I wi^h violence pursued my own destruction: But thou have warned
me by thy sacred Word, and took me off that I might live to praise thee. Thou
art my confidence O God; Thou art the rock, the rock of my salvation. Thy Word
shall be my guide, for all thy paths are Mercy and Truth: Lord when I look upon
my former worldliness, I utterly abhor my conversation: strengthen me with
thy assistance, that I may lead a new life; make me more and more sensible of
my own condition, and perfect thou the good work thou have begun in me: In all
my designs be thou my Counselor, that I may prosper in my undertakings. In
all my actions be thou my guide, that I may keep the path of thy Commandments,
Let all my own devises come to naught, lest I presume upon the arm of flesh;
let not my wealth increase without thy blessing, lest I be fatted up against
the day of slaughter: Have thou a hand in all my just employments, then prosper
thou the work of my hands, O prosper thou my handy-worke: That little I enjoy,
confirm it to me, and make it mine, who have no interest in it till thou own
me as thy Child: Then shall my soul rejoice in thy favors, and magnify thy
name for all thy mercies: Then shall my lips proclaim thy loving kindness, and
sing thy praises for ever and ever.

The lascivious man's Heaven.
CAn flesh and blood be so unnatural to forget the Laws of Nature? Can
blowing youth immure it self within the Icey walls of Vestall Chastity? Can
lusty diet, and mollicious rest bring forth no other fruits, but faint desires,
rigid thoughts, and Phlegmatic, conceits? should we be stocks and stones and
(having active souls) turn altogether passives? Must we turn Ancherites and
spend our days in Caves, and Hermitages, and smother up our precious hours in
cloysterd folly, and recluse devotion? Can rosy cheeks, can ruby lips, can
snowy breasts and sparkling eyes, present their beauties and perfections to the
sprightly view of young mortality, and must we stand like Statues without sense
or motion? Can strict Religion impose such cruel tasks and even impossible
commands upon the raging thoughts of her unhappy votaries, as to withstand and
contradict the instinct, and very principles of Nature? Can faire-pretending
Piety be so barbarous to condemn us to the flames of our affections, and make
us Martyrs to our own desires? Is It not enough to conquer the rebellious
actions of imperious flesh, but we must manacle her hands, darken her eyes;
nay worse, restrain the freedom of her very thoughts? Can full perfection be
expected here? Or can our work be perfect in this vale of imperfection? This
were a life for Angels, but a task too hard for frail, for transitory man.
Come, come, we are but men, but flesh and blood, and our born frailties cannot
grapple with such potent tyranny. What Nature and Necessity requires us to do,
is venial, being done. Come, strive no more against so strong a stream, but
take thy fill of beauty; solace thy wanton heart with amorous contemplations,
cloathe all thy words with courtly Rhetoric, and soften thy lips with Dialects
of Love; Surfeit thy self with pleasure, and melt thy passion into warm
delights; Walk into Natures universal Bower, and pick what Flower does most
surprise thine eye; drink of all waters, but be tied to none. Spare neither
cost nor pains, to compass thy Desires: Enjoy varieties; emparadise thy soul
in fresh Delights. The change of pleasure makes thy pleasure double: Ravish thy
senses with perpetual choice, and glut thy soul with all the delicates of
Love.

BUt hold! there is a voice that whispers in my troubled ear, a voice that
blanks my thoughts, and stops the course of my resolves; a voice that chils the
bosom of my soul, and fills me with amazement: Hark,

They which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 21.
Exodus 20 14 Thou shall not commit Adultery. Matthew 5. 28. Whosoever looks
upon a woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his
heart Romans 13. 13 Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting, nor in
drunkenness, nor in chambering, nor in wantonness 1 Peter 2. 11. Abstain from
fleshly lusts, which war against the soul His Proofs.
Nilus in Paraen. Woe be to the fornicator and adulterer, for his garment is
defiled and spotted, and the heavenly Bridegroom casts him out from his chaste
nuptials.

A world of presumptuous and heinous offenses do arise and spring from the
filthy fountain of adulterous lust, whereby the gate of heaven is shut, and
poor man excluded from God.

S Gregor. Mor. Hence the flesh lives in sensual delights for a moment, but
the immortal soul perishes for ever His Soliloquy,
LUst is a Brand of original fire, raked up in the Embers of flesh and blood;
uncoverd by a natural inclination, blown by corrupt communication, quenched
with fasting and humiliation: It is raked up in the best, uncovered in the
most, and blown in thee, O my lustful soul; O turn thy ear from the
pleadings of Nature, and make a Covenant with thine eyes: Let not the language
of D^lilah inchant thee, lest the hands of the Philistims surprise thee: Review
thy past pleasures, with the charge and pains thou had to compass them, and
show me, where is thy pennyworth? Foresee what punishments are prepared to meet
thee, and tell me, what is thy purchase? Thou have batterd away thy God for a
lust; sold thy Eternity for a Trifle; If this bargain may not be r^cald by
tears, dissolve thee O my soul into a Spring of waters: If not to be reverst
with price, reduce thy whole estate into a Sack cloth, and an Ash tub. Thou
whose ^iver has scorcht in the flames of lust, humble thy heart in the ashes
of Repentance: and as with Esau thou have sold thy Birthright for Broth, so
with Jacob wrestle by prayer till thou get a blessing.

His Prayer.
O God, before whose face the Angels are impure; before whose clear omniscience
all Actions appear, to whom the very secrets of the hearts are open; I here
acknowledge to thy glory and my shame, the filthiness and vile impurity of my
nature: Lord I was filthy in my very conception, and in filthiness my mothers
womb enclosed me, brought forth in filthiness, and filthy in my very
innocence, filthy in the motions of my flesh, and filthy in the apprehensions
of my soul: my words all clothed with filthiness, and in all my actions
filthy and unclean, in my inclination filthy, and in the whole course of my
life nothing but a continued filthiness. Wash me O God, and make me clean,
cleanse me from the filthiness of my corruption; Purge me O Lord with Hyssop,
and create a clean heart within me: Correct the vagrant motions of my flesh,
and quench the fiery darts of Satan; Let not the Law of my corrupted members
rule me; O let concupiscence have no dominion over me: Give me courage to
fight against my lusts, and give my weakness strength to overc^me; make sharp
my sword against this body of sin, but most against my Dalilah, my bosom
sin. Deliver me from the tyranny of temptation, or give me power to subdue it:
Confine the liberty of my wanton appetite, and give me temperance in a sober
diet; Grant me a heart to strive with thee in Prayer, and hopeful patience to
attend thy leisure; Keep me from the habit of an idle life, and close mine
ears against corrupt communication; Set thou a watch before my lips, that all
my words may savor of sobriety: Preserve me from the vanity and pride of life,
that I may walk blameless in my conversation; Protect me from the fellowship
of the unclean, an^ from all such as are of evil report. Let thy grace O God
be sufficient for me, to protect my s^ule from the buffetings of Satan; Make me
industrious and diligent in my calling, lest the enemy get advantage over me:
In all my temptations let me have recourse to thee. Be thou my refuge when I
call upon thee; Forgive O God the sins of my youth, O pardon the multitudes
of my secret sins: Increase my hatred to my former lise, and strengthen my
resolution for the time future; Hear me O God, and let the words of my mouth be
always acceptable to thee, O God my strength and my Redeemer.

The Sabbath Breakers Profanation.
THe glittering Prince that sits upon his regal, and imperial Throne, and the
ignoble Peasant that sleeps within his sordid house of Thatch are both alike to
God: An Ivory Temple and a Church of Clay are prized alike by him: The flesh of
Bulls, and the perfumes of My he and ^assia smoke his Altars with an equal
pleasure: And does he make such difference of days? Is he that was so weary of
the New-Moones, so taken with the Sun to tie his Sabbath to that only day? The
tenth in tithes is any one in ten, and why the seventh day not any one in
seven? We sanctify the day, the day not us: But are we Jews? Are we still
bound to keep a legal Sabbath in the strictness of the Letter? Have the
Gentiles no privilege by virtue of Messiahs coming, or has the Evangelicall
Sabbath no immunities? The service done the day's discharged, my liberty
restored; And if I meet my profits, or my pleasurer then* I Will give them
entertainment. If business call me to account, I dare afford a careful ear.
Or if my sports invite me, I Will entertain them with a cheerful heart: I Will
go to Mattens with as much devotion as my neighbor, I Will make as low
obeisance, and as just responds as any; but as soon as Evensong's ended, my
Church-devotion and my Psalter shall sanetifie my Pue till the next Sabbath
call; Were it no more for an old custom sake, then for the good I find in
Sabbaths, that Ceremony might as well be spared. It is a day of Rest: And
what is a Rest? A relaxation from the toil of labor: And what is labor but a
painful exercise of the frail body? But where the exercise admits no toil,
there Relaxation makes no Rest: What labor is it for the worldly man to
compass Sea and Land to accomplish his desires? What labor is it for the
impatient lover to measure Hellespont with his widened arms to hasten his
del^ght? What labor for the youth to number music with their sprightly paces?
Where pleasure's reconciled to labor, labor is but an active rest; Why should
the Sabbath then, a day of rest, divorce thee from those delights that make thy
Rest? Afflict their souls that please, my rest shall be what most conduces to
my hearts delight. Two hours will vent more prayers then I shall need, the rest
remains for pleasure.

His extirpation.
COnscience, why start'st thou? A judgment strikes me from the mouth of
heaven, and says,

Whosoever does any work on my Sabbath, his soul shall be cut off, Exodus 31.
14. Exodus 20. Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day; six days shall thou
labor, and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day, etc. Exodus 31.
14. Ye shall keep my Sabbath, for it is holy unto you. Exodus 31. 13. Verily my
Sabbaths thou shall keep, for this is a sign betwixt me and you, throughout
your Generations. Luke 23. 56. And they returned and prepared spices, and
ointments, and rested on the Sabbath day according to the Commandment. His
Proofs.
Gregor. We ought upon the Lords day to rest from bodily labor, and wholly to
addict our selves to prayers, that whatsoever has been done amiss the week
before, may upon the day of our Lords resurrection be expiated and purged by
fervent prayers. Cyr. Alex. Sin is the storehouse of death and misery, it
kindles flames for it is dearest friends. Therefore whosoever when he should
rest from sin, busieth himself in the dead and fruitless works of
wickedness, and renouncing all piety, lusts after such things as will bring
him into eternal destruction, and everlasting flames, justly deserves to die
and perish with the damned, because when he might have enjoyed a pious rest, he
labored to run headlong to his own destruction. His Soliloquy.
MY soul, how have thou profaned that day thy God has sanctified! How have
thou encroach'd on that which heaven has set apart! If thy impatience cannot
act a Sabbath twelve hours, what happiness can thou expect in a perpetual
Sabbath? Is six days too little for thy self, and two hours too much for thy
God? O my soul, how do thou prize temporalls beyond eternalls? Is it equal
that God who gave thee a body, and six days to provide for it, should demand
one day of of thee, and be denied it? How liberal a receiver art thou, and how
miserable a Requiter! But know my soul, his Sabbaths are the Apple of his eye:
He that has power to vindicate the breach of it, has threatened judgments to
the breaker of it. The God of mercy that has mitigated the rigor of it for
charity sake, will not diminish the honor of it for profaneness sake: sorget
not then my soul to remember his Sabbaths, and remember not to forget his
judgments, lest he forget to remember thee in Mercy: What thou have neglected,
bewail with con^^ition, and what thou have repen^ed, forsake with resolution,
and what thou have resolved strengthen with devotion,

His Prayer.
O Eternal, just, and all discerning Judge; in thy self, glorious; in thy
Son, gracious; who ^^yest without a witness, and condemnest without a jury; O!
I confess my very actions have betrayed me, thy word has brought in evidence
against me, my own conscience has witnessed against me, and thy judgment has
past sentence against me: And what have I now to plead but mine own misery,
and whether should that misery flee but to the God of mercy? And since O Lord
the way to mercy is to leave my self, I here disclaim all interest in my
self, and utterly renounce my self: I that was created for thy glory, have
dishonored thy Name; I that was made for thy service, have profaned thy
Sabbaths; I have slighted thy Ordinances, and turned my back upon thy
Sanctuary; I have neglected thy Sacraments, abused thy Word, despised thy
Ministers and despised their ministry; I have come into thy Courts with an
unprovided heart, and have drawn near with uncircumcised lips; And Lord I know
thou art a jealous God, and most severe against all such as violate thy Rest;
The glory of thy Name is precious to thee, and thine honor is as the Apple of
thine eye; But thou O God that art the God of Hosts, have published and
declared thy self the Lord of mercy; The constitution of thy Sabbath was a
work of time, but Lord thy mercy is from all eternity; I that have broke thy
Sabbaths, do here present thee with a broken heart; thy hand is not shortened
that thou can not heal, no^ thy ear deafned that thou can not hear;
St^etch forth thy hand O God and heal my wounds. Bow down thine ear O Lord,
and hear my Prayers; Alter the fabric of my sinful heart, and make it tender
of thy glory; Make me ambitious of thy service, and let thy Sabbaths be my
whole delight; Give me a holy reverence of thy Word, that it may prove a light
to my steps and a Lanthorn to my feet. Endue my heart with Charity and Faith
that I may find a comfort in thy Sacraments. Bless thou the Ministers of thy
sacred Word, and make them holy in their lives, sound in their doctrine and
laborious in their callings. Preserve the universal Church in these distracted
times; give her peace, unity, and uniformity, purge her of all Schism, error
and superstition; Let the Kings daughter be all glorious within, and let thine
eyes take pleasure in her beauty, that being honored here to be a member of her
Militant, I may be glorified with her triumphant.

The Censorious man's Crimination.
I Know there is much of the seed of the Serpent in him by his very looks, if
his words betrayed him not; He has eaten the Egg of the Cock^trice, and
surely he remains in the state of perdition; He is not within the Covenant,
and abides in the Gall of bitterness; His studied Prayers show him to be a
high Malignant, and his Jesu worship concludes him popishly affected; He comes
not to our private meetings, nor contributes a penny to the cause* He cries up
learning, and the book of Common Prayer, and takes no arms to hasten
Reformation; He fears God for his own ends, for the spirit of Antichrist is
in him. His eyes are full of Adulteries, and goes a whoring after his own
inventions: He can hear an oath from his superiors without reproof, and the
heathenish Gods named without spitting in his face: Wherefore my soul
detesteth him, and I will have no conversation with him; for what fellowship
has light with darkness, or the pure in heart with the unclean? Sometimes he
is a Publican, sometimes a Pharisee, and always an Hypocrite; He railes against
the Altar as loud as we, and yet he cringes and makes an Idol of the name of
Jesus; he is quick-sighted to the infirmities of the Saints, and in his heart
rejoices at our failings* he honors not a preaching ministry, and too much
leans to a Church Government; he paints devotton on his face, whilst pride is
stamped within his heart: he places sanctity in the walls of a Steeple-house,
and adores the Sacrament with his popish knee; His Religion is a Weathercock,
and turns breast to every blast of wind. With the pure he seems pure, and with
the wicked he will join in fellowship; A sober language is in his mouth but
the poison of Aspes is under his tongue: His works conduce not to edification,
nor are the motions of his heart sanctified; He adores great ones for
preferment, and speaks too partially of authority: He is a Laodicean in his
faith, a Nicolaitane in his works, a Pharisee in his disguise, a rank Papist
in his heart, and I thank my God I am not as this man.

His Commination.
BUt stay my soul, take heed whilst thou judge another, lest God judge thee;
how come thou so expert in another heart, being so often deceived in thy
own? A Saul to day, may prove a Paul to morrow; Take heed whilst thou would
seem religious thou appear not uncharitable; and whilst thou judge man, thou
be not judged of God, who says, Judge not, lest ye be judged, Mat. 7. 1.

John 7. 24. Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.
Romans 14. 10. But why do thou judge thy brother? or why do thou set at
naught thy brother? We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. 1
Cor 4. 5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come who will both
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsel of the heart. Romans 14. 13. Let us not therefore judge one another any
more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling, block or an
accusation to fall in his brothers way: Psalm. 50. 6. God is judge himself. His
Proofs.
St. Augustine. Apparent and notorious iniquities ought both to be reproved and
condemned, but we should never judge such things as we understand not, nor can
certainly know whether they be done with a good or evil intent. St. Augustine.
When thou know not apparently, judge charitably; because it is better to
think well of the wicked then by frequent censuring to suspect an innocent man
guilty of an offense. St. Augustine. The unrighteous Judge shall be justly
condemned. His Soliloquy.
HAs thy brother, O my soul, a beam in his eye? And have thou no moat in thine?
Clear thy own, and thou will see the better to cleanse his: If a Theife be in
his Candle, blow it no^ out, lest thou wrong the flame, but if thy snuffers be
of Gold, snuff it: Has he offended thee? Forgive him: Has he trespass^d
against the Congregation? Reprove him: Has he sinned against God? Pray for
him. O my soul, how uncharitable have thou been? How Pharisaically have thou
judged? Being sick of the Iaundies, how have thou censured another yellow? And
with blotted fingers made his blurre the greater? How has the pride of thine
own heart blinded thee toward thy self? How quick sighted to another! Thy
brother has slipped, but thou have fallen, and have blancht thy own impiety with
the publishing his sin: Like a Fly, thou stingest his sores and feed'st on his
corruptions; Jesus came eating and drinking, and was judged a glutton; John
came fasting, and was challeng^d with a devil; Judge not my soul, lest thou
be judged; malign not thy brother, lest God laugh at thy destruction: Would
thou escape the punishment? judge thy self: Would thou avoid the sin? humble
thy self.

His Prayer.
O God that art the only searcher of the Reins, to whom the secre^s of the
heart of man are only known, to whom alone the judgment of our thoughts, our
words and deeds belong, and to whose sentence we must stand or fall, I a
presumptuous sinner that have thrust into thy place and boldly have presumed to
execute thy office, do here as humbly confess the insolence of mine attempt,
and with a sorrowful heart repent me of my doings; and though my convinced
conscience can look for nothing from thy wrathful hand but the same measure
which I measured to another, yet in the confidence of that mercy which thou
have promised to all those that truly and unfainedly believe, I am become an
humble suitor for thy gracious pardon: Lord, if thou search me but with a
favorable eye, I shall appear much more unrighteous in thy sight, then this
my uncharitably condemned brother did in mine* O look not therefore, Lord,
upon me as I am, lest thou abhor me; but through the merits of my blessed
Savior, cast a gracious eye upon me; Let his humility satisfy for my
presumption, and let his meritorious sufferings answer for my vile
uncharitableness; let not the voice of my offense provoke thee with a stronger
cry, then the language of his Intercession. Remove from me O God all spiritual
pride, and make me little in my own conceit; Lord light me to my self, that by
thy light I may discern how dark I am; Lighten that darkness by thy holy
Spirit, that I may search into my own corruptions: And since O God all gifts
and graces are but nothing, and nothing can be acceptable in thy sight without
charity; quicken the dullness of my faint affections, that I may love my
brother as I ought; Soften my marble heart that it may melt at his infirmities;
Make me careful in the examination of my own ways, and most severe against
my own offenses: Pull out the beam out of mine own eye, that I may see
clearly, and reprove wisely* Take from me O Lord, all grudging, envy, and
malice, that my seasonable reproofs may win my brother. Preserve my heart from
all censorious thoughts, and keep my tongue from striking at his name: Grant
that I make right use of his Infirmities, and read good Lessons in his
failings, that loving him in thee, and thee in him according to thy command,
we may both be united in thee as members of thee, that thou may receive
honor from our communion here, and we eternal glory from thee hereafter in
the world to come.

The Liars Fallacies.
NAy if Religion be so strict a Law to bind my tongue to the necessity of a
truth on all occasions, at all times, and in all places, the gate is too strait
for me to enter: Or if the general rules of downright truth will admit no ^ew
exceptions, farewell all honest mirth farewell all trading, farewell the whole
converse betwixt man and man: If always to speak punctual truth be the true
Symptoms of a blessed soul; Tom Tell troth has a happy time, and fools and
children are the only men. If truth sit Regent, in what faithful breast shall
secrets find repose? What kingdom can be safe? What Common wealth can be
secure? What war can be successful? What Stratagem can prosper? if bloody
times should force Religion, to shroud it self beneath my roo^e; upon demand,
shall my false truth betray it. Or shall my brothers life, or shall my own be
seized upon through the cruel truth of my downright confession? or rather not
be secured by a fair officious lie? shall the righteous Favorite of Egypts
Tyrant, by virtue of a loud lie, sweeten out his joy and heigthen up his soft
affection with the Antiperistasis of tears, and may I not prevaricate with a
sullen truth to save a brothers life, from a bloodthirsty hand? shall Jacob and
his too indulgent mother, conspire in a lie to purchase a paternall blessing in
the false name, and habit of a supplanted brother, and shall I question to
preserve the granted blessing of a life, or livelihood, with a harmless lie?
Come, come, my soul, let not thy timorous conscience check at such poor things
as these: So long as thy officious tongue aims at a just end* a lie is no
offense: So long as thy perjurious lips confirm not thy untruth with an
aud^ci^us brow, thou n^edst not fear: The weight of the cause releeves the
burden of the Crime: Is thy Center good? No matter how crooked the lines of
the circumference be: Policy allows it: If thy journies end be heaven, it
matters not how full of Hell thy journey be, Divinity allows it: Will thou
condemn the Egyptian Midwives for saving the infant Israelites by so merciful a
lie? When martial execution is to be done* will thou fear to kill? When hunger
drives thee to the gates of death, will thou be afraid to steal? When civil
wars divide a Kingdom, will Mercuries decline a lie? No, circumstances
excuse, as well as make the lie; Had Caesar, Scipio, or Alexander been
regulated by such strict Divinity, their names had been as silent as their
dust; A lie is but a fair put off, the sanctuary of a secret, the riddle of a
lover, the stratagem of a Soldier, the policy of a Statesman, and a salve for
many desperate sores.

His Flames.
BUt hark, my soul, there is something rounds mine ear, and calls my language
to a rec^ntation; The Lord has spoken it,

Liers shall have their part in the lake which bur^eth with fire and brimstone,
Revel. 21. 8. Exodus 20. Thou shall not raise a false report. Levit. 19. 11. Ye
shall not deal falsely, neither lie one to another. Prove. 12. 22. Lying lips
are abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly are his delight. Prove.
19. 5. He that speaks lies shall not escape. Ephesians. 4. 5. Put away lying, and
every one speak truth with his neighbor, for we are members one of another.
Revel. 21. 27. There shall in no wise enter into the new Jerusalem any thing
that works abomination, or that makes a lie. His Proofs.
S. Augustine. Whosoever thinks there is any kind of lie that is not a sin,
shamefully deceives himself, mistaking a lying or cousening knave for a square
or honest man. Gregor. Eschew and avoid all falsehood, though sometimes certain
kind of untruths are less sinful, as to tell a lie to save a man's life: yet
because the Scripture says, The liar slays his own soul, and God will
destroy them that tell a lie; therefore, religious and honest men should
always avoid even the best sort of lies, neither ought another man's life be
secured by our falsehood or lying, lest we destroy our own soul* in laboring
to secure another man's life. His Soliloquy.
WHat a child O my soul, has thy false bosom harb^rd* And what reward can
thy indulgence expect from such a father? What blessing can thou hope for
from heaven, that pleadest for the son of the devil, and crucifyest the Son of
God? God is the Father of truth; To secure thy estate thou deniest the truth,
by framing o^ a lie: To save thy brothers life, thou opposest the truth in
justifying a lie. Now tell me O my soul, art thou worthy the name of a
Christian, that denyest and opposest the nature of Christ? Art thou worthy of
Christ that preferrest thy estate, or thy brothers life before him? O my
unrighteous soul, can thou hold thy brother worthy of death for giving thee
the lie, and thy self guiltless that make a lie? (...), but in some cases
truth destroys thy life; a lie preserves it: My soul, was God thy Creator?
then make not the devil thy preserver: Will thou despair to trust him with thy
life that gave it, and make him thy Protector that seeks to destroy it? Reform
thee and repent thee, O my soul; hold not thy life on such conditions, but
trust thee to the hands that made thee.

His Prayer.
O God, that art the God of truth, whose word is truth, that hate lying lips,
and abominatest the deceitful tongue, that banishest thy presence all such as
love or make a ly, and love truth, and requirest uprightness in the inward
parts, I the most wretched of the sons of men, and most unworthy to be called
thy son, make bold to cast my sinfull^ eyes to heaven; Lord I have sinned
against heaven and against truth, and have turned thy grace into a lie; I have
renounced the ways of righteousness, and harbored much iniquity within me
which has turned thy wrath, against me; I have transgrest against the checks
of my own conscience, and have vaunted of my transgression: which way soever I
turn mine eye, I see no object but shame and confusion: Lord, when I look upon
my self, I find nothing there but fuel for thy wrath and matter for thine
indignation, and my condemnation. And when I cast mine eyes to heaven, I there
behold an angry God, and a severe revenger; But Lord at thy right hand I see a
Savior, and a sweet Redeemer; I see thy wounded Son cloathd in my flesh, and
bearing mine infirmities, and interceding for my numerous transgressions; for
which my soul does magnify thee O God, and my spirit rejoices in him my
Savior; Lord, when thou look upon the vast score of my offenses, turn
thine eyes upon the infinite merits of his satisfaction; O when thy justice
calls to mind my sins, let not thy mercy forget his sufferings; Wash me, O
wash me in his blood, and thou shall see me clothed in his righteousness: Let
him that is all in all to me, be all in all for me; make him to me
sanctification, justification and redemption: Inspire my heart with the spirit
of thy truth, and preserve me from the deceitfulness of a double tongue: Give
me an inward confidence to rely upon thy fatherly providence, that neither
fear may deter me, nor any advantage may turn me from the ways of thy
truth: Let not the specious goodness of the end encourage me to the
unlawfulness of the means, but let thy Word be the warrant to all my actions;
Guide my footsteps that I may walk uprightly, and quicken my conscience, that
it may reprove my failings: Cause me to feel the burden of this my habitual
sin, that coming to thee by a true and serious repentance, my sins may obtain
a full and a gracious forgiveness: Give me a heart to make a Covenant with my
lips, that both my heart and tongue being sanctified by thy Spirit, may be both
united in truth by thy mercy, and magnify thy name for ever, and for ever.

The revengefull man's rage.
O What a Julip to my scorching soul is the delicious blood of my Offend^r! and
how it cooles the burning F^ver of my boiling veins! It is the Quintessence of
pleasures, the height of satisfaction, and the very marrow of all delight, to
bathe and paddle in the blood of such, whose bold affronts have turned my
wounded pat^ence into fury? How full of sweetness was his death, who dying was
revenged upon three thousand enemies? How sweetly did the younger brothers
blood allay the soul-consuming flame of the elder, who took more pleasure in
his last breath, then heaven d^d in his first Sacrifice? Yet had not heaven to
demned his action, nature h^d found an Advocate for his passion: What sturdy
spirit has the power to rule his suffer^ng thoughts, or curb the headstrong
^u^y of his Irascible affections? Or who but fools (that cannot taste
anjnjury) can moderate their highbred spirits; and stop their passion in her
full carrier? Let heavy Cynicks, they whose leaden souls are taught by stupid
reason to stand bent at every wrong, that can digest an injury more easily then
a complement, that can protest against the Laws of nature, and cry all
natural affection down, let them be Andirons for the in^urious world to work
a Heat upon: let them find shoulders to receive the paineful stripes of
peevish Mortal^s, and to bear the wrongs of daring insolence: Let them be
drawn like Calves p^epar'd for slaughter, and bow t^e^r servile necks to sharp
destruction: let them submit their slavish bosoms to be trod and tr^mpled
under ^oot for every pleasure: My Eagle spirit flies a higher pitch, and like
ambitious Phaeton climbes into the fiery Chariot, and drawn with fury, scorn,
revenge, and honor; rambles through all the Spheres, and brings with it
confusion and combustion; my reeking sword shall vindicate my reputation, and
rectify the injuries of my honorable name, and quench it self in plenteous
streams of blood Come tell not me of Charity, conscience, ^r transgression;
My Charity reflects upon my self, begins at home, and guides by the justice of
my passion, is bound to labor for an honorable satisfaction: My conscience is
blood-proofe, and I can broach a life with my illustrious weapon with as little
^eluctation, as kill a Flea that ^ucks my blood without Commission, and I can
drink a health in blood upon my bended knee, to reputation.

His Retaliation.
BUt hark my soul I hear a languishing, a dying voice cry up to heaven for
vengeance; It cries aloud, and thunders in my startling ear, I tremble and my
shive^ing bones are filled with ho^ror; ^t cries again ^m^, and hear what
heaven replies,

All that take up the sword shall perish by the sword, M^t^h 26. 52. Levit. 10.
18. Thou shall not avenge, or bear any grudge against the Children of my
people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: I am the Lord. Deuteronomy.
32. 35. To me belongs vengeance and recompense. Ezekiel. 25. 12, 13. Because
that Edom has dealt against the house of Judah, by taking vengeance, and has
greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them:

Therefore thus says the Lord God, I will also stretch out mine hand upon
Edom, and will cut off man and beast from it.

Matthew 5. 39. Resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on the right
cheek, turn to him the other also. His Proofs.
Tertull. What Is the difference between one that does an injury* and another
that outragiously suffers it, except that the one it first and the other second
in the o^ence? but both are guilty of mutual inju^y in the sight of God; who
forbids every sin, and condemns the offender. Tertull. How can we honor God
if we revenge our selves? Gloss. Every man is a murderer, and shall be
punished as Cain was if he do (as Cain did) either assault his brother with
violence, or pursue him with hatred. His Soliloquy.
REvenge is an Act of the Iras^^ble affections, deliberated with malice, and
executed without mercy: How often O my soul have thou cursed thy self in the
perfectest of Prayers? How often have thou turned the spiritual body of thy
Savior into thy damnation? Can the Sun rise to thy comfort, that has so often
set in thy wrath? So long as thy wrath is kindled against thy brother, so long
is the wrath of God burning against thee? O, would thou offer a pleasing
sacr^ fice to heaven? Go first and be reconciled to thy brother. I, but who
shall right thy honor then? Is thy honor wronged? Forgive, and it is
vindicated, I, but this kind of heart-swelling, c^n brook no Powltesse but
revenge. Take heed, my soul, the remedy is worse then the disease: If thy
intricate distemper transcend thy power, make choice of a Physician that can
purge that humor that foments thy malady: Rely upon him; submit thy will to
his directions; he has a tender heart, a skillful hand, a watchful eye, that
makes thy welfare the price of all thy pains, expecting no reward, no fee, but
praises, and Thanksgiving.

His Prayer.
O God, that art the God of peace, and the lover of unity and concord, that
do command all those that seek forgiveness, to forgive; that hate the
froward heart, but show mercy to the meek in spirit: With what a face can I
appear before thy mercy-seat, or with what countenance can I lift up these
hands thus stained with my brothers blood? How can my lips, that daily breathe
revenge against my brother, presume to own thee as my father, or expect from
thee thy blessing, as thy child? If thou forgive my trespasses O God as I
forgive my trespassers, in what a miserable estate am I, that in my very
prayers condemn my self, and do not only limit thy compassion by my
uncharitableness, but draw thy judgments on my head for my rebellion? That
heart O God which thou requirest as a holy present, is become a spring of
malice; These hands which I advance, are ready instruments of base revenge. My
thoughts, that should be sanctified, are full of blood, and how to compass
evil against my brother is my continual meditation: The course of all my life
is wilful disobedience, and my whole pleasure, Lord, is to displease thee: My
conscience has accused me, and the voice of blood has cried against me: But
Lord, the blood of Jesus cries louder then the blood of Abell, and thy mercy is
far more infinite then my sin. The blood that was shed by me cries for
vengeance, but the blood that was shed for me sues for mercy; Lord hear the
language o^ this blood, and by the merits of this voice be reconciled unto me.
That time which cannot be recalled, O give me power to redeem, and in the mean
time a settled resolution to reform. Suppress the violence of my headstrong
passion, and establish a meek spirit within me. Let the sight of my own
vileness take from me the sense of all disgrace, and let the Crown of my
reputation be thy honor; Possess my heart with a desire of unity and concord,
and give me patience to endure what my impenitence has deserved ^ Breath into
my soul the spirit of love, and direct my affe^^ions to their right object;
turn all my anger against that sin that has provoked thee, and give me holy
revenge, that I may exercise it against my self. Grant that I may love thee
for thy self, my self in thee, and my neighbor as my self; Assist me O God,
that I may subdue all evil in my self, and suffer patiently all evil as a
punishment from thee. Give me a merciful heart, O God; make it ^low to wrath,
and ready to forgive; Preserve me from the act of evil, that I may be
delivered from the fear of evil; that living here in charity with men, I may
receive that sentence of, Come ye blessed, in the kingdom of glory.

The secure man's Triumph.
SO, now my soul thy happiness is entaild and thy illustrious n^me shall live
in thy succeeding Generations; Thy dwelling is established in the fat of all
the land: thou have what mortal heart can wish, and want nothing but
immortality: The best of all the land is thine, and thou art planted in the
best of Lands: A land whose Constitutions make the best of Government, which
Government is strengthened with the best of Laws, which Laws are executed by
the best of Princes, whose Prince, whose Laws, whose Government, whose land
makes us the happiest of all subjects, makes us the happiest of all people. A
land of strength, of plenty, and a land of peace, where every soul may sit
beneath his Vine, unfrighted at the horrid language of the hoarse Trumpet,
unstartled at the warlike summons of the roaring Cannon. A land whose beauty
has surpised the ambitious hearts of foreign Princes, and taught them by
their martial Oratory to make their vain attempts. A land whose strength
reads vanity in the deceived hopes of Conquerours, and crowns their
enterprises with a shameful overthrow. A land whose native plenty makes her
the worlds Exchange, supplying others able to subsist without supply from
foreign Kingdoms; in it self happy; and abroad honorable. A land that has
no vanity, but what by accident proceeds and issues from the sweetest of all
blessings, peace and plenty; that has no misery but what is propagated from
that blindness which cannot see her own felicity. A land that flows with Milk
and Honey, and in brief, wants nothing to deserve the title of a Paradise, the
Curb of Spain, the pride of Germany, the aid of Belgia, the scourge of
France, the Empress of the world, and Queen of Nations: She is begirt with
walls, whose builder was the hand of heaven, whereon there daily rides a Navy
Royal, whose unconquerable power proclaims her Prince invincible, and
whispers sad despair into the fainting hearts of foreign Majesty: She is
compact within her self, in unity, not apt to civil discords or intestine
broils; The envy of all nations, the ambition of all Princes; the terror of
all enemies, the security of all neighboring States. Let timorous Pulpits
threaten ruin, let prophesying Churchmen dote till I believe: How often and
how long have these loud sons of Thunder false prophesied her desolation? and
yet she stands the glory of the world: Can pride demolish the Towers that
defend her? Can drunkenness dry up the Sea that walls her? Can flames of lust
dissolve the Ordnance that protect her?

His overthrow.
Be well advised my soul; there is a voyee from heaven roar louder then
those Ordnance, which says,

Thus says the Lord, The whole land shall be desolate, Jer. 4. 27. Esaias 14. 7.
The whole earth it at rest, and at quiet, they break forth into singing.

Yea the Firee trees rejoyee at thee, and the Cedars of Lebanon sing, etc.

Yet shall thou be brought down to hell, to the sides of the Pit.

Ier. 5. 12. They have belied the Lord, and said, it is not he, neither shall
evil come upon us, neither shall we see sword, or famine. 1 Cor. 10. 12. Let
him that stands take heed lest he fall. Luke 17. 26. They did eat and drink,
and they married wives and were given in marriage, until the flood came and
destroyed them all. His Proofs.
Greg. Mor. A man may as soon build a Castle upon the rouling waves, as ground
a solid comfort upon the unceriaine ebbs and fluxes of transient pleasures. St.
Augustine. Whilst Lot was exercised in s^ffering reproach and violence, he
continued holy and pure, even in the filth of Sodom: but in the mount being in
peace and safety, he was surprised by sensual security, and defiled himself
with his own daughters.

Our prosperous and happy state is often the occasion of more miserabl ruin, a
long peace has made many men both careless and cowardly; and that is the most
fatal blow when an unexpected enemy surprises us in a deep sleep of peace and
security, Greg. Mag.

His Soliloquy.
SEcurity is an improvident carelessness, casting out all fear of approaching
danger; It is like a great Calm at Sea, that soreruns a storm: How is this
verified O my sad soul in this our bleeding nation! Were thou not but now for
many years even nuzzl^d in the bosom of habitual peace? Did thou foresee
this danger? Or could thou have contrived a way to be thus miserable? Did
thou not laugh invasion to scorn? or did thou not less fear a Civil war?
Was not the Title of the Crown unquestionable? And was not our mixed government
unapt to fall into diseases? Did we want good Laws? or did our Laws want
execution? Did not our Prophets give lawful warning? or were we moved at the
sound of judgments? How have thou lived O my uncarefull soul to see these
prophesies fulfilled, and to behold the vials of thy angry God poured forth!
Since mercies O my soul could not allure thee, yet let these judgments now at
length enforce thee to a true Repentance. Quench the Firebrand which thou have
kindled; turn thy mirth to a right mourning* and thy feasts of joy to
humiliation.

His Prayer.
O God by whom kings reign, and kingdoms flourish, that set up where none
can batter down, and pullest down where none can countermand, I a most humble
Suitor at the Throne of Grace, acknowledge my self unworthy of the least of all
thy mercies, nay worthy of the greatest of all thy judgments: I have sinned
against thee the author of my being, I have sinned against my conscience, which
thou have made my accuser, I have sinned against the peace of this Kingdom,
whereof thou have made me a member: If all should do, O God, as I have done,
Sodom would appear as righteous, and Gomorrah would be a president to thy
wrath upon this sinful Nation. But Lord thy mercy is inscrutable, or else my
misery were unspeakable, for that mercy sake be gracious to me in the free
pardoning of all my offenses. Blot them out of thy remembrance for his sake in
whom thou art well pleased: Make my head a fountain of tears to quench that
brand my sins have kindled toward the destruction of this flourishing
kingdom; Bless this kingdom O God, establish it in piety, honor, peace, and
plenty. Forgive all her crying sins, and remove thy judgments far from
her. Bless her Governor, thy servant, our dread Sovereign, endue his soul
with all religious, civil, and princely virtues; Preserve his royal person in
health, safety, and prosperity; prolong his days in honor, peace, or victory,
and crown his death with everlasting glory. Bless him in his royal Consort,
unite their hearts in love and true Religion. Bless him in his princely issue;
Season their youth with the fear of thy Name. Direct thy Church in doctrine
and in discipline, and let her enemies be converted, or confounded; purge her
of all superstition and heresy, and root out from her, whatsoever thy hand
has not planted. Bless the Nobility of this Land, endue their hearts with
truth, loyalty, and true policy. Bless the Tribe of Levi, with piety,
learning, and humility. Bless the Magistrates of this kingdom, give them
religious and upright hearts, hating covetousness. Bless the Gentry with
sincetity, charity, and a good conscience. Bless the Commonalty with loyal
hearts, painful hands, and plentiful increase. Bless the two great
Seminaries of this kingdom, make them fruitful and faithful Nurseries both to
the Church and Commonwealth. Bless all thy Saints every where, especially
those that have stood in the gap betwixt this kingdom and thy judgments, that
being all members of that Body whereof thou Christ art head, we may all join in
humiliation for our sins, and in the propagation of thy honor here, and be
made partakers of thy glory in the kingdom of glory.

The Presumptuous man's Felicities.
TEll bauling Babes of Bugbeares, to fright them into quietness, or terrify
youth with old wives fables, to keep their wild affections in awe; Such Toys
may work upon their timorous apprehensions, when wholesome precepts fayl, and
find no audience in their youthful cares: Tell not me of Hell, Devils, or of
damned souls to enforce me from those pleasures which they nickname Sin:
What tell ye me of Law? my soul is sensible of Evangelicall precepts, without
the needless and uncorrected thunder of the killing Letter, or the terrible
paraphrase of roaring Boanarges, the tediousness of whose language still
determines in damnation; wherein I apprehend God far more merciful then his
Ministers. It Is true, I have not led my life according to the pharisaicall
Square of their opinions, neither have I found judgments according to their
Prophecies, whereby I must conclude that God is wonderfully merciful, or they
wonderfully mistaken. How often have they thundered torment against my
voluptuous life, and yet I feel no pain: How bitterly have they threatened
shame against the vaunts of my vainglory? yet find I honor: How fiercely
have they preached destruction against my cruelty? and yet I live: What plagues
against my swearing? yet not infected: What diseases against my drunkenness?
and yet sound; What danger against procrastination? yet how often has God been
found upon the deathbed? What damnation to Hypocrites? yet who more safe? What
stripes to the ignorant? yet who more Scotfree? What poverty to the slothful?
yet themselves prosper: What falls to the proud? yet they stand surest: What
curses to the covetous? yet who richer? What judgments to the lascivious? yet
who more pleasure? What vengeance to the profane, the censorious, the
revengefull? yet none live more unscourg'd: Who deeper branded then the Liar?
yet who more favored? Who more threatend then the presumptuous? yet who less
punished? Thus are we foold and kept in awe with the strict fancies of those
Pulpit-men, whose opinions have no ground but what they gain from popularity:
Thus are we frighted from the liberty of Nature by the politic Chimeraes of
Religion; whereby we are necessitated to the observing of those Laws whereof
we find a greater necessity of breaking.

His Anathemaes.
BUt stay my soul, there is a voice that darts into my troubled thoughts,
which says,

Because thou have not kept my Laws, all the curses in this Book shall
overtake thee, till thou be destroyed, Deuteronomy. 29 Deuteronomy. 29. 27 And the anger of
the Lord was kindled against the land, to bring upon it all the curses that are
written in this Book. 2 Chronicles. 34. 24 Thus says the Lord, behold I will bring
evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the curses
that are written in the book Deuteronomy. 28. 15 But if thou will not hearken unto the
voice of the Lord thy God to observe and do all his commandments, and his
statues which I command thee this day, all these curses shall come upon thee,
and overtake thee. His Proofs.
Bernard. It is certain thou must die, and uncertain when, how or where;
seeing death is always at thy heels; Thou must (if thou be wise) always be
ready to die. Bernard. To commit a sin is an humane frailty, to persist in it
is a divelish obstinacy. Bernard. There are some who hope in the Lord, but yet
in vain, because they only smooth and flatter themselves, that God is
merciful, but repent not of their sin; such confidence is vain and foolish,
and leads to destruction. His Soliloquy.
PResumption is a sin whereby we depend upon Gods mercies without any warrant
from Gods Word: It is as great a sin, O my soul, to hope for Gods mercy,
without Repentance, as to distrust Gods mercy upon Repentance: In the first
thou wrongst his justice; In the last, his mercy: O my presumptuous soul, let
not thy prosperity in sinning encourage thee to sin; lest, climbing without
warrant into his mercy, thou fall without mercy into his judgment: Be not
deceived; a long Peace makes a bloody War, and the abuse of continued mercies
makes a sharp judgment: Patience, when slighted, turns to fury, but
illrequited, starts to vengeance: Think not, that thy uupunisht sin is hidden
from the eye of heaven, or that Gods judgments will delay for ever: The
stalled Ox that wallowes in his plenty, and waxes wanton with ease, is not
far from slaughter: The Ephod O mydesperate soul, is long a filling, but
once being full, the leaden cover must go on; and then, it hurries on the
wings of the wind: Advise thee then, and whilst the Lamp of thy prosperity
lasts, provide thee for the evil day, which being come repentance will be out
of date, and all thy prayers will find no ear.

His Prayer.
Gracious God, whose mercy is unsearchable, and whose goodness is unspeakable,
I the unthankful object of thy continued favors, and therefore the miserable
subject of thy continual wrath, humbly present myselfmade misery before thy
sacred Majesty; Lord when I look upon the horridness of my sin, shame strikes
me dumb: But when I turn mine eye upon the infiniteness of thy mercy, I am
emboldned to pour forth my soul before thee; as in the one, finding matter for
confusion; so in the other arguments for compassion: Lord I have sinned
grievously, but my Savior has satisfied abundantly; I have trepassed
continually, but he has suffered once for all: Thou have numbered my
transgressions by the hairs of my head, but his mercies are innumerable like
the stars of the sky: My sins in greatness are like the mountains of the
earth, but his mercy is greater then the heavens: Oh if his mercy were not
greater then my sins, my sins were impardonable; for his therefore and thy
mercies sake cover my sins, and pardon my transgressions: make my head a
fountain of tears, and accept my contrition O thou Wellspring of all mercy:
strengthen my resolution, that for the time to come I may detest all sin:
Increase a holy anger in me that I may revenge my self upon my self, for
displeasing so gracious a Father; Fill my heart with a fear of thy judgments,
and sweeten my thoughts with the meditation of thy mercies: Go forwards O my
God, and perfect thy own work in me, and take the glory of thy own free
goodness; furnish my mouth with the praises of thy name, and replenish my
tongue with continual thanksgiving; Thou have promised pardon to those that
repent; behold I repent, Lord quicken my Repentance. Thou might have made me
a terrible example of thy justice, and struck me into hell in the height of my
presumption; but thou have made me capable of thy mercies, and an object of thy
commiseration; for thou art a gracious God, of long-suffering and slow to
anger, thy name is wonderful, and thy mercies incomprehensible: Thou art only
worthy to be praised: Let all the people praise thee O God: O let all the
people praise thee: Let Angels and Archangels praise thee, Let the
Congregations of Saints praise thee, let thy works praise thee, let every thing
that breathes praise thee for ever, and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

