MARTHA HATFIELD.



THE WISE VIRGIN OR, A wonderful Narration of the hand of God, wherein his
severity and goodness has appeared in afflicting a Child of eleven years of
age, when stricken dumb, deaf and blind through the prevalencie of her
disease; yet upon her wonderful recovery was heard at several times to utter
many glorious Truths concerning Christ, Faith, and other subjects. To the
wonderment of many that came far and near to see and hear her.

The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein, Psalm. 111. 2. All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints
shall bless thee, Psalm. 145. 10. Natura in minimis maxim mirabilis.

By James Fisher, a Servant of CHRIST.

LONDON: Printed for John Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear in Cheap Side.
MDCLIII.

blazon or coat of arms Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.

To All those who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and especially my
much endeared Friends the Parents of this Child of Wonders: Grace and Peace be
multiplied, through the Knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord.
THe Gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord (in the whole dispensation thereof) seems
to be nothing else but a Composition of wonders, every thing therein being
matter both of wonderment and document: And as in other respects, so
particularly in the manner of the propagation thereof, and in the way whereby
our wise good God has brought it home, and settled the precious truths thereof
upon the hearts of his chosen ones. Though God uses a general Uniformity, yet
is there also a particular variety of Dispensation; God sometimes stepping out
of the ordinary course of instituted means, to meet with the darkness,
unbelief, and other weaknesses of poor souls, especially in these last Ages of
the World, wherein there are some rarities of Providence, whereby God seems to
speak unto us, that he is intending to do some new and strange thing in the
Earth.

And if you look narrowly what these means are which God has chosen out, 1
Cor. 1. 27, 28.
you shall plainly discover that of the Apostle to be verified all along, that
they are the foolish, the weak, the base, and the despised things of the World.
He has not chosen arms, or arms of the Mighty ones, nor the mouth of the
Sword, but the Sword of the mouth; Psalm. 8. 2.
for out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings he has ordained strength,
whereby he effects wonderful things, for the advancement of his Kingdom
here in the World. That which comes out of the mouths of these Babes shall
accomplish his Royal Will.

Thus it was with the Head and Captain General of this Infantry, the Lord
Jesus; he was at first a Babe and a Suckling; and the Apostles were such in
their original; and such are all those who are their In idem caput, though not
in eu^dem gradum.
Successors.

But this Scripture seems to receive a further completion, even in the Letter
of it in this instance and example, of which I shall now make Relation. Out of
her mouth the Lord has ordained such things should be uttered as may (I hope
through his blessing) prove isntrumental for the promoting of some part at
least of that glorious Gospel-Designe of Love toward lapsed Creatures, (which
you will find recorded in the subsequent Relation, and that both in the time
of her extreme weakness, as also since her Restoration and Recovery: and
because God has raised up one, so extraordinarily to declare so much of his
Will unto us; surely God expects that we should more then ordinarily improve
these his dispensations, and the rather, because such Mirabilia Dei are usual
presages of great mutations in the Countries where they are acted; and if men
answer not God in such Providence, he usually gives them up to spiritual
evils, and after that to temporal Desolations. May not Germany, Scotland,
Ireland acknowledge this with tears in their eyes? that they have not walked
worthy of the glorious appearances of God amongst them; and may not England
subscribe the same confession in letters written (as Draco's Laws were) with
their own Blood? Has not God showed signs and wonders in all these Nations?
And are not spiritual Judgments as gray hairs, Hosea 7. 9.
visibly here and there upon us? and is it not observable, that the Jews
before their being given up to utter Desolation, enjoyed the highest
dispensations that ever? when a people are lifted up to Heaven (as Capernaum
was) with Gospel-priviledges, and yet have much of hell in their practices; the
next news we hear of them will be, that they are brought down to Hell by Gods
Judicial Providence.

The extraordinary works of Gods mercies being abused, make way for
extraordinary Judgments.

But I wish and hope that others, but especially you my dear Friends and
relations, who have been eye and ear-witnesses of these rare actings of
Providence, and whose hearts have been so much affectd therewith) will wisely
consider the Lords doings, and lay them upon your hearts, until your hearts be
warmed therewith, and your lives conformed accordingly.

This Child being acquainted with some intentions of some of her Friends to
print her Speeches, answered, I wish they may aim at a right end, a most
seasonable Item; and if we do not endeavor to have them first printed in our
hearts, and to publish them in our lives, we shall give but a poor account of
the publication of them to the world.

If the World must know (as we do judge that fit, that such a light should not
be set under a bushel) what God has done for us: I beseech you, let us carry
it so as the World may know (to our joy and not grief) what we do for God.

Oh let us take heed to our spirits, Mal. 2. 15.
that we do not with these sweet flowers of mercies, as children with their
Nosegayes, smell at them and delight in them for a short time, and then cast
them away. God has done wonderful things for us; Oh that it might appear, he
has wrought wonderful things in us! His wonderful works do declare his Name
is near to us; let our works declare that his Name, his Service, Word, Worship,
and all his Institutions and Commands are dear to us. If God walk in the
midst of us, then we should be exactly careful, that no unclean thing be
found in us. Deuteronomy. 23. 12, 13, 14*
It did much aggravat^ Solomon's defections from the Lord, that they were acted
after God had appeared to him twice; 1 King. 11. 12.
God has not appeared once or twice, but many times, and in sundry manners,
and particularly in this Providence, (much of God appearing in her every time
she spoke) how great will our sin be, if after God had given us such a
deliverance, Ezra 9. 13, 14.
nay so many mercies in the womb of this, we should again break his Commands,
grow loose and mindlesse of God, and forsake his Ordinances, and ways, (as
many do?)

Gods Works in this instance declare his Name to be near, and that exclusively,
by way of exclusion of all other names; and David might mean so much in that
phrase that his Name and the names of all his gallant and Heroic Commanders
were to be excluded, that Gods Name might not be obseured; God did all in this
business, and therefore it is fit that he alone should be exalted. Oh let us
give him that little, all we have: let us strive to exalt him, he may be higher
in our hearts, (though not in himself) and the rather, because these
Providencies have fruitfully administered varieties of advantages for the
raising up of our spirits in the exaltation of Gods glorious Name. May not the
parents of this child say with ^onderment, God raised up one out of David's
House, 2 Samuel 12. 11. who attempted to deprive him of his earthly Kingdom; but
God has raised one out of our Family, who may be isntrumental to further our
enjoyment of an heavenly Kingdom. They (I know) desire that others would help
them in endeavoring to render according to the mercies received, and how
should they or others improve such dispensations, but by laboring to act faith
at a higher rate, then we have done? Faith has two legs, whereby it comes to
Christ, (and it is called a coming to Christ, John 6. 35.) submission and
closing; in such mix^ providence as these (where God checkers his
dispensations, working Checker-work,) there will be much use of a submitting
frame of heart, to submit our selves, children and all to the Will of the
Father of our spirits, Heb. 12. 9. and we should improve this Providence (in
raising up this Child) by faith, for the raising up of the Church from under
all her Convulsions and prevailing diseases; many other ways we should improve
such Works of God, but I have already exceeded the bounds of an Epistle.

I shall only urge you and my self to suck that sweet breast of the promise,
Psalm 50. 15. you have prayed, God has delivered, and now he expects to be
glorified, and he promises, you shall glorify me: Can then our unbelief, our
dead, sluggish, fickle, unconstant and forgetful heart hinder it? if God say,
thou shall, who has resisted his Will? Oh then lie at the pool of this
promise, until your unbelieving, unthankful hearts be healed. Lie at this
beautiful gate, until you receive an alms, and a word Come, that shall raise
up your Spirits, that you may walk, and leap, and praise the Lord. Let me
entreat you to review this Childs Speeches, but especially to eye God in all
his providentiall actings toward her, until your hearts be raised to exalt
the glorious Lord in all those Attributes, which shine forth in this Scene of
his Actings; Eye them for the strengthening of your faith, to trust God in all
your straits, to submit to God when he is pleased to press you down with the
left hand of afflictions, whilst he writes a fairer copy of his Law in your
hearts, with the right hand of his holy Spirits powerful^ visitations; Psalm.
75. 1.
eye them that you may learn to love Jesus Christ with more sincerity, and to
use the world more cautelously, lest it use (nay ride) you (as others) with
great cruelty: Cor. 7. 31
eye them, that so you may learn to sanctify God in your hearts, who has
diseases and cures at his command; who gives the opening of the mouth, and
causes the tongue of the dumb to sing, Ezekiel. 29. 21.
and the tongue of the stammerers to speak plainly, Isai. 32. 4.
and confirms the feeble knees (all which and more he has done for this
Child: Isai. 35. 3.
) eye them also, that your hearts may be brought in love with, and confirmed in
your love to the precious (and yet o sad, despised) Ordinances and Institutions
of Jesus Christ, the King of his Church, (which God has opened a Child's mouth
to plead for;) And if you may gather such sweet fruits as these from off the
Branches of these providentiall actings of our wise God. I shall sit under the
Tree rejoicing, that God has made me Isntrumental to call you forth to so
good an employment, and subjoyn my self,

Yours, (Through Grace,) James Fisher.
Sheffeild, January 20. 1652/3.
To the godly, conscientious READER.
IT is thy privilege for soul-advantage that thou live amongst Sermons, and
it is a choice mercy in the Saints Count-book that now when so many bid
Preaching depart, and Ordinances depart, and Duties depart; yet still the Lord
is not wanting to appear (in some kind or other) owning his appointments. Yea,
thou may observe Jesus Christ to be so desirous of thy Company, that he
leaves no means unattempted to win thy soul to God; for the dear love of Jesus
Christ seems to flow and break over the banks of ordinary means, that so it may
encompass thy heart, and fetch thee wholly into the Father. Now surely,
Christian, thou will confess, that it is a barren soul indeed whom the
over-flowings of Christ's love will not make fruitful. Believe it, Gods unwonted
layings out of Love are not answered with stinted and wonted layings out of
obedience. Great cost and little incomes is unprofitable trading. When the Lord
help^ us to receipts, we had need beg hard that h^ would help us with returns;
for questionles^ God expects those should be Commemoration-dayes whereon his
Saints have their exceedings of Love: it is certain, Christians, when Jesus
Christ steps out of his high-road, he has some special business then with
Sinners. Now, thou to whom this Book shall come, the Lord (thou see) has
stepped aside to speak with thee, take heed how thou refusest to hear the
voice that speaks from Heaven. Christ sees that Word-preaching will not serve,
and therefore he sends thee both Word and Work-preaching, and all that he may
make thee Eternally blessed. Oh do thou not still go about to frustrate Christ's
endeavors, in his work of winning thy poor soul; 't may be thou have long
stopped thine Ears to his Words, but what will thou stop thine Eyes to his
Works too? Oh look to this young Divine, to this Child-Preacher, or rather to
the Lord in this Childe-Preacher; and if thou can not spell Christ's meaning
by his words, yet put together Words and Works, and thou shall soon see what
they make; if thou can not know Christ by his ordinary appearings, yet, oh
learn to know him by his Extraordinary; for truly it is a brutish thing to bury
Christ in his own works.

Look, Christian! Here thou may see a (...) burning and yet not consumed,
yea a ^^sh burning, and yet blossoming. Natural (...) preserved, when natural
means of preser^^tion were denied; but indeed a few loaves ^^ll feed five
thousand, when Christ has the ^^oking of them. God can make a little of (...)
cr^eature go far, when he makes it up ^^th a great deal of Christ; for we
see, though (...) Commons were shorter then Daniels, yet (...) find her very
well-liking: think therefor at what Ordinary or rather Extraordinary ^ath she
dieted; surely she had food, we ^new not off. Well might she live who fed so
^lenteously on life it self; and certainly that ^ife of hers was a happy life,
which dwelt so ^eer the life of happiness. We did not know ^hy the life of
nature should be continued, except it were that the life of grace might be
prolonged; but this we found, that the continuance of her life was a continued
Sermon, and did preach forth the wonderful power and love of Jesus Christ; as
if she had learnt a new and holy Art of living poor souls to God; or as if
Faith were to come by seeing. Gracious Child! who for her age might be a
Learner, and yet is made so learned a Teacher, who so sweetly takes Christ for
her text truth for her Doctrine, and Holiness for her Use. Surely 't was he who
at 12 years old was found in the Temple, Luke 2. 46.
sitting amongst the Doctors, hearing of them, and asking of them Questions.
'twas he (I say) who has ranked this Twelve years-old Child amongst the
Doctors of our Israel. 'Twas he that made her Sermons, she only did but preach
them: For her Speech bewrayed she had been with Jesus. Oh what gracious words
she uttered! nothing but honey dropped from her mouth, and that such honey as
tasted much of the spiritual Canaan. And indeed, Christian, none can speak so
heavenlily, none so healingly, none so sweetly, none so feelingly, as those
that have much of God speaking in them. The Sentences she uttered are in this
Book recorded. And now can thou read, and not wonder; wonder, and not desire
to read? And yet the manner of her speaking added Emphasis to the things she
spoke. Her eyes were fixed, as if she saw Christ; her countenance cheerful, as
if she embraced Christ; her lips smiling, as if she kissed Christ; yea, her
arms sometimes sweetly clasping, as if with Simeon she had got an arm-ful of
Christ.

What think you meant her soul, whilst her body used such an action? Oh what
happiness for a poor soul to lose it self in the All-fulnesse of Christ!
truly, these things made us all cry out, Luke 1. 66
What manner of Child shall this be? But oh see the wonderful workings of our
God. He has let her come down into this lower room again. God seemed to take
her out of the crowd into his Chambers up above, where he sweetly whispered his
mind unto her; and now he has sent her back again, that she may live over her
own Sermons. And yet so was God taken with her company, that he would not let
her come down again, till his Children had petitioned again and again for her.
And then the more to endear his mercy to us, he sends her down in the Arms of
Prayer. So that now we find this truth in our own experiences: That a
Christian reaches highest when he is on his knees. I might speak much more of
her, but I had rather commend grace the^ gracious persons. Oh let this (I
beseech thee) with the other soulhelps Christ affords thee, prevail with thee
to be good in good earnest: it is not leaves or bloomes that Christ looks for
now, but fruit. I confess indeed, the Winter of Religion seems to be past,
wherein both bloomes and fruit, Profession and Practice was nipped and
suppressed: and now is the Spring, wherein most men are fair in bloom, which
gives me hopes that the Lord is bringing about a time, when holy lips and holy
lives, heavenly Communication, and heavenly Conversation shall meet together;
so that flourishing Professors will prove fruitful Practicers. Oh! be not thou
one, who shall keep off such hoped-for times as these: think how thou will
answer all Gods costs about thee. And if thou be he that must be called in to
give an account for every word thou speak; o then what account will thou
give for every word that God speaks to thee? Thou that have such heavenly
Doctrine, o take heed of earthly Use: heart-warning exhortations, and
heart-cooling conversations are fearful and incongruous sights. I confess, if
I did not in some measure know the Unteachablenesse of a corrupt heart, I
should conclude, that Non-profiting by such wonders as these, is the greatest
wonder of all. Well, Christian! thou have a Providence here thrown into thy
lap, o improve it, and be not befooled with fleshly wisdom, but o mind thy
work, drive on thy souls trade. And if thou have an Interest in God, know thus
much, that this Child has an interest in thee; when therefore thou ^oest to
improve thy interest at the Throne, forget not Her, nor Him, who is

Finningley, Jan. 25. 1652. Joyful in this and all other thy Soul-helps, John
Firth.

To the READER, Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
THe voice of Providence (Christian friend, for such I suppose thee, and
unprejudiced I wish thee) is never to be neglected, especially when it is
understood according to the Analogy of faith. Indeed, providentiall
administrations are not to be forced: as it seems to me over-bold, if not an
impious act, to judge always according to the outward face of dispensations,
to make providence point out what we effect (as * he judged of the Scriptures)
even to speak our prejudiced and partial thoughts: Scriptura ^asus cereus and
plum^ea ^es^iae aedificationis ^egula. Pighiu^ ex Exam. Chem. in ^ecrel. 1.
Council. Trident. ^ess 4.
^ Psalm. Z^ph. 3. 5
107 43. Psalm. 111. 2
so it is over-Atheist-like to let the righteous God be every day in the City,
John 20. 25.
and yet none to read any thing. Life of ^he hand* ^sai. 57. 10.
The Works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein. Whosoever is wise will observe these things, and he shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

There are a sort of men in these last and worst of days, that will believe
nothing but what themselves behold, and slight all ( Thomas-like) that
themselves have not a finger in. To get these above life of sense is not in my
capacity, though it may be in my aim. I do acknowledge my obscure testimony
far below such atchievments. The sword of the Lord and Gideon undertake them.
Yet, why may not a broken pitcher give some light, and that sudden light
disperse the Amalekites? though I can find nothing in my self (my witness is
in heaven) why I should be in public; for been vixit, qui been latuit; yet I
dare not resist that voice that calls me to bear witness to Gods workings, who
has so signally owned his now despised Ministry, and slighted Ordinances,
speaking withal peace to a tossed and afflicted family. That never misled
spirit (that shall peruse the ensuing wonders) may any more despise; or
drooping poor soul (that shall hear how God remembered such an one in her low
Psalm. 136 23.
estate, and heard the prayers of such nothing creatures) may any more despair.

The Subject of the ensuing wonder is Mrs. Martha Hatfeild, a branch of a
Family of good Note in the West of Yorkshire, as to externals, having wherein
they might glory. But (which is their glory) their great prerogative is not
here, not in this World; that they are been nati, is an empty bubble, in
respect of being been renati; this is their (...), John 1. 12. (...) etc.
their privilege that they are sons and daughters of God. This Family (as God
uses to deal with Heb. 12. 6
them he loves) the wise God was pleased to keep in a low and dark condition,
without were fightings within were fears: 2 Cor. 7. 5, 6.
but God, who comfort such as are cast down, comforted them in this
Infant-preacher, much of whose discourse was an earnest pressing unto faith.
When her sorrowing parents and astonished friends were (as it were) at their
wits end in relation to her sad condition, even then she wished them frequently
to roll upon upon God, who would bring them to their desired Psalm. 107. 30.
haven, to their expected end. Oh let us labor for faith, (said she) In
ecstasy of November. 9. Revel. 2.
for He that is faithful unto death, shall receive the crown of life. And in
relation to their affliction (she said) In the ^ame ecstasy.
Satan is always malicing and perplexing the Children of God to make their
journey uncomfortable, thinking that if he get not victory then, he shall never
get victory; but my Christ has vanquished Satan. This handmaid of the Lord
(Reader, to give thee a taste of her) was piously principled even from her
Cradle, the Spirit blossoming in her in the very Spring of her age. Even while
she spelled words and syllables, she spel'd out Christ; for if she met with a
free promise, or some good sentence, holding out Gods love to man, she would
say, Mother, this is a sweet place, and usually read it over again. Yet, though
she thus grew in the inward, 2 Cor. 4. 16.
her outward man was weakened and decayed, till the twelfth year of her age,
the year of these wonderful transactions betwixt God and her spirit, as if
that year Christ would again honor now in this member of his, (to confute such
as would be thought somebody in these days) as once in his own person he
silenced those Doctors of the Jewish Synagogue. Luk 22. 42, 46.
In this eleventh year, viz. April 1652. her bodily disease increased; so did
her love to heavenly things also; for even those toys which that age delights
in, she desired not so much as ^o hear named by her sisters; setting her
thoughts upon, and inuring her tongue to speak of those things above, where
shortly she expected to arrive. At last, the disease over-mastered her
strength, seized upon the Organes of her senses, so that she could neither
speak, see, nor hear, (to the apprehen^ion of any about her) she could not move
^ut as she was born by others, and much of this time her teeth was so closed,
that she was not capable of receiving food, only some liquid matter they
dropped in at a broken tooth, and this very little, she putting it out so fast
as it was given her; thus lay she diverse months, even until December, an
object of sorrow to her parents, and of astonishment to all others, capable
only of their pity, not of their help; but a mirror of the mighty power of
God, proving by this argument, that Luke 4. 4.
Man lives not by bread alone; it is not the arm of flesh that is to be
confided in; Jer. 17. 5.
but he that knows our infirmities, is only able both to help and heal them.

During this continued Paroxysme, she had very frequently (sometimes every day)
certain grand ecstasies, whereby (after that her body had been racked on the
wheel of convulsion) it became as stiff and expanse as that body which is
seized on by death and coldness. In which ecstasies God did to astonishment
appear. For now flowed those streams of living waters, those precious, divine
sentences contained in the ensuing pages: which thou tasting, with the Organes
of the same Spirit they were delivered, thou can but admire.

Look on the person, a child going on twelve years, and can but confess
that out of the mouth of a babe and suckling God has perfected Psalm. 8. 2.
praise. Look at the condition wherein she uttered these, in a deep ^ance; and
do not see it fulfilled, that the tongue of the dumb shall sing. Jer. 35. 5.
6.
Look at the things she spoke, are they not deep things of 1 Cor. 2. 10.
God? is there heresy or error intermingled? Could thou discern the manner
of her expressions, the vivacity of spirit, how the words drop from a touched,
experienced, self-concerned heart; thou would say, as the Queen of Sheba 1
Kings 10. 7.
said of Solomon, The half was not told thee. Look at the suitableness of the
things spoken, and thou'st confess, they came not by the will of man, but this
holy one of God spoke as she was moved, (...), 2 Pet. 1. ult.
(borne, supported, and carried out) by the holy Spirit. Concerning this last
cir^umstance, when some rashly affirmed, that ^e was acted by Satan, they
judging accor^^ng to carnal reason; at the next ecstasy which was the only
time of her speaking) ^he uttered thus, I am not in the hands of ^atan, but in
the hands of my God: when ^ome pretenders to Revelations, (as these ^mes are
full of such) visited her, at that very time, she was carried out to say, Job
4. 8.
Take ^eed you sow not tares; for if you sow tares, you shall reap tares: and
afterward fully witnessed against them thus: Take hee^ you de^ise not Gods
Ordinances, nor his Instruments that he has sent to preach his Word. God will
let you go on with your delusions for a time, but there will come a day of
Judgment to try whether you be right or false; and In ecstasy, October. 9
again, Lord restrain those that go about to interrupt those Instruments which
thou have sent to preach out thy holy Word in thy Congregations; it is
requisite, that offenses should come, but woe to them by whom they come. In
ecstasy, Nov. 1. Luke 17. 1
November the ninth being purposed ^or a day of seeking God by fasting and
prayer, the night before she encouraged them that were about her, In ecstasy,
Nov. 8. Psalm 50. 15
with that of the Psalmist, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And the night after the work was
done, she admonished them In ecstasy of November. 9.
thus Oh let us call to mind what the Lord has done for us, Jam. 1. 24
and not be like the natural man that looks his face in a Glass, an^
presently forgets what manner of man he was.

Thus God by this his handmaid opposed profane scoffers, cautioned misled
creatures, and bare witness to the excellency and necessity of the now
slighted Ordinances and Ministry.

Reader, here thou may a while behold (as it were) a conflict in her godly
parents betwixt joy and grief; their tears issued not all from the same
Fountain; the one eye was swollen with drops of gladness, the other of sorrow:
while they beheld the deep trials of God upon them, their lips quivered, Hab.
3. 16
rottenness entered into their bones, they trembled in themselves: but when
again they beheld, how Isai. 34. 11.
God laid their tossed and afflicted, with fair colors checkered his work,
paved his steps with black and white marble; then again they are comforted.
Petru^ Te^orius Archbishop (...) Toledo.
As that Popish Bishop, when not able to determine, whether Solomon were a
child of wrath or love, caused his Effigies to be drawn, half in heaven, half
in hell; so they judge their affairs ^o resemble that Cloud, which ushered the
^sraelites to the land of Promise; it had a ^ark side as well as a bright.
Exodus 14 20.
Thus God ^olds them till the time came that he would command deliverances for
them; Psalm. 44. 4.
then he put them on a way to attain this and, not by might, nor by power;
Zach. 4. 6
not wis^ome of men, nor outward means of Physic, but that grace might be
advanced; ^o send for the Elders of the Church and ^et them pray over the
afflicted; which was done Zach. 12. 10.
in the spirit of grace and supplication: and after twice wrestling with God in
fasting and prayer, he was pleased to be entreated. And as gloriously admirable
was Gods hand in raising her up, as in casting her down; for in the close of
the second days work, that God might manifest himself to be a God hearing
prayer, Psalm. 65. 1.
and that creatures in their lowest condition might never more despond, he
showed some glimmerings of his gracious favor, and within a few days gave to
her understanding, senses, speech, the use of her legs, and since a daily
income of health and strength, and which is better then life, suffered not
these high actings of his Spirit to be an occasion of puffing her up, but kept
her in a gracious humble depend in^ frame of spirit; for being informed wha^
she had said, she replied thus in her childis^ speech, December. 8 the first time
she spoke out of an ecstasy.
Have I? me cannot tell, I can (...) nothing of my self, it was not me, it was
the Spirit of God in me; I am nothing but poor earth-worm, and me has nothing
bu^ what my God gives me; for me is nothin^ but dust and ashes. Again, some
two (...) three days before God gave her the use (...) her legs, her father
desiring to neglect n^ lawful means, wished one to signify hi^ pleasure to
her, that he had thoughts o^ procuring a Physicians advice concerning her;
whereto she sweetly answered, she would be disposed by her parents will, bu^
her desire was to wait Gods end, she could wish no Physician might partake of
any glory with God; for he alone had done the cure, he alone deserved the
praise.

Thus (Reader) have thou a true Narrative of that which seems mavelous in our
eyes: the Lord remove from thy heart all self and prejudice, make thee willing
to give God the glory of his own workings; slubber not over this passage of
divine Providence with careless or profane thoughts; eye God, learn to live by
faith, and despise not Ordinances, which God has from heaven in this occasion
borne witness to. I have purposely avoided all frothie flourishes of the
tongue, lest the truth should be suspected; for I would win thy heart, not thy
senses; not words, but things take wise men: of whose number, if thou would
be thought one, judge soberly, and the end is obtained By

The unworthiest, yet a faithful Welwisher to thy precicious Soul. Wa. Barnard
Church-Sandal, January 28. 1652.
THE NARRATIVE, Wherein is related how this Child was visited, and the manner
of her Disease, when she did utter those Heaven born Truths herewith published.
THis Child who has been the subject of such wonders of Providence, is the
daughter of Master Anthony and Mistress Faith Hatfield of Leighton in the
West Riding of Yorkshire; her name is Martha Hatfield: she was complete twelve
years old the 27 day of September, in the year of our Lord 1652. She has been
from her birth a child of wonders, being so little when she was brought out of
her mothers womb; that it wa^ thought she would speedily have returned (...)
the common womb, where all living mu^ ere long be laid up. But God who
quicknet^ the dead, who is the preserver of man, cont^tinued her life, and she
grew up very hope^fully, as a plant of Gods own planting, ye^ some years before
this visitation, she was observed to be of a sad spirit, often retiring into
corners, and weeping for a long time, and could not then render any reason
thereof* but it evidently appeared afterward, that she was much afflicted with
the spleen-winde* which increased (notwithstanding the use of means) to greater
extremity.

But before I proceed, I must desire the Reader not to expect an exact Relation
of her Disease in physical terms of art; because it pleased the all-wise
Disposer of all occurrences so to order the spirit of the child, and his own
dealings toward her, (as you may see anon) that no means could be used toward
her recovery, and so no Physicians did stay with her to observe the symptoms
of her disease; so that it is but conjectural what it was; it is thought the
rigid convulsions, (...).
or rather that it was a complicated disease of many of those distempers which
affect the brain; but I shall give it you in our Country Dialect, as those
that were usually with ^er did apprehend it.

I shall observe this Method: 1 I shall speak of her disease. 2 Relate her
speeches. 3 The manner of her recovery.


1 Her Disease.
The Spleen-winde (after some time) did ^row to that extremity, that she could
not ^igest her meat, but vomited up all that she ^ook, which yet was but a
small quantity for (...) long time; after which she was taken all of one side,
beginning at her neck, which ^aused her to hold her head awry; and from ^hence
it went into her arm, and took away ^he use of it for many days, and when her
^arm was better, it fell into her leg on the same side, and continued there
until she fell quite down, which was after this manner. She had extraordinary
fits of violent vomiting, and after that Convulsions, which occasioned extreme
torments, especially in the night, and so she continued (sometimes better,
sometimes worse) for many days, sorely troubled with a stopping, etc.

In which time she had the use of her understanding, and could speak, and with
many sweet words was able to exhort her parents to trust in God. Saying, If we
had but faith, it would carry us thorough all the tro^bles of this world.

Then about April the sixth, 1652, (...) perceived such a change in her, April
6, 1652.
that (...) thought she would die presently, and she (...) into a fit of
extreme pain in her side, which took away her breath, and her senses for (...)
hours; and she was stricken all over stiff, (...) which time she lay (as if
dead) hopeless (...) life in the judgments of those who behe^^ her. Yet about
the third hour she was enabled with great alacrity to express the joy^ of
Heaven, and sweetly prayed for hersel^ and all her relations, as she conceived
their necessities required.

First, Her Prayer.
for her father thy serva^t, the head of the family, Lord, give him faith in
Jesus Christ to lay hold upon thee, and give him patienc^ to be contented with
thy will; and for ou^ mother who has been so long weak, Lord, restore her, and
make her a comfort to us all, and teach her to submit to thy will; and for my
Grandmother that old stock, that old stock, that thou have made such a comfort
to us, good Lord, we thank thee for her, and if I live, I desire to be thankful
for her. And for our brother who is to be disposed of, good Lord, direct the
heart of thy servant our father to dispose of him as may be most (...) thy
glory, and for the good of his soul ^d body.

Good Lord, bless our sister who has ta^n so great pains with my mother and
me; ^d our other little brother, Lord, make him ^ine, and guide him in all his
ways in his ^ung-yeers, that his soul may be precious in ^y sight; and my
other sister the Lord ^ve her grace. And that other little sister, ^ood Lord,
take away that infirmity from her ^ye, if it be thy will. And for that sister
whom ^hou have disposed of in marriage, the Lord ^less that family, and give
them more and more of thy Spirit to guide them in thy ways; and, Lord, give
him a Spirit of prayer, ^ut let us not make haste, for thy time is the best.
And for that little branch, Lord, as it grows in days and years, grant that it
may grow in grace, and walk in thy way. And for that godly sweet servant of
thine * (that prayed so heartily for me the last night) the Lord bless him; Her
Uncle, ^ap. Hatfield
and, Lord, bless thy servant, who is gone to use means for her health, and
bless the means, for without thy bessing nothing can profit; and, Lord, if it
be for thy glory bring them together, and if not, make them contented to yield
to thy will. Good Lord, bless all our Family, and make them thine* and teach
all our friends to walk in thy ways.

When she began this prayer, Note.
all about her were so amazed with the suddenness of it, that they could not
(for the joy and astonishment wherewith their spirits were filled) observe each
passage so exactly as is desired they had done, so that many of her expressions
are lost; but these things set down are (as near as they that were present
could recall to their thoughts) related and written down in her own very words.

After this prayer her head fell, and she was as in a trance, and as she past
into it she said, The Lord be with you all, I am now going to Heaven, where I
hope one day you will come to me. And when she was come forth of that trance,
in which they thought she would have died, she was exceedingly rapt up with joy
(which perhaps was the Heaven she spoke of, that she was going to) laughing,
and spreading her arms, and clasping them close to her, that they could not be
opened; but presently she opened them, and expressed herself in these words.

I have found my Christ, o, I have found my Christ, how sweet is he to me!

After this fit of joy, Conflict.
she fell into a sore conflict with Satan, and opening her arms which were
clasped with hugging her sweet Christ unto her, she struck so vehemently as
(...) she had more then ordinary strength, and ^prest her self in these words.

Away, away, away Satan, with a stern ^untenance (which was a great change in
her ^^ce, which was so amiable before in her re^oycing of it) and so she
continued for some ^^me, and then the Lord was pleased to give ^er comfort
again.

And then she laughed, Comfort.
and rejoiced much more then before, and spread her arms, and ^lasped them
close again, and said; O, my Christ is come again, my Christ is come again;
(...) shall vanquish Satan, and cast him behind me.

Then she fell again into another conflict, Conflict.
with striking as before, but never spoke in a conflict; but the conflict being
over, she spoke, and laughed, and behaved her self in the like manner as before.

O, Comfort.
now my sweet Christ is come again, he is come again, and has destroyed my
spiritual enemy, who would have destroyed my soul. O labor for Christ, and
that the Name of Christ may be written upon all your hearts with letters of
gold.

Thus one time with comforts, and at other times with conflicts, she continued
the greatest part of one night (which they that were present thought, was about
the several times that night, but they were all so astonishe^ both with the
matter and manner, that the could not certainly relate how many of tho^
conflicts and comfortable fits she had; ne^^ther indeed (as they acknowledge)
are the^ able to relate the manner thereof, as it wa^ made known unto them.

After this about 17 days, Until April 23
she lay stiff and never spoke all that time, and it pleased the Lord so to
order her disease, that she came to her self twice a day: viz. at twelve a
clock a^ noonday, and six at night, and then she did understand herself, but
could not speak, and to these times she kept constantly for about 17 days, and
then she would make signs to wash her mouth with small beer or water, they not
knowing what she would have, but she could manifest dislike of what was
offered; if it was not that which she desired; she took no food all this time,
but only washed her mouth (as was said) twice a day.

About this time coming to herself, April 23
she fell into great extremity of vomiting for two days, and that which she
vomited was like gall or soot, and blood, and by times continued in that
extremity for seven or eight days, and was carried about in the arms of one or
other, or sat on their knees having little rest, save some short Dormes; she
spoke ^uch, and uttered many sweet expressions.

Many times being desired to take some ^od, she answered; I would take food if
God would give me leave, but I cannot, I cannot; and when they would do any
thing about her (if it might be) to give her some ^ase, she would say, Alas,
here is no ease ^ere, O that you will not suffer a poor crea^ure to have some
ease! there is no comfort ^o be had here, but there is ease in Heaven.

At another time, she said, O Lord, some ^ase for a poor distressed creature;
Lord, for ^hy Son Christ his sake.

Again, Where Is my father and my mother, that they may pray for me? I had a
father and a mother, and brethren and sisters.

Again, she was much troubled, and said, What a naughty, naughty Lass was I, to
be so impatient? but now I have more pain, and the Lord has given me more
patience; now I can say with David, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. Good? It is good indeed, for my father has got good, and my mother
has got good, and I have got good, and God has got glory. I would not have
been without this affliction for any thing; this is a good affliction indeed.

Her sister Hannah speaking to her, Must these little pretty hands go into the
grave, and rot in the dust? I (said she) what should they do else? poor sinful
corrupt flesh.

Her father asking her, Child art not hungry, thou have eaten nothing of a
long time? She said, I hunger for nothing but Christ, I am very hungry after
him, I would very fain^ have him.

Then he asked her if she would drink? she said, I am very thirsty for Christ.

They were speaking to her of a Physician, but she said, My comfort is in
Christ; I pray you trouble me not with the Physician. But speaking to her
father; she said, Will you not? I beg of you that I may have no other Physician;
Jesus Christ will be my Physician: for my grave is better for me then to be
here.

Again, Lord reveal unto me what is the cause of this affliction, what sin it
is that lies unrepented of; sins of omission, or commission, or what sins
soever they are; Lord, reveal them to me, and pardon them all, and give me
repentance for them; with many such words which are not remembered.

Again, O Lord, I beseech thee, look upon me with pity and compassion; Lord,
do not forget me, but think upon me.

Again, Oh my sin is the cause of it; Oh teach me to say as David, It is good
for me that I have been afflicted.

Again, Good Lord, look upon me with ^tty and compassion, and enable me to bear
^y hand; Lord, mitigate these pains which ^e upon me; Lord, pardon all my sins,
and ^emove all these afflictions, which are upon ^^y body, if it seem good in
thine eyes.

Again, The Lord has in mercy looked on (...) in his pity and compassion; I
hope I shall ^ot be from my Christ long: Come, Lord Je^us; O come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly.

Then she comforted her self with Jobs ^ase, that though he sat on the
dunghill, ^craping his sores with a potsheard, and though God gave Satan power
over his body, yet not over his soul, and though his wife tempted him to curse
God, (what a wicked woman was that? what a wicked woman was that? said she) yet
his soul was precious in Gods sight.

Then musing with herself, she uttered herself thus by way of Question: Why did
God create man? for his glory.

Quest. Why does he afflict his children? for their good.

Quest. Why should we desire to die when we are in afflictions? seeing the
grave praises him not, and seeing it is for Gods glory to live?

Again, she said; Come to me, all ye children, and I will gather you as a Hen
gathers her Chickens: and you shall sing Halleluiahs in Heaven with Christ,
and all his holy Angels.

Again, Happy are they who appear for Christ, for they shall appear with him in
glory.

Again, at another time she said, that nobody knew what troubles she had gone
thorough (in reading the Word and Prayer) by reason of evil and wicked
thoughts, and that she was glad sometimes to leave off reading, and to go to
prayer, and said, I have sought to God many times with tears (which nobody
knew of) to help me against unprofitable thoughts, but now she had got the
victory thorough Christ: and then she laughed.

This (I conceive) was the cause of those sad fits of weeping (whereof I made
mention before) of which she could not, Note.
or at least Satan would not suffer her to give any account.

These and many other sweet expressions fell from her in those seven or eight
days, which yet are forgotten, none thinking then to have presented this story
to public view; and whether these things be related in the order they were
uttered, I Will not affirm, but this I may say, they are set down as near as
could be in her own words, without any additions, and this many credible
witnesses will testify.

And that you may be induced the rather ^o credit this, be pleased to take this
character of this child, that before this extreme weak^ess fell upon her, she
was observed to be very frequent in private Prayer; and her mo^her being
exercised with long weakness, she would read by her out of such good books ^s
there were in the house: and her mother observed that she would read with much
affection, Ball of Faith. Buroughs Treatises, etc.
so that her mother thought, and said she hoped that her heart was taken with
the things which she did read; the child would say (Mother forsooth) is not
this a good sentence (if you please) I will read it over again: she was noted
to be a very loving, tenderhearted, and affectionate child to all; and
especially she manifested it in many pregnant expressions to her mother in her
sickness.

After this, May 1.
May the first or second, she was freed from that extremity of pain, her
disease much varying, and she was stricken all over stiff, all her parts being
extended, as if stretched forth, and if any one lifted up her arm higher or
lower, there it would fix where they set it; and so buckle any joint of her
hand, and it would stand as it was set, and thus she continued for 17 days,
Until May 19*
and never spoke word, neither did she take any thing, but they washed her mouth
with beer or water several times in a day.

It was noted, that when any did speak to her concerning any thing of the
World, or of any particulars (which as a child) she had delighted in, she
would then show discontent; but if they discoursed of heavenly matters, then
she showed no signs of discontent, but seemed to give attention.

Then her Convulsion fits were grown to greater extremity, May 19. 1652.
the disease working with strange varieties, causing several motions and
postures, and then at sometimes she had those stiff fits or congelations, and
then she did utter those sweet sayings afterward set down; and when she grew
limber, she gave over speaking.

Here I shall briefly note some things, and then set down her speeches.

1 She spoke not but in a stiff fit (or very rarely, and then but a word or
two) and she continued speaking from May the 19, until June the 21, 1652:
beginning usually about eight of the clock at night, and so continued with some
little intermission between every sentence to speak for two hours or more, and
then ceased until the next night about the same time: She did speak some things
in the morning, or sometimes in the afternoon, but so very seldom, and then
she was limber all over, but then there were strange workings of the
Convulsions, twisting her fingers, writhing her neck, drawing her mouth to her
ear.

2 It was observed, that sometimes in those stiff fits wherein she spoke, she
would change her countenance, and look very sadly and frowningly; and it was
conceived by those who beheld her, that then she was under some temptation,
because the next thing she spoke (after such frowning fits) was always
something against Satan that roaring lurking lion, and then she would smile,
and look very cheerfully.

3 The manner of her coming into those stiff fits, was with beatings of her
hands upon her breast, and she had sore Convulsions, and then of a sudden she
had all her parts extended, and then she smiled; and then they knew that she
would speak presently; she lay upon her back, and had the most sweet, amiable,
cheerful countenance that ever I beheld (excepting one or two frowning fits in
a night) all the time of her speaking. She had also rejoicing fits, clasping
her arms, and laughing sometimes, and sometimes she spoke when the Convulsions
drew her mouth awry, and when she spoke, sometimes her speech was lower,
sometimes more audible; always with that vigor, vivacity, and earnestness of
spirit, that it did much affect the hearts of them who heard her; and sometimes
she was so weak that her chaps only moved, but no words could be heard:
further, it was observed that she did always speak very good sense, and when
she mistook, she would go over with the matter again, and make it good
sensebefore she left off.

4 Observe, that when her times of speaking came, there was one who wrote her
words, all helping to remember the very words as she uttered them, and after
they were written down (in the space between her speakings) they were read
over, and every one desired to manifest their assent if they judged the words
to be truly related, and there were usually many present, many strangers
coming daily to hear her, when her speaking times were known, and I do believe
and know, and many will witness, that there was great care taken that her own
words might be set down.

5 From this time until a little before the Lord was pleased to restore her,
it was thought that she neither did see or hear, or know any body, and that she
never minded what was said to her, nor answered to any thing that was spoken to
her.

6 These wonderful providentiall allurances some have sinisterously
interpreted surmizing, nay, some speaking that she was bewitched, possessed,
etc. and that Satan did speak in her, and that it was not her voice, but a
voice in her; to whom God shall give an answer from Heaven in his late dealings
and gracious dispensations toward her.

It was the judgment of a very judicious Physician who was sometimes with her,
that her disease was natural, her speech supernatural.

It Is true, we read in the Scriptures of God, that Satan can transform himself
into an Angel of light, and has spoken sometimes divine matters, and quoted
Scriptures (but corruptly often; De spect^is and l^muribus.
) Satan herein (as Lavater observes) imitates Gamesters, who suffer young
heirs to win to make them more eager of the game; and so engages them till
they have won all. Satan will comply with the tempers, and dispositions of
such as he sees strongly inclined to gracious actings, rowing with the tide of
their inclinations; but he notes also out of Ambrose and Chrysostom, that he
does this, b^t to insinuate into them, and to draw them by these artifices, by
these delightful baits to swallow the hook of evil suggestions and temptations;
but this child never spoke of her temptations, or uttered any of Satan's
language in those her times of speaking, but all her speeches were sweet and
gracious, much of Christ and Faith, and against Satan; and against many Errors
of the present times, both in judgment and practice, but nothing that might
tend to promote Satan's Kingdom, and I cannot think that Satan would have bin a
midwife to help to the birth so many masculine sentences, and highborn
truths, as this child has uttered; such Divisions would much tend to the
destruction of his Kingdom; he would have mingled some of his dross amongst
this pure gold, if he had prevailed so far as to gain any interest in and power
over this child.

7 In this long time of her silence, viz. seventeen days, her friends began to
be much perplexed, fearing God had left her, and many Prayers were sent up that
he would please to open her mouth again, and upon the nineteenth of May, God
having much stirred up her mothers heart to seek that mercy from him; she
coming into the room where the child lay, could scarcely take her seat there,
before the Child began to speak, and the first words which she uttered, and
that with much vivacity of spirit, were these: viz.

I was in darkness, but now I am in light. Which words her dear mother (with
others) who had mourned under the want of that mercy, did take as a most
seasonable answer to their Prayers, and satisfaction to the doubts which
pressed their spirits, and they were much revived with the appearances of God
in this svveet change in the child, who proceeded on to utter those precious
sayings, which now I shall set down in the order as they were spoken, and
taken from her mouth.

Here follows the Childs Speeches.
Which I shall set down, and place over against them such Scriptures as her
words seem to relate to, though I cannot think that she ever had in her
thoughts, or ever read many of those Scripture-phrases which she uttered, but
God did specially help and guide her in her expressions, to the praise of his
glorious grace; in a poor vveak unlikely instrument; which may justify our
practice in publishing these things, we not daring to put such a light under a
bushel; and if you consider that these things were spoken by a child not yet
twelve years of age, and that when she was under such prevailing distempers,
which took away her senses, and knowledge of any friend, and her speech at
all other times, but vvhilest she uttered these things, I hope it will render
the meanest of her speeches no contemptible things.

The Childs Speeches, May the 19th, 1652.
I Was in darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8
but now I am in light.

Labor for Christ, Christ is crept in again, claspe him in your arms, hold him
fast; ^ovv you have obtained Christ, hold him fast.

Away with that roaring lion, 1 Pet 5. 18
chain him up, my God chain him up, Christ is come again; how svveet my Christ
is! how good my God has been to me, to give me Jesus Christ! when you get
Jesus Christ, hold him fast; do not let him go.

My God has spoken a word of comfort; Seek, Matthew. 7. 7
and ye shall find; ask, and ye shall have; knock, and it shall be opened unto
you: he bids me knock, and he will open.

How sweet is Jesus Christ! Cantic. 3. 4
sweeter then gold and money; if you have him, hold him fast; now we have him,
we will not let him go; how sweet my God is! Oh how sweet my God is!

May the 20th.
Oh, what a God have we, that has given Jesus Christ to die for us?

My God has cast me down with his left hand, Psalm. 63. 8.
he upholdeth me with his right hand, but he will raise me up with both.

My Christ is heavier then all this world; weigh all the world and Christ, and
he will weigh all down.

Oh what a glorious God have I, to give me his Christ to save my soul! who
would but trust him? oh trust in him; when all things in the World fail, he
will not fail, he will stick fast to you, trust him, oh trust in him.

Pluck Satan away, 1 John 5. 18.
pluck him away, my God, let him not touch me, let him not enter into my soul.

My Christ is come again, 1 Pet. 2. 34
o, how sweet my Christ is! Oh, how sweet he is! those that feel the sweetness
of Christ, they will trust in him.

Strait is the way to heaven, Matthew. 7. 14.
but my Christ is gone before me, and has opened the gates, he has laid up
treasures for me in Heaven.

My Christ will not fly away from those that trust in him. John 6. 37.


All the World is vanity, there is nothing to take pleasure in, Eccles. 1. 12.
Psalm 9. 10.
but all is vanity and vexa^ion of spirit, but they that know the pleasure and
sweetness of Christ, they will stick close to him: Oh labor to get him by
faith!

Struggle, Oh struggle, let him not go, he is an everlasting good to those that
depend upon him; I desire to depend upon him.

Joy is in Heaven without sorrow, Revel. 21. 4.
and comfort without discomfort, where Christ will wipe away all tears from the
eyes of those that desire to depend upon him.

Learn to know the sweetness of Christ, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Psalm. 125. 1.
for they that love him he will never forsake them, and those that do trust in
him, and live to him, he will never forsake them.

Labor for Christ, trust in him, Oh serve him, and get faith in him.

Labor to trust in Christ, and believe in him; those that know the sweetness
of Christ, will embrace him, and never let him go; and he will embrace them,
and never let them go.

Labor for Christ, that ye may have the joys of Heaven with my sweet Father,
John 17. 24.
and his Angels for ever.

My Christ is come again, Isai. 40. 11
taking me up in his arms to Heaven: Oh, how sweet Christ is, embracing me in
his arms, carrying me in Noah's Ark to Heaven!

Oh, what a sweet Father have I, that does all things in wisdom, for the good
of my poor soul! ^eb. 13. 5.
My God will stick fast to me, he will never forsake me.

Labor to lay up Christ, embrace him in your arms, and when you feel sweetness
from Christ, hold him fast. Oh, what a sweet God have I to rely upon! now that
I have obtained Christ, Act^ 11. 28.
I will stick close to him.

My God does all things in wisdom, he knows what is good for me.

Now my God has pulled back Satan that roaring Lion, and has cast him behind
me: Oh, what a sweet God have I! Oh, how sweet is my Christ, he has laid up
treasures in Heaven for this my soul.

May the 21th.
Whom I love, Revel. 3. 19.
I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and repent.

Why did God create his Children? for his glory. And why does God afflict his
children? for their good.

Come to me, Matthew. 23. 37.
all my children, and I will gather you, as the Hen gathers her Chickens, and
you shall sing Hallelujahs with the holy Angels for ever.

Why should we desire to die when we are in affliction? seeing the grave
praises him not.

Happy are they that appear with Jesus Christ here, for they shall appear with
him in glory.

Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy-laden, Matthew. 11. 28.
and I will give you rest: Oh, come to me, John 7. 37.
( says my God) and drink of my drink, and thou shall never thirst: Oh labor
for Christ.

All things I count but dung in comparison of Christ. Phil. 3. 8.


Get faith in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17.
and that will draw you nigh to God, and not draw you back from him.

Call upon me in the time of trouble, Psalm. 50. 15
and I will hear you.

What a sweet Father have I to give me Jesus Christ? who can be thankful? Can I
be thankful? enough?

Pardon, and forgive me all my sins, oh let not that roaring Lion get power
over me, pluck him back.

Cleave to Jesus Christ, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Isai. 26. 4. Heb. 13. 5
trust in Jesus Christ, and he will never forsake you; stick fast to Jesus
Christ, rely upon him; when all comforts fail in this World, he will never
fail; therefore stick close to him.

Get grounded in Grace, and pray to Jesus Christ; never forsake him, and he
will never forsake you.

Labor for Jesus Christ, and if you get him, what is all the whole World? if
ye be poor in this World, ye are rich in Jesus Christ.

If we could but get into Heaven, there is comfort without discomfort, joy
without sorrow, where God will wipe away all tears: Oh, how happy are they that
enjoy Christ! to them that enjoy him, he will make way for them; therefore
labor to get Jesus Christ, and serve him, John 14. 2, 3.
and he will save you both from the dangers in this World, and in that which is
to come.

May the 22.
Labor for Jesus Christ, and to get faith in him and for the life of faith in
Cbrist. Gal. 2. 10.
Lord, give us the light of Heaven, that we may see Jesus Christ with our
spiritual eyes, for we cannot behold him with our mortal eyes.

Labor for the life of Grace, that we may behold the glorious God of Heaven;
when all the light of our mortal eyes is gone, still there is light in Jesus
Christ.

Come unto me, poor soul, and follow me, take up my cross, Matthew. 16. 24.
and I will be thy Savior.

Take heed of despising God, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
for fear that his wrath be poured out upon you.

If once we have obtained Christ, there will be no cause of mourning, but of
singing and rejoicing, we shall then have no cause of mourning.

Come unto me, Matthew. 11. 28.
all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you. Oh, what a sweet God is this?

Oh save me and defend me from that roaring lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
that goes about seeking to destroy my soul.

When Christ which is our life shall appear in his glory, Col. 3* ^*
then shall we have light.

Pull back Satan, cast him behind me: Oh Lord, thou know my whole heart
depends upon thee.

May the 23.
Labor for Jesus Christ, get faith in Jesus Christ, and he will lock up your
souls in his Cabinet, and keep you from that roaring lion, which goes about
seeking whom he may devour.

Stick fast to Jesus Christ, and Satan can have no power over you.

Ah, that we should be led away with Satan's temptations unto lies, to follow
our corruptions; Satan labors to get a poor soul, and when he has got it, he
will cast it into hell.

Ah, is it not better to be with my Father in Heaven, where we shall sing
Hallelujahs with holy Angels for ever?

Follow not Satan's steps, but follow Jesus Christ's steps, and he will lead you
up to Heaven.

Sing praises, Psalm. 47. 6. Psalm. 103. 2.
sing praises to our God, for all his mercies that he bestows upon us, and be
not ignorant of them, and forget them not; for if we forget them, he will be
forgetful of us.

Take heed of Satan that roaring lion, take heed that he get not into you; for
if he do, he will sink deeper and deeper into you.

Labor for Jesus Christ; for when all the helps in the World are gone, there
is help in Jesus Christ.

Lord, give us repenting hearts, that we may repent truly; and come we to
Christ, that we may repent truly, that thy wrath be not poured out upon us.

Seek for Christ, look for Christ till you find him, never give over till you
have found him; when you have found him, stick close to him; and he will stick
close to you.

Get faith in Jesus Christ, believe in him; believe him in his mighty power,
believe him in his glory.

Lord, give us the true light of Heaven, for we cannot see with our mortal
eyes, but with our spiritual eyes we shall.

Oh what a good God have we, that never slumbers, nor sleeps, but watches
over his poor servants!

Come my Disciples, Matthew. 16. 24. Heb. 8. 10.
take up your cross and follow me, and you shall be saved; I will be your God,
and you shall be my people.

O Lord, I desire to wait till my glass be run, for I long to be in Heaven with
thy holy Angels rejoicing.

Those that hunger and thirst after Jesus Christ, John 7. 37. Colos. 3. 4.
let them come and drink of the water of life, and they shall thirst no more,
and when Christ their life shall appear, then they shall appear with him also in
glory.

Come unto me in time of trouble, and I will save and deliver you.

Come, my people, enter in at the gates of Heaven, and I will guide you in it.

My soul, O Lord, watches, and watches till the glass be run, to be in Heaven
rejoicing with the holy Angels for ever.

Labor for Jesus Christ; what are we without Christ? we are but as a lump of
clay or lead, full of corruption, and without the Spirit of God.

Oh, Good Lord, work a thorough work in us, that we may be like thy holy Angels
in Heaven.

Now my Christ is come again, oh that I could hold him fast, and not let him
slip from me; Oh Lord, give us thankful hearts to thee, who have given us Jesus
Christ thy dear Son, to take our sins upon him; all our sufferings are nothing
in comparison of Jesus Christ's sufferings, he suffered the death upon the Cross
for us.

Lord, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
take away these stony hearts of ours, and give us new hearts; and take away
these thorns out of our hearts, and give us thankful hearts; that we may be
ever thankful unto thee for all thy good gifts, that thou have bestowed upon us.

May the 24th.
Lord, Isai. 53. 6
give us Jesus Christ, for without Christ we are nothing, but like lost sheep
that are gone astray.

Take heed that the temptations of Satan overcome you not; lest he cast you
into hell.

Not into our ears, Oh Lord, but come into our hearts, and take away these
stony hearts of ours, and give us new hearts.

How good is thy Word, Jer. 24. 7.
O God! how good is thy Word! ground it not in our heads, O Lord, but in our
hearts.

Pull back Satan that roaring lion which goes about seeking whom he can
devour, and to cast him into hell; oh follow not his ways, nor steps, for in
them there is nothing but blasphemy and lying; but follow Christ's steps, and
there will be rejoicing for ever.

Before that Christ take you up into Heaven, John 14. 22, 23. and 17. 26.
he will give you full assurance of himself, and lock you up in his cabinet,
and keep you from that hunting roaring lion.

If he conquer me, he will cast me into helfire, 1 John 5. 18.
but my Christ will not suffer him to touch me; my Christ is stronger then he;
he will not let him prevail against me.

My body is but worms meat in the grave, Job 19. 26.
but what care I for my body; so that my soul be in Heaven with my God and his
Angels.

Seek for Christ, and you shall find him; Matthew. 7. 7
hunt for him, and he will be found of you.

Strait is the gate that leads to Heaven, Matthew. 7. 13, 14.
and few there be that find it, but wide is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be which go therein.

The afflictions of the body are nothing, but the soul is a rare jewel; when
both body and soul are afflicted, Pro. 41. (...)
then there is cause of sorrow; but pray to God that he may support your souls.

O take my soul into thy protection, for if both body and soul should be gone,
then all is gone, but when they are in thy hands* then they are safe, then
there is no cause of sorrow but of rejoicing, and singing Aalleluiah for ever.

Trust in God, walk in Gods way, the more you walk in Gods way, the more he
will give you kis assurance.

Get into Jesus Christ, for in him there is joy and comfort, and no cause of
discomfort.

If we could but get one touch of the sweetness of Jesus Christ, it would
ravish our hearts, so that we would strive to get nigher* and nigher unto him.

Oh, what a good God have we! who would not trust in such a God? let us but eye
God, and he will eye us, and the more we look unto God, the more will his power
be exalted in us.

What if a man have not only part, but the whole World, yet he can never be
satisfied; and a poor soul that only has a desire after Christ cannot be
contented; but when a poor soul has gained all Christ, then it is satisfied.

A poor soul will be always hungring, hungring, hungring, and thirsting till
he have gotten all Christ, then he will be satisfied, and say he has enough.

How loving and gracious is our God, that does all things in wisdom, and
mercy, and for our good, in pity, and compassion!

Oh, how happy a thing it is, and joyful for ^o see, when a poor soul is going
to Heaven, and Christ says; Come, poor soul, come, ^ome and I will lock thee
up in my Cabinet, and keep thee from sin and Satan!

He is an everlasting God, stick close to him, and he will stick close to you.

As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore and repent.

When we are in affliction, Christ is all in all, but some in their afflictions
are apt to say that God has forgotten them, but whom God loves he corrects;
and afflictions are but to make us stick closer to God, that it may be for our
good and comfort-

Let us sing praise to our God, and be thankful; let us not turn back from him,
and he will not turn back from us.

Whom God loves, he corrects in mercy.

Correction is good for poor souls, it makes them stick closer to Christ, and
that they may know him the more both for his own glory, and their own good
every way.

As the Father calls his child when he has done amiss, Isai. 27. 18, 19.
and asks why he does so, and gives him correction: so God he gives his
children correction, but it is for their good and comfort.

God scourges and whippeth his children, but he will not give them one whip,
nor one lash more then is for their good.

Just is God in all his dealings, Nehem. 9. 33. Psalm. 121. 3, 4. Mal. 2 2.
he neither slumbreth nor sleeps, but is diligent, and careful in watching
over his poor children.

Let us give him praise for all his mercies, lest he turn his blessings into
cursings.

Labor for Jesus Christ, stick close to Jesus Christ, and he will stick close
to you, he will never forsake you; till you have him, you can never be
satisfied.

Labonr to follow things according to Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 8.
for if we gain Christ we gain all.

When all helps fail, Heb. 13. 5.
Christ will never fail you, he will never forsake you.

Let us labor to get into Jesus Christ, that we may be like the Angels in
Heaven and let us bend our minds to Jesus Christ, for his mercies are greater
to us then we can desire*

May the 25.
Come, poor soul, come, poor soul, see how God stretches forth his hand to an
afflicted soul; thou have been afflicted, but now I will take thee up into
Heaven; God will take a poor afflicted soul into Herven.

Good is thy Word (O Lord) to be esteemed ^ot only in our heads, but in our
hearts; take ^way these stony hearts, O Lord, that thy Word may work a thorough
work in us.

Oh take my soul, O Lord, into thy protection, and lock it up in thy cabinet,
for I am assured (Lord) that I shall be in happiness with thee, and thy holy
Angels in Heaven.

Labor to get faith in Jesus Christ, and it will keep you out of the deep pit.

Trust in Jesus Christ, and be mindful of his ways, and he will be mindful of
you.

He waketh, and neither slumbereth, nor sleeps; who would but follow his
steps, and not Satan's?

Lord, open thou our hearts and our eyes, that we run not headlong into that
bottomless pit of hell and destruction.

Come, my Disciple, and take up thy cross, and walk, and thou shall be saved.

Pray for fixed hearts and souls in Jesus Christ, that they be not cast into
hellfire; God give us fixed and zealous hearts for Jesus Christ, and fixed for
Heaven.

The Lord will not turn back from us, if we do not turn back from him, he will
carry us up to Heaven, where there is no change, but joy, and rejoicing for
evermore.

Trust in Jesus Christ, and he will rebuke your spiritual enemy. Satan is the
greates^^ enemy to your souls; if he get them he vvi^^ cast them into hellfire.

Come, my people, into my Tabernacle, and I will embrace you with my arms, and
there shall be cause of joy, and rejoicing with God and his holy Angels for
ever.

If you can but rise with Christ, Col. 3. 1.
and see^ those things that are above, he will take you up into Heaven, and
lock you up in his Cabinet; if you can but rise with him, there will be cause
of joy and rejoicing for ever with my God, and his holy Angels for ever.

If we can but rise so high as Heaven, there will be cause of joy and comfort,
and no cause of discomfort, if we be but raised so high as to seek those things
that are above, then we are happy.

Come, Psalm. 149. 1 and 6. verse.
let us sing a new Sang, let the praises of God be always in our mouths, and
let them never depart out of our mouths.

Come, and let us rejoice, and be glad with our heavenly Father, where there is
cause of comfort, and no cause of discomfort.

Let us labor to draw nigh home, for we are not at home whilst we are here;
let us therefore hunger, and thirst after better places, we are but as pilgrims
and strangers here, Heb. 11. 13, 14, 16.
but we must labor to wait with patience till our glass be run:

We are but as Travelers that travel to and fro, let us labor to come to an
abiding place where there is no change, then there is comfort, then we come to
that place that our souls thirst after.

What a gracious Father have we! Psalm. 103. 1, 2.
let us be thankful unto him for our manifold mercies and blessings; what cause
have we to give him praise for them? let us never be unmindful of giving him
praise, and he will never be unmindful of us.

What a Christ have we, that does all things in wisdom! Oh, what he has done
for us! Phil. 2. 8.
we can never suffer so much for him as he has for us, he suffered the death
upon the cross for us.

Good is thy Word, O God, and to be esteemed of us; let us not be ignorant of
it, let us have a token of thankfulness in our hearts, let us acknowledge it,
that we may give God the glory of it again: teach us the way that we may
acknowledge, and be thankful.

Come, my people, do not thirst, but come and drink of the waters of life
freely, John 7. ^.
and you shall never thirst again. I suppose, she meant, do not rest in your
thirsting, but come and drink.)

Come, my people, follow me into that pleasant place of Heaven, and there you
shall have joy everlastingly.

Put thy Spirit into our hearts, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
and take away these stony hearts, that we may become new Christians.

Come, my people, enter in at the gate* Strait is the gate, but I will lead you
and open the gate of that comfortable place, the gate of Heaven.

Oh, trust in God, and labor to be true believers, and he will free you from
sin and Satan that roaring lion, that seeks whom he may devour: put your trust
in the Lord, and then you will have cause of joy and rejoying for ever.

Oh God, thou art merciful unto thy children; and the more we hunger and thirst
after thee, the more merciful art thou; Lord, we thank thee for thy mercies
that thou have bestowed upon us.

God is gracious in all his ways and actions. Let us trust still in God: if we
do but trust in God, we shall never faint: although I be in a suffering
condition here, I shall be in a comfortable condition hereafter.

How sweet is Christ in his dealings and ^ispensations! he will not let Satan
that cun^ing roaring Lion do me any hurt.

Oh, ground faith in our hearts, O Lord, upon thy Son Jesus Christ: oh, ground
our ^earts aright upon him, and he will provide for us: and take us up into his
Kingdom, where there is no cause of mourning, but all ^oy and comfort for ever.

We are but as pilgrims here, and stay a time till our glass be run, and then
Jesus Christ will be our protector and guider, where we shall rejoice for ever.

I will keep your souls in my protection. I will rebuke Satan that roaring lion
for your sakes.

Note that oftentimes she would have uttered words, but could not, and then her
lips would move, so that I conceive some of her speeches were spoken in
relation to something that she had in her mind, and could not utter; and so in
the last speech which is set down: and this may help the Reader to understand
some other of her Speeches. May the 26th.
Seek the things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God
our Father; if we can but rise so high, there we should have cause of comfort,
and none of discomfort, for ever and ever.

Happy shall we be when we are raised so high as to sit at the right hand of
God our Father.

God my Father has chained up Satan that roaring lion, that he cannot enter
into my soul.

God does sometimes suffer Satan to afflict us, that we may be drawn nearer to
him.

God lets us lie in afflictions, that we may get good by them, and himself
glory.

Let us praise God for all his mercies, and he will shower them down upon us
the more.

The more we seek to give God glory for all his mercies, the more will God seek
to pour down good upon us.

Though God do take away the comfort of this world, yet he will give us comfort
in another world.

Gracious is God, and pitiful to poor souls, when they shall call to him for
help, and says, Lord, I am helpless of my self, my help is upon thee, and I
trust in thee, then he gives him help, and comfort by faith in Jesus Christ.
Who would but trust in such a God that give us Christ that we may joy and
rejoice? Oh how good a God have we, that does rebuke the Tempter, and will not
let him have us, though he strive to catch us! he would make our going to
Heaven uncomfortable, and pull away our souls, but God will not suffer him; for
those that God has chosen, they shall receive comfort.

How gracious is God in all his ways, and worthy to be esteemed of; if we do
not esteem of him, he will not esteem of us; he is angry with his people, Isai.
54. 7, 8
it is but for a while; but with those that he is ever angry, he will say, Go,
ye cursed, into hellfire, and what a pitiful case is that?

God will stretch out his hand to a poor soul, and say, Come, poor soul, come,
thou have been long in affliction, but I will lay thee up in Heaven, there thou
shall be happy, and rejoice for ever.

Our Father gives us his Son Jesus Christ, to save our souls, or we had been
burning in hellfire before this time, but our God is gracious to us.

Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, Matthew. 7. 19.
is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

Lord, open our eyes, that we may see Jesus Christ coming into our souls with
white robes; we cannot see him with our mortal eyes, but, Lord, make us to see
him with ou^ spiritual eyes; this would be the joyfulles^ sight that ever we
did see in all our lives.

What disobedient children are we that do not go when our Father comands us to
go*

If you be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
himself sits at the right hand of God.

Let us have our eyes lift up to Heaven, that we may see Jesus Christ sitting
at the right hand of God: and let us be thankful for all his mercies, for if we
be unmindful of him, he will be unmindful of us.

Lord, our hearts are empty, fill them with thy Spirit, and take away the
corruption that is within us.

Why are our hearts set upon the World? there is nothing but pride and
corruption in the World, and we poor sinful creatures are subject to run
headlong into the World. Lord, wean our hearts from the World.

Good Lord, give us grace, and the eye of Faith, that we may see Jesus Christ
coming though afar off, and that we may come nigh, and stick close to him.

Lord, give us faith, that we may trust thee, and believe in thee, and make us
true believers in the Lord Jesus Christ; for we have nothing of our selves, but
corruption to trust on, and that will fly from us.

How good God is, and merciful to all his ^hildren, in delivering them from all
the ^emptations of their spiritual enemy, which ^aily seeks to destroy them!

Oh, come, my people, into my Tabernace, and I will take you up into my throne,
and ^here you shall rejoice with me, and my Angels for ever and ever.

Labor for Jesus Christ, and when you have obtained him, embrace him, and he
will embrace you; cleave fast to him, and he will cleave fast to you.

Acknowledge Jesus Christ, who is our Savior; and when all things in the World
fail, he will not fail, he will stick close to you, and not forsake you.

Let us be thankful for all mercies, though they be but little ones; for when
we are thankful for little ones, he will pour more upon us; and if we be not
thankful for the least mercy, he will pour down great curses upon us.

Look into the actions of God; and the more you look into his works, the more
power of God you shall find in them; all that he does, he does it for the good
of his poor Children, and those that fear him.

May the 27th.
Lord, purge our bodies, and purify ou^ corrupt hearts, that thy Word may
work* through work in us; cast back, cast back tha^ tempting roaring lion, that
goes about seeking whom he may devour.

What disobedient children are we, for that which God commands, we will not
do, but that which he forbids, that we do, and run on headlong to our own
destruction.

If the Spirit of God once work in our hearts, then we shall be happy, and
shall sound out the praise and glory of our God, for he is wonderful in our
eyes.

Lord, Psalm. 51. 15.
open thou our mouth, and let our lips show forth thy praise; our God make
speed to save us: o teach us to know Jesus Christ, for how will that ravish our
poor souls to know our Savior! and then we shall draw nigher to heaven, and
rejoice with our Father.

Come, my people, come, enter into my Tabernacle, and I will have mercy upon
you.

Help, help, Lord, for Christ's sake, that I may obtain that happy place, for
there is comfort without discomfort, and joy without sorrow.

May the 28th.
What disobedient children are we for do^g those things which we ought not to
do, and in leaving undone those things, which ^e ought to have done.

Come, my people, enter into my Taberna^le, and I will gather you under my
wings as a ^en gathers her chickens; and I will assure you of your salvation,
and you shall rejoice with my holy Angels for ever and ever.

Let us labor to get faith in Jesus Christ, who will gather us from our
enemies; when a poor soul thinks he is cast down into hell, then Christ comes
and raises it up, then that soul will rejoice with Christ, and he will keep it
from falling into that deep pit, he will not let it fall again; who would but
trust in such a God as this, that will give his children hearts to believe and
fear him?

Labor to get Jesus Christ, for we cannot get him without pains: if we mean to
be one with him: O how ought we to take pains and labor to know and
acknowledge Jesus; we must struggle and strive for him, or else we can never
obtain him.

May the 29th.
How good is our God, that takes pity upon a poor afflicted soul, for when a
poor soul is going to hell, and sees no help but in Jesus Christ, then it
cries, Help, help, help, Lord, and then Jesus Christ delivers that poor soul
out of hell.

Labor for Jesus Christ, and seek for him: he is not gained easily, we must
seek for him and take pains for him, or we shall never obtain him; unless we
take pains we shall never sinde him.

Lord, give us hearts that we may seek after Jesus Christ, and that we may
rely upon him by faith, that we may be made true believers in thy Word.

Lord, open thou our mouths, that our lips may show forth thy praise: Lord,
pour out thy Spirit upon our souls, and it will make us draw nigher and nigher
unto thee.

Many are they, Lord, that cannot obtain Jesus Christ, it is because they do
not take pains: John 6. 27.
but let us arise, and be doing; for without pains we can get nothing; we must
take pains, and struggle for Jesus Christ, else we can never obtain him.

Lord, fill our hearts with Jesus Christ, for they are empty; fill them full of
Jesus Christ, that we may be able to live by faith upon him; Lord, fill our
hearts with the knowledge of Jesus Christ; for our hearts are empty, and with
the righteousness of Jesus Christ; Lord, enrich our souls, that we may enrich
the Kingdom of God.

Let us be thankful to God for all his mercies and blessings which he is
pleased to bestow upon us: 1 Samuel 2. 30. Psalm. 50. 23.
for the more thankful we are, the more will he pour down his mercies and
blessings upon us.

How gracious is our God, that does all things in wisdom and mercy to his poor
servants! he does nothing to them, but that which is for their good, in mercy
and in righteousness. O Lord, give us true faith in the righteousness of
Jesus Christ, that we may rely upon him for our Salvation.

What a sweet thing it is to enjoy Jesus Christ! happy is that soul that does
enjoy such a gift from our Father.

If we should be thankful all our days, we can never be thankful enough; for
he suffered the death upon the cross for our sins.

Lord, pardon and forgive us all our sins, and wash them away in the blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and then shall we be purified, and become pure
Christians,

Let us give praise unto our God for all his mercies and blessings that he has
bestowed upon us; 1 These. 5. 18.
let us always be praising our God, and be thankful, and ever thankful.

May the 30th.
Lord, humble our hearts, and open our eyes, Romans 1. 22. 23.
that we be not led away with Satan, and run headlong to our destruction.

We have enemies too many to draw us back from Jesus Christ, John 6. 44.
but there are very few that will draw us to Jesus Christ.

Lord, Psalm. 119. 117.
take our souls into thy protection and keeping, for when they are with thee,
they are safe.

Let us sing praise to our God, Psalm. 136. 2.
for his mercy endures for ever.

Lord, take away our unbelief, and fasten us to Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
that we may become new Christians.

Lord, wash away all our sins in the blood of thy Son Jesus, and purify our
affections, that we may become pure Virgins in Jesus Christ.

Come, let us drink of the water of life, and then we shall never thirst again.

Oh how happy are they that can but obtain Jesus Christ: for if we be never
so poor in this world, if we can but obtain Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8.
we shall have riches enough, for then we shall be rich in glory,

May 31.
The Lord give us faith, Ephesians. ^. 8.
for without faith we cannot get Jesus Christ.

The Lord give us knowledge, Romans 10. 17. Ephesians. 1. 18, 19.
for without knowledge we cannot attain faith, and without faith we cannot
attain to salvation.

If we can attain to the height of faith, we shall attain to the height of
Jesus Christ; and if we attain to the height of Jesus Christ, we shall attain
to the height of glory.

Lord, humble us under our burden of sin, That when Christ who is our life
shall appear, Matthew. 23. 12.
we may also appear with him in glory.

Come, Psalm. 50. 15. 1 John 1. 7 Ephesians. 5. 27.
my people, Call upen me in time of trouble, and I will hear you and answer
you.

Oh, wash us, and cleanse us, that neither spot, nor stain be upon us; wash us
clean in the blood of Christ, that we may become new Virgins, pure Virgins.

Let us bless God, 2 Chronicles. 20. 22, 23, 24.
and be thankful for all those mercies that he is pleased to pour down upon
us; let us be thankful, yea very thankful; for the more we thank him, the more
will he pour down his mercies upon us.

June 1, 1652.
Lord, pardon, and forgive us all our sins, and give us hearts earnestly to beg
pardon for them; if thou had not been a merciful Father, we had all been
burning in hellfire* we had all been burning, and howling in hellfire before
this, but thou have given thy So Jesus Christ to die for our sins: for his sake
we beg pardon for them.

Lord, give us thankful hearts, we have cause to be thankful, if we had a
thousand hearts, we could never be thankful enough to thee for all thy mercies,
that thou have bestowed, and showred down upon us.

Lord, give us thy Word, and ground it in our hearts; Lord, give us thy Spirit
into our hearts, for without thy Spirit the Word i^ but a dead letter.

I will be your God, Jet. 31. 33.
and ye shall be my people.

Lord, Titus 1 1. Col. 2 2.
give us faith in Jesus Christ, for without faith in him we can never
acknowledge Jesus Christ, to be our alone Savior and Redeemer.

She spoke not again until June the fourth.
Oh, my God, I give unto thee my soul, my body, and my heart, and all; hoping
that I now am going unto that happy place, which I have desired so long.

June the 5th.
If a poor man which has not a bit of bread, Ephesians. 3. 8. Col. 2. 3.
nor a broom to sweep his house withal; yet if he have but Christ, he is
richer then that man which has all the riches of this World.

Who would but trust in such a God, that will save and defend us from all evil?

Who would but trust in such a Christ, Luke 1. 74.
that will defend us from Satan, and all our enemies both bodily and
spiritual? Who would but trust in such a Christ, that will preserve us as he
did Jonah three days and three nights in the Whales belly? Jonah 1. 17.


Lord, humble; humble our stony hearts, that they be not puffed up with pride and
vanity.

How often would I have gathered you together as a Hen gathers her Chickens
under her wings, Matthew. 23. 37.
and ye would not, but were stubborn and rebellious.

June the 6th.
Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you together, as a
Hen gathers her Chickens, and you would not.

Let not your hearts be drawn after the vanities of this world, nor after the
steps of Satan, which goes lurking, lurking, watching and waiting like a
Serpent; but follow Christ's steps, for if Satan get you, he will fling you into
hellfire.

Long is the way to heaven, Matthew. 7. 1^, 14.
and much a-do we have to get thither: but short is the way that leads to
hell.

What disobedient children are we, that will not follow Gods commands? that
which is evil he forbids us, and that we do; and that which is good he commands
us, and that we we do not.

Lord, wean our hearts from this world: let us not be led by sin, nor Satan:
let not Satan get any power over our souls: if he get power over our souls, he
will cast them into the bottom of hell for ever and ever.

This world is nothing but fading comforts; Phil. 3. 8.
nothing but dross, loss and dung in comparison of Christ.

What are we better when we are in our pomp in this world, Mar. 8. 36.
when we do nothing but pine in our souls, and our souls to be cast into hell,
where there will be howling for ever and ever?

Lord, Matthew. 6. 19.
pardon our proud worldly hearts, for we are always hungring after this sinful
world; where there is nothing but that which will lead us into hell.

Oh, Ve^se 33.
let us not hunger after this world, but hunger after Christ.

O, John 6 44. Joh. 12. 32*
what a loving Father have we, that when a poor soul is thrown down as low as
hell, and is in great afflictions, then he sends Jesus Christ, and takes pity
of that poor soul, and lifts it up to heaven!

Christ will look upon a poor soul with the eyes of compassion, then that poor
soul is happy, and he will carry it to heaven, where it shall rejoice with God
and his holy Angels.

Tet us hunger for Jesus Christ, and when we have him, let us hold him fast;
and let us stick close to him, and he will stick close to us; he will be our
keeper, and Savior both of bodies and souls.

Good is thy Word, and to be esteemed; drive it into our hearts, 1 Thessalonians* 2. 13.
and not only into our heads, but into our hearts, that it may work a through
work in us.

Come, Isai. 40. 31
let us fly up to heaven as a bird in the air; if we could get up as high as
heaven, we should be happy.

Joy, joy, joy, everlasting joy. Psalm. 16. 11 Psalm. 9^. ^


Come, let us sing praises unto our God with mirth and joy; Matthew. 16. 27.
for we shall sing with our Father, and his holy Angels for ever, and ever.

Lord, Romans 16. 20.
vanquish Satan that roaring lion, and tread him under foot, that he may not
overcome our souls by his evil ways, watching every opportunity.

June the 7th.
This night came one of those commonly called Quakers, and all that came to her
did judge that then she knew none, neither could she hear or did ever mind
what was said to her or in her company; and this man and her Uncle Capt.
Hatfield being in discourse, she uttered the words following at that time
(which are very observeable,) viz.

Take heed, take heed that you sow not Tares, Matthew. 13. 25. Gal. 6. 7, 8.
Matthew 7. 19.
lest you reap Tares; Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn
down and cast into the fire.

Lord, give us faith in Christ, for without faith and knowledge we cannot come
unto Christ.

Come, let us fly unto the Throne of grace as a bird does into the air.

Lord, Heb. 4. 16.
give us zealous hearts for Jesus Christ, for there is help in him, but there
is no help upon the earth.

Lord, resist Satan that roaring Lion, that goes about seeking whom be may
devour: let us cleave to Jesus Christ, when Satan draws near; and he will
deliver us from that roaring lion.

June the 8th.
Lord, quicken our dead and ignorant hearts, John 5. 40. Joh. 12. 35.
which are stubborn and rebellious, (but before we be quickened we must lie at
the feet of Jesus Christ,) for without we be quickened, we are like an ignorant
man that travels up and down and knows not whither.

Lord, humble these proud hearts of ours, and take that burden from us, for
Christ says, Matthew. 11. 28.
Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.

If we be dead-hearted, Joh. 10. 10.
we must lie down at the feet of Jesus Christ, till he be pleased to quicken us.

Take heed of despising God and his Ordinances, Luke 10. 16.
for if we despise them, God will despise us.

Set your affections on things above, Col. 3. 1.
and not on things below, for your life is hid with Christ in God.

Labor for Jesus Christ, and he will cast out that spiritual enemy that would
cast you out.

Trust in Jesus Christ, for he is a trusty God to trust in.

Let us put on the whole Armor of God.

O, Ephesians. 6. 11. 1 Pet. 2. ult.
let us labor for Jesus Christ, and he will be our Shepherd, and we shall be
his Sheep, he will lock us up in his cabinet, and keep us from sin and Satan.

Lord, Mar. 9. 24. 2 Timothy 2. 1.
strengthen our unbelieving hearts.

Let us labor to be strong in faith, and we shall be strong in Jesus Christ.

Let us labor to be rich in Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 6. 10. Revel. 2. 9.
though we be poor in the world.

I have obtained Jesus Christ.

When you have obtained Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 7. Matthew. 23. 46. John 5. 39.
46, 47.
you have obtained a jewel of all jewels.

Let us be partakers of the Word of God, and we shall be partakers of Jesus
Christ: if we do not know the Word of God, nor be partakers of it, we shall
never know Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4. 16 17.


When we are but weak in body, and are true Christians, we shall be strong in
Jesus Christ.

If we be weak in body, our body loses by it, Luke 11. 22.
but our souls gain by it.

Let us labor to get true possession of Jesus Christ, and then Satan that
roaring lion can get no possession of us.

Lord, John 4. 14.
give us the life of grace, to spring up in our hearts, that we may be drawn to
thee.

June the 9th.
Lord, Joh. 17. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 16
give us the light of heaven, that we may be holy as thou art holy.

If once grace be but kindled in our hearts, then happy shall we be and
blessed.

Let us trust in Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5. 9. Acts 15. 9.
and he will conquer our spiritual enemy, and purify our double hearts.

Let us be thankful and ever thankful for all his mercies, Mal. 2. 2.
lest he turn his blessings into curses, and pour down his wrath upon us.

Lord, give us true repenting hearts for our sins, Jer. 31. 18. Luke 13. 3
Revel. 21. 7
lest we run headlong to hell for want of repentance.

Come, my Disciples, take up your cross and follow me, and I will be your God:
joy, joy, joy.

Learn the lesson of faith, Heb. 11. 27 Ephesians. 6. 16.
or you shall never know Christ; but, Lord, let us learn this lesson of faith,
that we thy unvvorthy servants may be delivered both from our bodily, and
spiritual enemies.

We are poor dry creatures; Ezekiel. 17. 4, 5.
but, Lord, breath thy Spirit into us, that we may be Saints in Heaven.

Good Lord, James 2. 5.
enrich our souls that we may enrich the Kingdom of Heaven.

Come, Psalm.* 24. 3 4, with 15.
my people, enter into my Tabernacle, and you shall rest in joys for ever.

We must labor to have hearts for Jesus Christ, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5.
or we shall never attain to him: we must labor for him; he is not easily
gained* but we must take pains, and seek him*

Let us put off the rags of sin, Ephesians. 4. 23. Romans 13. 14. Cantic. 3. 4
and put on the robes of righteousness.

Let us struggle for Jesus Christ, and labor for him, lay hold of him, and
when we have obtained him, let him not slip from us.

Let us give God the glory of all things, and he will pour down all things
upon us, that are good for us.

Lord, Luke 11. 1
pardon our sins, and give us hearts to beg pardon of thee for them.

Lord, ^ These. 5. 18.
give us thankful hearts to acknowledge thy goodness, and to be thankful for
every little mercy.

Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 52. with 58
fit and prepare our unprepared hearts, that we may be prepared at the sound of
the trumpet.

Let us labor to be married to Jesus Christ, Revel. 19. 7, 8, 9.
and that is better then all the marriages in the world; it is an everlasting
marriage; Psalm. 73. 26.
he is the richest above all: he is an ever^^sting portion; John 6. 35.
he that feeds bodies with na^ural food, will also feed the souls of all those
^^at believe and put their trust in him with ^piritual food.

June the 10th.
Knock at the gates of righteousness, 2 Pet. 1. 1.
and Christ will open the door of faith.

Trust in Jesus Christ, Psalm. 27. 14
and he will comfort you with that word (Come, poor souls.)

Put on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 11.
that ye may be able to fight against the Devil and Hell.

Lord, John 1. 16.
fill our hearts with the fullness of Jesus Christ, that no corruption remain in.

Lord, Psalm. 4. 6, 7
satisfy our hearts, for without thee we cannot be satisfied.

Lord, Phil. 1. 29. Ephesians. 2. 8.
give us faith in Jesus Christ, that we may rest believing in him, for our
hearts are full of unbelief.

Lord, take our hearts off from this worldly trash, 1 John 2. 15. John 5. 44*
for this world is nothing else but trash. Lord, humble these proud hearts,
that we may cleave, and stick more close to Jesus Christ.

Lord, Psalm. 79. 9. Psalm. 51. 7.
take these base and ignorant hearts of ours, cleanse and purge them.

Let us not be forgetful of Gods mercies* lest he be forgetful of God. Psalm.
78. 7. Deuteronomy. 32. 18. Isai. 9. 6.


O how good my God is, that has give^ me Jesus Christ! Lord, fill me full of
Jesus Christ, that I may dwell with him.

Lord, pardon and forgive us all our sin^ and wash them away in the blood of
Jesus Christ.

Lord, purify our hearts, as the honey i^ purified from the dross.

Lord, give us faith to believe in Jesus Christ, for without faith we can never
attain to Jesus Christ.

Let us lie at the feet of Jesus Christ, Matthew. 23. 12. Deuteronomy. 32. 18. with 19
Psalm. 78. 42 with 59. Psalm. 124. 7
that we may be raised to the height of glory.

Let us be thankful for every good mercy; for if we be not thankf^l, God will
hide his face from us.

Lord, keep back that roaring lion, and tread him under foot, he did lay his
snare for me, but thou have broken it, and I am escaped, as the bird from the
fowler.

Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear you, and deliver you from
all dangers in this world, and that which is to come.

Let us labor to attain to the height of righteousness, Romans 3. 26. Heb. 10.
22 Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19.
that we may attain to the height of faith; for if we do not attain to the
height of righteousness, we can never attain to the height of faith; and if we
do not attain to the height of faith, we shall never attain to the height of
Jesus Christ.

Trust in Jesus Christ, and he will conquer that enemy that would conquer your
poor souls; but God has conquered him in me.

Come, poor people, let us rejoice together.

Come, let us sing a new song, for all his mercies that he is pleased to bestow
upon us.

How great is the mercy of God to us, Lam. 3. 22.
in keeping of us from sinking down into that bottomless pit!

Let us take heed of displeasing God, 1 Samuel 2. 30 ult.
lest God displease us, and be angry with us.

June the 11th.
Call upon me in time of trouble, and I will hear and deliver you.

So then all they that put their trust in God, Psalm. 2. 13. meeter.
and call upon him, shall be happy and blessed.

Cast down that roaring lion that goes about to conquer my poor soul: if I do
but put my trust in Jesus Christ, he will conquer him.

Lord, give us righteousness; 2 Pet. 1. 1.
for without righteousness we cannot get faith, and without faith we cannot
get Christ.

Lord, Acts 5. 3. Heb. 10. 22.
give us true repenting hearts for all our sins, for without true repenting
hearts we can never get assurance of our salvation.

Lord, Neh. 8. 10.
ravish our hearts with the joy of Heaven, that we may labor and take pains
for Jesus Christ, for without pains he will never be found.

Joy, joy, joy, everlasting joy.

Lord, Luke 1 46, 47, with 48.
humble our self-willed hearts, that we may be thankfnll for all thy mercies
which thou have been pleased to bestow upon us.

Thou have been a loving, and a merciful Father, but we have been stubborn and
rebellious children: if thou had not been a gracious Father, we had all been
burning in hellfire before this.

Come, Hose 10. 12.
let us sow the seed of faith, that we may reap gladness.

When we are in affliction, we must cry to Jesus Christ for help, and he will
help us.

June the 12th.
Let us trust in Jesus Christ, and labor for faith; struggle and strive for
it, then our Father will give us his dear Son Jesus Christ.

We can never do so much for Jesus Christ as he has done for us; Luke 17. 10.
John 15. 13.
he has laid down his life to save us.

Joy, joy, joy, everlasting joy.

Gods World and this world are not both alike; James 4. 4.
those that are of this world, they love the world; and such, if they do not
suffer in this world, they must suffer in another world hell torments in
brimstone and fire for ever and ever.

We pray thee, good God, look upon thy poor unworthy people, and deliver us
from all dangers.

Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 45.
quicken us in thy Son Jesus Christ, till we come to that joyful place where
there is no change.

Lord, fill our hearts with the fullness of Jesus Christ, that we may dwell
with thee and thy holy Angels for ever.

Lord, keep our hearts close unto thee, and pull us forth of the snare of Satan
that roaring lion, and make us to escape, as the bird escapes out of the net of
the fowler.

What a good God and merciful Father have we! if he had not been merciful to
us, we had been all burning in hell before this.

Lord, ripen us; for the sooner we are ripe, the sooner shall we have assurance
of Jesus Christ.

Lord, Col. 3. 11.
satisfy our unsatisfied hearts; i^ we had all this world, we should never be
satisfied, but if we had Jesus Christ we should be satisfied.

We are here like poor captives without grace in our hearts. Isai. 26. 19. Romans
8. 2.


Without thy Spirit, Lord, we are but as dry creatures, dry bones, moscer'd
away, without thou breath the spirit of life into us.

Lord, Mal. 3. 3.
purge our unclean hearts, that we may be purified in Jesus Christ.

Good Lord, look down upon thy unworthy servants, and give us thankful hearts
for all those mercies that thou have bestowed upon us, lest all our mercies be
turned into curses.

June the 13th.
Come, let us suck sweetness from Jesus Christ, Isai. 66. 11
as the Be sucks sweetness out of the flower.

Come, let us call upon the Lord in time of trouble, and what afflictions
soever we are in he will hear us, and deliver us.

Come let us search these false hearts of ours: Lam. 3. 40. Jer. 17. 9. Psalm.
139. 23, 24.
there is deceit in every corner of them, but we must desire of God to help us
to search them, lest our searching prove all in vain.

Let us labor to get the truth of Jesus christ; Ephesians. 4. 2^.
if we can but get the truth of Jesus christ, it will ravish our hearts; first,
he ^epares our hearts for the work of faith, ^en he works faith in them.

Those that God has chosen he will pluck ^ut the blind eye, Isai. 29, 18
Matthew. 6. 22.
that they be not led a^ay by sin and Satan, and he will give them (...) light
eye.

Lord, fill our hearts with the fullness of jesus Christ: that we do not sink
into the ^ottomlesse pit.

Come and knock at the gate of righteousness, and wait till Jesus Christ come
and open the gates.

Lord, pull back that roaring lion, that serpent that goes about, seeking to
devour our poor souls. God will but suffer him to step in, that we may stick
closer to Jesus Christ.

Lord, Zach. 3. 2.
rebuke that roaring lion, and chain him up, that he may have no power over our
poor souls.

Lord, prepare our unprepared hearts (...) against thou call.

Oh God, prepare our hearts, (...) may come before thee with thankf^^ (...) for
every mercy that thou have (...) on us.

Lord, Heb. 11. 6.
give us faith, for without faith we cannot come to thee.

June the 14th.
Good Lord, enrich our poor souls, that we may enrich the Kingdom of Heaven.

We have but dry and ignorant hearts, Psalm. 143. 11. Matthew. 25. 33, etc. 1
These. 4. 17.
Lord, quicken them, that we may sit at the right hand of God with Jesus
Christ, rejoicing with him for ever?

June the 15th:
Good Lord, Acts 2. 37.
what shall we do to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven?

June the 18th.
The Lord be with you, Job 14 14. 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52, 53. Psalm. 116.
for I am going to change, and after shall never change.

I pray you, pray that my soul may be precious in the sight of God.

God is going now to finish his work.

My God has laid up treasures for me in he^^n.

June the 19th.
(...) I see the fine sights of Heaven, (...) ^mbracing me in his arms, and
(...) the light of Heaven.

Then she spoke no more till June 21th.
The Lord of Heaven be with you all; though we part here, I hope we must meet
in Heaven; my Christ is showing me the way to Heaven.

Pray, pray, pray for some help from God, and pray that your prayers may be
accepted of God.

These valedictory expressions of hers, I conceive, might arise from that
change, which now should be in the manner of her disease; for now she had no
more the liberty of speech given to her until the 29th. day of July, and then

July the 29th.
About eight of the clock at night (as that was the ordinary time that she
began at, and so continued some two hours with intervals to speak) she being in
a stiff fit spoke these words with a smiling countenance.

My Christ is come again. I have obtained Christ.

I have my desire, I have now a crucified Christ.

Then she spoke not again until August 11th, about 10 of the clock at night.
Now my Father has given me Jesus Christ again (I hope) to save my soul.

Now I have obtained Christ again, a cr^cified Christ.

Let us put off the rags of sin, and put o^ the robes of righteousness.

August the 15, about 7 of the clock, she lying in the same posture, spoke as
follows.
My Savior is come again, that suffere^ death upon the Cross to save my soul.

I was in darkness, but now I am in light*

My Christ has vanquished Satan tha^ goes about to destroy my soul.

Then she spoke not again until August the 17.
When she had the extremest convulsion^ fit that ever; she was drawn with her
face turned behind her, and one eye looking up, and the other shut, and in
that fit she spoke as follows.

I will be with my God, and my God will be with me. 1 Chronicles. 15. 2. John 8. 48.
John 10. 28, 29.


I hope my soul is precious in the fight of my God.

I am not in the hands of the Devil, but in the hands of my God.

Which words much refreshed the spirits of her friends, who stood weeping by
her to see her so sadly handled: then she proceeded.

My Gods Angels have pitched their Tents about me, Psalm. 34. 7.
and will carry my soul into heaven.

I will never forsake my God, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Heb. 13. 5. Psalm. 28. 4, 5. Isai.
5. 12, 13.
and my God will never forsake me.

Take heed of slighting Gods mercies; for if we slight his mercies, he will
slight us; if we slight his mercies, he will pour his wrath upon us.

August 20.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will relieve you.

Ask, and ye shall have; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

Ask, and you shall have life everlasting.

Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
Devil, and all his Angels.

Let us wait upon the Lord until his time appointed, Psalm. 27. 14 Psalm. 31. 15.
and he will ease us; for our time is of the Lord: we cannot have it when we
would, but when the Lord pleases.

August 23 at 8 a clock at night.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear and deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me.

Lord, humble our haughty and proud hearts, that they be not led away with this
world, for we are apt to follow the steps of Satan, rather then the steps of
God.

First, he prepares our hearts that they may be capable of faith, Isai. 40. 3.
and then he works faith in them.

Lord, Psalm. 51. 7.
purge our rusty hearts, that they may be clean, that we may become pure
Virgins of thine; for if thou do not purge them, they will be like rusty iron
that lies long.

My Christ will tread Satan under foot, which goes about like a roaring lion,
hunting to destroy my poor soul, but he can go no further then my God gives
him leave, he has a malice unto my poor soul.

Those that belong to God Satan is always in perplexing and troubling them,
Luke 11. 21.
but God does but let him step in to make them stick closer unto God: if Satan
get but one step in, and get in his head, he will strive to get in his whole
body; the least opporrunity he can get, he will seek it, and will not lose it.

Let us cast off the rags of sin, and put on the robes of righteousness, 1
John 16. Phil. 3. 9. to 12.
and then we shall obtain Jesus Christ.

Let us suck sweetness from Jesus Christ, even as the Be sucketh honey from
the flower.

August the 30th.
Let us draw comfort from Jesus Christ, ^s the child milk from the mothers
breast; ^he harder we draw, the more we shall get.

Take heed you slight not Gods mercies; for if you slight his mercies, it is
just with God to slight you.

August 31. at 10 a clock in the morning.
Lord, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
cast out our stony hearts, and make them new, that we may be new creatures.

Lord, purge the dross out of our hearts, and purify them.

Let us stand at the gate of righteousness, and wait until Jesus Christ see
time to open the door of faith.

Lord, rebuke that crooked Serpent, that would destroy my poor soul, but my
Father will not suffer him; he has a malice to my poor soul, but God will but
let him step in, and get a look in, but it is to make me stick closer to Jesus
Christ.

Let us fear the Lord, that we may live in his fear, and die in his favor.

Let us take heed that we slight not Gods mercies, Psalm. 78. 60.
lest he turn his back off us; if we do not fear him and serve him, he will
fli^ away from us, Jor. 5. 24, 25.
and then when we com^ unto him again, Isai. 1. 12, 10 15.
when he calls us not, h^ will say unto us, Go ye cursed into hellfire for
ever; and vvil not accept of us, but cast us o^

September the 1.
Many there be that cannot attain to the height of Gods Word, Isai. 29. 24. and
32. 4.
but if they labou^ for it, he will give it them.

The Word of God is but a dead letter, 2 Cor. 3 6.
without his Spirit be with it.

September 2. at 4 a clock in the afternoon.
The snare is broken, and I am escaped, even as a bird from the foul-catcher.

God will not make the Cup so bitter, Isa. 27. 8, 9
but he will mix it with comfort, he will mix it with sugar, he will mix it
with comfort as well as with discomfort.

September 3.
Prepare against the Grave open, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. 1 Cor. 15. 17, 19. with 58.
and the Trumpet sound, that we may be in hopes to obtein a joyful
resurrection.

September the 4th.
Let us labor to believe in God, Micah 6. 9. Heb. 12. 10 11. Job 5. 19.
and trust ^n him; for he afflicts us to make us stick closer unto him: he
whips us with one rod; if that will not do, he takes a second; and if that will
not do, he takes a third; and if that will not do, he takes the fourth, that he
might bring our hearts home to him, Psalm. 119. 71.
and that we might say, It is good for us that we have been afflicted.

Prepare, prepare against the mouth of the Grave open, and the Trumpet sound,
that we may be in hopes to obtein a joyful resurrection.

September the 5. at 2 a clock in the afternoon.
Let us labor for faith; the greatest faith, the greatest joy.

Let us labor to believe in Jesus Christ; Romans 15. 13. Ephesians. 3. 17. Isai. 26.
4.
no faith, no Christ; no faith, no Christ.

Let us labor to trust in Jesus Christ; all things are fading and transitory
in respect of Christ. All things are but dross and dung in comparison of
Christ. Set your affections on things above, Phil. 3. 8. Col. 3. 2, 3.
and not on things of the earth: for we are dead, and our lives are hid with
Christ in God.

Let us labor to trust in Jesus Christ, Heb. 13. 8.
if al^ things in the world fail, he will never fail.

Lord, 1 Pet. 5. 10
establish, establish our hearts upon thee, and let us pray for faith and
grace, and all other good things, and make us thankful to thee for ever and
ever.

Lord, Matthew. 7. 24.
give us faith to build upon thee.

Lord, give us faith to build upon thee, for without faith we can do nothing:
no faith, no Christ; no Christ, no Salvation.

Let us fly, Heb. 4. 16. Dan. 12. 3.
let us fly unto the throne of Grace, as the bird does into the air, hoping
that we shall shine before the face of the Lord as a star in the firmament.

Lord, Revel. 12. 10. Luke 10. 18.
cast down Satan that Serpent, and tread him under foot, that seeks to devour
my soul, but he cannot; he has a malice to my poor soul, but chain him up
Lord; for he is always troubling and perplexing the Servants of God, Luke 11.
21.
but those that he has overcome, he lets them alone, until he cast them into
hell, where they shall lie howling for ever and ever, where there is no end.

Lord, Zach. 12. 10.
establish our hearts upon thee, and give us grace to pray for faith, and all
other good gifts, and make us truly thankful to thee as a Christian ought to
be.

September 6. at 4 a clock in the afternoon.
Lord, purge our hearts that are stubborn ^d rebellious against thee.

Lord, purify our hearts, as the honey from ^e dross.

Again, the same day at 6 a clock.
My Christ is come again, and he will never forsake me: I will stick close to
him, and ^e will never fly back from me.

Let us stick close unto the Lord, Luke 1. 74
and trust (...) him, and he will save us from all dangers (...) this world;
for with him in the World to ^ome there is no danger. 1 These. 1. 10.


September the 7th.
Lord, grant that as we grow in days and years, 2 Pet. 3. 18
we may grow in grace and holiness.

September the 8th.
This day a Physician came to visit her, being sent for by her parents; they
desiring to use what means could be procured for her: and it pleased God
(whilst the Physician was there with her) to shut up her mouth, her teeth
being set in her head, so as the^ could not open them; her upper teeth were
drawn somewhat over her nether teeth; an^ so they continued (save only that
the workings of the Convulsions opened them sometimes, and drew her tongue out
of her mouth. I say, so they continued) until the seventh (...) December
following; all which time she live^ with the least quantity of food that could
be for they put milk into her lips, and how an^ should go into her stomach we
know not* except some of it passed at each side of he^ mouth, where one tooth
was wanting, and yet in this time she grew very fat, and he^ flesh very firm
and solid, and she did look very fair and fresh.

Whereas you might rather apprehend that she was a lean, dried, and withered
Anatomy; and yet we conceived, she did take down something; though before the
setting of her teeth, we could not perceive that she took any thing down, but
spurted it out presently; only by the effects, we gathered that she did
receive some nourishment, because she had the benefit of nature; but her stools
were such, as all that behold them admire: they are round, of the quantity of a
Nutmeg, very hard, and like a piece of earth rolled in lime, and they have no
smell.

Yet in this condition when her teeth were thus set, she spoke in her stiff
fits for several days, as follows.

September the 8th.
When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear with him in
glory.

Let us labor for Christ: Heb. 11. 26
if a poor man have but Christ, and have nothing else, he is richer then the
richest man in the world.

Christ has pulled back Satan that roaring lurking lion, that would destroy my
poor soul; but my Christ is stronger then he, and will not let him.

Let us strive for Christ: happy, happy, happy, happy are they that have Christ.

Lord, 2 Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 13. 9.
help us to build up a new building of thy grace; build them upon our hearts,
and establish our hearts upon thee.

She intermitted speaking till September 20. and then she said
Lord, Co^ 2. 7.
lay a new groundwork in our hearts of faith, and make it steadfast; if thou
graft it, it will take root.

My God has vanquished Satan that has such a malice to my poor soul, he would
get in, 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. with 1 John 5. 4. and Ephesians. 6 12. Psalm. 131. 2 Psalm.
17. 14 Psalm. 73. 26
he cannot, he cannot, my God does bu^ suffer him to step in to make me stick
close unto him, and deter me from this devilli^^ wicked world.

Lord, wean our hearts from the trash (...) this world, and give us Christ to
be our portion, and he will be an everlasting portion.

Lord, Deuteronomy. 32. 4
Lord, work a new groundwork i^ our hearts; for if thou work it, it will
stand* and if thou work it not, it will fall to the ground.

September the 22th.
Her lips did move long before she could utter any words, at last she expressed
her self, as follows. Take heed you do not despise Gods Ordinances, Heb. 12.
25
and his Word, which he spoke out of his own mouth; for if you despise Gods
Ordinances, and his Word, God will despise you, and cast you of his left hand,
and say, Go you cursed into hellfire, prepared for you.

Let us labor to be followers of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5. 1
and defy the fiery darts of the Devil.

Let us labor to build our conversation upon the Lord.

Take heed of the Devil, for he is always ^erplexing and terrifying the
servants of God: but take heed, for it is more danger^us when he comes in
white, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14.
then when ^e comes in black; for he will but flatter ^ou, and make you
believe that he will save ^ou, and show you fine things; but take heed, ^e
will but flatter you, and deceive you, that ^e may cast you into hell.

September the 23th.
This night and the other nights follovving till the 19 of October, she spoke
constantly about 8 a clock at night. Lord build up our hearts upon the High
corner-stones, which high-corner stones are the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Lord, pardon all our sins; whether they ^e Scarlet-sins, or Crimson-sins; or
sins of a double die, or sins, of ignorance, or sins of vvilfulnesse; Revel. 1.
5.
Lord, pardon them, and vvash them away in the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It is our sins that is the cause of the sufferings of that thy Beloved One,
Isai. ^3. 5.
thy Son Jesus Christ.

No man can come to Christ, John 6. 44.
except the Father draw him.

Let us struggle and strive to have our conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20.
with v. 14.
and let us press forward to have our conversation there; for without we have
our conversation in heaven, there will be howling and torment in hellfire for
ever and ever; but in Heaven there will be life everlasting.

Prepare, Heb. 9. 27. Matthew. 25. 46.
prepare against the day of death; for when the day of death comes, then
after comes the day of Judgment, and then comes death to the wicked, and
life to the righteous.

Take heed that Satan that roaring lion do not reign in your hearts; for it is
more dangerous when he comes in white like an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 14.
then when he comes in black like a Blackmoore.

Lord, purge and purify our drossy, ignorant and corrupt hearts, that we may
be followers of thee; and wash us, and cleanse us in the blood of thy beloved
One, thy Son Christ Jesus.

Take heed that Satan get not power over your souls; 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9.
for if he get in his head, he will strive to get in his whole body.

Then she laughed, and closed her Arms, and said, Joy, joy, joy, everlasting
joy.

September the 24th.
Lord, take away these stony, thorny, and corruptible hearts, Zach. 13. 9.
and purge them, purify, and refine them, even as silver and gold is refined.

Let the Word of God be written in your hearts in letters of gold.

Take heed you sow not good seed on thorny ground, Jer. 4 3. Luke 8. 7.
for the thorns will spring up and choke it.

My Christ will tread Satan under foot, Romans 16. 20.
he has promised to do it, and he will fulfill his promise, he will do it, he
will not fail, he is to be trusted.

One glimpse of Christ is worth all the world.

Lord, 1 John 5. 18.
pull back Satan, that roaring lion, that goes about to devour my poor soul,
but he cannot, but he cannot touch it.

Lord, 1 Pet. 5. 10
establish our hearts upon thee, and set them steadfast upon thee, and fix them
upon thee, and change our hearts, and make them new vessels.

Lord, wash us, Ephesians. 5. 27. 1 Pet. 1. 19.
and cleanse us in the blood of thy beloved One, and make us without spot and
blemish, even as thy spotless lamb.

My Christ has vanquished Satan that lurking, roaring lion which goes about
to destroy my poor soul, Psalm. 46. 1.
but he cannot enter in, my Christ is stronger then he, he is an help to my
soul in the time of trouble, in the time of extremity.

When a poor soul is going a journey to heaven, then Satan is always in
troubling him; for he thinks, if he cannot get power then, he can never get
power; then he is busiest, he shows his strength, he puts out all his
strength.

Abstain, 2 Timothy 2. 22. 2 Pet. 2. 11
abstain from all vices in this world that are so strong in us, as
drunkenness, lasciviousness, blasphemy, and drawing into evil company, and
all other vices, lying and thieving; for if we anger God, it will be just with
God to pour his wrath down upon us.

September 25.
Oh Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. 37.
Jerusalem! how often would I have gathered thee together, as a hen gathers
her chickens under her wings? but thou would not. Hos. 13. 9. Romans 12. 2.
Thy destruction is of thy self.

Let us wean our hearts from this world; for if it once get into us, it is hard
to get out again; Psalm. 4. 5.
we toil and moil for our bodies, but which of us takes that pains for our
souls? we are sooner filled with the trash of this world, Matthew. 6. 19.
then with our God; we are apt to seek into this world, but which of us looks
into our hearts, and examines our hearts, whether they be for God or not; Prove.
28. 9. Matthew. 23. 25, 27, 28.
and whether we follow the commands of God? if we do not follow his commands,
he will not hear us. The heart of man is false and hollow; a hollow-hearted man
will shine on the outside, 1 Kings 8. 39.
but he is rotten within, he shows it so to this world, but God knows the
heart of man.

Seeing we have put off the old man with his deeds, Col. 3 9, 10.
let us put on the new man, which is renewed with knowledge.

Take heed you put not new wine into old bottles, Matthew 9. 17.
lest the bottles break, and scatter the wine.

Let us labor to lay hold upon Christ, James 1. 23 24, 25.
and stick close to him, and follow his Commandments, and not be like the man
that looks his face in a glass, and presently forgets what manner of man he
was.

Let us labor for Christ, Ephesians. 2 8 Phil. 3. 8.
and get faith; the greater faith, the greater joy: Faith is a gift to win
Christ by; Christ will not be won without faith.

Many there be that will not believe there is a God, but it is the littleness
of their faith, the weakness of faith; they are fools and do not understand,
Psalm. 14. 1.
that think so, for the fool has said in his heart, There is no God.

There are many that say, Matthew. 24. 24. 1 Timothy 2. 5
they have Christ, and they are Christ, but there is no more Christ's but one.
Many there be that say that they have Christ, and they Christ, but they do but
make a show to the world, 1 Cor. 4. 10
and flatter the world; when God knows, Gal. 5. 24.
they know not what Christ is. They make a show to the world, and say, Christ
i^ within them, and Christ is within them when alas they do not know what he is
(...) they flatter the world, 2 Pet. 1. 9. and 2. 20.
and they think to flatter God too; but alas, alas, the day of judgment, the
day of judgment; alas, alas, they are blind, and cannot see; there is a mis^
before their eyes; they run, but they cannot tell whither; 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8
they stumble, there is (...) stumbling block before their eyes.

Oh how happy a thing it is, and joyful for to see, when a poor Christian is
embraced in those two arms of love, that beloved One, that beloved One! those
whom he has chosen, John 17. 24.
he will take them for his own for ever, he will lock them in his Cabinet from
all sin and sorrow, and from the Devils assaults.

In the day when I make up my jewels, they shall be mine, Mal. 3. 17.
says the Lord.

She concluded with much rejoicing, but expressed no words.

September 26
I am the true Vine, John 15. 1, 2.
and my Father is the Husbandman: every branch that brings not forth good
fruit in me, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire.

Those that I do not chastise, Heb. 12. 8.
they are not sons, but bastards, says the Lord.

Lord, pull back Satan, that roaring lion, which would devour my poor soul; but
he cannot, but he cannot, my God will not suffer him.

Obey the Commmandments of God, Deuteronomy. 6. 3. Exodus 20. 7. Romans 2. 11 and 12, and
13
and do not dishonor him, but honor him; and do not abuse his Titles, Words,
or Works: labor to make a right use of them; it is them that we must be
overthrown, or accepted by.

Take heed you live not in a known sin; for if you live in a known sin, it is a
double sin; and if in a double sin, God will double his Judgments; Luke 12.
47, 48.
God will denounce against you the greatest Judgment amongst the Catalogue: if
you dishonor God, he will make you smart for it.

Take heed of Satan, that cunning Serpent; beware of him, beware of him; for he
is always drawing and flattering us unto him; and when he has got us unto
him, hellfire will be our end.

Let us labor to forsake sin, Joel 3. 16. margin.
and cleave unto Jesus Christ, and let him be our safeguard; if you give way to
little sins, it will bring on greater sins; Ephesians. 5. 6.
For which things sake the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience: if you give way to little sins, it will bring on greater sins,
and then the greater will be your Judgment.

Lord, sanctify it unto us, that it may take an impression in our hearts; and
work it in us, that it may take a deep impression in our hearts.

Let us labor to be partakers with that thy beloved One, Phil. 2. 8. Gal. 3.
13.
that suffered death upon the Cross to save us from hell torments: had not he
suffered death upon the Cross for our sins, we had been howling in hell this
day: have we not cause to love him? have we not cause to love him, that
suffered death upon the Cross, that cruel death by the Jews? if we should
suffer never so much, we could never suffer so much for him, as he did for us;
Oh have we not cause to love him? let us lay down our lives for his sake that
laid down his life for us. What miserable creatures are we! Isai. 53. 3.
so that our souls be but saved, we never think of Christ's sufferings for us;
we always forget that, but we must remember it, at the day of Judgment the
Lord will call us to an account for all these things.

In the day when I make up my jewels, Mal. 3. 17.
they shall be mine, says the Lord Jehovah.

September 27.
Lord, as thou have fed our bodies with tempor all food, so feed our souls with
spiritual food.

Lord, Heb. 4. 2.
work thy Word with faith in our hearts; unless it be written with thy Spirit,
it is but a dead letter.

In the beginning was the Word, Joh. 1. 1, 3.
and the Word was with God, and all things were made by him.

Beware of Satan, that Serpent that goes about, and stands in corners to watch
to vanquish my soul, but he cannot, but he cannot touch it, 1 John 5. 18
he cannot enter in, labor to have the foundation of life, that he may not
touch it, which foundation is an everlasting foundation, it will stand, it will
never fail.

Let us labor for Christ; 1 Cor. 1. 27
for the stronger we are in Christ, the weaker we are in this world; the
stronger we are in this world, the weaker we are in Christ.

Let us labor to build our conversation upon the three-corner stones, Ephesians.
2. 20.
which is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Trust in the Lord, Isai. 26. 3.
Trust in the Lord Jehovah; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

Lord, satisfy our unsatisfied hearts, for if a man have all the world, he
has not enough, but he hankers, and hungers, and thirsts more after the things
of the world; but when we have Christ, Psalm. 73. 25. Phil. 3. 8. Col. 3. 11.
Oh what can we desire more, what would we have more? Oh! what can a Christians
heart desire more then that beloved One, that Christ Jesus? labor to have your
foundation built upon that Holy one, that Holy One.

September 29.
Take heed you lie not one to another, Col 3 9, 10.
seeing you have put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the new
man which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created him.

Be wise in all your doings, and be ye present, be ye present before the eyes
of the Lord: Psalm. 2. 10.
o fear the Lord; o fear the Lord, though you fear not men.

See that you serve the Lord above with trembling and with fear: Verse 11.
Mee^e^.
see that with reverence you rejoice in him in like manner: o let us fear the
Lord, that we may live in his fear, and die in his favor.

Oh that we had hearts to observe the Commandments of God: Deuteronomy. 5. 29
if we had but hearts to observe his Commandments, we should never ruu upon our
own souls destruction, as we do.

Labor to spend your time well in this world of abomination and sin; 1 Cor. 7.
29 30, 31. Luke 13. 3.
for it is but for a little moment: and labor to repent before the day of
death, (for after the day of death there is no repentance) lest you run
headlong into hell to your own destruction for ever and ever.

Beware of Satan, that Serpent, and give not way to his assaults, but despise
them, and fly back from them.

Let us labor for Christ, Cant. 5. 10
and let us hunger and thirst after him; for one glimpse of Christ is better
then a 1000 worlds; for one glimpse of Christ will ravish a poor Christians
heart: for when a Christian is drooping and thinking that God has forsaken
him, then God out of his favor shows him one glimpse, Hosea 6. 3.
and then goes back again, and shows him but by glimpses and glimpses, to
make him stick closer unto him, even as a star that lightens and darkens, and
lightens and darkens, to make the light shine brighter.

She spoke no more until the sixth of October.
Come, my people, enter into my Tabernacle. Having spoken these words, she fell
into an exraordinary fit of laughing and tittering heartily, six or seven
several times, as she used to do in her best health, when she was over-joyed
with any thing, and soon after fell into a mourning, and (as it were) wept in
her breast, and then she spoke the words following.

Beware of Satan that Serpent, lest he reign in your hearts; for if he touch
you, he will creep in and in, like a snail, and if he get hold, he will not be
got out, unless Christ pull him off.

Let us labor to follow the Commandments and Rules of our heavenly Father. 1
John 2. 3, 15.
Oh, that we could but observe, and follow them; we should never have our
hearts tied to this world of abomination and sin as we have.

Come, all you that are thirsty, and drink of the water of life freely, ^ohn 7.
37.
and you shall never thirst again, says the Lord.

Let us labor to repent of all our sins before the day of death; ^^cles. 9.
^0. and 11. 3
for after death there is no repentance: As life leaves us, so judgment
finds us.

Let us labor to have our hearts tied to that Beloved One, Luke 5. 4, 5
if we could but have our hearts tied unto him, we should never run astray like
lost sheep, as we do.

Twice she rejoiced, and laughed very high, and then she said:
My Christ, my Christ shines before me; 1 Pet. 1. 8.
oh, have we not cause to rejoice in him, that shines so gloriously before us
in white robes? Oh, trust in him; Oh, trust in him: Oh that glorious sight; the
Son of my sweet Father: Oh, let us labor to get faith, and let us never be
without faith, that we may rejoice in him for ever and ever.

Lord, pull back Satan that subtle Serpent, and chain him up, Lord, and let
him get no power over my poor soul; he always maliceth, and troublerh and
perplexeth the child of God, Ephesians. 6. 16.
but he can get no power over me; I do believe he cannot: I trust in thee, I
trust in thee; for thou have promised that thou will help me in time of
trouble, Isai. 41. 10.
and in time of extremity; thou do but suffer him to look in, to look in, to
make me stick closer unto thee, and to deter me from this vain, wicked,
transitory world, and from his assaults.

Lord, Revel. 7. 1
wash us, and cleanse us in the blood of thy only begotten Son, Revel. 12. 4.
that we may become pure Virgins of thine. Psalm 139. 23, 24.


Lord, help us to examine our hearts, and look into them, and search them to
the bottom, and seek to the bottom to see if there be no dross left in them;
neither dross, nor sin remain in them.

Let us not think too well of our selves; Romans 12. 16. 1 Cor. 8. 2. Phil. 2. 3.
for when a man thinks he is in the highest condition, then he is in the
lowest: and when a poor doubting Christian thinks he is in the lowest
condition, he is in the highest.

Lord, humble our proud, haughty, ignorant, and rebellious hearts, that are not
worthy to taste of the least mercy of thine; o let us be thankful for the least
mercy that the Lord has poured down upon us, and you shall see that he will
pour down greater.

Then she laughed very much, and clasped her arms several times, and said:
Oh, Phil. 1. 28. Isai. 1. 18, 19.
let us hunger and thirst after that holy One; let us never be affrighted with
Satan's temptations; Though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as
wool; and though they be like Crimson, they shall be like Snow: if you consent
and obey, you shall eat the good things of the Land: but if you be stubborn and
rebellious, you shall be devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it.

October the 8th.
Lord, pull back Satan, that lurking, roaring lion, that goes about to destroy
my poor soul; he watches and waits for every opportunity to get in, but he
cannot. My Christ will tread him under foot, that he can get no power of my
poor soul.

There be many that say, Matthew. 24. 23.
Lo, here is Christ, and lo, there is Christ, but there is no more crucified
Christ's, but one alone.

Oh, let us rejoice. Oh, let us sing and rejoice; for the snare is broken, and
we are escaped as a bird from the fowler.

We are poor dry bones, Lord, breath a Spirit of life into us, that we may
become lively Saints of thine; for if thou breathest not the Spirit of life
upon us, we are but like dry bones that moscer away.

Lord, pardon and forgive us all our sins, whether they be sins of Omission or
Commission; or sins of ignorance, or sins of knowledge; or sins of weakness, or
sins of wilfulness; or what sort of sins soever they be: Lord, wash us and
cleanse us in the blood of thy Beloved One, thy Son Jesus Christ; there is not
one day that goes over our heads, but we sin every day more and more.

We poor nothing creatures, that are not worthy to taste of the least mercy of
thine; if thou had not been a merciful, and a pitiful God, we had been all
howling in hellfire before this day; but thou shewedst pity, and compassion
upon us, or else we had all been sunk into that endless pit; but thou gave us
thy Beloved Son to redeem us out of that endless pit of torment.

Let us draw comfort from Jesus Christ, even as the Be sucks honey from the
flower; 1 Pet. 2 3. 4.
if the Be find sweetness in one flower, she will not fly away to another;
even so, if we could find sweetness from Jesus Christ, we should not fly
away from him as we do; but we must labor for it before we can get it: for how
should the Be get honey from the flower, unless it labor and suck for it? so
how should we get sweetness and comfort from Jesus Christ, unless we labor
for it?

The Birds of the air have nests, Luke 9. 58
and the Foxes have holes, but the Son of man has not where to put his head.

October 9.
Take heed you lie not one to another, Col. 3. 9.
for the Lord says, Isai. 63. 8.
They are my children such as will not lie.

Take heed you despise not Gods Ordinances, nor his Instruments that he has
sent to preach his Word. God will but let you go on with your own delusions for
a time, but there will come a day of Judgment to try whether you be right or
false: he is the Judge of all Judges, he is a true Judge, that will try
whether you be right or false.

These stony hearts of ours Lord renew them with the knowledge and
righteousness of Christ thy only begotten Son, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24.
in whom thou art well pleased.

Lord, quicken these thorny, dead, ignorant and carnal hearts of ours that are
so set upon the world, wherein there is nothing but vanity and vexation of
spirit: for what is a man better, if he have all the world and have not Christ?
for he is always hungring after more; for how can a round thing fill a three
cornered? so this world cannot fill our hearts, nor give us satisfaction; why
should we be so in love with this world? when we depart, we cannot take it with
us, we must leave it behind us; we must change either for a better life or a
worse, either for a life of torment or a life of joy.

Let us labor to forsake sin and live unto Psalm. 49. 17
righteousness, Matthew. 7. 24. to 27.
that we may have our conversation built upon the Lord substantially: if it be
built on soft ground, it will fall; but if it be built upon that substantial
rock, it will stand for ever.

October 10.
Lord, 2 Co^. 5 17 Heb. 4 2.
renew us with thy grace, that we may be fit to come to the School of Christ,
to learn the lesson of faith.

Lord, Romans 6. 6, 8
cast out the old man, that he may not take root, that we may become new
livers; and when that old man is cast out, labor to dravv nearer and nearer
unto Christ.

Take heed you live not in a known sin; 2 Pet. 2. 22
for if you live in a known sin, and wallow in sins, even as a sow does wallow
in the mire, it is dangerous.

Lord, Job 34. 32.
Lord, that which I know not, teach thou me, and I will learn.

Let us search the secrets of our hearts, Psalm. 139. ult.
lest there be any weeds scattered amongst them.

Wait and be patient, Psalm. 37. 7.
whatsoever the Lord pleases to lay upon you, as patient Job, in all his
afflictions he was patient. Job 1. 18, 19. Ver. 21, 22
When one came and told him, that all his Children went to feast at their
elder Brothers house, and the house fell upon them; he said, It is the will of
the Lord, why should not I be contented? The Lord gives, and the Lord takes
away, Job 2. 9, 10
blessed be the Name of the Lord: and his wife came to him, and bade him curse
God and die: then he said, Oh thou foolish woman, Job 1. 14, 15, 16, 17.
shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil?
then there came another to him, and told him, that his goods were all gone and
devoured; yet Job was of the same mind that he was before, and said, The Lord
gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the Name of the Lord: and Job was
patient in all his afflictions, Job 19 25, 26, 27.
and was confirmed that his soul was precious in the sight of the Lord.

Lord, cast down Satan, that Serpent, and chain him up, that he may get no
power over my poor soul.

Lord, humble these proud hearts of ours, that are so blown up with the pride
and vanities of this world; if we did but look into and examine our hearts, we
should not please the flesh so as we do, but whilst we are in the flesh, Gal.
5. 17,
we are apt to follow the lusts of the flesh.

Oh let us labor for that Holy One, Matthew. 13. 46.
that Holy One, that Jewel, that precious Jewel, that Jewel of our Heavenly
Father, that Jewel of all Jewels

Oh what can a Christian heart desite more then a Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
then a crucified Christ.

Oh if we can but gain Christ, we have all, we have all.

Oh that we had but hearts to conceive the preciousnesse, the sweetness and
holiness of that Beloved, that Christ.

Oh that we could but have Christ set upon our hearts aright. Gal. 4. 19.


Oh let us glorify him in all things; all honor and glory be given to him, to
whom it belongs.

October the 11th.
Lord, pull back that subtle Serpent, he is so subtle, that he is always
seeking in corners to devour my poor soul, but he cannot; my Christ is stronger
then he: and when he sees, that he cannot get power over the child of God,
then he goes away murmuring and repining.

Faith, 1 Cor. 13. 13.
hope, and charity, and the chiefest of these is charity; charity is love, is
love in Christ; faith is a gift of Christ; and hope, is hope to gain Christ.

Oh let us pray for faith, and all other good graces that are necessary for us,
Heb. 9. 24. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
and let us pray earnestly unto Christ, that he may pray for us in Heaven; and
if he pray for us, we shall be sure to be heard.

Let us cast our care upon the Lord, in all ca^amities; 1 Pet. 5. 7.
for he has bid us cast our care upon him, and he will care for us.

October the 12th.
Come, John 7. 37.
all you that are a thirst, and drink freely of the Spring-well-water of life,
and you shall never thirst again.

My Christ has pulled back Satan, that lurking, roaring lion, that goes about
to destroy my poor soul; but if God bid him be gone, he must be gone: my God
will pull him off me, I hope; if you watch not to him as well as he watches to
you, he will flatter and deceive you, as he would have done our Savior Christ,
Matthew. 4. 5 8, 9.
if he had had that power; but he had not that power, when he set him upon the
Pinnacle of the Temple, and showed him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the
glory thereof, and said, All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me: if we do not look unto his corners, Verse 6.
he will get and command power over us, as he thought to have done over our
Savior Christ, when he said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cause these
stones to be made bread.

Lord, Isai. 29 18.
open the eyes of the blind, that they may see clearly into the errors of sin.

Depend upon the Lord in all your extremities and calamities, and when his
appointed time is come, he will release you.

Cast your selves into those arms of love, and he will be your Savior.

October the 14th.
She rejoiced very much, and then had an exceeding great and long conflict, and
then she rejoiced again, and said, My Christ has vanquished Satan, that
lurking, roaring lion, that goes about to devour my poor soul, but he cannot,
but he cannot come near it; My Christ is stronger then he; My God does but let
him step in, to make me rely more upon him.

Lord, humble these proud, ignorant and carnal hearts of ours, that we be not
led away with this world, and the vanities in it, and let us not taste of them;
for if we taste of them, they will enter into us more and more; 1 Pet. 2. 3, 4.
if we could but taste of the sweetness of Christ, we shall be tied unto him
more and more, and fly back from the world and desire him more and more.

Then she had another great rejoicing fit, and stretched out her arms, and
said,

Let us stick close to that Holy One, John 15. 5, 6.
and he will stick close to us; but if we sit loose from him, he will sit loose
from us.

Take heed of living in a known sin; for if you live in a known sin, it is
dangerous; for if you live in a sin you know you are guilty of, it is
dangerous; o look back unto your selves, and labor truly to repent, lest your
sins be hardened, and God turn his back of you; for if they once be hardened,
it is hard to get them off again.

Take heed you live not in known sins, as drunkenness, lasciviousness,
blasphemy, and keeping of evil company, and all other vices; labor to repent
of them, and say, Lord, Job 34. 32.
that which I know not, teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will do
so no more.

October the 15th.
Let us hunger and thirst after that Holy One, and not follovv the vanities of
this world, as we do, the vanities of this world of abomination, and sin.

Let us labor to forsake sin and this world, and all things that are therein,
and stick close unto Jesus Christ, that Holy One, and not be like the swine
that regard acorns more then pearls.

Let us labor to have our conversation built upon the Lord steadfastly; let us
labor to have our foundation of life built upon that substantial rock
steadfastly; for if it be built upon sandy ground, it will fall; but if it be
built upon that steadfast rock, it will stand for ever and ever.

Lord, pull back Satan, that Serpent, tha^ goes about to devour my poor soul;
but he cannot, he cannot, he cannot enter in; my Christ will give him no power.

Let us labor to forsake sin, and live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 24
and truly repent of our former sins, which we have sinned, which we have
committed formerly, let us truly repent of them.

Oh let us cry aloud unto the Lord, in the time of extremity and calamity, and
he has promised that he will give ear unto us.

October the 16th.
Oh let us trust in the Lord, 2 These. 3. 3
for he is a trusty one, he is to be trusted: let us cast both our bodies and
souls into the hands of that everliving and glorious God, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
for he has bid us to cast our care upon him, and he will care for us.

If we should trust a carnal man that has Psalm. 146. 3.
no care of his salvation, but of the trash of this world, he is so greedy of
it, and hungers and thirsts after it, James 4. 4.
that he thinks that that will make him; but the nearer we are to the trash of
this world, the farther are we off of God: if we could but hunger and thirst
after the riches of Christ, we should not hunger after the riches of this
world, John 4. 14.
as we do.

Oh that we had but hearts to conceive the riches of Christ from the riches of
this world; Prove. 3. 13 14. Psalm. 49. 11 12. Prove. 1. 32. 1 Cor. 1. 20
for we think that the riches of this world will be the making of us, but
alas, alas, they will be the undoing of us. The wisdom of man is
foolishness, but the wisdom of God is righteousness.

October the 17th.
Lord, Revel. 7. 14. and 14. ^. 1 Per. 1. 16 Matthew. 5. 48. Heb. 12. 14 1 Cor.
15. 50.
Lord, vvash us and cleanse us in the purity of thy only begotten Son, in
whom thon art well pleased, that we may become pure Virgins of thine; for
without we be in some part holy, as thou art holy, and in some part perfect,
as thou art perfect, we can never enter into the Kingdom of God, into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Resist the Devil, and he will fly back from you: he will go away murmuring
and repining at you: take heed he enter not into your hearts; John 13. 2.
for if he do, he will leave corruption behind him: even as the snail leaves
slime behind it: so he leaves the corruption of sin behind him. The
corruption of the Devil will show it self, and the holy righteousness of
God will show it self; but there is a great deal of difference: for where
the corruptiou of Satan remainerh there is nothing but lasciviousness, Act. 13
10
blasphemy, lying, threatening, and keeping of evil company: 2 Cor. 5. 17
but where the purity of Christ remains, there is upright dealing,
righteousness, and true holiness.

Lord, Ephesians. 5. 18. Luke 24. 49. Romans 8. 10, 13.
fill us with thy Spirit; Lord, endue us with the Spirit of Christ, for where
the Spirit of Christ remains, there can no corruption enter in.

Oh let us labor for the riches of Christ; for if a poor man that is never so
poor, James 2. 5.
has but the riches of Christ, he is accepted of God; for with the Lord there
is no respect of persons.

October the 18th.
Trust in the Lord Jehovah, Isai. 26. 4.
for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

Let us labor for faith; Romans 15. 1.
the greater faith, the greater joy; Heb. 11. 33 etc. Ephesians. 2. 8. Acts 17. 28
faith is the beginning of wisdom: it is the first thing that does belong to a
Christian. Oh if we could but get faith, it would carry us above all; it would
carry us from the lowest earth to the highest heaven.

Oh let us labor for Christ, Jer. 42. 20.
that holy One, by whom we live, move, and have our being.

Lord, Hos. 11. 12
sanctify our unsanctified hearts, and keep us from dissembling; for if we
dissemble with man, Psalm. 139. 2 3.
we shall not dissemble with God: there are many false hearts in this world,
Verse 2. Jer. 17. 9.
but God knows them; God knows their coming in and their going out; though
hypocrisy be hid from man, it cannot be hid from God: God knows our thoughts,
Revel. 2. 2, 19. Eccles. 12. 14. Romans 14. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
words, works, actions. The heart of man is deceitful, but God can find it
out. God knows every work we do, every word we speak, every thought we think,
and we must answer for them one day: the Lord will call us to an account at the
day of judgment, he is a righteous Judge, he will judge righteously: if we
deal not uprightly with man, we shall not deal uprightly with God.

Lord, soften these stony, ignorant, hard, and carnal hearts of ours; Lord,
mollify them with thy graces, with all thy gracious gifts, as faith, that we
may be fit to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Oh let us be patient, ^ames 5. 8. Isai. 30. 18.
until the appointed time of the Lord; he waits on us, but we cannot be
contented to wait upon him; we could be contented to be all our lives without
afflictions; Psalm. 119. 50. Heb. 12. 11
but if we should not know affliction, we should not know comfort. We should be
so taken and blown up with comfort, that we should not know our selves; if we
should not have discomfort mixed with comfort, we should value it so much, that
we should value the creature more then the Creator.

October 19. about 4 a clock in the afternoon.
Let us labor to be followers of that Beloved One, Matthew. 7. (...)
he that does not the will of my Father which is in Heaven, he is not worthy
of the Lord.

Oh let us put off the rags of sin, and put on the robes of righteousness,
that we may be fit to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Again, the same day about eight of clock she spoke, and she did keep to that
hour until November 21. Narrow is the way that leads unto life, Matthew. 7.
and few there be that find it; but wide is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be that go therein.

Oh let us labor for Christ, Heb. 7. 26. John 10. 7. with 3. and 9
that Love, that Dove, that undefiled One; he is the Doorkeeper, he will lead
us from the gates of hell unto everlasting life.

Lord, pull down those that have a mind to pull down thee, and raise up those
that have a desire to raise up thee.

Lord, give us patience to vvait upon thy time appointed: we would be all our
lives without affliction, but it is for our good; not for our hurt, but for
our good; thou do not chastise us for our hurt, but for our good; for the
Lord has said, they are not my children, Heb 12. 10 and verse 9.
but bastards, whom I do not chastise not. Oh why should not we vvait upon
him that vvaiteth alvvayes upon us? why should not we be patient? but we are
so naughty, and full of corrupt nature, that we cannot be contented to vvait
upon him till our Glass be run; he vvaiteth and watches over us every hour
and minute: when the time appointed comes, he can raise any of us up, even as
he did the Maid, when he said, Arise, and be whole; and she arose, and was
healed. Oh why should not we be contented, Mark 5. 41 42.
for his Arm is not shortened, nor his Power diminished; Isai. 59. 1.
therefore why should no^ we be contented?

In this world whilst we are in affliction we think it is miserable and
grievous; bu^ hereafter it will be sweetened; while we a^ in affliction we
think it is miserable and grievous; but the Lord will sweeten it with the cup
of mercy; the Patient must taste of (...) bitter potion before his stomach be
cleared*

Oh let us labor to fear the Lord, that we may live in his fear and die in his
favor, Matthew. 7. 2.
for as we do, so we must look to be done by*

October the 20th
Children, Ephesians. 6. 1.
obey your parents in all things, knowing that it is well pleasing unto the
Lord.

Oh let us labor to have our wills melted into the will of that everliving and
glorious God. Matthew. 26. 39.


The secrets of God are hid from man, Matthew. 1^. 25, 26.
and his ways past finding out; but the Lord will reveal them to his children
in some part, when his time appointed is come.

Lord, humble these proud hearts of ours, and endue us with the gift of
Humiliation.

Oh let us labor to return thanks unto the Lord for all his mercies that he
has poured down upon us; for the way of begetting more, is to return thanks
unto the Lord, and to give reverence unto him; we reverence our earthly
fathers, our natural fathers, Oh why should not we much more reverence our
Heavenly Father? Heb. 12. 9.


Oh let us labor to forsake this world, and all things that are therein; for
there is nothing that is desirable.

Oh let us labor to stick close unto that Holy One: for when all things in the
world fail, Heb. 13. 5. and 8.
he will never fail, he will stick close to us, when all things in this world
decay, and moscer away, he will be an everlasting rock.

Lord, open our blind eyes, that we may see clearly the weakness of our
selves, and the strength of Christ.

Oh let us labor to lead our lives and conversations well in this life; for as
we do, so we must look to be done by: if we sow unto the flesh, Gal. 6. 8.
we shall reap corruption; but if we sow unto the Spirit, we shall reap life
everlasting.

October the 21th.
Let us labor to repent of all our sins which we have lived in formerly,
which lies unrepented of; for after the day of death there is no repentance;
Eccles. 9. 10.
as life leaves us, so Judgment finds us.

October the 22th.
Oh let us cast our care upon the Lord, Psalm. 68 5.
for he will care for us, he has promised to be a father to the fatherless,
and a husband to the widow.

Lord, pull back Satan, that lurking, roaring lion, that goes about to devour
my poor soul; but he cannot, my Christ will tread him under foot, that he can
get no power over my poor soul.

Lord, graft thy Word into our heads, and not only into our heads, but into
our hearts also. We are poor Earth-wormes, Lord, breath into us the breath of
life, that we may become lively Saints of thine, that we may become lively
Saints of thine, and that we may sing Hallelujahs with thee in the highest
Heavens.

Take heed you lie not one to another, for if you go in that way, the Devil
will take that occasion to pour in more corruption.

Lord, mollify these hard hearts of ours with thy graces, that are so hardened
with sin and corruption.

October the 24th.
Lord, Isai. 29, (...) Matthew. 1^. 14.
open the eyes of the blind, that ^ey may see clearly the purity that is in
Christ; and the corruption that is in them^ves they see and perceive not, they
hear and understand not.

Lord, enrich our souls with thy graces, that ^e may be instruments to enrich
the King^ome of Heaven.

Lord, pull back Satan, that lurking, roar^g lion, that goes about to destroy
my poor ^ul; but he cannot: my Christ will give him ^o power: he will not let
him touch it. He ^oth what he can to get victory; but he cannot: my Christ will
not let him. The Devil ^aliceth the children of God: he is always ^usiest
about them, and flattering them; he (...) always thinking to make them fear
him, and flattering them, and thinking to overcome them; but those whom God
has ^hosen, he will take them for his own; the ^oor doubting Christian the
Devil is always ^utting fears and doubts into them; but when he thinks they
are in the lowest con^^ition, they are in the highest; and when a man thinks
he is in the highest condition, he is in the lowest; when a poor doubting
Christian thinks he falls, 1 Cor. 10. 12.
he stands; a^ when a man thinks he stands, he falls.

Lord, take away these hearts of stone, a^ renew us with hearts of flesh.

Lord, humble these proud hearts of our^ that we may not be swallowed up with
the vanities of this world; 2 Timothy 4. 10.
we are apt to (...) drawn to the vanities of this world, and (...) fly back
from Christ. Oh what disobedie^ children are we, that follow not the commands
of so loving a Father: that which (...) bids us to do, that we do not; and
the which he bids us not do, that we do.

Oh let us labor for faith, Revel. 2. 10.
for he that (...) faithful until death, he shall enjoy the crowne^ life.

October the 25th.
Come my people enter into thy chamber, Isai. 26. 20.
she the door upon thee, hide thy self for a little m^ment, until the
indignation of the Lord be overpast.

He that does not the will of my Father, Matthew. 10. 37, 38.
which is in heaven, he is not worthy of me, says the Lord.

Take heed you sow not good seed upon thorny ground, Jer. 4. 30. Matthew. 13. 7.
lest the thorns spring up, and choke it.

My Christ has pulled back Satan, that lurking, roaring lion, which goes
about to devour my poor soul: he maliceth my poor soul, and thinks to get the
victory, but he cannot.

Oh let us labor to be partakers with that Beloved one, 1 Pet. 1. 19. John 1.
29. 1 John 2. 2.
that immaculate lamb of God, that spotless lamb that laid down his life to
take away the sins of the whole world.

Oh let us labor for faith, that rich grace of our God; Lord, pour it down
upon us, that is, that rich grace of eternity, that is, the grace, by which we
must either live or die; without we have that grace, we shall never come to
God, we shall never come to Christ. Oh let us labor for faith; o let us labor
for faith; no faith, no Christ; no Christ, no salvation.

Lord, as thou have fed out bodies with temporal food, so feed our souls with
spiritual food; that we may be able Instruments to enrich the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Lord, Matthew. 3. 16. Acts 13. 9. Romans 15. 19.
endue our spirits with the gift of Humiliation: for the Spirit of God is a
humble Spirit, a meek Spirit, a holy Spirit, a full Spirit; it acts powerfully,
and breaths where it lists.

Trust in the Lord Jehovah, Isai. 26.
for in the Lord Jehovah is our everlasting strength.

Come, Isai. 1. 18, 19, 20.
my people, let us reason together: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as wool; though they be like crimson, they shall be as white as snow; if you
consent and obey, you shall eat the good things of the land; but if you be
stubborn and rebellious, you shall be de voured with the sword; for the mouth
of the Lord has spoken it.

October the 26th.
Come, John 7 39. and 4. 14. Revel. 22. 17. ^ Pet. 2. 25.
all you that are thirsty, and drink freely of the spring-well-water of life,
and you shall never thirst again.

Oh let us labor to have our hearts tied to that immaculate Lamb, that we do
not run away like a lost sheep into this world, as we do; wherein there is
nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit.

My Christ has vanquished Satan, that lurking, roaring lion, that labors to
eclipse my comfort; but he cannot, but he cannot, he can get no power; he
maliceth the good of my poor soul, but he is never the nearer for that; 2 Cor.
1. 5.
as much as he seeks to discomfort me, so much the more there is one above that
comforts me.

The Works of God are wonderful, Romans 11. 33.
and his ways past finding out; the wisdom of man is foolishness, but the
wisdom of God is righteousness.

Lord, Heb. 2. 4. with Heb. 10. 38.
humble these proud hearts of ours, that they be not blown up with the vanities
of this world; for we are apt to become back-sliders from that which is good,
and to be followers of that which is evil.

Come unto me, Matthew. 11. 28.
all ye that are weary and heavy-laden, and I will give you rest, says the
Lord.

In the day when I make up my jewels, Mal. 3. 17.
they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hoasts.

October the 27th.
As many as I love, Revel. 3.
I rebuke and chasten; be zealous therefore, and repent.

Oh let us call upon the Lord in time of trouble, Psalm. 50. Luke 18. 1 etc.
Isai. 62. 6, 7
and he has promised that he will hear us: o let us charge the Lord with his
promises; for he loves to be charged with his promises, of his children, and
he will give more attentive ear unto them: o let us wrestle with him, as Jacob
did, when he said, I will not let thee go until thou bless me: Genesis 32. 24 26.
he would not have a denial of God.

First, he prepares our hearts, that they may be capable of faith; then he
works faith in them.

October the 28th.
Ask, Matthew. 7.
and you shall have; seek, and you shall find; knock, and the door of
Righteousness shall be opened unto you.

They that do the Will of my Father, Matthew. 12. 50.
they are my Mother, Sister, and Brother, says our Savior Christ.

We poor dry bones that moscer away for want of one drop of the dew of
righteousness: we moscer away; we are so deeply drowned in sin, in the
corruption of sin, that we cannot of our selves attain to the power to enjoy
that sweet enjoyment of Eternity.

Lord, pull back Satan, that lurking, roaring lion, that goes about to eclipse
the spiritual comfort of my poor soul; but he cannot, but he cannot; my Christ
has made a wall, and he cannot enter the wall, he cannot cast it down.

Oh let us labor for Christ, that Love, that Dove, that Undefiled One, that
Holy One, by whom we live, move, and have our being; he is All in All, perfect
without imperfection.

Oh let us labor for the sweet enjoyment of Eternity; Revel. 21. 4.
where there is comfort without discomfort, joy without sorrow; and where all
tears are wiped away from our eyes, and botled up.

Oh let us labor to attain to that eternal weight of glory, Psalm. 56. 8. 2
Cor. 4. 17
where there is nothing but joy and rejoicing, mirth and melody, and singing
Hallelujahs with the Lord in the highest Heavens.

Ephesians. 6. 1, with 5. 6.
Children, obey your parents in all things, knowing that it is well-pleasing
unto the Lord: for the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience.

October the 29th.
No man can come to Christ, John 6.
except the Father draw him.

Lord, 2 Pet. 1. 1. and 1 Pet. 1. 7.
endue us with those rich graces of thine, as faith, which is the richest of
all; we are so benumbed with sin, lukewarm, and key-cold, that we cannot
apprehend them to make a right use of them.

Oh let us labor for Christ: for when Christ, who is our life, shall appear,
then shall we also appear with him in glory.

We poor, miserable, and wretched creatures, that have sinned against thee
every day more and more; if thou had not bin a pitiful and merciful God,
Lam. 3. 22.
we had before this been sunk into the endless pit of torment, but thou have
showed pity and compassion upon us, John 3. 16, 17.
in giving us thy only begotten Son to redeem us from that endless pit of
torment.

M^rtifie therefore your members which are upon the earth, Col. 3. 5.
as fornication, adultery, blasphemy, and covetousness, which is Idolatry.

My Christ has cast down Satan, that lurking, roaring lion, that thinks to get
the upper hand over my poor soul; Genesis 13. 15 Romans 16. 20.
but I hope, nay I am sure, that there is one above that will defend me from
him; he has promised that he will tread him under foot.

The godly have their torments here, Luke 16. 25.
but the wicked shall have their torments for ever hereafter.

Take heed of Satan, for he is very subtle; for there is more danger when he
comes in white, like an Angel of light, then when he comes in black, like a
Blackmoore.

Oh let us labor for Christ, Psalm. 37. 25.
that Holy One: for he will never suffer the righteous to be forsaken, nor
their seed to beg their bread.

October the 30th.
There be many that say, Lo, hereis Christ, and lo, Matthew. 24. 23.
there is Christ; but there is no more crucified Christ's then one alone.

Lord, pardon and forgive us all our sins which we have sinned against thee, of
what sort soever they be. Lord, wash us and cleanse us in the blood of thy
only begotten One: o what disobedient children are we that are so rebellious
against thee: Isai. 27. 3. Psalm. 121. 3, 4.
Good Lord, pardon us, that we should be so disobedient to so loving a Father,
that has always an eye over us, and watches over us every day and night, and
continually; that which thou biddest us to do, that we do not; and that which
thou biddest us not to do, that we do: but alas, alas, the greater is our
Judgment.

October the 31th.
Cast your care upon the Lord, for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Matthew. 6.
27. Mark 8. 36
and let not your care be upon the world; it will be never the better for you,
but a great deal worse; for What are we better, if we gain the whole world, and
lose our own souls, and be cast into hell for ever?

Oh let us labor to be partakers of the immaculate Lamb: o what a sweet thing
it is to be partakers of that immaculate Lamb!

Oh! it would ravish a poor Christians soul; o let us labor for him; if we
lose him, we lose all.

Lord, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. James 5. 1. to the 15.
humble these proud and ignoran^ hearts of ours, that they be not puff't up and
blown up with the pride of this world; for God knows there is many of them;
but Lord, teach them to know themselves, that they may live to please thee, and
not to live in thy displeasure.

Oh let us knock at the door of Righteousness, until Christ Jesus that
immaculate lamb of God be pleased to open to us the door of faith.

November the 1.
Lord, Romans 6. 14
purify these drossy hearts of ours, that we may become pure Virgins of thine,
and leave them without dross or sin remaining in them.

Lord, restrain those that go about to interrupt those instruments, Acts 4 24.
to the 30. 2 The^. 3. 1 2.
which thou have sent to preach out thy holy Word in thy Congregations: it is
requisite that offenses should come, but woe be to them by whom they come.

Oh let us labor to gain the Kingdom of Heaven, and struggle, and strive for
it; for it is not gained with a little ado, but Heaven is won by violence,
Matthew. 11. 12.
and the violent take it by force.

Lord, enrich these poor fainting souls of ours with thy graces, that we may
become able instruments to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

November the 3.
Lord, endue us with thy rich graces, as faith, which is the richest grace of
all; but our hearts are so stony, that we cannot apprehend them aright, to make
a right use of them; but make them of a fit temper, that we may have our wills
melted into that Will of that everlasting, everliving, and glorious Lord our
God, that we may lie at the feet of that immaculate lamb of thine, until those
two arms of Love be pleased to take us up into the throne of Heaven.

Put on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.
that we may be able to stand against all the wiles of the Devil.

Oh labor to take notice of that everliving, Micah 6. 3, 4, 5.
and glorious Lord, our good God, and of all his mercies that he has been
pleased to pour down upon us; for if we take notice of him, he will take notice
of us, both of all our needs and necessities, Matthew. 6. 32. 33.
and necessary things both temporal and spiritual; for if we sit loose from
him, he will sit loose from us.

November the 4th.
Oh let us labor to repent of all our sins which we have lived in formerly,
Genesis 35. 3. Psalm. 136. 23, 24.
and call to mind what the Lord has done for us in distress. When we were in
the hands of our enemies, he has preserved us from the hands of our enemies;
for if we were as we should be, we should be thankful every hour of a day; but
God knows we are far short.

Good Lord, Zach. 13. 9
refine us, even as silver and gold is refined, and make us without spot or
blemish, even as thy spotless lamb, and cloth us with the righteousness of him.

November the 5th.
He that knows the will of his Father that is in heaven, Luke 12. 47.
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

Lord, renew these stony hearts of ours, and give us hearts of flesh.

Lord, open our blind eyes, that we may see cl^erly the error of sin, and the
purity that is in Christ, and the corruption that is in our selves.

We poor, miserable, and wretched creatures, Lord, pardon and forgive us all
our sins, that we have committed against thee, and wash them away in the blood
of that thy beloved One, and leave us without spot or stain remaining in us.

November the 6th.
The Works of God are wonderful, and his ways past finding out.

Servants, Ephesians. 6. 5
obey the will and command of your Masters, which are upon the earth, knowing
that you have a Master in heaven.

Oh let us call upon the Lord in the time of extremity and calamity, and he
has promised to give ear unto us.

November the 8th.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear you, Psalm. 50.
and you shall glorify me.

Oh Lord, endue us with thy graces, that we may be fit to come to the School of
Christ, to learn the lesson of faith.

Oh let us labor for that beloved One; for if we have him, we have all; if we
want him, we want all: he will stand unto us, when all will fall down; all
things are but dross and dung in comparison of him.

Oh labor to repent of all your sins: Zach. 12. 10.
but you must first lay the groundwork of faith, and then truly repent, and
return home unto the Lord.

Oh let us cry aloud unto the Lord in the time of necessity, and he has
promised to give ear unto us.

Cast your care upon the Lord, for he cares for you; in the time of extremity
and calamity, when all helpers in the world fail, he will be your greatest help
of all; Psalm. 22. 11. with 19. Romans 1. 28.
he must do it, or none.

Oh let us labor to fear the Lord, that we may live in his fear, and die in
his favor.

Come unto me, Matthew. 11. 28.
all ye that are weary and heavy-laden, and I will give you rest. Oh what a
sweet promise is this, if we had but hearts to apprehend it aright! but our
hearts are so stony, and so full of corruption, that it can take no effect;
but, Lord, mollify them.

November the 9th.
Oh let us call to mind what the Lord has done for us, and not be like the
natural man that looks his face in a glass, James 1.
and presently forgets what manner of man he was.

Oh let us labor and take pains for that well-beloved One, Phil. 3.
and labor to s^ick close unto him; for if we lose him, we lose all; and if we
gain him, we gain all.

Oh let us labor to set our affections on the things that are above, and not
on the world, wherein there is nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit.

Oh let us labor to wait and be patient until his appointed time, for his
time is the best time.

My Christ has vanquished Satan, that lu^king, roaring lion, that goes about
to devour my poor soul; but I hope he has nothing to do with me, I hope my God
will own me for his own; he is always malicing and perplexing the children of
God, to make their journey uncomfortable, and thinks that if* he get not
victory then, he shall never get victory.

Come, all ye that are a thirst, and drink freely of the Spring-well-water of
life, and you shall never thirst again.

Lord, Lord, endue us with thy graces, that we may become lively branches in
thy Vineyard; prune it, dress it, and water it, and look to it, that nothing
hurt it, nor harm it.

Oh let us labor for faith, for they that are faithful until death, shall
receive a Crown of life.

Lord, satisfy these unsatisfied hearts of ours; for if a man have all the
world, he thinks that he has not enough; but when he has Christ, then he is
fully satisfied. Ah, what can a Christian heart desire more then a crucified
Christ, then a naked Christ? what can a Christian heart desire more? he is the
jewel of all jewels, he is the upright One.

Labor to deal faithfully in all things: for as you do, so you must look to be
done by; if you sow to the flesh, you shall reap corruption; but if you sow
to the Spirit, you shall reap life everlasting.

Lord, endue us with thy graces, and set them aright upon our hearts, but they
are so benumbed, lukewarm, and key-cold, that we cannot apprehend them to make
a right use of them: but Lord, make them of a fit temper

Oh let us labor for Christ, that love, that Dove, that undefiled one, that
laid dow^ his life to pardon the sins of all the elect.

November the 10th.
Lord, forgive and pardon all our sins, whether they be sins original or
actual sins, of weakness or wilfulness; sins of omission or commission, sins
of ignorance or of knowledge, scarlet sins or crimson sins, or sins of a double
diet, or what sort of sins soever they be; Lord, wash them and cleanse us in
the blood of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, in whom alone thou art well pleased.

Oh let us labor for Christ, Psalm. ^0. 1.
that habitation, in whom we live, move, and have our being.

Ask, and you shall have; knock, and it shall be opened to you, and the door
that leads to everlasting life shall be opened unto you. Faith, hope, and
charity, the greatest of these three is charity. Charity is love, and the love
of Christ; faith is a gift given of Christ; and hope is a hoping to enjoy
Christ.

Now, Lord, of thy merciful promise, let thy poor doubting Christian feel some
dram of assurance to this poor soul: let a poor sinner feel one dram of the
assurance of thy love to his poor doubting soul.

Oh let us suck sweetness from Jesus Christ, as the child sucks milk from the
mothers breast; the harder we draw, the more we shall get; the child wrangles
and wrangles till the mother give it the pap in the mouth, and then it is quiet
and satisfied: so, and there she stayed a good space, going often over with the
word [so] before she could get any more words; at last, she said [so] a poor
soul seeks, and knows not what it wants, and wrangles, and wrangles till it get
Christ; all the world will not satisfy it, but (and then she lifted up her
self, and struck with her hand upon her thighs with much fervor of spirit)
when it gets Christ, then it is satisfied, (and then using the same actions
again, said) when it gets Christ, then it is abundantly satisfied; all the world
will not satisfy him, but Christ will give him full satisfaction.

November the 11th.
Be ye holy, even as Christ is holy. Be y^ holy, Psalm. 37. 3.
as I am holy, says the Lord.

Trust in the Lord, trust in the Lord, trust the Lord with all that you have;
for he has promised, Psalm 34. 22 and 17. 7. Heb. 11. 19 and 32, 35. 36.
that he will provide for them that trust in him, and keep you from evil.

Lord, renew us with that rich grace of faith, (...) will carry us above, it
will carry us from the lowest earth to the highest heaven; we are not in the
lowest earth here, we are but in the middle earth; but faith will carry us from
the lowest earth to the highest heaven.

Lord, teach us to walk in thy paths, and teach us the way that leads to
everlasting life.

November the 12th.
No man can come to Christ, John 6.
unless the Father ^raw him.

Take heed you lie not one to another; Col. 3.
for if ^ou give way to that sin, the Devil will take that occasion to pour in
more corruption.

Oh let us labor for Christ, 1 John 5. 12
that holy One; want him, and want all; and have him, and have all.

November the 14th.
Isai. 63 8.
Take heed you lie not one to another; for the Lord says, They are my children,
such as will not lie, and I will be their Savior.

Trust the Lord, trust in the Lord; for he ^s a trusty one, he is to be
trusted; trust the Lord with your self, and all yours, and he will watch over
you for good, and keep you from evil: Psalm. 125. 1
for he has promised, that those that trust in him!, shall be as Mount Zion,
which shall never be moved.

November the 15th.
He that knows the will of his Father which is in heaven, and does it not,
shall be beaten with many stripes.

Oh let us not be forgetful of those me^cies Psalm. 10^. 1, 2.
which the Lord has been pleased ^ pour down upon us; but be thankful f^
them, and prize them highly, for if we ha^ a thousand hearts, and a thousand
hearts, w^ could never be sufficiently thankful: the mercies of God are to be
esteemed, and highly esteemed of: there is many a poor Christian, many a poor
creature, which would be glad to have those mercies which we daily and hourly
enjoy; they are so common, that we do not esteem of them: but alas, alas, the
greater is our Judgment.

November the 16th.
Lord, Hab. 2. 5.
humble these proud hearts of ours, lest we betake our selves to this vain
world, and so run headlong into hell, to our own souls destruction.

Let us labor and take pains for that immaculate Lamb of God; for he will
never see the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging bread.

Oh let us labor for Christ, that holy One; for, when Christ, who is our life,
shall appear, then shall we appear with him in glory.

Lord, Isai. 33. 17.
open our blind eyes, that we may see clearly the purity that is in Christ,
and ^^e corruption that is in our selves.

November the 19th.
Lord, purge and purify these drossy hearts ^f ours, and refine them, even as
silver and ^old is refined, that we may become pure ^irgins of thine.

Oh let us labor and take pains to inherit ^he Kingdom of Heaven, where there
is nothing but mirth and melody, joy and re^oycing, joy without sorrow, comfort
without discomfort; where all tears are wiped away, and botled up.

November the 20th.
Oh let us labor for Christ, Gal. 4. 19. Revel. 2. 17.
that holy One; he is all in all, perfect without imperfection; have him, and
have all; want him, and want all; all things are but dross and dung in
comparison of him.

Oh let us labor to have the Name of Christ set aright upon our hearts, that
it might make a deep impression, that it might take effect to work effectually.

Oh let us labor to have our conversation built upon that substantial rock
steadfastly; for if it be built upon sandy ground, it will fall; but if it be
built upon that substantia rock, it will stand for ever.

November the 21th.
Trust the Lord, for he is a trusty one, h^ is to be trusted; he has promised,
that tho^ that trust in him shall stand as Mount Zion, the shall never be
removed, but abides for ever.

Oh let us wait and be patient until the appointed time of the Lord, for his
time is the best time: Heb. 10. 37
For he that shall come, will come and will not tarry.

Take heed that yon sow not good seed on thorny ground, lest the thorns spring
up and choke it.

Lord, humble these proud hearts of ours, lest we be blown up with this world,
and the vanities thereof; if we could but feel one dram of the sweetness of
Christ, we should not give way to the vanities of the world as we do; but while
we are in the flesh, we are apt to follow the lusts of the flesh; if we could
be so sensible of the sweetness of Christ, and apprehend it aright, we should
be taken up so with Christ, and with the sweetness of him, that we should not
be so carried away with the vanities of the world, but we should give up our
selves to christ, and make him our Habitation.

The same night about 12 a clock.
She had great extremity of pain, and, as conceived, would gladly have spoken,
ma^ing signs that her heart was in Heaven, as was thought by those who were
present with her) for she pulled at her breast seve^all times, and held up her
hand as high as she could reach, looking up with her ^yes; and then, after a
short space, she spoke, and said,

Me is not in the hand of mine enemy, but ^n the hand of my loving Father; he
is an ever-living, ever-loving and glorious Lord God, he is a wise God, and he
will not give his children one lash more then he sees good for them.

After this she spoke no more until the eighth day of December, which was the
day after the Lord had graciously given her the use of her Senses and of her
Understanding.

To close up this second part of the Narrative, I shall add this, that some of
these Speeches she uttered, (though but few of them will need such Apology) in
weakness, as a child under such strange distempers, as did somewhat confuse
and perturbe her intellectuals; but other things she uttered through the
strength of the Spirits assistance extraordinarily guiding her tongue to utter
such things, as now she cannot tell that ever she did speak them. There be some
things often repeated; yet because either they are uttered with some variety, and
were things that it seems her heart was much carried forth to mention;
therefore I have set them down, and hope they will not be tedious, but may
raise up further thoughts of them, when you read them over again, and compare
them with the Scriptures in the Margin; and if you knew the state of the
family, and the condition of some that came occasionally to hear her, Exodus 12.
4
you would say, there was a Divine hand that guided her tongue, and that God
was with her mouth, adapting her speeches to their necessities.

And I suppose her heart was more affected with some truths before this ill
fit, and of those things she makes the most frequent mention: But whilst I am
Apologizing ^or her Repetitions, some may tax me for Omissions: some have said,
that she prophesied, and no such passages are here related; to which I answer,
there is no ground for such a report: there is one passage related in one of
her Speeches, October the 19th. (in the end of page 107, and beginning of page
108.) about, Raising of the Maid; unless they fancy this to be a Prophetic
foretelling of her Recovery, I know not any thing uttered by her, nor could
upon enquiry hear of any thing that might give ground for such a report; but
the truth is, such Reporters (I hear) do some of them expect to have the gift
of Miracles, and it may be of prophesying, and seemed to be much taken with
Gods dispensations to this Child, hoping it would have conduced something to
the promoting of their cause, but are disappointed; for God has opened the
mouth of a dumb child to confute their follies. It may be they prophesied that
she would prophecy, and so have proved themselves to be false prophets.

My hearts desire and prayer to God shall be, that these Speeches may take as
deep impression upon the hearts of the Readers, as they did upon her body, who
was the Speaker: God was pleased to hold her upon the rack for so many weeks,
nay months, in which she endured grievous torturings; and yet to enable her to
speak such things, surely so extraordinary a Teacher requires more then
ordinary attention. When Jonah, who had bin so close a student in the Whales
belly College, came to preach to the Ninevites^ the strangeness of the
Relation concerning the Preacher, might make his Sermons take more with them,
Exodus 8. 19
Shall not they rise in Judgment against the men of this Generation? some, it
may be (with Pharaohs South-sayers) will acknowledge the finger of God is in
this, when his whole hand is visible; but if men slight such dispensations, no
wonder: for if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16. ult.
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. God indulged to
the Israelites (its thought) to enjoyne them Ceremonies of his devising, to
prevent their use of, or hankering after such as were of man's devising; God
seems to indulge to the weakness of some in such extraordinary actings of his
Providence (in this Instance, and a few others which might be mentioned;) but
if the Father of the Family take all this care, and yet men are not contented
with his established Institutions, but they are finding out new Inventions;
Eccles. 7. 29.
God will certainly correct this wantonizing humor: It argues, our stomachs
are foul and crazy, when we must have new dishes every meal, and cannot ^eed
upon the standing dishes of Gods Ordinances: Zach. 14. 16, 17, 18. 19.
the King of Saints will nor be thus affronted, but level and discharge the
Ordnance of his power against those that disclaim the Ordinances of his Grace.
But I hope, through the pourings out of the Spirit many shall be so wise as to
observe these things, and to profit by ordinary and extraordinary
dispensations; and surely, They shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord.

The third Part of the NARRATIVE; Containing The wonderful Recovery of this
Child of Wonders.
MAny days had been set apart in the Family to seek the face and favor of
God, on the behalf of this afflicted Child; which Duties her parents, (as
Obed-Edom the Ark) were forward to entertain (as at other times, so) now in
this their afflicted condition. They have had much experience that God was a
God hearing prayer; and therefore would not be beaten off from these (now alas,
too much neglected) means, from which they had sucked much sweetness, having
found God sometimes marvellously helping of them, 2 Chronicles. 26. 15. Dan. 11. 34.
till they were strong in the power of his might, but always helping them with
a little help, and bearing up their spirits under the trials, though they did
not obtain a full enlargement: and when one told the father of this child,
that the room was not able to bear so many as came to seek God in those duties:
he replied, The more, the better, so that those who come, can pray and believe.

But yet the Lord in wisdom seemed to us to be as one astonished, Jer. 14. 9.
as a mighty man that cannot save, the Childs distempers of body growing more
violent, she having most terrible crying fits, (by reason of her extreme pain,
which crying fits continued till she vomited blood, and then she was quiet)
which were very grievous and afflictive to the spirits of all that heard her;
and the whole Family so continually under sadness, and their sleep so broken,
that you might have seen Every one with their hands upon their loins, Jer. 30.
6.
as a woman in travel, and all faces turned into palenesse. Which dealings of
the Lord with that family did serve to awaken them to a more solemn way of
seeking his face, and it was judged, that it was his purpose to have his
providential dispensations in relation to this child more publicly taken
notice of, that so they might not be hid in a corner, but many might behold his
glorious goings, and bear witness thereof unto the world, when he should
finish his work upon her: therefore her Parents did write and speak to several
Ministers of his Word, (two of which have prefixed Epistles to this Narrative)
and a Day was fixed to be set apart for Humiliation, of which many precious
servants of God had notice, which was the ninth day of November: November. 9,
1652.
In which Day the Company being met at Mr. Hatfeilds house, and the work
entered on, but the child was observed by such as did attend her to be
somevvhat unquiet; the reason whereof they knevv not, only a thought came in,
that if she were brought into the Room where the Company was assembled, that
then she might possibly be quieter; wherefore her Maid brought her in her
arms, where she continued quietly all the time we were at the duty, not
once interrupting us, and the eye did serve to affect the heart, and to help
them to vvrastle with God more affectionately; this passage is the more
wonderful; because (so far as could be rationally judged) she did neither
hear or see or know any body; and so we know not how she should understand
that there was such a work in hand, unless the Lord should hint it to her,
(as he did many of her Speeches, if not all) and indeed, some of her Speeches
the night before and night after the Duty was concluded, do import such a
thing. See her Speeches November the eighth, where she quotes that Psalm. 50.
15. and suitably to that she added after: Oh let us cry aloud unto the Lord in
the time of necessity, and he has promised to give ear to us; which word did
strongly call upon us to cry mightily unto the Lord: there are many other
passages that night, which I refer the Reader to, and we took them as
messages sent from Heaven to quicken our hearts in the duty; there was one
passage that night, viz. her fourth speech about repentance and faith; whereby
she did direct us how to order our Humiliations as desiring they might be
Evangelicall, Zach. 1^. 10.
not legal; the fruits of faith, not of slavish fears: she would have us
look on Christ, and then mourn; believe, and then repent; and when the duty
was concluded November the ninth, at her usual time she uttered several
passages, wherein we might observe God exceedingly ordering of her words, as
the first speech that night, and the fourth, and the seventh, and especially
the ninth, which was an admirable caution given in to us.

Now to return, that which was (in relation to the child) set upon our
hearts particularly to ask of God, was this, that he would please to quiet
her spirit, ease her of her pain, so that the ears of her dear relations might
not be filled with such doleful cries, nor their hearts with those fears and
amazements, whereby they were much unfitted to act Faith, or do any duty to
God or man; extram sadness and faintings oppressing and overvvhelming their
spirits; and in this the Lord was pleased graciously to answer the desires of
his poor Servants through the Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ, which we
had notice of at our next meeting, and did desire to improve it, taking it as a
pledge that God would do more for us, and own us in our Attendances upon him
in his own way.

At the end of that day of Humiliation a Motion was made, that we might
continue once a month (at least) to seek God until he should be pleased to
come with healing under his wings. Those that were engaged in that work
living at a great distance from one another, we could not well meet oftener
then once a month, and with that resolution we parted, waiting to see what
the Lord would do for his Servants in that Family, whose condition God did very
much assist those who were engaged in that Duty to bear upon their hearts
continually, with much tenderness. The time appointed for the next day of
Humiliation was, as I remember; the 9 day of December next ensuing.

But the Lord ordered things so, that the child grew exceeding weak, not being
able to speak from the 21 of November, any more, (as was before noted,) so that
her friends did think that God was coming to finish his work, and her time of
warfare here in the body.

Wherefore her father dispatched messages to the Ministers and Christians to
meet and keep a day of Humiliation, on Thursday, the second of December, (a
week sooner then we thought of) and accordingly we met on that day, and found
her very weak, (so that she was not brought into the room, where we performed
the Duties of the day:) That which (amongst other things, as particularly
relating to her) was desired of God, was, that God would manifest his power in
enabling her to speak again, that so, whilst she lived, she might be useful
and isntrumental for his glory; her Speeches having bin very powerful upon the
hearrs of many (we hope, to the conversion, at least, conviction of some, and
the edification of most that heard them:) God was also very earnestly entreated
(with many arguments which his Spirit suggested) to raise her up, that he,
perfecting his work, might have perfect praises; and his work might be cleared
to the conviction of slanderous tongues, and the further comfort and
satisfaction of the hearts of his people; the day being finished, we departed
to our Homes, desiring to submit, and wait the Lords leisure, and (if she
lived) to continue seeking of him. But, behold, God was better to us then we
could think, and when we had scarce faith to believe what he had (in some
measure) set our hearts a work to ask (upon the ninth of December, the Day
which formerly, as I noted, we had agreed together to have sought God for her,
but did perform the duty a week sooner: I say, upon that day) we had (as a
real Testimony of her Fathers thankfulness to God, and real respects to us)
the joyful news of her mavelous Recovery transmitted to us, which take as
follows,

Mr. Hatfield his faithful Relation of the Lords Work, in recovering Mrs.
Martha Hatfield his daughter out of her great Afflictions, which was by him
sent unto the Ministers, who had sought God for her upon the second of
December, 1652. MOre works of wonder from Heaven, which may teach us, and all
that hear of it, to depend upon the Lord in the Duty of Prayer and Fasting.
Since the second of December (in which day many sweet Petitions were put up to
the Lordon the behalf of this child) we have perceived some Symptoms, that
God was restoring her understanding, as upon the fifth and sixth days of
December, she would have given notice, and signs of that which she had not
given signs of before, since about Mid-April, and upon the seventh of December
betwixt five and six a clock at night, it pleased God to open her teeth, being
shut since the eighth day of September, (as I noted before) she yawned, and
trial was made, and we found her mouth opened, and then she took food without
spilling; after an hours space she knew her youngest sister, being about 4
years of age, who used to lie by her, and be very fond of her, and would be
oftentimes kissing of her; and soon after she knew her Mother, and rejoiced to
see her with laughing and stroaking of her face, and clasping her arms about
her neck; and then her Father came, and asked her, if she knew him, and after a
while (for her eyes were yet somewhat dim) she did the like to him, holding up
her hands together, as if she would desire him to pray for her, and she did the
like to her Mother. And we plainly discovered that God had restored at that
instant the senses of Hearing, Seeing, Smelling and Handling, for when we
called her by her name, she had an expression, whereby we perceived she heard
us, as also that she saw us, and there was a pair of sweet Gloves, and we bad
her smell at them, and she put them to her Nose several times; and she had at
that time much use of her hands, which she had not before. And her Mother came
to her again, and said, What has the Lord done for thee? art thou not willing
to give God all that he has given thee, thy Life, Understanding, and all thy
Senses, and Heart, and all? and she manifested her self by signs, that she
was cheerfully willing so to do, by holding up her hands, and lifting up her
eyes with smiling, and plucking at her heart diverse times, and then lifted up
her hand as high as she could reach, as though she would give God her heart,
and all; and about nine a clock she knew her sister Hannah, and her
Grandmother, the Wife of Mr. George Westby, a Gentleman well known in the
North and South, (a very godly Gentlewoman) and she did express the same by
laughing and stroking their faces, and closing of her hands to her Grandmother,
as if she desired her to pray for her.

Then she went to bed, and God gave her reasonable good rest and sleep; that
next morning, being the eighth of Decembor, she had four or five sick fits, her
body, face and lips being very much swelled; but when she was better, the
swelling did fall again at an instant, and then always she held up her hands
and eyes, seeming to praise God, and all the afternoon she played with some
odd toys, and Spice, which Neighbors had brought her, which she had in a
little Basket until betwixt five and six a clock at night, and then she fell
into a stiff fit, yet without any appearance of the Convulsions before, (as it
had been formerly with her) and then she spoke, as she used to do in a stiff
fit, and said,

Oh let us wait and be patient until the appointed time of our wise God; for
his time is the best time, Hab. 2.
And he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; and the just shall live
by faith; but if any draw back, my soul shall take no pleasure in them.

Let us labor for Christ, that Holy One, by whom we live, move, and have our
being, he is all in all; Oh trust in him, and believe in him for all things,
trust in him, fear him, and love him, for he has promised, All things shall
turn to the good of them that love him and delight in him. Romans 8. 28.


Oh let us labor for faith, for He that is faithful unto the death, shall
receive a crown of life.

She spoke all these sentences with much fervencie, lifting up her hands, and
shaking her head; she continued in this stiff fit about a quarter of an hour,
and then she came to her self; and her mother being set upon the bed by her,
she laughed, and rejoiced, and said,

Mother, ah Mother, how do you? Ah my dear Child, (said her Mother) how do
thou? she answered, Me is pretty well, I praise my God. Oh Mother, love God,
love him; o get faith, get faith: her Mother said, So I have need.

It is observable (though I did not so note it before) that one of the last
things she spoke of, before God took away her understanding and senses, was to
stir up her Mother to get Faith, and that would carry her above all
difficulties, and now she begins with pressing that counsel again, which her
Mother desires to make special use of; and the Lord help her to do so. Her
Mother further said to her: Ah Child, thou have been a Preacher of
righteousness, and taught us the way to heaven. The Child answered, Have I?
Have I? me cannot tell, I can do nothing of my self; it was not me, it was the
Spirit of God in me; I am nothing but a poor Earth-worme, and me has nothing
in me but what my God gives me, for me is nothing but dust and ashes: and she
spoke all this evening after, and answered any Question (that was put to her)
very sensibly, and was carried to bed, and has had a very quiet nights sleep;
she said this morning, being the ninth of December, she never awaked till that
time, which was about seven a clock.

The Lord be praised for his mavelous Works, for they are wonderful in our
eyes.

Thus I have given you a true Relation of things since our meeting before God
in her behalf, whereby it is very apparent, that the Lord has heard and
answered the petitions of his people, and that the Sun of righteousness is
risen with healing under his wings. Mal. 4. 2.


The glory of the Lord be advanced with much thankfulness for all, and of all;
and more especially of you, who sent out the Dove that returned at the last
with the Olive Branch in her mouth.

The Copy of this Relation I received the ninth of December, when the Officers
and Members of the Church of Christ in Sheffield were met at a private
Conference, and I read over this Relation to them, which caused many tears of
joy, and their hearts were mightily ravished with the appearances of God in
this Business; and as they had prayed for her, so did they then return praise
to him.

Upon the 15 day of December, I did go to visit her, at which time did visit
her the Lady Lambert, as also Colonel Bright and his Lady, who were much
affected with the wonderful Works of God, which were so evident upon that
Child: When I came thither, I met with the Ministers, with whom I had joined
in seeking to God for her, though I little thought of meeting them there at
that time: but so God mercifully ordered it, that we might agree upon a day to
call the Company together, who had joined in seeking Gods face, then to exalt
his glorious Name, who had wrought such wonders in that Family, and we agreed
to keep the 28th. day of December as a day of Thanksgiving for what God had
done; but the Lord knowing our dullness and weakness before the day came, did
cast in further mercies, that so we might be quickened to make his praise more
glorious, as you will see in the subsequent Relation, which I received from Mr.
Hatfield, whose fidelity and conscientious walking is well known in the
Country, and therefore his Testimony the more worthy credence.

The ninth of December the Child lying in a Trundle-bed, at her Mothers
bed-feet; her Mother (when she awaked) asked her what a night she had: she
replied, a very good night, I praise God, I never awaked till now, which was
about seven a clock. Her Mother said, Mattee, God has done great and
wonderful things for thee, in manifesting so much of his power upon thee, and
to us in thee; the Lord set these things aright upon our hearts. Then Mattee
replied with a sigh, ^er sp^ech
Oh when the Lord is pleased (...) do great things for us, he expects and looks
for great things from us; even as the Husbandman that sowes a great deal of
seed, he looks for a great crop; if he have a great seed-time, he looks to reap
a great Harvest: So the Lord, when he is pleased to do great things for his
people, he expects great things from them.

Then her Mother spoke again to her, saying, The Lord has set thy condition
upon the hearts of his people, and thou art a Child of prayer, by which I hope
the Lord will have much glory; for there have been many days set apart to seek
the Lord on thy behalf. Her speec^
Then she said, Oh is not that a great mercy? those days were days of love to
my poor soul. We do not discern mercies to be mercies, we are so full of
corruption and sin, because the strong man armed had taken possession in our
hearts, but there is a stronger then he that will dispossess him.

Her Mother said, there are many Ministers who have wrestled with God for thee
both in public and in private. She said, I would be glad to see them, Her
spee^^
that I may give them thanks for their pains, and love to my soul.

Her Mother further said, We are comfortably encouraged to depend upon the Lord
in the duty of prayer, for we have had apparent and immediate Answers from Him.

Oh, Her speech Isai. 45, 19.
said she, that is a sweet mercy; The seed of Jacob shall not seek the face of
God in vain.

That morning she very freely and cheerfully expressed her self in any thing
which concerned her spiritual condition; and she was so free, and her spirit
was so enlarged to speak, that her Mother dissuaded her from speaking so much,
for fear of spending her little stock of spirits, she being but weak.

Oh, Her speech
no, no (said she) my spirits can never be spent with speaking of my God: if
any would feed me with speaking of my God, I could live upon it.

The same day, being the ninth of December, her Uncle Hatfeild (a Captain in
the Army, a godly man) came to her, and did ask her if she knew him? She said,
Me have forgotten you, but I hope God will give me my memory in due time, that
I may know you; then he asked her, how she did? she said, Me is pretty well, I
praise God; but within an hour and a half after he came to her again, and did
ask her if she did know him, and after a little time, earnestly viewing of him,
(her eyes being yet weak) she said,

Oh my Uncle John, my good Uncle, my dear Uncle John! then said he, You have
been a long time afflicted, but I hope you have found the love of God toward
you in this Affliction: for those whom he does love, he does chastize. She
said, I hope so. They are bastards and not sons, Her speech
whom the Lord corrects not.

Then he asked her, If she had not a dimnesse before her eyes? Yes, Her speech
said she, but I hope, that if God please to lend me life, he will give me the
comforts of life, to make my life comfortable, and that he will raise me up,
and give me my senses by little and little; then said he, You have spoken much
of God, and have been an Instrument of much good to people that came to hear
you: She replied, Her speech
My soul will rejoice in that; it was not me, it was the Spirit of God in me: I
am but a poor Earth-worm, and can do nothing of my self.

Then he said, Her speech
You have spoken very much, there be two Books written of what you did speak;
Is there so, said she? I wish they may look at a good end. He did ask her,
whether she did remember what she had said? No, Her speech Psalm. 66. 16.
said she, I have forgot, but I hope God will give me my memory, that I may
tell to others what God has done to my soul; I pray, Uncle, pray to God for my
Memory.

Being asked several questions of such things as she had uttered in her stiff
fits: she answered to the same sense, and in most of the same words. Quest.
It was asked her, whether faith or repentance was the first work in
conversion? Her ans.
she said, You must first lay the groundwork of faith, and then repent, and
turn home to the Lord; you are not at home here, you are but pilgrims and
strangers.

It was asked her, Quest.
what was the Cornerstone in the spiritual building of the Church? she said,
Her ans.
Christ, but the stone is three-cornered, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

It was asked her, Quest.
what was faith, hope, and charity? Her ans.
She said, Faith is a gift of God to believe in Christ; hope, is a hoping to
enjoy Christ; and charity, is the love of Christ.

It was asked, Quest.
how we may do to get the door of faith opened? Ans.
She said, Walk in the paths of Righteousness.

Here by the way you may note, that the Spirit of God did sometimes help her to
speak things that yet she did not fully understand; she had in one or two of
her stiff fits uttered these words. Knock at the gate of Righteousness, and
God shall open unto you the door of Faith; in reference to that speech this
Question was asked her, but God had not at that time revealed it to her; I
believe more of the marrow of the Gospel could scarcely have been uttered in so
few words; It Is the great question with poor souls; they say, If we could
believe, then we might have any thing; but how shall we get faith? here many
puzzle themselves, as if God had put them to shift for themselves: as a poor
man works and gets money, and that will buy him all things, no though we must
ordinarily get faith in Hearing, etc. yet not by our Hearing; the Answer is
here, Stand and knock at the gate of Righteousness: Gal 2. 16.
that Righteousness which justifies us when we believe, 2 Pet. 1. 1.
does purchase faith for us that we may believe. Pardon this digression.

It was asked her, if the Devil did not go about to destroy her. Yes, said she.

It was asked, Quest.
Who conquered those Temptations: Ans.
she said, Quest.
Jesus Christ: Ans.
the Devil goes about to destroy us with his Temptations; but I hope they will
not be laid unto our charge, but to the charge of him from whence they came.

At another time she was asked, Quest.
why Christ had conquered Satan: Ans.
she answered, For his own Names sake, and for my sake.

At another time, I being with her, Quest.
did ask her, whether she thought that God would recover her strength by his
immediate power (as he had begun) or by the use of means? She answered me very
solemnly, I do believe, that God will raise me up by his immediate power
without means, h.e. Physic.

Then I asked her, Quest.
if she did not desire that means might be used? Ans.
She answered, that she had often pressed her self to be willing to use means, but
yet she could not find her heart made willing.

Then I asked, Quest.
why she desired to be willing to use means? Ans.
She answered, Because her friends desired it, and for their satisfaction.

Then I asked her, Quest.
what ground she had to believe that God would raise her up by his immediate
power? She answered, Ans.
Because God did not make her willing to use the means, though she had often
desired it of him; and if he would have her use means, he would make her
willing: and then she had heard of that Providence, how God shut up her teeth,
whilst the Physician was in the House from the eighth of September till
December, about three months; and she further said, that she thought that God
would not that the Physician should have any one part of the honor of raising
her to health, but he would have all the glory to himself.

At another time I spoke thus to her, Cozen Mattee, you told me that you did
believe God would raise you up by his immediate power, he has done much for
you, but yet you have many relics of weaknesses upon you; Quest.
Will you endeavor to act faith upon that power of God? Ans.
She answered, It is my desire, but I have nothing but what is freely given me
of my God*

One night when they were undressing of her, one told her, she had no shoes,
(for they had given all her clothes and wearing things to some poor children,
not expecting her life) and her Father said, there was a Shoemaker in the
Town, but he was a Quaker; she asked, what that was? it was answered, he was
one that sleights Ministers, and Gods Ordinances: She replied, she would have
no Quakers Shoes then.

At another time, the same thing being discoursed of, and she giving the same
answer: her Sister Hannah, (who was very tender of her, and had prejudiced
herself with her care of her and of her Mother in their weaknesses) asked her,
if she knew, what the Quakers were? She answered, They are such as are above
Onances (for then she could not pronounce many words, her speech being
gradually restored to her) her sister said, What mean you? she answered, I
shall make you understand, they are such as slight Gods Ministers, whom he has
sent to preach his Word.

Another hearing of this discourse, did ask her why she would have no Quakers
shoes, did she think there was any errors sewed up in the seames of the shoes?
she answered, No, but (says she) they say I am a Quaker, and to convince them,
that I am not, I will have no dealings with them.

Many other such passages there were, but I forbear to add more.

She continued pretty well, and with much cheerfulness of spirit, and the Lord
was pleased to make her meat and sleep comfortable to her; but she had no use
at all of her legs, but was carried to bed, and from bed, until the 21th. of
December, which day she being in bed about 9 a clock at night, her Father being
in the room, she told him, she felt strength come into her legs: he asked her,
How? she said, It trickled down, and came into her thighs, knees, and ancles,
like warm water, and so continued a quarter of an hour: and after that working
was past, her Sister Hannah took her up, and set her upon her feet, and she
stood by her self without holding, which she had not done for three quarters of
a year before, having had no use of, or strength in her legs, and when she was
laid in bed again, she fell into extremities of hot and cold fits four or five
several times; one while as if she had been dipped in hot water; and again
suddenly, as though she had been dipped in cold water, and presently after she
was very ^ick and vomited; and that being over, she had much pain in all her
joints, and in great extremity from the head to the feet; then at an instant
she said, I praise God, I am now as well as ever I was in my life, I am neither
sick, nor have any pain.

Then her Mother spoke to her, Ah Child, now thou understandest how suddenly
the Lord has given thee thy limbs, even so suddenly did the Lord give thee thy
senses and thy speech, but then thou wast not able to apprehend it.

Oh, said she, how shall we be ever able in any measure to extol the Name of
the Lord in praises that are due unto him for all his mercies to us; I desire
that the Lord would be pleased to perfect my heart, and frame it as he will be
pleased to accept of it, for I have cause to praise the Lord more then others,
seeing the Lord is pleased to take notice of me more then others.

Her Mother said, Child, is not thy mind full of the apprehensions of the
Lords wonderful dealings with thee? Yes, said she, but I cannot express it so
largely as I desire to do; but I hope the Lord will help me: ^ can do nothing
of my self; Her speech
but I may say with the Apostle Paul, I can do any thing through Christ that
strengthens me.

Then her Mother said, What are we poor miserable Miscreants, that the Lord
should make choice of a child of ours to hold forth so much of his power and
glory? She answered, Her speech
It is not any worthiness that is in us, but it is the Will of the Lord; the
Lord saw It good in his all-seeing Decree, for he had decreed before I was
born, that it should be so.

Her Mother said, Oh, my unbelieving heart would never yield to think that
there would be such a glorious end of this affliction. Ah Mother (said she) the
Lord has done above your faith, Her speech
what cause have we to praise him?

The 22th. of December, when she rose in the morning, she said she could go;
but we were afraid to trust her strength, it being so long a time since she had
any use of her legs, yet she desired leave to make trial how she could go, and
she went up and down the room beyond all expectation, and the Lord so continued
his good hand upon her, and she increased in strength daily, so that upon the
28th. of December, the time appointed for the Thanksgiving, when we met there,
she was able to come forth into the Hall to meet and welcome us; and we did
behold a Miracle, it was wonderful in our eyes, so that our hearts did rejoice
with a kind of trembling at the glory of the Lord, which appeared in that
Object, and it did the more affect, because it was more then many (if not most)
of us heard of before we came into the house; so that we see God had put still
more matter of praise into our mouths: when we came together to the duty, she
came and joined with us most part of the day; but the place where we met being
very full of people, she toward the close of the day grew somewhat faint and
weary, and so withdrew, but was well presently, and much affected was her heart
with (...) goodness of the Lord; in the morning, before we engaged our selves
in the duty of that day, she desired that we might sing a Psalm or two which
she had made choice of, viz. the 103 Psalm, or the 118 Psalm, which of them
the Ministers pleased, and in the close of the day the Assembly were desired to
praise God in the words of David, written in the 118th. Psalm, and some of the
verses of that Psalm which did best suit with the occasion of the day, were
culled out, as the six first verses, and the 13th. verse to the end of the
18th. also the 21 and 23, 24. and the two last verses. In that day as we
desired to exalt the Lord in our hearts, who had so signally fulfilled diverse
promises, and that in particular, Psalm. 118. verse. 15. which had been often
urged formerly; so were her Parents very solicitous, lest they should not
render unto the Lord according to his mavelous appearances for them and to
them; therefore was that promise urged, Psalm. 50. 15. Thou shall glorify me,
which (as was declared to them) is not only demonstrative of their duty, but
operative to enable them to perform their duty; and so we parted with our
hearts full of joy, and desires that we might, be strengthened by the power of
the Lords might to walk worthy of these glorious ownings of his poor worthless
creatures.

Since this day of Thanksgiving the Lord has in much mercy increased her
strength every day: she did not then go so strongly as since she has done: one
observable passage there was; she was sitting in a Chair, and both she and the
Chair fell, and she hurt her leg; but not long after she was observed to go
with more strength and nimblenesse then before; and God made that fall a means
of her rising up to more strength, and not only are her outward parts (through
the goodness of God) strengthened, but her understanding, memory, and
ripeness of apprehension are much enlarged, beyond what they were before her
sickness, which we were much afraid had been utterly and altogether destroyed
in this sad visitation; and as a further addition, to make the mercy yet more
complete, the Lord has been pleased to work a great change in the frame and
temper of her disposition, which formerly (by reason of the prevalencie of the
Spleen, which she is now wholy freed from; as from all other infirmities
which she had formerly) was much inclined to sadness and fretfulnesse; but
now she is of a vvondrous, meek, quiet, and sedate temper, and vvalks on with
much cheerfulness and evennesse of spirit; so that we may discover much of
God in her carriages; she is also very diligent in reading and prayer, and such
other employments as her Mother sees fit to exercise her in, so that she may be
a pattern for many, who far exceed her in years; and God does keep her in a
wonderful humble frame; she is not lifted up with her Receptions, but desirous
to walk up to her Mercies; she has not much ravishing joys, but God has made
good that promise to her, Jer. 33. 6.
He has brought her health and cure, and has revealed to her abundance both
of peace and truth.

It has pleased God, since these passages of his Providence, again to try that
Family, in removing from them that precious Gentlewoman, Mrs. Fr. Westby,
Mother to Mrs. Hatfeild, and Grandmother to this Child, an ancient Disciple of
Christ, who had gained a great addition to her stock of Graces, and comforts
by this Childs Afflictions and Restoration: She was full of the joy of the
Lord in the beholding of these vvonderfull workings of God in that Family, and
is now translated to Heaven, where she is praising God for those and many
other Mercies, in a higher strain then our untuned spirits can reach unto; and
when God had brought that affliction upon the Family this Child perceiving her
dear Mother to be much dejected with that dispensation, did much labor to
comfort her; and amongst other passages this was one. With tears she spoke to
her Mother thus: Good Mother, labor to submit to the Will of God; o labor to
submit: if we do not submit willingly, God can make us to submit.

I shall shut up the Narrative with this passage of this Childs dear Father
in the Close of his Relation which he sent to me, viz.

The power of the Lord be made known in all his Works, with thankfulness to
his glory for ever.

To which I will add my AMEN.

The Conclusion of the NARRATIVE.
THat Caution, which this sweet Child hinted, (as was before noted) that we
should look to a good end in publishing her speeches, took such Impression on
my spirit, that (though I was strongly urged to it) I durst not venture upon the
presenting of these things to Public view, before I had first examined my
ends in that undertaking, and could (through the free grace of God, I hope, in
sone measure) approve my Heart to him in that enterprise.

And since I have undertaken it, I am sorry that I could not dispatch it
sooner, whilst the impressions were fresh upon the spirits of her Friends, but
my many diversions and interruptions in that populous place, where God has
east my lot, must be my Apology, and I hope the publishing of these things now
may serve (through the supply of the Spirit of Christ) to revive those thoughts
and resolutions, which I hope will never be wholly oblitterated.

That which I shall only add, is the ends and uses, which, I conceive, our
wise God might have, and which we and others should make of such wonderful
works of his, and I shall refer them to two Heads, they are such as concern
Either 1 Particularly, that Family.

Or 2 Generally, the Nation.

1 Particularly, that Family: and there

1 God did foresee what his intentions were, as to that Family, in taking to
himself that precious Gentlewoman Mrs Westby, the Grandmother of this Child:
she was one of the most affectionate Mothers that I have been acquainted with;
she had two sons, Mr. Thomas Westby, and Mr. George Westby; and two
daughters, Mrs. Hatfeild, and Mrs. Spencer, Wife of Lieutenant Colonel Spencer;
and she had much comfort in them, (as in her Grandchildren, all of them that
are grown up, giving good hopes of Grace wrought in them.)

These were planted near together, and amongst them she spent her time and
strength; some of them being much visited with bodily weaknesses, and manifold
Temptations, in all which she was a singular help of their faith and comforts;
I have heard of many dutiful Children, who have been very serviceable to their
Mothers, but have not heard of a Mother so officious (shall I say serviceable)
to her Children; so that their affections could not but be much let out to her;
and therefore the parting with her would be the more difficult: wherefore I
think, God did act these wonders in that Family to strengthen their faith, to
arm them for such a trial as this; that they who had seen so much of God,
might be taught (in any trial) more willingly to submit to God; He that raised
so great comfort to them out of such an affliction, they might now stay upon,
that he would give an abundant supply to them, whatever comforts he should take
from them; He did therefore give them those Cordials to carry with them, when
they should be put to Sea again, and meet with new Storms and Tempests; and I
wish they may, and hope they will improve those experiences to these ends and
uses.

2 That Family (whereof this Child is a member) has been much afflicted more
then other Families, and it has been a praying Family; and many were ready to
say, What are they better for their Fasting and Praying? they are alvvayes
under affliction: I conceive therefore God has owned them, that as their
afflictions have abounded, 2 Cor. 1. 4.
so their comforts much more; God has made them eminent in respect of his
wonderful workings for them; as they were before, by reason of his afflictings
of them; and I hope that when they lay their afflictions and consolations in
the Balance, they will experience, that afflicted godliness is better then
successful wickedness; and that if the sauce had not been so tart, their
stomachs had not been so quick; and that if they had not sunk into the waters
of afflictions, they had never learnt to swim in the Rivers of true pleasures.

I desire they may yet more and more, and hope they do find out many medicinal
virtues in the great Herball of the Scriptures, which they had never
discovered, had they not been exercised with new maladies; they would not so
have learnt to live the life of faith, if they had not been sometimes under the
sentence of Death in their own sense; they would never have so powerfully
discovered Gods power and faithfulness, if they had not seen manifestly their
own weakness. Truly, I find the most of God in those who are most afflicted
by God.

2 Generally, to the Inhabitants of this Nation, I conceive Gods ends are:

1 To convince them by his Works, who will not be won by his Word; the
wonderful way of manifesting these precious Truths by this Child does cry
aloud to us to practice them: God has raised up a Child to reprove the men of
this generation for their oppositions against that Holy Child Jesus Acts 4. 27.
and to exhort them to seek more for Christwho are so much in seeking great
things for themselves; she speaks much of slighting the world to those that are
so much slighting the Word: and o that this use were made of it; that there
were more seeking faith and Christ, and less seeking of self and creatures;
that there were more practice of real holiness, and less breaking forth of
open profaneness, and that under the notion (o dreadful!) of perfection; and
that we may not be like, as was said of the Schoolmen, who turned all Religion
in utrum, non in usum; for, as Luther elegantly, God loves Curristas, not
Quaeristas, practicers, not praters; Isai. 2. 2.
walkers, not talkers of Religion.

2 God has in these glorious actings most eminently and evidently carried on
this great design of love to confirm the hearts of people, that his presence
is with his Ministers, and such sober-hearted Christians, Revel. 14. ^.
who have not defiled themselves with women: h. e. (I conceive with others)
with false worships, and to bear witness against those who slight the
Institutions and appointments of Jesus Christ, and obtruding upon miserably
seduced souls things of their own devising, which never came into his heart to
appoint; who instead of following the lamb where ever he goes, do follow the
wolf in a lambs skin wherever he goes; who slight the written word and so
strike at the Crown and Scepter of Jesus Christ, the King of Saints. God has
opened the mouth of the Dumb to confute the madness of those that oppose his
holy Institutions, and in that he has so miraculously raised her up at the
entreaties of his poor Ministers and Servants, when some of those
above-Ordinances-people scorned at our Fastings and Prayings, he has evidently
owned (shall I say us? alas, who are we? we desire to be willing to decrease,
so that Christ may increase, but he has owned) his own Ordinances and
Officers, and those despised duties of Fasting and Prayer: and o that they, who
slight these appointments of Christ, would consider those Prophecies, Isa. 66.
24. with 23. and Zachar. 14. from 16 to 19 verse. which I conceive are
prophecies calculated for Gospel Times, and will (in the Minatory part thereof)
fall heavy upon the new Gospellers of our times, and woe to them against whom
the sweet-mouth'd promises shall spit fire and brimstone; the coals of sweet
Juniper, they say, are the hottest.

It may be some (whose principles and practices are loose enough) will say, God
has owned them in their seekings of him: To such I shall only say this, that
as when men comply with Antichrist, (though indirectly) God has opposed their
enterprizesthough he may love some of their persons: so those that oppose
Antichrist (though it may be indirectly too) yet he may and has owned and
prospered their undertakings, and yet be angry with their personal errors and
miscarriages, and it was their happiness that they had a good cause, and
though he heard prayers that were sent up for them as they did his work, 2
Cor. 1. 9.
yet not as they intended their own work.

But o that poor misled souls would hear the voice of these providentiall
actings of God in this example, and would now with others of Gods people gather
together, and appoint themselves one Head Jesus Christ, owning him and his
Institutions, till they be as clearly abolished, as they were evidently
instituted by his unquestionable Authority, that Great might be the day of
Jezreel, even of our English Israel.

And if this Narrative may have any such effect upon the hearts of my Dear
Countrymen in this Nation ( for whom I have had sorrow in my heart) I shall
turn my mournings into rejoycings, and in the mean time fix my eye and heart
upon those promises, Acts 15. 17. Hoseae 1. 11. and particularly that which, I
think, excludes not the Gentiles, Great shall be the Day of Jezreel: Amen, Even
so, Come Lord Jesus.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT To the Reader.
THe truth of the Particulars related in the preceding Narrative will be
avouched by many person of worth, both for Honesty and Piety whereof, if any
doubt, they may enquir^ at Leighton in Yorkshire, or in sever a^ other Towns
near adjoining, and be fully satisfied in all particulars.

Many Names (by way of Testimoniall^ might have been produced; but this
Reference is thought sufficient.

We hope ( Reader) those that are eng^^ged in this Work, dare not commit su^^
impiety, as to gull the World with a pie^^ of Forgery.

April 18th. 1653.

Imprimatur Joseph Caryl.


