ENCHIRIDION MISCELLANEUM.

Spare Hours Improved in MEDITATIONS Divine Contemplative Practical
Moral Ethical Oeconomical Political


From the Piety and Learning of Fr: Quarles and Ar: Warwick
Gent:

By it They being dead, yet Speak (Heb. XI. 4) The 12 Impression.

Amsterdam, Printed by Stephen Swart Bookseller, at the Crowned Bible, on the
West-seide of the Exchange. 1677.

ENCHIRIDION. Cent. I.
CHAP. I.
PIety and Policy are like Martha, and Mary, Sisters: Martha fail's, if Mary
help not: and Mary suffers, if Martha be idle: Happy is that Kingdom where
Martha compla^^^ of Mary; but most happy where Mary complies with Martha: Where
Piety and Policy go hand in hand, there War shall be just; and Peace
honorable.

CHAP. II.
LEt not civil discords in a foreign Kingdom encourage thee to make invasion.
They that are factious among themselves, are jealous of one another, and more
strongly prepared to encounter with a common Enemy: Those whom civil
commotions set at variance, foreign Hostility reconciles. Men rather affect
the possession of an inconvenient Good, than the possibility of an uncertain
Better.

CHAP. III.
IF thou have made a Conquest with thy Sword, think not to maintain it with thy
Scepter: Neither conceive, that new favors can cancel old injuries: No
Conqueror sits secure upon his newgot Throne, so long as they subsist in power,
that were dispoyl'd of their possessions by his Conquest.

CHAP. IV.
LEt no price nor promise of Honor bribe thee to take part with the Enemy of
thy natural Prince: Assure thy self who ever wins, thou art lost: If thy
Prince prevail, thou art proclaimed a Rebel, and branded for death: If the
Enemy prosper, thou shall be reckoned but as a meritorious Traitor, and not
secure of thy self: He that loves the Treason hates the Traitor.

CHAP. V.
IF thy strength of parts has raised thee to eminent place in the
Commonwealth, take heed thou sit sure: If not, thy fall will be the greater: As
Worth is fit matter for Glory; so Glory is a fair mark for Envy. By how much
the more thy Advancement was thought the Reward of Desert; by so much thy fall
will administer matter for disdain: It is the ill fortune of a strong brain, if
not to be dignified as meritorious, to be deprest as dangerous.

CHAP. VI.
IT is the duty of a Statesman, especially in a free State, to hold the
Commonwealth to her first frame of Government, from which the more it swervs,
the more it declines: which being declined is not commonly reduced without that
extremity, the danger whereof rather ruins than rectifies. Fundamental
Alterations bring inevitable perils.

CHAP. VII.
THere be three sorts of Government; Monarchical, Aristocraticall, De
mocraticall; and they are apt to fall three several ways into ruin: The
first, by Tyranny; the second, by Ambition; the last, by Tumults. A
Commonwealth grounded upon any of these is not of long continuance; but wisely
mingled, each guard the other, and make that Government exact.

CHAP. VIII.
LEt not the proceedings of a Captain, though never so commendable, be confined
to all Times: As these alter, so must they: If these vary, and not they, ruin
is at hand: He lest fails in his design, that meets Time in its own way: And he
that observes not the Alterations of the Times, shall seldom be victorious but
by chance: but he that can ^ot alter his course according to the Alterations of
the Times shall never be a Conqueror: He is a wise Commander, and only He,
that can discover the change of Times, and changes his Proceedings according to
the Times.

CHAP. IX.
IF thou desir'st to make war with a Prince, with whom thou have formerly
ratified a league; assail some Ally of his, rather than himself: If he resent
it, and come, or send in aid, thou have a fair Gale to thy desires: If not, his
infidelity in not assisting his Ally, will be discoverd: Hereby thou shall gain
thy self advantage, and facilitate thy designs.

CHAP. X.
BEfore thou undertake a War, let thine Eye number thy forces, and let thy
judgment weigh them: if thou have a rich Enemy, no matter how poor thy
Soldiers be, if courageous and faithful: Trust not too much the power of thy
Treasure, for it will deceive thee, being more apt to expose thee for a Prey
then to defend thee: Gold is not able to find good Soldiers; but good
Soldiers are able to find out Gold.

CHAP. IX.
IT the Territories of thy Equal Enemy are situated far South from thee, the
advantage is thine, whether he make offensive, or defensive war; If North, the
advantage is his: Cold is less tolerable then heat: This is a friend to Nature;
that, an Enemy.

CHAP. XII.
IT is not only uncivil, but dangerous for Soldiers, by reproachful words,
to throw disgrace upon the Enemy. Base Terms are Bellows to a slaking Fury, and
Goads to quicken up revenge in a fleeing Foe: He that objects Cowardice against
a failing enemy, adds spirit to him, to disprove the aspersion, at his own
cost: It is therefore the part of a wise Soldier to refrain it; or of a wise
Commander, to punish it.

CHAP. XIII.
IT is better for two weak Kingdoms rather to compound an injury (though to
some loss) than seek for satifaction by the sword; lest while they two weaken
themselves by mutual blows, a third decide the Controversy to both their
Ruins. When the Frog and the Mouse could not take up the quarrel, the Kite
was Umpire.

CHAP. XIV.
LEt that Commonwealth which desires to flourish, be very strict, both in her
punishments, and Rewards, according to the merits of the Subject, and offense
of the Delinquent: Let the Service of the Deserver be rewarded, lest thou
discourage worth; and let the Crime of the offender be punished, lest thou
encourage Vice: the neglect of the one weakens a Commonwealth; the omission of
both ruins it.

CHAP. XV.
IT is wisdom for him that sits at the Helm of a settled State, to demean
himself toward his subjects at all times, so, that upon any evil accident,
they may be ready to serve his occasion: He that is only gracious at the
approach of a danger, will be in danger, when he expects deliverance.

CHAP. XVI.
IN all designs, which require not sudden Execution, take mature deliberation,
and weigh the convenients, with the inconvenients, and then resolve; after
which, neither delay the execution, nor bewray thy intention. He that discovers
himself, till he has made himself Master of his desires, lay's himself open to
his own Ruin, and makes himself prisoner to his own tongue.

CHAP. XVII.
LIberality in a Prince is no Virtue, when maintained at the Subjects unwilling
Cost. It is less reproach, by miserableness, to preserve the popular love, then
by liberality to deserve the private thanks.

CHAP. XVIII.
IT is the excellent property of a good and wise Prince, to use War as he does
Physic, carefully, unwillingly, and seasonably; either to prevent approaching
dangers, or to correct a present mischief, or to recover a former loss. He that
declines Physic till he be accosted with the danger, or weakened with the
disease, is bold too long, and wise too late. That Peace is too precise, that
limits the justness of a War to a sword drawn, or a Blow given.

CHAP. XIX.
LEt a Prince that would beware of Conspiracies, be rather jealous of such whom
his extraordinary Favors have advanced, then of those whom his pleasure has
discontented: These want means to execute their pleasures; but they have means
at pleasure to execute their desires: Ambition to rule is more vehement, than
Malice to Revenge.

CHAP. XX.
BEfore thou undertake a War, cast an impartial Eye upon the Cause: If it be
just, prepare thy Army; and let them all know, they fight for God and thee: It
adds fire to the spirit of a Soldier, to be assured, that he shall either
prosper in a fair War, or persh in a just Cause.

CHAP. XXI.
IF thou desir'st to know the power of a State, observe in what correspondence
it lives with her neighboring State: If She make Alliance with the
Contribution of Money, it is an evident sign of weakness: If with her valor,
or repute of forces, it manifests a native strength: It is an infallible sign
of power, to sell friendship; and of weakness to buy it: That which is bought
with Gold, will hardly be maintained with Steel.

CHAP. XXII.
IN the Calms of Peace it is most requisite for a Prince, to prepare against
the storms of War, both Theorically, in reading Heroic Histories; and
practically, in maintaining Martial discipline: Above all things, let him
avoid Idleness, as the Bane of Honor; which in Peace, indisposes the Body; and
in War, effoeminates the Soul: He that would be in War victorious, must be in
Peace laborious.

CHAP. XXIII.
IF thy two neighboring Princes fall out, show thy self, either a true Friend,
or a fair Enemy: It is indiscretion, to adhere to him whom thou have least
cause to fear, if he vanquish: Neutrality is dangerous, whereby thou becomest a
necessary Prey to the Conqueror.

CHAP. XXIV.
IT is a great argument of a Princes wisdom, not only to choose, but also to
prefer wise Counselors: And such are they, that seek less their own
advantages, than his; whom wise Princes ought to reward, lest they become their
own Carvers; and so, of good Servants, turn bad Masters.

CHAP. XXV.
IT much conduces to the dishonor of a King, and the ilfare of his Kingdom, to
multiply Nobility, in an over-proportion to the Common people: Cheap Honor
darkens Majesty; and a numerous Nobility brings a State to necessity.

CHAP. XXVI.
IT is very dangerous, to try experiments in a State, unless extreme necessity
be urgent, or popular utility be palpable: It is better for a State to connive
a while, at an inconvenience, too suddenly to rush upon a Reformation.

CHAP. XXVII.
IF a valiant Prince be succeeded by a weak Successor, he may, for a while,
maintain a happy State, by the remaining virtue of his glorious Predecessor:
But if his life be long; ordying he be succeeded by one less valiant then the
first, the Kingdom is in danger to fall to ruin. That Prince is a true Father
to his Country, that leaves it the rich inheritance of a brave Son. When
Alexander succeeded Philip, the world was too little for the Conqueror.

CHAP. XXVIII.
IT is very dangerous for a Prince, or Republic, to make continual practice
of cruel exaction: For where the Subject stands in sense, or expectation of
evil, he is apt to provide for his safety, either from the evil he feels, or
from the danger he fears; and growing bold in Conspiracy, makes Faction, which
Faction is the Mother of Ruin.

CHAP. XXIX.
BE careful to consider the good or ill disposition of the people toward thee
upon ordinary occasions: if it be good, labor to continue it; if evil,
provide against it: As there is nothing more terrible then a dissolute
Multitude without a Head; so there is nothing more easy to be reduced; (if
thou can endure the first shock of their fury;) which if a little appeased,
every one begins to doubt himself, and think of home, and secure themselves,
either by flight, or Agreement.

CHAP. XXX.
THat Prince who stands in fear more of his own people, than strangers, ought
to build Fortresses in his Land: But he that is more afraid of Strangers than
his own People, shall build them more secure in the Affections of his Subjects.

CHAP. XXXI.
CArry a watchful Eye upon dangers before they come to ripeness, and when they
are ripe, let loose a speedy hand: He that expects them too long, or meets them
too soon, gives advantage to the evil: Commit their beginnings to Argus his
hundred Eyes, and their ends to Briareus his hundred Hands, and thou art safe.

CHAP. XXXII.
OF all the difficulties in a State, the Temper of a true Government most
felicifies and perpetuates it: Too sudden Alterations distemper it. Had Nero
turned his Kingdom as he did his Harp, his Harmony had been more honorable,
and his Reign more prosperous.

CHAP. XXXIII.
IF a Prince, fearing to be assaild' by a foreign Enemy, has a well-arm'd
people, well addressed for War, let him stay at home, and expect him there: But
if his subjects be unarmed, or his Kingdom unacquainted with the stroke of War,
let him meet the enemy in his Quarters. The farther he keeps the War from his
own Home, the less danger. The Seat of War is always miserable.

CHAP. XXXIV.
IT is a necessary wisdom for a Prince to grow in strength, as he increases in
Dominions: it is no less virtue to keep, than to get: Conquests not having
power answerable to their greatness, invite new Conquerors to the ruin of the
old.

CHAP. XXXV.
IT is great prudence in a Statesman, to discover an inconvenience in the
birth; which, so discovered, is easy to be suppressed: But if it ripen into a
Custom, the sudden remedy thereof is often worse than the disease: in such a
Case, it is better to temporize a little, than to struggle too much. He that
opposes a full-ag'd inconvenience too suddenly, strengthens it.

CHAP. XXXVI.
IF thou have conquerd' a Land, whose Language differs not from thine, change
not their Laws and Taxes, and the two Kingdoms will in a short time
incorporate, and make one body: But if the Laws and Language differ, it is
difficult to maintain thy Conquest; which that thou may the easier do,
observe three things: First, to live there in person, (or rather send
Colonies:) Secondly, to assist the weak inhabitants, and weaken the mighty:
Thirdly, to admit no powerful Forreigner to reside there: Remember Lewis the
thirteenth of France; How suddenly he took Milain, and how soon he lost it.

CHAP. XXXVII.
IT is a gracious wisdom in a Prince, in civil Commotions, rather to use
Juleps, then Phlebotomy; and better to breath the distemper by a wise delay,
then to correct it with too rash an Onset: it is more honorable, by a slow
preparation to declare himself a gracious Father, than by a hasty War to
appear a furious Enemy.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
IT is wisdom for a Prince in fair weather to provide for Tempests: He that so
much relies upon his peoples faith, to neglect his own preparation, discovers
more Confidence than wisdom: He that ventures to fall from above, with hopes to
be caught below, may be dead ere he come to ground.

CHAP. XXXIX.
HE that would reform an ancient State in a free City buy's convenience with a
great danger: To work this Reformation with the less mischief, let such a one
keep the shadows of their ancient Customs, though in substance they be new: Let
him take heed when he alters the natures of things, they bear at lest the
ancient names. The Common people, that are naturally impatient of innovations,
will be satisfied with that which seems to be, as well as that which is.

CHAP. XL.
UPon any difference between foreign States, it is neither safe nor honorable
for a Prince, either to buy his Peace, or to take it up at interest: He that
has not a Sword to command it, shall either want it, or want Honor with it.

CHAP. XLI.
IT is very requisite for a Prince, not only to weigh his designs in the
flower, but likewise in the fruit: He is an unthrift of his honor that
enterprises a design, the failing wherein may bring him more Disgrace, than the
success can gain him Honor.

CHAP. XLII.
IT is much conducible to the happiness of a Prince, and the security of his
State, to gain the hearts of his Subjects: They that love for fear, will seldom
fear for love: it is a wise Government which gains such a Tie upon the Subject,
that he either cannot hurt, or will not: But that Government is best and most
sure, when the Subject joy's in his obedience.

CHAP. XLIII.
LEt every Soldier arm his mind with hopes, and put on courage: Whatsoever
disaster falls, let not his heart sink. The Passage of providence lies through
many crooked ways; Adespairing heart is the true Prophet of approaching evil:
his actions may weave the webs of fortune, but not break them.

CHAP. XLIV.
IT is the part of a wise Magistrate to vindicate a man of power or
State-imployment from the malicious scandals of the giddy-headed multitude, and
to punish it with great severity; Scandal breeds Hatred; Hatred begets
Division; Division makes Faction, and Faction brings Ruin.

CHAP. XLV.
THe strongest Castles a Prince can build, to secure him from Domestic
commotions, or foreign Invasions, is in the hearts of his Subjects; And the
means to gain that strength is, in all his actions to appear for the public
good, studious to contrive, and resolute to perform.

CHAP. XLVI.
A Kingdom is a great building, whose two main supporters are the Government of
the State, and the Government of the Church: It is the part of a wise Master to
keep those Pillars in their first posture, irremovable: If either fail, it is
wisdom rather to repair it, than remove it: He that pul's down the old, to set
up a new, may draw the roof upon his head, and ruin the foundation.

CHAP. XLVII.
IF is necessary wisdom in a Prince to encourage in his Kingdom, Manufacture,
Merchandise, Arts, and Arms. In Manufacture lie the vital spirits of the body
politic: In Merchandise, the spirits natural: In Arts and Arms, the Animal:
If either of these languish, the Body droops; As these flourish, the Body
flourishes.

CHAP. XLVIII.
TRue Religion is a setler in a State, rather then a Stickler; While she
confirms an established Government, she moves in her own Sphere. But when she
endeavors to alter the old, or to erect a new, she works out of her own
Vineyard: When she keeps the Keys, she sends showers of Milk: But when she
draws the Sword, she sayls in Seas of Blood: Labor therefore to settle
Religion in the Church; and Religion shall settle Peace in thy Land.

CHAP. XLIX.
IF thou entertain any foreign Soldiers into thine Army, let them bear thy
Colors, and be at thy Pay, lest they interest their own Prince: Auxiliary
Soldiers are the most dangerous: A foreign Prince needs no greater invitation
to seiz upon thy City, then when he is required to defend it.

CHAP. L.
BE cautious in undertaking a design, upon the report of those that are
banished their Country, lest thou come off with shame or loss, or both. Their
end expects advantages from thy Actions, whose miseries lay hold of all
opportunities, and seek to be redrest by thy Ruin.

CHAP. LI.
IF thou endeavourest to make a Republique in a Nation where the Gentry
abounds, thou shall hardly prosper in that design: And if thou would erect a
Principality in a Land, where there is much equality of people, thou shall not
easily effect it. The way to bring the first to pass, is to weaken the Gentry:
The means to effect the last, is to advance and strengthen ambitious, and
turbulent spirits; so that being placed in the midst of them, their forces may
maintain thy power; and thy favor may preserve their Ambition: Otherwise there
shall be neither proportion nor continuance.

CHAP. LII.
IT is more excellent for a Prince to have a provident Eye for the preventing
future mischiefs, than to have a potent Arm for the suppressing present evils:
Mischiefs in a State are like Hectique Fevers in a body: In the beginning hard
to be known, but easy to be cured; but, let it alone a while, it becomes more
easy to be known, but more hard to be cured.

CHAP. LIII.
IF a Kingdom be apt to Rebellion, it is wisdom to preserve the Nobility and
Commons at variance: Where one of them is discontented, the danger is not
great: The Commons are slow of motion, if not quickened with the Nobility; the
Nobility is weak of power, if not strengthened by the Commons: Then is danger,
when the Commonalty troubles the water, and the Nobility steps in.

CHAP. LIVE.
IT is very requisite for a Prince to have an Eye that the Clergy be elected
and come in, either by collation from him, or particular Patrons, and not by
the People; and that their power hold dependence upon home, and not foreign
Authority: It is dangerous in a Kingdom, where the Crosiars receive not their
power from the Regal Sword.

IT is a perilous weakness in a State, to be slow of resolution in the time of
War: To be irresolute in determination is both the sign, and the ruin of a
weak State: such affairs attend not Time: Let the wise Statesman therefore
abhor delay, and resolve rather what to do, than advise what to say: Slow
deliberations are symptoms, either of a faint courage, or weak Forces, or false
Hearts.

CHAP. LVI.
IF a Conqueror has subdued a Country, or a City abounding with pleasures,
let him be very circumspect to keep himself and his Soldiers temperate.
Pleasures bring effoeminacy; and effoeminacy fore-runs ruin: such conquests,
without blood or sweat, sufficiently do revenge themselves upon their
intemperate Conquerours.

CHAP. LVI.
IT is an infallible sign of approaching ruin in a Republic, when Religion is
neglected, and her established ceremonies interrupted: let therefore that
Prince that would be potent, be pious; and that he may punish looseness the
better, let him be religious: the joy of Jerusalem depends upon the peace of
Sion.

CHAP. LVIII.
LEt that Prince that desires full sovereignty, temper the greatness of too
potent a Nobility: a great and potent Nobility quickens the people, but presses
their fortunes: it adds Majesty to a Monarch, but diminishes his power.

CHAP. LIX.
IT is dangerous for a Prince to use ambitious Natures, but upon necessity,
either for his Wars, or to be instruments for the demolishing insolent
greatness: and that they may be the less dangerous, let him choose them rather
out of mean births then noble; and out of harsh natures, rather then plausible.
And always be sure to balance them with those that are as proud as they.

CHAP. LX.
LEt Princes be very circumspect in the choice of their Councillors, choosing
ueither by the greatness of the beard, nor by the smoothness of the face: let
him be wise, but not crafty: active, without private ends: courageous, without
malice: religious, without faction: secret without fraud; one better read in
his business, than his Nature: and a riddle only to be read above.

CHAP. LXI.
IN a mixed Monarchy, if the Hierarchy grow too absolute, is is wisdom in a
Prince, rather to depress it then suppress it: all altertions in a fundamental
Government bring apparent dangers; but too sudden alteration threatens
inevitable ruin: when Aaron made a molten Calf, Moses altered not the
Government, but reproved the Governor.

CHAP. LXII.
BEfore thou build a Fortress, consider to what end: if for resistance against
the Enemy, it is useless; a valiant Army is a living Fortress: if for
suppressing the subject, it is hurtful: it breeds Jealousies, and Jealousies
beget hatred: if thou have a strong Army to maintain it, it adds nothing to thy
strength: if thy Army be weak it conduces much to thy danger: the surest
Fortress is the hands of thy Soldiers, and the safest Citadel is the hearts of
thy subjects.

CHAP. LXIII.
IT is a Princely Alchymie, out of a necessary War to extract an honorable
Peace, and more beseeming the Majesty of a Prince to thirst after Peace, than
conquest: blessedness is promised to the Peacemaker; not to the conqueror: it
is a happy State, whose Prince has a peaceful Hand, and a Martial Heart, able
both to use Peace, and to manage War.

CHAP. LXIV.
IT is a dishonorable thing for a Prince to run in debt for State-service; but
to pay it in the pardon of a Criminal Offense, is most dangerous. To cancel
the faults of subjects, with their deserts, is not only the symptom of a
disordered Commonwealth, but also of her Ruin.

CHAP. LXV.
LEt not a Commander be too forward to undertake a War, without the person of
his Prince: it is a thankless employment, where mischief attends upon the best
success; and where (if a Conqueror) he shall be in danger, either through his
onwn Ambition, or his Princes suspicion.

CHAP. LXVI.
IT is great oversight in a Prinnce, for any respects, either Actively, or
Passively to make a foreign Kingdom strong: he that gives means to another to
become powerful, weakens himself, and enables him to take the advantage of his
own weakness.

CHAP. LXVII.
WHen the humors of the people are stirred by discontents, or popular grief,
it is wisdom in a Prince to give them moderate liberty to evaporate: he that
turn's the humor back too hastily makes the wound bleed inwardly, and fills the
body with malignity.

CHAP. LXVIII.
IF having levied an Army, thou find thy self too weak, either through the
want of men or money; the longer thou delay'st to fight, the greater thy
Inconvenience grow's: if once thy Army falls asunder, thou certainly loosest by
thy delay: where hazarding thyfortunes betimes, thou have the advantage of thy
men, and may by fortune win the day: it is less dishohour to be overcome by
force than by flight.

CHAP. LXIX.
IT is the part of a wise Commander in Wars, eether Offensive or Defensive,
towork a necessity of Fighting into the breasts of his Soldiers: Necessity of
action takes away the fear of the Act, and makes bold Resolution the favorite
of Fortune.

CHAP. LXX.
CLemency and mildness is most proper for a Principality, but reservedness and
severity for a Republique; but moderation in both: Excess in the one breads
contempt: in the other, Hatted; when to sharpen the first, and when to sweeten
the last, let Time and Occasion direct thy judgment.

CHAP. LXXI.
IT is very requisite for a Prince that desires the continuance of Peace, in
time of Peace to encourage, and respect his Commanders: When brave Spirits find
neglect to be the effect of quiet times, they devise all means to remove the
Cause, and by suggesting inducements to new Wars, disturb and unsettle the old
Peace, buying private honor with public danger.

CHAP. LXXII.
BE not covetous for priority in advising thy Prince to a doubtful Attempt,
which concern's his State; if it prosper, the Glory must be his; if it fail,
the dishonor will be thine: When the Spirit of a Prince is stopped in the
discharge, it will recoyl and wound the first Adviser.

CHAP. LXXIII.
IF being the Commander of an army, thou espiest a gross and manifest error in
thine Enemy, look well to thy self, for treachery is not far off: He whom
desire of victory binds too much, is apt to stumble at his own Ruin.

CHAP. LXXIV.
IT is the heigh of a provident Commander not only to keep his own designs
indiscoverable to his Enemy; but likewise to be studious to discover his: He
that can best do the one, and nearest guess at the other, is the next step to a
conqueror. But he that fail's in both, must either ascribe his Overthrow to his
own Folly, or his victory to the Hand of Fortune.

CHAP. LXXV.
IF thou be ambitious of Honor, and yet fearful of the Canker of Honor,
Envy; so behave thy self, that Opinion may be satisfied in this, that thou
seek Merit, and not Fame; and that thou attributest thy Preferment rather to
Providence, than thy own Virtue: Honor is a due debt to the deserver; and who
ever envyed the payment of a debt? a just advancement is a providentiall act of
Providence.

CHAP. LXXVI.
IT behooves a Prince to be very circumspect before he make a League; which,
being made, and then broke, is the forfeiture of his Honor: He that obtain's a
Kingdom with the rupture of his faith, has gained the Glory of a Conquest, but
lost the honor of a Conqueror.

CHAP. LXXVII.
LEt States that aim at greatness, beware lest new Gentry multiply too fast, or
grow too glorious; Where there is too great a disproportion betwixt the Gentry
and the common Subject, the one grow's insolent; the other slavish When the
body of the Gentry grow's too glorious for a Corslet, there the heads of the
vulgar wax too heavy for the Helmet.

CHAP. LXXVII.
UPon the beleaguering of a city, let the Commander endeavor to take from the
Defendants, all scruples which may invite them to a necessity of defense: Whom
the fear of slavery necessitates to sight, the boldness of their resolution
will disavantage the assaylants, and dissicilitate their design: Sense of
necessity justifies the War; and they are hopeful in their arms, who have no
other hope but in their ams.

CHAP. LXXIX.
IT is good for States and Princes (if thy use ambitious men for their
advantage) so to order things, that they be still progressive, rather than
retrograde: When ambitious men find an open passage, they are rather busy than
dangerous; and if well watched in their proceedings, they will catch themselves
intheir own snare, and prepare a way for their own destruction.

CHAP. LXXX.
OF all Recreationis, Hunting is most proper to a Commander; by the frequency
whereof he may be instructed in that necessary knowledge of situation, with
pleasure; which, by earnest experience, would be dearly purchased. The Chase is
a fair Resemblance of a hopeful War, proposing to the Pursuer a flying Enemy.

CHAP. LXXXI.
EXpect the army of thy Enemy on plain and easy ground, and still avoid
mountainous and rocky places, and straight passages, to the utmost of thy
power: it is not safe to pitch any where thy forces cannot be brought together:
He never deserved the name of good Gaimster, that hazards his whole Rest, upon
less than the strength of his whole Game.

CHAP. LXXXII.
IT matters not much whether in government, thou tread'st, the steps of severe
Hannibal, or gentle Scipio, so thy actions be honorable, and thy life
virtuous: Both in the one, and the other, is both defect and danger, if not
corrected, and supported by the fair Repute of some extraordinary Endowments:
No matter, whether black or white, so the Steed be good.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
IT is the safest way in a Martial expedition, to commit the main charge to
one: Companions in command beget confusion in the Camp: When two able
Commanders are joined in equal Commission, each is apt to think his own way
best, and by mutual thwarting each other, both give opportunity to the Enemy.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
IT is a high point of Providence in a Prince to observe popular Sects in their
first Rise, and with a severe hand, to nipp them in the Budd: But being once
full aged, it is wisdom not to oppose them with too strong a hand; lest in
suppressing one, there arise two: a soft Current is soon stopped; but a strong
stream resisted, breaks into many, or overwhelm's all

CHAP. LXXXV.
IT makes very much to thy advantage to observe strictly the National virtues,
and vices and humors of foreign Kingdoms, whereby the times past shall read
useful Lectures to the times present: He that would see what shall be, let him
consider what has been.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
IF, like Manlius, thou command stout and great things, be like Manlius
stout to execute great commands: it is a great blemish in Sovereignty when the
Will rores, and the Power whispers: if thou can not execute as freely as thou
commandst, command no more than what thou may also freely execute.

CHAP. LXXXII.
IF one Prince desire to obtain any thing of another, let him (if occasion will
bear it) give him no time to advise: Let him endeavor to make him see a
necessity of sudden resolution, and the danger either of Denial, or Delay; He
that gives time to resolve, gives leisure to deny, and warning to prepare.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
L Let not thine army at the first encounter be too prodigal in her strength
for a dead lift: When the enemy has abated the fury of his first heat, let him
then feel thou have reserved thy forces for the last blow; So shall the honor
he has gained by his valor increase the glory of thy victory: Fore-games when
they prove are speediest, but after-games, if wisely played, are surest.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
IT is very requisite for a Prince to keep the Church always in proportion to
the State. If the Government of the one be Monarchical, and the other
Democraticall, they will agree, like Metal joined with clay, but for a while.
Durable is that State, where Aaron commands the people, and where Moses
commands Aaron: But most happy in the continuance, where God commands both.

CHAP. XC.
LEt not the Covetousness of a Captain purloyn to his own use, or any way
bereave his soldiers of any profit due unto their service, either in their
means or spoils: Such injuries (being quickn'd by their daily necessities) are
never forgot: What Soldiers earn with the hazard of their lives, (if not
enjoyed) prophesies an overthrow in the next Battle.

CHAP. XCI.
IF a Prince expect virtuous Subjects, let his Subjects have a virtuous prince;
So shall he the better punish the vices of his degenerate Subjects; So shall
they trulier prize virtue, and follow it, being exemplified in their Prince.

CHAP. XCII.
IT is the property of a wise Commander, to cast an eye rather upon Actions,
than upon persons; and rather to reward the merits of men than to read the
Letters of Ladies: He that for favor, or reward, preferr's a worthless
Soldier, betray's a Kingdom, to advance a Traitor.

CHAP. CXIII.
WHere Order and Fury are well acquainted, the War prospers, and Soldiers end
no less men then they begun: Order is quickened by Fury, and Fury is regulated
by Order: But where Order is wanting, Fury runs her own way, and being an
unthrift of its own strength, failing in the first assault, cravens; and such
beginning more than men, end less than women.

CHAP. XCIV.
IT is the quality of a wise Commander, to make his Soldiers confident of his
wisdom, and their own strength: if any danger be, to conceal it; if manifest,
to lessen it: Let him possess his army with the justness of the War, and with
a certainty of the victory. A good cause makes a stout heart, and a strong arm.
They that fear an overthrow, are half conquered.

CHAP. XCV.
IT is requisite in a General to mingle love with the severity of his
Discipline: they that cannot be induced to fear for love, will never be
enforced to love for fear: Love opens the heart, Fear shuts it: That
encourages, This compell's: And victory meets encouragement, but flees
Compulsion.

CHAP. XCVI.
IT is the part of a well advised State never to entrust a weighty service,
unto whom a noted injury or dishonor has been done; He cannever be zealous in
performance of Service, the height of whose expectation can rather recover a
lost name, than gain a fresh honor.

CHAP. XCVII.
THree ways there be to begin a Repute, and gain dignities in a Commonwealth:
The first by the virtue of glorious Parents, which, till thou degeneratest too
much, may raise thee upon the wings of Opinion: The second is by associating
with those, whose actions are known to be eminent: The third, by acting some
exploit, either public or private, which in thy handhath proved honorable.
The two first may miss, being founded on Opinion: the last seldom fail'es,
being grounded upon Evidence.

CHAP. XCVIII.
IF thou art called to the Dignity of a Commander, dignify thy place by thy
Commands: and that thou may be the more perfect in commanding others,
practice upon thy self: Remember, thou art a servant to the public weal and
therefore forget all private respects, either of kin or friend: Remember thou
art a Champion for a Kingdom; forget therefore all private affections either of
Love or Hate: He that would do his Country right, must not be too sensible of
a personal wrong.

CHAP. XCIX.
IT is the part of a wise Commander to read Books, not so much as Men; nor men
so much as Nations: He that can discern the inclinations, conditions, and
passions of a Kingdom, gain's his Prince a great advantage both in Peace and
War.

CHAP. C.
ANd you most High and Mighty Princes of this lower World, who at this
intricate and vatious game of War, vie Kingdoms, and win Crowns; and by the
death of your renowned Subjects, gain the lives of your bold-hearted Enemies;
Know there is a Quo Warranto, Whereto you are to give account of vour
Eye-Glorious actions, according to the righteous rules of Sacred Justice: How
warrantable it is to rend imperial Crowns from off the Sovereign heads of
their too weak possessours; or to snatch Scepters from out the conquered hand
of heaven-anointed Majesty, and by your vast ambitions still to enlarge your
large Dominions, with Kingdoms ravished from their natural Princes, judge you.
O let your brave designs, and well-weighed actions, be as just as ye are
glorious; and consider, that all your Wars, whose ends are not to defend your
own Possessions, or to recover your dispossessions, are but Princely injuries,
which none but heaven can right. But where necessity strikes up her hard
Alarms, or wronged Religion beats her zealous Marches, Go on, and let both
Swords and Stratagems proclaim a victory, whose noised renown may fill the
world with your eternal Glory.

The End of the first Century.
ENCHIRIDION. The Second Book. Cent. 2.
CHAP. I.
APromise is a child of the understanding and the understanding begets it, the
will brings it forth: he that performs it, delivers the mother: he that brerks
it, murders the child. If he be begotten in the absence of the understanding,
it is a Bastard; but the child must be kept. If thou mistrust thy
understanding, promise not; if thou have promised, break it not: it is better
to maintain a Bastard then to murder a child.

CHAP. II.
CHarity is a naked child, giving honey to a Be without wings: naked, because
excuseless and simple; a child, because tender and growing: giving honey,
because honey is pleasant and comfortable: to a Be, because a Be is laborious
and deserving; without wings, because helpless, and wanting. If thou deniest to
such, thou killest a Be; If thou giv'st to other than such, thou preserv'st a
Drone.

CHAP. III.
BEfore thy undertaking of any design, weigh the glory of thy action with the
danger of the attempt: if the glory ontweigh the danger, it is cowardice to
neglect it: if the danger exceed the glory, it is rashness to attempt it: if
the Balances stand poised, let thy own Genius cast them.

CHAP. IV.
Would thou know the lawfulness of the action which thou desire to
undertake? let thy devotion recommend it to divine blessing: if it be lawful,
thou shall perceive thy heart encouraged by thy prayer: if unlawful, thou
shall find thy prayer discouraged by thy heart. That action is not warrantable,
which either blushes to beggs blessing, or having succeeded, dares not present
thanksgiving.

CHAP. V.
IF evil men speak good, or good men evil of thy conversation, examine all thy
actions, and suspect thy self. But if evil men speak evil of thee, hold it as
thy honor, and by way of thankfulness, love them, but upon condition, that
they continue to hate thee.

CHAP. VI.
IF thou hope to please all, thy hopes are vain; if thou fear to displease
some, thy fears are idle. The way to please thy self is not to displease the
best; and the way to displease the best, is to please the most: if thou can
fashion thy self to please all, thou shall displease him that is All in All.

CHAP. VII.
IF thou neglectest thy love to thy neighbor, in vain thou professest thy love
to God: for by thy love to God, the love to thy neighbor is begotten, and by
the love to thy neighbor, thy love to God is nourisht.

CHAP. VIII.
THy ignorance in unrevealed Mysteries, is the mother of a saving Faith; and
thy understanding in revealed Truths, is the mother of a sacred Knowledge:
understand not therefore that thou may believe, but believe that thou may
understand: understanding is the wages of a lively Faith, and Faith is the
reward of an humble ignorance.

CHAP. IX.
PRide is the ape of charity, in show not much unlike; but somewhat fuller of
action. In seeking the one, take heed thou light not upon the other: they are
two Paralells; never but asunder: charity feeds the poor, so does pride:
charity builds an Hospital, so does pride: in this thy differ: charity gives
her glory to God; pride takes her glory from man.

CHAP. X.
Have thou lost thy money, and do thou mourn? another lost it before thou
had it; be not troubled: perchance if thou had not lost it, now it had lost
thee for ever: think therefore what thou rather have escaped then lost: perhaps
thou had not been so much thy own, had not thy money been so little thine.

CHAP. XI.
FLatter not thy self in thy faith to God, if thou wantst charity for thy
neighbor; and think not thou have charity for thy neighbor, if thou want
faith to God; where they are not both together, they are both wanting; they are
both dead, if once divided.

CHAP. XII.
BE not too slow in the breaking of a sinful custom: a quick courageous
resolution is better then a graduall deliberation: in such a combat, he is the
bravest soldier that lay's about him without fear or wit. Wit pleads; fear
disheartens; he that would kill Hydra, had better strike off one neckthen five
heads: fell the Tree, and the Branches are soon cut off.

CHAP. XII.
BE careful rather of what thou do, then of what thou have: for what thou
have is none of thine, and will leave thee at thy death, or thou the pleasure
of it, in thy sickness. But what thou do, is thine, and will follow thee to
thy grave, and plead for thee or against thee at thy Resurrection.

CHAP. XIV.
IF thou enjoyest not the God of love, thou can not obtain the love of God,
neither until then can thou enjoy a desire to love God, nor relish the love
of God: thy love to God is nothing but a faint reflection of Gods love to thee:
till he please to love thee, thy love can never please him.

CHAP. XV.
LEt not thy fancy be guided by thine eye; nor let thy will be governed by thy
fancy: thine eye may be deceived in her object; and thy fancy may be deluded in
her subject: let thy understanding moderate between thine eye, and thy fancy;
and let thy judgment arbitrate between thy fancy and thy will; so shall thy
fancy apprehend what is true: so shall thy will elect what is good.

CHAP. XVI.
Endeavor to subdue as well thy irascible, as thy concupiscible affections: to
endure injuries with a brave mind, is one half of the conquest; and to abstain
from pleasing evils with a courageous spirit is the other: the sum of all
humanity, and height of moral perfection, is Bear and Forbear.

CHAP. XVII.
IF thou desire not to be too poor, desire not to be too rich: He is rich, not
that possesses much, but he that covets no more: and he is poor, not that
enioy's little, but he that wants too much: the contented mind wants nothing
which it has not: the covetous mind wants not only what it has not, but
likewise what it has.

CHAP. XVIII.
THe outward senses are the common Cinque Ports where every subject lands
toward the understanding: The ear hear's a confused noise, and presents it to
the common sense. The common sense distinguishes the several sounds, and
convey's it to the fancy: the fancy wildly descants on it: the understanding
(whose object is truth) apprehending it to be Music, commends it to the
judgment: The judgment severally and jointly examines it, and recommends it
to the will: the will (whose object is good) approves it, or dislikes it; and
the memory records it, And so in the other senses according to their subjects.
Observe this progress, and thou shall easily find where the defect of every
action lies,

CHAP. XIX.
THe way to subject all things to thy self, is to subject thy self to Reason,
thou shall govern many, if Reason govern thee: would thou be crowned the
Monarch of a little world? Command thy self.

CHAP. XX.
THough thou give all thou have for charity sake, and yet retainest a secret
desire of keeping it for thy own sake, thou rather leavest it then forsakest
it: He that has relinquisht all things, and not himself, has forsaken
nothing; he that sets not his heart on what he possesses, forsaketht all
things, though he keep his possessions.

CHAP. XXI.
SEarch into thy self before thou accept the ceremony of honor: if thou art a
Palace, honor (like the Sun beams) will make thee more glorious: if thou art a
Dunghill, the Sun may shine upon thee, but not sweeten thee. Thy Prince may
give thee hononr, but not make thee honorable.

CHAP. XXII.
EVery man is a King in his own Kingdom. If Reason command, and passion obey,
his government speaks a good King: if thine inordinate affection rules, it
shows a proud Rebel; which, if thou destroy not, will depose thee: there is no
mean between the death of a Rebel, and the life of a Prince.

CHAP. XXIII.
AVouw, promise, and a resolution, have all one object, only differ in respect
of the persons to whom they are made; the first, is between God and man. The
second, between man and man; the third, between man and his own soul; they all
bind, if the object be lawful, to necessity of performance: if unlawful, to
the necessity of sin: they all take thee prisoner: if the object be lawful,
thy performance has redeemed thee; if unlawful, blood and tears must ransom
thee.

CHAP. XXIV.
IF thou have any business of Consequence in agitation, let thy Care be
reasonable, and seasonable: continual standing bent weakens the Bow: too hasty
drawing breaks it. Put off thy cares with thy colaths: so shall thy Rest
strengthen thy labor; and so shall thy labor sweeten thy Rest.

CHAP. XXV.
WHen thy inordinate affections do flame toward transitoty happiness, quench
them thus: think with thy self; if my Prince should give me what honor he has
to bestow, or bestow on me what wealth he has to give, it could not stay with
me, because it is transitory; nor I with it, because I am mortal: then revise
thy affections, and weigh them with their object, and thou will either confess
thy folly, or make a wiser choice.

CHAP. XXVI.
WIth three sorts of men enter no serious friendship: the ungrateful; man; the
Multiloquious man; the Coward: the first cannot prize thy favors; the second
cannot keep thy Counsel; the third dare not vindicate thy Honor.

CHAP. XXVII.
IF thou desire the time should not pass too fast, use not too much pastime:
thy life in Jollity blazes like a Tapour in the wind: the blast of honor wastes
it, the heat of pleasure melts it; if thou labor in a painful calling, thou
shat be less sensible of the flux of Time, and sweetlier satisfied at the time
of Death.

CHAP. XXVIII.
GOd is Alpha and Omega, in the great world; endeavor to make him so in the
little world; make him thy evening Epilogue, and thy morning Prologue; practice
to make him thy last though at night when thou sleep; and thy first, thought
in the morning when thou awakest; so shall thy fancy be sanctified in the
night, and thy understanding rectified in the day; so shall thy rest be
peaceful, thy labors prosperous, thy life pious, and thy death glorious.

CHAP XXIX.
BE very circumspect in the choice of thy company. In the society of thine
equals thou shall enjoy more pleasure; in the society of thy superiors thou
shall find more profit: to be the best in the company, is the way to grow
worse: the best means to grow better, is to be the worst here.

CHAP. XXX.
THink of God (especially in thy devotion) in the abstract, rather then the
concrete: if thou conceive him good, thy finite thoughts are ready to terminate
that good in a conceived subject; if thou think him great, thy bounded conceit
is apt to cast him into a conprehensible figure: conceive him therefore,
diffused goodness without quality, and represent him an incomprehensible
greatness without quantity.

CHHP. XXXI.
IF thou and true Religon be not as yet met; or met, unknown; by these marks
thou shall discove it. First, it is a Religion that takes no pleasure in the
expense of blood. Secondly, it is a Religion whose Terents cross not the book
of Truth. Thirdly, it is a Religion, that takes most from the creature, and
gives most to the creatout: if such a one thou meet with, assure thy self it is
the right, and therefore professit in thy Life, and protect it to thy Death.

CHAP. XXXII.
LEt another passion be a lecture to thy reason, and let the Shipwreck of his
understanding be a Seamark to thy passion: so shall thou gain strength out of
his weakness; safty out of his danger; and raise thy self a building out of his
ruins.

CHAP. XXXIII.
IN the height of thy prosperity expect adversity, but fear it not; if it come
not, thou art the more sweetly possessed of the happiness thou have, and the more
strongly confirmed; if it come, thou art the more gently dispossessed of the
happiness thou had, and the more firmly prepared.

CHAP. XXXIV.
TO tremble at the sight of thy sin, makes thy faith the less apt to tremble:
the Devils believe, and tremble, because they tremble at what they believe;
their belief brings trembling: thy trembling brings belief.

CHAP. XXXV.
AUthology is the way to Theology: until thou see thy self empty, thou will
not desire to be filled: he can never truly relish the sweetness of Gods mercy,
that never tasted the bitterness of his own Misery.

CHAP. XXXVI.
IS any outward affliction fallen upon thee, by a temporary loss? advise with
thy self, whether it be recoverable, or not: if it be, use all such lawful and
speedy means (the violence and unseasonableness whereof may not disadvantage
thee in the pursuit) to recover it; if not recoverable, endure with patience
what thou can not recure with pains: he that carnally asslicts his soul for
the loss of a transitory good, casts away the kernel, because he has lost the
shell.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Natural anger glances into the breasts of wisemen, but rests in the besom of
fools: in them, it is infirmity; in these, a sin: there is a natural anger;
and there is a spiritual anger; the common object of that, is the person; of
this, his vice: he that is always angry with his sin, shall seldom sin in his
anger.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
IF any hard affliction has surprised thee, cast one eye upon the hand that
sent it; and the other, upon the sin that brought it; if thou thankfully
receive the message, he that sent it will discharge the messenger.

CHAP. XXXIX.
ALl passions are good or bad, according to their objects: where the object is
absolutely good, there the greatest passion is too little: where absolutely
evil, there the lest passion is too much: where indifferent, there a little is
enough.

CHAP. XL.
WHen thou do evil that good may come thereby, the evil is surely thine: if
good should happen to ensue upon the evil which thou have done; the good
proceeds from God; if therefore thou do evil, thereby to occasionate a good,
thou laist a bad foundation for a good building; and servest the Devil that
God may serve thee: where the end of evil is good in the intention, there the
end of that good is evil in the extention.

CHAP. XLI.
BE as far from desiring the popular love, as fearful to deserve the popular
hate: ruin dwells in both: the one will hug thee to death; the other will crush
thee to destruction: to escape the first, be not ambitious; to avoid the
second, be not seditious.

CHAP. XLII.
WHen thou see misery in thy brothers face, let him see mercy in thine eye;
the more the oil of mercy is powered on him by thy pity, the more the oil in thy
Cruse shall be increased by thy Piety.

CHAP. XLIII.
REad not books alone, but men, and amongst them chiefly thy self: if thou find
any thing questionable there, use the Commentary of a severe friend, rather
then the gloss of a sweetlipt flatterer: there is more profit in a distasteful
truth, then deceitful sweetness.

CHAP. XLIV.
IF the opinion of thy worth invite any to the desire of thy acquaintance,
yield him a respect suitable to his quality: too great a reservation will expose
thee to the sentence of Pride; too easy access will condemn thee to the
censure of Folly: things too hardly endeavored, discourage the seeker: too
easily obtained, disparage the thing sought for: too easily got, is lowly
prized; and quickly lost,

CHAP. XLV.
WHen convenience of time has ripened your acquaintance, be cautious what thou
say, and courteous in what thou do: observe his inclination: if thou find
him weight, make him thine own, and lodge him in a faithful bosom: be not
rashly exceptious, nor rudely familiar: the one will breed contention; the
other contempt.

CHAP. XLVI.
WHen Passion is grounded upon Fancy, it is commonly but of short continuance:
Where the foundation is unstable, there the building is not lasting, He that
will be angry for any Cause, will be angry for no Cause; and when the
understanding perceives the cause vain, then the judgment proclaims the the
effect void.

CHAP. XLVII.
IF thou desire to purchase Honor with thy wealth; consider first how that
wealth became thine: if thy labor got it, let thy wisdom keep it: if
Oppression found it, let Repentance restore it: if thy parent left it, let thy
virtues deserve it: Solet thy virtues deserve it: So shall thy honor be safer,
better, and cheaper.

CHAP. XLVIII.
SIn is a Basilisk whose eyes ar full of Venom, if the eye of thy soul see her
first, it reflects her own poison and kills her: if she see thy soul, unseen,
or seen too late, with her poison, she kills thee: Since therefore thou can
not escape thy Sin, let not thy Sin escape thy observation.

CHAP. XLIX.
IF thou expect'st to rise by the means of Him, whom thy Fathers greatness
rais'd'from his service to Court preferment, thou will be deceived: For the
more in esteem thou art, the more sensible is He of what he was, whose former
servitude will be Chronicled by thy advancement, and glory obscured by thy
greatness: However he will conceive it a dead service, which may be interpreted
by thee, as a merited Reward, rather than a meritorius benefit.

CHAP. L.
TRust not to the promise of a common swearer, for he that dare sin a against
his God, for neither profit nor pleasure, will trespass against thee for his
own advantage. He that dare break the precepts of his Father, will easily be
persuaded to violate the promise unto his Brother.

CHAP. LI.
LEt the greatest part of the news thou hear be the lest part of what thou
beleevest, lest the greatest part of what thou beleevest be the lest part of
what is true. Where lies are easily admitted, the Father of lies will not
easily be excluded.

CHAP. LII.
DEliberate long, before thou consecrate a Friend; and when thy impartial
judgment concludes him worthy of thy bosom, receive him joy fully, and
entertain him wisely: impart thy secrets boldly, and mingle thy thoughts with
his: He is thy very self; and use him so: if thou firmly think him Faithful,
thou make him so.

CHAP. LIII.
AS there is no worldly gain, without some loss; so there is no worldly loss
without some gain. If thou have lost thy wealth, thou have lost some trouble
with it: if thou art degraded from thy Honor thou art likewise freed from the
stroke of envy; if sickness has blurred thy beauty, it has delivered thee
from pride; Set the allowance against the loss, and thou shall find no loss
gre^^; He loses little or nothing, that reserves himself.

CHAP. LIVE.
IF thou desire to take the best advantage of thy self (especially in matters
where the Fancy is most employed) keep temperate diet, use moderate exercise,
observe seasonable, and set hours for Rest; Let the end of thy first sleep
raise thee from thy Repose: Then has thy Body the best temper; Then has thy
Soul the lest incumberance: Then no noise shall disturb thy Ear; No object
shall divert thine Eye: Then, if, thy sprightly Fancy transport thee not
beyond the common pitch, and show thee not the Magazin of high invention,
return thee to thy wanton Bed, and there conclude thy self more fit to wear thy
Mistresses Favor, then Apollos Bays.

CHAP. LV.
IF thou art rich, strive to command thy money, lest she command thee: if thou
know how to use her, she is thy Servant: if not, thou art her Slave.

CHAP. LVI.
BRing thy daughter a husband of her own Religion, and of no hereditary
disease; Let his wisdom outweigh his wealth: Let his parentage excel his
person, and let his years exceed hers: Let thy prayers recommend the rest to
providence: if he prove, thou have found a Son: if not, thou have lost a
Daughter.

CHAP. LVII.
SO use Prosperity, that Adversity may not abuse thee: if in the one, Security
admits no fears; in the other, Despair will afford no hopes: He that in
Prosperity can foretell a danger, can in adversity foresee deliverance.

CHAP. LVIII.
IF thy faith have no doubts, thou have just cause to doubt thy faith; and if
thy doubts have no hope, thou have just reason to fear despair; When there fore
thy doubts shall exercise thy faith, keep thy hopes firm to qualify thy doubts;
So shall thy Faith be secured from doubts: So shall thy doubts be preserved
from despair.

CHAP. LIX.
IF thou desire to be truly valiant, fear to do any injury: He that fears not
to do evil, is always afraid to suffer evil: He that never fears is
desperate: And he that fears always, is a Coward: He is the true valiant man,
that dares nothing but what he may, and fears nothing but what he ought.

CHAP. LX.
ANger may repast with thee for an hour, but not repose for a night: The
continuance of Anger is Hatred, the continuance of Hatred turns Malice. That
anger is not warrantable, which has seen two Suns.

CHAP. LXI.
IF thou stand guilty of oppression, or wrongfully possessed of another
Right; see, thou make Restitution before thou give an Alms: if otherwise,
what art thou but a Thief, and make God thy Receiver?

CHAP. LXII.
WHen thou pray'st for spiritual Graces, let thy prayer be absolute; When, for
temporal Blessings, add a Clause of Gods pleasure: in both, with Faith and
Humiliation: So shall thou undoubtedly receive what thou desire, or more, or
better; Never prayer rightly made, was made unheard, or heard, ungranted.

CHAP. LXIII.
He that gives all, though but little, gives much; because God looks not to
the quantity of the Gift, but to the quality of the Giver; He that desires to
give more then he can, has equaled his Gift to his desire, and has given
more then he has.

CHAP. LXIV.
Be not too greedy in desiring Riches, nor too eager in seeking them: nor too
covetous in keeping them; nor too passionate in losing them: the first will
possess thy soul of discontent; The second will dispossess thy body of Rest;
The third will possess thy wealth of thee; The last will dispossess thee of thy
self: He that is too violent in the concupiscible, will be as violent in the
irascible.

CHAP. LXV.
BE not too rash in the breaking of an inconvenient custom: As it was gotten,
so leave it by degrees. Danger attends upon too sudden Alterations: He that
pulls down a, bad building by the great, may be ruined by the fall: But he that
takes it down Brick, by Brick, may live to build a better.

CHAP. LXVI.
IF thou desire that inestimable Grace of saving Faith, detest that insatiable
vice of damnable Covetousness: it is impossible, one heart (though never so
double) should lodge both: Faith possesses thee of what thou have not;
Covetousness dispossesses thee of what thou have: Thou can not serve God,
unless Mammon serve thee.

CHAP. XLVII.
BEware of him that is slow to Anger: Anger when it is long in coming, is the
stronger when it comes, and the longer kept. Abused patience turns to fury:
When Fancy is the ground of passion, that understanding which composes the
Fancy qualifies the passion; But when judgment is the ground the Memory is the
Recorder.

CHAP. LXVIII.
HE that professes himself thy open enemy, arms thee against the evil he means
thee, but he that dissembles himself thy secret Friend, strikes beyond Caution,
and wounds above Cure: From the first, thou may deliver thy self: From the
last, good Lord deliver thee.

CHAP. LXIX.
IF thou have wronged thy brother in thought, reconcile thee to him in thought;
if thou have offended him in words, let thy reconciliation be in words: if thou
have trespassed against him in deeds, by deeds be reconciled to him: That
Reconciliation is most kindly which is most in kind.

CHAP. LXX.
NOt to give to the poor is to take from him: Not to feed the hungry, if thou
have it, is the utmost of thy power to kill him: That therefore thou may
avoid both Sacriledg and Murder, Be Charitable.

CHAP. LXXI.
SO often as thou remembrest thy sins without Grief, so often thou repecaest
those sins by thy not grieving: He that will not mourn for the Evil which he
has done, gives earnest for the Evil he means to do; Nothing can assuage that
fire which Sin has made, but only that Water which Repentance has drawn.

CHAP. LXXII.
LOok well before thou leap into the chair of Honor: The higher thou climbest
the lower thou fallest, unlesh Virtue preserve thee: if Gold or Favor advance
thee, thy Honor is pinned upon the wheel of Fortune: When the wheel shall
turn, thy Honor falls, and thou remain'st an everlasting Monument of thy own
ambitious folly.

CHAP. LXXIII
WE are born with our temptations: Nature sometimes presses us to evil,
sometimes provokes us unto good, therefore thou give her more then her due,
thou nourishest an enemy; if less then is fufficient, thou destroyest a friend:
Moderation will prevent both.

CHAP. LXXIV.
IF thou scorn not to serve Luxury in thy Youth, Chastity will scorn thy
service in thy Age; and that the Will of thy green years thought no Vice in the
acting, the necessity of thy gray hairs makes no Virtue, in the forbearing:
Where there is no Conflict, there can be no Conquest; where there is no
Conquest, there is no Crown.

CHAP. LXXV.
THou did nothing toward thy own Creation, for thou were created for thy
Creators glory; Thou must do something toward thy own Redemption, for thou were
redeemed for thy own good: He that made thee without thee, will not save thee
without. thee.

CHAP. LXXVI.
WHen thy tongue and heart agree not in confession, that confession is not
agreeable to Gods pleasure: He that confesses with his tongue, and wants
confession in his heart, is either a vain man, on an Hypocrite: He that has
confession in his heart, and wants it in his tongue, is either a proud man, or
a timorous.

CHAP. LXXVII.
GOld, is Caesar's Treasure, Man is Gods: Thy Gold has Caesar's image, and thou
have Gods; Give therefore those things unto Caesar which are Caesar's; and unto
God, which are Gods.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
IN the Commission of evil, fear no man so much as thy own self: Another is
but one witness against thee: Thou art a thousand: Another thou may avoid,
but thy self thou can not; Wickedness is its own punishment.

CHAP. LXXIX.
IN thy Apparel avoid Singularity, Profuseness, and Gaudiness; Be not too
early in the fashion; nor too late: Decency is the halfway between Affectation
and Neglect: The Body is the shell of the Soul; Apparel is the Husk of that
Shell; The Husk often tells you what the Kernel is.

CHHP. LXXX.
LEt thy recreation be manly, moderate, seasonable, lawful; if thy life be
Sedentary, more tending to the exercise of thy Body; if active, more to the
refreshing of thy mind: The use of Recreation is to strengthen thy Labor, and
sweeten thy Rest.

CHAP. LXXXI.
Be not censorious, for thou know not whom thou judge; it is a more
dextrous error to speak well of an evil man, then ill of a good man. And
safer for thy judgment to be misled by simple Charity, then uncharitable
Wisdom: He may tax others with privilege, that has not in himself, what
others may tax.

CHAP. LXXXII.
TAke heed of that Honor, which thy wealth has purchased thee, for it is
neither lasting, nor thine own. What, money creates, money preserves: if thy
wealth decays, thy Honur dies; it is but a slippery happiness which Fortunes
can give, and Frowns can take; and not worth the owning which a nights Fire can
melt, or a rough Sea can drown.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
IF thou can desire any, thing not to be repented of, thou art in a fair way
to Happiness; if thou have attained it, thou art at thy ways end; He is not
happy who has all that he desires, but that desires nothing but what is good;
if thou can not do what thou need'st not repent, yet endeavor to repent what
thy necessity has done.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
SPend a hundred years in Earths best pleasures; and after that, a hundred
more; to which being spent, add a thousand; and to that, ten thousand more; the
last shall as surely end, as the first are ended, and all shall be swallowed
with Eternity: He that is born to day, is not sure to live a day; He that has
lived the longest, is but as he that was born yesterday: The Happiness of the
one is, That he has lived; the Happiness of the other is, That he may live;
and the lot of both is, That they must die: it is no happiness to live long,
nor unhappiness to die soon: Happy is he that has lived long enough, to die
well.

CHAP. LXXXV.
BE careful to whom thou give, and how: He that gives to him that deserves
not, loses his gift, and betrays the giver. He that conferrs his gift upon a
worthy receiver, makes many debtors, and by giving, receives. He that gives for
his own ends, makes his gift a bribe, and the receiver a prisoner: He that
gives often, teaches requittance to the receiver, and discovers a crafty
confidence in the giver.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
Has any wronged thee? Be bravely revenged: Slight it, and the work's begun;
Forgive it, and 't is finished: He is below himself that is not above an injury.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
LEt not thy passion miscall thy Child, least thou prophecy his fortunes: Let
not thy tongue curse him, last thy curse return from whence it came: Curses
sent in the room of blessings are driven back with a double vengeance.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
IN all the Ceremonies of the Church which remain indifferent, do according to
the constitution of that Church where thou art: The God of Order and Unity, who
created both the Soul and the Body, expects Unity in the one, and Order in both.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
LEt thy religious Fast be a voluntary abstinence, not so much from Flesh, as
Fleshly thoughts: God is pleased with that Fast which gives to another, what
thou deniest to thy self; and when the afflicting of thy own Body, is the
repairing of thy Brothers. He fasts truly that abstains sadly, griev's really,
gives cheerfully, and forgives charitably.

CHAP. XC.
IN the hearing of Mysteries keep thy tongue quiet: five words cost Zacharias
forty weeks silence: In such heights, convert thy Questions into Wonders; and
let this suffice thee, The Reason of the Deed, is the power of the Doer.

CHAP. XCI.
DEride not him whom the looser world calls Puritan, lest thou offend a little
one: if he be an Hypocrite, God, that knows him, will reward him; if zealous,
that God that loves him, will revenge him: if he be good, he is good to Gods
Glory: if evil, let him be evil at his own charges: He that judges, shall be
judged.

CHAP. XCII.
SO long as thou art ignorant, be not ashamed to learn: He that is so fondly
modest, not to acknowledge his own defects of knowledge, shall in time, be so
fondly impudent to justify his own ignorance: ignorance is the greatest of of
all infirmities; and, justified, the chiefest of all Follies.

CHAP. XCIII.
IF thou be a Servant, deal just by thy Master, as thou desire thy Servant
should deal with thee: Where thou art commanded, be obedient: where not
commanded, be provident: Let diligence be thy Credit; Let faithfulness be thy
crown: Let thy Masters credit be thy care, and let his welfare be thy content:
Let thine Eye be single, and thy heart humble: Be Sober, that thou may be
circumspect: He that in Sobriety is not his own man, being drunk, whose is he?
Be neither contentious, nor Lascivious: The one shows a turbulent Heart; The
other an idle Brain. A good Servant is a great Master

CHAP. CXIV.
LEt the Foundation of thy Affection be Virtue, then make the Building as rich,
and as glorious as thou can: if the Foundation be Beauty, or Wealth, and the
building Virtue the Foundation is too weak for the Building; and it will fall:
Happy is he, the Palace of whose affection is founded upon Virtue, wal'd with
Riches, glazed with Beauty, and Roof'd with Honor.

CHAP. XCV.
IF thy mother be a widow, give her double honor, who now acts the part of a
double Parent. Remember her nine months burden, and her tenth months
travel: forget not her indulgence, when thou did hang upon her tender
breast. Call to mind her prayers for thee before thou came into the world;
and her cares for thee when thou were come into the world. Remember her secret
Groans, her affectionate tears, her broken slumbers, her daily fears, her
nightly frights. Relieve her wants; cover her imperfections; comfort her age:
and the widows husband will be the Orphans Father.

CHAP. XCVI.
AS thou desire the love of God and man, beware of Pride: it is tumor in thy
mind that breaks and poisons all thy actions; it is a worm in thy treasure
which eats and ruins thy estate: it loves no man; is beloved of no man; it
disparages virtue in another by detraction; it disrewards goodness in it self,
by vain glory: the friend of the flatterer, the mother of envy, the nurse of
fury, the baud of luxury, the sin of devils, and the devil in mankind: it
hates superiors, it scorns inferiors, it owns no equals: in short, till thou
hate it, God hates thee.

CHAP. XCVII.
SO behave thy self among thy children, that they may love and honor thy
presence: be not too fond, least they fear thee not: be not too bitter, least
they fear thee too much; too much familiarity will embolden them; too little
countenance will discouragethem: so carry thy self, that thy may rather fear
thy displeasure, than thy correction; when thou reprov'st them, do it in
season; when thou correct'st them, do it not in passion: as a wise child makes
a happy father, so a wise father makes a happy child.

CHAP. XCVIII.
WHen thy hand has done a good act, ask thy heart if it be well done: the
matter of a good action is the deed done; the form of a good action is the
manner of the doing: in the first, another has the comfort, and thou the
glory; in the other, thou have the comfort, and God the glory: that deed is ill
done wherein God is no sharer.

CHAP. XCIX.
Would thou purchase Heaven? advise not with thy own ability. The prize of
Heaven is what thou have? examine not what thou have, but what thou art: give
thy self, and thou have bought it: if thy own vileness be thy fears, offer thy
self and thou art precious.

CHAP. C.
THe Birds of the air die to sustain thee; Beasts of the field die to nourish
thee; the Fishes of the Sea die to feed thee. Our stomachs are their common
Sepulcher. Good God! with how many deaths are our poor lives patcht up! How
full of death is the miserable life of momentany man!

The end of the second Century.
THE Third Century.
CHAP. I.
IF thou take pains in what is good, the pains vanish, the good remains: if
thou take pleasure in what is evil, the evil remains, and the pleasure
vanishes: what art thou the worse for pains, or the better for pleasure, when
both are past?

CHAP. II.
IF thy fancy, and judgment have agreed in the choice of a fit wife, be not
too fond, least she surfeit, nor too peevish, least she languish: love so, that
thou may be feared; rule so, that thou may be honored: be not too
diffident, least thou teach her to deceive thee, nor too suspicious, least thou
teach her to abuse thee: if thou see a fault, let thy love hide it; if she
continue it let thy wisdom reprove it: reprove her not openly, least she grow
bold: rebuke her not tauntingly, least she grow spiteful: proclaim not her
beauty, least she grow proud: boast not her wisdom, least thou be thought
foolish; show her not thy imperfections, least she disdain thee: pry not into
her Dairy, least she despise thee: profane not her ears with looss
communication, least thou defile the sanctuary of her modesty: an understanding
husband makes a discreet wife; and she, a happy husband.

CHAP III.
WRinkle not thy face with too much laughter, least thou become ridiculous;
neither wanton thy heart with too much mirth, least thou become vain: the
suburbs of folly is vain mirth, and profuseness of laughter, is the City of
fools.

CHAP. IV.
LEt thy tongue take counsel of one eye, rather then of two ears; let the news
thou reportest be rather stale then false, least thou be branded with the name
of liar. It is an intolerable dishoneur to be that which only to be called so,
is thought worthy of a Stab.

CHAP. V.
LEt thy discourse be such as thy judgment may maintain, and thy company may
deserve. In neglecting this, thou losest thy words; in not observing the other,
thou losest thy self. Give wash to swine, and wort to men; so shall thou
husband thy gifts to the advantage of thy self, and shape thy discourse to the
advancement of thy hearer.

CHAP. VI.
Do thou roar under the Torments of a Tyrant? weigh them with the sufferance
of thy Savior, and they are no plague. Do thou rage under the Bondage of a
raving Conscience? compare it to thy Saviors passion, and it is no pain. Have
the tortures of Hell taken hold of thy dispairing soul? compare it to thy
Saviors torments, and it is no punishment: what sense unequally compares, let
faith enterchangeably apply, and thy pleasures have no comparison. Thy sins are
the Authors of his sufferings; and his hell is the price of thy heaven.

CHAP. VII.
ARt thou banished from thy own Country? thank thy own folly: had thou chosen
a right home, thou had been no Exul: had thou commanded thy own Kingdom,
all Kingdoms had been thy own: the fool is banished in his own Country; the
wiseman is in his own Country, though banished: the fool wanders, the wiseman
traruls.

CHAP. VIII.
IN seeking virtue, if thou find poverty, be not ashamed: the fault is none of
thine. Thy honor, or dishonor is purchased by thy own actions. Though vettue
give a ragged livery, she gives a golden Cognizance: If her service make thee
poor, blush not. Thy poverty may disadvantage thee, but not dishonor the^.

CHAP. IX.
GAze not on Beauty too much, least it blast thee; nor too long, least it blind
thee; nor too near, least it burn thee: if thou like it, it deceives thee; if
thou love it, it disturbs thee; if thou lust after it, it destroys thee: if
virtue accompany it, it is the hearts paradise, if vice associate it, it is the
souls purgatory: it is the wisemans Bonefire, and the fools Furnace.

CHAP. X.
IF thou would have a good servant, let thy servant find a wise master: let
his food, rest, and wages be seasonable; let his labor, recreations, and
attendance depend upon thy pleasure: be not angry with him too long, least he
think thee malicious; nor too soon, least he conceive thee rash; nor too often,
least he count thee humorous. Be not too fierce least he love thee not; nor too
remiss, least he fear thee not; nor too familiar, least he prize thee not. In
brief, whilst thou giv'st him the liberty of a servant, beware thou losest not
the Majesty of a Master.

CHAP. XI.
IF thou desire to be chaste in Wedlock, keep thy self chaste before thou
wedd'st: he that has known pleasure unlawfully, will hardly be restrained from
unlawful pleasure. One woman was created for one man. He that strays beyond
the limits of liberty, is brought into the verge of Slavery. Where one is
enough, two are too many, and three are too few.

CHAP. XII.
IF thou would be justified acknowledge thy injustice: he that confesses his
sin, begins his journey toward salvation: he that is sorry for it, mends his
pace: he that forsakes it, is at his journeys end.

CHAP. XIII.
BEfore thou reprehend another, take heed thou art not culpable in what thou
go about to reprehend. He that cleanses a blot with blotted fingers, makes a
greater blur.

CHAP. XIV.
BEware of drunkenness, lest all good men beware of thee; where drunkenness
reigns, there reason is an Exul; virtue a stranger; God an Enemy; Blasphemy is
wit, Oaths are Rhetoric, and Secrets are Proclamations. Noah discovered that
in one hour, drunk, which sober, he kept secret six hundred years

CHAP. XV.
WHat thou give to the poor, thou securest from the Thief, but what thou
withhold'dst from his necessity, a Thief possesses. Gods Exchequer is the poor
man's Box: when thou strik'st a Tally, he becomes thy debtor,

CHAP. XVI.
TAke no pleasure in the folly of an Idiot, not in the fancy of a Lunatic nor
in the frenzy of a Drunkard. Make them the object of thy pity, not of thy
pastime; when thou behold'st them, behold how thou art beholding to him that
fuffered thee not to be like them There is no difference between thee and them,
but Gods favor.

CHAP. XVII.
IF being in eminent place, thou have incurred the Obloquy of the multitude,
the more thou endeavourest to stop the stream, the more it overflow's; wisely
rather divert the course of the vulgar humor, by divulging and spreading some
ridiculous noveltie, which may present new matter to their various fancy, and
stave their tongues from off thy worried name. The first subject of the common
voice, is the last news.

CHAP. XVIII.
IF thou desire to see thy child virtuous, let him not see his fathers vices:
Thou can not rebuke that in them, that they behold practiced in thee; till
reason be ripe, examples direct more then precepts: Such as thy behavior is
before thy childrens faces, such commonly is theirs behind their parents backs.

CHAP. XIX.
USe Law and Physic only for necessity; they that use them otherwise, abuse
themselves into weak bodies, and light purses: they are good remedies, bad
buisnsses, and worse recreations.

CHAP. XX.
BE not over curious in prying into mysteries; lest, by seeking things which
are needless, thou omittest things which are necessary: it is more safe to
poubt of uncertain matters, then to dispute of undiscovered Mysteries.

CHAP. XXI.
IF what thou have received from God thou sharest to the poor, thou have gained
a blessing by thy hand; if what thou have taken from the poor, thou give to
God, thou have purchased a Curse into the Bargain. He that puts to pious uses,
what he has got by impious Usury, robs the Spittle to raise an Hospital; and
the cry of the one, will out-plead the prayers of the other.

CHAP. XXII.
LEt the end of thy argument be rather to discover a doubtful Truth, than a
commanding Wit; In the one, thou shall gain substance; in the other, Froth:
that flint strikes the steel in vain, that propagates no sparkles; covet to be
Truths champion, at lest to hold her colors: he that pleads against the truth,
takes pains to be overthrown; or, if a conqueror, gains but vainglory by the
conquest.

CHAP. XXIII.
TAke no pleasure in the death of a creature, if it be harmeless or useless,
destroy it not: if useful, or harm full destroy it mercifully: He that
mercifully made his Creatures for thy sake, expects thy mercy upon them for his
sake. Mercy turns her back to the unmercifull.

CHAP. XXIV.
IF thou art called to the dignity of a Priest, the same voice calls thee to
the honor of a Judge; if thy life and doctrine be good, thou shall judge
others: if thy doctrine be good, and thy life bad, only thy felf: if both be
good, thou teach thy people to escape condemnation: if this be good, and
that bad, thou teach God to condem thee.

CHAP. XXV.
IF thou be not a Prometheus to advise before thou do; be an Epimetheus to
examine when thou have done: when the want of advise has brought forth an
improvident act, the act of examination may produce a profitable Repentance.

CHAP. XXVI.
IF thou desire the happiness of thy soul, the health of thy body, the
prosperity of thy estate, the preservation of thy credit, converse not with a
Harlot: her eyes run thy reputation in debt; her lips demand the payment; her
breasts arrests thee; her arms imprison thee; from whence, believe it, thou
shall hardly get forth till thou have either ended the days of thy credit, or
paid the utmost farthing of thy Estate.

CHAP. XXVII.
CAarry a watchful eye upon those familiars that are either silent at thy
faults, or sooth the in thy frailties, or excuse thee in thy follies; for such
are either cowards, or flatterers, or fools: if thou entertain them in
prosperity, the Coward will leave thee in thy dangers, the Flatterer will quit
thee in thy adversity: but the fool will never forsake thee.

CHAP. XXVIII.
IF thou have an Estate, and a son to inherit it, keep him not too short, least
he think thou live too long; what thou allowest him, let him receive from thy
hand, as gift; not from thy Tenants, as Rent: keep the reins of thy Estate in
thy own hand, least thou forsaking the sovereignty of a father, he forget the
reverence of a child: let his liberty be grounded on thy permission, and keep
him within the compass of thy instruction: let him feel, thou have the Curb,
though occasion urge thee not to check. Give him the choice of his own wife,
if he be wise. Counsel his affection rather than cross it, if thou be wise;
least his marriage bed be made in secret, or depend upon thy grave. If he be
given to lavish company, endeavor to stave him off with lawful recreations:
be cheerful with him, that he may love thy presence; and wink at small faults,
that thou may gain him: be not always chiding, least thou harden him: neither
knit thy brow too often, least thou dishearten him: remember the discretion of
a father often times prevents the destruction of a child.

CHAP. XXIX.
IF thou hide thy Treasure upon the Earth, how can thou expect to find it in
Heaven? Can thou hope to be a sharer where thou have reposed no stock? What
thou give to God's glory, and thy soul's health, is laid up in Heaven, and is
only thine; that alone, which thou exchangest, or hidest upon Earth is lost.

CHAP. XXX.
REgard not in thy Pilgrimage how difficult the passage is, but whither it
tends; nor how delicate the journey is, but where it ends: If it be easy,
suspect it; if hard, endure it: He that can not excuse a bad way, accuses his
own sloth; and he that sticks in a bad passage, can never attain a good
journey's end.

CHAP. XXXI.
MOney is both the generation and corruption of purchased honor: honor is
both the child and stave of potent money: the credit which honor has lost
money has found: When honor grew mercenary, money grew honorable. The way to
be truly Noble, is to contemn both.

CHAP. XXXII.
GIve not thy tongue too great a liberty, lest it take thee prisoner: A word
unspoken is like the sword in thy scabberd, thine; if vented, thy sword is in
another hand: if thou desire to be held wise, be so wise as to hold thy tongue.

CHAP. XXXIII.
IF thou be subject to any great vanity, nourish it not: if it will be
entertained, encourage it not: if it grow strong, more strongly strive against
it; if too strong, pray against it; if it weaken not, join fasting to thy
Prayer; if it shall continue, add perseverance to both; if it decline not, add
patience to all, and thou have conquered it.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Has any wounded thee with Injuries? meet them with patience; hasty words
ranckle the wound, soft language dresses it, forgiveness cures it, and oblivion
takes away the scarr. It is more noble, by silence to avoid an injury, then by
argument to overcome it.

CHAP. XXXV.
BE not instable in thy resolutions, nor various in thy actions, nor in thy
affections: so deliberate, that thou may resolve; so resolve, that thou may
perform; so perform, that thou may persevere: Mutability is the badg of
Infirmity.

CHAP. XXXVI.
LEt not thy good intention flatter thee to an evil action; what is
essentially evil, no circnmstance can make good; it matters not with what mind
thou did that, which is unlawful, being done: if the act be good, the
intention crown's it; if bad, it deposes thy intention: no evil action can be
well done.

CHAP. XXXVII.
LOve not thy children too unequally; or, if thou do, show it not; least
thou make the one proud, the other envious, and both Fools: if Nature has made
a difference, it is the part of a tender Parent to help the weakest. That
trial is not fair, where affection is the judge.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
IN giving of thy alms, enquire not so much into the person, as his necessity:
God looks not so much upon the merits of him that requires, as into the manner
of him that releiv's: if the man deserve not, thou have given it to Humanity.

CHAP. XXXIX.
IF thou desire the Eucharist should be thy Supper, let thy life be thy
Chaplain; if thy own worthiness invites thee, presume not to come; if the
sorrowful sense of thy own sins forbid thee, presume not to forbear; if thy
faith be strong, it will confirm it; if weak, it will strengthen it: He only
that wants Faith is the forbidden guest.

CHAP. LX.
Would thou traffic with the best advantage, and Crown thy virtues with the
best return? Make the poor thy Chapman, and thy purse thy Factor: So shall thou
give trifles which thou coul'st not keep, to receive treasure which thou can
not lose: There Is no such Merchant as the charitable man.

CHAP. LXI.
FOllow not the multitude in the evil of sin, lest thou share with the
multitude in the evil of punishment: The number of the Offenders diminishes
not the quality of the offense: As the multitude of Suitors draw's more favor
to the Suit; So the multitude of Sinners draw's more punishment on the Sin: The
number of the Faggots multiplies the fury of the Fire.

CHAP. XLII.
IF thou be angry with him that reproves thy Sin, thou secretly confesses his
reproof to be just: if thou acknowledge his Reproof to be just, thou secretly
confessest thy anger to be unjust He that is angry with the just Reprover,
kindles the fire of the just Revenger.

CHAP. XLIII.
Do well while thou may, lest thou do evil when thou would not: Pe that
takes not advantage of a good Hour, shall lose the Benefit of a good Will.

CHAP. XLIV.
LEt not mirth be thy profession, lest thou become a Make-sport. He that has
but gained the Title of a jester, let him assure himself, The Fool's not far
off.

CHAP. XLV.
IN every Relative action, change conditions with thy brother; Then ask thy
conscience what thou woudest be done to; Being truly resolved exchange again,
and do thou the like to him, and thy Charity shall never err: it is injustice
to do, what without impatience thou can not suffer.

CHAP. XLVI.
LOve thy neighbor for Gods sake, and God for his own sake, who created all
things for thy sake, and redeemed thee for his mercy sake: If thy love have any
other Object, it is false love: if thy object have any other end, it is
self-love.

CHAP. XLVIII.
LEt thy conversation with men, be sober and sincere: Let thy devotion to God
be dutiful and decent: Let the one be hearty, and not haughty; Let the other
be humble, and not homely: So live with men, as if God saw thee; So pray to
God, as if men heard thee.

CHAP. XLVIII.
GOd's pleasure is the wind our actions ought to sail by: Man's will is the
Stream that Tides them up and down; if the wind blow not, thou may take the
advantage of the Tide; if it blow, no matter which way the Stream runs, if with
thee, thy voyage will be the shorter; if against thee, the Sea will be the
rougher: it is safer to strive against the Stream, then to sail against the
Wind.

CHAP. XLIX.
IF thou desire much Rest, desire not too much: there is no less trouble in the
preservation, then in the acquisition of abundance; Diogenes found more rest in
his Tub than Alexander on his Throne.

CHAP. L.
Would thou multiply thy riches? Diminish them wisely: Or would thou make
thy Estate entire? divide it charitably: Seeds that are scattered, increase;
but hoarded up, they perish.

CHAP. LI.
HOw came thou by thy Honor? By Money: How came thou by thy Money? By
Extortion: Compare thy penny worth with the price, and tell me truly, how truly
Honorable thou art? It is an ill purchase that is encumbred with a curse, and
that Honor will be ruinous that is built on Ruins.

CHAP. LII.
IF thy Brother has priyately offended thee, reprove him ptiyately, and having
lost himself in an injury, thou shall find him in thy forgiuness: He that
rebukes a private fault openly, betray's it, rather then reproves it.

CHAP. LIII.
WHat thou desire, inspect thoroughly before thou prosecute: Cast one eye upon
the inconveniences, as well as the other upon the Conveniences. Weigh the
fullness of the Barn with the Charge of the Plough: Weigh Honor with her
Burden, and Pleasure with her Dangers; So shall thou undertake wisely what thou
desire; or moderate thy desires in undertaking.

CHAP. LIVE.
IF thou owe thy whole self to thy God for thy Creation, what have thou left
to pay for thy Redemption, that was not so cheap as thy Creation? In thy
Creation, he gave thee thy self, and by thy self to him: In thy Redemption he
gave himself to thee, and through him restored thee to thy felf: Thou art given
and restored: Now what owe thou unto thy God? if thou have paid all thy
debts, give him the Surplusage, and thou have merited.

CHAP. LV.
IN thy discourse take heed what thou speak, to whom thou speak, how thou
speak, and when thou speak: What thou speak, speak speak truly; when
thou speak, speak wisely. A Fools heart is in his Tongue; but a Wise man's
Tongue is in his heart.

CHAP. LVI.
Before thou act a Theft, consider what thou art about to do: if thou take it,
thou losest thy self; if thou keep it, thou disenablest thy Redemption: Till
thou rest or'st it, thou can not be restored; When it is restored, it must
cost thee more pain, and sorrow, than ever it brought thee pleasure or profit.
It is a great folly to please the Palate with that which thou know must
either be vomited, or thy death.

CHAP. LVII.
SIlence is the highest wisdom of a Fool, and Speech is the greatest trial of a
Wise man, if thou would be known a Wise man, let thy words show thee so; if
thou doubt thy words, let thy silence feign thee so. It is not a greater point
of Wisdom to discover knowledge, then to hide ignorance.

CHAP. LVIII.
THe Clergy is a Copy book, their Life is the Paper, whereof some is purer,
some Courser: Their Doctrine is the Copies, some written in a plain Hand others
in a Flourishing Hand, some in a Text Hand, some in a Roman Hand, others in a
Court Hand, others in a Bastard Roman: if the choice be in thy power, choose a
Book that has the finest Paper, let it not be too straight nor too loosely
bound, but easy to lie open to every Eye; follow not every Copy, least thou be
good at none: Among them all choose one that shall be most Legible and useful,
and fullest of Instructions. But if the Paper chance to have a Blot, remember,
the Blot is no part of the Copy.

CHAP. LIX.
Virtue is nothing but an act of loving that which is to be beloved, and that
act is Prudence, from whence not to be removed by constraint is Fortitude; not
to be allured by enticements is Temperance; not to be diverted by Pride is
justice. The declining of this act is Vice.

CHAP. LX.
REbuke thy Servants fault in private: public reproof hardens his shame: if
he be past a youth, strike him not: he is not fit for thy service, that after
wise reproofs will either deserve thy strokes, or digest them.

CHAP. LXI.
TAke heed rather what thou receivest, then what thou give; What thou give
leaves thee, what thou take, sticks by thee: He that presents a gift buys the
Receiver; he that takes a gift sells his liberty.

CHAP. LXII.
THings Temporal, are sweeter in the Expectation: Things Eternal are sweeter in
the Fruition: The first shames thy Hope, the second crown's it: it is a vain
Journey, whose end affords less pleasure then the way.

CHAP. LXIII.
KNow thy self that thou may Fear God: Know God, that thou may Love him; in
this, thou art initiated to wisdom; in that, perfected: The Fear of God is the
beginning of Wisdom: The Love of God is the fulfilling of the Law.

CHAP. LXIV.
IF thou have Providence to foresee a danger, let thy Prudence rather prevent
it, than fear it. The fear of future evils brings oftentimes a present
mischief: Whilst thou seek'st to prevent it, practice to bear it. He is a wise
man that can avoid an evil; he is a patient man that can endure it; but he is
a vailiant man can conquer it.

CHAP. LXV.
IF thou have the place of a Magistrate, deserve it by thy Justice, and
dignifie it with thy Mercy: Take heed of early gifts: an open hand makes a
blind eye: be not more apt to punish Vice, then to encourage Virtue. Be not too
severe, least thou be hated, nor too remiss, least thou be slighted: So
execute Justice, that thou may be loved: so execute mercy, that thou may
be feared.

CHAP. LXVI.
LEt not thy Table exceed the fourth part of thy Revenu: Let thy provision be
solid, and not far fetched, fuller of substance than Art: Be wisely frugall in
thy preparation, and freely cheerful in thy entertainment: If thy guests be
right, it is enough; if not, it is too much: Too much is a vanity; enough is a
Feast.

CHAP. LXVII.
LEt thy apparel be decent, and suited to the quality of thy place and purse:
Too much punctualitie, and too much morositie, are the two Poles of Pride: Be
neither too early in the Fashion, nor too long out of it, nor too precisely in
it: what custom has civilized, is become decent, till then, ridiculous: Where
the Eye is the Jury, thy apparel is the evidence.

CHAP. XLVIII.
IF thy words be too luxuriant, confine them, least they consine thee: He that
thinks he never can speak enough, may easily speak too much. A full tongue, and
an emty brain, are seldom parted.

CHAP. LXIX.
IN holding of an argument, be neither choleric, nor too opinionate; The one
distempers thy understanding; the other abuses thy judgment: Above all things
decline Paradoxes and Mysteries: Thou shall receive no honor, either in
maintaining rank falsehoods, or meddling with secret truths? as he that pleads
against the truth, makes with the mother of his Error: so he that argues
beyond warrant, makes wisdom the midwife of his folly.

CHAP. LXX
DEtain not the wages from the poor man that has earned it, least God withhold
thy wages from thee: If he complain to thee, hear him, least he complain to
Heaven, where he will be heard: if he hunger for thy sake, thou shall not
prosper for his sake. The poor man's penny is a plague in the rich man's purse.

CHAP. LXXI.
BE not too cautious in discerning the sit objects of thy Charity, least a soul
perish through thy discretion: What thou give to mistaken want, shall return
a blessing to thy deceived heart: Better in relieving idleness to commit an
accidental evil, then in neglecting misery to omit an essential good: Better
two Drones be preserved, then one Be perish.

CHAP. LXII.
THeology is the Empress of the world; Mysteries are her Privy Council;
Religion is her Clergy; The Arts her Nobility; Philosophy her Secretary: The
Graces her Maids of Honor; The Moral virtues, the Ladies of her Bedchamber;
Peace is her Chamberlain; True joy, and endless pleasures are her Courtiers;
Plenty her Treasurer; Poverty her Exchequer; The Temple is her Court: If thou
desire access to this great Majesty, the way is by her Courtiers; if thou have
no power there, the common way to the Sovereign is the Secretary.

CHAP. LXXIII.
IT is an evil knowledge to know the good thou should embrace, unless thou
likewise embrace the good thou know: The breath of divine knowledge, is the
bellows of divine love, and the flame of divine love, is the perfection of
divine knowledge.

CHAP. LXXIV.
IF thou desire rest unto thy soul, be just: He that does no injury, fears not
to suffer injury: The unjust mind is always in labor: It either practices the
evil it has projected, or projects to avoid the evil it has deserved.

CHAP. LXXV.
Accustom thy palate to what is most usual: He that delights in rarities,
must often feed displeased, and sometimes lie at the mercy of a dear market:
common food nourishes best, delicates please most: The sound stomach preferr's
neither. What art thou the worse for the last years plain diet, or what now the
better for thy last great Feast?

CHAP. LXXVI.
WHo ever thou art, thou have done more evil in one day, than thou can
expiate in six; and can thou think the evil of six days can require less
then one? God has made us rich in days, by allowing six, and himself poor by
reserving but one; and shall we spare our own flock, and shear his Lamb? He
that has done nothing but what he can justify in the six days, may play the
seventh.

CHAP. LXXVII.
HOpe and Fear, like Hippocrates Twins, should live and die together: If hope
depart from fear, it travels by security, and lodges in presumption; if fear
depart from hope, it travels to insidelitie, and Inns in despair the one shuts
up heaven, the other opens hell; the one makes thee insensible of Gods frowns,
the other, incapable of Gods favors; and both teach God to be unmercifull, and
thee to be most miserable.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
CLose thine ear against him that shall open his mouth secretly against
another: If thou re^eive not his words, they ^^ie back, and wound the Report^^:
If thou receive them, they flee forward, and wound the receiver.

CHAP. LXXIX.
IF thou would preserve a sound body, use fasting and walking; if a
healthful soul, fasting and praying; Walking exercises the body, praying
exercises the soul, fasting cleanses both.

CHAP. LXXX.
Would thou not be thought a fool in another conceit? Be not wise in thine
own: He that trusts to his own wisdom, proclaim's his own folly: He is truly
wise, and shall appear so, that has folly enough to be thought not worldly
wise, or wisdom enough to see his own folly.

CHAP. LXXXI.
DEsir'st thou knowledge? know the end of thy desire: Is it only to know? Then
it is curiosity: Is it because thou may be known? then it is vanity: If
because thou may edify, it is charity: If because thou may be edified,
it is wisdom. That knowledge turns to mere excrement, that has not some heat of
wisdom to digest it.

CHAP. LXXXII.
WIsdom without innocence is knavery; Innocence without wisdom is foolery: Be
therefore as wise as serpents, and innocent as doves: The subtilty of the
serpent, instructs the innocence of the dove: The innocence of the dove,
corrects the subtilty of the serpent: What God has joined together, let no man
separate.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
THe more thou imitatest the virtues of a Saint departed, the better thou
celebrat'st that Saints day. God is not pleased with surfeiting for his sake,
who with his fasting so often pleased his God.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
Choose not thy serviceable soldier out of soft apparel, lest he prove
effoeminate, nor out of a full purse, lest he grow timorous: They are more fit
for action, that are fiery to gain a fortune abroad, then they that have
fortunes to lose at home. Expectation breeds spirit; Fruition brings fear.

CHAP. LXXXV.
GOd has given to mankind a common Library, his creatures; and to every man a
proper book, Himself, being an abridgement of all the other: If thou read with
understanding, it will make thee a great master of Philosophy, and a true
servant to the divine Author. If thou but barely read, it will make thee thy
own Wise man, and the Authors fool.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
DOubt is a weak child lawfully begotten between an obstructed judgment, and a
fair understanding. Opinion is a bold bastard gotten between a strong fancy,
and a weak judement; it is less dishonorable to be ingenuosly doubtful, then
rashly opinionate.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
AS thou art a moral man, esteem thy self not as thou art, but as thou art
esteemed. As thou art a Christian, esteem thy self as thou art, not as thou art
esteemed: Thy price in both rises and falls as the market goes. The market of a
moral man is wild opinion. The market of a Christian is a good conscience.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
PRovidence is an exercise of reason; experience an act of sense: by how much
reason excel's sense, by so much providence exceeds experience. Providence
prevents that danger, which experience repents: Providence is the rational
daughter of wisdom: experience the Empirical mistress of fools.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Has fortune dealt thee ill Cards? let wisdom make thee a good Gamester: in a
fair Gale, every fool may sail; but wise behavior in a storm commends the
wisdom of a Pilot: To bear adversity with an equal mind, is both the sign and
glory of a brave Spirit.

CHAP. XC.
IF any speak ill of thee, flee home to thy own conscience, and examine thy
heart: if thou be guilty, 't is a just correction: if not guilty, 't is a fair
instruction: make use of both, so shall thou distill Honey out of Gall, and out
of an open enemy, create a secret friend.

CHAP. XCI.
AS the exercise of the body natural is moderate recreation, so the exercise of
the body politic, is military discipline: by that the one is made more able;
by this, the other is made more active: Where both are wanting, there wants no
danger to the one, through a humorous superfluity; to the other, by a negligent
security.

CHAP. XCII.
GOd is above thee, Beasts are beneath thee: acknowledge him that is above thee,
and thou shall be acknowledged by them that are under thee: Whilst Daniel
acknowledged God to be above him, the Lions acknowledged Daniel to be above
them.

CHAP. XCIII.
TAke heed whilst thou show wisdom in not speaking, thou betrayest not thy
folly in too long silence: if thou art a fool, thy silence is wisdom; if a wise
man, too long silence is folly; As too many words from a fools mouth, gives a
wise man no leave to speak; so too long silence in a wise man, gives a fool the
opportunity of speaking, and makes thee guilty of his folly.

CHAP. XCIV.
COnsider what thou were, what thou art, what thou shall be: What Is within
thee, what is above thee, what is beneath thee, what is against thee: what was
before thee, what shall be after thee; and this will bring to thy self
humility, to they neighbor charity, to the world contempt, to thy God
obedience: He that know's not himself Positively, can not know himself
Relatively.

CHAP. XCV.
THink not thy love to God merits Gods love to thee: his acceptance of thy duty
crowns his own gifts in thee: Man's love to God is nothing but a faint
reflection of God's love to man.

CHAP. XCVI.
BE always less willing to speak then to hear; what thou hear thou
receivest; what thou speak thou give. It is more glorious to give, more
profitable to receive.

CHAP. XCVII.
See thou good days? prepare for evil times: No Summer but has his Winter:
He never reaped comfort in adversity, that sowed it not in prosperity.

CHAP. XCVIII
IF being a magistrate, thou connivest at vice, thou nourishest it; if thou
sparest it, thou committest it: What is not, by thee, punished in others, is
made punishable in thee. He that favors present evils, en tails them upon his
posterity: He that excuses the guilty, condemns the Innocent.

CHAP. XCIX.
TRuth haunts no corners, seeks no by-ways: If thou profess it, do it openly:
if thou seek it, do it fairly: he deserv's not to profess Truth, that professes
it fearfully he deserv's not to find the Truth that seeks it fraudulently.

CHAP. C.
IF thou desire to be wiser yet, think not thy self yet wise enough: and if
thou desire to improve knowledge in thy self, despise not the instructions of
another: He that instructs him, that thinks himself wise enough, has a fool to
his scholar: He that thinks himself wise enough to instruct himself, has a
fool to his master.

The end of the Third Century.

THE Fourth Century.
CHAP. I
DEmean thy self more warily in thy study, then in the street. If thy public
actions have a hundred witnesses, thy private have a thousand. The multitude
look's but upon thy actions: Thy conscience look's into them: the multitude may
chance to excuse thee, if not acquit thee, thy conscience will accuse thee, if
not condemn thee.

CHAP. II.
OF all vices take heed of Drunkenness; Other vices are but fruits of
disordered affections: this disorders, nay, banishes reason: Other vices but
impair the soul, this demolishes her two chief faculties; the Understanding,
and the Will: Other vices make their own way; this makes way for all vices: He
that is a Drunkard is qualified for all vice.

CHAP. III.
IF thy sin trouble thee, let that trouble comfort thee; as pleasure in the
remembrance of sin exasperats Justice, so sorrow in the repentance of sin
mollifies mercy: it is less danger to commit the sin we delight in, than to
delight in the sin we have committed.

CHAP. IV.
THe way to God is by thy self, The way to thy self is by thy own corruptions:
he that balks this way, err's; he that travels by the creatures, wanders. The
motion of the Heavens shall give thy soul no rest: the virtue of Herbs shall
not increase thine. The height of all Philosophy, both natural and moral, is to
know thy self, and the end of this knoweledg is to know God.

CHAP. V.
INfamy is where it is received: if thou art a Mudd-wall, it will stick: if
Marbl, it will rebound: if thou storm at it, it is thine: if thou contemn it, 't
is his.

CHAP. VI.
IF thou desire Magistracy, learn to forget thy self; if thou undertake it, bid
thy self farewell; he that looks upon a common cause with private eyes, looks
through false Glasses. In the exercise of thy politic office, thou must forget
both Ethics and Oeconomicks. He that puts on a public Gown, must put off a
private Person.

CHAP. VII.
LEt the words of a Virgin, though in a good cause, and to as good purpose, be
neither, violent, many, nor first, nor last: it is less shame for a Virgin to
be lost in a blushing silence, then to be found in a bold Eloquence.

CHAP. VIII.
ARt thou in plenty? give what thou will: Art thou in poverty? give what thou
can: as what is received, is received according to the manner of the
receiver; so what is given, prized according to the measure of the giver: he is
a good workman that makes as good work as his matter will permit.

CHAP. IX
GOd is the Author of Truth; the Devil, the Father of Lies: If the telling of
a truth shall endanger thy life, the author of Truth will protect thee from the
danger, or reward thee for thy damage. If the telling of a Lie may secure thy
life, the father of Lies will beguil thee of thy gains, or traduce the
security. Better by losing of a life to save it, then by saving of a life to
lose it. However, better thou perish than the Truth.

CHAP. X.
Consider not so much what thou have, as what others want: what thou have, take
heed thou lose not. What thou have not, take heed thou covet not: if thou have
many above thee, turn thy eye upon those that are under thee: If thou have no
Inferiors, have patience a while, and thou shall have no Superiors. The grave
requires no marshal.

CHHP. XI.
IF thou see any thing in thy self, which may make thee proud, look a little
further, and thon shall find enough to humble thee; if thou be wise, view the
Peacock's feathers with his feet, and, weigh thy best parts with thy
imperfections. He thar would rightly prize the man, must read his whole Story.

CHAP. XII.
LEt not the sweetness of contemplation be so esteemed, that action be
despised, Rachel was more fair, Lea more fruitful: as contemplation is more
delightful, so is it more dangerous: Lot was upright in the City and wicked in
the Mountain.

CHAP. XIII.
IF thou have but little, make it not less by murmuring: if thou have enough,
make it not too much by unthankfulness: He that is not thankfully contented
with the lest favor he has received, has made himself incapable of the lest
favor he can receive.

CHAP. XIV.
WHat thou have taken unlawfully, restore speedily, for the sin in taking it,
is repeated every minute thou keep'st it: if thou can, restore it in kind: if
not, in value; if it may be, restore it to the party; if not, to God: the Poor
is Gods Receiver.

CHAP. XV.
LEt the fear of a danger be a spur to prevent it: He that fears otherwise,
gives advantage to the danger: It is less folly not to endeavor the prevention
of the evil thou fear, then to fear the evil which thy endeavor cannot
prevent.

CHAP. XVI.
IF thou have any excellence which is thine own, thy tongue may glory in it
without shame; but if thou have received it, thy glory is but usurpation; and
thy pride is but the prologu of thy shame: Where vainglory commands, there
folly counsels; where pride Rides, there shame Lacquies.

CHAP. XVII.
GOd has ordained his creatures, not only for necessity, but delight; since
he has carved thee with a bountiful hand, fear not to receive it with a
liberal heart: He that gave thee water to allay thy thirst, gave thee wine to
exhilarat thy heart. Restore him for the one, a necessity of thanks, return him
for the other, the cheerfulness of prais.

CHAP. XVII.
IF the wicked flourish and thou suffer, be not discouraged: thy are fatted for
destruction; thou art Dieted for health; they have no other Heaven but the
hopes of a long Earth; thou have nothing on Earth but the hopes of a quick
Heaven: if there were no journeys end, the travel of a Christian were most
comfortless.

CHAP. XIX.
IMp not thy wings with the Churches feathers, least thou fly to thy own
Ruin: impropriations are bold Metaphors; which continued, are deadly
Allegories: one foot of land in Capite, encumbers the whole estate: The Eagle
snatched a coal from the Altar, but it fired her Nest.

CHAP. XX.
LEt that table which God has pleased to give thee, please thee: He that made
the Vessel knows her burden, and how to ballast her; He that made all things
very good, cannot but do all things very well; If thou be content with a
little, thou have enough: if thou complainest, thou have too much.

CHAP. XXI.
Would thou discover the true worth of a man? Behold him naked: dis-treasure
him of his ill-got Wealth, degrade him of his dear bought honor dis-robe him
of his purple Habit. Discard his pampered body; then look upon his soul, and
thou shall find how great he is: Natural sweetness is never sented but in the
absence of artificial.

CHAP. XXII.
IF thou art subject to any secret folly blab it not, last thou appear
impudent; nor boast of it lest thou seem insolent: Every man's vanity ought to
be his greatest shame: and every man's folly ought to be his greatest secret.

CHAP. XXIII.
IF thou be ignorant, endeavor to get knowledge, least thou be beaten with
stripes: if thou have attained knowledge, put it in practice, least thou be
beaten with many stripes: Better not to know what we should practice, then not
to practice what we know; and less danger dwell's in unaffected ignorance, then
unactive knowledge.

CHAP. XXIV.
TAke heed thou harbor not that vice called Envy, least another happiness be
thy torment, and God's blessing become thy Curse: virtue corrupted with
vainglory, turn's Pride: Pride poisoned with malice, becoms Envy: join
therefore Humility with thy Virtue, and Pride shall have no footing, and Envy
shall find no entrance.

CHAP. XXV.
IF thy endeavor cannot prevent a Vice, let thy Repentance lament it: the more
thou remembrest it without heart's grief the deeper it is rooted in thy heart:
take heed it please thee not, especially in cold blood: Thy pleasure in it
makes it fruitful, and her fruit is thy destruction.

CHAP. XXVI.
THe two knowledges, of God, and thy self, are the high way to thy Salvation;
that breeds in thee a filial love; this a filial fear: The ignorance of thy
self is the beginning of all sin, and the ignorance of God is the perfection of
all evil.

CHAP. XXVII.
RAther do nothing to the purpose, then be idle, that the Devil may find thee
doing: the Bird that sits is easily shot, when fliers' escape the Fowler:
idleness is the dead Sea that swallow's all Virtues, and the Self-made
Sepulcher of a living man: the idle man is the Devils hireling; whose livery is
rags whose diet and wages are famine, and diseases.

CHAP. XXVIII.
BE not so mad as to alter that Countenance which thy Creator made thee:
Remember it was the work of his Hands; if it be bad, how dare thou mend it?
If it be good, why do thou mend it? art thou ashamed of his work, and proud
of thy own? he made thy face to be known by, why desire thou to be known by
another: it is a shame to adulterate modesty, but more to adulterate nature.
Lay by thy art, and blush not to appear what he blushes not to make thee. It is
better to be his Picture than thy own.

CHAP. XXIX.
LEt the ground of all thy Religious actions be obedience, examine not why it
is commanded, but observe it, because it is commanded. True obedience neither
procrastinates, nor questions.

CHAP. XXX.
IF thou would buy an inheritance in Heaven, advise not with thy Purs, least
in the mean while thou lose thy purchase: The Widow bought as much for two
mites, as Zaccheus did for half his estate: the prize of that purchase is what
thou have, and is not lost for what thou have not, if thou desire to have it.

CHHP. XXXI.
WIth the same height of desire thou have sinned, with the like depth of sorrow
thou must repent: thou that have sinned to day, deferr not thy repentance till
to morrow: he that has promised pardon to thy Repentance, has not promised
life till thou repent.

CHAP. XXXII.
TAke heed how thou receivest prais from men: from good men neither avoid it,
nor glory in it. From evil men, neither desire it, nor expect it: To be praised
of them that are evil, or for that which is evil, is equal dishonor: He is
happy in his worth, who is praised by the good, and imitated by the bad.

CHAP. XXXIII.
PRoportion thy chatity to the strength of thy estate, least God proportion thy
estate to the weakness of thy charity: Let the lips of the poor be the trumpet
of thy gift, least in seeking applause, thou lose thy Reward: Nothing is more
pleasing to God than an open hand, and a close mouth.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Do thou want things necessary? Grumble not: perchance it was a necessary
thing thou should want: Endeavor lawfully to supply it; if God bless not
thy endeavor, bless him that knows what is fittest for thee. Thou art Gods
Patient: Prescribe not thy Physician.

CHAP. XXXV.
IF another death, or thy own depend upon thy confession, if thou can, say
nothing: if thou must, say the Truth: it is better, thou lose thy life, than
God his Honor: it is as easy for him to give thee life, being condemned; as
repentance, having sinned: it is more wisdom to yield thy Body, than hazard thy
Soul.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Cloth not thy language, either with Obscurity, or affectation: in the one
thou discover'st too much darkness, in the other, too much lightness: He that
speaks from the understanding, to the understanding, is the best interpreter.

CHAP. XXXVII.
IF thou expectest death as a friend, prepare to entertain it: If thou
expectest death as an enemy, prepare to overcom it: Death has no advantage, but
when it coms a stranger.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
FEar nothing, but what thy industry may prevent: Be confident of nothing but
what fortune cannot defeat: it is no less folly to fear what is impossible to
be avoided, then to be secure when there is a possibility to be deprived.

CHAP. XXXIX.
LEt not the necessity of Gods decree discourage thee to pray, or dishearten
thy prayers; do thou thy duty, and God will do his pleasure: if thy prayers
make not him sound that is sick, they will return, and confirm thy health that
art sound: If the end of thy prayer be to obtain thy request, thou confinest
him that is infinite: if thou have done well, because thou were commanded, thou
have thy reward in that thou have obeyed. Gods pleasure is the end of our
prayers.

CHAP. XL.
MArry not too young, and when thou art too old, marry not, least thou be fond
in the one, or thou dote in the other, and repent for both: let thy liking
ripen before thou love: let thy Love advise before thou choos; and let thy
choice be fixed before thou marry: Remember that the whole happiness or
unhappiness of thy life depends upon this one Act. Remember nothing but death
can dissolve this knot. He that weds in haste, repents ofttimes by leisure: And
he that repents him of his own act, either is, or was a fool by confession.

CHAP. XLI.
IF God has sent thee a Cross, take it up and follow him: use it wisely, least
it be unprofitable; Bear it patiently, least it be intolerable: Behold in it
Gods anger against sin, and his love toward thee; in punishing the one, and
chastening the other: if it be light, slight it not; if heavy, murmur not: Not
to be sensible of a judgment is the symptom of a hardened heart; and to be
displeased at his pleasure, is a sign of a rebellious will.

CHAP. XLII.
IF thou desire to be magnanimous, undertake nothing rashly, and fear nothing
thou undertak'st: Fear nothing but infamy: Dare any thing but injury; the
measure of magnanimity is, neither to be rash, nor timorous.

CHAP. XLIII.
Practice in health, to bear sickness, and endeavor in the strength of thy
life to entertain death: He that has a will to die, not having power to live,
shows necessity, not virtue: It is the glory of a brave mind to embrace pangs
in the very arms of pleasure: What name of virtue merits he, that goes when he
is driven?

CHAP. XLIV.
BE not too punctual in taking place: If he be thy superior, it is his due; if
thy inferior, it is his dishonor: It is thou must honor thy place; thy Place,
not thee: It is a poor reward of worth that consists in a right hand, or a
brick-wall.

CHAP. XLV.
PRay often, because thou sinn'st always: Repent quickly, lest thou die
suddenly. He that repents it, because he wants power to act it, repents not of
a sin: for He that wants power to actuate his sin, has not forsaken his sin,
but his sin him.

CHAP. XLVI.
MAke Philosophy thy journey, Theology thy journeys end: Philosophy is a
pleasant way, but dangerous to him that either tires or retires: in this
journey it is safe, neither to loyter, nor to rest, till thou have attained thy
journeyes end: He that sits down a Philosopher, rises up an Atheist.

CHAP. XLVII.
FEar not to sin, for God's sake, but thy own? Thy sin overthrow's not his
glory, but thy good: He gain's his Glory not only from the salvation of the
Repentant, but also from the confusion of the Rebellious: There be vessels for
honor, and vessels for dishonor, but both for his honor. God is not grieved
for the glory he shall lose for thy improvidence, but for the horror thou shall
sind for thy impenitence.

CHAP. XLVIII.
INsult not over misery, nor deride infirmity, nor despise deformity. The
first, shows thy inhumanity: the second, thy folly; the third, thy pride: He
that made him miserable, made thee happy to lament him: He that made him weak,
made thee strong to support him: He that made him deformed, gave thee favor to
be humbled: He that is not sensible of another unhappiness, is a living stone;
but he that makes misery the object of his triumph is an incarnate Devil.

CHAP. XLIX.
MAke thy recreations, servants to thy business, least thou become slave to thy
recreations: When thou go up into the Mountain, leave this servant in the
Valley: When thou go to the City, leave him in the Suburbs. And remember,
The servant must not be greater than his Master.

CHAP. L.
PRaise no man too liberally before his face, nor censure him too lavishly
behind his back; the one savours of flattery; the other, of malice; and both
are reprehensible: The true way to advance another virtue, is to fellow it;
and the best means to cry down another vice, is to decline it.

CHAP. LI.
IF thy Prince command a lawful act, give him all active obedience: if he
command an unlawful act, give him passive obedience. What thy well grounded
conscience will suffer, do cheerfully without repining; where thou may not do
lawfully, fuffer courageously without Rebellion: Thy life and livelihood is thy
Princes, Thy conscience is thy own.

CHAP. LII.
IF thou give, to receive the like, it is Exchange: if to receive more, it is
covetousness: if to receive thanks, it is vanity: if to be seen, it is
vainglory; if to corrupt, it is Bribery; if for Example, it is formality; if
for compassion, it is Charity; if because thou art commanded, it is obedience:
The affection in doing the work, gives a name to the work done.

CHAP. LIII.
FEar death, but be not afraid of Death. To fear it, whets thy expectation: To
be afraid of it, dulls thy preparation: if thou can endure it, it is but a
slight pain; if not, it is but a short pain: to fear death is the way to live
long; to be afraid of Death, is to be long a dying.

CHAP. LIVE.
IF thou desire the love of God and man, be humble; for the proud heart, as it
loves none but it self, so it is beloved of hone, but by it self: The voice of
humility is God's music, and the silence of Humility is Gods Rhetoric: Humility
enforces, where neither verrue nor strength can pravail, nor Reason.

CHAP. LV.
LOok upon thy burning Taper, and there see the Emblem of thy Life: The slame
is thy Soul; The wax, thy Body, and is commonly a span long; The wax, (if never
so well tempered) can but last his length; and who can lentghen it? If ill
tempered, it shall wast the faster, yet last his length; an open window shall
hasten either, an Extinguisher shall put out both: Husband them the best thou
can, thou can not lengthen them beyond their date: leave them to the injury
of the Wind, or to the mercy of a wastfull, hand, thou hastnest them, but still
they burn their length: But puff them out, and thou have shortened them, and
stopped their passage, which else had brought them to their appointed end: Bodies
according to their constitutions, stronger or weaker, according to the equality
or inequality of their Elements, have their dates, and may be preserved from
shortning, but not lengthened. Neglect may wast them, ill diet may hasten them
unto their journe's end, yet they have lived their length; A violent hand may
interrupt them; a sudden death may stop them, and thy are shortened. It lies in
the power of man, either permissively to hasten, or actively to shorten, but
not to lengthen or extend the limits of his natural life. He only, (if any)
has the art to lengthen out his Taper that puts it to the best advantage.

CHAP. LVI
DEmean thy self in the presence of thy Prince with reverence and cheerfulness:
That, without this, is too much sadness; This without that is too much
boldness: Let thy wisdom endeavor to gain his opinion, and labor to make thy
loyalty his confidence: Let him not find thee false in words, unjust in thy
actions, unseasonable in thy suits, nor careless in his service: cross not his
passion, question not his pleasures, Press not into his Secrets; Pry not into
his Prerogative: Displease him not, lest he be angry; appear not displeased,
lest he be jealous: the anger of a King is implacable: the jealousy of a
Prince is incurable.

CHAP. LVII.
GIve thy heart to thy Creator, and Reverence to thy Superiors: Give diligence
to thy Calling, and ear to good Counsel: Give Alms to the poor, and the Glory
to God: Forgive him that ignorantly offends thee, and him that having wittingly
offended thee, seeks thee: Forgive him that has forcibly abused thee, and him
that has fraudulently betrayed thee: Forgive all thine enemies, but lest of
all, thy self: Give and it shall be given thee: Forgive, and it shall be
forgiven thee. The sum of all Christianity is, Give and Forgive.

CHAP. LVIII.
BE not too great a niggard in the commendations of him that professes thy own
quality: if he deserve thy praise, thou have discovered thy Judgment; if not,
thy modesty: Honor either returns to, or reflects on the Giver.

CHAP. LIX.
IF thy desire to raise thy Fortunes encourage thee to place thy delights
a'midst the casts of Fortune, be wise betimes, lest thou repent too late; What
thou gettest, thou gainest by abused Providence; what thou losest, thou losest
by abused Patience; What thou winnest is prodigally spent; what thou losest is
prodigally lost: it is an evil trade that prodigality drives: and a bad voyage
where the Pilot is blind.

CHAP. LX.
BE very wary for whom thou becomest Security, and for no more then thou art
able to discharge, if thou love thy liberty. The borrower is a slave to the
lender: The Security is a slave to both: Whilst the Borrower and Lender are
both eased, the Security bears both their burdens: He is a wise security that
secures himself.

CHAP. LXI.
LOok upon thy affliction as thou do upon thy Physic: Both imply a disease;
and both are applied for a Cure; That, of the Body; This of the Soul: If they
work, they promise health: if not, they threaten death: He is not happy that is
not asslicted, but he that finds happiness by his affliction.

CHAP. LXII.
IF the Knowledge of Good whet thy desire to good, it is a happy Knowledge: if by
thy ignorance of Evil, thou art surpised with Evil, it is an unhappy
ignorance. Happy is he that has so much Knowledge of Good, as to desire it, and
but so much Knowledge of evil, as to fear it.

CHAP. LXIII.
WHen the flesh presents thee with delights, then present thy self with dangers
Where the world possesses thee with vain Hopes, there possess thy self with
true fear: When the Devil brings thee Oil, bring thou Vinegar. The way to be
safe, is never to be secure.

CHAP. LXIV.
IF thy brother has offended thee, forgive him freely, and be reconciled: To
do Evil for Evil, is human corruption: To do Good for Good is civil
retribution: To do Good for Evil is Christian perfection: The act of
Forgiveness is Gods Precept: The manner of Forgiveness is Gods President.

CHAP. LXV.
REverence the Writings of holy Men, but lodge not thy Faith upon them, because
but men: They are good Pools, but no Fountains: Build on Paul himself no longer
then he builds on Christ: if Peter renounce his Master, renounce Peter: The
word of man may convince Reason; But the word of God alone can compel
conscience.

CHAP. LXVI.
IN civil things follow the most; in matters of Religion, the fewest; in all
things follow the best: So shall thy ways be pleasing to God; so shall thy
behavior be plausible with men.

CHAP. LXVII.
WHat counsel thou administrest to thy Brother under any loss or misery,
register carefully and when the Case is thine, follow it: So shall thy own
Reason convince thy passion, or thy passion confess her own unreasonableness.

CHAP. LXVIII.
WHen thou go about to change thy moral Liberty into a Christian Servitude,
prepare thy self to be the world's laufing-stock: if thou overcomest her
Scoffs, thou shall have double Honor: if overcome, double Shame: He is unworthy
of a good Master, that is ashamed of a bad Livery.

CHAP. LXIX.
LEt not the falling of a Salt, or the crossing of a Hare, or the crying of a
Cricket trouble thee: They portend no evil, but what thou fear: He is ill
acquainted with himself that know's not his own Fortunes more then they: If
evill-follow it, it is the punishment of thy Superstition; not the fulfilling
of their Portent: All things are lucky to thee, if thou will, nothing but is
ominous to the Superstitious.

CHAP. LXX.
SO be have thy self in thy course of life, as at a banquet: Take what is
offered with modest thankfulness: And expect what is not as yet offered with
hopeful patience: let not thy rude Appetite press thee, nor a slight
carefulness indispose thee, nor a sullen discontent deject thee; Who desires
more than enough, has too much: And he that is satisfied with a little has no
less than enough: Been est cui Deus obtulit parca, quod satis est, manu.

CHAP. LXXI.
IS thy Child dead? He is restored, not lost: is thy treasure stolen? it is not
lost, it is restored: He is an ill debtor, that counts repayment loss: But it
was an evil chance that took thy child, and a wicked hand that stole thy
Treasure: What is that to thee? it matters not by whom he requires the things
from whom he lent them: What goods are ours by loan, are not lost when
willingly restored, but when unworthily received.

CHAP. LXXII.
CEnsure no man, detract from no man: Praise no man before his face; traduce no
man behind his back: Boast not thy self abroad, nor flatter thy self at home:
if any thing cross thee, accuse thy self: if any one extol thee, humble thy
self: Honor those that instruct thee, and be thankful to those that reprehend
thee: Let all thy desires be subjected to Reason, and let thy reason be
corrected by Religion: Weigh thy self by thy own Balances, and trust not the
voice of wild opinion: Observe thy self as thy greatest enemy, so shall thou
become thy greatest friend.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Endeavor to make thy discourse such as may adminster profit to thy Self, or
Standers by, least thou incurrthe danger of an idle Word: Above all Subjects,
avoid those, which are Scurrilous, and obscean; Tales that are impertinent, and
improbable; ard dreams.

CHAP. LXXIV.
IF God has blessed thee with a son, bless thou that son with a lawful calling:
choos such employment, as may stand with his Fancy, and thy Judgment: His
country claim's his ability toward the building of her honor. If he cannot
bring a Cedar, let him bring a shrub. He that brings nothing usurps his life,
and robs his country of a Servant.

CHAP. LXXV.
AT the first entrance into thy Estate, keep a low sail; Thou may rise with
Honor; Thou can not decline without shame: He that begins as his Father
ended, shall end as his Father begun.

CHAP. LXXVI.
IF any Obscure Tale should chance to slip into thine Ears, among the varieties
of Discourse (if opportunity admit) reprove it: if otherwise, let thy silence,
or change of countenance interpret thy dislike: the attentive Ear is Baud to
the lascivious Tongue.

CHAP. LXXVII.
BE more circumspect over the works of thy Brain, then the Actions of thy Body:
These have infirmity to plead for them: but they must stand upon their own
bottoms: These are but the objects of few; They, of all: These will have Equals
to defend them: they have Inferiors to envy them; Supeperiours, to deride
them; all to censure them: It is no less danger for these to be proclaimed at
Paul's Cross, then for them to be protested in Paul's Churchyard.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
USe Common place-books, or Collections, as Indexes to light thee to the
Authors, lest thou be abused: He that takes Learning upon trust, makes him a
fair Cup-board with another Plate. He is an ill advised purchaser, whose title
depends more on Witnesses than Evidences.

CHAP. LXXIX.
IF thou desire to make the best advantage of the Muses, either by Reading, to
benefit thy self, or by Writing, others; keep a peaceful soul in a temperate
body: A full belly makes a dull brain; and a turbulent Spirit, a distracted
Judgment: The Muses starve in a Cooks shop, and a Lawyers Study.

CHAP. LXXX.
WHen thou communicatest thy self by Letters, heighten or depress thy style
according to the quality of the party and business; That which thy tongue would
present to any, if present, let thy Pen represent to him, Absent: The tongue is
the minds Interpreter, and the Pen is the Tongues Secretary.

CHAP. LXXXI.
KEep thy soul in exercise, lest her faculties rust for want of motion: To eat,
sleep, or sport too long, stops the natural course of her natural actions: To
dwell too long in the employments of the body, is both the cause, and sign of a
dull Spirit.

CHAP. LXXXII.
BE very circumspect to whose Tuition thou committ'st thy child: Every good
Scholar is not a good Master: He must be a man of invincible patience, and
singular observation: he must study children that will teach them well, and
reason must rule him that would rule wisely: he must not take advantage of an
ignorant father, nor give too much ear to an indulgent Grandmother: the common
good must outweigh his private gains, and his credit must out-bid Gratuities:
he must be deligent, and sober, not too familiar, nor too reserved, neither
amorous nor fantastic: Just, without fierceness, merciful, without fondness:
if such a one thou meet with, thou have found a Treasure, which, if thou
know how to value, is invaluable.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
LEt not thy laughter handsell thy own jest, least whilst thou laugh at it,
others laugh at thee: neither tell it often to the same hearers, least thou be
thought forgetful, or barren: There is no sweetness in a Cabage twice sod, or
a tale twice told.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
IF opinion has lighted the Lamp of thy Name, endeavor to encourage it with
thy own Oil, lest it go out and stink: The Chronical disease of Popularity is
shame: If thou be once up, beware: From Fame to Infamy is a beaten Road.

CHAP. LXXXV.
CLeans thy morning soul with private and due Devotions; till then admit no
buisness: The firstborn of thy thoughts are God's, and not thine, but by
Sacriledg: think thy self not ready till thou have praised him, and he will be
always ready to bless thee.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
IN all thy actions think God sees thee; and in all his actions labor to see
him; that will make thee fear him; this will move thee to love him; The fear of
God is the beginnining of Knowledge, and the Knowledge of God is the perfection
of Love.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
LEt not the expectation of a reversion entice thy heart to the wish of the
possessours death, lest a judgment meet thee in thy expectation, or a Curse
overtake thee in thy fruition: Every wish makes thee a murderer, and moves God
to be an Accessory; God often lengthens the life of the possessour with the
days of the Expectour.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
PRize not thy self by what thou have, but by what thou art; he that values, a
Jewel by its golden frame, or a Book by its silver clasps, or a man by his
vast estate, errs: if thou art not worth more then the world can make thee, thy
Redeemer had a bad penny worth, or thou an un-curious Redeemer.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
LEt not thy Father's, nor The Fathers, nor the Church, thy Mother's belief, be
the ground of thine: The Scripture lies open to the humble heart, but locked
against the proud Inquisitour; he that believes with an implicit Faith is a
mere Emperick in Religion.

CHAP. XC.
OF all sins, take greatest heed of that which thou have last, and most
repented of: He that was last thrust out of doors, is the next readiest to
crowd in again: and he that thou have forest baffled, is likeliest to call more
help for a revenge: it is requisite for him that has cast one devil out, to
keep strong hold least seven return.

CHAP. XCI.
IN the meditation of divine Mysteries, keep thy heart humble, and thy thoughts
holy; let Philosophy not be ashamed to be confuted, nor Logic blush to be
confounded; what thou can not prove, approve; what thou can not comprehend,
beleev; and what thou can beleev, admire; so shall thy ignorance be satisfied
in thy Faith, and thy doubts swallowed up with wonders: the best way to see
daylight, is to put out thy candle.

CHAP. XCII.
IF opinion has cried thy name up let thy modesty cry thy heart down, lest
thou deceive it; or it thee; there is no less danger in a great name than a
bad; and no less honor in deserving of praise, then in the enduring it.

CHAP. XCIII.
USe the holy Scriptures with all reverence; let not thy wanton fancy carve it
out in jests, nor thy sinful wit make it an advocate to thy sin: it is a
subject for thy faith, not fancy; where Wit and Blasphemy is one Trade, the
understanding's Banckrupt.

CHAP. XCIV.
Do thou complain that God has forsaken thee? it is thou that have forsaken
him: it is thou that art mutable: in him there is no shadow of change, in his
light is life; if thy Will drive thee into a Dungeon, thou make thy own
darkness, and in that darkness dwells thy death; from whence, if he redeem thee,
he is merciful; if not, he is just; in both, he receiv's glory.

CHAP. XCV.
MAke use of Time, if thou love Eternity: know, yesterday cannot be recalled,
to morrow cannot be assured: to day is only thine, which if thou procrastinate,
thou losest; which lost, is lost for ever: One today, is worth two to morrows.

CHAP. XCVI.
If thou be strong enough to encounter with the times, keep thy Station; if
not, shift a foot to gain advantage of the Times: He that acts a Beggar to
prevent a Thief, is never the poorer; it is a great part of wisdom, sometimes to
seem a fool.

CHAP. XCVII.
IF thou intend thy writings for the public view, lard them not too much with
the choice lines of another Author, lest thou lose they own Gravy: what thou
have read and digested being delivered in thy own Style becoms thine: it is
more decent to wear a plain suit of one entire cloth, then a gaudy garment
checkered with diverse richer fragments.

CHAP. XCVIII.
IF God has blessed thee with inheritance, and children to inherit, trust not
the staff of thy family to the hands of one: Make not many Beggars in the
building up of one great heir, lest if he miscarry through a prodigal Will, the
rest sink through a hard necessity. Gods allowance is a double portion: when heigh
blood, and generous breeding break their fast in plenty, and dine in poverty,
they often sup in Infamy: if thou deny'st them Faulcons wings to prey on Fowl,
thou give them Kites stomachs to seiz on Garbage.

CHAP. XCIX.
BE very vigilant over thy child in the April of his understanding, least the
frosts of May nipp his Blossoms. While he is a tender Twig, streighten him;
whilst he is a new Vessel, season him; such as thou make him, such commonly
thou shall find him. Let his first lesson be Obedience, and the second shall be
what thou will. Give him Education in good Letters, to the utmost of thy
ability, and his capacity. Season his youth with the love of his Creator, and
make the fear of his God the beginning of his knowledge: If he have an active
spirit, rather rectify then curb it; but reckon idleness among his chiefest
faults: Above all things, keep him from vain lascivious and amorous Pamphlets,
as the Primmers of all Vice. As his judgment ripens, observe his inclination,
and tender him a Calling, that shall not cross it: Forced Marriages and
Callings seldom prosper; show him both the Mow, and the Plough; and prepare him
as well for the danger of the Skirmish, as possess him with the honor of the
prize: If he choose the profession of a Scholar, advise him to study the most
prositable arts: Poetry, and the Mathematics, take up too great a latitude of
the Soul, and moderately used, are good Recreations, but bad Callings, being
nothing but their own Reward: if he choose the profession of a Soldier, let him
know, withal, Honor must be his greatest wages, and his enemies his surest
Paymaster: Prepare him against the danger of a War, and advise him of the
greater mischiefs of a Garnison; let him avoid Debauchedness, and Duels to the
utmost of his power, and remember he is not his own man, and (being his
Countries servant) has no estate in his own life: If he choose a Trade, teach
him to forget his Fathers House, and his Mothers Wing: Advise him to be
conscionable, careful, and constant: This done, thou have done thy part, leave
the rest to Providence, and thou have done it well.

CHAP. C.
COnvey thy love to thy Friend, as an Arrow to the Mark, to stick there, not as
a Ball against the Wall, to rebound back to thee: that friendship will not
continue to the End that is begun for an End.

MEditation is the life of the soul; Action is the soul of Meditation; Honor
is the reward of action: So meditate, that thou may do; So do, that thou
mai'st purchase Honor: For which purchase, give God the Glory.

FINIS.
Spare-Minutes; Or RESOLVED MEDITATIONS And REMEDITATED RESOLUTIONS.

Written by ARTHUR WARWICK.

-- Ego cur acquirere pauca Si possim invidetur.

The sixth Edition.

AMSTERDAM, Printed by Stephen Swart, Bookseller, at the westside of the
Exchange, at the Crouned Bible. 1677.

Resolved MEDITATIONS And Premeditaded RESOLUTIONS.
IT is the over curious ambition of many, to be best or be none: if they may
not do so well as they would, they will not do so well as they may. I will
do my best, and what I want in power, supply in will. Thus whils I pay in
part, I shall not be a debtor for all. He owes most that pays nothing.

CHAP. I.
PRide is the greatest enemy to reason, and discretion the greatest opposite to
pride. For whils wisdom makes art the ape of nature, pride makes nature the
ape of art. The Wiseman shapes his apparel to his body, the proud man shapes
his body by his apparel. It Is no marvel then, if he know not himself, when
he is not to day, like him he was yesterday: and less marvel, if good men will
not know him, when he forgets himself, and all goodness. I should fear, whilst
I thus change my shape least my Maker should change his opinion: and finding me
not like him Ho made me, reject me, as none of his making. I would any day put
off the old cause of my apparel, but not every day put on new fashioned
apparel. I see great reason, to be ashamed of my pride, but no reason, to be
proud of my shame.

CHAP. II.
The reason that many men want their desires, is, because their desires want
reason. He may do what he will, that will do but what he may.

CHAP. III.
I Should marvel that the Covetous man can still be poor, when the Rich man is
still covetous, but that I see, a poor man can be content, when the contented
man is only rich: the one wanting in his store, whiles the other is stored in
his wants. I see then, we are not rich or poor, by what we possess, but by
what we desire. For he is not rich that has much, but he that has enough:
nor he poor that has but little, but he that wants more. If God then make
me rich by store, I will not impoverish my self by covetousness: but if he
make me poor by want, I will enrich my self by content.

CHAP. IV.
Hypocrisy desires to seem good rather than to be so honesty desires to be
good rather than seem so. The worldlings purchase reputation by the sale of
desert, wisemen buy desert, with the hazard of reputation. I would do much to
hear well, more to deserve well, and rather loose opinion then merit, I shall
more joy me, that I know my self what J am, than it shall grieve me to hear
what others report me. J had rather deserve well without praise, than do ill
with commendation.

CHAP. V.
ACoward in the field is like the Wisemans fool, his heart is at his mouth, and
he does not know what he does profess: but a Coward in his faith, is like a
fool in his wisdom; his mouth is in his heart, and he dares not profess what
he does know. I had rather not know the good I should do, than not do the good
I know. It is better to be beaten with few stripes, than with many.

CHAP. VI.
Each true Christian is a right traveller: his life his walk, Christ his way,
and Heaven his home. His walk painful, his way perfect, his home pleasing. I
will not loyter, least I come short of home: I will not wander, least I come
wide of home, but be content to travel hard, and be sure I walk right, so
shall my safe way find its end at home, and my painful walk make my home
welcome.

CHAP. VII.
AS is a wound to the body; so is a sinful body to the soul: the body
endangered till the wound be cured, the soul not sound till the bodies sin be
healed, and the wound of neither can be cured without dressing, nor dressed
without smarting. Now as the smart of the wound, is recompensed by the cure of
the body: so is the punishment of the body sweetened by the health of the soul
Let my wound smart by dressing, rather than my body die; Let my body smart by
correction, rather than my soul perish.

CHAP. VIII.
IT is some hope of goodness not to grow worse: it is a part of badnes not to
grow better. I will take heed of quenching the spark, and strive to kindle a
fire. If I have the goodness I should, it is not too much; why should I make it
les? If I keep the goodness I have it is not enough: Why do I not make it more?
He never was so good as he should be, that does not strive to be better than
he is: He never will be better than he is, that does not fear to be worse then
he was.

CHAP. IX.
Health may be enjoyed; sickness must be endured: one body is the object of
both, one God the Author of both. If then he give me health, I will thankfully
enjoy it, and not think it too good, since it is his mercy that bestows it: if
he send sickness, I will patiently endure it, and not think it too great, since
it is my sin that deserves it. If in health; I will strive to preserve it by
praising of him: if in sickness; I will strive to remove it, by praying to him.
He shall be my God in sickness and in health, and my trust shall be in him in
health and in sickness. So in my health, I shall not need to fear sickness, nor
in any sickness despair of health.

CHAP. X.
IT is the usual plea of poverty to blame misfortune, when the ill finished
cause of complaint is a work of their own forging. I will either make my
fortunes good, or be content they are no worse. If they are not so good, as I
would they should have bine, they are not so bad, as I know they might have
bine. What though I am not so happy as I desire? It Is well I am not so wretched
as I deserve.

CHAP. XI.
THere is nothing to be gotten by the worlds love, nothing to be lost (but its
love) by its hate. Whey then should I seek that love that cannot profit me, or
fear that malice that cannot hurt me? If I should love it, for loving me,
God would hate me, for loving it, If I loath it for hating me, it cannot hurt
me for loathing it. Let it then hate me, and I will forgive it, but if it love
me, I will never requite it. For since its love is hurtful, and its hate
harmeles, I will contemn its hate, and hate its love

CHAP. XII.
AS there is a folly in wit, so there is a wisdom in ignorance. I would not be
ignorant in a necessary knowledge, nor wise above wisdom. If I know enough I
am wise enough, if I seecke more I amfoolish.

CHAP. XIII.
It Is no marvel that man has lost his rule over the creature, when he would
not be ruled by the will of the Creator. Why should they fear man, when man
would not obey GOD? I could wish no creature had power to hurt me, I am glad
so many creatures are ordained to help me. If GOD allow enough to serve me, J
will not expect that all shoult fear me.

CHAP. XIV.
NO affliction (for the time) seems joyous, all time in afiliction seems
tedious. J will compare my miseries on earth with my joys in Heaven, and the
length of my miseries, with its eternity, so shall my journey seem short; and
my burden easy.

CHAP. XV.
THere is nothing more certain than death, nothing more uncertain than the time
of dying. I will therefore be prepared for that at all times, which may come at
any time, must come at one time or another. I shall not hasten my death by being
still ready, but sweeten it. It makes me not die the sooner, but the better.

CHAP. XVI.
THe commendation of a bad thing, is it is shortness, of a good thing its
continuance: it were happy for the damned, if their torments knew end, it is
happier for the Saints that their joys are eternal. If man, that is born of a
woman, be full of misery, it is well that he has but a short time to live: if
his life be a walk of pain, its a blessing, that his days are but a spann
long. Happy miseries that end in joy: happy joys that know no end: happy end
that dissolves to eternity.

CHAP. XVII.
HAd I not more confidence in the truth of my Savior, than in the traditions
of men, poverty might stagger my faith, and bring my thoughts into a perplexed
Purgatory. Wherein are the poor blessed, if pardon shall be purchased only by
expense? Or how is it hard for a rich man to enter into Heaven, if money may
buy out the past, presend and future sins of himself, his deceased and
succeeding progeny? If heaven be thus fold, what benefit has my poverty, by
the price already paid? I find no happiness in Room on earth. It Is happiness for
me to have Room in Heaven.

CHAP. XVIII.
THere is no estate of life so happy in this world, as to yield a Christian the
perfection of content: and yet there is no state of life so wretched in this
world, but a Christian must be content with it. Though I can have nothing here
that may give me true content, yet I will learn to be treuely contented here
with what I have. What care I though I have as much as I desire, if I have as
much as I want, I have as much as the most, if I have as much as I desire.

CHAP. XIX.
IT is the greatest of all sins always to continue in sin. For where the
coustome of sinning waxes greater the conscience for sin grows the less: it
is easier to quench a spark, then a fire; I had rather break the Cockatrices
egg, then kill the Serpent. O daughter of Babylon, happy shall he be that
takes thy childern whilst they are young and dasheth them against the stones.

CHAP. XX.
NAture bids me love my self and hate all that hurt me, Reason bids me love my
friends and hate those that envy me, Religion bids me love all and hate none.
Nature shows care, Reason wit, Religion love. Nature may induce me, Reason
persuade me, but Religion shall rule me. I will hearken to Nature in much, to
Reason in more, to Religion in all. Nature shall make me careful of my self,
but hateful to none; Reason shall make me wise for my self, but harmeles to
all; Religion shall make me loving to all, but not carles of my self. I may
hear the former, I will hearken only to the later. I subscribe to some things
in all, to all things in Religion.

CHAP. XXI.
Abundance is a trouble, want a misery, honor a burden, baseness a scorn,
advancements dangerous, disgrace odious. Only a competent estate yields the
quiet of content. I will not climb, least I fall, nor lie in the ground, least
I am trod on. I am safest whiles my legs bear me. A competent heat is moast
health full for my body, J would desire neither to freez nor to burn.

CHAP. XXII.
A Large promise without performance is like a false fire to a great Piece,
which discharges a good expectation with a bad report. J will fore-think what
J will promise, that J may promise but what J will do. Thus whilst my words
are led by my thoughts, and followed by my actions, J shall be careful in my
promises, and just in their performance. J had rather do and not promise, than
promise and not do.

CHAP. XXIII.
THe good meaner has two tongues, the Hypocrite a double tongue. The good man's
heart speaks without his tongue, the Hypocrites tongue, without his heart. The
good man hat oftentimes God in his heart, when in his mouth there is no God
mentioned: the Hypocrite has God often in his mouth, when the fool has said
in his heart, There is no God. I may soonest hear the tongue, but safest the
heart, the tongue speaks lowdest, but the heart truest.

CHAP. XXIV.
THe speech of the tongue is best known to men: God best understands the
language of the heart: the heart without the tongue may pierce the ears of
heaven, the tongue without the heart speaks an unknown language. No marvel
then if the desires of the poor are heard, when the prayers of the wicked are
unregarded. I had rather speak three words in a speech that God knows, then
pray three hours in a language he understands not.

CHAP. XXV.
MEditation is the womb of our actions, action the midwife of our Meditations.
A good and perfect conception, if it want strength for the birth, perishes in
the womb of the mind, and, if it may be said to be born, it must be said to be
stillborn: a bad and imperfect conception, if it has the happiness of a birth,
yet the mind is but delivered of a burden of imperfections, in the perfection
of deformity, which may beg with the criple at the gate of the Temple, or
perish through imperfections. If I meditate whats's good to be done, and do
not the good I have meditated, I loof my labor, and make cursed my knowledge. If
I do the thing that is good, and intend not that good that I do, it is a good
action, but not well done. Others may enjoy some benefit, I deserve no
commendations. Resolution without action is a sloathfull folly, Action without
resolution is a foolish rashness. First know what is good to be done, then do that
good being known. If forecast be not better than labor, labor is not goot
without forecast. I would not have my actions done without knowledge, nor
against it.

CHAP. XXVI.
IT is the folly of affection not to reprehend my erring friend, for fear of
his anger: it is the abstract of folly, to be angry with my friend for my
errors reprehension. I were not a friend, if I should see my friend out of the
way, and not advise him: I were unworthy to have a friend, if he should advise
me (being out of the way) and I be angry with him. Rather let me have my
friends anger than deserve it; rather let the righteous smite me friendly by
reproof, than the precious oil of flattery, or connivence, break my head. It
is a folly to fly ill will, by giving a just cause of hatred. I think him
truer friend that deserves my love, than he that desires it.

CHAP. XXVII.
WHen children meet with primroses, nuts, or apples in their way, I see those
pleasures are oftimes occasions to make them loyter in their errands, so that
they are sure to have their parents displeasure, and oftimes their late return
finds a barred entrance to their home, whereas those who meet with dangers in
the way, make haste in their journey, and their speed makes them welcomed, with
commendation. Nature has sent me abroad into the world, and I am every day
traveling homeward: If I meet with store of miseries in my way, discretion
shall teach me a religious haste in my journey: And if I meet with pleasures,
they shall pleasure me only by putting me in mind of my pleasures at home,
which shall teach me to scorn these, as worse than trifles. I will never more
rekon a troublesome life, a curse, but a blessing. A pleasant journey is dear
bought with the loss of home.

CHAP XXVIII.
WHen I see the fisher bait his hook. I think on Satan's subtle malice, who
sugars over his poisoned hooks with seeming-pleasures. Thus Eves Apple was
canded with divine knowledge, ye shall be as God, knowing good and evil. When
I see the fish fast hanged, I think upon the covetous Worldling, who leapes at
the profit without considering the danger. Thus Achan takes the gold and the
garment, and never considers that his life must answer it. If Satan besuch a
fisher of men, its good to look before we leap. Honey may be eaten, so that
we take heed of the sting: I will honestly enjoy my delights, but not buy them
with danger.

CHAP. XXIX.
I See, when I have but a short journey to travel, I am quickly at home, soon
out of the pain of my travel, soon into the possession of my rest. If my
life be but my walk, and Heaven my home, why should I desire a long journey?
Indeed knowing my home so pleasand, I would not be weary with a long walk, but
yet the shorter my journey, the sooner my rest.

CHAP. XXX.
I Cannot see two sawyers work at the pit, but they put me in mind of the
Pharisee and the Publican: the one casts his eye upward, whiles his actions
tend to the pit infernal: the other standing with a dejected Countenance,
whiles his hands and heart move upward. It Is not a shame to make show of our
profession, so we truly profes what we make show of: But of the two, I had
rather be good, and not seem so, than seem good, and not be so. The
Publican went home to his house rather justified then the Pharisee.

CHAP. XXXI.
WHen I think on the Eagls carrying up of the shel fish into the air, only to
the end he may brak him by his fall, it puts me in mind of the devils costly
courtesies, who out of the bounty of his subtilty, is still ready to advance us
to destruction. Thus more then once he dealt with my Redeemer, no sooner had
he raised him to the top of an high pinnacle, but straight follows, cast thy
self down; and having placed him on an high mountain, let him fall down and
he shall be largely rewarded with his own. If advancement be so dangerous, I
will take heed of being ambitious. Any estate shall give me content: I am high
enough if i can stand upright.

CHAP. XXXII.
WHen i se leaves drop from their trees, in the beginning of Autumn, just such
thinck I, is the friendship of the world. Whiles the sap of maintenance lasts,
my friends swarm in abundance, but in the winter of my need, they leave me
naked. He is an (...) happy man that has a true friend at his need: but he is
more truly happy that has no need of his friend.

CHAP. XXXIII.
I Should wonder, that the unsatiable desires of ambition can find no degree
of content, but that I see they seek a perfection of honor on earth, when the
fulness of glory is only in Heaven. The honor on earth is full of degrees,
but no degree admits a perfection: Whereas the glory of Heaven admits of
degrees, but each degree affords a fullnes. Here, one may be lower then another
in honor, and yet the highest want a glory: There, though one Star differs
from another in glory, yet in the fullnes of glory they all shine as Stars.
Here the greatest may want, there the least has enough: Here, all the earth
may not be enough for one; There, one Heaven is enough for all Lord let me
rather be least there, without honor here, then the greatest here, without
glory there. I had rather be a dorekeeper in that house, then a ruler in these
tents.

CHAP. XXXIV.
When I see the heavenly Sunn buried under earth in the evening of the day, and
in the morning to find a resurrection to his glory, Why (think I) may not the
Sons of heaven buried in the earth, in the evning of their days, expect the
morning of their glorious Resurrection? Each night is but the pastdayes
funeral, and the morning his resurrection: Why then should our funeral sleep
be other then our sleep at night? Why should we not as well awake to our
Resurrection, as in the morning? I see night is rather an intermission of day,
then a deprivation, and death rather borrows our life of us then robbs us of
it. Since then the glory of the Sunn finds a Resurrection, why should not the
sons of glory? Since a dead man may live again, I will not so much look for
an end of my life; as wait for the coming of my change.

CHAP. XXXV.
I See, that candle yields me small benefit at day, which at night much steeds
me: and I know, the cause is not because the candles light was les at day, but
because the days light is les in the evening. As my friends love to me, so mine
to my friend may be at all times alike; but we best se it, when we most need
it: and that, not because our love is then greater, but our want Though then i
welcome a courtesy according to my want, yet i will value a courtesy
according to its worth. That my fortunes need not my friends courtesy, is my
happiness: should my happiness slight my friends courtesy, 'twere my folly.

CHAP. XXXVI.
I See that candle makes small show in the day which at night yields a glorious
luster, not because the candle has then more light, but because the air has
then more darkness. How prejudicial then is that ambition, which makes me seem
less then Jam, by presuming to make me greater then I should be. They whose
glory shines as the sparks amongst stubble, loos their light, if compared to
the Son of glory. I will not seat my self higher then my place, least J
should be disgraced to an humility, but if J place my self lower then my seat,
J may be advanced to the honor of, Friend sit up higher. I had rather be
exalted by my humility, then be brought low by my exaltation.

CHAP. XXXVII.
I See that candle which is as a Sunn in the darkness, is but as a darkness in
the Sunn: the candle not more lightning the nights darkness, then the Sunn
darkening the candles light. I will take heed then of contention, especially
with great ones. As J may be to strong for the weaker; so J must be to weak for
the stronger. I cannot so easily vanquish mine inferiors, but my superiors may
as easily conquer me: I will do much to be at peace with all men, but suffer
much ere J contend with a mighty man.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
I See when J follow my shadow it flies me, when I fly my shadow it follows
me: I know pleasures are but shadows, which hold no longer then the sun shine
of my fortunes. Least then my pleasures should forsake me, J will sorsake them.
Pleasure most flies me when J most follow it.

CHAP. XXXIX.
It is not good to speak evil of all whom we know bad: it is worse to judge
evil of any, who may prove good. To speak ill upon knowledge, shows a want of
charity: to speak ill upon suspicion shows a want of honesty. I will not speak
so bad as J know of many: I will not speak worse then J know of any. To know
evil by others, and not speak it, is sometimes discretion: to speak evil by
others, and not know it, is always dishonesty. He may be evil himself who
speaks good of others upon knowledge, but he can never be good himself, who
speaks evil of others upon suspicion.

CHAP. XL.
A Bad great one is a great bad one. For the greatness of an evil man, makes
the man's evil the greater. It is the unhappy privilege of authority, not so
much to act, as teach wickedness, and by a liberal cruelty, to make the
offenders sin not more his own then others. Each fault in a leader is not so
much a crime, as a rule for error: And their vices are made, (if not warrans,
yet) presidens for evil. To sin by prescription, is as usual as damnable: and
men run post in their journey, when they go to the devil with authority. When
then the vices of the rulers of others, are made the rules for vices to others,
the offenses of all great ones must needs be the greatest of all offenses.
Either then let me be great in goodness, or else it were good for me to be
without greatness. My own sins are burden too heavy for me why then should
I lade my self with others offenses.

CHAP. XLI.
TO speak all that is true, is the property of fools, to speak more the^ is
true, is the folly of too many. He that spends all that is his own, is an
unthrifty prodigal: He that spends more then his own, is a dis-honest
unthrift: I may sometimes know what I will not litter, I must never utter what
I do not know. I should be loath to have my tongue so large as my heart, I
would scorn to have my heart les then my tongue. For if to speak all that I
know, shows too much folly, to speak more then I know shows to little honesty.

CHAP. XLII.
It is the ambitious folly of too manny, to imitate rather greatness then
goodness. They will sooner follow the example of their Lord, then the precepts
of their God. I will always honor greatness, I will only imitate goodness: and
rather do good without a pattern, then commit evil in imitation. It Is better
to be sived without a president, then to be damned by example.

CHAP. XLIII.
THere is no security in evil society, where the good are often made worse,
the bad seldom better. For it is the peevish industry of wickedness, to find, or
make a fellow. It Is like, they will be birds of a feather, that use to flock
together. For such commonly does their conversation make us, as they are with
whom we use to convers. I cannot be certain, not to meet with evil company,
but I will be careful, not to keep with evil company. I would willingly sort
my self with such, as should either teach, or learn goodness: and if my
companion cannot make me better, nor I him good, I will rather leave him ill,
then he shall make me worse.

CHAP. XLIV.
TO teach goodness is the greatest praise, to learn goodness, the greatest
profit. Though he be wisest that can teach, yet he that does learn is wiser. I
will not therefore be unwilling to teach, nor ashamed to learn. I cannot be so
ignorant, but I may teach somewhat, nor so wise but I may learn more. I will
therefore teach what I know, and learn what I know not. Though it be a greater
praise to teach, then to learn, yet it is a lesser shame to learn then to be
ignorant.

CHAP. XLV.
AS there is a misery in want, so there is a danger in exces. I would therefore
desire neither more nor less, then enoug. I may as well die of a surfeit as of
hunger.

CHAP. XLVI.
IT is the apish nature af many, to follow rather example then precepts: but it
would be the safest course of all, to learn rather by precept then example.
For there is many a good Divine that cannot learn his own teaching. It is easier
to say this do, then to do it. When therefore I see good doctrine with an
ewill life. J may pity the one, but I will practice only the other. The good
sayings belong to all, the evil actions only to their authors.

CHAP. XLVII.
THere are two things necessary for a traveller, to bring him to the end of his
journey; a knowledge of his way, a perseverance in his walk. If he walk in a
wrong way, the faster he goes the farther he is from home: if he sit still in
a right way, he may know his home, but never come to it: Discreet stays make
speedy journeyes, I will first then know my way ere I begin my walk the
knowledge of my way is a good part of my journey. He^ that faints in the
execution loses the glory of the action. I will therefore no only cnow my
way, but also go on in my way: I had rather my journey should want a
beginning, then come to an untimely end. If Heaven be my home an^ Christ my
way, I will learn to know my way, ere I haste to travel to my home He that
runs hastily in a way he knows not, may come speedily to an hom^ he loves
not. If Christ be my way, an^ Heaven my home, I will rather endur^ my pain
full walk, then want my pe^fect rest. I more esteem my home the my journey; my
actions shall be led b^ knowledge, my knowledge be followe^ by my actions.
Ignorance is a ba^ mother to devotion, and idleness a ba^ steward to knowledge.

CHAP. XLVIII.
I Cannot but wonder at the folly (...) those hearts, who are like to kill
themselves with the fear of dying, making the news of an ensuing mischief, a
worse mischief then that they have news of: whereas the foreknowledg of an
approaching evil, is a benefit of no small good. For if it cannot teach us to
prevent it by providence, it may show us how to sustain it by patience. I may
grieve with the smart of an evil, as soon as I feeld it: But I will not smart
with the grief of an evil as soon as I hear of it. My evil when it comes
may make my grief too great, whey then should my grief before it comes make my
evil greater?

CHAP. XLIX.
AS J see in the body, so I know in the soul, they are often most desperately sik,
who are least sensibl of their diseas: whereas he that fears each light wound
for mortal, seeks a timely cure, and is healed. I will not reckon it my
happiness, that J have many sores, but since I have them, J am glad they greve
me. I know the cure is not the more dangerous, because my wounds are more
grievous; J should be more sick if J plained less.

CHAP. L.
IT is one, not of the least evils, not to avoid the appearance of evil, which
often makes the innocent justly punished with undeserved suspicion. I would
desire to be thought good, but yet J had rather be so. It is no small
happiness to be free from suspicion, but a greater to be void of offense. I
would willingly be neither evil nor suspected: but of the two J. had rather be
suspected and not deserve it, then deserve evil and not be suspected.

CHAP. LI.
I Know but one way to Heaven, I have but one Mediator in Heaven, even one
Christ: and yet I hear of more ways, more Mediators. Are there then more
Christ's? Are the Lords ways as your ways that we must go to the King of
Heaven as unto a King on earth? Or if we must, yet if my King bid me come
shall J send an other? If he bid me come unto him, shall J go unto another? If
he bid me ask for peace only in the name of the Prince of peace, why should J
mention the Lady Mary? If J shall be heard only in the name of his Son, why
should J use the name of his servants? Were it a want of manners, or a want of
obedience to come when J am bid? Is another better, or am J too good to
goe-in-mine own errants to the Almighty? Because the Son was worse used then
the servants on earth, shall the servants therefore be sooner heard then the
Son in Heaven? There are still unjust Husbandmen in the Lords vineyard, who
not only abuse the servants, but kill again the Son, and rob him of his due
inheritance. When the Lord therefore of the Vineyard comes, what will he do
to these Husbandmen? J do not envy your glory ye Saints of God, yet J will
not attribute the glory of my God to his Saints. How shall my God glorify me,
if J should give his glory to another?

CHAP. LII.
TO be without passion is worse then a beast, to be without reason, is to be
less then a man. Since J can be without neither, J am blessed, in that J have
both. For, if it be not against reason to be passionate, J will not be
passionate against reason. J will both grieve and joy, if J have reason for it,
but not joy nor grieve above reason. J will so joy at my good as not to take
evil by my joy: so grieve at any evil as not to increase my evil by my
grief. For it is not a folly to have passion, but to want reason. J would be
neither senseless, nor beastly.

CHAP. LIII.
IT is the folly of wit in some to take pains to trim their labors in
obscurity. It is the ignorance of learning in others, to labor to divest their
pain by bluntness; the one thinking he never speaks wisely, till he goes
beyond his own, and all men's understandings: the other thinking he never
speaks plainly, til he dive beneath the shallowest apprehension, J as little
affect curiosity in the one, as J care for the affectation of baldness in the
other. J would not have the pearl of Heavens Kingdom so curiously set in gold,
as that the art of the workman should hide the beauty of the jewel: nor yet
so slightly valued, as to be set in lead: or sobeastly used as to be
slubbered with dirt. I know the pearl how ever placed) still retains its
virtue, yet J had rather haveit set in gold, then seek it in dunghill. Neat
apparel is an ornament to the body, but a disgrace, if either proud or slovenly.

CHAP. LIVE.
I See corruptionr so largely rewarded, that J doubt not, but J should thrive
in the world, could J get but a dispensation of my conscience for the liberty
of trading. A little flattery would get me a great deal of favor, and I could
buy a world of this worlds love, with the sale of this little trifle Honesty.
Were this world my home, I might perhaps be trading: but alas, these merchandiz
yield les then nothing in heaven. I would willingly be at quiet with the world,
but rather at peace with my conscience. The love of men is good, whiles it
lasts, the love of God is better being everlasting. Let me then trade for
those heavenly merchandiz if, J find these other in my way, they are a great
deal more then J look for, and (a little) more then J care for.

CHAP. LV.
AS faith is the evidence of things not seen: so things that are seen are the
perfecting of faith. J believe a tree will be green, when J see him leaveles in
winter: J know he is green when J see him flourishing in summer. It was a fault
in Thomas not to believe till he did see. It were a madness in him not to
believe when he did see. Belief may sometime exceed reason, not oppose it, and
faith be often above sense not against it. Thus whiles faith does assure me
that J cat Christ effectually, sense must assure me that J taste bread really.
For though J oftentimes see not those things that J believe, yet I must still
believe those things that I see.

CHAP. LVI.
THere is none so innocent as not to be evil spoken of, none so wicked as to
want all commendation. Theare are too many who condemn the just and not a few
who justify the wicked. J often hear both envy and flattery speaking false-hoods
of my self to my self, and may not the like tongues perform the like taskes of
others to others? J will know others by what they do themselves, but not learn
my self by what J hear of others. J will be careful of mine own actions, not
credulous of others relations.

CHAP. LVII.
THe Cross is but a sign of Christ Crucified, Christ Crucified the substance
of this Cross. The sign without the substance is as nothing, the substance
without the sign is all things. J hate not the sign, though J adore but the
substance. J will not blaspheme the Cross of Christ, J will not but worship
Christ Crucified. J will take up my Cross, J will love my Cross, J will bear my
Cross, J will embrace my Cross, yet not adore my Cross. All knees shall bend in
reverence to his name, mine never bow in Idolatry to his image.

CHAP. LVIII.
IT is the nature of man to be proud, when man by nature has nothing to be
proud of. He more adorneth the Creature, then he adoreth the Creator: and
makes, not only his belly his god, but his body, J am ashamed of their glory,
whose glory is their shame. If nature will needs have me to be proud of
something. I will be proud only of this; that J am proud of nothing.

CHAP. LIX.
AS the Giver of all things, so each receiver loves a cheerful giver. For a
bargain is valued by the worth of the thing bought, but a gift by the mind of
the party giving: which made the widows mite of more worth, then the riches of
superfluity. J see then, he gives not best that gives most, but he gives
most, that gives best. If then J cannot give bountifully, yet J will give
freely, and what J want in my hand, supply by my heart. He gives well, that
gives willingly.

CHAP. LX.
I See at a Feast, that others feed heartily on that dish which perhaps would
not suit with my appetit, whilst I make as good a meal on'those cates, that
perhaps their palats could not relis. I will not therefore think I do well
because my actions please not others, nor be confident that my actions are
good, because my doings please my self: but be more careful to provide what
is good at a feast, then what is delightful: and more study to expres what is
honest in my actions, then what (...) ^leasing. So, if sick stomachs cannot
relish my sound meats, the fault shall light on their ill appetits: and if
unseasoned judgments like not my honest intentions, the fault shall fall on
their ill relished apprehensions. It would please me well to have praise when
J deserve it; but joy me more to deserve praise when J have it.

FINIS.
Resolved MEDITATIONS And Premeditated RESOLUTIONS. The Second part.
CHAP. I.
WHen one ascends from the ground to an higher room, I observe with what
contempt he insults and tramples on the stairs by which he rises, and how he
first and most durteth that step by which he first stepped from the dirt. Which
puts me in mind of the practice of the aspiring ambitious, who, to get up to
their wished height of honor, bedurt with scorn, and neglect those by whose
shoulders they were first mounted, and exalted, J hate that ambition which
inforceth ingratitude; which, being the beasest of vices, can not but soil and
disgrace a man graced with such honors, J am not preferred with honor, if
debased with ingratitude.

CHAP. II.
HE that will not be persuaded to leap down from an high chamber at once,
comes willingly down by the stayres: and yet the declining degrees of his
winding descent make it not les down ward to him, but les perceived of him. His
leap might have brought him down sooner, it could not have brought him down
lower. As J am then fearful to act great sins, so J will be careful to
avoid small sins. He that contemn's a small fault commits a great one, J fee
many drops make a shower: and what difference is it, whether J be wet either in
the rain, or in the river, if both be to the skinn? There is small benefit in
the choice, whither we go down to Hell by degrees or at once.

CHAP. III.
THe gentle and harmeles sheep being conscious of their own innocence, how
patiently, how quietly, do they receive the kneif, either on the altar, or in
the shambles? How silently and undaunted do they meet death and give it
entrance with small resistance? When the filthy loathsome and harmefull swine
roar horribly at the first handling, and with and hideous crying reluctance,
are haled, and held to the slaughter. This seems some cause to me, why wicked
men (conscious of their filthy lives, and nature) so tremble at the
remembrances, startle at the name, and with horror roar at the approach of
death: when the godly quietly uncloath themselves of their lives, and make
small difference twixt a natural nights short sleep, and the long sleep of
nature. J will pray not to come to an untimely violent death, J will not
violently resist death at the time when it comes. J will expect and wait my
change with patience, embrace it with cheerefullnes, and never fear it as a
total privation.

CHAP. IV.
IT is no small fault to be bad, and seem so: it is a greater fault to seem
good, and not be so: The cloak of dissimulation is a main part of the gearment
spotted with the flesh. A vice thus covered is worse then a naked offense.
There is no devil to the Hypocrite.

CHAP. V.
WHen J see the Larkers day-net spread out in a fair morning, and himself
whirling his artificial motion, and observe how by the reflecting luster of
the Sun on the wheeling instrument, not only the merry lark, and fearful
Pigeon are dazzled, and drawn with admiration; but stouter birds of prey, the
swift Merlin, and towering Hobbie are enticed to stoop, and gazing on the
outward form, lose themselves Me thinks J see the devils nightnets of enticing
harlots fully paraleld, spread out for us in the vigor of our youth; which
with roeling eyes draw on the lust fullnes of affection, and betray the
wantonness of the heart, and with their alluring glances often make to stoop
within danger of their fatal nets, not only the simple and careless, but
others also, men otherwise wary and wise: who comeing within the pull of the
net lie at the mercy of that merciles fowler, to their certain destruction.
Hence J resolve when J see such glasses, to shun such motions, as assured
that those glasses have nets adjoining; those nets a fowler attending; that
fowler a death prepared for me, then which J cannot die a worse J may by
chance, J must by necessity, at sometime come within their view: J will at no
time come within their danger. J cannot well live in this world, and not see
them at all, J cannot live well in this world, nor at all in the better world,
if J be caught in their fatal nets.

CHAP. VI.
THere be that make it their glory to feed high, and fare deliciously every
day, and to maintain their bodies elementary, search the elements, the earth,
sea, and air, to maintain the fire of their appetits. They that thus make
their bellies their gods, do make their glory their shame. J distaste a sordid
diet as unwholesome, J care not to taste and feed on variety of delicates as
unhealthfull. Nature conted with a few things, is cloyed, and quelled with
overmany: and digestion her cook employed in the concoction of so much variety
at once, leaves the stomach too foul a kitchen for healt to abide in. Since
then so to feed may the sooner end my life, and the end of my life is not so to
feed, J will be taught by Grace not to live to eat, but eat to live; and
maintain health by a competent diet, not surfeit with exces.

CHAP. VII.
HE that too much admires the glory of a Princes Court, and drawn up thither
(by his ambition) thinks high places to be the highest happiness; let him view
the foggie mists, the moist vapors, and light exhalations drawn up from the
earth by the attractive power of the glorious Sunn-beames: which when they are
at highest, either spend themselves there in portnding metors, to others
terror and their own consumption; and either by resolution are turned into
rain, or congelation unto hayle or snow, which sink lower into the earth at
their fall, then they were at their ascending. For my part, J may admire such a
glowing coal. J will not with the Satyr kis it. As J think it not the least
and last praise to please Princes; so, J know, it is not the least danger of
times to live with them, procul a Jove, procula fulmine. He presumes too much
of his own brightness that thinks to shine clear near the Sunn; where, if his
light be his own, it must be obscured by comparison; if borrowed from the
Sunn, then is it not his, but an others glory. A candle in the nights obscurity
shows brighter than a torch at noonday. And Caeser thought it a greater glory
to be the first man in some obscure town, than the second man in Rome the head
City of the world.

CHAP. VIII.
IT is a common custom (but a lewd one) of them that are common lewd ones, by
custom, to wound the fame, and taint the reputation of their neighbors with
slanders; and having no les impotency in their tongues, than impurity in their
hearts, form both opinions and censures according to the mould of evil in
themselves. And this they do, either with the Lapwing to divert, by their
false cries, the traveling stranger from finding the nest of their filthiness,
or with the curtald Fox in the Fable, to have all foxes cut-tayld: or, with the
fish Sepia, to darken with the pitchie ink of aspersions, all the water of the
neighborhood, that so themselves may escape the net of Censure, justly cast to
cath them. Or else, to have themselves thought as good as any other, they will
not have any thought good, that dwells near them. I will therefore suspect him
as scarce honest, who would (with a slander) make me suspect an other as
dishonest. I will not presently disrespect him as dishonest, whom a lewd person
dishonesteth with suspicion. The devil is not more black-mouthed then a
slanderer; nor a slanderer less malcious then the devil.

CHAP. IX.
WHen I see the Sun rising from the East in glory, like a giant ready for the
course, within an hours space obscured with mists, darkened with clouds, and
sometimes eclipsed with the Moons inferior body: and however, without these,
after noon declining, clining descending, setting, and buried under our
horizon; I seem to se an earthly King mounting his throne in glory, yet soon
clouded with cares, and sear of dangers: sometime darkened in honor by the
malicious envry of his subjects; sometimes eclipsed in his dominions by the
interposition of foreign powers; and however, without these, in a short time
desending and setting at the evening of his life, and seldom passing the whole
day thereof in perfect continual glory. Then think I, O the odds of comfort
in that heavenly and these earthly kingdoms; O the comfort of this odds: There
each Saint is a glorious King each King has his incorruptible Crown; each
Crown a boundles, feareles, endless kingdom. Let me strive for the glory of
such a kingdom only, which is a kingdom of such glory.

Felices animae quibus haec cognoscere sola,
Inque domos superumse scandere, cura fuit.
CHAP. X.
THe Laws in themselves are the scales of justice, the wronged poore-mans
shelter, the pillars of the Commonwealth: but the abused practice makes those
scales unequal, that pooremans shelter a man's poor shelter for his wrongs.
The proof of this, appears with the Juries at the Assizes in their proofs:
when one may often discern perjury usher in the evidence to the jury, and
injury follow with the verdict. I admire with reverence the justice and
wisdom of the Laws: I deplore with compassion the abused practice of the
Laws, and resolve, rather to bear with patience and hayleshower of injuries,
than to seek shelter at such a thicket, where the brambles shall pluck of my
fleece, and do me more hurt by schratching, than the storm would have done by
hayling. I care not for that physic, where the remedy is worse then the
disease.

CHAP. XI.
HOw cunningly does the Prince of darkness take on him the form of an Angel of
light? How often have seeming saints prooved devils? even in those things
(lightly) most faulty, which they make a show of being most free from: Some
more proud of being thought plain, then a flaunting gallant in his new fashion.
Others refusing a deserved commendation, only with a desire to be commended
for refufing it: The one hating pride with a more proud hatred, the other
shunning praish with a greater vainglory. It is bad to have vices, worse to
dissemble them. Plato possessed his rich bed with less pride then Diogenes
trampled on it.

CHAP. XII.
I Meet sometimes with men whose crazed brains seem soldered with quicksilver;
the strains of whose Actions run only in odd crotchets; whose judgments being
hood-winkt with their own opinion, and passion, admit of (...) I will not
therefore ambitiously beg their voices for my preferment; nor weigh my worth
in that uneven balance, in which a feather of opinion shall be moment enough
to turn the scales, and make a light piece go current, and a current piece
seem light.

CHAP. XV.
THere are a sort of men which are kind men to me, when they expect some
kindness from me: who have their hands down to the ground in their salutations,
when the ground of their salutations is to have a hand at me in some commodity.
But their own ends once served, their kindness has its end a^ once: And then
it seems strange to me, how strange they will seem to grow to me; as if the
cause (their desire) being removed, the effect (their courtesy) must straight
cease. I will not acknowledge such my friends but their own; and when ever J see
such insinuating palpation, I will betink me what the author^ would have of me.
And with a thrifty discretion, rather deny such their requests, then in a
prodigal kindness become their friend, more then mine own.

CHAP. XVI.
I See a number of gallants every where, whose incomes come in yearly by set
numbers, but runn out daily, sans number. I could pity the cases of such brave
men, but that I see them still in brave cases. And when I see them often foxed;
me think the Proverb suits, those suits, What is the fox but his case? I
should think them to be Eutrapelus his enemies whom he clothed richly to make
them spend freely, and grow deboshed. I will do those men right, and wonder at
them, because they desire it. J will not wrong my self to envy at them,
because they deserve it not, nor to pity them, because they scorn it. I know
that gorgeous apparel is an ornament to grace the Court, for the glory of the
Kingdom, but it is no ornament useful in the Kingdom of Grace, nor needful in
the Kingdom of Glory. A rich coat may be commendable in the Accidents of
armory only, but it is not the only substance of a commendable Gentleman, J
will value the apparel, by the worthiness of the wearer; J will not value the
worthiness of the wearer, by the worth of his apparel. Adam was most gallantly
appareled, when he was innocently naked.

CHAP. XVII.
THE men of most credit in our time, are the Usurers. For they credit most men:
And though their greatest study be security, yet is usually their fortune to
be fullest of care. Time is precious to them: For they think a day broke to
them, is worth a broke-age from their Creditor. Yet this they find by use, that
as they have much profit by putting out, so must they have much care to get it
in For debtors are of Themistocles his mind, and take not so much care how to
repay all, as how they may not pay at all their creditors, and make this their
first resolution, how they may make no resolution at all. J envy not therefore
the Usurers gains, but considering they (as Merchant-adventurers) send abroad
their estates in uncertain vessels, sometime into the bankrupt rivers of
prodigality, and unthriftines, sometimes into the sea of casualties, and
misfortunes, that manny times their principal comes short home, J think, with
my self, Let them gain much by the adventure, that adventure so much to gain. J
will make this use of those uses, as to claim no interest in their gains, nor
to owe any thing to any man but love. If I lend where need is, and receive my
principal again, I will account that my principal gain, and think my
courtesy but a commanded charity.

CHAP. XVIII.
INgratitude is the character of an ill nature in our selves, a canker of
friendship with others, and the very poison that kills charity in the embrio,
being but newly conceived in the pregnant minds of good men, and causing an
abortion of liberality, e're it comes to its intented birth. For who will sow
those barren sands, where he knows he must not only not expect a good harvest,
but be sure to lose his seed and labor? Yet in these times what is more common
or more practiced then this ingratitude? For in receiving benefits, who will
not (with Euclio in Plautus) find a third hand to reach out to take them? But
in requiting, who is not more maimed then the statua's of Mercury, which
Alcibiades so mangled that he scarce left them a finger to point out the way
to travelers? It is ten to one, but we all desire to be cured of the
leprosies of our wants: yet scarce one of ten of us returns to give thanks
for the cure. I will not think my self so enriched by receiving a courtesy, as
engaged to be thankful for it. I am not left a free man at my liberty, by
taking a man's free liberality: but I sell my freedom for his benefits. I cannot
deserve to be gracious with my friend, if, with the Graces, I look not with two
faces back to requite, as well as with one forward to receive:

CHAP. XIX.
I Will not much commend others to themselves, I will not at all commend my
self to others, So to prais any to their faces, is a kind of flattery: but to
prais my self to any is the height of folly. He that boasts his own praises,
speaks ill of himself and much derogates from his true deserts. It is worthy of
blame to affect commendation.

CHAP. XX.
MErrily and wittily said Plautus, that was one of the merry Wits of his time,
I would (said he) by my will have tale bearers and tale-hearers punished; the
one hanging by the tongue, the other by the ears. Were his will a law in force
with us, many a tatling gossip would have her vowels turned to mutes, and be
justly tongue tied that desires to be tied by the teeth at your table; where
with Thominus his tooth, she gnaweth on the goodname of her neighbor: And many
hungry Parrat, whose belly is his arts-master, would cease to second his ave to
his Lord with depraving tales called news, and make his grace after dinner the
disgrace of some innocent: And most men would give them course entertainment,
that come to entertain their ears with discourse of defamative reports. I will
be silent and barren of discourse when I chance to hear a tale, rather then go
with cild therewith, till another ears be my midwife, to deliver me of such a
deformed monster. I may hear a tale of delight, and perhaps smile at an
innocent jest, I will not jest, nor joy at a tale disgracing an innocent person.

CHAP. XXI.
WHen I see a gallant ship well rigged, trimmed, tackled manned and munition'd
with her top and topgallant, and her spread sails proudly swelling with a full
gale, infaire weather putting out of the haven into the smooth maine and
drawing the spectators eyes, with a well-wishing admiration, and shortly hear
of the same ship splitted against some dangerous rock, or wracked by some
disasterous tempest, or sunck by some leake sprung in her by some accident, me
seems J see the case of some Court-favourite, who to day like Sejanus
dazeleth all men's eyes with the splendor of his glory, and with the proud and
potent beak of his powerful prosperity cutteth the waves and ploweth through
the pres of the vulgar, and scorneth to fear some remora at his keel below, or
any cros-winds from above, and yet to morrow on some storms of unexpected
disfavour, springs a leak in his honor, and sinks on the Syrtes of disgrace,
or dashed against the rocks of displeasure is splitted and wracked in the
Caribois of infamy, and so concludes his voyage in misery and misfortune. I
will not therefore adventure with the greedy shepherd to change my sheep into
a ship of adventure, on the sight of a calm sea. Vt pelago suadetuo etiam
retinacula solvas
Multa tamen latus tristia pontus habet.
I will study to deserve my Princes favor, I will not desire to be a Princes
favorite. If I fall whence I am, I can raise my self, but to be cast down
thence were to be crushed with a desperate downfall. I prefer a mediocrity,
though obscure, yet safe, before a greater eminency with a far greater danger.

CHAP. XXII.
WHen a storm drives me to shelter me under a tree, I find that if the storm be
little, the tree defends me, but if the storm be great, the tree not only not
defends me, but powers on me that wet which it self had received, and so
makes me muth wetter. Hence instructed, I resolve that if improvidently I fall
into some small danger of the laws, I will presume to seek shelter under the
arms of some potent friend, but if the tempest of my trouble be too potent for
my friend, I will rather bear all my self, then involve my friend in the
danger. It would be bad enough for me to be drencht with or distressed by the
storm of the laws anger only; It would be worse to be drowned with the anger of
my storming friend also. My conscience of my ill deserving toward the laws
would enforce a patience: my remembrance of my well-deserving to my friend
would make the just addition of his anger intolerable.

CHAP. XXIII.
COntent is the mark we all aim at, the chief good and top of felicity, to
which all men's actions strive to ascend: But it is solely proper to Gods
wisdom to ingros all true content into his own hand, that he may sell it to
Saints by retaile, and enforce all men to buy it of him or want it. Hence is it
that a godly man in his mean estate, enjoyes more content in God, then a King
or Emperor in his earthly glory and magnificence. I will then strive to
purchase me a patent of content from him that has the monopoly thereof: and
then, if I have little in estate, I shall have much in content Godliness shall
be my great riches, whiles I am contented with what I have.

CHAP. XXIV.
AS in the greater world for man, so in the little world of man, as in the
outward riches of the one, so in the inner treasures of the other, many posses
much and enjoy but little, many have much, and use but little, others use much,
and but little well. J shall not so much endeavor to have much wherewithal to
do, as to do much, with that little J have. It shall not so much greeve me,
that I am a poor treasurer, as joy mo, if I have been a good steward. I could
wish I had more to use well, but more wish well to use that I have. If he were
so blamed that employed not one talent well, what would become of me, if I had
ten, and abused them?

CHAP. XXV.
POpular applaus, and vulgar opinion may blow up and mount upward the bubbl of
a vain glorious mind, till it burst in the air, and vanish: But a wise man
builds his glory on the strong foundation of virtue, without expecting or
respecting the slender props of vulgar opinion. J will not neglect what every
one thinks of me; For that were impudent dissolutenes. J will not make it my
commoncare, to hearken how J am cared for of the common sort, and be
over-sollicitous what every one speaks of me, For that were a toylesome
vanity. J may do well, and hear ill: And that is a Kingly happiness. I may do
ill, and hear well: and that is an hypocrites best felicity. My actions shall
make me harmony in my hearts inner chamber: I will not borrow the Voices of the
vulgar to sweeten my Music.

CHAP. XXVI.
THe rancor of malice is the true nature of the devil, and the soul possessed
therewith is his dearest darling. For where envy, hate, and revenge take up the
whole heart, there God has no room at all lest to be in all his thoughts. I
may meet a mad man, and avoid him, I may move a choleric man, and pacify
him, I may cross a furious drunkerd, and shunn him, but a malicious man is more
dangerous, implacable, and inevitable then they all. Malice omits no occasion
to do mischief: and if it mis thy body and substance, it prosecutes thy
shadow, Visam fera saevit in umbram. My soul come not thou into their secrets,
unto their assembly, mine honor be not thou united. I must not turn anger
out of my nature, I must not turn my nature into anger, I must give place to
Wrath, but not a resting place, but a place to let it pas-by, that I may let
go displeasure. I may give entrance to anger on just cause, I may not give it
entertainment on any cause, till it sower with the leaven of malice. I must be
angry with sin, but I must be angry and sin not.

CHAP. XXVII.
WHen I plant a choice flower in a fertile soil, I see nature presently to
thrust up with it, the stinging nettle, the stinking hemlocke, the drowzie
poppie, and many such noisome weeds, which will either choke my plant with
excluding the Sunn, or divert its nourishment to themselves: But if I weed but
these at first, my flower thrives to its goodness and glory. This is also my
case when I endeavor to plant grace in the fertile soil of a good wit. For
luxurious nature thrusts up with it, either stinging wrath, or stinking
wantonness, or drowzie sloth or some other vices, which robb my plant of its
desired flourishing. But these being first plucked up, the good with produces
in its time, the fair flower of virtue. I will not there fore thinck the best
wits, as they are wits fittest to make the best men, but as they are the best
purged, best wits. The ground of their goodness is not the goodness of their wits
ground, but the good weeding and clensing it. I must first eschew the evil,
ere I can do good, supplant vices, ere I can implant virtue.

CHAP. XXVIII.
AS it is never too soon to be good: so is it never too late to amend. I will
therefore neither neglect the time present, nor despair of the time past. If I
had been sooner good, I might perhaps have been better. If I am longer bad, I
shall (I am sure) be wors. That I have stayed long time idle in the marketplace
deserves reprehension, but if I am late sent into the vineyard, I have
encouragement to work, I will give onto this last as unto thee.

CHAP. XXIX.
WHen I see the Husbandman well contented with the cold of frost and snow in the
Winter, because, though it chilleth the ground, yet it kills the charlock,
though it check the wheat somewhat in growing, yet it choaketh the weeds from
growing at all: Why should I be moved at the winter of affliction? Why vexed
at the quaking fit of a quartan ague? Why offended at the cold change of
affection in my Summerfriends? If as they seem bitter to my mind or body, they
prove healthful to my bettered soul. If my wants kill my wantonness, my poverty
check my pride, my disrespected sleighting quell my ambition and vainglory,
and every weed of vice being thus choked by afflictions winter, my soul may
grow fruitful for heavens harvest, let my winter be bitter, so that I be
gathered with the good corn at reaping time into the Lords barn.

CHAP. XXX.
AS often as I hear the Robin-red-brest chaunt it as cheerfully in September,
the beginning of Winter, as in March the approach of the Summer, why should not
we (think I) give as cheerful entertainment to the hoary-frosty hayres of
our ages winter, as to the Prim-roses of our youth's spring? Why not to the
declining sunn in adversity, as (like Persians) to the rising sunn of
prosperity? I am sent to the Ant, to learn industry; to the Dove, to learn
innocence; to the Serpent, to learn wisdom; And why not to this bird to learn
equanimity and patience; and to keep the same tenor of my minds quietness, as
well at the approach of calamities winter, as of the spring of happiness? And,
since the Romans constancy is so commended, who changed not his countenance
with his changed fortunes, Why should not I, with a Christian resolution, hold
a steady course in all weathers, and though I be forced with cros-winds, to
shift my sails, and catch at side-winds, yet skill fully to steer, and keep on
my course, by the Cape of good hope, till I arive at the haven of eternal
happiness?

CHAP. XXXI.
THe same water which being liquid is penetrated with an hors-haire, will bear
the horse himself when it is hard frozen. I muse not then that those precepts
and threats of God's judgments enter not into the hardened hearts of some old
men, frozen by the practice of sin, which pierce and penetrate deep into the
tender hearts and melting consciences of younger folks thawed with the warmth of
God's fear. Hence see I the cause why the sword of the Word so sharp that it
serves in some to divide the joints and marrow, in others glaunceth or
reboundeth without dint or wound, from their cristall frozen and adamantin
hearts. I cannot promise my selfs to be free from sin, I were then no man; but
I will purpose in my self to be free from hardness of heart, by costum and
continuance in sin, I may err in my way, I will not persist and go on in my
errors, till I cannot return again into my way. I may stumble, I may fall,
but I will not lie still when I am fallen.

CHAP. XXXII.
WHen I see two game-cocks at first sight, without premeditated malice fight
desperately and furiously, the one to maintain the injury offered, the other to
revenge the injury received by the first blow, and to maintain this quarrel,
not only dye the pit with their blood, but die in the pit with their mutual
bloody wounds, me thinks I see the succes of those duellers of our time; which
being ambitious of Achilles his praise, Pelidis juvenes cedere nescij,
desperately and furiously adventure their lives here, and endanger their souls
hereafter only for the vain terms of falls honor. I will not say but that
being flesh and blood I may be careless of my flesh and blood to revenge
injurious indignities offered me: yet since as a tenant my soul must answer her
Land lord for reparations of the house she dwells in, and I have no warrant of
God or man for such revenge, I will not kill my own soul to kill an other man's
body. I will not pull the house of my body on my souls head in a fury, that God
may make them both fuel for the fury of hell fire.

CHAP. XXXIII.
When I view the heavens declaring the glory of God, and the firmament showing
his handy work, and consider that each little numbered star even of the sixth
magnitude, contains the earths dimension 18. times in bigness by Astronomers
conclusions, I easily descend to consider the great difference of earthly men's
glory, and that weight of glory afforded the Saints in heaven. For what a poor
ambition is it to be the best man in a City? What Is a City to a Shire? What a
Shire to the whole Island? What this Island to the Continent of Europe? What
Europe to the whole Earth? What that Earth to a Star? What that Starr to
Heaven? and that to the Heaven of Heavens? And so by a retrogradation how
little? How nothing is this poor glory. J find many which say, hoc nihil est
aliquid: J find in my self cause to say, hoc aliquid nihil est. Jf J needs
will be somebody by my ambition, J will be ambitious to be ranged with the
Saints in Heaven rather then ranked with the Kings on earth: since the least in
the Kingdom of Heaven is greater then they.

CHAP. XXXIV.
I Saw once a Jerfalcon let fly at an Heron, and observed with what clamor the
Heron entertained the sight and approach of the Hawk, and with what winding
shifts he strove to get above her, laboring even by bemuting his enemies
feathers to make her slaggwinged and so escape: but when at last they must
needs come to a necessitated encounter, resuming couroge out of necessity he
turned face against her, and striking the Hawk thorough the gorge with his bill
fell down dead together wihth is dead enemy. This fight seemed to me the
event of a great suit i^ Law, where one trusting to his cause potency more then
his causes equity endeavors to disinherit his stubbor^ neighbor by colorable
titles to hi^ land. Here may you hear the clamorous obloquies of the wronged
and se^ the many turnings and winding Meanders in the Law sought out to get
above his adversary. And lastly when the issue must come to trial, oftentimes
in the grapple they both sink to beggary by the Law whiles lawfully they seek
to get aabove each other. Hence warned against potent enemies I will always
pray, Lord make me not a prey unto their teeth, and against an equal or
inferior I will not borrow the laws extreme right to do him extreme wrong:
nor fall to law with any body till I fall by law, to be nobody. I will not do
that to have my will, which will undo my self of what I have, by my
willfullnes.

CHAP. XXXV.
THe Psalmist does not slander the slanderers, when in a good description of
their bad natures, he says, their throat is an open sepulcher, etc. the poison
of Asps is under their lips. For what more loathsome stench, and noisome smells
can a new opened sepulcher belch out, then these venomous open throated
slanderers? And well may their lips contain the poison of Asps, of which Lucan
says, in nulla plus est serpente venent when a few words of theirs shall (like
a Witches spell) charm and strike dead a man's dearest reputation. I will
therefore endeavor to make my actions of that virtue, that as an antidote of
Mithridates his best confection, they may repel the worst infection those
Serpents shall spit at me. And albeit I cannot be free from their assaults
(from which none is freed) yet I will not with Cleopatra set those Asps so near
my heart that they may stop my vital spirits with their poison. And since I
must pas thorough this Africa of monsters and harmefull beasts, I will
carefully fear and shunn the worst of tame beasts the flatterer, and of wild
beast the slanderer.

CHAP. XXXVI.
MEditation is a busy search in the storehouse of fantasy for some Idea's of
matters, to be cast in the moulds of resolution into some forms of words or
actions; In which search when I have used my greatest diligence, I find this in
the conclusion, that to meditate on the Best is the best of Meditations: and a
resolution to make a good end is a good end of my resolutions.

FINES.

