A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF THE THREE NATVRES; viz. Humane. The roots or originals
of the Politic States of. Caesar. Divine. The roots or originals of the
Politic States of. Christ. Dev^^^^sh. The roots or originals of the Politic
States of. Antichrist.


^^clation (...) a former Treatise, discovering the said three States, and
withal farther clearing the ^^^nesse thereof.

^^ereby also is laid op^n to humane reason, the im^^^^^bility of compulsive
Ecclesiastical Govern^^^^ to be of Divine Institution.

(...) that Liberty of (...) is to be allowed by (...) unto all, holding the
bounds of Civility.

(...) confirmed by principles in Nature and Holy Scripture: Humbly presented
to the serious consideration of the High Court of Parliament.

By Michael Quintine.

Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the (...) and thy seed and her
seed.

Iam. 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall (...) by the Law of
Liberty.

London Printed. 1642.

TO THE HIGH COURT Of Parliament now assembled within his Majesty's Realm of
England, be all rightness of spirit, the root of irreproveable designs, and
prosperous correspondent success, in all matters pertaining to godliness,
State, and Commonwealth in every respect.
I Formerly committed to the consideration of this most Honorable Assembly, a
Treatise containing a brief discovery of the Civil, true Ecclesiastical, and
false Ecclesiastical States, in the essential and maine circumstantiall parts
of each body or state, being the most exact way to discover and rectify
grievances in any State of Policy, whereby God and Caesar may have their due;
for the accomplishment whereof, and further clearing the usefulness of what is
therein contained, I do humbly beg your impartial Examination of the
ensuing passages, evidently manifesting from whence these said several
Policies do spring or arise; and confirming withal what is already proved by
the said Treatise touching the great abuses done to the Church of Christ and
Civil State, by the false Ecclesiastical State or Kingdom of Antichrist.

All things have their beginning and ending from God as the Primary cause of
them, Romans 11.36.

Also all things have their being through Secondary, Natural or isntrumental
causes, Matthew. 7.16, 17, 18.19, 20.

The root and ground of Policy is Nature Divine, Humane, or Devilish, it is
properly of use to none but such creatures as participate of an immortal
spiritual substance. All things under the degree of humane nature are
incapable thereof, and all other immortal spirits are invisible, witness the
whole Creation in all ages past, present, and to come.

Mankind, or humane nature in the condition she now stands, under the curse,
being thereby made liable through mercy of redemption unto salvation, and
through wrath of reprobation unto damnation, is subject unto a threefold
Politic Government, (viz.)

1. Humane or Civil Government, or the Policy of Magistracy, which concerns
men in ordering of their bodies and estates, which arises from the Law of the
nature of man, in man, toward man in the state of Innocence.

2. True Ecclesiastical State or Kingdom of the Gospel, the visible
government of Jesus Christ, who sits upon the Throne of David in Divine
Policy, which issues from the Law of the divine nature, which is perfect love,
as is testified in the Son of Love, the salvation of Mankind.

3. And false Ecclesiastical State or Kingdom of Antichrist, devilesh or
visible Government of the son of pride, which in spiritual politic
jurisdiction exalts himself above all that is called God, or said to be of
God, in matter of policy, sitting in the Temple of God (which is conscience) as
God, and subjecting, or ruling over the same by compulsion the portion, of
fools and unreasonable men, for it loves opposite, and preventeth any course
of nature, which flows from the Law of the spirit of envy, the nature of the
devil, the father of lies all mischief and confusion.

These three States of Policy of which I have formerly treated more at large,
the holy Scripture and common or humane reason show forth in a lively manner,
issuing from the three natures; namely, Humane, Divine, and Devilish.

To the true and substantial discovery of the which three natures the roots
of Policy, and how they are jointly consisting in man without intermixion and
interposition of contraries; I shall in this Treatise most chiefly and
briefly address my self.

Humane nature, or the nature of man's body, his elementary or fleshly part of
his essence (which essence consists of flesh and spirit, Romans 7.22.23.)

Thou art considerable, and likewise the whole man, in a twofold State and
condition. As created, or redeemed; as fallen, and under the curse.

The nature of the sprituall part of man's essence will be discovered in setting
forth the divine, and divillish nature, spirit, or disposition.

The nature of man's humane part in the created state, as the Morrall Law of
God, and the person of Christ do witness, was without sin, made righteous
according to the Image of God, Genesis 1.17. And according to the disposition or
nature then in man, toward man, out of the law thereof (which is the ordinary
means through Gods favor and mercy of the general preservation of mankind)
springs civil Government or Magistracy, Romans 13.

But ever since Adam and Eve were snared with an ambitious temptation, and
would be wise without allowance, they drew a curse upon their humane nature
themselves, and throughout all their posterity, even to the end of the world,
and ever since they tasted of the tree of Knowledge of good and evil, which
was forbidden, they and theirs in the humane part have always loved evil more
then good, which is an infallible testimony of a cursed change in the nature of
humanity.

Therefore Humane nature, Take notice that thou art now since thy fall in thy
Elimentary constitution cursed, mischievous, and averse to any good, inclining
to the nature of the Angels, who left their first estate, and art become
pleased in nothing more than the exercise of pride, deceit and envy; an
Humorist, seeking thy self, although to the destruction of thy self, and all
that have or may have any relation unto thee; thus much has the whole race of
mankind (except the Son of God himself) manifested, plainly expressing an
undeniable effect of the curse, the unruly and exceeding predomination of one
element or other in the said nature, this is the nature of the humane or bodily
part of man, no civil calling but redemption exempted any man in any measure,
common experience is witness enough, besides holy Scriptures confirms the
truth thereof, Romans 3.10. to ver. 19. Psalm. 51.5. Romans 7.18. Notable proof
also hereof is the Scripture discovering the throne of affections, the
principle part in the body of man, and may well be taken for the whole man,
Genesis 6.5. Jer. 17.9. Matthew. 15.19. had not God out of his love in general to
man given the State of Magistracy, which was for restraint of the unrulinesse
of man's humane nature. Romans 13.3.4.1. Tim. 1.9.10. what difference would there
appear between earth and hell, only in case of eternity, of evil and misery;
the humane nature being thus subjected under the power of justice, God is free
in the compassion of his love, to bestow his Spirit and redemption, where he
please, and in his wrath and displeasure to reject and cast away whom he will;
who, and what shall contend with his Maker. Romans 9.20, 21.

The nature of the spiritual substance, the immortal soul, the formal part
of the essence of man, it issues from God or the devil, and is one of the
said two Fathers or Fountains of Spirits, and it will be sufficiently set
forth in the discovery of their natures.

But that the soul of man receives his being, and participateth in nature, as
aforesaid; take a few proofs from principles in Nature, and Positive truth of
Divine Writ.

Man begets a Son in his own likeness in the nature of his material
substance, but the often contrariety in the spirits of parents and children,
as godly parents, and wicked children, wicked parents and godly children, the
unlikenesse in that part proves them no soul Parents.

Likewise in case Parents should beget souls, when as often times the father
and mother are contrary in nature of spirit what shall be their Offspring in
that respect?

The Scripture shows plainly that the children of God in respect of their
souls, and the nature of them are said to be borne of God, Joh. 1.13. Joh.
3.6. God is called the Father of them in respect of that part of their essence,
Matthew. 5.16. and ver. 48. Luke 12.32. Christ clears this point to the full,
discovering the Fountain or Father of the spirit of the Jews, who went about
to kill him, Joh. 8.42. and 44. and in Heb. 12.9. the Holy Ghost terms our
natural parents Fathers of our flesh, and God the Father of Spirits.

The divine nature, spirit, quality, or disposition of God (which most
specially of any part of his essence sets him forth to be what he is, the only
and absolute good, Matthew. 19.17.) is infinite love, every part of the whole
creation does testify the truth thereof, which he made not to supply his own
want; the continual supply of the sundry wants of the whole earth does the
same, the great mountainous work of love never to be forgotten by the sons
of men, the giving of the price of Redemption, his only begotten son, his
express Image, who laid down his life for his people, fulfilling the will of
his Father, Ioh. 3.16, 17. A testimony without exception, proving the nature of
God to be infinite, and matchless love, Romans 5.8. The nature and quality of
all things is the most eminent part of their essence, and so it is the most
pernicious part by which God is made known to the sons of men, for his
nature or spirits sake, which is love, he is called love, 1 Ioh. 4.16. for a
testimony hereof always to stop the mouths of liars, and their father
(whose envy would cloud all the favor of God toward poor men) besides the
state of humane Policy, God has from Adam unto this day from time to time
instituted a state of Divine policy, in public testimony and visible
acknowledgement of the fellowship which he has with his redeemed ones; and now
according to the fullness of time, manifesting the fullness of his love in
paying down the full price of Redemption, the perfection and full
accomplishment of the work of salvation; of his divine Nature which is perfect
love and goodness, he has instituted a visible state of divine Policy, for
the son of his Love, the Captain of salvation, and his people of Love here
upon earth, which is composed of love; not only for matter and form, but also
in respect of state and platform, and the Laws and Ordinances thereof; upon
what can man think or look, and not see the tender mercies of God over all
his works? Psalm, 145.9.

And that the Nature, Spirit, or disposition of the whole Host of God, both
men and Angels is Love, the Word of God clears it experimentally by the
ministering of the Angels, and by the Morrall Law of God, both Tables written
in the hearts of men which are made partakers of the divine nature, for by love
is the same fulfilled, Romans 10.13.

The nature, Spirit, or disposition of the Devil, (from whom every base spirit
deriveth his measure of unnatural lewdness, both men and Angels of the
devilish brood) is infinite envy, Loves opposite, the first Act that ever the
devil did unto mankind, proves the truth thereof, for in his hopeless
desperate fallen estate, without any expectation of relief to himself, he
treacherously deceived man in the time of his innocence, and by delusion and
flattery through rebellion against his Maker drew him into the thraldom of
sin and misery, notwithstanding it could be no abatement to his own, Genesis 3.
and ever since man has subsisted in an hope of redemption from time to time,
and in sundry ways, has the nature of the devil been largely expressed to be
envy her self, which is always so ready to work mischief that she pines at
the good of any; witness the case of Adam, Abel and Job, yea all of note for
uprightness upon record in Scripture from age to age, farther testimony hereof
is, 1 Chronicles. 21.1, 1 Pet. 5.8.

The several states of Policy which God did opportunely institute in the world
for the good and comfort of men, the upright in special, against which none
but the nature of the devil, boundless envy could except, or vilify them;
yet the chiefest of them has she undervalued, and by delusion has drawn the
chief of the earth in the state of civility, and the greatest part of
temporizing subjects thereof, likewise to tread the same under foot, and all
that apparently incline thereunto; and has caused the earth, the great ones,
and greatest part thereof to set up, countenance, and support a state of Tyranny
in matters of conscience, wherein is disorderly forced together with violence
divine and civil things, to the confusion of both the service he wills and
delights in, even the utter undoing of the whole earth: In the time of the
state of the Jews which God ordained as a great light to show the world that
he had visible fellowship with such as fear him, and to preserve them in
holiness: then and therein how did the envy of the devil, and his crew
shelter such oppression, and gross abuse of Gods holy things, which grew to
such an height of hypocrisy that they were not ashamed without Law or Reason,
yea contrary to both, to put to death equity, yea Love himself, the very Son
of God, whom none could convince of sin, which effected the confusion of
their house, Matthew. 23. and since the desolation thereof, and Gods election of
the Kingdom of his Son, in the state of love, composed of matter and form
of love, Subjects won by love, Volunteers, worshipers in spirit and truth, Joh.
4.23, 24. How has matchless envy been palpably manifested to be the nature
of the devil, who to confound mankind in all ways, by his deluding feats
and wiles has brought in fashion in all parts of the earth, violent and
compulsive government of conscience, knowing, whilst that continues, humane
race, especially the most upright and innocent must to wrack, for who in
conscience can govern or be governed by humane power, but for civilities sake,
except such men as can, to gain the world, and present welfare of their flesh,
subject conscience to any thing, excusing themselves upon the unjust demanded
charge of others, who, for all their great takings upon them; have as much to
do in that respect to give account for themselves as they; the truth of this
discovery is plain enough by experience, that the nature of the devil is
infinite envy, if men would look into it: but what shall I say, if our first
Parents in the time of innocence were short sighted, well may their posterity
conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity be blind.

And that the nature, spirit, and disposition of the hellish rabble, the whole
company of devilish men and Angels is envy, the same with the devils, their
spiritual Father, See Ioh. 8.44. 1 Ioh. 3.10, 11, 12.

That the essence of man consists of a twofold substance, is formerly
proved, the nature of his humane part, and the nature of his spiritual
substance (being derived from God or the devil) together with the nature of
them also, is likewise set forth, which three natures are also discovered to be
the ground and root of Policy: The next thing intended and promised in this
Treatise is, to lay open how two natures are consisting in man without
intermixtion and interposition of contraries, which in any height of measure is
the means of confusion in any creature.

By the way it falls to my hand to speak of the excellency of the
constitution of humane nature in the first creation, which was without sin,
and whereunto all the creatures besides were made subject and inferior, both
in the nature of their constitutions, government, and use, which humane
constitution also was made serviceable (being the subject part of man) to the
right spirit which God breathed into him, whereby man became that complete
creature in both parts, the description of whose nature in both respects is the
Morrall Law of God, whose lively, or rather living Image was the only begotten
Son of God, that quickening spirit, Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of what was lost
in and by man, in, and for all the Elect and chosen seed of Adam, but for
brevitie sake, I shall omit to speak any more of it, and according to my
purpose, endeavor to show how the essence of man consists of a twofold
substance without interposition of contrary natures.

Man considered as formerly, created, and fallen, redeemed, and under the
curse, the Law of Justice holds him liable to love and wrath, salvation and
reprobation, and to be made a vessel of honor and dishonor without any wrong
and injustice at all.

The consideration of man as created in righteousness, and as redeemed from
all iniquity, Tit. 2.14. whereby righteousness is imputed, and man becomes as
made without sin, is both one, if any difference be in case of privilege;
redemption affords the greater, making stronger the union by the means of
reconciliation, wherein the redeemed are indeered unto God, Romans 5. from verse.
6. to 11. Romans 8.32. etc. And God is the like unto them, 1 Pet. 1. from 13. to
20. The case standing thus between God and man by redemption, whereby the
humane part of man is made or become as at first, a subject or material
vessel for a divine, reasonable, or living soul; and although full of frailty
and infirmity as all elementary and mortal bodies, as also as earth and dross
it self in comparison of any divine spiritual substance, which as it is in it
self, is void of any divin use, yet such as God in his wisdom is pleased to
make part of the essence of man, which sets forth the glory of redemption,
and the power of Christ in the work of salvation, 2 Cor. 12.9. and so man in
his consistance of soul and body, flesh and spirit, is imputed as in first
creation without sin, and said to be born of God, and not to commit sin, as God
accounts of his children through redemption, 1 John 3.9, 10. And thus the two
Natures, Divine and Humane are consisting in man, without intermixion of
contraries; though through infirmity of the flesh, subject to natural
corruption, temptation of the devil, and abuse of the men of the world,
against which they war, until the perfection of the redemption of the body
do appear, even until Mortality has put on Immortality.

Man considered fallen, and under the curse, is a correspondent subject for the
devil, being both inclineable to confusion, and the way of destruction, as is
set forth in their several natures; these are the enemies Tares which he sowed
amongst the good seed, these grow together in the world until the harvest of
God; I need not stand to relate the means of their union, nor the testimonies
thereof, the world in all parts, every day yields plenty thereof; what does God
reprobate, but the devils own; the union it self of the nature of man, and of
the spiritual substance which he receives from the devil, as the father
thereof, is all one by way of infusion, with that of God and man, differing
only in nature and substance, and the end thereof: Thus contrary to the
twofold consistence of the essence of the redeemed is this of the cursed,
without contrariety in nature of both parts, but not without man's confusion,
because in this case the poor creature Man, is made a slave unto the worst of
creatures, whereby his being and end becomes more vile and miserable than the
most inferior creature which God formed out of the earth.

This once more, with my heart in my hand, in the sight and discovery of
natures, the fountains of Policy for the truths sake, which is the way of all
man's real happiness; Must I speak unto this high Court, which guides the
Raines of the power of all the State of this Land; If the strength of the
devils envy through delusion was too hard for you Parents in the time of
Innocence in their nature, and has since their fall prevailed against diverse
of their posterity, both by deceit and violence, to the confusion of them in
respect of matters spiritual and temporal; Consider ye civil powers, and yet
children of Adam and Eve, yea, and since the curse are ye not as liable to be
corrupted in your policy, which is but the image of their nature, both in the
nature, use, and service thereof; may not ye subscribe to devilish advise,
reaching after more and higher dominions than God has given you, and make what
is your own, an instrument of confusion, in employing it out of bounds, to the
destruction of innocent bodies, which is worshipping the devil, and an effect
of the curse upon mankind; such practice has been the lot of many Nations and
particular persons, witness your own experience; Why do ye as parents of
souls and spirits meddle in the command of conscience, and support such as
do, with sword and maintenance; is it typical, as in the time and state of
the Jews, or as if Christ were not risen from the dead, or do you think God
accepts of more than he requires at your hands, or will you make an
intermixion, one head of two bodies, or two heads of one body, which cannot be
otherwise, if Church and Commonwealth be all one, or being as two under one
head, which nature and policy both deny, in Scripture and common reason; will
ye work your own confusion, in taking Gods work upon you, in making worshippers
in spirit and truth, for such only God requires, Ioh. 4.21, 22, 23, 24. which
by compulsion you must do, or make hypocrites; can ye draw men to Christ in
Spirit or Policy, which is not in your power, Ioh. 6.44, 45, 46. or will ye who
should provide for the strength of the Law of humanity, break the Law of
Charity belonging to conscience, Romans 14. This great spiritual State of
jurisdiction now in fashion, or any that is like to be of the constitution of
compulsion (which jumbleth and tumbleth together the finest natures, and
soulest worship, Gods Divine and holy Ordinances with foulest and profanest
natures (which will one day cost confusion of souls and blood enough) were it
not for the great temporal revenewes entailed upon her, she would not in
humane reason and common equity be so much stood upon, and contended for, for
those that go about to yoke others consciences, would not be served so
themselves, except they be devils incarnate, and will become any thing in
Religion to serve covetous ends; Bondage of conscience is the grossest slavery,
and most devilish captivity upon earth, from whence springs the greatest
treachery, and most dangerous rebellion which the earth can afford, ye may
believe it when ye see it; All liberty within bounds of civility encourage
industry, and begets a rich Nation, hinders not prevention of dotage, and
underhand conveighance of estate to foreign Belly-gods, who by flattery, rob
people stronger in zeal then knowledge, of their bodily means of safeguard,
and load their souls with an increase of unnatural slavery, even to their
destruction. So hoping of the true effect of upright dealing with God and Man,
the sight of that liberty of truth which brings peace, strength and safety to
all Lands and people of Innocence: I remain Gods and Yours, in all due service
to my power.

M. Q.

Now follows the Reasons and Motives that set me upon this Work.
NOt long since I commended to your Highness, and the Parliament, one Treatise
containing an essential discovery of the States of Policy as they are
distinct one from another. And another since of the Natures likewise from
whence they spring; both which in effect bind both your Sovereignty, and your
chiefest Court of Council to cast about for the preservation and defense of
your Kingdoms, and every subject thereof in the liberty of conscience, keeping
the bonds of civility and humanity; but (although at a far distance) I
perceive the old course is still on foot, making sides of Religion, and yokes
for conscience on all sides, wherein has a world of blood been spilt already,
and much more will be if the same continue; Covetousness, pride, and delusion
must bring forth their fruits where they grow, as do all other things; for any
hurt which befalls mankind, let the pretense be what it will, flows from
thence, not from Christian Religion; for neither Christ himself, or any of his
Disciples upon Record in the New Testament, Apostles, or Evangelists, or
others, did in a warlike way, either offend or defend themselves for their
Religions sake.

From former passages expressed in both the said Treatises, I have manifested
sufficient ground of boldness, for speaking to you Gods of the earth, which to
rehearse or enlarge is not improper; and for these causes following I am
constrained yet further to move your greatness, and being reasonable therein,
if ye being as gods despise me, I shall notwithstanding fulfill the will of the
Lord of Lords in discovering the spirits of error, though I perish in the Work
with the strength of his encouragement, Mat. 10.32.

The first cause is this, I being by the Law of Humanity, or the nature of man,
as deeply engaged in the joy of the welfare, and sorrow of the misery thereof,
though a nothing, as having any interest in the power of enlargeing or
preventing either, am bound by the Law of the Spirit of Humanity and
Christianity to discover any thing or course tending to the accomplishment of
both, wherein is fulfilled the duty of innocence and uprightness without
fear (the root of slavery and flattery) according to Mark 4.22. and Mat.
10.27, 28.

The second cause is, for that there are and shall be many false Christ's, false
prophets, and false Teachers, as there be many Antichrists, and false Churches,
according to the prophesies of the New Testament, Matthew. 24.4, 5. also verse.
24. 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 John 2.18. These are all one in spirit, and in that respect
are of the devil, or as the devil himself working the misery and confusion
of mankind, in the greatest measure that may be (the being of the world
reserved) and that according to the working of Satan also, as in the
beginning, Serpent-like, and as in the full strength of his Reign, Dragon and
Lyon-like, as is set forth, 2 These. 2.9, 10. The Revelation sets forth at large
the spirit of Antichrist, or false Church in his full portracture in every part
and member of the said body, from the sixth Chapter to the latter end of the
same book; Now, although not in any measure invested in any power of
suppressing any course of evil, and lifting up or inlivening any of good; yet
as fully bound to discover both, by Christian and natural bonds as any, if all
sanctity and salvation both of soul and body be of the Spirit of God, Christ,
and the Church or Kingdom of Christ, then of necessity is all mischief of
sin and misery touching man of the spirit of the devil, Antichrist and his
Kingdom; and in short, consider each Kingdom is to be discerned by the
Doctrine and Learning, and the Discipline, or Government of the Spirit thereof;
and so the Doctrine of the Gospel teaches touching matters of the soul
(whose welfare is accomplished and enlarged by the freedom and peace of
conscience) Christians to bear one with another, and the stronger to suffer
for the weaker; knowing that none is master of his own light or another, and
in case of greatest gainsaying, or persecution for conscience sake, to suffer
without resistance, to do good to all, even our enemies: in respect of that
part of our well being, the discipline thereof is a government without Master or
Lordship, as has been formerly set forth, agreeable to the Scriptures; as
touching men in their persons and estates, both teach and govern according to
honesty and sobriety to be just and peaceable with all men, to suffer wrong in
all, in case it be put upon them, the Doctrine and Discipline of the Spirit of
God, his Son and his Kingdom, or visible Government tends all to the life of
Justice, Peace, and Love, which is the way of salvation or preservation, and
perfection of happiness, wherein lived Christ and his disciples upon Record in
all long suffering, as the New Testament at large witnesses without reaching
after worldly pomp, riches, and great command.

Whatsoever professes to be Christ's, and is contrary in spirit, is of the
devil, and is false Christ, or Antichrist, whether a person or state and
members thereof, and if so visible as holding forth Doctrine and Discipline
under the profession of Christ, or being for him, in pretense, and teaching
universal salvation to all of all Nations, with National worship without
Christ's exception, Ioh. 4.23, 24, Acts 10.34, 35. Teaching also for necessary
Doctrine, commandments of men, outward conformity in matters of Ceremony,
abstinence from meats, and marriages, which God has allowed; these be
delusions, and Doctrines of devils, Mocksoules, snares, and enemies to the
peace and liberty of conscience, and to the welfare thereof. As touching men's
persons and estates, teaching to sacrifice the things belonging thereto for
sin and trespasses, it is making Merchandise of men, no salvation but
penance, a doctrine issuing from envy the mother of coveteousnesse, the root
of all evil, and is falsely called Christ's, but properly is of Antichrist.

Likewise Discipline and Government called Christ's, in Nature, Masterfull,
Lordly, and compulsive, and enforcing the practice of such doctrine as
aforesaid, or the effect of any other by any external violence, it is none of
Christ's, but Antichrists, interrupting, yea by contrariety outing the obedience
of faith which works by love, which only is Christ's, and only acceptable to
God, and most acceptable with men, this is devilish and snaring the world,
setting all together by the ears, that have more will to use violence to gain
the Mastership of their own conscience (to whom it is most due next to God)
then to be a slave to others therein, or to suffer as Christ, and his
disciples, keeping (though others break them) the Laws of civility, hence
comes contention the daughter of pride, who makes men forget their maker and
their fellows wherein they should be preserved.

The third cause is, that the generality of all or any Nation may not be nursed
up any longer in their wilful delusion of being justified and saved in
believing and worshipping as the Rulers believe and worship; wherein they
discharge themselves of any error, and lay the blame of it upon their
governors, who also out of their aspiring pride to be as God and Christ;
indeed ( Adam like) are willing of it, yea they will have it so, clean
contrary to the doctrine of Christ and his Spirit, Mar. 16.16. Romans 14.12. and
v. 22, 23. wherein also is is practically contradicted with positive
affirmation and reason, Christ and his Disciples it is apparent in Scripture,
learned men to live by their own faith, and to be able to give a reason
thereof; it was their own practice also, and not to use any Religion which was
or should be in fashion amongst the great ones; there is no sin but it is again
God, and every one shall give account to him, Romans 14.10.11, 12. the King as he
is King, and the subject, as a subject in matters of conscience in point of
Religion, all are as one with God, in that he respects no man's person, as is
evident by Scripture, when pride and covetousness be well unmasked, the common
people will have but small encouragement to be so ready to destroy one another
for that which Christ would have them saved, even for the faithful and free
use of their consciences; but this is the effect of following great ones, who
give their power to him who teaches to kill men for conscience sake, Christ's
and man's enemies both; is it not sufficient and faithful allegiance, for
subjects to lay down their lives and all that they have in defense of their
Prince, for his preservation in the freedom of his own conscience, and
maintenance of civility, but that they must needs hazard themselves contrary to
civility and Christianity to kill their fellows because they will not be
slaves in that respect, wherein God accounts of them, and styles them by the
name of Kings and Priests, through the mediation of Christ, Rev. 1.5, 6. but
woe to the inhabitants of the earth, when Princes are led by those that make a
pray upon them and theirs. I mean the false Prophets who appear in sheep
clothing but are inwardly wolves, ravening after the world, and devouring
souls and bodies for worldly ends, of which Christ gave fair warning, Mat.
7.15, 16. to make fair pretenses for the Lord, and to speak much in his name
and for him, and to set the world on fire with the heat of wars, to the
unspeakeable ruin of mankind for religion, shows such to be none of Christ's
Prophets, Acts 7.21. but rather to be the false teachers of pernicious ways as
they are rendered, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. etc.

The fourth cause is, that King and Magistrates may be remembered, that they are
not exempted from error of any nature incident to mankind, and therefore their
Laws for Religion are no sufficient bonds for conscience, but in their own
particulars; Christ's only are sufficient in that case. Secondly, that ye may
be (...) remembered, although, as it were in Paradise for plenty and command of
all things, yet as unapt, ye more than A-(by reason of the curse) to be
content with your allowance dam, who in his devilish reach to be as his maker,
poisoned all the happiness which he had with allowance.

3. That ye may be put in mind that God has not laid upon you a charge
impossible for you to undergo, such as the keeping of all your subjects in the
upright use of conscience, being impossible for you to alter the same, being
good or evil, or to account to God for them in the errors thereof, yea
altogether unable to answer God for one of a thousand in your own, but that
you preserve and defend them, ordering their persons and estates in civil
demeanor, in the liberty and freedom of their conscience, in which respect
God only will take account of them, which ye might happily perform, if ye would
leave Gods office to himself.

4. That although (as aforesaid) in Paradise void and not much sensible of
afflicton, which learned David to keep Gods Law, (but rather fitted for the
pleasures of this life) ye may be remembered, that ye are the more subject to
be tempted by the devil and his instruments, who are led by his spirit of
delusion, and devouring, together with your own lusts, to be drawn through
flattery, and undue elevation, to oppression in all respects, both inward and
outward, and therefore have the more cause to be careful to keep your selves
to the Laws of modesty, justice, and mercy, the best ornament for Gods
Vicegerents, his special officers or ministers of Justice in humane affairs,
wherein you shall comply with the King of Kings, and having him on your side,
you will be strong enough for all the world, in the way of defense for his and
yours.

In relation to these causes, and former passages, Most Noble King and high
Court of Parliament, for the prosperity and peace of the service and worship of
God, in all good conscience, and for the same of man in all humanity; I can do
no less then move you always to put an end to quarrels for conscience sake,
in granting all liberty within bounds of civility, for the Tenent of going alI
together (...) the ears in that case, is suggested upon false grounds; for did
not men spoil each other for conscience sake, (...) they have no law for from
Christianity, but from the spirit of the bottomless pit; with what peace of
conscience, or color of manhood, but in breach of civil peace, could they
offer wrong to each other, which civil Laws could not right without
bloodshed, but in case of murder or the like, double and treble the strength of
civil Laws, which are the life and glory of all Kingdoms, and cast away the
image of Egypt in both respects, temporal and spiritual bondage, for God
has branded it with evil for both, and let the lives of innocent men be free,
according to the end of your Ordinance, and the Laws thereof, as God has
appointed. 1 Timothy 9.10.

Agree O ye powers of this Land, differ not for matters of this life, a little
worldly honor or; maintenance; and if you will needs fall out and fight for
your Religion, take notice in such practice you cross the doctrine and actual
carriage of Christ and his Disciples, Mat. 26.52. Rev. 13.10. If ye will be
killing by way of offense or defense for Religions sake, take notice how ye
disobey the Law of the Spirit of God and Christ, Mat. 5.44. Luke 6.35, 36. Luke
23.34. Acts 7.60. Uncivil and inhumane actions, their correction belongs to
the civil Authority, and until that taken innocence, her part; conscience
then must satisfy thy self with the measure of Christ, and preceding Saints,
if thou will actually and really as verbally in profession follow Christ, and
such as are and were led by his Spirit; So leaving these passages with former
to Royal and all right consideration, I remain in all loyal subjection for
the service of God and man.

M. Q.


