EMBLEMES


CAMBRIDGE

Printed by RD. for Francis. Eglesfeild. and are to be sold at the sign of the
Marigold. in St. Paul's Churchyard. 16^^

(...):

Haec laus, hic apex Sapientiae est, ea viventem appetere, quae morienti forent
appetenda.

TO My much honored, and no less truly beloved Friend, EDW. BENLOWES, Esquire.
My dear Friend,
YOu have put the Theorboe into my hand, and I have played: You gave the
Musician the first encouragement; the Music returns to you for Patronage.
Had it been a light Air, no doubt but it had taken the most; and among them
the worst: But being a grave Strayn, my hopes are, that it will please the
best; and among them, You. Toyish Airs please trivial ears: They kiss the
fancy, and betray it: They cry, Hail, first; and after, Crucify: Let Dorrs
delight to immerd themselves in dungwhilest Eagles scorn so poor a Game as
Flies. Sir, you have Art and Candor: Let the one judge, let the other excuse

Your most affectionate Friend, FRA. QUARLES



What here we see is but a graven face
Only the shadow of yt brittle case
Wherein were treasurd up those gems which he
Has left behind him to Posterity
To the Reader.
AN Emblem is but a silent Parable. Let not the tender Eye check, to see the
allusion to our blessed Savior figured in these Types. In holy Scripture, he
is sometimes called a Sower; sometimes, a Fisher; sometimes a Physician: And
why not presented so as well to the eye as to the ear? Before the knowledge of
letters God was known by Hieroglyphics: And, indeed, what are the Heavens, the
Earth, ^ay every Creature, but Hieroglyphics and Emblemes of His Glory? I have
no more to say. I wish thee as much pleasure in the reading, as I had in the
writing. Farewell, Reader.

BY Fathers backed, by Holy Writ led on,
Thou show a way to Heaven by Helicon:
The Muses Font is consecrate by Thee,
And Poesy, baptized Divinity:
Blessed soul, that here embark'st: Thou sail'st apace,
'T is hard to say, moved more by Wit, or Grace;
Each Muse so plyes her Oar: but O, the Sail
Is filled from Heaven with a Diviner Gale:
When Poets prove Divines, why should not I
Approve in Verse this Divine Poetry?
Let this suffice to license thee the Press;
I must no more; nor could the Truth say less.
Sic approbavit RICH. LOVE Procan. Cantabrigiensis.

Tot Flores QUARLES, quot Paradisus, habet.
Lectori been- male-volo.
Qui legit ex Horto hoc Flores, Qui carpit, Ut^rque
Jure potest VIOLAS dicere, jure ROSAS.
Non e Parnasso VIOLAM, Paestive ROSETO
Carpit Apollo, magis quae sit amoena, ROSAM.
Quot Versus, VIOLAS legis; and Quem verba lo^^^^um
Credis, verba dedit: Nam dedit Ille ROSAS.
Utque Ego non dicam haec VIOLAS suayissima; T^^^
Ipse facis VIOLAS, Livide, si violas.
Nam velu^ e VIOLIS sibi sugit Ara^ea virus:
Vertis ita in succos Hasque, ROSASque tuos.
Quas violas Mu^as, VIOLAS puto, quasque recusa^
Dente tuo rosas, has, reor, esse ROSAS.
Sic rosas, facis esse ROSAS, dum (...), rodis:
Sic facis has VIOLAS, Livide, dum violas.
Brent. Hall. 1634. EDW. BENLOVVES.



THE FIRST BOOK.
The Invocation.
ROwze thee, my soul; and drein thee from the dregs
Of vulgar thoughts: Skrue up the heightened pegs
Of thy sublime Theorboe four notes higher,
And higher yet; that so, the (...)-mouthed Quire
Of swift-wing'd Seraphims may come and join,
And make thy consort more than half divine.
Invoke no Muse; Let heaven be thy Apollo;
And let his sacred influences hallow
Thy high-bred strains; Let his full beams inspite
Thy ravished brains with more heroic (...):
Snatch thee a Quill from the spread Eagles wing,
And, like the morning Lark, mount up and sing:
Cast off these dangling plummets, that so clog
Thy laboring heart, which gropes in this dark fog
Of dungeon-earth; Let flesh and blood (...)
To stop thy flight, till this base world appear
A thin blew Lanskip: Let thy pineons sore
So high a pitch, that men may seem no more
Than Pismires, crawling on this Molehill earth,
Thy ear untroubled with their frantic mirth;
Let not the frailty of thy flesh disturb
Thy new-concluded peace; Let Reason (...)
Thy hot-mouth'd Passion; and let heavens fire season
The fresh Conceits of thy corrected Reason.
Disdain to warm thee at Lusts smokie fires,
Scorn, scorn to feed on thy old bloat desires:
Come, come, my soul, hoyse up thy higher sails,
The wind blows fair? Shall we still creep like Snails,
That gild their ways with their own native slimes?
No, we must fly like E^gles, and our Rhimes
Must mount ^o heaven and reach the Olympic ea^;
Our heav'n-blown fire must seek no other Sphere.
Thou great Theanthropos, that giv'st and ground'st
Thy gifts in dust; and from out dunghill crown'st
Reflected Honor, taking by retail,
What thou have given in gross, from lapsed, frail,
And sinful man; that drink'st full draughts, wherein
Thy Childrens leprous fingers, scurf'd with Sin,
Have padled, cleanse, O cleanse my crafty Soul
From secret crimes, and let my thoughts control
My thoughts: O, teach me stoutly to deny
My self, that I may be no longer I:
Enrich my fancy, clarify my thoughts,
Resine my dross; O, wink at humane faults;
And through this slender conduit of my Quill
Convey thy Current, whose clear streams may fill
The hearts of men with love, their tongues with praise:
Crown me with Glory: Take, who list, the Bays.
I.


JAM. 1. 14. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own lust, and
enticed.
Serpent. Eve. Serp. NOt eat? Not taste? Not touch? Not cast an eye
Upon the fruit of this fai^ Tree? And why?
Why eat'st thou not what Heaven ordained for food?
Or can thou think that bad which heaven called Good?
Why was it made, if not to be enjoyed?
Neglect of favors makes a favor void:
Blessings unused, pervert into a Wast,
As well as Surfets; Woman, Do but taste:
See how the laden boughs make silent suit
To be enjoyed; Look how their bending fruit
Meet thee halfway; Observe but how they crouch
To kiss thy hand; Coy woman, Do but touch:
Ma^k what a pure Vermilion blush has died
Their swelling cheeks, and how for shame they hide
Their palsy heads, to see themselves stand by
Neglected: Woman, Do but cast an eye.
What bounteous heaven ordained for use, refuse not;
Come, pull and eat: Y' abuse the thing ye use not.

Eve. Wisest of Beasts, our great Creator did
Reserve this Tree, and this alone forbid;
The rest are freely ours, which doubtless are
As pleasing to the taste; toth' eye, as fair;
But touching this, his strict commands are such,
`Tis death to taste, no less than death to touch.

Serp. Pish; death's a fable: Did not heaven inspire,
Your equal Elements with living Fire,
Blown from the spring of life? Is not that breath
Immortal? Come; ye are as free from death
As He that made ye. Can the flames expire
Which he has kindled? Can ye quench his fire?
Did not the great Creatours voice proclaim
What ere he made (from the blue spangled frame
To the poor leaf that trembles) very Good?
Blessed he not both the Feeder, and the Food?
Tell, tell me then, what danger can accrue
From such blessed Food, to such half-gods as you?
Curb needless fears, and let no fond conceit
Abuse your freedom; woman, Take, and eat.

Eve. 'T is true; we are immortal; death is yet
Unborn, and, till rebellion make it debt,
Undue; I know the Fruit is good, until
Presumtuous disobedience make it ill.
The lips that open to this Fruit's a portall
To let in death, and make immortal mortal.

Serp. You cannot die; Come, woman, Taste and fear not:

Eve. Shall Eve transgress? I dare not, O I dare not.

Serp. Afraid? why draw'st thou back thy timorous arm?
Harm only falls on such as fear a harm.
Heaven knows and fears the virtue of this Tree:
'T will make ye perfect Gods as well as He.
Stretch forth thy hand, and let thy fondness never
Fear death; Do, pull, and eat, and live for ever.

Eve. 'T is but an Apple; and it is as good
To do as to desire. Fruit's made for food:
I Will pull, and taste, and tempt my Adam too
To know the secrets of this dainty.

Serp. Do.

S. CHRYSOSTOM. sup. Matthew. He sorced him not: He touched him not: Only said, Cast
thy self down; that we may know, whosoever obeys the Devil casts himself
down: For the Devil may suggest, compel he cannot. S. BERN. in ser. It is the
Devils part to suggest; Ours, not to consent. As os^ as we resist him, so often
we overcome him; as osten as we overcome him, so often we bring joy to the
Angels, and glory to God; Who proposes us, that we may contend, and assisteth
us, that we may conquer. EPIG. I.
Unluckie Parliament! wherein, at last,
Both houses are agreed, and firmly past
An Act of death, confirmed by higher Powers:
O had it had but such success as Ours!
II.


JAMES 1. 15. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin
when it is finished brings forth death.
1
LAment, lament; Look, look what thou have done!
Lament the worlds, lament thy own estate:
Look, look by doing how thou art undone;
Lament thy fall; lament thy change of State:
Thy faith is broken, and thy freedom gone,
See, see too soon, what thou lament'st too late.
O thou that were so many men, nay all
Abbridg'd in one, how has thy desperate fall
Destroyed thy unborn seed, destroyed thy self withal.
2
Uxorious Adam, whom thy maker made
Equal to Angels that excel in power,
What have thou done? O why have thou obeyed
Thy own destruction? Like a new-cropt flower
How does the glory of thy beauty fade!
How are thy fortunes blasted in an hour!
How art thou cowed, that had the power to quell
The spite of new-fall'n Angels, baffle Hell,
And vie with those that stood, and vanquish those that fell.
3
See how the world (whose chaste and pregnant womb
Of late conceived, and brought forth noth^ng ill)
Is now degenerated, and become
A base Adultresse, whose false births do fill
The earth with Monsters, Monsters that do rome
And rage about, and make a trade to kill:
Now Glutt'ny paunches; Lust begins to spawn;
Wrath takes revenge; and Avarice, a pawn;
Pale Envy pines, Pride swells, and Sloth begins to yawn.
4
The Air that whispered, now begins to rore,
And blustering Boreas blows the boiling Tide;
The whit-mouth'd Water now usurps the shore,
And scorns the power of her tridentall guide;
The Fire now burns, that did but warm before,
And rules her ruler with resistlesse pride:
Fire, Water, Earth and Ai^e, that first were made
To be subdued, see how they now invade;
They rule whom once they served, command, where once obeyed
5
Behold; that nakedness, that late bewrayed
Thy glory, now is become thy shame, thy wonder:
^ehold; those Trees whose various fruits were made
For food, now turned a shade to shroud thee under:
Behold; that voice (which thou have disobeyed)
That late was music, now aff^ights like thunder:
Poor man! Are not thy joints grown sore with shaking,
To view the effect of thy bold undertaking,
That in one hour didd'st mar, what heaven six days was making?
S. AUGUST. lib. 1. de lib. arbit. It is a most just punishment, that man
should lose that freedom which man could not use, yet had power to keep if he
would; and that be who had knowledge to do what was right, and did not, should
be deprived of the knowledge of what was right; and that he who would not do
righteously when he had the power, should lose the power to doit, when he ^ad
the will. HUGO de anima. They are justly punished that abuse lawful things,
but they are most justly punished, that use unlawful things: Thus Lucifer fell
from Heaven: thus Adam lost his Paradise. EPIG. 2.
See how these fruitful kernels, being cast
Upon the earth, how thick they spring! how fast!
A full-ear'd crop and thriving, rank and proud;
Prepost'rous man first sowed, and then he plough'd.
III.


PROVERBS 14. 13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that
mirth is heaviness.
1
ALas fond Child,
How are thy thoughts beguiled,
To hope for honey from a nest of wasps?
Thou may as well
Go seek for ease in hell,
Or sprightly Nectar from the mouths of asps.
2
The world's a hive,
From whence thou can derive
No good, but what thy souls vexation brings:
Put case thou meet
Some peti-peti sweet,
Each drop is guarded with a thousand stings.
3
Why do thou make
These murmuring troops forsake
The safe protection of their waxen homes?
This hive contains
No sweet that is worth thy pains;
There Is nothing here, alas, but empty combs.
4
For trash and toys,
And grief-ingend'ring joys,
What to^ment seems too sharp for ^lesh and blood!
What bitter pills,
Composed of real ills,
Man swallows down to purchase one false good!
5
The dainties here,
Are least what they appear;
Though sweet in hopes, yet in fruition sour:
The fruit that is yellow,
Is found not always mellow:
The fairest Tulip's not the sweetest flower.
6
Fond youth, give ore,
And vex thy soul no more
In secking what were better far unfound;
Alas thy gains
Are only present pains
To gather Scorpions for a future wound.
7
What Is earth? or in it,
That longer then a minit
Can lend a free delight that can endure?
O who would droyl,
Or delve in such a soil,
Where gain's uncertain and the pain is sure?
S AUGUST. Sweetness in temporal matters is deceitful: Il is a labor and a
perpetual sear; it is a dangerous pleasure, whose beginning is without
providence, and whose end is not without repentance. HUGO. Luxury is an
enticing pleasure, a bastard mirth, which has honey in her mouth, gall in her
heart, and a a^ing in her tail. EPIG. 3.
What, Cupid, are thy shafes already made?
And seeking honey, to set up thy trade?
True Emblem of thy sweers! Thy Bees do bring
Honey in their mouths, but in their tails, a sting.
IV.


PSALM 62. 9. To be laid in the balance, it is altogether lighter then
vanity.
1
PUt in another weight: 'T is yet too light:
And yet: Fond Cupid, put another in;
And yet another: Still there is under weight;
Put in another hundred: Put agin.
Add world to world; then heap a thousand more
To that; then, to renew thy wasted store,
Take up more worlds on trust, to draw thy balance lower.
2
Put in the flesh, with all her loads of pleasure;
Put in great Mammons endless inventory;
Put in the ponderous acts of mighty Caesar;
Put in the greater weight of Swedens glory;
Add S^pio's gauntlet; put in Plato's gown:
Put Circes charms, put in the triple crown.
Thy balance will not draw; thy balance will not down
3
Lord, what a world is this, which day and night,
Men seek with so much toil, with so much trouble?
Which weighed in equal scales is found so light,
So poorly over-balanc'd with a bubble?
Good God! that frantic mortals should destroy
Their higher hopes, and place their idle joy
Upon such airy trash, upon so light a toy
4
Thou bold Impostour, how have thou befooled
The tribe of Man with counterfeit desire!
How has the breath of thy false bellows cooled
Heavens freeborn flames, and kindled bastard fire!
How have thou vented dross in stead of treasure,
And cheated man with thy false weights and measure,
Proclaiming bad for good; and gilding death with pleasure!
5
The world's a crafty Strumpet, most affecting
And closely following those that most reject her;
But seeming careless, nicely disrespecting
And coyly flying those that most affect her:
If thou be free, the's strange, if strange she is free;
Flee, and she follows; Follow, and she will flee:
Then she there is none more coy, there is none more fond then she.
6
O what a Crocodilian world is this,
Composed of treacheries, and ensnaring wiles!
She clothes destruction in a fo^mall kiss,
And lodges death in her deceitsull smiles;
She hugs the soul she hates; and there does prove
The veriest tyrant where she vows to love,
And is a Serpent most, when most she seems a Dove.
7
Thrice happy he, whose nobler thoughts despise
To make an object of so easy gains;
Thrice happy he, who scorns so poor a prize
Should be the crown of his heroic pains:
Thrice happy he, that never was born to try
Her frowns or smiles; or being born, did lie
In his sad nurses arms an hour or two, and die.
S. AUGUST. lib. Confess. O you that dote upon this world, for what victory do
ye sight? Your hopes can be crowned with no greater reward then the world can
give; and what is the world but a brittle thing full of dangers, wherein we
travel from lesser to greater perils? O let all her vain, light, and momentany
glory perish with her self, and let us be conversant with more eternal things.
Alas, this world is miserable; life is short, and death is sure. EPIG. 4.
My soul, what is lighter then a feather? wind.
Then wind? The fire. And what then fire? The mind.
What Is lighter then the mind? A thought. Then thought?
This bubble-world. What then this bubble? Naught.
V.


1. COR. 7. 31. The fashion of this world passes away.
GOne are those golden days, wherein
Pale conscience started not at ugly sin:
When good old Satu^nes peaceful Throne
Was unusurped by his beardlesse Son:
When jealous Ops never feared the abuse
Of her chaste bed, or breach of nuptial Truce:
When just Astraea poys'd her Scales
In mortal hearts, whose absence earth bewails:
When froth-born Venus and her brat,
With all that spurious brood young Jove begat,
In horrid shapes were yet unknown;
Those Halcyon days, that golden age is gone.
There was no Client then to wait
The leisure of his long-tayl'd Advocate;
The Talion Law was in request,
And Chaunc'ry courts were kept in every breast;
Abused Statutes had no Tenters,
And men could deal secure without indentures:
There was no peeping hole to clear
The Wittals eye from his incarnate fear;
There were no lustful Cinders then
To broyl the Carbonado'd hearts of men;
The rosy cheek did then proclaim
A shame of Guilt, but not a guilt of shame:
There was no whining soul to start
At Cu^ids twang, or curle his flaming (...);
The Boy had then but callow wings,
And fell Erynnis Scorpions had no stings:
The better-acted world did move
Upon the fixed poles of Truth and Love.
Love essenc'd in the hearts of men;
Then Reason ruled; there was no Passion then;
Till Lust and Rage began to enter,
Love the Circumference was, and love the Center.
Until the wanton days of Jove
The simple world was all composed of Love;
But Jove grew fleshly, false, unjust;
Inferior beauty sill'd his veins with lust;
And Cucquean Juno's fury hurld
Fierce balls of rage into th'incestuous world:
Astraea sled, and love returned
From earth, earth boiled with lust, with rage it burned:
And ever since the world has been
Kept going with the scourge of Lust and Spleen.
S. AMBROS. Lust is a sharp spur to vice, which always puts the affections
into a false gallop. HUGO. Lust is an immoderate wantonness of the slesh, a
sweet poison, a cruel (...); a pernicious potion, which weakeneth the body of
man, and esseminateth the strength of an heroic mind. S. AUGUST. Envy is the
hatred of another felicity: in respect of Superiors, because they are not
equal to them; in respect of Inseriours, lest be should be equal to them; in
respect of equals, because they are equal to them: Through envy proceeded the
fall of the world, and the death of Christ. EPIG. 5.
What? Cupid, must the world be lasht so soon?
But made at morning, and be whipped at noon?
It Is like the wagge that plays with Venus Doves,
The more 't is lasht, the more perverse it proves.
VI.


ECCLES. 2. 17. All is vanity and vexation of spirit.
1
HOw is the anxious soul of man befooled
In his desire,
That thinks an Hectic sever may be cooled
In stames of fire,
Or hopes to rake full heaps of burnisht gold
From nasty mire!
A whining Lover may as well request
A scornful breast
To melt in gentle tears, as woo the world for rest.
2
Let wit and all her studied plots effect
The best they can;
Let smiling Fortune prosper and perfect
What wit began;
Let earth advise with both, and so project
A happy man;
Let wit or fawning Fortune vie their best;
He may be blessed
With all that earth can give: but earth can give no rest.
3
Whose gold is double with a careful hand,
His cares are double;
The pleasure, honor, wealth of sea and land
Bring but a trouble;
The world it self, and all the worlds command,
Is but a bubble.
The strong desites of man's ins^tiate breast
May stand possessed
Of all that earth can give; but earth can give no rest.
4
The world's a seeming Par'dise, but her own
And man's tormenter;
Appearing sixth, yet but a rolling stone
Without a tenter;
It is a vast Circumference, where none
Can find a Center.
Of more then earth can earth make none possessed;
And he that least
Regards this restless world, shall in this world find rest.
5
True rest consists not in the often revying
Of worldly dross;
Earths mi^ie purchase is not worth the buying;
Her gain is loss;
Her rest, but giddy toil, if not relying
Upon her cross.
How worldlings droil for trouble! That fond breast
That is possessed
Of earth without a cross, has earth without a rest.
CASS. in Ps. The Cross is the invincible sanctuary of the humble: The
dejection of the proud, the victory of Christ, the destruction of the devil,
the confirmation of the faithful, the death of the unbeliever, the life of the
just. DAMASCEN. The Cross of Christ is the key of Paradise: the weak man's
staff: the Converts convoy: the upright man's perfection: the soul and bodies
health: the prevention of all evil, and the (...) of all good. EPIG. 6.
Worldlings, whose whimpring folly holds the losses
Of honor, pleasure, health and wealth such crosses,
Look here, and tell me what your Arms engrosse,
When the best end of what ye hug's a cross.
VII.


1. PETER 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the devil as a
roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour.
1
WHy dest thou suffer lustful sloth to creep,
Dull Cyprian lad, into thy wanton brows?
Is this a time to pay thine idle vows
At Morpheus shrine? Is this a time to sleep
Thy brains in wastfull slumbers? up and rouse
Thy leaden spirits: Is this a time to sleep
Adjourn thy sanguine dreams: Awake, arise,
Call in thy thoughts; and let them all advise,
Had thou as many Heads as thou have wounded eyes.
2
Look, look, what horrid furies do await
Thy slatt'ring slumbers! If thy drowzie head
But chance to nod, thou fall'st into a bed
Of sulfurous flames, whose torments want a date.
Fo^d boy, be wise; let not thy thoughts be fed
With Phrygian wisdom; fools are wise too late:
Beware betimes, and let thy reason sever
Those gates which passion closed; wake now, or never:
For if thou nodd'st thou fall'st: and falling fall'st for ever.
3
Mark, how the ready hands of death prepare:
His bow is bent, and he has notch'd his dart;
He aims, he levels at thy slumbering heart:
The wound is posting, O be wise, beware.
What? has the voice of danger lost the art
To raise the spirit of neglected care?
Well, sleep thy fill, and take thy soft reposes;
But know withal, sweet tastes have sour closes;
And he repents in thorns, that sleeps in beds of roses.
4
Yet sluggard, wake, and gull thy soul no more,
With earths false pleasure, and the worlds delight,
Whose fruit is fair, and pleasing to the sight,
But sour in taste, false at the putrid core:
Thy flaring glass is gems at her halflight:
She makes thee seeming rich, but truly poor:
She boasts a kernel, and bestows a shell;
Performs an inch of her fair promised ell:
Her words protest a Heaven; her works produce a hell.
5
O thou the fountain of whose better part
Is eathed, and gravelled up with vain desire:
That daily wallow'st in the fleshly mire
And base pollution of a lustful heart,
That feel'st no passion but in wanton fire,
And own'st no torment but from Cupids dart;
Behold thy Type: Thou sitst upon this ball
Of earth, secure, while death that flings at all,
Stands armed to strike thee down, where flames attend thy fall.
S. BERN. Security is no where; It is neither in Heaven, nor in Paradise, much
less in the world: In Heaven the Angels sell from the divine presence; in
Paradise, Adam sell from his place of pleasure; in the world, Judas sell from
the School of our Savior HUGO. I eat secure, I drink secure, I sleep secure,
even as though I had past the day of death, avoided the day of judgment, and
escaped the torments of hellfire: I play and laugh, as though I were already
triumphing in the kingdom of Heaven. EPIG. 7.
Get up, my soul; Redeem thy slavish eyes,
From drowzy bondage: O beware; Be wise:
Thy fo's before thee; thou must sight or fly:
Life lies most open in a closed eye.
VIII.


LUKE 6. 25. Woe be to you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and weep.
THe world's a popular disease, that reigns
Within the froward heart and frantic brains
Of poor distempered mortals, often arising
From ill digestion, through the unequal poysing
Of ill-weigh'd Elements, whose light directs
Malignant humors to malign effects.
One raves, and labors with a ^oyling liver;
Rends hair by handfuls, cursing Cupids quiver:
Another with a bloudy-slux of oaths
Vows deep revenge: one dotes; the other loathes:
One frisks and sings, and vies a slagon more
To drench dry cares, and makes the welkin rore:
Another droops; the sunshine makes him sad;
Heaven cannot please: One's mop'd; the tother's mad:
One hugs his gold; another lets it sly:
He knowing not for whom; nor the other why.
One spends his day in plots, his night in play;
Another sleeps and slugs both night and day:
One laughs at this thing; the other cries for that:
But neither one nor the other knows for what.
Wonder of wonders! What we ought t'evite
As our disease, we hug as our delight:
'T is held a symptom of approaching danger,
When disacquainted Sense becomes a stranger,
And takes no knowledge of an old disease;
But when a noisome grief begins to please
The unresisting sense, it is a fear
That death has parli'd, and compounded there:
As when the dreadful Thund'rers awful hand
Powers forth a v^all on the infected land,
At first the affrighted Mortals quake and fear:
And every noise is thought the Thunderer:
But when the frequent soul-departing bell
Has paved their ears with her familiar knell,
It is reputed but a nine days wonder,
They neither fear the Thund'rer nor his Thunder:
So when the world (a worse disease) began
To smart for sin, poor new-created Man
Could seek for shelter, and his generous Son
Knew by his wages what his hands had done;
But bold-fac'd Mortals in our blushlesse times
Can sin and smile, and make a sport of crim^,
Transgress of custom, and rebel in ease;
We false-joy'd fools can triumph in disease,
And (as the careless Pilgrim, being bit
By the Tarantula, begins a sit
Of life concluding laughter) wast our breath
In lavish pleasure, till we laugh to death.
HUGO de anima. What profit is there in vain glory, momentany mirth, the worlds
power, the ^leshes pleasure, ^ll riches, noble descent, and great desires?
Where is their laughter? Where is their mir^h? Where their insolence? their
arrogance? From how much joy to how much sadness! Aster how much mirth, how
much misery! From how great glory are they (...) to how great torments! What
has ^allen to them, may b^fall thee, because thou art a man: Thou art of
earth; thou live^l of earth; thou shall return to earth. Death expects thee
everywhere; be wise therefore, and expect death everywhere. EPIG. 8.
What ayls the fool to laugh? Does something please
His vain conceit? Or is 't a mere disease?
Fool, giggle on, and wast thy wanton breath;
Thy morning laughter breeds an evening death.
IX.


1. JOHN 2. 17. The world passes away, and all the lusts thereof.
1
DRaw near, brave sparks, whose spirits scorn to light
Your hallowed tapours, but at honors flame;
You, whose heroic actions take delight
To varnish over a new-painted name;
Whose high-bred thoughts disdain to take their slight,
But on th'Icarian wings of babbling fame;
Behold, how tottering are your high-built stories
Of earth, whereon you trust the groundwork of your glories
2
And you, more brainsick Lovers, that can prise
A wanton smile before eternal joys;
That know no heaven but in your Mistress eyes;
That feel no pleasure but what sense enjoyes:
That can, like crown-distemper'd fools despise
True riches, and like babies whine for toys:
Think ye, the Pageants of your hopes are able
To stand secure ^n earth, when earth it self's unstable?
3
Come dunghill worldlings, you that ^oot like swine,
And cast up golden trenches where ye come:
Whose only pleasure is to undermine
And view the secrets of your mothers womb:
Come bring your Saint, p^uch'd in his leather ^hrine,
And summon all yo^ griping Angels home.
Behold your world, the bank of all your store:
The world (...) so admire; the worl^ ye so adore.
4
A feeble world, whose hot-mouth'd pleasures tire
Before the race; before the start, retrait;
A faithless world, whose false delights expire
Before the term of half their promised date;
A fickle world, not worth the least desire,
Where every chance proclaims a change of State:
A feeble, faithless, sickle world, wherein
Each motion proves a vice; and every act, a sin.
5
The beauty, that of late was in her flower,
Is now a ruin, not to raise a lust;
He that was lately drenched in (...) shower,
Is master now of neither gold nor trust;
Whose honor late was manned with princely power,
His glory now lies buried in the dust;
O who would trust this world, or prize what is in it,
That gives and takes, and chops and changes every minit!
6
Nor length of days, nor solid strength of brain
Can find a place wherein to rest secure;
The world is various, and the earth is vain:
There Is nothing certain here, there is nothing sure:
We trudge, we travel but from pain to pain,
And what is our only grief's (...) only cure:
The world's a torment; he that would endeaver
To find the way to rest, must seek the way to leave her.
S. GREG. in ho. Behold, the world is withered in it self, yet flourishes in
our hearts; every where death, every where gries, every where (...): On every
side we are smitten; on every side filled with bitterness, and yet with the
blind mind of carnal desire we love her bitterness: It (...), and we follow
it; it falls, yet we stick to it: And because we (...) enjoy it fallen, we
sall with it, and enjoy it, sallen. (...). 9. If Fortune hale, or envious Time
but spurn,
The world turns round; and with the world we turn:
When Fortune sees, and Lynx-ey'd Time is blind,
I Will trust trust thy joys, O world; till then, the wind.
X.


JOHN 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do.
Here Is your right ground: wagge gently o'r this black;
'T is a short cast; y' are quickly at the jack.
Rub, rub an inch or two; two crowns to one
On this bouls side: blow wind, 't is fairly thrown:
The next boul's worse that comes, come boul away;
Mammon, you know the ground untutour'd, play;
Your last was gone, a yard of strength well spared,
Had touched the block; your hand is still too hard.
Brave pastime, (...), to consume that day,
Which without pastime slies too swift away!
See how they labor; as if day and night
Were both too short to serve their loose delight:
See how their curved bodies wreath, and (...)
Such antic shapes as Proteus never knew:
One raps an oath, another deals a (...);
He never better boul'd; this never worse:
One rubs his itchlesse elbow, thrugs and laughs,
The the other bends his beetle-browes, and chafes:
Sometime they whoop, sometimes their Stygian cries
Send their black- Santos to the blushing skies:
Thus mingling humors in a mad (...),
They make bad Premises, and worse Conclusion:
But where is the Palm that Fortunes hand allows
To bless the victours honorable (...)?
Come, Reader, come; I Will light thine eye the way
To view the Prize, the while the gamesters play:
Close by the jack, behold, gill fortune stands
T^ wave the game; see, in her partial hands
The glorious garland's held in open show,
To cheer the Lads, and crown the Conq'rours brow.
The world's the jack; the gamesters that contend,
Are Cupid, Mammon: that judicious Friend,
That gives the ground, is Satan; and the boules
Are sinful thoughts: the Prize, a crown for fools.
Who breathes that boules not? what bold tongue can say
Without a blush, he has not boul'd to day?
It is the trade of man; and every sinner
Has played his rubbers: Every soul's a winner.
The vulgar Proverb's crossed: He hardly can
Be a good bouler and an honest man.
Good God, turn thou my Brazil thoughts a new;
New sole my boules, and make their bias true:
I Will cease to game, till fairer ground be given,
Nor wish to win until the mark be heaven.
S. BERNARD lib. de Consid. O you Sons of Adam, you covetous generation, what
have ye to do with earthly riches, which are neither true, nor yours. Gold and
silver are real earth, red and white, which the only error os man makes, or
rather reputes, precious: In short, if they be yours carry them with you. S.
HIEROME. in Ep. O Lust, thou infer^all fire, whose fuel is gluttony; whose
flame is pride; whose sparkles are wanton words; whose smoke is infamy; whose
ashes are uncleanness; whose end is hell. EPIG. 10.
(...) well followed: Cupid bravely led;
Both Touchers; equal Fortune makes a dead:
No reed can measure where the conquest lies;
Take my advise; compound, and share the Prize:
XI.


EPHESIANS 2. 2. Ye walked according to the course of this world, according to
the Prince of the air.
1
O Whither will this mad-brain world at last
Be driven? where will her restless wheels arive?
Why hurries on her ill-match'd pair so fast?
O whither means her (...) groom to drive?
What? will her ^ambling sits be never past?
For ever ranging? never once (...)?
Will earths perpetual progress never expire?
Her Team continuing in their fresh careire,
And yet they never rest, and yet they never tire.
2
Sols hot-mouth'd steeds, whose noslrils vomit flame,
And braz^n lungs (...) forth quotidian fire,
Their twelve hours task performed, grow (...) and lame,
And their immortal spirits faint and tire:
At th'azure mountains foot their labors claim
The privilege of rest, where they retire
To quench their burning (...), and to steep
Their flaming nostrils in the western deep,
And fresh their tired soul^s with strength-restoring sleep.
3
But these prodigious hackneyes, basely got
'Twixt men and devils, made for race nor flight,
Can drag the idle world, expecting not
The bed of rest, but travel with delight;
Who neither weighing way, nor weather, trot
Through dust and dirt, and droyl both night and day;
Thus droyl these fiends incarnate, whose free pains
Are fed with dropsies and venerial blains.
No need to use the whip; but strength, to rule the rains.
4
Poor captive world! How has thy lightness given
A just occasion to thy foes illusion?
O, how art thou betrayed, thus fairly driven
In seeming triumph to thy own confusion?
How is thy empty universe bereaven
Of all true joys, by one false Joys delusion?
So have I seen an unblown virgin fed
With sugared words so full, that she is led
A fair attended Bride to a false Bankrupts bed.
5
Pull, gracious Lord; Let not thine Arm forsake
The world, impounded in her own devises;
Think of that pleasure that thou once did take
Amongst the Lillies and sweet Beds of spices.
Hale strongly, thou whose hand has power to slake
The swift-foot fury of ten thousand vices:
Let not that dust-devouring Dragon boast,
His craft has won, what Judahs Lion lost;
Remember what it (...) Recount the price it cost.
ISIDOR. lib. 1. De summo bono. By how much the nearer Satan perceives the
world to an end, by so much the more ^iercely he troubles it with persecution;
that knowing himself is to be damned, he may get company in his damnation.
CYPRIAN in ep. Broad and spacious is the road to infernal li^: there are
enticements and death-bringing pleasures. There the Devil flattereth, that he
may deceive; smileth, that he may endamage; allureth, that he may destroy.
EPIG. 11.
Nay (...) and fair good world; post not too fast;
Thy journeys end requires not half this have.
Unless that arm thou so disdain'st reprives thee,
Alas thou needs must go: the devil drives thee.
XII.


ISAIAH 66. 11. Ye may suck, but not be satisfied with the breast of her
consolation.
1
WHat never filled? Be thy lips skrew'd so fast
To the earths sull breast? For shame, for shame unseise thee:
Thou take a surset where thou fhould'st but taste,
And make too much not half enough to please thee.
Ah fool, ^orbear; Thou swallow'st at one breath
Both food and poison down; thou draw'st both milk and death.
2
The ub'rous breasts, when fairly drawn, repast
The thriving infant with their milkie blood,
But being (...), return at last
Unwholesome gulps composed of wind and blood.
A moderate use does both repast and please;
Who strains beyond a mean draws in and gulps disease.
3
But, O that mean whose good the least abuse
Makes bad, is too too hard to be directed:
Can thorns bring grapes, or crabs a pleasing juice?
There Is nothing wholesome, where the whole's infected.
Unseise thy lips: Earths milk's a rip'ned core
That drops from her disease, that matters from her sore.
4
Think thou that paunch that (...) out thy coat,
Is thriving fat; or flesh, that seems so brawny?
Thy paunch is dropsied and thy cheeks are bloat;
Thy lips are white and thy complexion tawny;
Thy skin's a bladder blown with wa^ry tumors;
Thy ^lesh a trembling bog, a quagmire full of humors.
5
And thou whose thrivelesse hands are ever straining
Earths fluent breasts into an empty sive,
That always have, yet always art complaining,
And whin'st for more then earth has power to give;
Whose treasure flows and flees away as fast;
That ever have, and have, yet have not what thou have:
6
Go choose a substance, fool, that will remain
Within the limits of thy leaking measure;
Or else go seek an urne that will retain
The liquid body of thy slippery treasure:
Alas, how poorly are thy labors crowned?
Thy liquour's neither sweet, nor yet thy vessel sound
7
What l^sse then fool is Man, to prog and plot,
And lavishout the cream of all his care,
To gain poor seeming goods, which, being got,
Make firm possession but a thorow-fare:
Or if they stay, they furrow thoughts the deeper,
And being kept with care, they loose their careful keeper.
S. GREG. Hom. 3. secund. part Ezech. If we give more to the flesh then we
ought, we nourish an enemy; If we give not to her necessity what we ought, we
destroy a citizen: The flesh is to be satisfied so sarre as (...) to our good;
whosoever allows so much to her as to make her proud, knows not bow to be
satisfied: To be satisfied is a great art; least by the satietie of the slesh
we break ^orth into the iniquity of her folly. HUGO de Anima. The heart is a
small thing, but desires great matters: It is not sufficient for a Kites
dinner, ye^ the whole world is not sufficient for it. EPI^. 12.
What makes thee fool, so fat? Fool, thee so bare?
Ye suck the self-same milk, the self-same air:
No mean betwixt all paunch, and skin and bone?
The mean's a virtue, and the world has none.
XIII.


JOHN 3. 19. Men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are
evil.
LOrd, when we leave the world and come to Thee, How dull, how slug are we!
How backward! how preposterous is the motion Of our ungain devotion!
Our thoughts are milstones, and our souls are lead, And our desires are dead:
Our vows are fairly promised, faintly paid; Or broken, or not made:
Our better work (if any good) attends Upon our private ends:
In whose performance one poor worldly scoff Foyls us, or beats us off.
If thy sharp (...) find out some secret fault, We grumble or revolt:
And if thy gentle hand forbear, we stray, Or idly lose the way.
Is the road fair? we loyter: cloggd with mire? We stick, or else retire:
A lamb appears a lion; and we fear, Each bush we see's a bear.
When our dull souls direct their thoughts to thee,
The soft-pac'd snayl is not so slow as we:
But when at earth we dart our winged desire, We burn, we burn like ^ire.
Like as the amorous needle joys to bend
To her Magnetic friend:
Or as the greedy Lovers eye balls fly
At his fair Mistres eye:
So, so we cling to earth; we fly and puff,
Yet fly not fast enough.
If pleasure becken with her balmy hand,
Her beck's a strong command:
If honor call us with her courtly breath,
An hours delay is death:
If profits golden singer'd charms enveigle's,
We clip more s^ift then Eagles:
Let Auster weep, or blustering Boreas rore
Till eyes or lungs be sore:
Let Neptune swell until his dropsie-sides
Burst into broken tides:
Nor threatening rocks, nor winds, nor waves, nor fire
Can curb our fierce desire;
Nor fire nor rocks can stop our surious minds,
Nor waves, nor winds.
How fast and fearelsse do our footsteps flee!
The lightfoot Roe-buck's not so swift as we.
S. AUGUST. sup. Psalm. 64. Two several Lovers built two several Cities; The
love of God builds a Jerusalem; The love of the world builds a Babylon: Let
every one enquire of himself what he lov^th, and he shall resolve himself of
whence he is a Citizen. S. AUGUST. lib. 3. Confess. All things are d^iven by
their own weight, and tend to their own center: My weight is my love; by that I
am driven whithersoever I am driven. Ibidem. Lord, he loves thee the less,
that loves any thing with thee, which he loves not for thee. EPIG. 13.
Lord, scourge my Ass if she should make no have,
And curb my Stag if he should fly too fast:
If he be overswif^, or she prove idle,
Let Love lend him a spur: Fear, her, a bridle.
XIV.


PSALM 13. 3. Lighten mine eyes, O Lord, lest I sleep the sleep of death.
Will It never be morning? Will that promised light
Never break, and clear these clouds of night?
Sweet Phospher, bring the day,
Whose conquering ray
May chase these sogs; Sweet (...), ^ing the day.
How long! how long shall these benighted eyes
Languish in shades, like fe^ble fli^s
Expecting Spring! How long shall darkness soil
The face of earth, and thus beguile
Our souls of sprightfull action? when will day
Begin to dawn, whose newborn ray
May gild the wether-cocks of our devotion,
And give our unsoul'd souls new motion?
Sweet Phospher, bring the day,
Thy light will fray
These horrid mists; Sweet Phospher, bring the day.
Let those have night, that slily love t'immure
Their cloistered crimes, and sin secure;
Let those have night, that blush to let men kno^
The baseness they never blush to do;
Let those have night, that love to take a nap
And loll in Ignorances lap;
Let those whose eyes, like Ouls, abhor the light,
Let those have night that love the night:
Sweet Phospher, bring the day;
How sad delay
Afflicts dull hopes! Sweet Phospher, bring the day.
Alas! my light invain-expecting eyes
Can find no Objects but what rise
From this poor moral blaze, a dying spark
Of Vulcans forge, whose flames are dark
And dangerous, a dull blew burning light,
As melancholy as the night:
Here Is all the Suns that glister in the Sphere
Of earth: Ah me! what comfort's here?
Sweet Phospher, bring the day;
Haste, haste away
Heavens loytring lamp; Sweet Phospher, bring the day.
Blow, Ignorance: O thou, whose idle knee
Rocks earth into a Lethargy,
And with thy sootie fingers have bedight
The worlds fair cheeks, blow, blow thy spite;
Since thou have pufft our greater Tapour, do
Pusse on, and out the lesser too:
If ere that breath-exiled flame return,
Thou have not blown, as it will burn:
Sweet Phospher, bring the day;
Light will repay
The wrongs of night: Sweet Phospher, bring the day.
S. AUGUST. in Joh. ser. 19. God is all to thee: If thou be hungry, he is
bread; If thirsty, he is water; If in darkness, he is light; If naked, he is a
robe of immortality. AIANUS de conq. not. God is a light that is never
darkened; An unwearied life, that cannot d^e; a fountain always flowing; a
garden of lise; a seminary of wisdom, a radical beginning of all goodness.
EPIG. 11.
My soul, if Ignorance puff out this light,
She 'll do a favor that intends a spite:
'T seems dark abroad; but take this light away,
Thy windows will discover break a day.
XV.


REVELATION 12. 12. The Devil is come unto you, having great wrath, because he
knows that he has but a short time.
1
LOrd! can thou see and suffer? is thy hand
Still bound to th'peace? Shall earths black Monarch take
A full possession of thy wasted land?
O, will thy slumbering vengeance never wake,
Till full-ag'd law-resisting Custom shake
The pillours of thy right by false command?
Unlock thy clouds, great Thund'rer, and come down;
Behold whose Temples wear thy sacred Crown;
Redress, redress our wrongs; revenge, revenge thy own.
2
See how the bold Usurper mounts the seat
Of royal Majesty; How overstrawing
Perils with pleasure, pointing every threat
With bugbear death, by torments over-awing
Thy frighted subjects; or by favors drawing
Their tempted hearts to his unjust retreat;
Lord, can thou be so mild? and he so bold?
Or can thy flocks be thriving, when the fold
Is governed by a Fox? Lord, can thou see and hold?
3
That swist-wing'd Advocate, that did commence
Our welcome suits before the King of kings,
That sweet Ambassador, that hu^ ries hence
What airs the harmonio^s soul or sighs or sings,
See how she flutters with her idle wings;
Her wings are clipped, and eyes put out by sense:
Sense conquering Faith is now grown blind and cold,
And basely crav^nd, that in times of old
Did conquer Heaven it self, do what the Almighty could.
4
Behold how double Fraud does s^ourge and t^ar
Astraeas wounded sides, plough'd up and rent
With knotted cords, whose fury has no ear;
See how she stands a prisoner to be sent,
A slave, into eternal banishment,
I know not whither, O, I know not where:
Her Patent must be cancelled in disgrace;
And sw^-lip Fraud, with her divided face,
Must act As^s part, must take Astraeas place.
5
Faiths pineons clipped? And fair Astraea gone?
Q^ck-seeing Faith now blind? And Justice see?
Has Justice now found wings? and has Faith none?
What do we here? who would not wish to be
Dissolved from earth, and with Astraea flee
From this blind dungeon to that Sunne-bright Thro^?
Lord, is thy Scepter lost, or laid aside?
Is hell broke loose, and all her Fiends untied?
Lord, rise and rowze, and rule and crush their furious pride.
PETR. RAV. in Math. The Devil is the author of evil, the sountain of
wickedness, the adversary of the truth, the corrupter of the world, man's
perpetual enemy; he pl^teth snares, diggeth ditches, spurreth bodies, he
goadeth souls, he suggesteth thoughts, belcheth anger, exposes virtues to
hatred, makes vices beloved, sows errors, nourishes (...), disturbeth
peace, and scatters asfections. MACAR. Let us susser with those that susser,
and be crucified with those that are crucified, that we may be glorisied with
those that are glorisied. SAVANAR. If there be no enemy, no sight; is ^o sight,
^o victory; is no victory, no crown. EPIG. 15.
My soul, sit thou a patient looker on;
Judge not the Play before the Play is done:
Her Plot has many changes: Every day
Speaks a new Scene; the last act crowns the Play.
THE SECOND BOOK.
I.


ISAIAH 50. 11. You that walk in the light of your own sire, and in the sparks
that ye have kindled, ye shall lie down in sorrow.
1
DO, silly Cupid, snu^e and trim
Thy false, thy feeble light,
And make her self-consuming slames more bright;
Me thinks she burns too dim.
Is this that sprightly fire,
Whose more then sacred beams inspire
The ravished hearts of men, and so in^lame desire?
2
See, Boy, how thy unthristie blaze
Consumes, how fast she wains;
She spends her self, and her, whose wealth maintains
Her weak, her idle rays.
Cannot thy lustful blast,
Which gave it luster, make it last?
What heart can long be pleased, where pleasure spends so fast?
3
Go, Wanton, place thy pale-faced light
Where never breaking day
Intends to visit mortals, or display
Thy sullen shades of night:
Thy Torch will burn more clear
In nights un-Titan'd Hemisphere;
Heavens scornful slames and thine can never co-appear.
4
In vain thy busy hands address
Their labor to display
Thy easy blaze within the verge of day;
The greater drowns the less:
If Heavens bright glory shine,
Thy gli^ing sparks must needs resign;
Pustout heavens glory then, or heaven will work out thine.
5
Go, Cupids rammish Pander, go,
Whose dull, whose low desire
Can find sufficient wa^h from Natures (...),
Spend borrowed breath, and blow,
Blow wind, made strong with spite;
When thou have pu^t the greater light,
Thy lesser sp^k may shine, and (...) the new-made nigh^.
6
Deluded mortals, tell me when
Your daring breath has blown
Heavens Tapour out, and you have spent your own,
What sire shall warm ye then?
Ah fools, perp^tuall night
Shall h^unt your souls with Stygian fright,
Where they shall boil in flames, but flames shall bring no light.
S. AUGUST. The sufficiency of my merit is to know that my merit is not
sufficient. S. GREG. Mor. 25. By how much the less man sees himself, by so
much the less he displeases himself; And by how much the more he sees the
light of Grace, by so much the more be disdaineth the light of nature. S. GREG.
Mor. The light of the understanding humility kindles, and pride covers.
EPIG. 1.
Thou blowst heavens si^e, the whilst thou go about,
Rebellious fool, in vain to blow it out:
Thy folly adds confusion to thy death;
Heavens sire confounds, when fanned with Follies breath.
II.


ECCL^S. 4. 8. There is no end of all his labor, neither is his eye satisfied
with riches.
O How our wid'ned arms can over-stretch
Their own dimensions! How our hands can retch
Beyond their distance! How our yielding breast
Can shrink, to be more full, and full possessed
Of this inferior Orb! How earth refined
Can cling to sordid earth! How kind to kind!
We gape, we grasp, we gripe, add store to store;
Enough requires too much: too much craves more.
We charge our souls so sore beyond their stint,
That we recoyl or burst: The busy Mint
Of our laborious thoughts is ever going,
And coining new desires; desires, not knowing
Where next to pitch, but like the boundless Ocean
Gain, and gain ground, and grow more strong by motion.
The pale-faced Lady of the black-ey'd night
First tips her horned brows with easy light,
Whose curious train of spangled Nymphs attire
Her next nights glory with increasing ^ire;
Each evening adds more luster, and adorns
The growing beauty of her grasping horns:
She sucks and draws her brothers golden store
Until her glutted Orb can suck no more.
^v'n so the Vultur of insatiate minds
Still wants, and wanting seeks, and seeking finds
New fuel to increase her ravenous sire,
The grave is sooner cloyd then men's desire:
We cross the seas, and midst her waves we burn,
Transporting life's, perchance that never return;
We (...), we ransack to the utmost sands
Of native kingdoms, and of foreign lands;
We travel sea and soil, we pry, we proul,
We progress, and we prog from pole to pole;
We sp^nd our midday sweat, our midnight oil,
We (...) the night in thought, the day in toil:
We make Art servil, and the Trade gentile,
(^t b^th corrupted with ingenious guile)
To compass earth; and with her empty store
To fill our arms, and grasp one handful more;
Thus seeking rest, our labors never ^ase,
But as our years, our hot desires increase:
Thus we, poor little Worlds! (with blood and sweat)
In vain attempt to comprehend the great;
Thus, in our gain, become we gainful losers,
And what is enclosed, encloses the enclosers.
Now Reader, close thy book, and then advise:
Be wisely worldly, be not worldly wise;
L^ not thy nobler thoughts be always raking
The worlds base dunghill; vermin's took by taking:
Take heed thou trust not the deceitful lap
Of wanton Dalilah; The world's a trap.
HUGO de Anima. Tell me where be those now that so lately loved and hugged the
world? Nothing remains of them but dust and worms: Observe what those men
were; what those men are: They were like thee; they did eat, drink, laugh, and
led merry days, and in a moment slipped into hell. Here their flesh is food for
worms; there, their souls are fuel for fire, till they shall be rejoyned in
an unhappy fellowship, and cast into eternal torments; where they that were
once companions in sin, shall be hereafter partners in punishment. EPIG. 2.
Gripe, C^pid, and gripe still until that wind,
That Is pent before, find secret vent behind:
And when thou have done, hark here, I tell thee what,
Before I Will trust thy armfull, I Will trust that.
III.


JOB 18. 8. He is cast into a net by his own feet, and walks upon a snare.
1
WHat? n^s and quiver too? what need there all
These sly devices to betray poor men?
Die they not fast enough, when thousands fall
Before thy dart? what need these engines then?
Attend they not, and answer to thy call,
Like nightly coveys, where thou list and when?
What needs a stratageme where strength can sway?
Or what need strength compel, where none gainsay?
Or what need stratageme or strength, where hearts obey?
2
Husband thy sleights: It is but vain to wast
Honey on those that will be caught with gall;
Thou can not, ah! thou can not bid so fast
As men obey: thou art more slow to call,
Then they to come; thou can not make such have
To strike, as they being struck make have to fall.
Go save thy nets for that rebellious heart
That scorns thy power, and has obtein'd the art
To Avoid thy flying shaft, to quench thy fi'ry dart.
3
Lost mortal, how is thy destruction sure,
Between two bawds, and both without remorse!
The one's a Line, the the other is a Lure;
This, to entice thy soul; that, to enforce:
Waylaid by both, how can thou stand secu^e?
That draws, this wooes thee to the eternal curse.
O charming tyrant, how have thou be^ool'd
And slav'd poor man, that would not if he could
Avoid thy line, thy lure; nay could not, if he would!
4
Alas thy sweet persidious voice betrays
His wanton ears with thy Sirenian baits;
Thou wrapp'st his eyes in mists, then boldly lays
Thy Lethall gins before their crystal gates;
Thou lock'st up every Sense with thy false keys,
All willing prisoners to thy close deceits:
His ear most nimble where it deaf should be,
His eye most blind where most it ought to see,
And when his heart's most bound, then thinks it self most free.
5
Thou grand Impostour, how have thou obtein'd
The wardship of the world! Are all men turned
Idiots and lunaticks? are all retained
Beneath thy servile bands? Is none returned
To his forgotten self? Has none regained
His senses? Are their senses all adjourned?
What none dismissed thy Count? will no plump fee
Bribe thy false fists to make a glad decree,
^unfool whom thou have fooled, and set thy prisoners free?
S. BERN. in Ser. In this world is much treachery, little truth; here, all
things are traps; here, every thing is beset with snares; here, souls are
endangered, bodies are sna^s; here all things are vanity, and vexation of
spirit. EPIG. 3.
Nay, Cupid, pitch thy trammil where thou please,
Thou can not fail to take such fish as th^se;
Thy thriving spert will never be spent: no need
To fear when every cork's a world thou 'lt speed,
IV.


HOSEA 13. 3. They shall be as the chaff that is driven with a whirlwind out of
the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.
FLint-hearted Stoics, you, whose marble eyes
Contemn a wrinckle, and whose souls despise
To follow Natures too a^ected fashion,
Or travel in the Regent-walk of Passion;
Whose rigid hearts dis^ain to shrink at fears,
Or play at fast and loose with smiles and tears;
Come, burst your spleens with laughter to behold
A new found vanity, which days of old
Never knew: a vanity, that his beset
The world, and made more slaves then Mahomet:
That has condemned us to the servile yoke
Of slavery, and made us slaves to smoke.
But stay! why tax I thus our modern times,
For newborn follies, and for newborn crimes?
Are we sole guilty, and the first age free?
No, they were smok'd and slav'd as well as we:
What Is sweet-lipt Honors blast, but smoke? What Is treasure
But very smoke? And what more smoke then pleasure?
Alas: they 're all but shadows, sumes and blasts;
That vanishes, this sades, the other wastes.
The restless Merchant, he that loves to steep
His brains in wealth, and lays his soul to sleep
In bags of Bullion, sees the immo^tall Crown,
And fain would mount, but I gots keep him down:
He brags to day, perchance, and begs to morrow;
He lent but now, wants credit now to borrow:
Blow winds, the treasure's gone, the merchant's (...);
A slave to silver's but a slave to smoke.
Behold the Glory-vying child of fame,
That from deep wounds sucks forth an honored name,
That thinks no purchase worth the style of good,
But what is sold for sweat, and sealed with blood;
That for a point, a blast of empty breath,
Undaunted gazes in the face of death;
Whose dear-bought bubble, sill'd with vain renown,
Breaks with a phillop, or a Generals frown:
His stroke-got Honor sta^gers with a stroke;
A slave to Honor is a sla^e to smoke.
And that fond soul which wastes his idle days
In loose delights, and sports about the blaze
Of Cupids candle; he that daily spies
Twin habies in his mistress Geminies,
Whereto his sad devotion does impart
The swe^t burnt-offering of a bleeding heart:
See, how his wings are singed in Cyprian sire,
Whose flames consume with youth, in age expire:
The world's a bubble; all the pleasures in it,
^ke morning vapou^s, vanish in a minit:
The vapors vani^h, and the bubble's broke;
A slave to pleasure is a slave to smoke.
Now, Sto^ck, cease thy laughter, and repast
Thy pickled cheeks with tears, and weep as sast.
S. HIERON. That rich man is great, who thinks not himself great, because be
is rich: the proud m^n (who is the poor man) braggeth outwardly, but beggeth
inwardly: he is blown up, but not full. PETR. RAV. Vexation and anguish
accompany riches and honor: The pomp of the world and the favor of the people
are but smoke, and a blast suddenly vanishing: which, if they commonly please,
commonly bring repentance, and for a minute of joy, they bring an age of
sorrow. EPIG. 4.
Cupid, thy diet's strange: It dulls, it rowzes,
It cools, it heats, it binds, and then it looses:
Dull-sprightly-cold-hot fool, if ever it winds thee
Into a looseness once, take heed, it binds thee.
V.


PROVERBS 23. 5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches
make themselves wings, they sly away as an Eagle.
1
FAlse world, thou lie: Thou can not lend
The least delight:
Thy ^avours cannot gain a Friend,
They are so slight:
Thy morning pleasures make an end
To please at night:
Poor are the wants that thou supply'st,
And yet thou vaunt'st, and yet thou vy'st
With heaven; Fond earth thou boasts; false world thou lie.
2
Thy babbling tongue tells golden tales
Of endless treasure;
Thy bounty offers easy sales
Of lasting pleasure;
Thou ask'st the Conscience what she ails,
And swear'st to ease her;
There Is none can want where thou supply'st:
There Is none can give where thou deny'st.
Alas, sond world thou boasts; salse world thou lie.
3
What well advised ear regards
What earth can say?
Thy words are gold, but thy rewards
Are painted clay;
Thy cunning can but pack the cards;
Thou can not play:
Thy game at weakest, still thou vy'st;
If ^een, and then revy'd, deny'ft;
Thou art not what thou seem: false world, thou lie.
4
Thy tinsil bosom seems a mint
Of new-coin'd treasure,
A Paradise, that has no stint,
No change, no measure;
A painted cask, but nothing in it,
Nor wealth, nor pleasure:
Vain earth! that falsely thus comply'st
With man: Vain man! that thus ^ely'st
On earth: Vain man, thou dot'st: Vain earth, thou lie.
5
What mean dull souls, in this high measure
To haberdash
In earths base wares, whose greatest treasure
Is dross and trash?
The height of whose inchaunting pleasure
Is but a flash?
Are these the goods that thou supply'st
Us mortals with? Are these the highest?
Can these bring cordial peace? False world, thou lie.
PET. BLES. This world is (...): Her end is doubtful; Her conclusion is
horrible; Her Judge is terrible; And her punishment is ^tolerable. S. AUGUST.
lib. Confess. The vain glory of this world is a deceitful sweetness, a
fruitless labor, a perpetual fear, a dange^ous honor: Her beginning is
without providence, and her end not without repe^ance. EPIG. 5.
World, the a^t a traitor; thou have stamped thy base
And chymick metal with great Caesar's face;
And with thy bastard bullion thou have bartered
For wares of price; how justly drawn and quartered!
VI.


JOB 15. 31. Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity, for vanity shall
be his recompense.
1
BElieve her not: Her glass dissuses
False portraitures: thou can ^pie
No true reflection: She abuses
Her mis informed beholders eye;
Her Chrystall's falsely steeled: It scatters
Deceitful beams. Believe her not, she flatters.
2
This flaring mirror represents
No right proportion, hi^w, or feature:
Her very looks are complements;
They make thee fairer, goodlier, greater:
The skillful gloss of her reflection
But paints the Context of thy course complexion.
3
Were thy dimension but a stride,
Nay, were thou statur'd but a span,
Such as the long-bill'd troops desi'd,
A very fragment of a man;
She Will make thee Mi^as, which ye will,
The ^ove-slain tyrant, or the Ionick hill.
4
Had (...), or the ungratious Star
Conspired to make one common place
Of all deformities that are
Within the volume of thy face,
She Would (...) thee favor should out-move
The Troy-bane Hellen, or the Queen of Love.
5
Were thy consumed estate as poor
As (...), or afflicted Jobs:
She Will change thy wants to seeming store,
And turn thy (...) to purple robes;
She Will make thy hide-(...) flanck appear
As plump as theirs that feast it all the year.
6
Look off; let not thy Optics (...)
Abused; thou see not what thou should:
Thy self's the Object thou should see,
But't is thy shadow thou behold'st:
And shadows thrive the more in stature,
The nearer we approach the light of nature.
7
Where Heavens bright beams look more direct,
The shadow shrinks as they grow stronger:
But when they glaunce their fair aspect,
The (...)-faced shade grows larger, longer;
And when their lamp begins to fall,
Th'increasing shadows lengthen most of all.
8
The soul that seeks the noon of grace,
Shrinks in, but swells if (...);
As heaven (...) up, or veils his face,
Our self esteems grow (...) or great.
The least is greatest; and who shall
Appear the greatest are the least of all.
HUGO lib. de Anima. In vain he lifts up the eye of his heart to behold his
God, who is not first rightly advised to behold himself: First thou must see
the visible things of thy self, before thou (...) be prepared to know the
invisible things of God, (...) if thou can not apprehend the things within
thee, thou can not comprehend the things above thee: The best looking-glass
wherein to see thy God, is perfectly to see thy self. EPIG. 6.
Be not deceived, great fool: There is no loss
In being small; great bulks but swell with dross.
Man is heavens Masterpiece: If it appear
More great, the value's less; if less, more dear.
VII.


DEUTERONOMY 30. 19. I have set before thee life and death, blessing and
cursing, therefore choose life, that thou and thy seed may live.
1
THe world's a Floor, whose swelling heaps retein
The mingled wages of the Ploughmans toil;
The world's a heap, whose yet unwinnowed grain
Is lodged with chaff and buried in her soil;
All things are mixed, the useful with the vain;
The good with bad, the noble with the vile;
The world's an Ark, wherein things pure and gross
Present their lossefull gain, and gainful loss,
Where every dram of gold conteins a pound of dross.
2
This furnished Ark presents the greedy view
With all that earth can give, or Heaven can add;
Here, lasting joys; here, pleasures hourly new,
And hourly fading, may be wished and had:
All points of Honor, counterseit and true,
Salute thy soul, and wealth both good and bad:
Here may thou open wide the two-leav'd door
Of all thy wishes, to receive that store
Which being empty most, does overflow the more.
3
Come then, my soul, approach this royal Burse,
And see what wares our great Exchange reteins;
Come, come; here is that shall make a firm divorce
Betwixt thy wants and thee, if want complains;
No need to sit in council with thy purse,
Here Is nothing good shall cost more price then pains:
But O my soul, take heed if thou rely
Upon thy faithlesle Optics, thou w^lt buy
Too blind a bargain: k^ow, fools only trade by the eye.
4
The wo^ldly wisdom of the foolish man
Is like a sieve, that does alone retein
The grosser substance of the worthless bran:
But thou, my soul, let thy brave thoughts disdain
So course a purchase; O be thou a fan
To purge the chaff, and keep the winnow'd grain:
Make clean thy thoughts, and dress thy mixed desires,
Thou art Heavens tasker; and thy God requires
The purest of thy sloore, as well as of thy sires.
5
Let grace conduct thee to the paths of peace,
And wisdom bless thy souls unblemisht ways,
No matt^r then, how short or long's the lease,
Whose d^te determins thy self-numbred days:
No need to car^ for wealths or f^es increase,
Nor (...) his Palm, nor high Apollo's Bays.
Lord. if thy gracious bounty please to fill
The (...) of my desires, and teach me skill
To di^e and ^use the corn, take those the chaff that will.
S. AUGUST. lib. 1. de doct. Christi. Temporal things more ravish in the
expectation, then in s^uition: but things eternal more in the sruition then
expectation. Ibide^. The lise os man is the middle between Angels and beasts:
Is man takes pleasure in carnal things, he is compared to beasts; but is he
delights in spiritual things, he is suited with Angels. EPIG. 7.
Art thou a child? Thou will not then be fed,
But like a child, and with the childrens bread:
But thou art fed with chaff, or corn undrest:
My soul thou savour'st too much of the beast.
VIII.


PHILIPPIANS 13. 19. They mind earthly things, but our conversation is in
Heaven.
Venus. Div. Cupid. Ven. WHat means this pe^vish brat? Whish, lullaby,
What a^ls my babe? what ails my babe to cry?
Will nothing still it? will it neither be
Pleased with the nurses breast nor mothers knee?
What ails my bird? what moves my froward boy
To make such whimp'ring faces? Peace, my joy:
Will nothing do? Come, come, this pettish brat,
Thus cry and bawl, and cannot tell for what?
Come busse and friends, my lamb; whish, lullaby,
What ails my babe? what ails my babe to cry?
Peace, peace my dear; alas, thy early years
Had never faults to merit half these tears;
Come smile upon me: Let thy mother spy
Thy fathers image in her babies eye:
Husband these guiltlesle drops against the rage
Of harder fortunes, and the gripes of age;
Thine eye's not ripe ^or tea^s: whish, lullaby;
What ails my babe, my sweet^ faced babe to cry?
Look, look, what is here! A dainty golden thing:
See how the dancing bells turn round and ring
To please my bantling! here is a knack will breed
A hundred kisses: here is a knack indeed.
So, now my bird is white, and looks as fair
As Pelops shoulder, or my milk-white pair:
Here Is right the fathers smile; when Mars beguiled
Sick Venus of her heart, just thus he smiled.

Divine Cupid. Well may they smile alike; thy base-b^ed boy
And his base sire had both one cause, a toy:
How well their subjects and their smil^s agree?
Thy Cupid sinds a toy, and Mars found thee:
^alse Queen of beauty, Queen of false delights,
Thy knee presents an ^mbleme, that invites
Man to himself, whose self-transported heart
(Ov^rwhelm'd with native sorrows, and the sma^t
Of purchased grie^s) lies whining night and day,
Not knowing why, till heavy he^ld delay,
The dull-brow'd Pander of despa^r, lays by
His leaden buskins, and presents his eye
With antic tri^les, which the indulgent earth
Makes proper objects of man's childish mirth.
These be the coin that pass, the sweets that please;
There Is nothing good, there is nothing great but these:
These be the pipes that base-born minds dance after,
And turn immod' rate tears to lavish laughter;
Whilst Heavenly rap^res pass without regard;
Their strings are harsh and their high strains unhea^d:
The plough-m^ns whistle or the trivial ^ure
^ind more resp^ct then great Apollo's lute:
We'll look to Heaven, and trust to higher joys;
Let swine love husks, and ch^ldren whine for toys.

S. BERN. That is the true and chief joy, which is not conceived from the
creature, but received from the Creato^; which (being once possessed thereof)
none can take from thee: whereto all pleas^e being compared is torment, all joy
is grief, sweet things are bitter, all glory is ba^enesse, and all de^ectable
things are despicable. S. BERN. Joy in a changeable subject must necessarily
change as the subject changes. EPIG. 8.
Peace, childish Cupid, peace: thy singer'd eye
But crios for what, in time, will make thee cry:
But are thy peevish wranglings thus appeased?
Well may thou cry, that art so poorly pleased.
IX.


ISAIAH 10. 3. What will ye do in the day of your visitation? to whom will ye
^lie for help? and where will ye leave your glory?
1
IS this that jolly God, whose Cyprian bow
Has shot so many flaming darts,
And made so many wounded Beauties go
Sadly perplexed with whimp'ring hearts?
Is this that Sovereign Deity that brings
The slavish world in awe, and st^ngs
The blund'ring souls of swains, and stoops the hearts of Kings.
2
What Circean cha^m, what Hecatean spite
Has thus abused the G^d of love?
Great Jove was vanquished by his greater might;
(And who is stronger-arm'd then Jove?)
Or has our lust^ull god persorm'd a rape,
And (fearing Argus eyes) would escape
The view of jealous earth, in this prodigious shape?
3
Where be those rosy cheeks, that lately scorned
The malice of injurious Fates?
Ah, where is that pearl Percullis, that adorned
Those dainty two-leav'd Ruby gates?
Where be those killing eyes, that so controlled
The world? And locks, that did infold
Like knots of slaming wire, like curles of burnisht gold?
4
No, no, 't was neither He^tean spite
Nor charm below, nor power above;
'T was neither Circes spell, nor Stygian sprite,
That thus transformed our god of Love;
'Twas owl-eyed Lust (more potent far then they)
Whose eyes and actions hate the day:
Whom all the world observe, whom all the world obey.
5
Se how the latter Trumpets dreadful blast
Affrights stout Mars his t^embling son!
Se, how he startles! how he stands aghast,
And scrambles from his melting Throne!
Hark, how the direful hand of vengeance tears,
The swelt'ring clouds, whilst Heaven appears
A ci^cle filled with flame, and centered with his fears.
6
This is that day, whose often report has wo^n
Neglected tongues of Prophets bare;
The faithless subject of the worldlings scorn,
The sum of men and Angels prayer:
This, this the day whose All-discerning light
Ransacks the secret dens of night,
And severs good from bad; true joys from false delight.
7
You groveling worldings, you, whose wisdom trades,
Where light never shot his golden ^ay;
That hide your actions in Cimeri^n ^des,
How will your eyes endure this day?
Hills will be deaf, and mountains will not hea^;
There be no caves, no corners there,
To shade your souls from fire, to shield your hearts from fear
HUGO. O the extreme loath somnesse of fleshly lust, which not only
^sseminates the mind, but ene^ves the body; which not only di^taineth the
soul, but disguiseth the (...) It is ^hered with sury and wantonness; it is
accompanied with ^ury and wantonness; and it is followed with gries and
r^ntance. EPIG. 9.
What? sweet-fac'd Cupid, has thy bastard-treasure,
Thy boasted honors, and thy bold-fac'd pleasure
Perplexed thee now? I told thee long ago,
To what they would bring thee, fool, To wit, to woe.
X.


NAH^M 2. 10. She is empty, and void, and waste.
1
She Is empty: hark, she sounds: there is nothing there
But noise to fill thy ear;
Thy vain enquiry can at length but find
A blast of murmuring wind:
It is a cask, that seems as full as fair;
But merely tunn'd with air:
Fond youth, go build thy hopes on better grounds:
The soul that vainly founds
Her joys upon this world but feeds on empty sounds.
2
She Is empty: hark, she sounds: there is nothing in it.
The spark-ingend'ring ^lint
Shall sooner melt, and hardest raunce shall first
Dissolve and quench thy thirst,
Ever this false world shall still thy stormy breast
With smooth faced calms of rest:
Thou may as well expect Meridian light
From shades of black-mouthed night,
As in this empty world to find a full delight.
3
She Is empty: hark, she sounds; 't is void and vast;
What if some flattering blast
Of flat^ous honor should perchance be there,
And whisper in thine ear^:
It is but wind, and blows but where it list,
And vanish^s like a mist:
Poor honor earth can give! What generous mind
Would be so base to bind
Her Heav'n-bred soul a slave to serve a blast of wind?
4
She Is empty: hark, she sounds: 't is but a ball
For fools to play withal:
The painted silm but of a stronger bubble,
That Is lined with silken trouble:
It is a world, whose work and recreation
Is vanity and vexation;
A Hagg, repaired with vice-complexion, paint,
A quest-house of complaint:
It is a saint, a fiend; worse fiend, when most a saint.
5
She Is empty: hark, she ^ounds: 't is vain and void.
What 's here to be enjoyed,
But grief and sickness, and large bills of sorrow,
Drawn now, and crossed to morrow?
Or what are men, but puffs of dying breath,
Revived with living death?
Fond la^, O build thy hopes on surer grounds
Then what dull flesh propounds:
Tru^ not this hollow world, she 's empty: hark, she sounds.
S. CHRYSOSTOM. in Ep. ad Heb. Contemn riches, and thou shall be rich; contemn
glory, and thou shall be glorious; contemn injuries, and thou shall be a
conqueror; consemne rest, and thou shall gain rest; contemn earth, and thou
shall find Heaven. EPIG. lib. de Vanit. mundi. The world is a vanity which
affords neither beauty to the amorous, nor reward to the laborious, nor
encouragement to the industrious. EPIG. 10.
This house is to be let for life or years;
Her rent is sorrow, and her In-come tears:
Cupid, 't'as long stood void; her bills make known,
She must be dearly let; or let alone.
XI.


MATTHEW 7. 14. Narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it.
PRepost'rous fool, thou troul'st amiss;
Thou err'st; that is not the way, 't is this:
Thy hopes, instructed by thine eye,
Make thee appear more near then I;
My floor is not so flat, so fine,
And has more obvious rubs then thine:
'T is true; my way is hard and strait,
And leads me through a thorny ^ate,
Whose ranckling pricks are sharp and fell;
The common way to Heaven 's by hell:
'T is true; thy path is short and fair,
And free of rubs: Ah, fool, beware,
The safest road's not always even;
The way to Hell 's a seeming Heaven.
Think thou, the Crown of Glory 's had
With idle ease, sond Cyprian lad?
Think thou, that mirth, and vain delights,
High feed, and shadow-shortning nights,
Soft knees, full bones, and beds of down
Are proper Prologues to a Crown?
Or can thou hope to come, and view,
Like prosperous Caesar, and subdue?
The bondslave Usurer will trudge
Inspite of Gouts, will turn a drudge,
And serve his soul-condemning purse,
To Increase it with the widows curse:
And shall the Crown of glory stand
Not worth the waving of a hand?
The fleshly wanton to obtain
His minute-lust, will count it gain
To lose his freedom, his estate,
Upon so dear, so sweet a rate;
Shall pleasures thus be prized, and must
Heavens Palm be cheaper then a lust?
The true-bred Spark, to hoise his name
Upon the waxenwings of fame,
Will sight undaunted in a slood
That Is raised with brackish drops and blood:
And shall the promised Crown of life
Be thought a toy, not worth a strife?
An ^asie good brings easy gains;
But things of price are bought with pains:
The pleasing way is not the right:
He that would conquer Heaven must fight.
S. HIERON. in Ep. No labor is hard, no time is long, wherein the glory of
Eternity is the mark we level at. S. GREG. lib. 8. Mor. The valor of a just
man is to conquer the slesh, to contradict his own will, to quench the delights
of this present life, ^o endure and love the miseries of this world for the
reward of a better, to contemn the slatteries of prosperity, and inwardly to
overcome the fears of adversity. EPIG. 11.
O Cupid, if thy smoother way were right,
I should mistrust this Crown were (...):
The way's not easy where the Prize is great:
I hope no virtues where I smell no sweat.
XII.


GALATIANS 6. 14. God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross.
1
CAn nothing settle my uncertain breast, And fix my rambling love?
Can my affections find out nothing best? But still and still remove?
Has earth no mercy? will no Ark of rest Receive my restless Dove?
Is there no Good, then which there is nothing higher, To bless my full desire
With joys that never change; with joys that never expire?
2
I wanted wealth; and at my dear request, Earth lent a quick supply;
I wanted mirth to charm my sullen breast; And who more brisk then I?
I wanted fame to glorify the rest; My fame flew eagle-high:
My joy not fully ripe, but all decayed; Wealth vanished like a shade,
My mirth began to slag, my fame began to fade.
3
The world's an Ocean, hurried to and fro
With every blast of passion:
Her lustful streams, when either ebb or flow,
Are tides of man's vexation:
They alter daily, and they daily grow
The worse by alteration:
The earth's a cask full tunn'd, yet wanting measure;
Her precious wind, is pleasure;
Her yest is honors puff; her lees are worldly treasure.
4
My trust is in the Cross: let Beauty ^ag
Her loose, her wanton sail;
Let countenance gilding Honor cease to brag
In courtly terms, and vail;
Let ditch-bred wealth henceforth forget to wag
Her base though golden tail;
False beauties conquest is but real loss,
And wealth but golden dross;
Best Honor's but a blast: my trust is in the Cross.
5
My trust is in the Cross: There lies my rest;
My fast, my sole delight:
Let cold-mouth'd Boreas, or the hot-mouth'd East
Blow till they burst with spite:
Let earth and hell conspri^ their worst, their best,
And join their twisted might:
Let showers of thunderbolts dar^ down and wound me,
And troops of fiends surround me,
All this may well confront; all this shall never confound me.
S. AUGUST. Christ's Cross is the Chrisc^osse of all our happiness: It
delivers us from all blindness of error, and enriches our darkness with
light; It resto^th the troubled soul ^o re^t; It brings strangers to Gods
acquaintance; It makes remote forrein^rs near neighbors; It cu^teth off
discord; concludes a league of everlasting peace, and is the (...) author of
all good. S. BERN. in Ser. de resur. We find glory in the Cross; tous that are
saved it is the power of God, and the fullness of all virtues. EPIG. 12.
I followed rest, rest ^led and soon forsook me;
I ran from grief, grief ran and over-took me.
What shall I do? lest I be too much tossed
On worldly crosses, Lord, let me be crossed.
XIII.


PROVERBS 26. II. As a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool returns to his
folly.
O I am wounded! and my wounds do smart
Beyond my patience, or great Chirons art;
I yield, I yield; the day, the palm is th^ne;
Thy bow's more true; thy sha^s more fierce then mine,
Hold, hold, O hold thy conquering hand. What need
To send more darts? the first has done the deed:
Often have we struggled, when our ^quall a^ms
Shot equal shafts, inflicted equal harms;
But this exceeds, and with her flaming head,
Twyfork'd with death, has struck my conscience dead.
But must I die? Ah me! If that were all,
Then, then I Would stroke my bleeding wounds, and call
This dart a cordial, and with joy endure
These harsh ingredients, where my grief's my cure.
But something whispers in my dying ear,
There is an after day; which day I fear:
The slender debt to Nature's quickly paid,
Discharged perchance with greater ease then made;
But if that pale-faced Sergeant make arrest,
Ten thousand actions would (where of the least
Is more then all this lower world can bail)
Be entered, and condemn me to the jail
Of Stygian darkness, bound in red hot chains,
And gripped with tortures worse then Titian pains.
Farewell my vain, farewell my loose delights;
Farewell my rambling days my rev'ling nights;
'T was you betrayed me first, and, when ye found
My soul at vantage, gave my soul the wound:
Farewell my bullion gods, whose sov'reigne looks
So often caught me with their golden hooks:
Go, seek another slave; ye must all go;
I cannot serve my God and Bullion too.
Farewell false henour; you, whose ayry wings
Did mount my soul above the thrones of kings;
Then slatte'd me, took pet, and in disdain,
Nipt my green buds; then kicked me down again:
Farewell my Bow; farewell my Cyprian Quiver;
Farewell dear world, farewell dear world for ever.
O, but this most delicious world, how sweet
Her pleasures relish! Ah! How jump they meet
The grasping so il! and with their sprightly fire,
Revive, and raise, and rowze the rapt desire!
For ever? O, to part so long? what? never
Meet more? another year, and then for ever:
Too quick resolves do resolution wrong;
What part so soon, to be divorced so long?
Things to be done are long to be debated;
Heaven is not day'd. Rep^ntance is not dated.
S. AUGUST. lib. de util. again. poen. Go up my soul into the tribunal of thy
Conscience; There set thy guilty self before thy self: Hide not thy self
behind thy self, (...) God bring thee forth before thy self. S. AUGUST. in
Soliloq. In vain is that washing, where the next sin de^ileth: He has ill
repented whose sins are repeated: that stomach is the worse for vomiting,
that licketh up his vomit. ANSELM. God has promised pardon to him that
repents, but be has not promised repentance to him that sins. EPIG. 13.
Brain-wounded Cupid, had this hasly dart,
As it has pricked thy fancy, pier^'d thy heart,
'T had been thy friend: O how has it deceived thee!
For had this dart but killed, this dart had saved thee.
XIV.


PROVERBS 24. 16. A just man falls seven times and rises up again, but the
wicked shall fall into mischief.
1
It Is but a foyl at best, and that is the most
Your skill can boast:
My slippery footing failed me; and you trip^
Just as I slipped:
My wanton weakness did her self betray
With too much play:
I was too bold: He never yet stood sure,
That stands secure:
Who ever trusted to his native strength,
But fell at length?
The Title's crazed the Tenure is not good,
That claims by th'evidence of flesh and blood.
2
Boast not thy skill; the rigl^eous man falls ost,
Yet falls but soft:
There may be dirt to mire him, but no stones
To crush his bones:
What if he staggers? Nay, put case he be
Foiled on his knee;
That very knee will bend to Heaven, and woo
For mercy too.
The true-bred Gamester ups a fresh, and then,
Falls to 't again;
Whereas the leaden-hearted coward lies,
And yields his conquered life, or craven'd, dies.
3
Boast not thy Conquest; thou, that every hour
Fall's^ ten times lower;
Nay, have not power to rise, if not, in case,
To fall more base:
Thou wallow'st where I slip; and thou do tumble,
Where I but stumble:
Thou glory'st in thy slav'ries di^ty badges,
And fall'st for wages:
Sow^grief and sad repentance scowrs and clears
My stains with tears:
Thy falling keeps thy falling still in ure;
But when I slip I stand the more s^cure.
4
Lord, what a nothing is this little Span,
We call a Man!
What fenny trash mainteins the smoth'ring sires
Of his desires!
How slight and short are ^is resolvs at longest!
How weak at strongest!
O if a sinner held by thy fast hand
Can hardly stand,
Good God! in what a desperate case are they
That have no stay!
Man's state implies a necessary curse;
When not himself, he is mad; when most himself, he is worse.
S. AMBROS. in Sermon. ad vincula. Peter stood more firmly after he ^ad lamented
his fall, then before he fell. Insomuch that he found more grace then he lost
grace S. CHRYSOSTOM. in Ep. ad Heliod. monach. It is no such heinous matter to fall
afflicted; as being down to lie dejected: It is no danger for a soldier to
receive a wound in battle, but after the wound received, through despair of
recovery, to refuse a remedy; for we often see wounded Champions wear the Palm
at last, and after flight, crowned with victory. EPIG. 14.
Triumph not Cupid, his mischance does show
Thy trade; does once, what thou do always do:
Brag not too soon: has thy prevailing hand
Foiled him? Ah fool, the ast taught him how to stand?
XV.


JEREMIAH 32. 40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me.
SO, now the soul's sublimed: her sour desires
Are recalcin'd in heavens well-tempred fires:
The heart restored and purged from drossie nature
Now finds the freedom of a newborn creature:
It lives another life, it breaths new breath;
It neither feels nor fears the sting of death.
Like as the idle vagrant (having none)
That boldly' dopts each house he views his own;
Makes every purse his chequer; and at pleasure,
Walks forth, and taxes all the world like Caesar,
At length by virtue of a just command,
His sides are lent to a severer hand;
Whereon his pass, not fully understood,
Is texted in a manuscript of blood:
Thus past from town to town, until he come
A sore repentant to his native home:
Even so the rambling heart, that idly roves
From crimes to sin, and uncontrolled removes
From lust to lust, when wanton slesh invites
From old-worn pleasures to new choice delights,
At length corrected by the filial rod
Of his offended (but his gracious God)
And lasht from sins to sighs; and by degrees,
From sighs to vows; from vows to bended knees,
From ^ended knees, to a true pensive breast;
(...) to torments, not by tongues expressed,
(...); (and from his sinful self exiled)
(...) a glad father, he a welcome child:
O then it lives; O then it lives involved
In (...) raptures; pants to be dissolved:
(...) royal Of spring of a second Birth
(...) open to Heaven, and shuts the doors to earth:
If lovesick love commanded clouds should hap
To rain such showers as quickened Danaes lap:
Or dogs (far kinder then their purple master)
Should lick his sores, he laughs nor weeps the faster.
If earth (Heavens rival) dart her idle ray;
To Heaven, 't is wax, and to the world, 't is clay:
If earth present delights, it scorns to draw,
But, like the jet unrubb'd, disdains that straw:
No hope deceives it, and no doubt divides it;
No grief disturbs it; and no error guides it;
No fear distracts it; and no rage inflames it;
No guilt condemns it, and no folly shames it;
No sloth besots it; and no lust inthralls it;
No scorn afflicts it, and no passion gawls it:
It is a ^arknet of immortal life;
An A^k of peace; the lists of sacred strife;
A purer piece of endl^sse transitory;
A shrine of Grace, a little throne of Glory:
A Heaven-born Offspring of a newborn birth;
An earthly Heaven; an ounce of Heavenly earth.
S. AUGUST. de spir. and anima. O happy heart, where piety (...); where (...)
subjects, where repentance corrects, where obedience direct^th, where
perseverance perfecteth, where power protecteth, where devotion projecteth,
where charity connecteth. S. GR^G. Which way soever the heart turns it self
(if carefully) it shall commonly observe, that in those very things we lose
God, in t^ose very things we shall find God: It shall find the heat of his
power in consideration of those things, in the love of which things he was most
cold, and by what things it fell, (...), by those things it is raised,
converted. EPIG. 15.
My heart! but wherefore do I call thee so?
I have renoun^'d my interest long ago:
When thou were false and fleshly, I was thine;
Mine were thou never, till thou were not mine,
THE THIRD BOOK.


The Entertainment.
ALL you whose better thoughts are newly born,
And (rebaptiz'd with holy fire) can scorn
The worlds base trash, whose necks disdain to bear
The imperious yoke of Satan; whose chaste ear
No wanton songs of Sirens can surprise
With false delight; whose more then Eagle-eyes
Can view the glorious flames of gold, and gaze
On glittering beams of honor, and not daze;
Whose souls can spurn at pleasure, and deny
The loose suggestions of the flesh draw nigh:
And you whose amorous, whose select desires
Would feel the warmth of those transcendent (...),
Which (like the rising Sun) put out the light
Of Venus star, and turn her day to night;
You that would love, and have your passions crowned
With greater happiness then can be found
In your own wishes; you that would a^ect
Where neither scorn, nor guile, nor disiespect
Shall wound your tortured souls; that would enjoy,
Where neither want can pinch, nor fullness cloy,
Nor double doubt afflicts, ^or baser fear
Unflames your courage in pursuit, draw near:
Shake hands with earth, and let your soul respect
Her joys no further, then her joys reflect
Upon her Makers glory: if thou swim
In wealth, see him in all; see all in him:
Sink'st thou in want, and is thy small cruse spent?
See him in want; enjoy him in con^nt:
Conceiv'st him lodged in Cross, or lost in pain?
In Prayer and Patience find him out again:
Make Heaven thy Mistress, let no change remove
Thy loyal heart; be fond; be sick of love:
What if he stop his ear, or knit his brow?
At length he will be as fond, as sick as thou:
Dart up thy soul in groans: Thy secret groan
Shall pierce his ear, s^all pierce his ear alone:
Dart up thy soul in vows: Thy sacred vow
Shall sind him out, where Heaven alone shall know:
Dart up thy soul in sighs: Thy whispering sigh
Shall rouse his ears, and fear no listner nigh:
Send up thy groans, thy sighs, thy closet vow;
There Is none, there is none shall know but Heaven and thou:
Groans fresht with vows, and vows made salt with tears,
Unscale his eyes, and scale his conquered ears:
Shoot up the bosom shaf^ of thy desire,
Feathered with faith, and double-forkt with fire.
And they will hit: Fear not, where Heaven bids come:
Heavens never deaf, but when man's heart is dumb.
I.


ISAIAH 29. 6. My soul has desired thee in the night.
GOod God! what horrid darkness does surround
My groping soul! how are my senses bound
In utter shades; and muf^ed from the light
Lusk in the bosom of eternal night!
The bold-sac'd Lamp of heaven can set and rise;
And with his morning glory fill the eyes
Of gazing mortals; his victorious ray
Can chase the shadows, and restore the day:
Nights bashful Empress, though she often wain,
As ost repents her darkness, primes again;
And with her circling horns does re-embrace
Her brothers wealth, and orbs her silver face.
But ah, my Sun deep swallowed in his fall,
Is set, and cannot shine, nor rise at all:
My bankrupt wain can beg nor borrow light;
Alas, my darkness is perpetual night.
Falls have their risings, wainings have their primes,
And desperate sorrows wait their better times;
Ebs have their Floods, and Autumnes have their Springs:
All States have changes hurried with the swings
Of Chance and Time, still tiding to and fro:
Terrestrial bodies and celestial too.
How often have I vainly grop'd about,
With lengthened arms, to find a passage out,
That I might catch those beams mine eye desires,
And bath my soul in those celestial fires:
Like as the (...), cloistered in her mue,
To scowr her downy robes, and to ren^
Her broken flags, preparing to overlook
The timorous Mallard at the sliding brook,
Je^ often from perch to perch; from stock to ground;
From ground to window, thus surveying round
Her dove-befeath'red Prison, till at length,
(Calling her noble birth to mind, and strength
Whereto her wing was born) her ragged beak
Nips off her dangling jesses, strives to break
Her gingling fetters, and begins to bate
At every glimpse, and darts at every grate:
Even so my weary soul, that long has bin
An Inmate in this T^nement of sin,
Locked up by cloud-brow'd Error, which invites
My cloystred thoughts to feed on black delights,
Now scorns her shadows, and begins to dart
Her winged desires at thee, that only art
The Sun she seeks, whose rising beams can fright
These duskie clouds that make s^ dark a night:
Shine forth, great Glory, shine; that I may see
Both how to loath my self, and honor Thee:
But if my weakness force thee to deny
Thy slames, yet lend the twilight of thine eye:
If I must want those Beams I wish, yet grant,
That I, at least, may wish those Beams I want.
S. AUGUST. Soliloqu. cap. 33. There was a great and dark cloud of vanity
before mine eyes, so that I could not see the Sun of Justice, and the Light of
Truth: I being the son of darkness, was involved in darkness: I loved my
darkness, because I knew not thy light: I was blind, and loved my blindness,
and did walk from darkness to darkness: But Lord thou art my God, who have
led me from darkness, and the shadow of death; ^ast called me into this
glorious light, and behold, I see. EPIG. I.
My soul, cheer up; what if the night be long?
Heaven finds an ear, when sinners find a tongue?
Thy tears are morning showers: Heaven bids me say,
When Peter's cock begins to crow, 't is day.
II.


PSALM 69. 3. O Lord, thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid
from thee.
See thou this fulsome Idiot? In what measure
He seems transported with the antic pleasure
Of childish baubles? can thou but admire
The empty fullness of his vain desire?
Can thou conceive such poor delights as these
Can fill the insatiate soul of man, or please
The fond aspect of his deluded eye?
Reader, such very fools are thou and I:
False puffs of honor; the deceitful streams
Of wealth; the idle, vain, and empty dreams
Of pleasure, are our traffic, and ensnare
Our souls, the threefold subject of our care:
We toil for trash, we barter solid joys
For airy tr^s; sell our Heaven for toys:
We snatch at barley grains, whilst pearls stand by
Despised; such very fools art thou and I.
Aym'st thou at honor! does not the Idiot shake it
In his left hand? fond man, step forth and take it:
Or would thou wealth? see how the fool presents thee
With a full basket; if such wealth contents thee:
Would thou take pleasure? if the fool unstride
His prauncing Stallion, thou may up and (...):
Fond man, such is the pleasure, wealth, and honor
The earth affords such fools as dote upon her;
Such is the game whereat ^ths idiots sly;
Such idiots, ah, such fools are thou and I:
Had rebell-mans fool-hardinesse extended
No further then himself, and there had ended,
It had been just; but, thus enraged to sly
Upon the eternal eyes of Majesty,
And drag the Son of Glory from the breast
Of his indulgent Father; to a^ rest
His great and sacred Person; in disgrace,
To spit and spaul upon his Sun bright face;
To taunt him with base terms; and being bound,
To scourge his soft, his trembling sides; to wound
His head with thorns; his heart with humane (...);
His hands with nails, and his pale slank with spears:
And then to paddle in the pure^ stream
Of his spilt blood, is more then most extreme:
Great builder of mankind, can thou propound
All this to thy bright eyes, and not confound
Thy handiwork? O, can thou choose but see,
That made the eye? can ought behid from thee?
Thou see our persons, Lord, and not our guilt;
Thou see not what thou may, but what thou will:
The Hand that formed us, is enforced to be
A Screen set up betwixt thy work and thee:
Look, look upon that Hand, and thou shall spy
An open wound, a through-fare for thine eye;
Or if that wound be closed, that passage be
Denied between thy gracious eyes and me,
Yet view the scarre; that scarre will countermand
Thy wrath: O read my fortune in thy hand.
S. CHRYSOSTOM. Hom. 4. Joan. Fools seem to abound in wealth, when they want all
things; they seem to enjoy happiness, when indeed they are only most
miserable; neither do they understand that they are del^ded by their fancy,
till they be delivered from their folly. S. GREG. in Mor. By so much the more
are we inwardly foolish, by how much we strive to seem outwardly wise. EPIG. 2.
Rebellious fool, what has thy folly done:
Controlled thy God, and crucisi'd his Son?
How sweetly has the Lord of life deceived thee?
Thou shedst his blood, and that shed blood has saved thee.
III.


PSALM 6. 2. Have mercy, Lord, upon me, for I am weak; O Lord, heal me, for my
bones are vexed.
Soul. Jesus. Soul AH, Son of David, help:

Jes. What sinful (...) Implores the Son of David?

Soul It is I:

Jes. Who art thou?

Soul Oh, a deeply wounded breast
That Is heavy laden, and would fain have rest.

Jes. I have no scraps, and dogs must not be fed
Like household children with the childrens bread.

Soul True, Lord; yet tolerate a hungry whelp
To lick their crummes: O Son of David, help.

Jes. Poor Soul, what ail'st thou?

Soul O I burn, I fry;
I cannot rest, I know not where to fly
To find some case; I turn my blubbered face
From man to man; I ^oul from place to place,
To Avoid my tortures, to obtein relief,
But still am dogged and haunted with my grief:
My midnight torments call the sluggish light,
And when the morning 's come, they woo the night.

Jes. Surcease thy tears, and speak thy free desires.

Soul Quench, quench my slames, and swage these scorching fires.

Jes. Can thou believe my hand can cure thy grief?

Soul Lord, I believe; Lord, help my unbelief.

Jes. Hold forth thy arm, and let my fingers try
Thy pulse; where chiesly does thy torment lie?

Soul From head to foot; it reigns in every part,
But plays the self-law'd tyrant in my heart.

Jes. Can thou dig^st? can relish wholesome food?
Haw stands thy taste?

Soul To nothing that is good:
All sinful ^rash, and earths unsav'ry stuff
I can digest and relish well enough.

Jes. Is not thy blood as cold ^s hot, by turns?

Soul Cold to what is good; to what is bad it burns.

Jes. How old's thy grief?

Soul I took it at the fall
With eating fruit.

Jes. 'T is Epiden^call:
Thy bloud's infected, and the infection sp^ng
From a bad liver: 'T is a fever strong
And full of death unless, with present speed,
A vein be opened; thou must die, or bleed.

Soul O I am faint and spent: that lance that shall
Let forth my blood, lets forth my life withal:
My soul wants cordials, and has greater need
Of blood, then (being spent so far) to ble^d:
I faint already: If I bleed, I die.

Jes. 'T is either thou-must bleed, sick soul, or I:
My bloud's a cordial. He that sucks my veins,
Shall ^se his own, and conquer greater pains
Then these: cheer up; this precious blood of mine
Shall cure thy grief; my heart shall bleed for thine:
Believe, and view me with a faithful eye,
Thy soul shall neither languish, bleed, ^or die.

S. AUGUST. lib. 10. Confess. Lord, be mercisull unto me: Ah me: Behold, I hide
not my wounds: Thou art a Ph^sician, and I am sick; Thou a^t merciful, and I
am miserable. S. GREG. in Pastoral. O Wisdom, with how sweet an a^t does thy
wine and oil vestore health to my healthlesse soul! How powersully mercisull,
how mercifully powerful art tho^ Powerful sor me, mercisull to me! EPIG. 3.
Can thou be sick, and such a Doctor by?
Thou can not live, unless thy Doctor die!
Strange kind of grief, that finds no medicine good
To swage her pains, but the Physicians blood!
IV.


PSALM 25. 18. Look upon my affliction and my pain, and forgive all my sins.
BOth work and strokes? both lash and labor too?
What more could Edom, or proud Ashur do?
Stripes after stripes? and blows succeding blows?
Lord, has thy scourge no mercy, and my woes
No end? my pains no ease? no intermission?
Is this the state? Is this the sad condition
Of those that trust thee? will thy good^esse please
T'allow no other favors? none but these?
Will not the thet'rick of my torments move?
Are these the symptoms? these the signs of love?
Is It not enough, enough that I ^ulfill
The toylsome task of thy laborious mill?
May not this labor expiate and pu^ge
My sin, without the addition of thy scourge?
Look on my cloudy brow, how fast it rains
Sad showers of sweat, the fruits of fruitless pains:
Behold these ridges; see what purple surrows
Thy plow has made; O think upon those sorrows
That once were thine; will, will thou not be wooed
To mercy, by the charms of sweat and blood?
Can thou forget that drowsy mount, wherein
Thy dull Disciples slept? was not my sin
There punished in thy soul? did not this brow
Then sweat in thine? were not those drops enough?
Remember Golgotha, where that springtide
O'rflow'd thy sovereigne Sacramental side:
There was no sin, there was no guilt in Thee,
That caused those pains; thou sweat'st, thou bledst for me.
Was there not blood enough, when one small drop
Had power to ransom thousand worlds, and stop
The mouth of Justice? Lord, I bled before
In thy deep wounds; can Justice challenge more?
Or do thou vainly labor to hedge in
Thy losses from my sides? my blood is thin,
And thy free bounty scorns such easy thrift;
No, no, thy blood came not as lone but gift.
But must I ever grind? And must I earn
Nothing but stripes? O will thou disaltern
The rest thou gav'st? Have thou perused the curse
Thou laid'st on Adams fall, and made it worse?
Can thou repent of mercy? Heaven thought good
Lost man should feed in sweat; not work in blood:
Why do thou wound the already wounded breast?
Ah me! my life is but a pain at b^st:
I am but dying dust: my days, a span;
What pleasure take thou in the blood of man?
Spare, spare thy scourge, and be not so austere;
Send fewer strokes, or lend more strength to bear.
S. BERN. Hom. 81. in Cant. Miserable man! who shall deliver me (...) the
reproach of this shameful bondage? I am a miserable man but a ^ree man; ^ce,
because a man; miserable, because a servant: In regard of my bondage,
miserable; in regard of my will, inexcusable: For my will, that was ^ree,
beslaved it self to sin, by assenting to sin; for he that commits sin
is the servant to sin. EPIG. 4.
Tax not thy God: Thine own defaults did urge
This twofold punishment; the mill the scourge.
Thy sin's the author of thy self tormenting:
Thou grind'st for sinning; scourged for not repenting.
V.


JOB 10. 9. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and
will thou bring me to dust again?
THus from the bosom of the new-made earth
Poor man was delv'd, and had his unborn birth;
The same the stuff the self-same hand does trim
The plant that fades, the beast that dies, and him:
One was their sire, one was their common mother,
Plants are his sisters, and the beast his brother,
The elder too; beasts draw the self-same breath,
Wax old alike, and die the self-same death:
Plants grow as he, with fairer robes arraid;
Alike they slourish, and alike they ^ade:
The beast in sense exceeds him and in growth,
The three-ag'd oak does thrice exceed them both:
Why look thou then so big, thou little span
Of earth? What art thou more in being man?
I, but my great Creator did inspire
My chosen earth with that diviner fire
Of reason; gave me judgment and a will;
That to know good; this to choose good from ill:
He put the rains of power in my free hand,
And jurisdiction over sea and land:
He gave me art to lengthen out my span
Of life, and made me all, in being man:
I, but thy passion has committed treason
Against the sacred person of thy reason:
Thy judgment is co^rupt, perverse thy will;
That knows no good, and this makes choice of ^ll:
The greater height sends down the deeper fall;
And good d^clin'd turns bad, turns worst of all.
Say then, proud inch of living ^arth, what can
Thy greatness claim the more in being man?
O but my soul transcends the pitch of nature,
Born up by the Image of her high Creator;
Outbraves the life of reason, and beats down
Her waxen wings, kicks off her brazen crown.
My earth's a living Temple to entertein
The King of Glory, and his glorious train:
How can I mend my title then? where can
Ambition sind a higher style then man?
Ah, but that Image is defaced and soiled;
Her Temple's razed, her Altars all desil'd;
Her vessels are polluted and distained
With lothed lust, her ornaments profaned;
Her oyl-forsaken lamps, and hallowed tapours
Put out; her incense breaths unsav'ry vapors:
Why swell'st thou then so gi^ thou little span
Of earth? what art thou more in being man?
Ete^nall Potter, whose blessed hands did lay
My course soundation from a sod of clay,
Thou know my slender vess^l's apt to leak;
Thou know my brittle temper's prone to break;
Are my bones brazzil, or my slesh of oak?
O, mend what thou have made, what I have broke:
Look, look with gentle eyes, and in thy day
Of vengeance, Lord, remember I am clay.
S. AUGUST, S^liloq, 32. Shall I ask, who made me? It was thou that made me,
without whom nothing was made: Thou art my maker, and I thy work. I thank thee,
my Lord God, by whom I live, and by whom all things su^sist, because thou
made me: I thank the, O my Potter, because thy hands have made me, because
thy hands have formed me. EPIO. 5.
Why swell'st thou, man, pust up with fame and purse?
Thou Art better earth, but born to dig the worse:
Thou came from earth, to earth thou must return,
And art but earth cast from the womb to the urn.
VI.


JOB 7. 20. I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?
why have thou set me as a mark against thee?
LOrd, I have done; and, Lord, I have misdone;
It Is solly to contest, to strive with one
That is too strong; 't is folly to assail
Or prove an arm, that will, that must prevail.
I Have done, I Have done; these trembling hands have thrown
Their daring weapons down: the day's thine own:
Forbear to strike where thou have won the field;
The palm, the palm is thine: I yield, I yield.
These ueach'rous hands that were so vainly bold
To try a thrivelesse combat, and to hold
Self-wounding weapons up, are now extended
For mercy from thy hand; that knee that bended
Upon her guardlesse guard, does now repent
Upon this naked floor; See both are bent,
And sue for pity: O my ragged wound
Is deep and desperate, it is drenched and drowned
In blood and briny tears: It does begin
To stink without, and putrify within:
Let that victorious hand, that now appears
Just in my blood, prove gracious to my tears:
Thou great Preserver of presumptuous man,
What shall I do? what satisfaction can
Poor dust and ashes make? O if that blood
That yet remains unshed were half as good
As blood of oxen; if my death might be
An offering to atone my God and me;
I would disdain injurious life, and stand
A suitor to be wounded from thy hand.
But may thy wrongs be measured by the span
Of life? or balanced with the blood of man?
No, no, eternal sin expects for guerdon,
Eternal pen^nce, or eternal pardon:
Lay down thy weapons, turn thy wrath away,
And pardon him that has no price to pay;
Enlarge that soul, which base presumption binds;
Thy justice cannot loose what mercy finds:
O thou that wilt not bruise the broken reed,
Rub not my sores, no^ prick the wounds that bleed.
Lord, if the peevish infant fights and flies,
With unpar'd weapons, at his mothers eyes,
Her frowns (half mixed with smiles) may chance to show
An angry love-trick on his arm, or so;
Where if the babe but make a lip and cry,
Her heart begins to melt, and by and by
She coaks his dewy-cheeks; her babe she blisses,
And choaks her language with a thousand kisses:
I am that child; lo, here I prostrate lie,
Pleading for mercy; I repent and cry
For gracious pardon: let thy gentle ears
Hear that in words, what mothe^s judge in tears:
See not my (...), Lord, but through my fear,
And look on every trespass through a tear:
Then calm thy anger, and appear more mild:
Remember, the art a Father, I, a child.
S. BERN. Ser. 21. in Cant. Miserable man! Who shall deliver me from the
reproach (...) this shameful bondage? I am a miserable man, but a free man:
Free, because like to God; miserable, because against God: O keeper of mankind,
why have thou set me as a mark against thee? Thou have set me, because thou
have not hindered me: It is just that thy enemy should be my enemy, and that he
who repugneth thee, should repugne me: I who am against thee, am against my
self. EPIG. 6.
But formed, and sight? but bo^n, and then rebel?
How small a blast will make a bubble swell?
But dare the ^oore affront the hand that laid it?
So apt is dust to fly in 's face that made it.
VII.


JOB 13. 24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy?
WHy do thou shade thy lovely face? O why
Does that eclipsing hand so long deny
The Sunshine of thy soul-enliv'ning eye?
Without that Light what light remains in me?
Thou art my Lise, my Way, my Light; in thee
I live, I move, and by thy beams I see.
Thou art my Lise; If thou but turn away,
My life's a thousand deaths: thou art my Way:
Without thee, Lord, I travel not but stray.
My Light thou art; without thy glorious sight,
Mine eyes are darkened with perpetual night.
My God, thou art my Way, my Life, my Light.
Thou art my Way; I wander, if thou fly:
Thou art my Light; If hid, how blind am I^
Thou art my Lise; If thou withdraw, I die.
Mine eyes are blind and dark, I cannot see;
To whom, or whether should my darkness flee,
But to the Light? And who is that Light but thee?
My path is lost; my wandering steps do stray;
I cannot safely go, nor safely stay;
Whom should I seek but thee, my Path, my Way?
O, I am dead: to whom shall I, poor I,
Repair? to whom shall my sad ashes fly
But Life? And where is Life but in thine eye?
And yet thou turn'st away thy face, and fly'st me;
And yet I sue for grace, and thou deny'st me;
Speak, art thou angry, Lord, or only try'st me?
Unskreen those Heavenly lamps, or tell me why
Thou shad'st thy face; perhaps thou think, no eye
Can view those flames, and not drop down and die.
If that be all, shine forth, and draw thee nigher;
Let me behold and die; for my desire
Is Phoenix. like to perish in that fire.
Death conquered Laz'rus was redeemed by thee;
If I am dead, Lord, see deaths prisner free;
Am I more spent, or stink I worse then he?
If my pusst light be out, give leave to tine
My slamelesse-snuss at that bright Lamp of thine;
O what is thy Light the less for lighting mine?
If I have lost my Path, great Shepherd, say,
Shall I still wander in a doubtful way?
Lord, shall a I amb of Isr'els sheepfold st^ay?
Thou art the (...) (...); the blind man's Eye;
The dead man's Life; on thee my hopes rely;
If thou remove, I err; I grope; I die.
Disclose thy Sunbeams; close thy wings, and stay;
See, see how I am blind, and dead, and stray,
O thou, that art my Light, my Life, my Way.
S. AUGUST. Soliloqu. cap. 1. Why do thou hide thy face? Happily thou (...)
say, none can see thy face and live: Ah Lord, let me die, that I may see thee;
let me see thee, that I may die: I would not live, but die. That I may see
Christ, I desire death; That I may live with Christ, I despise life. ANSELM.
Med. cap. 5. O excellent hiding, which is become my persection! My God, Thou
hidest thy treasure, to kindle my desire; Thou hidest thy pearl, to inflame the
seeker; Thou delayest ^o give, that Thou may teach me to importune; seem
not to hear, to make m^ persever. EPIG. 7.
If (...) all-quickning eyes vouchsafe to shine
Upon our souls, we slight; If not, we whine
Our Equinoctial hearts can never lie
Secure beneath the Tropicks of that eye.
VIII.


JE REMIA^ 9. 1. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night.
O That mine eyes were springs, and could transform
Their drops to seas! my sighs into a storm
Of zeal and sacred violence, wherein
This laboring vessel laden with he^ sin,
Might suffer sudden shipwreck, and be split
Upon that rock, where my drencht soul may sit
O'rwhelm'd with plenteous passion; O and there
Drop, drop into an everlasting tear!
Ah me! that every sliding vein that wanders
Through this vast Isle did work her wild meanders
In brackish tears in stead of blood, and swell
This flesh with holy dropsies, from whose well,
Made warm with sighs, may fume my wasting breath
Whilst I dissolve in steams, and reek to death!
These narrow sluices of my dribbling eyes
Are much too strait for those quick springs that rise,
And hourly fill my temples to the top;
I cannot shed for every sin a drop.
Great builder of mankind, why have thou sent
Such swelling floods, and made so small a vent^
O that this flesh had been composed of snow,
In stead of earth, and bones of ice, that so
Feeling the fervor of my sin, and lothing
The ^ire I feel I might be thawed to nothing!
O thou, that did with hopeful joy entomb
Me thrice three moons in thy laborious womb,
And then, with joyful pain, broughtst forth a Son,
What worth thy labor, has thy labor done!
What was there! Ah! what was there in my birth
That could deserve the easiest smile of mirth?
A man was born: Alas, and what is a man?
A scuttle full of dust, a measured span
Of flitting Time; a furnished pack, whose wares
Are sullen griefs, and soul-tormenting cares:
A vale of tears; a vessel tunn'd with breath,
By sickness brocht, to be drawn out by death:
A hapless, helpless thing, that born does cry
To feed; that feeds to live; that lives to die.
Great God and Man, whose eyes spent drops so often
For me, that cannot weep enough, O soften
These marble brains, and strike this slintie rock;
Or if the music of thy Peter's cock
Will more prevail, fill, fill my harkening ears
With that sweet sound, that I may melt in tears:
I cannot weep, until thou broch mine eye;
Or give me vent, or else I burst and die.
S. AMBROS. in Psalm. 118. He that commits sins to be wept for, cannot weep
for sianes committed: And being himself most lamentable, has no tears to
lament his offenses. NAZIANZ. Orat. 3. Tears are the deluge of sin, and the
worlds sacrifice. S. HIERON. in Esaiam. Prayer appeaseth God, but a tear
compels him: That moves him, but this constrains him. EPIO. 8.
Earth is an Island ported round with fears;
The way to Heaven is through the Sea of tears^
It is a stormy passage, where is found
The wrack of many a ship, but no man drowned.
IX.


PSALM 18. 5. The sorrows of hell compassed me about, and the snares of death
prevented me.
IS not this Type well cut? In every part
Full of rich cunning? sill'd with Zeuxian Art?
Are not the hunters, and their Stygian hounds
Limm'd full to th'life? did ever hear the sounds,
The music, and the lip-divided breaths
Of the strong-winded horn, recheats, and deaths
Done more exact? the infernal Nimrods hollow?
The lawless Purliews? and the game they follow?
The hidden engines? and the snares that lie
So undiscovered, so obscure to the eye?
The new-drawn net? and her entangled prey?
And him thae closes it? Beholder, say,
Is It not well done? seems not an em'lous strife
Betwixt the rare cut picture and the life?
These Purliew-men are Devils; and the Hounds,
(Those quick-nos'd Canibals that scour the grounds)
Temptations, and the Game these Fiends pursue,
Are humane souls, which still they have in view;
Whose fury if they chance to escape by slying,
The skillful Hunter plants his net, close lying
On the unsuspected earth, bayted with treasure,
Ambitious honor, and self-wasting pleasure;
Where if the soul but stoop, death stands prepared
To draw the net, and drawn, the soul's ensnat'd.
Poor soul! how (...) thou hurried to and fro?
Where can thou safely stay? where safely go?
If stay, these hot-mouth'd hounds are apt to tear thee;
If go, the snares enclose, the nets ensnare thee:
What good in this bad world has power to invite thee
A willing guest? wherein can earth delight thee?
Her pleasures are but itch; her wealth but (...);
A world of dangers, and a world of snares:
The close pursuers busy hands do plant
Snares in thy substance; Snares attend thy want;
Snares in thy credit; Snares in thy disgrace;
Snares in thy high estate; Snares in thy base;
Snares tuck thy bed, and Snares arround thy board;
Snares watch thy thoughts, and Snares attach thy word;
Snares in thy quiet; Snares in thy commotion;
Snares in thy (...); Snares in thy devotion;
Snares lurk in thy resolves; Snares in thy doubt;
Snares lie within thy heart, and Snares without;
Snares are above thy head, and Snares beneath;
Snares in thy sickness; Snares are in thy death:
O, if these Purliews be so full of danger,
Great God of Hearts, the worlds sole sov'reigne Ranger,
Preserve thy Dear, and let my soul be blessed
In thy safe Forest, where I seek for rest:
Then let the hell hounds rore; I fear no ill;
Rouse me they may, but have no power to kill.
S. AMBROS. lib. 4. in cap. 4. Lucae. The reward of honors, the height of
power, the delicacie of diet, and the beauty of a harlot are the snares of the
devil. S. AMBROS. de bono mortis. Whilst thou seek pleasures thou runnest
into snares; for the eye of the harlot is the snare of the Adulterer. SAVANAR.
In eating, he sets before us gluttony; I^ generation, luxury; In labor,
sluggishnesse; In conversing, envy; In governing, covetousness; In correcting,
anger; In honor, pride; In the heart, he sets evil thoughts; In the mouth,
evil words; In actions, evil works: when awake, he moves us to evil actions;
when asleep, to filthy dreams. EPIG. 9.
Be sad, my Heart, deep dangers wait thy mirth;
Thy soul's waylaid by Sea, by Hell, by Earth:
Hell has her hounds; Earth, snares; the Sea a shelf;
But most of all, my Heart, beware thy self.
X.


PSALM 143. 2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified.
Jesus. Justice. Sinner. Jes. BRing forth the prisner, Justice.

Just. Thy commands
(...) done, just Judge; See here the prisner stands.

Jes. What has the prisner done? Say, what is the cause
Of his commitment?

Just. He has broke the laws
Of his too gracious God; conspired the death
Of that great Majesty that gave him breath,
And heapt transgression, Lord, upon transgression.

Jes. How know thou this?

Just. Even by his own confession
His sins are crying; and they cried aloud:
They cried to Heaven; they cried to Heaven for blood.

Jes. What say thou, sinner? have thou ought to plead,
That sentence should not pass? hold up thy head,
And show thy brazen, thy rebellious face.

Sin. Ah me! I dare not: I Am too vile and base
To tread upon the earth, much more to (...)
Mine eyes to Heaven: I need no other (...)
Then mine own conscience; Lord, I must confess,
I am no more then dust, and no whit less
Then my (...) styles me. Ah, if thou
Search too severe, with too severe a brow,
What flesh can stand? I have transgrest thy laws;
My merits plead thy vengeance, not my cause.

Just. Lord, shall I strike the blow?

Jes. Hold, Justice, stay:
Sinner, speak on; what have thou more to say?

Sin. Vile as I am, and of my self abhorred,
I am thy handiwork, thy creature, Lord,
Stamped with thy glorious Image, and at first
Most like to thee, though now a poor accursed
Convicted catiff, and degen'rous creature,
Here trembling at thy bar.

Just. Thy fault's the greater.
Lord, s^ll I strike the blow?

Jes. Hold, Justice, stay:
Speak, sinner; have thou nothing more to say?

Sin. Nothing but Mercy, Mercy; Lord, my state
Is miserably poor and desperate;
I quite renounce my self, the world, and flee
From Lord to

Jesus: from thy self, to thee.

Just. Cease thy vain hopes; my angry God has vowed
Abused mercy must have blood for blood:
Shall I yet strike the blow?

Jes. Stay, Justice, hold;
My bowels yearn, my fainting blood grows cold,
To view the trembling wretch; me thinks I spy
My fathers image in the prisners eye.

Just. I cannot hold.

Jes. Then turn thy thirsty blade
Into my sides: let there the wound be made:
Cheer up, dear soul, redeem thy life with mine:
My soul shall smart, my heart shall bleed for thine.

Si^. O ground-lesse deeps! O love beyond degree!
The offended dies to set the offender free.

S. AUGUST. Lord, if I have done that, for which thou may damn me; thou have
not lost that, whereby thou may save me: Remember not, sweet Jesus, thy
justice against the sinner, but thy benignity toward thy creature: Remember
not to proceed against a guilty soul, but remember thy mercy toward a
miserable wretch: Forget the insolence of the provoker, and behold the misery
of the invoker; for what is Jesus but a Savior? ANSELM. Have respect to what
thy Son has done for me, and forget what my sins have done against thee:
My flesh has provoked thee to vengeance, let the flesh of Christ move thee to
mercy: It is much that my rebellions have deserved; but it is more that my
Redeemer has marited. EPIG. 10.
Mercy of mercies! He that was my drudge
Is now my Advocate, is now my Judge:
He suffers, pleads, and sentences, alone:
Three I adore, and yet adore but One.
XI.


PSALM 69. 15. Let not the water-flood overflow me, neither let the deeps
swallow me up.
THe world's a Sea; my flesh a Ship that is manned
With laboring Thoughts, and steered by Reasons hand:
My Heart's the Sea-mans Card, whereby she sails;
My loose Affections are the greater Sails:
The Top-sail is my Fancy, and the Gusts
That sill these wanton sheets are worldly Lusts.
Prayer is the Cable, at whose end appears
The Anchor Hope, never slipped but in our fears:
My Will's the unconstant Pilot, that commands
The stagg'ring Keel; my Sins are like the Sands:
Repentance is the Bucket, and mine Eye
The Pump, (...) (but in extremes) and dry:
My Conscience is the Plummet that does press
The deeps, but seldom cries, A sathom less:
Smooth Calm's security; the Gulf, despair;
My Fraught's Corruption, and this Life's my Fair:
My Soul's the Passenger, confusedly driven
From fear to fright; her landing-Port is Heaven.
My Seas are stormy, and my Ship does leak;
My Sailors rude; my Steersman saint and weak:
My Canvace torn, it slaps from side to side;
My Cable's crakt, my Anchor's slightly ti'd;
My Pilot's crazed, my thipwrack-Sands are cloak'd;
My Bucket's broken, and my Pump is choked;
My Calm's deceitful; and my Gulf too near;
My Wares are flubber'd, and my Fare's too dear:
My Plummet's light, it cannot sink nor sound;
O shall my Rock-bethreatned Soul be drowned?
Lord, still the Seas, and shield my Ship from harm;
Instruct my Sailours, guide my Steersmans arm:
Touch thou my Compass, and renew my Sails
Send stifter courage, or send milder gales;
Make strong my Cable; bind my Anchor faster;
Direct my ^ilot, and be thou his Master;
Object the Sands to my more serious view,
Make sound my Bucket, bore my Pump anew:
New cast my Plummet, make it apt to try
Where the Rock^ lurk, and where the Quick sands lie;
Guard thou the Gulf with love, my Calms with care;
Cleanse thou my Fraught; acc^pt my slender Fare;
Refresh the Sea-sick passenger; cut short
His Voyage; land him in his wished Port:
Thou, Thou, whom winds and stormy seas obey,
That through the deep gav'st grumbling Isr'ell way,
Say to my Soul, be safe; and then mine eye
Shall scorn grim death, although grim death stand by;
O thou whose strength-reviving Arm did cherish
Thy sinking Peter, at the point to perish,
Reach forth thy hand, or bid me tread the wave,
I Will come, I Will come: the voice that calls will save.
S. AMBROS. Apol. post. pro David. Cap. 3. (...) The cons^uence of lusts make a
great tempest, which in this sea disturbeth the sea-saring soul, that reason
cannot govern it. S. AUGUST. Soliloqu. Cap 35. We labor in a boisterous sea:
Thou stand upon the shore and (...) our dangers: Give us grace to hold a
middle course ^wixt S^ylla and Charybdis, that both dangers escaped, we (...)
at our Port secure. Ep 10. 11.
My Soul, the seas are rough, and thou a stranger
In these false coasts; O keep aloof; there is danger:
Cast forth thy plummet; see a rock appears;
Thy ship wants sea-room; make it with thy tears.
XII.


JOB 14. 13. O that thou would hide me in the grave, that thou would keep
me secret until thy wrath be past!
O Whither shall I fly? what path untrod
Shall I seek out to escape the flaming rod
Of my ostended, of my angry God?
Where shall I sojourn? what kind sea will hide
My head from Thunder? where shall I abide,
Until his flames be quenched or laid aside?
What, if my feet should take their hasty flight,
And seek protection in the shades of night?
Alas, no shades can blind the God of Light.
What, if my soul should take the wings of day,
And find some desert; if the spring away,
The wings of vengeance ^ip as fast as they.
What if some solid rock should entertain
My frighted soul? Can solid rocks restrain
The stroke of Justice, and not cleave in twain?
Nor Sea, nor Shade, nor Shield, nor Rock, nor Cave,
Nor silent Deserts, nor the sullen Grave,
Where slame-ey'd fury means to smi^e, can save.
The Seas will part; Graves open; Rocks will split;
The Shield will cleave; the frighted Shadows slit;
Where Justice aims, her fiery darts must hit.
No, no, if stern-brow'd vengeance means to thunder,
There is no place above, beneath, nor under,
So close, but will unlock, or rive in sunder.
'T is vain to flee; 't is neither here nor there
Can escape that hand until that hand forbear;
Ah me! where is he not, that is every where?
'T is vain to flee; till gentle mercy show
Her better eye, the farther off we go,
The swing of Justice deals the mightier blow.
The ingenious child, corrected, does not fly
His angry mothers hand, but clings more nigh,
And quenches with his tears her flaming eye.
Shadows are faithless, and the rocks are false;
No trust in brass, no trust in marble walls;
Poor cots are even as safe as Princes halls.
Great God, there is no safety here below;
Thou art my Fortress, though thou seem my fo,
It Is thou that strik'st the stroke must guard the blow.
Thou art my God; by thee I fall or stand;
Thy Grace has given me courage to withstand
All tortures, but my conscience and thy hand.
I know thy Justice is thy self; I know,
Just God, thy very self is Mercy too;
If not to thee, where? whither should I go?
Then work thy will; If passion bid me flee,
My reason shall obey; my wings shall be
Stretched out no further then from thee to thee.
S. AUGUST. in Psalm. 30. Whither fly I? To what place can I safely fly? To
what mountain? To what den? To what strong house? What castle shall I hold?
What walls shall hold me? Whithersoever I go, my self follows me: For
whatsoever thou fliest, O man, thou may, but thy own conscience: wheresoever
O Lord, I go, I find thee if angry, a Revenger; if appeased, a Redeemer: what
way have I, but to fly from thee to thee: That thou may avo^d thy God,
address thee to thy Lord. EPIG. 12.
Has vengeance found thee? Can thy fears command
No rocks to shield thee from her thundering hand?
Know thou not where to escape? I Will tell thee where;
My soul make clean thy conscience; hide thee there.
XIII.


JOB 10. 20. Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone, that I may
bewail my self a little.
MY Glass is half unspent: Forbear t'air^st
My thri^sse day too soon: my poor request
Is that my glass may ^un but out the rest.
My time-devoured minutes will be done
Without thy h^lp; see, see how swift they run:
Cut not my thread before my thread be spun.
The gain's not great I purchase by this stay;
What loss sustain'st thou by so small delay,
To whom ten thousand years are but a day?
My following eye can hardly make a shift
To count my winged hours; they fly so swift,
They scarce deserve the bounteous name of gift.
The secret wheels of hurrying Time do give
So short a warning, and so fast they drive,
That I am dead before I seem to live.
And what is a Life? a weary Pilgrimage,
Whose glory in one day does fill the stage
With Childhood, Manhood, and decrepit Age.
And what is a Life? the ^lourishing array
Of the proud Summer meadow, which today
Wears her green plush, and is tomorrow hay.
And what is a Life? A blast sustein'd with clothing,
Maintein'd with food, retained with vile self-lothing,
Then weary of it self, again'd to nothing.
Read on this dial, how the shades devour
My short-lived winters day; hour eats up ho^re;
Alas, the totall's but from eight to sour.
Behold these Lillies (which thy hands have made
Fair copies of my life, and open laid
To view) how soon they droop, how soon they fade!
Shade not that dial, night will blind too soon;
My nonag'd day already points to noon;
How simple is my suit! how small my boon!
Nor do I beg this slender inch, to while
The time away, or falsely to beguile
My thoughts with joy; here is nothing worth a smile.
No, no: 't is not to please my wanton ears
With frant^k mirth, I beg but ho^es, not years:
And what thou giv'st me, I will give to tea^s.
Draw not that soul which would be rather led;
That Seed has yet not broke my Serpents head;
O shall! die before my sins are dead?
Behold these rags; am I a sitting guest
To taste the dainties of thy royal feast,
With hands and face unwash'd, ungirt, unblest?
First, let the Jordan streams (that ^ind supplies
From the deep fountain of my heart) arise,
And cleanse my spots, and clear my leprous eyes.
I have a world of sins to be lamented;
I have a sea of tears that must be vented:
O spare till th^n; and then I die contented.
S. AUGUST. lib de Civit. Dei Cap. 10. The time wherein we live is taken from
the space of our life; and what remains is daily made less and less, in so
much that the time of our life is nothing but a passage to death. S. GREG. lib.
9. Cap. 44. in Cap 10. Jeb. As moderate afflictions bring tears, so immoderate
take away tears; In so much that sorrow becomes no sorrow, which swallowing up
the mind of the afflicted, takes away the sense of the affliction. EPIG. 13.
Fear thou to go, when such an Arm invites thee?
Dread'st thou thy loads of sin? or what affrights thee?
If thou begin to fear, thy fear begins;
Fool, can he bear thee hence, and not thy sins?
XIV.


DELLTERONOMY 32. 29. O that men were wise, and that they understood this, that
they would consider their latter end.
Flesh. Spirit. ^l. WHat means my sisters eye so often to pass
Through the long entry of that Optic glass?
Tell me; what secret virtue does invite
Thy wrinkled eye to such unknown delight?

Sp. It helps the sight, makes things remote appear
In perfect view; It draws the object near.

Fl. What sense-delighting objects do thou spy?
What does that Glass present before thine eye?

Sp. I see thy foe, my reconciled friend,
Grim Death, even standing at the Glasses end;
His left hand holds a branch of Palm; his right
Holds forth a two-edged sword.

Fl. A proper sight!
And is this all? does thy Prospective please
The abused fancy with no shapes but these?

Sp. Yes, I behold the dark'ned Sun bereav'n
Of all his light, the battlements of Heaven
Swelt'ring in flames; the Angel-guarded Son
Of glory on his high Tribunal-Throne;
I see a Brimstone Sea of boiling fire,
And Fiends, with knotted whips of slaming wire,
Torturing poor souls, that gnash their teeth in vain,
And gnaw their flame-tormented tongues for pain.
Look, sister, how the queazy-stomack'd Graves
Vomit their dead, and how the purple waves
Scalld their consumelesse bodies, strongly cursing
All wombs for bearing, and all paps for nursing.

Fl. Can thy distempered fancy take delight
In view of tortures? these are shows to affright:
Look in this glass triangular; look here,
Here Is that will ravish eyes.

Sp. What see thou there?

Fl. The world in colors, colors that distain
The checks of Pro^eus, or the silken train
Of Flora's Nymphs; such various sorts of hiew,
As Sun-confronting ^is never knew:
Here, if thou please to beautify a town,
Thou may; or with a hand, turn't upside down;
Here may thou scant or widen by the measure
Of thine own will; make short or long at pleasure:
Here may thou tire thy fancy, and advise
With shows more apt to please more curious eyes.

Sp. Ah fool! that dot'st on vain, on present toys,
And disrespect'st those true, those future joys!
How strongly are thy thoughts befooled, alas,
To dote on goods that perish with thy glass!
Nay, vanish with the turning of a hand!
Were they but painted colors, it might stand
With painted reason, that they might devote thee;
But things that have no being to besot thee?
Foresight of future torments is the way
To baulk those ills which present joys bewray;
As thou have fooled thy self, so now come hither,
Break that fond glass, and let us be wise together.

BONAVENT. de contemptu seculi. O that men would be wise, understand, and
^oresee: Be wise, to know three things: The multitude of those that are to be
damned: the few number of those that are to be saved; and the vanity of
transitory things: Understand three things; the multitude of sins, the
omission of good things, and the loss of time: Foresee three things, the
danger of death, the last judgment, and eternal punishment. EPIG. 14.
What, Soul, no further yet? what never commence
Master in Faith? Still batchelour of Sense?
Is It insufficiency? Or what has made thee
Oreslip thy lost degree? thy lusts have staid thee.
XV.


PSALM 30. 10. My life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing.
WHat sullen Star ruled my untimely birth,
That would not lend my days one hour of mitth!
How often have these bare knees been bent, to gain
The slender alms of one poor smile, in vain!
How often, tired with the fastidious light,
Have my saint lips implored the shades of night?
How often have my nightly torments praid
For lingering twilight, glutted with the shade?
Day worse then night, night worse then day appears,
In fears I spend my nights; my days in tears:
I moan unpitt^'d, groan without relief,
There is nor end, nor measure of my grief.
The smiling flower salutes the day; it grows
Untouched with care; it neither spins nor sowes:
O that my tedious life, were like this flower,
Or freed from grief, or finished with an hour:
Why was I born? Why was I born a man?
And why proportioned by so large a span?
Or why suspended by the common lot,
And being born to die, why die I not?
Ah me! why is my sorrow-wasted breath
Den^'d the easy privilege of death?
The branded slave, that tugs the weary oar,
Obteins the Sabbath of a welcome shore;
His ransomed stripes are healed; his native soil
Sweetens the memory of his foreign toil:
But ah! my sorrows are not half so blessed;
My labor finds no point, my pains no rest:
I batter sighs for tears, and tears for groans,
Still vainly rolling Sisyphean stones:
Thou just Observer of our flying hours,
That, with thy Adamantine fangs, devours
The brazen monuments of renowned Kings,
Does thy glass stand? Or be thy moulting wings
Unapt to fly? If not why do thou spare
A willing breast; a breast that stands so fair?
A dying breast, that has but only breath
To beg a wound, and strength to crave a death?
O that the pleased Heavens would once dissolve
These sleshly fetters, that so fast involve.
My hamp'red soul; then should my soul be blessed
From all these ills, and wrap her thoughts in rest:
Till then, my days are months, my months are years,
My years are ages to be spent in tears:
My grief's entailed upon my wastfull breath,
Which no recov'ry can cut off, but death;
Breath drawn in cottages, puffed out in thrones,
Begins, continues, and concludes in groans.
INNOCENT. de vilitate condit. humanae. O who will give mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I may bewail the miserable ingresse of man's condition; the sinful
pregresse of man's conversation, the damnable egresse in man's dissolution? I
will consider with tears, whereof man was made, what man does, and what man is
to do: Alas, he is formed of earth, conceived in sin, born to punishment: He
does evil things, which are not lawful; He does ^ilthy things, which are not
decent; He does vain things, which are not ^pedient. EPIG. 15.
My heart, Thy life's a debt by Bond, which bears
Asecret date; the use is Groans and Tears:
Plead not; usurious Nature will have all,
As well the Interest as the Principal.
THE FOURTH BOOK.


I.
ROMANS 7. 23. I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin.
1
O How my will is hurried to and fro,
And how my unresolved resolves do vary!
I know not where to fix; sometimes I go
'This way, then that, and then the quite contrary:
I like, dislike; lament for what I could not;
I do, undo; yet still do what I should not;
And at the self same instant will the thing I would not.
2
Thus are my weather-beaten thoughts oppressed
With the earth-bred winds of my prodigious will;
Thus am I hourly tossed from East to West
Upon the rolling streams of good and ill:
Thus am I driven upon these slippery suds,
From real ills to false apparent goods:
My life's a troubled sea, composed of Ebs and Floods.
3
The curious Penman, having t^imm'd his page
With the dead language of his dabbled quill,
Lets fall a heedlesse drop, then in a rage
Cashiers the fruits of his unlucky skill;
Even so my pregnant soul in the insant bud
Of her best thoughts, show^s down a cole-black flood
Of unadvised ills, and cancels all her good.
4
Sometimes a sudden flash of sacred heat
Warms my chill soul, and se^s my thoughts in frame:
But soon that fire is shouldred from her seat
By lustful Cupids much inferior flame:
I feel two flames, and yet no flame entire;
Thus are the mungrill thoughts of mixed desire
Consumed between that heavenly and this earthly fire.
5
Sometimes my trash-disdaining thoughts out-passe
The common period of terrene conceit;
O then, me thinks I scorn the thing I was,
Whilst I stand ravished at my new estate:
But when the Icarian wings of my desire
Feel but the warmth of their own native sire,
O then they melt and plunge within their wonted mire.
6
I know the nature of my wavering mind;
I know the frailty of my fleshly will:
My Passion's Eagle-ey'd; my judgment blind;
I know what is good, but yet make choice of ill.
When the Ostrich wings of my desires shall be
So dull, they cannot mount the least degree,
Yet grant my soul desire but of desiring thee.
S. BERN. Med. 9. My heart is a vain heart, a vagabond and instable heart;
while it is led by its own judgment, and wanting Divine counsel cannot subsist
in it self, and whilst it diverse ways seeks rest, finds none, but
remains miserable through labor, and void of peace: It agrees not with it
self; it dissenteth from it self; it alters resolutions, changes the
judgment, frames new thoughts, pulls down the old, and builds them up
again: It wills and wills not; and never remains in the same state. S.
AUGUST. de verb. Apost. When it would, it cannot; because when it might, it
would not: Therefore by an evil will man lost his good power. EPIG. 1.
My soul, how are thy thoughts disturbed, confined,
Enlarged betwixt thy members and thy mind!
Fix here or there; thy doubt-depending cause
Can never expect one verdict 'twixt two Laws.
II.


PSALM 119. 5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes?
1
THus I, the object of the worlds disdain,
With Pilgrime-pace surround the weary earth:
I only relish what the world counts vain;
Her mirth's my grief; her sullen grief, my mirth;
Her light my darkness; and her truth my error;
Her freedom is my jail; and her delight my terror.
2
Fond earth! proportion not my seeming love
To my long stay; let not thy thoughts deceive thee;
Thou art my prison, and my home's above;
My life's a preparation but to leave thee:
Like one that seeks a door, I walk about thee:
With thee I cannot live; I cannot live without thee.
3
The world's a lab'rinth, whose anfractuous ways
Are all composed of rubs and crook'd meanders:
No resting here; He Is hurried back that stays
A thought; and he that goes unguided wanders:
Her way is dark, her path untrod, unev'n;
So hard's the way from earth; so hard's the way to Heaven.
4
This gvring lab'rinth is betrench'd about
On either hand with streams of sulfurous fire,
Streams closely sliding, erring in and out,
But seeming pleasant to the fond descrier;
Where if his footsteps trust their own invention,
He falls without redress, and sinks beyond dimension.
5
Where shall I seek a Guide? where shall I meet
Some lucky hand to lead my trembling paces?
What trusty Lantern will direct my feet
To escape the danger of these dangerous places?
What hopes have I to pass without a Guide?
Where one gets safely through, a thousand fall beside,
6
An unrequested Star did gently slide
Before the Wisemen to a greater Light;
Backsliding Israel found a double Guide;
A Pillar, and a Cloud; by day, by night:
Yet in my desperate dangers, which be far
More great then theirs, I have nor Pillar, Cloud, nor Star,
7
O that the pineons of a clipping Dove
Would cut my passage through the empty Air;
Mine eyes being seeld, how would I mount above
The reach of danger and forgotten care!
My backward eyes should never commit that fault,
Whose lasting guilt should build a Monument of Salt.
8
Great God, that art the flowing Spring of Light,
Enrich mine eyes with thy refulgent Ray:
Thou art my Path; direct my steps aright;
I have no other Light, no other Way:
I Will trust my God, and him alone pursue;
His Law shall be my Path; his Heavenly Light my Clue.
S. AUGUST. Soliloqu. cap. 4. O Lord, who art the Light, the Way, the Truth,
the Life; in whom there is no darkness, error, vanity, nor death: The Light,
without which there is darkness; The Way, without which there is wandering;
The Truth, without which there is error; The Life, without which there is
death: Say, Lord, Let there be Light, and I shall see Light, and eschew
darkness; I shall see the Way, and avoid wandering; I shall s^e the Truth, and
shun error; I shall see Life, and escape death: Illuminate, O illuminate my
blind soul, which ^itteth in darkness, and the sh^dow of death: and direct my
feet in the way of peace. EPIG. 2.
Pilgrim, trudge on: What makes thy soul complain
Crowns thy complaint. The way to rest is pain:
The road to resolution lies by doubt:
The next way home's the farthest way about.
III.


PSALM 17. 5. Stay my steps in thy paths, that my feet do not slide.
1
WHen ere the old Exchange of profit rings
Her silver Saints-bell of uncertain gains,
My merchant soul can stretch both legs and wings;
How I can run, and take unwearied pains!
The charms of profit are so strong, that I
Who wanted legs to go find wings to fly.
2
(...) time-beguiling Pleasure but advance
Her lustful trump, and blow her bold alarms,
O how my sportfull ^oul can frisk and dance,
And hug that Siren in her twined arms!
The sprightly voice of sinew-strengthning pleasure
Can lend my bedrid soul both legs and leisure.
3
If blazing Honor chance to fill my veins
With flattering warmth, and flash of Courtly fire,
My soul can take a pleasure in her pains;
My lofty strutting steps disdain to tire;
My antic knees can turn upon the hinges
Of Complement, and sk^ue a thousand cringes.
4
^ut when I come to Thee, my God, that art
The royal Mine of everlasting treasure,
The real Honor of my better part,
And living Fountain of eternal pleasure,
How nervelesse are my limbs! how faint and flow!
I have nor wings to fly, nor legs to go.
5
So when the streams of swift-foot Rhene convay
Her upland riches to the Belgic shore;
The idle vessel slides the watery lay,
Without the blast, or tug, of wind, or oar;
Her slippery keel divides the silver foam
With ease; so facil is the way from home.
6
But when the home-bound vessel turns her sails
Against the breast of the resisting stream,
O then she slugs; nor sail, nor oar prevails;
The Stream is sturdy, and her Tides extreme:
Each stroke is loss, and every tug is vain:
A Boat-lengths purchase is a League of pain.
7
Great All in All, that art my rest, my home;
My way is tedious, and my steps are slow:
Reach forth thy helpful hand, or bid me come:
I am thy child, O teach thy child to go:
Conjoyn thy sweet commands to my desire,
And I will venture, though I fall or tire.
S. AUGUST. Ser. 15. de Verb. Apost. Be always displeased at what thou art, if
thou desire to attain to what thou art not: For where thou have pleased thy
self, there thou abidest: But if thou say, I have enough, thou perishest:
Always add, always walk, always proceed; neither stand still, nor go back,
nor deviate: He that stands still, proceeds not; He goes back, that
continues not; He deviateth, that revolteth: He goes better that creeps in
(...) way, then he that runs out of his way. EPIG. 3.
Fear not, my Soul, to lose for want of cunning;
Weep not; Heaven is not always got by running:
Thy thoughts are swist, although thy legs be slow;
True love will creep, not having strength to go.
IV.


PSALM 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments.
LEt others boast of luck, and go their ways
With their fair game; know vengeance seldom playe^
To be too forward, but does wisely frame
Her backward Tables for an after-game:
She gives thee leave to venture many a blot;
And, for her own advantage, hits thee not;
But when her pointed Tables are made fair,
That she be ready for thee, then beware;
Then, if a necessary blot be set,
She hits thee; wins the game, perchance the set:
If prosperous chances make thy casting high,
Be wisely temperate; cast a serious eye
On after dangers, and keep back thy game;
Too forward seed-times make thy harvest lame:
If left hand Fortune give thee left hand chances,
Be wisely patient; let no envious glances
Repine to view thy gamesters heap so fair;
The hindmost Hound takes often the doubling Hare.
The worlds great Dice are false; sometimes they go
Extremely high, sometimes extremely low:
Of all her gamesters he that plays the least
Lives most at ease, plays most secure and best:
The way to win, is to play fair, and swear
Thy self a servant to the Crown of fear:
Fear is the Primmer of a Gamesters skill:
Who fears not Bad st^nds most unarmed to Ill:
The Ill that is wisely feared, is half withstood;
And fear of Bad is the best foyl to Good:
True Fear's the Elixar, which in days of old
Turned leaden Crosses into Crowns of Gold:
The World's the Tables; Stakes, Eternal life;
The Gamesters, Heaven and I; Unequal strife!
My Fortunes are my Dice, whereby I frame
My indisposed Life: this Life's the Game;
My sins are several Blots; the Lookers on
Are Angels; and in death the Game is done:
Lord, I Am a Bungler, and my Game does grow
Still more and more unshap'd; my Dice run low:
The Stakes are great; my car^lesse Blots are many;
And yet thou passest by, and hitst not any:
Thou art too strong; and I have none to guide me
With the least jog; the lookers on deride me:
It is a Conquest undeserving Thee,
To win a Stake from such a Worm as me:
I have no more to lose; If we persever,
'T is lost; and that once lost I m lost for ever.
Lord, wink at faults, and be no^ too severe,
And I will play my Game with greater fear;
O give me Fear, ere Fear has past her date:
Whose blot being hit, then fears, fears then too late.
S. BERN. Ser. 54. in Cant. There is nothing so e^ectuall to obtain Grace, to
retain Grace, and to regain Grace, as always to be sound before God not
over-wise, but to ^ear: Happy art thou if thy heart be replenished with three
^ears; a sear sor received Grace, a g^eater fear sor lost Grace, a greatest
^ear to recover Grace. S. AUGUST. super Psalm. Present sear begets Eternal
security: Fear God, which (...) above all, and no need to fear man at all.
EPIG. 4.
Lord, shall we grumble when thy flames do seourge us?
Our sins breathe fire; that fire returns to purge us.
Lord, what an Alchymist art thou, whose skill
Transmutes to perfect Good from pe^fect ill!
V.


PSALM 119. 37. Turn away mine eyes from regarding vanity.
1
HOw like to threads of flax
That touch the flame, are my inflamed desires!
How like to yielding wax
My soul dissolves before these wanton ^ires!
The fire, but touched, the flame but felt,
Like flax, I burn; like wax, I melt.
2
O how this flesh does draw
My fettered soul to that deceitful ^ire!
And how the eternal Law
Is baffled by the law of my desire!
How truly bad, how seeming good
Are all the laws of flesh and blood!
3
O wretched state of men,
The height of whose ambition is to borrow
What must be paid again
With griping interest of the next days sorrow!
How wild his thoughts! How apt to range!
How apt to vary! Apt to change!
4
How intricate and nice
Is man's perplexed way to man's desire!
Sometimes upon the ice
He slips, and sometimes falls into the ^ire;
His progress is extreme and bold,
Or very hot, or very cold.
5
The common food he does
Sustain his soul-tormenting thoughts withal,
Is honey in his mouth
To night, and in his heart, to morrow, gall;
It Is oftentimes, within an hour,
Both very sweet and very sour.
6
If sweet Corinna smile,
A Heaven of joy breaks down into his heart:
Corinna frowns awhile?
Hels torments are but copies of his smart:
Within a lustful heart does dwell
A seeming Heaven, a very Hell.
7
Thus worthless, vain, and void
Of comfort, are the fruits of earths employment;
Which ere they be enjoyed
Distract us, and d^stroy us in the enjoyment;
These be the pleasures that are prized
When Heavens cheap pen'worth stands despised.
8
Lord, quench these hasty flashes,
Which dart as lightning from the thundering skies,
And every minute, dashes
Against the wanton windows of mine eyes:
Lord, close the casement, whilst I stand
Behind the curtain of thy hand.
S. AUGUST. Soliloqu. cap. 4. O thou Sun that illuminatest both Heaven and
Earth! Woe be unto those eyes which do not behold thee: Woe be unto these blind
eyes which cannot behold thee: Woe be unto those which turn away their eyes that
they will not behold thee: Woe be unto those that turn away their eyes that they
may behold vanity. S. CHRYSOSTOM. sup. Matthew. 19. What is an evil woman but the
enemy of friendship, an unavoidable pain, a necessary mischief, a natural
tentation, a desiderable calamity, a domestic danger, a delectable
inconvenience, and the nature of evil painted over with the color of good
EPIG. 5.
'T is vain, great God, to close mine eyes from ill,
When I resolve to keep the old man still:
My rambling heart must covenant first with thee,
Or none can pass betwixt mine eyes and me.
VI.


ESTHER 7. 3. If I have found favor in thy sight, and if it please the King,
let my life be given me at my petition.
THou art the great Assuerus, whose command
Does stretch from Pole to Pole; the world's thy land;
Rebellious Vashti's the corrupted will,
Which being called refuses to fulfill
Thy just command: Esther, whose tears condole
The razed City's the regen'rate Soul;
A captive maid, whom thou will please to grace
With nuptial Honor in stout Vashti's place:
Her kinsman, whose unbended knee did thwart
Proud Hanans glory, is the fleshly part:
The sober Eunuch, that recalled to mind
The new-built gibbet ( Haman had divined
For his own ruin) fifty cubits high,
Is lustfull-thought-controlling chastity;
Insulting Haman is that fleshly lust
Whose red-hot fury, for a season, must
Triumph in pride, and study how to tread
On Mordecay, till royal Esther plead.
Great King, my sent-for Vashti will not come;
O let the oil o'th blessed Virgins womb
Cleanse my poor Esther; look, O look upon her
With gracious eyes; and let thy Beams of honor
So scour her captive stains, that she may prove
A holy Object of thy Heavenly love:
Anoint her with the Spiknard of thy graces,
Then try the sweetness of her chaste embraces:
Make her the partner of thy nuptial bed,
And set thy royal Crown upon her head:
If then ambitious Haman chance to spend
His spleen on Mordecay, that scorns to bend
The wilful stiffnesse of his stubborn knee,
Or basely crouch to any Lord but thee;
If weeping Esther should pref^rre a groan
Before the high tribunal of thy Throne,
Hold forth thy golden Scepter, and a^ord
The gentle audience of a gra^ious Lord:
And let thy royal Esther be possessed
Of half thy Kingdom, at her dear request:
Curb lustful Haman; him that would disgrace,
Nay, ravish thy fair Queen before thy face:
And as proud Haman was himself ensnared
On that self gibbet, that himself prepared;
So nail my lust, both puni^hment and guilt
On that dear cross that mine own lusts have buil^.
S. AUGUST. in Ep. O Holy Spirit always inspire me with holy works; Constrain
^e, that I may do: Counsel me, that I may love thee; Confirm ^e, that I may
hold thee; Conserve me, that I may no^ lose thee. S AUGUST. sup. Joan. The
Spirit rusts where the flesh rests: For as the flesh is (...) with sweet
things, the Spirit is refreshed with sow^e. Ibidem. Would thou that thy
flesh obey thy spirit? Then let thy spirit obey thy God: Thou must be governed,
that thou may govern. EPIG. 6.
Of Mercy and Justice is thy Kingdom built;
This plagues my sin; and that removes my guilt:
When ere I sue, Assuerus like decline
Thy Scep^re; Lord, say, Half my Kingdome's thine.
VII.


CANTICLES 7. II. Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the fields, and let us
remain in the villages.
1
Christ. Soul. C^r. COme, come my dear, and let us both retire
And whiff the dainties of the fragrant fields:
Where warbling Phil'mel and the shrill-mouth'd quire
Chaunt forth their raptures; where the Turtle builds
Her lonely nest; and where the newborn bryer
Breaths forth the sweetness that her April yields:
Come, come my lovely fair, and let us try
These rural delicates; where thou and I
May melt in private ^ames, and fear no stander by.

2
Soul. My hearts eternal joy, in lieu of whom
The earth's a blast, and all the world a bubble;
Our Citie-mansion is the fairer home,
But Countrey-sweets are tang'd with lesser trouble:
Let Us try them both, and choose the better; come;
A change in pleasure makes the pleasure double:
One thy commands depends my go, or tarry;
I Will stir with Martha, or I Will stay with Mary:
Our hearts are firmly fixed, although our pleasures vary.

3
Chr. Our Country mansion (situate on high)
With various Objects, still renews delight;
Her arched roof's of unstained Ivory:
Her wall's of fie^y-sparkling Chrysolite;
Her pavement is of hardest Prophety;
Her spacious windows are all glazed with bright
And fluming Carbuncles; no need require
Titans faint ^ayes, or Vulcans feebler fire;
And every Gate's a Pearl; and every Pearl, entire.

4
Soul. Fool that I was! how were my thoughts deceived!
How falsely was my fond conceit possessed!
I took it for an Hermitage, but paved
And daubed with neighboring dirt, and thacht at best;
Alas, I never expected more, nor craved;
A Turtle hoped but for a Turtles nest:
Come, come, my dear, and let no idle stay
Neglect the advantage of the headstrong day;
How pleasure grates that fe^ls the curb of dull delay!

5
Chr. Come then, my Joy; let our divided paces
Conduct us to our fairest territory;
O there we'll twine our souls in sweet embraces;

Soul. And in thine a^ms I Will tell my passion story:

Chr. O there I Will crown thy hea^ with all my graces;

Soul. And all those graces shall r^flect thy glory:

Chr. O there I Will feed thee with celestial Manna;
I Will be thy Hanna.

Soul. And I, thy Elkanah.

Chr. I Will found my trump of joy.

So. And I Will resound Hosanna

S. BERN. O blessed Contemplation! The death of vices, and the life of virtues!
Thee the Law and Prophets admire: who ever attei^ed perfection, if not by thee!
O blessed Solitude, the Magazine of celestial treasure! by thee things
earthly, and transitory, are changed into Heavenly, and Eternal. S. BERN. in
Ep. Happy is that house, and blessed is that Congregation, where Martha still
complains of Mary. EPIG. 7.
Mechanic soul, thou must not only do
With Martha; but, with Mary, ponder too:
Happy's that house where these fair sisters vary;
But most, when Martha's reconciled to Mary.
VIII.


CANTICLES 1. 3. Draw me; we will follow after thee by the savor of thy
Ointments.
THus like a lump of the corrupted Mass,
I lie secure, long lost, before I was:
And like a block, beneath whose burden lies
That undiscovered wo^m that never dies,
I have no will to rouse, I have no power to rise.
Can stinking Lazarus compound, or strive
With deaths entangling fetters, and revive?
Or can the water buried Axe implore
A hand to raise it; or it self restore,
And from her sandy deeps approach the dry-foot shore?
So hard's the task for sinful flesh and blood
To lend the smallest step to what is good;
My God, I cannot move the least degree;
Ah! If but only those that active be,
None should thy glory see, none should thy glory see.
But if the Potter please to inform the clay;
Or some strong hand remove the block away;
Their lowly fortunes soon are mounted higher,
That proves a vess^l, which before was mire;
And this being hewn, may serve for better use then sire.
And if that life-restoring voice command
Dead Laz'rus forth; or that great Prophets hand
Should charm the sullen waters, and begin
To becken, or to dart a stick but in,
Dead Laz'rus must revive, and the Axe must sloat again.
Lord, as I am, I have no power at all
To hear thy voice, or echo to thy call;
The gloomy Clouds of mine own guilt benight me;
Thy glorious beams, nor dainty sweets invite me;
They neith^r can direct; nor these at all delight me.
See how my sin-bemangled body lies,
Nor having power to will, nor will to rise!
Shine home upon thy Creature, and inspire
My livelesse will with thy regen'rate fi^e;
The first degree to do, is only to desire.
Give me the power to will, the will to do;
O raise me up, and I will strive to go:
Draw me, O draw me with thy treble twist,
That have no power but merely to resist;
O lend me strength to do, and then command thy list.
My Soul's a Clock, whose wheels (for want of use
And winding up, being subject to the abuse
Of eating ^ust) wants vigor to fulfill
Her twelve hours task, and show her makers skill,
But idly sleeps unmoved, and stands vainly still.
Great God, it is thy work: and therefore good.
If thou be pleased to cleanse it with thy blood,
And wind it up with thy soul-moving keys,
Her busy wheels shall serve thee all her days;
Her hand shall point thy power, her hammer strike thy praise
S. BERN. Sermon. 21. in Cant. Let us run, let us run, but in the savor of thy
Ointments, not in the confidence of our merits, nor in the greatness of our
strength: we trust to run, but in the multitude of thy mercies, for though we
run and are willing it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but
in God that shows mercy. O let thy mercy return, and we will run: Thou like a
G^ant, runnest by thy own power; we, unless thy ointment breath upon us,
cannot run. EPIG. 8.
Look not, my Watch, being once repaired to stand
Expecting motion from thy Makers hand.
H'as wound thee up, and cleans'd thy Cogs with blood:
If now thy wheels stand still thou art not good.
IX.


CANTICLES 8. 1. O that thou were as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my
mother, I would find thee without, and I would kiss thee.
1
COme, come my blessed Infant, and immure thee
Within the Temple of my sacred arms;
Secure mine arms, mine arms shall then secure thee
From Herod's fury, or the Highpriests harms;
Or if thy danger'd life sustain a loss,
My folded arms shall turn thy dying cross.
2
But ah, what savage Tyrant can behold
The beauty of so sweet a face as this is,
And not himself be by himself controlled,
And change his fury to a thousand kisses?
One smile of thine is worth more mines of treasure
Then there be Myriads in the days of Caesar.
3
O, had the Tetrarch, as he knew thy birth,
So known thy stock, he had not sought to paddle
In thy dear blood; but prostrate on the earth,
Had vaild his Crown before thy royal Cradle,
And laid the Scepter of his Glory down,
And begged a Heavenly for an Earthly Crown.
4
Illustrious Babe! how is thy handmaid graced
With a rich armfull! how do thou decline
Thy Majesty, that were so late embraced
In thy great Fathers arms, and now in mine!
How humbly gracious art thou, to refresh
Me with thy Spirit, and assume my flesh.
5
But must the treason of a traitors Hail
Abuse the sweetness of these ^uby lips?
Shall marble-hearted cruelty ass^il
These Alabaster sides with knotted whips?
And must these smiling Roses entertain
The blows of scorn, and flurts of base disdain?
6
Ah! must these dainty little sprigs that twine
So fast about my neck, be pie^c'd and torn
With ragged nails? and must these brows resign
Their Crown of Glory for a crown of thorn?
Ah, must this blessed Infant taste the pain
Of deaths injurious pangs? nay worse, be slain?
7
Sweet Ba^e! At what dear rates do wretched I
Commit a sin! Lord, every sin's a dart;
And every tr^spasse lets a javelin sly;
And every javelin wounds thy bleeding heart:
Pardon, sweet Babe, what I have done amiss;
And seal that granted pardon with a kiss.
BONAVENT. Soliloqu Cap. 1. O sweet Jesu, I knew not that thy kisses were so
sweet, nor thy society so sweet, nor thy attraction so virtuous: For when I
love thee, I am clean; when I touch thee, I am chaste; when I receive thee, I am
a virgin: O most sweet Jesu, thy embraces desile not, but cleanse; thy
attraction polluteth not, but sanctifies: O Jesu, the Fountain of uni^ersall
sweetness, pardon me, that I believed so late, that so much sweetness is in
thy embraces. EPIG. 9.
My burden's greatest: Let not A^las boast:
Impartial Reader, judge which bears the most:
He bears but Heaven; my folded arms sustain
Heavens maker, whom Heavens Heaven cannot contain.
X.


CANTICLES 3. 1. In my bed by night I sought him that my soul loved; I sought
him, but I found him not.
THe learned Cynick, having lost the way
To honest men, did in the height of day,
By Taper-light, divide his steps about
The peopled streets to find this dainty out;
But failed: The Cynick searched not where he ought:
The thing he sought for was not where he sought.
The Wisemens task seemed harder to be done,
The Wisemen did by Staire-light seek the Son,
And found: the Wisemen searched it where they ought;
The thing they hoped to find was where they sought.
One seeks his wishes where he should; but then
Perchance he seeks not as he should, nor when:
Another searches when he should, but there
He fails; not seeking as he should, nor where:
Whose soul desires the good it wants, and would
Obtain, must seek Where, As, and When he should:
How often have my wild affections led
My wasted soul to this my widdow'd bed,
To seek my Lover, whom my soul desires!
(I speak not, Cupid, of thy wanton fires:
Thy fires are all but dying sparks to mine;
My flames are full of Heaven, and all Divine)
How often have I sought this bed, by night,
To find that greater by this lesser light!
How often have my unwitnest groans lamented
Thy dearest absence! Ah how often vented
The bitter tempests of despairing breath,
And tossed my soul upon the waves of death!
How often has my melting heart made choice
Of silent tears, (tears louder then a voice)
To plead my grief, and woo thy absent ear!
And yet thou will not come, thou will not hear:
O is thy wonted love become so cold?
Or do mine eyes not seek thee where they should?
Why do I seek thee, if thou art not here?
Or find thee not, if thou art every where?
I see my error; 'T is not strange I could not
Find out my love: I sought him where I should not.
Thou art not found in downy beds of ease;
Alas, thy music strikes on harder keys:
Nor art thou found by that false, feeble light
Of Natures candle; Our Egyptian night
Is more then common darkness; nor can we
Expect a morning, but what breaks from thee.
Well may my empty bed bewail thy loss,
When thou art lodged upon thy shameful cross:
If thou refuse to share a bed with me,
We'll never part, I Will share a cross with thee.
ANSELM. in Protolog. cap. 1. Lord, if thou art not present, where shall I seek
thee absent? If every where, why do I not see thee present? Thou dwell it
light inaccessible; and where is that inaccessible light? Or (...) shall I have
access to light inaccessible? I beseech thee, Lord, teach me to seek thee, and
show thy self to the seeker; because I can neither seek thee, unless thou
teach me, not find the, unless thou show thy self to me: Let me seek thee, in
de^ thee, and desire thee in seeking thee; Let me find thee it loving thee, and
love thee in finding thee. EPIG. 10.
Where should thou seek for rest, but in thy bed?
But now thy rest is gone, thy rest is sled:
'T is vain to seek him there: My soul be wise;
Go ask thy sins; they 'll tell thee where he lies,
XI.


CANTICLES 3. 2. I will rise, and go about in the City, and will seek him that
my soul loves: I sought him, but I found him not.
1
O How my disappointed soul's perplexed!
How restless thoughts swarm in my troubled breast!
How vainly pleased with hopes, then crossely vexed
With fears! and how betwixt them both distressed!
What place is left unransack'd? Oh, where next
Shall I go seek the Author of my rest?
Of what blessed Angel shall my lips enquire
The undiscovered way to that entire
And everlasting solace of my hearts desire!
2
Look how the stricken Heart that wounded flies
Over hills and dales, and seeks the lower grounds
For running streams, the whilst his weeping eyes
Peg silent mercy from the following Hounds,
At length, embost, he droops, drops down, and lies
Beneath the burden of his bleeding wounds:
Even so my gasping foul, dissolved in tears,
Does search for thee, my God, whose deafned ears
Leave me the unransom'd Prisner to my panick fears.
3
Where have my busy eyes not pried? O where,
Of whom has not my threadbare tongue demanded?
I searched this glorious City; he is not here:
I sought the Country; she stands empty handed;
I searched the Court; he is a stranger there:
I asked the land; he is shipped: the sea, he is landed:
I climbed the air, my thoughts began to aspire;
But ah,! the wings of my too bold desire,
Soaring too near the Sun, were singed with sacred fire.
4
I moved the Merchants ear; alas, but he
Knew neither what I said, nor what to say:
I asked (...) Lawyer; he demands a fee,
And the^ demurrs me with a vain delay:
I asked the Schoolman; his advice was free,
But scor'd me out too intricate a way:
I asked the Watchman (best of all the sour)
Whose gentle answer could resolve no more,
But that he lately left him at the Temple door.
5
Thus having sought, and made my great inquest
In ev^y place, and searched in every ear;
I threw me on my bed; but ah! my rest
Was poisoned with the extremes of grief and fear,
Where looking down into my troubled breast,
The Magazine of wounds, I found him there:
Let others hunt, and show their sportfull Art;
I wi^h to catch the ^are before she start,
As Potchers use to do; Heavens form 's a troubled heart.
S. AMBROS. lib. 3. de Virg. Christ is not in the market, not in the streets:
For Christ is Peace, in the market are strises: Christ is Justice, in the (...)
is iniquity: Christ is a Labourer, in the market (...): Christ is Charity, in
the market is slander: Christ is Charity, in the market is fraud: Let us not
therefore seek (...), where we cannot find Christ. S. HIERON. Ep. 22. ad
Eustoch. Jesus is jealous: He will not have thy face seen: Let foolish (...)
abroad, seek thou thy Love at home. EPIG. 11.
What lost thy love? will neither bed nor board
Receive him? Not by tears to be implored?
It is the Ship that moves, and not the Coast;
I fear, I fear, my soul, 't is thou art lost.
XII.


CANTICLES 3. 3. Have you seen him whom my soul loves? When I had past a
little from them, then I sound him, I took hold on him, and left him not.
1
WHat secret corner? what unwonted way
Has escaped the ransack of my rambling thought?
The Fox by night, nor the dull Owl by day,
Have never searched those places I have sought,
Whilst thy lamented absence taught my breast
The ready road to grief, without request;
My day had neither comfort, nor my night had rest.
2
How has my unregarded language vented
The sad tautologies of lavish passion?
How often have I languish'd unlamented!
How often have I complained without compassion!
I ask't the Citie-watch, but some denied me;
The common street, whilst others would misguide me,
Some would debar me; some, divert me; some, deride me.
3
Mark how the widowed Turtle, having lost
The faithful partner of her loyal heart,
Stretches ^er feeble wings from coast to c^ast,
Haunts every path; thinks every shade does part
Her absent Love, and her; at length u^sped,
She re-betakes her to her lonely bed,
And there bewails her everlasting widow-head:
4
So when my soul had progrest every place,
That love and dear affection could contrive,
I threw me on my couch, resolved to embrace
A death for him, in whom I ceased to live:
But there injurious Hymen did present
His lanskip joys; my pickled eyes did vent
Full streams of briny tears, tears never to be spent.
5
Whilst thus my sorrow-wasting soul was seeding
Upon the rad'cal humor of her thought,
Even whilst mine eyes were blind, and heart was bleeding,
He that was sought, unfound, was found unsought.
As if the Sun should dart his orb of light
Into the secrets of the black-brow'd night:
Even so appeared my Love, my sole, my souls delight.
6
O how mine eyes now ravished at the sight
Of my bright Sun shot flames of equal fire!
Ah! how my soul dissolved with ov'r-delight,
To re-enjoy the Crown of chaste desire!
How sov'reigne joy deposed and dispossessed
Rebellious grief! And how my ravished breast --
But who can presle those heights, that cannot be expressed?
7
O how these arms, these greedy arms did twine,
And strongly twist about his yielding wast!
The s^ppy branches of the Thespian Vine
Never cling'd their less beloved Elm so fast;
Boast not thy flames, blind boy, nor feathered shot;
Let Hymen's easy snarles be quite forgot:
Time cann^t quench our ^ites, nor death dissolve our knot.
ORIG. Hom. 10. in diverse. O most holy Lord, and sweetest Master, how good art
thou to those that are of upright heart, and humble spirit! O how blessed are
they that seek thee with a simple heart! How happy that trust in thee! It is a
most certain truth, that thou love all that love thee, and never forsakest
those that trust in thee: For behold thy Love simply sought thee, and
undoubtedly found thee: She trusted in thee, and is not forsaken of thee, but
has obtained more by thee, then she expected from thee. BEDA in cap. 3. Cant.
The longer I was in finding whom I sought, the more earnestly I held him being
found. EPIG. 12.
What? found him out? let strong embraces bind him;
He Will fly perchance where tears can never find him.
New sins will lose what old repentance gains:
Wisdom not only gets, but got retains.
XIII.


PSALM 72. 28. It is good for me to draw near to God; I have put my trust in
the Lord God.
WHere is that Good, which wisemen please to call
The Chiefest? Does there any such befall
Within man's reach? Or is there such a Good at all?
If such there be, it neither must expire,
Nor change; then which there can be nothing higher:
Such Good must be the utter point of man's desire.
It is the Mark, to which all h^arts must tend;
Can be desired for no other end,
Then for it self, on which all other goods depend.
What may this Excellence be? does it subsist
A real Essence, clouded in the midst
Of cu^ious Art, or clear to every eye that list?
Or is it a tart Idea, to procure
An edge, and keep the practick soul in ure,
Like that dear Chymick dust, or puzzling Quadrature?
Where shall I seek this Good? where shall I find
This Catholic pleasure, whose extremes may bind
My thoughts, and fill the gulf of my insatiate mind?
Lies it in Treasure? In full heaps untold?
Does gowty Mammous griping hand infold
This secret Saint in sacred shrines of sov'reigne gold?
No, no; she lies not there; wealth often sowrs
In keeping; makes us hers, in seeming ours;
She slides from Heaven indeed, but not in Danat's showrs.
Lives she in honor? no. The royal Crown
Builds up a creature, and then batters down:
Kings raise thee with a smile, and raze thee with a frown.
In pleasure? no. Pleasure begins in rage;
Acts the fools part on earths uncertain stage;
Begins the Play in youth, and Epilogues in age.
These, these are bastard-goods; the best of these
Torment the soul with pleasing it, and please,
Like water gulp'd in fevers, with deceitful ease.
Earths flattering dainties are but sweet distresses:
Mole-hils perform the mountains she professes;
Alas, can earth confer more good then earth possesses?
Moun^, mount my soul, and let thy thoughts cashier
Earths vain delights, and make their full carier
At Heavens eternal joys; stop, stop thy Courser there.
There shall thy soul possess uncarefull treasure;
There shall thou swim in never-sading pleasure;
And blaze in honor far above the frowns of Caesar.
Lord, if my ho^e dare let her anchor fall
On thee, the chiefest Good, no need to call
For earths inferior trash; Thou, thou art All in All.
S. AUGUST. Soliloqu. cap. 13. I follow this thing: I pursue that; but am
filled with nothing. But when I found thee, who a^t that immutable, individed,
and only good, in my self, what I obtained. I wanted not; for what I obtained
not, I grieved not; with what I was possessed, (...) whole desire was (...). S.
BERN. Ser. 9. sup. beati qui habent, etc. Let others p^etend merit: let him
b^ag of the burden of the day; let him boast of his Sabbath fasts, and let him
glory that (...) is not as other men: but for me, it is good to clea^e unto the
Lord, and to put my trust in my Lord God. EPG. 13.
Let Bo^eas blasts, and Nep^unes waves be joined,
Thy Eolus commands the waves, the wind:
Fear not the rocks or worlds imperious waves:
Thou climbst a rock (my soul) a rock that saves.
XIV.


CANTICLES 2. 3. I sat under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste.
1
LOok how the sheep, whose rambling steps do stray
From the safe blessing of her Shepherds eyes
Estsoon, becomes the unprotected prey
To the winged squadron of beleagring slies;
Where swelired with the scorching beams of day,
She frisks from bush to brake, and wildly flies
From her own self, even of her self afraid;
She shrouds her troubled brows in every glade,
And craves the mercy of the soft removing shade.
2
Even so my wandering Soul, that has digrest
From her great Shepherd, is the hourly prey
Of all my sins. These vultures in my breast
Gripe my Promethean heart both night and day:
I hunt from place to place, but sind no rest;
I know not where to go, nor where to stay:
The eye of vengeance burns, her flames invade
My swelt'ring soul: My soul has often assaid,
But she can find no shroud, but she can feel no shade.
3
I sought the shades of Mitth, to wear away
My slow-paced hours of soul-consuming grief;
I searched the shades of sleep, to ease my day
Of griping sorrows with a nights reprief;
I sought the shades of death; thought there t'allay
My final torments with a full relief:
But mirth, nor sleep nor death can hide my hours
In the false shades of their deceitful bowrs;
The first distracts, the next disturbs, the last devours.
4
Where shall I (...)? To whom shall I apply (...)?
Are there no streams where a faint soul may wade?
Thy Godhead, JESUS, are the flames that fry me;
Has thy All-glorious Deity never a shade,
Where I may sit and vengeance never eye me,
Where I might sit refresht or (...)?
Is there no comfort? Is there no resection?
Is there no cover that will give protection
TO a fainting soul, the subject of thy wraths (...)?
5
Look up, my soul, advance the lowly stature
Of thy sad thoughts; advance thy humble eye:
See, here is a shadow found: The humane nature
Is made the Umbella to the Deity.
To catch the Sunbeams of thy just Creator;
Beneath this covert thou may safely lie:
(...) thine eyes to climb this fruitful tree,
As quick Zacheus did, and thou shall see
A cloud of dying flesh betwixt those beams and thee.
GUILL. in cap. 2. Cant. Who can endure the (...) rays of the Sun of
Justice? Who shall not be consumed by his beams? Therefore the Sun of Justice
took flesh, that through the conjunction of that Sun and this humane body a
shadow may be made. S. AUGUST. Med. cap. 37. Lord, let my soul flee from the
scorching thoughts of the world under the covert of thy wings, that being
resreshed by the moderation of thy shadow, she may sing merrily, In peace will
I lay me down and rest. (...). 14.
Ah, treacherous soul, would not thy pleasures give
That Lord which made thee living leave to live?
See what thy sins have done: thy sins have made
The Sun of Glory now become thy shade.
XV.


PSALM 137. 4. How shall we sing a song of the Lord in a strange land?
URge me no more: this aity mirth belongs
To better times: these times are not for songs.
The sprightly twang of the melodious Lute
(...) not with my voice; and both unsuit
My untuned fortunes: the affected measure
Of strains that are constrained (...) no pleasure.
Musick's the Child of mirth; where griefs assail
The troubled soul, both voice and fingers fail:
Let such as ravil out their lavish days
In honorable riot; that can raise
Dejected hearts, and conjure up a sprite
Of madness by the Magic of delight;
Let those of Cupids hospital, that lie
Impatient Patients to a smiling eye,
That cannot rest, until vain hope beguile
Their (...) torments with a wanton smile;
Let such redeem their peace, and salve the wrongs
Of froward Fortune with their frolic songs:
My grief, my grief's too great for smiling eyes
To cure, or counter-(...) to (...).
The Ravens dismal croaks; the midnight bowls
Of empty Wolves, mixed with the (...) of (...)
The nine sad knowls of a dull passing Bell,
With the loud language of a nightly knell,
And horrid outcries of revenged crimes,
Joined in a medley's music for these times:
These are no times to touch the merry string
Of Orpheus; no, these are no times to sing.
Can hide-bound Prisners, that have spent their souls
And famished bodies in the noisome holes
Of hell-black dungeons, apt their rougher throats,
Grown hoarse with begging alms, to warble notes?
Can the sad Pilgrim, that has lost his way
In the vast desert; there condemned a prey
To the wild subject, or his savage King,
Rouse up his palsy smitten spir'ts, and sing?
Can I a Pilgrim, and a Prisner too,
(Alas) where I am neither known, nor know
Ought but my torments, an unransom'd stranger
In this strange climate, in a land of danger?
O, can my voice be pleasant, or my hand,
Thus made a Prisner to a foreign land?
How can my music relish in your cars,
That cannot speak for sobs, nor sing for tears?
Ah, if my voice could, Orpheus-like, unspell
My poor Eurydice, my soul from hell
Of earths misconstru'd Heaven, O then my breast
Should warble airs, whose rhapsodies should feast
The ears of Seraphims, and entertain
Heavens highest Deity with their lofty strain,
A strain well drencht in the true Thespian Well,
Till then, earths Semiquaver, mirth, farewell.
S. AUGUST. Med. cap. 33. O infinitely happy are those Heavenly virtues which
are able (...) praise thee in holiness and purity, with excessive sweetness
(...) able exultation! From thence they praise thee, from whence they rejoice,
because they continually see for what they rejoice, for what they praise thee:
But we pressed down with this burden of flesh, far removed from thy countenance
in this pilgrimage, and blown up with worldly vanities, cannot worthily praise
thee: We praise thee by faith; nor sace to face: but those Angelical spirits
praise thee face to face, and not by says. EPIO. 15.
Did I refuse to sing? said I these times
Were not for songs? nor music for these climes?
It was my error: are not groans and tears
Harmonious raptures in the Almighties ears?
THE FIFTH BOOK.


I.
CANTICLES 5. 8. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my
beloved, that you tell him that I am sick of love.
1
YOu holy Virgins, that so often surround
The cities Sapphire walls, whose snowy feet
Measure the pearly paths of sacred ground,
And trace the new Jerus'lems Jasper street;
Ah, you whose care-forsaken hearts are crowned
With your best wishes; that enjoy the sweet
Of all your hopes; If ever you chance to spy
My absent Love, O tell him that I lie
Deep wounded with the flames that furnac'd from his eye.
2
I charge you, Virgins, as you hope to hear
The heavenly music of your Lovers voice;
I charge you by the solemn faith ye bear
To plighted vows, and to that loyal choice
Of your affections, or, if ought more dear
You hold; by Hymen, by your marriage joys,
I charge you tell him, that a flaming dart,
Shot from his eye has pierced my bleeding heart;
And I am sick of love, and languish in my smart.
3
Tell him, O tell him, how my panting breast
Is (...) with slames, and how my soul is pined;
Tell him, O tell him, how I he oppressed
With the full torments of a troubled mind;
O tell him, tell him, that he loves in jest,
But I in earnest; tell him, he is unkind:
But if a discontented frown appears
Upon his angry brow, accoast his ears
With soft and fewer words, and act the rest in tears.
4
O tell him, that his cruelties deprive
My soul of peace, while peace in vain she seeks;
Tell him those damask roses, that did strive
With white, both fade, upon my sallow cheeks;
Tell him, no token does proclaim I live,
But tears, and sighs, and sobs, and sudden shrieks;
Thus if your piercing words should chance to bore
His harkening ear, and move a sigh, give ore
To speak; and tell him -- Tell him, that I could no more.
5
If your elegious breath should hap to rouse
A happy tear, close harb'ring in his eye,
Then urge his plighted faith, the sacred vows,
Which neither I can break, nor he deny;
Bewail the torments of his loyal spouse,
That for his sake would make a sport to die:
O blessed Virgins, how my passion tires
Beneath the burden of her fond desires!
Heaven never shot such slames, earth never felt such fires!
S. AUGUST. Med. cap. 40. What shall I say? What shall I do? Whither shall I
go? Where shall I seek him? Or when shall I find him? Whom shall I ask? Who
will tell my beloved that I am sick of love? (...). in Cap. 5. Cant. I live,
but not I: it is my beloved that lives in me: I love my self, not with my own
love, but with the love of my beloved that loves me: I love not my self in my
self, but my self in him, and him in me. EPIG. 1.
Grieve not (my soul) nor let thy love wax faint,
Weep'st thou to lose the cause of thy complaint?
He Will come; Love never was bound to times nor laws:
Till then thy tears complain without a cause.
II.


CANTICLES 2. 5. Stay me with flowers, and comfort me with apples, for I am
sick with love^
1
O Tyrant love I how does thy sov'reigne power
Subject poor souls to thy imperious thrall!
They say, thy cup's composed of sweet and sour;
They say, thy diet's honey mixed with gall;
How comes it then to pass, these lips of our
Still trade in bitter; taste no sweet at all?
O tyrant love! Shall our perpetual toil
Never find a Sabbath, to refresh awhile
Our drooping souls? Art thou all srowns, and never a smile?
2
You blessed Maids of honor that frequent
The royal courts of our renowned Jehove,
With flowers restore my spirits faint and spent;
O fetch me apples from Loves fruitful grove,
To cool my palate, and renew my sent,
For I am sick, for I am sick of love:
These will revive my dry, my wasted powers,
And they will sweeten my unsav'ry hours;
Refresh me then with fruit, and comfort me with flowers.
3
O bring me apples to assuage that fire,
Which Aetna-like inflames my flaming breast;
Nor is it every apple I desire,
Nor that which pleases every palate best:
'T is not the lasting Deuzan I require,
Nor yet the red-cheek'd Queening I request;
Nor that which first bethrewd the name of wife,
Nor that whose beauty caused the golden strife;
No, no, bring me an apple from the tree of life.
4
Virgins, tuck up your silken laps, and fill ye
With the fair wealth of Floras Magazine;
The purple violet, and the pale-faced lilly;
The pancy and the organ colombine;
The flowring thyme, the guilt-boul daffadilly;
The lowly pink, the lofty eglentine:
The blushing rose, the queen of flowers, and best
Of Floras beauty; but above the rest,
Let Jesses sovereigne flower perfume my qualming breast.
5
Haste, Virgins, haste, for I lie weak and faint,
Beneath the (...) of love; why stand ye mute,
As if your silence neither cared to grant,
Nor yet your language to deny my suit?
No key can lock the door of my complaint,
Until I smell this flower, or taste that fruit;
Go, Virgins, seek this tree, and search that how'r^
O, how my soul shall bless that happy hour,
That brings to me such fruit, that brings me such a flower.
GISTEN. in cap. 2. Cant. Expos. 3. O happy sickness, where the infirmity is
not to death, but (...) lise, that God may be glorified by it! O happy sever,
that proceeds not from a consuming, but a calcining sire! O happy ^emper,
wherein the soul relisheth no earthly things, but only savoureth divine
nourishment! S. BERN. Sermon. 51. in Cant. By flowers understand faith; by fruit,
good works: As the flower or blossom is before the fruit, so is says before
good works: So neither is the fruit without the flower, nor good works without
faith. EPIG. 2.
Why apples, O my soul? Can they remove
The pangs of grief, or ease the flames of love?
It was that fruit which gave the first offense;
That sent him hither (...) that removed him hence.
III.


CANTICLES 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his; He feeds among the
lillies.
1
Even like two little bank-dividing brooks,
That wash the pebbles with their wanton streams,
And having ranged and searched a thousand nooks,
Meet both at length in silver-breasted Thames,
Where in a greater current they conjoyn:
So I my best-beloveds am; so he is mine.
2
Even so we met; and after long pursuit,
Even so we joined; we both became entire;
No need for either to renew a suit,
For I was flax and he was slames of sire:
Our firm united souls did more then twine;
So I my best-beloveds am; so he is mine.
3
If all those glittering Monarchs that command
The servile quarters of this earthly ball,
Should tender, in exchange, their shares of land,
I would not change my fortunes for them all:
Their wealth is but a counter to my coin;
The world's but theirs; but my beloved's mine.
4
Nay more; If the fair Thespian Ladies all
Should heap together their diviner treasure:
That treasure should be deemed a price too small
To buy a minutes lease of half my pleasure.
'T is not the sacred wealth of all the nine
Can buy my heart from him, or his, from being mine.
5
Nor Time, nor Place, nor Chance, nor Death can bow
My least desires unto the least remove;
He Is firmly mine by oath; I his by vow;
He Is mine by faith; and I am his by love;
He Is mine by water; I am his by wine;
Thus I my best-beloveds am; thus he is mine.
6
He is my Altar; I, his Holy Place;
I am his guest; and he, my living food;
I Am his by penitence; he mine by grace;
I Am his by purchase; he is mine, by blood;
He Is my supporting elm; and I his vine:
Thus I my best-beloveds am; thus he is mine.
7
He gives me wealth, I give him all my vows:
I give him songs; he gives me length of days:
With wreaths of grace he crowns my conquering brows:
And I his Temples with a crown of Praise,
Which he accepts as an ev'rlasting sign,
That I my best-beloveds am; that he is mine.
S. AUGUST. Manu. cap. 24. O my soul stamped with the image of thy God; love him
of whom thou art so much beloved: bend to him that boweth to thee, seek him
that seeks thee: Love thy lover, by whose love thou art prevented, being the
cause of thy love: Be careful with those that are careful, want with those
that want; be clean with the clean, and holy with the holy: choose this sriend
above all friends, who when all are taken away remains only faithful to
thee: In the day of thy burial, when all leave thee, he will not deceive thee,
but defend thee from the roaring Lions prepared sor their prey. EPIO. 3.
Sing, Hymen, to my soul: What? lost and found?
Welcomed espoused, enjoyed so soon, and crown'd^
He did but climb the Cross, and then came down
(...) gates of hell; triumphed, and fetched a Crown.
IV.


CANTICLES 7. 10. I am my Beloveds, and his desire is toward me.
1
LIke to the Artick needle, that does guide
The wandering shade by his Magnetic power,
And leaves his silken Gnomon to decide
The question of the controverted hour,
First franticks up and down, from side to side,
And restless beats his crystall'd Ivory case
With vain impatience; jets from place to place,
And seeks the bosom of his frozen bride,
At length he slacks his motion, and does rest
His trembling point at his bright Poles beloved breast.
2
Even so my soul, being hurried here and there,
By every object that presents delight,
Fain would be settled, but she knows not where;
She likes at morning what she loathes at night?
She bows to honor; then she lends an ear
To that sweet swan-like voice of dying pleasure,
Then tumbles in the scattered heaps of treasure;
Now flattered with false hope; now foiled with fear:
Thus finding all the worlds delights to be
But empty toys, good God, she points alone to thee.
3
But has the virtued steel a power to move?
Or can the untouched needle point aright?
Or can my wandering thoughts forbear to rove,
Unguided by the virtue of thy spirit?
O has my leaden soul the art t'improve
Her wasted talent, and unrais'd, aspire
In this sad moulting time of her desire?
Not first beloved have I the power to love?
I cannot stir, but as thou please to move me,
Nor can my heart return thee love, until thou love me.
4
The still Commandresse of the silent night
Borrows her beams from her bright brothers eye;
His fair aspect filles her sharp horns with light,
If he withdraw, her flames are quenched and die:
Even so the beams of thy enlightening spirit
Infused and shot into my dark desire,
Inflame my thoughts, and fill my soul with fire,
That I am ravished with a new delight;
But if thou shroud thy face, my glory fades,
And I remain a Nothing, all composed of shades.
5
Eternal God, O thou that only art
The sacred Fountain of eternal light,
And blessed Loadstone of my better part,
O thou my hearts desire, my souls delight,
Reflect upon my soul, and touch my heart,
And then my heart shall prize no good above thee;
And then my soul shall know thee; knowing, love thee;
And then my trembling thoughts shall never start
From thy commands, or swerve the least degree,
Or once presume to move, but as they move in thee.
S. AUGUST. Med. Cap. 25. If Man can love man with so entire affection, that
the one can scarce brook the others absence? If a bride can be joined to (...)
bridegroom with so great an ardency of mind, that for the extremity of love
she can enjoy no rest, not suffering his absence without great anxiety, with
what affection, with what (...) the soul whom thou have espoused by says and
compassion, to love thee her true God and glorious bridegroom? EPIG. 4.
My soul, thy love is dear: 'Twas thought a good
And easy pen'worth of thy Saviors blood:
But be not proud; All matters rightly scanned,
'Twas over-brought: 'Twas sold at second hand.
V.


CANTICLES 5. 6. My Soul melted whilst my Beloved spoke.
LOrd, has the feeble voice of flesh and blood
The power to work thine ears into a flood
Of melted mercy? or the strength t'unlock
The gates of Heaven, and to dissolve a rock
Of marble clouds into a morning shower?
Or has the breath of whining dust the power
To stop, or snatch a falling thunderbolt
From thy fierce hand, and make thy hand revolt
From resolute confusion, and in stead
Of vyals pour full blessings on our head?
Or shall the wants of famisht ravens cry,
And move thy mercy to a quick supply?
Or shall the silent suits of drooping flowers
Woo thee for drops, and be refreshed with showers?
Alas, what marvel then, great God, what wonder
If thy hell-rouzing voice, that splits in sunder
The brazen portals of eternal death;
What wonder if that life-restoring breath
Which dragged me from the infernal shades of night,
Should melt my ravished soul with ore-delight?
O can my frozen gutters choose but run,
That feel the warmth of such a glorious Sun?
Me thinks his language, like a flaming arrow,
Does pierce my bones, and melts their wounded marrow;
Thy flames, O Cupid (though the joyful heart
Feels neither tang of grief, nor fears the smart
Of jealous doubts, but drunk with full desires)
Are torments weighed with these celestial fires;
Pleasures that ravish in so high a measure,
That O I languish in excess of pleasure:
What ravished heart, that feels these melting joys,
Would not despise and loath the treacherous toys
Of dunghill earth? what soul would not be proud
Of wry-mouthed scorns, the worst that flesh and blood
Had rancour to devise? Who would not bear
The worlds derision with a thankful ear?
What palate would refuse full bowls of spite,
To gain a minutes taste of such delight?
Great spring of light, in whom there is no shade
But what my interposed sins have made,
Whose marrow-melting fires admit no screen
But what my own rebellions put between
Their precious flames, and my obdurate ear;
Disperse these plague-distilling clouds, and clear
My mungy soul into a glorious day;
Transplant this screen, remove this bar away,
Then, then my fluent soul shall feel the fires
Of thy sweet voice, and my dissolved desires
Shall turn a sov'reigne balsame, to make whole
Those wounds my sins inflicted on thy soul.
S. AUGUST. Soliloq. cap. 34. What fire is this that so warmeth my heart! What
light is this that so enlightneth my soul! O fire, that always burnest, and
never go out, kindle me: O light, which ever shinest, and art never darkened,
illuminate me: O that I had my heat from thee, most boly fire! How sweetly do
thou burn! How secretly do thou shine! How desiderably do thou inflame me!
BONAVENT Stim. amoris cap. 8. It makes God man, and man God; things temporal,
eternal; mortal, immortal; it makes an enemy a friend; a servant, a son;
(...) things, glorious; cold hearts siery, and hard things liquid. EPIG. 5.
My soul, thy gold is true, but full of dross;
Thy Saviors breath resines thee with some loss:
His gentle furnace makes thee pure as true;
Thou must be melted, ere the art cast anew.
VI.


PSALM 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and what desire I on earth in
respect of thee?
1
I Love (and have some cause to love) the earth:
She is my Makers creature; therefore good:
She is my Mother, for she gave me birth;
She is my tender Nurse; she gives me food:
But what is a Creature, Lord, compared with thee?
Or what is my Mother, or my Nurse to me?
2
I love the Air: her dainty sweets refresh
My drooping soul, and to new sweets invite me;
Her shrill-mouth'd quire sustain me with their flesh,
And with their Polyphonian notes delight me:
But what is the Air or all the sweets that she
Can bless my soul withal, compared to thee?
3
I love the Sea: She is my fellow creature;
My careful purveyer; she provides me store:
She walls me round; she makes my diet greater;
She wafts my treasure from a foreign shore:
But Lord of oceans, when compared with thee,
What is the Ocean, or her wealth to me?
4
To Heavens high city I direct my journey,
Whose spangled suburbs entertain mine eye;
Mine eye, by contemplations great attorney,
Transcends the crystal pavement of the sky:
But what is Heaven great God, compared to thee?
Without thy presence Heaven 's no Heaven to me.
5
Without thy presence Earth gives no refection;
Without thy presence Sea affords no treasure;
Without thy presence Air's a rank (...);
Without thy presence Heaven it self's no pleasure:
If not possessed if not enjoyed in thee,
What Is Earth, or Sea, or Air, or Heaven to me?
6
The highest Honors that the world can boast
Are subjects far too low sor my desire;
The brightest beams of glory are (at most)
But dying sparkles of thy living fire:
The proudest flames that earth can kindle, be
But nightly Glowworms, if compared to thee.
7
Without thy presence, wealth are bags of cares;
Wisdom, but folly; Joy, disquiet sadness;
Friendship is treason, and Delights are snares;
Pleasures but pain, and Mirth but pleasing madness:
Without thee, Lord, things be not what they be
Nor have they being, when compared with thee.
8
In having all things, and not thee, what have I?
Not having thee, what have my labors got?
Let me enjoy but thee, what farther crave I?
And having thee alone, what have I not?
I wish nor Sea, nor Land; nor would I be
Possessed of Heaven, Heaven unpossest of thee.
BONAVINT. cap. 1. Soliloq. Alas, my God, now I understand (but blush to
consesse) that the beauty of thy Creatures has deceived mine eyes, and I have
not observed that thou art more amiable then all thy creatures; to which thou
have communicated but one drop of thy inestimable beauty: For who has adorned
the Heavens with stars? Who has stored the air with sowl, the waters with
fish, the earth with plants and flowers? But what are all these but a small
spark of Divine beauty. S. CHRYSOSTOM. Hom. 5. in Ep. ad Romans In having nothing I
have all things, because I have Christ; Having (...) all things in him, I seek
no other reward, for he is the universal reward. EPIG. 6.
Who would not throw his better thoughts about him,
And scorn this dross within him; that, without him?
Cast up (my soul) thy clearer eye; Behold.
If thou be fully melted, there 's the mold.
VII.


(...) 120. 5. Woe is to me, that I remain in Meshech, and dwell in the tents of
Kedar!
IS Natures course dissolved? does Times glass stand?
Or has some frolic heart set back the hand
Of Fates perpetual Clock? will it never strike?
Is crazy Time grown lazy, faint or sick
With very Age? or has that great Pairroyall
Of Adamantine sisters late made trial
Of some new trade? shall mortal hearts grow old
In sorrow? snail my weary arms infold
And underprop my panting sides for ever?
Is there no charitable hand will sever
My well-spun thread, that my imprisoned soul
May be delivered from this dull dark hole
Of dungeon flesh? O shall I, shall I never
Be ransomed, but remain a slave for ever?
It is the lot of man but once to die,
But ere that death how many deaths have I?
What humane madness makes the world afraid
To entertein Heavens joy, because conveyed
By the hand of death? will nakedness refuse
Rich change of robes, because the man's not spruse
That brought them? or will poverty send back
Full bags of gold, because the bringer's black?
Life is a bubble, blown with whining breaths,
Filled with the torments of a thousand deaths;
Which, being pricked by death (while death deprives
One life) presents the soul a thousand lives:
O frantic mortal, how has earth bewitched
Thy Bedlam soul, which has so fondly pitched
Upon her false delights! Delights that cease
Before enjoyment finds a time to please:
Her fickle joys breed doubtful fears; her fears
Bring hopeful griefs; her griefs weep fearful tears;
Tears coin deceitful hopes; hopes, careful doubt,
And surly passion justles passion out:
To day we pamper with a full repast
Of lavish mirth; at night we weep as fast:
To night we swim in wealth, and lend; to morrow,
We sink in want, and find no friend to borrow.
In what a climate does my soul reside!
Where pale-faced murder, the firstborn of pride,
Sets up her kingdom in the very smiles,
And plighted faiths of men-like Crocodiles;
A land, where each embroyd'red satin word
Is lined with fraud; where Mars his law less sword
Exiles (...) balance; where that hand
Now slayes his brother, that new-sow'd his land:
O that my days of bondage would expire
In this lewd soil! Lord, how my soul's on fire
To be dissolved, that I might once obtain
These longed for joys, longed for so often in vain!
If Moses-like I may not live possessed
Of this fair land; Lord, let me see it at least.
S. AUGUST. (...). cap. 12. My life is a frail life; a corruptible life; a
life, which the more it increases, the more it decreaseth: The farther it
goes, the nearer it comes to death. A deceitful life, and like a shadow,
full of the snares of death: Now I rejoice, now I languish, now I flourish, now
infirm, now I live, and straight I die; now I seem happy, always miserable;
(...) I laugh, now I weep: Thus all things are subject to mutabilitie, that
nothing continues an (...) in one state: O joy above joy, exceeding all joy,
without which there is no joy, when shall I enter into thee, that I may see my
God that dwells in thee? EPIG. 7.
Art thou so weak? O can thou not digest
An hour of travel for a night of rest?
Cheer up, my soul; call home thy spirits, and bear
One bad good friday; full-mouthed Easter's near.
VIII.


ROMANS 7. 24. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?
BEhold thy darling, which thy lustful care
Pampers; for which thy restless thoughts prepare
Such (...) cates: for whom thy bubbling brow
So often sweats, and bankrupt eyes do ow
Such midnight scores to nature, for whose sake
Base earth is sainted, the infernal lake
Unfeard, the Crown of glory poorly rated,
Thy God neglected, and thy brother hated:
Behold thy darling, whom thy soul affects
So dearly; whom thy fond indulgence decks
And puppets up in soft, in silken weeds:
Behold thy darling, whom thy fondness feeds
With farre-fetcht delicates, the dear-bought gains
Of ill-spent time, the price of half thy pains:
Behold thy darling, who, when clad by thee,
Derides thy nakedness; and when most free,
Proclaims her lover slave; and being fed
Most full, then strikes the indulgent feeder dead.
What meanst thou thus, my poor deluded soul,
To love so fondly? Can the burning cole
Of thy affection last without the fuel
Of counter-love? Is thy compeer so cruel,
And thou so kind, to love unlov'd again?
Can thou sow favors, and thus reap disdain?
Remember, O remember, thou art born
Of royal blood; remember thou art sworn
A Maid of Honor in the Court of Heaven;
Remember what a costly price was given
To ransom thee from slavery thou were in;
And will thou now, my soul, turn slave again?
The Son and Heir to Heavens Triune JEHOVE
Would fain become a (...) for thy love,
And offers for thy dower his Fathers Throne,
To sit for Seraphims to gaze upon;
He Will give thee Honor, Pleasure, Wealth, and Things
Transcending far the Majesty of Kings:
And will thou prostrate to the odious charms
Of this base scullion? shall his hollow arms
Hugg thy soft sides? shall these course hands untie
The sacred Zone of thy virginity?
For shame, degen'rous soul, let thy desire
Be quickened up with more heroic fire;
Be wisely proud, let thy ambitious eye
Read nobler objects; let thy thoughts desie
Such amorous baseness; let thy soul disdain
The Ignoble profers of so base a swain;
Or if thy vows be past, and Hymen's bands
Have ceremonied your unequal hands,
Annull, at least avoid, thy lawless act
With insufficiency, or a precontract;
Or if the act be good, yet may thou plead
A second freedom; for the flesh is dead.
NAZIANZ. Orat. 16. How I am joined to this body, I know not; which when it is
healthful, provokes me to war, and being dammaged by war, affects me
with grief; which I both love as a fellowservant, and bate as an utter enemy:
It is a pleasant foe, and a perfidious friend. O strange conjunction and
alienation: what I fear I embrace, and what I love I am afraid of; before I
make war, I am reconciled, before I enjoy peace I am at variance. EPIG. 8.
What need that house be daubed with slesh and blood?
Hanged round with silks and gold? repaired with food?
Cost idly spent! That cost does but prolong
Thy thraldom. Fool, thou make thy jail too strong.
IX.


PHILIPPIANS 1. 23. I am in a strait between two, having a desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ.
1
WHat meant our careful parents so to wear,
And lavish out their ill expended hours,
To purchase for us large possessions here,
Which (though unpurchas'd) are too truly ours?
What meant they, ah what meant they to endure
Such loads of needless labor, to procure
And make that thing our own, which was our own too sure.
2
What mean these liv'ries and possessive keys?
What mean these bargains, and these needless sales?
What need these jealous, these suspicious ways
Of law-divis'd, and law-dissolv'd entails?
No need to sweat for gold, wherewith to buy
Estates of high-priz'd land; no need to tie
Earth to their heirs, were they but clogged with earth as I.
3
O were their souls but clogged with earth as I,
They would not purchase with so (...) an itch;
They would not take of alms, what now they buy;
Nor call him happy, whom the world counts rich:
They would not take such pains, project and prog,
To charge their shoulders with so great a log:
Who has the greater lands, has but the greater clog.
4
I cannot do an act which earth disdains not;
I cannot think a thought which earth corrupts not;
I cannot speak a word which earth profanes not;
I cannot make a vow earth interrupts not:
If I but offer up an early groan,
Or spread my wings to Heavens long-long'd for throne,
She darkens my complaints, and drags my offering down.
5
(...) like the hawk, (whose keepers wary hands
Have made a prisner to her wethring stock)
Forgetting quite the power of her fast bands,
Makes a rank bate from her forsaken block,
But her too faithful (...) does soon restrain
Her broken flight, attempted often in vain;
It gives her loins a twitch, and tugs her back again.
6
So, when my soul directs her better eye
To Heavens bright Palace (where my treasure lies)
I spread my willing wings, but cannot fly,
Earth hales me down, I cannot, cannot rise:
When I but strive to mount the least degree,
Earth gives a jerk, and foils me on my knee;
Lord, how my soul is rackt betwixt the world and thee!
7
Great God, I spread my feeble wings in vain;
In vain I offer my extended hands:
I cannot mount till thou unlink my chain;
I cannot come till thou release my bands:
Which if thou please to break, and then supply
My wings with spirit, the Eagle shall not sly
A pitch that is half so fair, nor half so swift as I.
BONAVENT. cap. 1. Soliloq. Ah sweet Jesus, pierce the marrow of my seul with
the (...) shafts of thy love, that it may truly burn and melt, and languish
with the only desire of thee; that it may desire to be dissolved, and to be
with thee: Let it hunger alone for the bread of lise; let it thirst after thee,
the spring and fountain of eternal light, the stream of true pleasure: let it
always desire thee, seek thee, and find thee, and sweetly rest in thee. EPIG.
9.
What? will thy shackles neither loose nor break?
Are they too strong, or is thy arm too weak?
Art will prevail where knotty strength denies;
My soul, there is Aquasortis in thine eyes.
X.


PSALM 142. 7. Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name.
MY Soul is like a bird, my slesh the cage,
Wherein she wears her weary pilgrimage
Of hours as few as evil, daily fed
With sacred wine, and sacramental bread;
The keys that lock her in, and let her out,
Are Birth and Death; 'twixt both she hops about
From perch to perch, from sense to reason; then
From higher reason down to sense again:
From sense she climbs to faith; where for a season
She sits and sings; then down again to reason:
From reason back to faith, and straight from thence
She rudely slutters to the perch of sense:
From sense, to hope; then hops from hope to doubt:
From doubt, to dull despair; there seeks about
For desperate freedom, and at every grate,
She wildly thrusts, and begs th'untimely date
Of unexpired thraldom, to release
The afflicted captive, that can find no peace.
Thus am I cooped within this sleshly cage
I wear my youth, and wast my weary age,
Spending that breath which was ordained to chaunt
Heavens praises forth, in sighs and sad complaint:
Whilst happier birds can spread their nimble wing
From shrubs to cedars, and there chirp and sing,
In choice of raptures, the harmonious story
Of man's redemption, and his Makers glory:
You glorious Martyrs, you illustrious troops,
That once were cloistered in your fleshly coops,
As fast as I, what rhet'rick had your tongu^s?
What dextrous Art had your Elegiak songs?
What Paul-like power had your admired devotion?
What shackle-breaking faith infused such motion
To your strong prayers, that could obtain the boon
To be enlarged, to be uncag'd so soon?
When I, poor I, can sing my daily tears,
Grown old in bondage, and can find no ears:
You great partakers of eternal glory,
That with your Heav'n-prevailing Oratory,
Released your souls from your terrestrial cage,
Permit the passion of my holy rage
To recommend my sorrows, dearly known
To you, in days of old, and once your own,
To your best thoughts, (but oh't does not besit ye
To move your prayers; you love and joy, not pity:)
Great Lord of souls to whom should prisners sly,
But thee? Thou had thy cage, as well as I:
And, for my sake, thy pleasure was to know
The sorrows that it brought, and fel^st them too;
O set me free, and I will spend those daves,
Which now I wast in begging, in thy praise.
ANSELM. in Protolog. cap. 1. O miserable condition of mankind, that has lost
that for which he was created! Alas, what has he lost? And what has he found?
He has lost happiness for which he was made, and found misery for which he
was not made: What is gone? and what is lest? That thing is gone, without which
he is unhappy; that thing is lest, by which he is miserable: O wretched men!
From whence are we expelled? To what are we impelled? whence are we thrown? And
whither are we burried? From our home into banishment; from the sight of God
into our own (...); from the pleasure of immortality to the bitter^esse of
death: Miserable change! from how great a good, to how great an evil? Ah me,
what have I enterprised? what have I done? whither did I go? whither am I come?
EPIG. 10.
Paul's midnight-voyce prevailed; his musicks thunder
Unhinged the prison doors, split bolts in sunder:
And sitst thou here, and hang'st the feeble wing?
And whin'st to be enlarged? soul, learn to sing.
XI.


PSALM 42. 1. As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul
after thee, O God.
1
HOw shall my tongue express that hallowed fire
Which Heaven has kindled in my ravished heart?
What Muse shall I invoke, that will inspire
My lowly quill to act a lofty part!
What Art shall I devise to express desire,
Too intricate to be expressed by Art!
Let all the nine be silent; I refuse
Their aid in this high task, for they abuse
The slames of love too much: assist me, David's Muse.
2
Not as the thirsty soil desires soft showers,
To quicken and refresh her Embryon grain;
Nor as the drooping crests of fading flowers
Request the bounty of a morning rain,
Do I desire my God: these, in few hours,
Re-wish what late their wishes did obtein,
But as the swift-foot Heart does wounded fly
To the much desired streams, even so do I
Pant after thee, my God, whom I must find or die.
3
Before a pack of deep-mouthed lusts I fl^e;
O they have singled out my panting heart,
And wanton Cupid, sitting in a tree,
Has pierced my bosom with a flaming dart;
My soul being spent, for refuge seeks to thee,
But cannot find where thou my refuge art:
Like as the swift-foot Heart does wounded fly
To the desired st^eams, even so do I
Pant after thee, my God, whom I must find or die.
4
At length by flight, I over-went the pack;
Thou drew'st the wanton da^t from out my wound;
The blood, that followed, left a pu^ple track,
Which brought a Serpent, but in ^hape a Hound:
We strove, he bit me; but thou brak'st his back,
I left him groveling on th'envenom'd ground;
But as the Serpent-bitten Heart does sly
To the long-long'd for streams, even so did I
Pant after thee, my God, whom I must find or die.
5
If lust should chase my soul, made swift by fright,
Thou art the st^eams whereto my soul is bound:
Or if a javelin wound my sides in flight,
Thou art the balsame that must cure my wound:
If povson chance to infest my soul, in fight,
Thou art the tread that must make me sound:
Even as the wounded Heart, embost, does sly
To the streams extremely longed for, so do I
Part after thee, my God, whom I must find or die.
CYP. lib. 5. in Joh. cap. 10. Oprecious water, which quencbeth the noisome
thirst of this world, that scoureth all the stains os sinners, that waters
the earth of our souls with heavenly showers, and brings back the thirsty
heart of man to his only God! S. AUGUST. Soliloq. 35. O fountain of life, and
vein of living waters, when shall I leave this forsaken, impassible, and dry
earth, and taste the waters of thy sweetness, that I may behold thy virtue, and
thy glory, and slake my thirst with the streams of thy mercy; Lord, I thirst:
Thou art the spring of life, (...) me; I thirst Lord, I thirst aste. thee the
living God! EPIG. 11.
The arrow-smitten Heart, deep wounded, slies
To the springs with water in his weeping eyes:
Heaven is thy spring: If Satan's fiery dart
Pierce thy faint sides, do so, my wounded Heart.
XII.


PSALM 42. 2. When shall I come and appear before God?
WHat is my soul the better to be tin'd
With holy fire? what boots it to be coined
With Heavens own stamp? what vantage can there be
To souls of Heav'n-descended pedigree,
More then to beasts that grovel? Are not they
Fed by the Almighties hand? and every day,
Filled with his blessing too? Do they not see
God in his Creatures as direct as we?
Do they not taste thee? hear thee? nay, what sense
Is not partaker of thine Excellence?
What more do we? Alas, what serves our reason,
But, like dark lanthorns, to accomplish treason
With greater closeness? It affords no light,
Brings thee no nearer to our purblind sight;
No pleasure rises up the least degree,
Great God, but in the clearer view of thee:
What priv'ledge more then sense has reason than?
What vantage is it to be born a man?
How often has my patience built, dear Lord,
Vain towers of Hope upon thy gracious Word?
How often has thy Hope reviving Grace
Wooed my suspicious eyes to seek thy face!
How often have I sought thee? Oh how long
Has expectation taught my perfect tongue
Repeated prayers, yet prayers could never obtain;
In vain I seek thee, and I beg in vain:
If it be high presumption to behold
Thy face, why did thou make mine eyes so bold
To seek it? If that object be too bright
For man's aspect, why did thy lips invite
Mine eye to expect it? If it might be seen,
Why is this envious curtain drawn between
My darkened eye and it? O tell me, why
Thou do command the thing thou do deny?
Why do thou give me so unp^iz'd a treasure,
And then deny'st my greedy soul the pleasure
To view thy gift? Alas, that gift is void,
And is no gift, that may not be enjoyed:
If those refulgent beams of Heavens great light
Guild not the day, what is the day, but night?
The drouzie shepherd sleeps; flowers droop and fade,
The birds are sullen, and the beast is sad:
But if bright Titan dart his golden ray,
And, with his riches, glorify the day,
The jolly shepherd pipes; flowers freshly spring;
The beast grows gamesome, and the birds they sing.
Thou art my Sun, great God: O when shall I
View the full beams of thy Meridian eye?
Draw, draw this fleshly curtain, that denies
The gracious presence of thy glorious eyes;
Or give me faith; and by the eye of grace,
I shall behold thee, though not face to face.
S. AUGUST. in Psalm. 39. Who created all things is better then all things; who
beau^ified all things is more beautiful then all things: who made strength is
stronger then all things: who made great things is greater then all things:
Whatsoever thou love he is that to thee: Learn to love the workman in his
work, the Creator in his creature: Let not that which was made by him possess
thee, lest thou lose him by whom thy self was made. S. AUGUST. Med. cap. 37. O
thou most sweet, most gracious, most amiable, most fair, when shall I see thee?
when shall I be satisfied with thy beauty? When will thou lead me from this
dark dungeon, that I may consesse thy name? EP 10. 12.
How art thou shaded in this veil of night,
Behind thy curtain slesh? thou see no light,
But what thy pride does challenge as her own;
Thy slesh is (...): soul take this curtain down.
XIII.


PSALM 55. 6. O that I had the wings of a Dove, for then I would fly away and
be at rest.
1
ANd am I sworn a dunghill slave for ever
To earths base drudg'ry? shall I never find
A night of rest? shall my indentures never
Be cancelled? did injurious Nature bind
My soul earths prentice, with no clause to leave her?
No day of freedom? must I ever grind?
O that I had the pinions of a Dove,
That I might quit my bands and sore above,
And pour my just complaints before the great Jehove!
2
How happy are the Doves, that have the power,
When ere they please, to spread their ayry wings!
Or cloud-dividing Eagles, that can tower
Above the sent of these inferior things!
How happy is the Lark, that every hour
Leaves earth, and then for joy mounts up and sings!
Had my dull soul but wings as well as they,
How I would spring from earth and clip away,
As wise Astrea did, and scorn this ball of clay!
3
O how my soul would spurn this ball of clay,
And loath the dainties of earths painful pleasure!
O how I Would laugh to see men night and day
Turmoyl, to gain that trash they call their treasure!
O how I Would smile to see what plots they lay
To catch a blast, or own a smile from Caesar!
Had I the pineons of a mounting Dove,
How I would sore and sing, and hate the love
Of transitory toys, and feed on joys above!
4
There should I find that everlasting pleasure,
Which change removes not, and which chance prevents not;
There should I find that everlasting treasure,
Which force deprives not, fortune dis-augments not;
There should I sind that everlasting Caesar,
Whose hand recalls not, and whose heart repents not;
Had I the pineons of a clipping Dove,
How I would climb the skies, and hate the love
Of transitory toys, and joy in things above!
5
No rank-mouth'd slander there shall give offense,
Or blast our blooming names, as here they do;
No liver-scalding lust shall there incense
Our boiling veins, There is no Cupids bow:
Lord, give my soul the milk-white innocence
Of Doves, and I shall have their pineons too:
Had I the pineons of a sprightly Dove,
How I would quit this earth, and sore above
And Heavens blessed kingdom find, with Heavens blessed King Jehove.
S. AUGUST. in Psalm. 128. What wings should I desire but the two precepts of
love, on which the Law and the Prophets depend! O if I could obtain these wings
I could fly from thy sace to thy face, from the sace of thy Justice to the face
of thy Mercy: Let us find those wings by love which we have lost by lust. S.
AUGUST. in Psalm. 76. Let us cast off whatsoever hinders, entangleth, or
burdeneth our flight until we attain that which satisfies; beyond which
nothing is; beneath which, all things are; of which, all things are. EPIG. 13.
Tell me, my wishing soul, did ever try
How fast the wings of red-crost faith can sly?
Why begg'st thou then the pineons of a Dove?
Faiths wings are swifter, but the swiftest love.
XIV.


PSALM 84. 1. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O God of Hosts.
ANcient of days, to whom all times are Now,
Before whose Glory Seraphims do bow
Their blushing cheeks, and veil their blemished faces,
That uncontain'd at once, do fill all places,
How glorious, O how far beyond the height
Of puzzled quils, or the obtuse conceit
Of flesh and blood, or the too flat reports
Of mortal tongues, are thy expreslesse courts!
Whose glory to paint forth with greater Art,
Ravish my fancy, and inspire my heart;
Excuse my bold attempt, and pardon me
For showing sense what faith alone should see.
Ten thousand millions, and tne thousand more
Of angel-measur'd leagues from the Eastern shore
Of dungeon earth this glorious Palace stands,
before whose pearly gates ten thousand bands
Of armed angels wait to entertain
Those purged souls for whom the Lamb was slain;
Whose guil^lesse death, and voluntary yielding
Of whose given life, gave this brave court her building;
The lukewarm blood of this dear Lamb being spilt,
To rubies turned, whereof her posts were built;
And what dropped down in cold and gelid gore,
Did turn rich Sapphires, and impav'd her floor:
The brighter flames, that from his ey-balls ray'd,
Grew Chrysolites, whereof her walls were made:
The milder glances sparkled on the ground,
And groundsild every door with Diamond;
But dying, darted upwards, and did fix
A battlement of purest Sardonix.
Her streets with burnisht gold are paved round,
Stars lie like pebbles scattred on the ground:
Pearl mixed with Onyx, and the Jasper stone,
Made gravelled causwayes to be t^ampled on:
There shines no Sun by day, no Moon by night;
The Palace glory is the Palace light:
There is no time to measure motion by,
There Time is swallowed with Eternity:
Wry-mouthed Disdain, and corner-haunting Lust,
And twy-sac'd Fraud, and beetle-brow'd Distrust,
Soul-boyling Rage, and trouble-state Sedition,
And giddy Doubt, and goggle-ey'd Suspicion,
And lumpish Sorrow, and degen'rous Fear
Are banished thence, and Death's a stranger there:
But simple Love, and sempiternall Joys,
Whose sweetness neither gluts, nor fullness cloyes;
Where face to face our ravished eye shall see
Great E^OHIM, that glorious One in Three,
And Three in One, and seeing him shall bless him,
And blessing, love him, and in love, possess him:
Here stay my soul, and ravish in relation:
Thy words being spent, spend now in contemplation.
S. GREG. in Psalm. 7. poenitent. Sweet Jesus, the word of the Father, the
brightness of paternall glory, whom Angels delight to view, teach me to do thy
will; that led by thy good Spirit, I may come to that blessed City, where day
is eternal, where there is certain security, and secure eternity, and
eternal peace, and peaceful happiness, and happy sweetness, and sweet
pleasure; where thou O God with the Father and the holy Spirit live and
reignest world without end. Ibid. There is light without darkness; joy without
grief; desire without punishment; love without sadness; (...) without
loathing; safety without fear; health without disease; and life without death.
EPIG. 14.
My soul, pry not too nearly; the complexion
Of Sols bright face is seen but by reslexion:
But would thou know what is heaven? I Will tell thee what;
Think what thou can not think, and heaven is that.
XV.


CANTICLES 8. 14. Make have, my Beloved, and be like the Roe, or the young Heart
upon the mountains of Spices.
GO, gentle tyrant, go; thy flames do pierce
My soul to deep; thy flames are too too fi^rce;
My marrow melts, my fainting spirits fry
In The torrid Zone of thy Meridian eye:
Away, away, thy sweets are too perfuming;
Turn, turn thy face, thy fires are too consuming:
Have hence, and let thy winged steps out-go
The frighted Ro-buck, and his flying To.
But will thou leave me then? O thou that a^t
Life of my soul, soul of my dying heart,
Without the sweet aspect of whose fair eyes,
My soul does languish and her solace dies;
Art thou so easily wooed? so apt to hear
The frantic language of my foolish fear?
Leave, leave me not, nor turn thy beauty from me;
Look, look upon me, though thine eyes o'rcome me.
O how they wound! but how my wounds content me!
How sweetly these delightful pains torment me!
How I am tortured in excessive measure
Of pleasing cruelties too cruel pleasure!
Turn, turn away, remove thy scorching beams;
I languish with these bitter-sweet extremes:
Have then, and let thy winged steps out-go
The flying Ro-buck, and his frighted To.
Turn back, my dear; O let my ravished eye
Once more behold thy face before thou fly;
What, shall we part without a mutual kiss?
O who can leave so sweet a face as this?
Look full upon me; for my soul (...)
To turn a holy (...) in those fires:
O leave me not, nor turn thy beauty from me;
Look, look upon me, though thy flames ov'rcome me.
If thou becloud the Sunshine of thine eye,
I freez to death, and if it shine, I fry;
Which like a fever, that my soul has got,
Makes me to burn too cold, or freez too hot:
Alas, I cannot bear so sweet a smart,
Nor can thou be less glorious th^n thou art.
Have then, and let thy winged steps out-go
The frighted Ro-buck, and his flying To.
But go not far beyond the reach of breath;
Too large a distance makes another death:
My youth is in her Spring; Autumnall vows
Will make me riper for so sweet a Spouse;
When aftertimes have burnished my desire,
I Will shoot thee flames for flames, and fire for fire.
O leave me not, nor turn thy beauty from me;
Look, look upon me, though thy flames ov'rcome me.
Author scalae Paradisi. Tom. 9. Aug. cap. 8. Fear not, O Bride, nor despair;
think not thy self contem^ed, if thy Bridegroom withdraw his face a while: All
things cooperate for the best: both from his absence, and his presence thou
gainest light: He comes to thee, and he goes from thee: he comes, to make
thee consolate; he goes, to make thee cautions, lest thy abundant consolation
puss thee up: he comes that thy languishing soul may be comforted; he goes,
lest his familiarity should be contemned; and being absent, to be more
desired; and being desired, to be more earnestly sought; and being long sought,
to be more acceptably sound. EPIG. 15.
My soul, sins monster, whom, with greater ease
Ten thousand fold, thy God could make then please;
What would thou have? nor pleased with sun, nor shade?
Heaven knows not what to make of what he made.
THE FAREWELL.


REV^LATION 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown
of life.
1
BE faithful, Lord, what is that?
Believe: 't is easy to believe; but what?
That he whom thy hard heart has wounded,
And whom thy scorn has spit upon,
Has paid thy sine, and has compounded
For those foul deeds thy hands have done:
Believe, that he whose gentle palms
Thy needle-pointed sins have naild,
Has born thy slavish load (of alms)
And made supply where thou have faild:
Did ever misery find so strange relief?
It is a love too strong for man's belief.
2
Believe that he, whose side
Thy crimes have pierced with their rebellions, di'd,
To save thy guilty soul from dying
Ten thousand horrid deaths, from whence
There was no escape, there was no slying,
But through his dearest bloods expense:
Believe, this dying friend requires
No other thanks for all his pain,
But even the truth of weak desires,
And for his love, but love again:
Did ever misery find so true a friend?
It is a love too vast to comprehend.
3
With floods of tears baptize
And drench these dry, these unregen rate eyes,
Lord, whet my dull, my blunt belief,
And break this sleshly rock in sunder,
That from this heart, this hell of grief,
May spring a Heaven of love and wonder:
O, if thy mercies will remove
And melt this lead from my belief,
My grief will then resine my love,
My love will then refresh my grief:
Then weep mine eyes as he has bled; vouchsafe
To drop for every drop an Epitaph.
4
But is the crown of Glory
The wages of a lamentable story?
Or can so great a purchase rise
From a salt humor? can mine eye
Run fast enought' obtain this prize?
If so, Lord, who is so mad to die?
Thy tears are trifles; thou must do:
Alas, I cannot; then endeavor:
I will; but will a tug or two
Suffice the turn? thou must persever:
I Will strive till death; and shall my feeble strife
Be crowned? I Will crown it with a crown of life.
5
But is there such a dearth
That thou must buy what is thy due by birth?
He whom thy hands did form of dust,
And gave him breath upon condition,
To love his great Creator, must
He now be thine by composition?
Art thou a gracious God and mild,
Or headstrong man rebellious rather?
O, man's a base rebellious child,
And thou a very gracious Father:
The gift is thine; we strive, thou crown'st our strife;
Thou giv'st us Faith; and Faith, a crown of life.
FINIS.

