THE SAINTS SUBMISSION TO THE WILL of GOD.

OR, A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a virtuous young Gentleman, Mr.
WILLIAM ELMES, The only Son and Heir of THOMAS ELMES, of Warmington in the
County of Northampton, Esquire.

BY RICHARD RESBURY, Minister of Oundle.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for J. Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey.
1654.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
A Few words in way of preface to the short discourse ensuing. The Argument is,
submission to the Will of God in cases of sorest trial. The occasion, the
sudden and untimely death of a very hopeful Gentleman, the Top-branch of a
very worthy family, who was found fallen from his horse, and ready to expire;
which in a very short time he did, against all endeavors to have preserved so
precious a treasure as his life. Circumstances brought in to the Jury, made it
appear to them, that the cause of his death, and fall in order thereto, was an
inward imposthume. Was it not too far below him to question it, I would against
all ungrounded surmises of whomsoever, give this clear testimony, upon full
enquiry and satisfaction, that as in his constant course, so at this time too,
he was free from all distemper and excess. I have but one word more; It was my
desire, since it was thought fit this little piece should pass the press, to
have put it into a better form, and set forth the discourse more full; but
multitude of emergent and unexpected occasions have wholly ravished my time from
me; that as an Embryo it comes forth, rather then as a timely birth. If it
might be of any use unto thy soul, according to the end intended, I shall
rejoice, resting,

Thy true friend in the Lord, R. RESBURY.

The Saints submission to the Will of God.
1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.
TImes of sad trials are even to the Saints themselves; times of great
perplexity and discomposure: an hard thing then to find the true path of duty
toward God, and walk in it with an even foot: dark times, and stormy times;
the spirits of the Saints, like a vessel in a troubled sea by night; a
difficult thing to steer a right course: like wayfarers benighted in a
Wilderness, hard to find their paths. The Word of God is a light in a dark
place, richly furnished for direction in all cases. The pole Star appearing to
guide our nightly course in the most tumultuous seas, it is as the pillar of
the cloud, and of fire to Israel in the Wilderness.

That the near relations of this deseased Gentleman are under a sad trial,
needs must we all be sensible; Nay, who amongst us, to whom he was known, is
not touched with it. A Gentleman, the hopes of his family, an only son to so
worthy parents, singularly virtuous, of lovely demeanor, cut off in the flower
of his age, and that by such a sudden stroke. Ravished from the dear embraces of
all his friends, by an unexpected surprisall. O it is a dark time; now for a
light to show unto poor benighted wanderers their way, that they may not lose
themselves. Now for a word of sure direction how to order our spirits toward
god in such a time as this: Oh blessed be our wise God, who has here given us
his good word, to be a light to our feet, a lanthorn to our steps, at this
time, and in this Wilderness, in this portion of Scripture now read unto you.

It is the answer of good old Eli unto Samuel, upon a most severe and terrible
message delivered him from God. The message from the 11. to the 15. v.
referring to the 2. chap. 31. to the end. This Samuel delivers to the full in
the 18 verse; Elies answer, and answer of clear and ready submission (without
either the least murmuring, or disputing) unto the will of God. And here now
from an excellent president we may conclude this Doctrine.

In all our saddest changes whatsoever, Doct.
as they are disposed to us by the hand of God, so it is our duty freely to
submit unto his will.

1. We are to take notice of them, as from him whose providence reaches to the
numbering of our hairs, to the fall of a Sparrow to the ground, much more does
he determine our days, number our months, and appoint our bounds, that we
cannot pass; in whom we live, and move, and have our being; in whose hands is
our breath, and all our ways.

We are freely to submit to his will, to resign our selves to his whole
pleasure. The former of these we shall pass over, and insist only upon this.
Now a clear and full confirmation of this we have here in my Text, and the
History to which it relates.

Here is a most sad change threatened in due time, and that very shortly too, to
be fulfilled: the whole posterity of Eli, both for the present and for ensuing
generations were to be cut off untimely, 2. chap. 31, 32, 33. This stroke upon
them should be accompanied with public judgment upon the whole Nation,
through their sin, verse. 32. Such should be the misery of his posterity
whilst alive, that should he live to see it, it should be a most horrible
vexation to him, verse. 33. His two sons, (I think all he had) should in and
for their sins (as far as appears) be cut off by the hand of an enemy at
once, verse. 34. From the whole race and family the Priesthood to be removed,
verse. 35. to utmost beggary and baseness should his offspring be reduced,
verse. 36. all this most certainly to be accomplished with evidence of greatest
wrath upon his posterity, chap. 3. verse. 11. to 15. and that in way of
judgment for his sin, verse. 13.

Now when he has heard all this, what answer makes he? does he exclaim? Oh,
who is able to bear so great severity from the Lord? does he dispute? and why?
for the children that are yet unborn? shall the wrath of the Lord reach unto
them? none of these things, but it is the Lord. This will conclude then the
saddest cases, and much more sad then this before us: 1. This providence is
shut up in one; here is nothing threatened for the future. 2. In this providence
is no character of wrath: of unaccountable dominion, and arbitrary pleasure
there is, but not of wrath: For,

1. Here is no singular provocation declared against, in recompense whereof
this stroke should be by way of judgment from the Lord.

2. It is such a stroke as may befall Gods children, Ecclesiastes chap. 9.
verse. 1, 2. as has befallen such: Jobs children; nothing appears but they all
died the children of God; not imaginable that none of them died so, yet their
stroke far greater.

3. The life of this Gentleman who fell under it, gives very hopeful testimony
against wrath in this stroke: that he was of a blameless and untoucht
conversation, so free from the vanities and evils of youth, as it will be hard
to find his match; all that know him, and observed him, can witness of him:
free from pride, modest and sober in his attire above most his equals in
estate, and birth. Nay, (as I am informed) would upon occasion declare his
great dislike of pride and vanity that way, and utterly refuse for himself,
that which in this proud and vain age passes for current, with many others:
Free from excess and riot, free from vanity in his speech, above most; hating
all immodest and corruption therein: his conversation and deporture affable and
lovely, not only inoffensive, but obliging: these things might appear to all
that knew but his outside; but they that knew him more inwardly, knew much
more. And that which speaks him not only a virtuous morralist, but very
hopefully a gracious Christian, a diligent attender upon public Ordinances in
love; diligent in duties of private converse with God; of tender and humble
affections in those duties, often observed to rise from his knees in family
prayer, with tears in his eyes: diligent in the holy observation of the
Sabbath; ever against detaining any the meanest servant at home, more then
needs must, for making ready provision for the body; looking upon it as a wrong
to their souls who had as great a right to the public ordinances, as the
greatest in the family. But these things by the way, partly for caution against
those misconstructions which the blind world are apt to make of such
remarkable providence befalling the Saints: partly to mind those upon whose
spirits this providence sits heaviest, how much it behooves them with all
clearness of spirit, to submit to the will of God herein; it being far short
of that sad inport which is found in many cases, wherein yet it is highly our
duty to submit to the will of God; and particularly of this in my Text, wherein
we find so clear a submission. The hopeful piety of the person deceased, as
likewise of the family, takes away the sting of this present grief and
trouble, and renders it much more light.

We now return to the Doctrine, In all our saddest changes whatsoever, as they
are disposed to us by the hand of God, so it is our duty freely to submit unto
his will. Another instance or two, Job 1.21. 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. the highest of
all, Matthew. 26.39, 42. one thing prayed for in that petition, is, Thy will be
done.

Reasons. The Will of God,

1. It is a most sovereign will. God has absolute and unaccountable dominion
over man, over all creatures, because Creator: Dominion amongst men, according
to the eminency of the Superior, and the dependency of the inferior: God
infinitely eminent, the creature wholly dependent. Upon this account the Apostle
answers that great objection, against Gods arbitrarinesse in his decrees of
election and reprobation, at which the Jesuiticall and Arminian generation so
endlesly quarrel. Romans 9.20, 21. with 11, 12, 13, and 18, verses, Austin
speaks high here.

If mankind, which was (as it is evident) at first created of nothing, should
be born without the original debt of death and sin; and yet of those the
Almighty Creator should will to condemn some to everlasting destruction; who
might say to the Almighty Creator, why have thou done thus? for he, who when
they were not, had given them to be, had it in his own power to what their end
should be: Neither might the rest say, why when their merits are alike, is the
divine judgments so unlike? because the Potter has power over the clay, to
make of the same lump one verssel indeed to honor, another to dishonor: it is
an uncreature-like temper to maintain reluctance against the will of God.

2. It is a most righteous will: the Lord never wills any thing, nor accordingly
does any thing, wherein he swerves one hair from the rule of righteousness,
or wrongs the creature in the least, Psalm 145. verse. 17. eminent in
righteousness, Psalm 36. verse. 6. in his most obscure administrations, where
his righteousness is least visible to us, yet the Saint always lay down this
as a sure conclusion, Jerem. 12.1, 2. And here: We deserve greater sufferings
then what in this world befalls us, needs then must non-subjection to Gods will
be a very unrighteous thing. Apply two straight things together, they close all
along; that which closes not with what is straight, must needs be crooked.

3. Its a most holy will. The Lord wills nothing but in greatest holiness, and
accordingly does nothing wherein he swerves from the rule of holiness in the
least measure, he is holy in all his works; the holy one of Israel, cellebrated
by the blessed Angels; Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God: so pure that the Heavens are
impure in his sight. Hence the Saints when they make their addresses to God,
about those his providence wherein they can discern least of his holiness, yet
this acknowledgment they hold fast, that he is most Holy, 1. Chap. Habakkuk 13,
14. The Sun and his beams remain pure, though shining through a thick glass:
the resistings then of the most holy will of God, must needs it self be unholy.

4. 'Its a will in conjunction with greatest wisdom, proceeding in all things
according to wisest counsels, doing all things in truest order, manner, season,
and beauty: The Lord in wisdom made all things. 3. Chap. Proverbs, 19, 20. In
wisdom does he order all things who works all after the counsels of his own
will, Ephesians. 1.11. Makes every thing beautiful in its time, Eccles. 3.11. A set
time and appointed season there is for every event known to him, and ordered by
him exactly, and is made truly beautiful, though to us it appears ortherwise;
we shall know hereafter the beauty of his Providence in all cases whatsoever:
therefore 'its great and perverse folly to repine against his will. Upon these
accounts 'its the duty of all men to submit (without all murmering and
disputing) to his will: but further as to the Saints, to them it is

5. A most gracious will: whatsoever the outside of any providence may be,
mercy is the inside to them: mercy is the Soul, whatsoever the Body of it may
be, Psalm. 25.10. Some of his paths are rough and thorny too; some of them are
dreadful to the eye, but all mercy and all truth to such: mercy in
faithfulness, having Covenanted to show mercy to them in all his dealings with
them; all providence work together for good to those that love him: Oh! the
blessed condition of the Saints, nothing befalls them but in mercy, nothing but
for their good. The wicked are scourged, they are scourged with one and the
same rod, the strokes in outward appearance equal. Yet the wicked in wrath,
they in mercy: The wicked as slaves, they as Children: The wicked for their
ruin, they for their advantage: The wicked for their destruction, they for
instruction. This mercy added to the rest of excellent properties of Gods will,
makes it lovely indeed: It lays it in fair colors, puts the varnish upon it,
whosoever have reason to submit, they have: 'its perverseness, unthankfulness,
absurdity of spirits not to submit to the will of God, disposing mercy to us.

6. It is a perfect will, what the Apostle speaks of his revealed will, or his
word according to his will, Romans 12.2. is true of his whole will, whither
revealed, or secret; whether expressed in word or work: perfect, as he is
perfect. Now perfection comprehends and shuts up in it all that is good, all
that is obliging, soveraignity, righteousness, holiness, wisdom, mercy,
faithfulness, beauty, majesty; whatsoever is excellent all is contained in
perfection: it is great imperfection, then in man and manifold to harbor
displeasure in his breast against the will of God, whatsoever sufferings or
troubles it disposes to us.

1. To meditate these excellencies of the divine Will in all cross providence
that befall us, Isaiah 40.27. Tumultuous disputing the works and ways of God,
questioning the worthiness of his proceedings; the Saints themselves apt
through infirmities to run into this. Job. 10.2, 3. Psalm. 73.2.13, 14. This is
unwarrantable; God takes Job for such excursions and extravagances of spirit
and speech. The Psalmist confesses of himself therein, verse 22. it is
malepertnes in the creature thus to do.

2. To take comfort in the saddest events, that all is in mercy to the Saints;
accordingly of greatest mercy. Course vessels, but fraught with richest
treasure.

3. To labor to find out and to lay hold on the good that such a providence is
fraught with,

FINIS.

