THE Tabernacle OF GOD with MEN: OR, The Visible Church Reformed.

A Discourse of the Matter and Discipline of the Visible Church, tending to
REFORMATION.

By Richard Resbury, Minister of the Word in Oundle, in Northamptonshire.

London, Printed in the year 1649.

The Preface to the Reader.
Reader,
THere are many interests in this active age contended for; the Sovereign
interest, the Kings Prerogative, the State interest, the Privileges of
Parliament, the popular interest, the Subjects Liberty; there is one above all
these to be heeded; the interest of the Church as more excellent; those civil,
this spiritual; those the interests of men as men in their several stations,
this the interest of the Saints as Saints; those making for a political, this
for a spiritual; those for a momentany, this for eternal happiness; this the
interest of Christ himself, who is head of his Church as well according to her
visible and ministerial, as her invisible and saving state; and therefore he
alone it is, who appoints her officers, administrations, laws, privileges,
liberties in the grand charter of his word; none of which, may the highest upon
earth, without crimen laesae Majestatis, attempt against the Crown of Christ,
to violate; Neither is this only excellent above the rest, but most
advantageous to them; It is not only the piety, but the true policy, of Kings,
Parliaments and people, to give due heed to the settling of this, which settled
truly, settles all theirs surely and beautifully. Be wise now therefore O ye
Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth: Kiss the Son. Nay the obtaining
of the kingdom of Christ in the world in all its claims, shall renew the face
of the whole Creation, and make a new heaven and a new earth.

It has been my endeavor in the integrity of my heart (so far as I have
obtained mercy to discern that deceitful piece) to enquire into the true state
and order of the visible Church of Christ; and if I may, to bring something, if
but a little Goats hair toward the setting up of the Sanctuary; One thing I
have labored, I hope not unuseful, to bring down the enquiry particularly to
our condition in this Nation, that we might distinctly consider what after so
many engagements to the Lord, by his great works for us, by our solemn Covenant
with him, lies upon us to practice. No more; Only I have, if thou be
faithful, thy prayers; if ingenuous, thine indulgence, where thou shall find
slips.

Thine in the service of the Gospel, RIC. RESBURY.

The Heads of this ensuing Discourse are these eight Propositions or
Instructions following.
I. THe true matter of the visible Church is visible Saints only. II.
Discipline is an Ordinance of Christ, for ordering the visible Church in her
several Congregations. III. To the people of the Church it belongs by Divine
right to choose their officers. IV. Christ has committed the power of
Discipline not to the Officers alone, but to the Church, that is, to the
Officers with the brotherhood. V. There is a Church Power formally distinct
from the Civil. VI. That Bishops in office above Presbyters, are no Church
officers of divine institution, it is pleaded by Jerome from Scripture and the
highest Gospel-antiquity. VII. To a particular Congregation of visible Saints,
furnished with Officers, it belongs to exercise all parts of Discipline within
it self. VIII. To a Congregation of visible Saints, not yet possessed of
Officers, it belongs to possess themselves of them.
The Tabernacle of God with Men. OR, The Visible Church Reformed.
CHAP. I. The first Instruction. The true Matter of the Visible Church, is
visible Saints only.
BY visible Saints we understand with Bucer, those in whose conversation the
necessary Signs of regeneration appear. For clearing this;

1. We do not mean that the regeneration of the Person can be certainly
concluded from such a conversation as we here require, because the heart within
may not be answerable; therefore an hypocrite not discerned, may be the true
matter of the visible Church.

2. But our meaning is, that the conversation must be such, as if the heart be
answerable, it is certain the Person is regenerate. To clear this further by
instance. Not only such as are commonly granted scandalous, are here shut out,
in whose conversation as sin reigns, so in their heart; for ought that may
appear at the least; but such also as we commonly call merely civil honest
men, because though their hearts be answerable to their conversation, yer are
they strangers to regeneration; the Proposition thus cleared, we come to
Arguments to confirm it.

1. To be visibly of the Church, is to be visibly Abraham's seed; to be visibly
Abraham's seed, is to be visibly of his faith, and to be visibly Christ's; Gal.
3.29. Abraham's flesh was to the Jews the visible bond of the Covenant; but to
the Proselytes, and to the Gentile Churches not his flesh, but his faith.

2. To be visibly of the Church, is to be such in the sight of men as they are
in the sight of God, who shall indeed be saved; and therefore visibly
believers, and holy, the people of all the promises, of all the Privileges of
the Gospel, therefore a justified, a sanctified people, a people adopted, a
people of Communion with God and Christ, a people of new obedience, a
spiritual people, etc.

3. To be the visible Church of God, is to be visibly his Temple, visibly an
habitation for himself by his spirit; Ephesians. 2.21, 22. but such are only they
who are visibly regenerate. The Temple was built of old of polisht stones and
costly timber, it received only the clean; the visible Church now is his
visible Temple, made up of lively stones into a spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2.5.
to abide apart from the unclean, that the presence of God may fill this Temple
of his, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17.

4. From the end of the visible Church; which is, that God might have an holy
people, separate from the world, enjoying all Ordinances performing in several
Congregations all solemn worship to him, glorifying his name by the light of
good works, etc. but only such as are visibly regenerate, are in any measure
fitted for these ends; wicked men quite contrarily affected; therefore as he is
in no wise to be owned for a Minister of the Church, who is no way fitted for
the ends of the ministry, but is manifestly contrary thereto; so neither are
they to be owned for members of the Church, who are qualified contrary to the
ends of Church Communion.

5. From Scripture-patterne; who were they that were received by the Baptist
and by the Apostles? Such as being wrought upon by the word preached, to an holy
Profession, forsaking false religions, confessing their sins, professing their
faith and repentance, desired to be solemnly received, and that when the
Profession of Christian Religion exposed to great temptations in the world.

1. For the Baptist, Mat. 3.6. it is a mean conceit at the best, to think such
a Confession then served the turn, as was palpably a Profanation of the name
of God, as giving no apparent hopes of repentance; let us hear the judgment of
some, the most approved and excellent Expositors. Calvin upon the place thus.
This Confession was a Testimony of repentance; -- that men may rightly offer
themselves to baptism, the Confession of sins is required of them; otherwise
the whole action was nothing else but an idle toying; furthermore it is to be
observed that who are here spoken of, were persons come to years, who we know
are not to be admitted promiscuously of the Church, nor by baptism to be
entered into the body of Christ, till they have first been tried. The same
Calvin upon Acts 19.18. having witnessed of those there spoken of, that they
did indeed testify that they were thoroughly affected with the serious fear of
God, who did of their own accord confess the crimes of their former life,
least by their dissembling they should inwardly nourish the wrath of God; he
adds concerning those who came to John's baptism, that by the Confession of
their sins, they made profession that they were not feignedly entered into
repentance.

Beza upon the same place, viz. Matthew. 3.6. thus, They are said by the Jews to
confess their sins, who acknowledge themselves all manner of ways to be
sinners, and seek for pardon from the mercy of God, as Dan. 9.3. etc. Hence it
appears (says he) that John admitted none to his Baptism but such as gave
testimony that they seriously embraced the doctrine of the free remission of
sins; and such a like public confession was required of the Catechumens in
the ancient Church, called by the name of Exomologesis.

Piscator in his observations upon Matthew. 3. v. 6, 8, 10. speaks thus, Baptism
is not to be applied to any of years, till he have first made confession of
his sins, and of his faith in Christ, and further promise of an holy life:
all these did John require (says he) of those that came to be baptized of him;
for the first, it is clear, verse 6. for the second, it is manifest out of the
words of Paul, Acts 19.4. where he says John baptized with the baptism of
repentance, saying to the people, that they should believe upon him who was to
come after John himself, that is, Christ Jesus. (Compare Acts 8.16.) For the
third, it is evident from verse 8.10. of this third of Matthew which is
particularly declared and applied to diverse kinds of life, Luke 3.10. etc.

Thus we see these excellent men, judicious and sincere in their generation,
gathered no such shuffing conclusions from the history of John's baptism
recorded in Scripture, as many of ours are wont to gather, who plead the
numbers recorded by John, as an argument that he did, and we may receive into
Church society all comers: for further discovery here, let us look into another
Scripture, concerning John and those received by him, together with the
judgments of those excellent and true hearted Divines upon the place; the text
of Scripture is Matthew. 11.12. and it shows how they were affected at least
apparently who came in so great numbers to be baptized of John; compare it with
Luke 16.16.

Piscator here, It shows the effect of John's Doctrine, to wit, that many
embraced that Doctrine with great zeal, and so took the Kingdom of heaven as
it were by force.

Beza. The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence. They break into it as it were
by a certain force: for this treasure of our heavenly father lies open (as it
were) to all, earnestly by every one to be laid hold upon, which he might seem
formerly to have hid, as it is unfolded Romans 16.25, 26. which compared with
this text now in hand, we are given to understand, both how entrance into the
Kingdom of heaven is offered us, to wit, by the preaching of the Gospel, and
how offered it is received by us: truly by force made upon our selves for
believing, and by the persevering heat of zeal.

Take it by force. Beza again, They snatch it to themselves, or they storm
it: a Metaphor taken from Tents, or from some Castle, which is stormed by
enemies breaking into it. So that fervent force of the spirit is signified, by
which the faithful being transported, are carried with earnest desire and
endeavor unto eternal life.

Cabvin. 1. There is no doubt but Christ commends the majesty of the Gospel
upon this ground, that it was sought after with the servent desire and
endeavor of many; for as God had raised up John to be the Horald of the
kingdom of his Son, so he put the efficacy of the spirit into his Doctrine,
that it should pierce into the hearts of men, and should kindle that their
heat: he adds, from these words of Christ, we learn what is the true nature
and manner of faith, verily that men do not coldly and overly agree to God when
he speaks to them, but that with an ardent affection they aspire after him,
and do as it were by a violent endeavor break through.

Bucer. The violent take it by force; that is, they who are so enflamed with
desire of the kingdom, that they cast life and all things behind their backs,
so they may be made partakers of the Gospel, and citizens of the kingdom of
heaven; then he refers this place to Luke 7.28, 29. and ads, this people, and
these Publicans, who neglecting all things, received with greatest zeal the
word of God first by John, then by Christ and his disciples, justifying God,
that is, as well by free confession of their sins, as with most earnest, nor
less acceptable embracing of offered grace, both acknowledging and proclaiming
God just, and the justifier are those violent ones which make force upon the
kingdom of heaven, and by force take it; and does not a man seem to take that
by force, for which he runs the hazard of life? by these we are taught, that
the treasure of the Gospel befalls not any but those who have sought it with
most (...) desire, and even love to hazard and lose al things for it. Thus
Bucer; hence we see how in the judgment of these worthy lights in the Church,
John's hearers were affected when by him received.

2. For the Apostles, and those received by them. Acts 2.41. to the end, Acts
4.32, 33, 34, 35. Acts 8.36, 37. read the places; see Calvin likewise upon Acts
5.13, where he thus shows of how pure a constitution the visible Church then
was; having observed it one fruit of the Miracle that unbelievers affrighted
with so remarkable a judgment upon Ananias and Saphira, durst not contemn the
Apostles, etc. He adds, though Luke ascribes not this only to the Miracles,
but rather comprehends all things together which might make for the increasing
the dignity of the Church; for so were all things ordered, as that a certain
divine majesty shined among them; for they differed no otherwise from others,
then Angels do from men; for there is in holy discipline, and the sincere
observation of godliness, a secret kind of majesty which awes even the wicked
whether they will or not; but we are at this day strangers to it; nay, by our
profane liberty of living wickedly, we render our selves together with the
Gospel contemptible. Thus much for the fifth Argument.

6. From express Command of the Churches separation from the openly wicked, 2
Cor. 6.17. with the former verses. Object. The wicked here are heathen and
professed Infidels. Answ. 1. The Apostle urges in his expostulation, v. 14, 15,
16. such a repugnancy in the Churches Communion with those wicked ones, as
betwixt light and darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness, Christ and
Belial; that the Church then may answer that part of the comparison which
belongs to her, (be those wicked ones who they will,) she must consist of a
righteous people. 2. If the Church must separate from them, because darkness,
unrighteousness, etc. then from those who are such in life, whatsoever in word
they profess, being as evil in Scripture account, as such heathen and termed
infidels or unbeleeving, Tit. 1.15, 16. worse then professed Infidels, 1 Timothy
5.8. and those who have a form of Godliness, (and therefore in word profess
the true God at the least.) but deny the power of it; guilty of open
wickedness, are to be turned from, 2 Timothy 3.5. 3. Otherwise manifest
Profanation of the name of God with a palpable lie, 1 John 1.6, 7. should
entitle to the great honor of Church Communion, and the great Privileges
thereto belonging; and the visible Church should be no Temple refusing the
unclean, but a common Inn for all Comers, a Cage of unclean birds, a Sty for
swine. 4. Many most abominable heretics may in word profess the true God, to
whom yet it is granted generally that Church Communion is to be denied. Add,
Ishmael, Esau, etc. professed the true God, yet they were not of the Church.

7. From the doctrine of discipline; Mat. 18.15. etc 1. The visible Church is a
brotherhood. If thy brother sin, etc. and this brotherhood founded in Christ,
John 20.17. but does Christ own as brethren, God as children, any but such as
are in some degree sanctified? apparently so, that they may be apparently
owned. 2. The duties by our Savior required in the exercise of discipline,
from any Church member indefinitely, cannot be expected from any other, both
here admonishing in the three degrees with aim at gaining a brother, etc. 1
Cor. 5.2. It is required of the Church that they be mourners when any proves
scandalous among them; to the Church of which the people are a maine part, is
the power of Christ committed, for casting out and delivering up to Satan, v.
4, 5. in case of neglect hereof the whole lump is leavened, viz. the whole
Congregation is under guilt; neglect here is a sin tending to the dischurching
of Churches, Rev. 2.14.20. etc. with all scandalous of the Church, familiar
society is to be refused by every Churchmember, v. 9.10. (...) such severity
herein is required as cannot be exercised toward all scandalous, with whom we
must needs have commerce in this world, v. 11. the scandalous within the
Church, when any prove such, are by the Church to be judged; v. 12. and put
away, v. 13. the end of all is to humble, shame, and recover the fallen sinner.
Now how can these things be expected from the Church, if wicked Persons shall
be allowed the matter of the Church? Can they deliver to Satan that are
themselves delivered to him? etc. have they share in the power of Christ, who
are themselves under the power of Satan? what is there in a company of wicked
Persons, to humble and shame a wicked Person? how shall they act in any of
their duties depending upon discipline, who have no Principles for it? 2 These.
3.6. If he that walks inordinately, having been formerly received, must be
withdrawn from, then such a one not yet received, is not to be received; and
generally, forasmuch as scandalous when in, are to be cast out; not in, they
are to be left out.

They who confine all Church Power to the officers alone, will here take
offense; that in following this Argument, we allow a share of that power to the
people; to that we shall speak more fully and purposely hereafter in due place.

8. From the Testimonies given to the Churches in most of the Epistles,
especially about the beginning, as Romans 1.8, and c. 15. v. 14. 1 Cor. 1.4. to
10. Phil. 1.3. to 9. 1 These. 1.2. to the end. 2 These. 1.3. to 8. read the
places; so of those seven Asian Churches, some very pure, as Smyrna and
Philadelphia, so as no fault found with them; others, as Ephesus, Pergamus and
Thyatira, a very fair Testimony of them, both what they had been, and what in
part they were, though not a little lapsed, but both against them, and the
other two most corrupt, Sardis and Laodicea, their dischurching is severely
threatened, except they shall return to a purer state. Object. The Apostle
gives a fair Testimony to the Church of Corinth, yet were there many great
enormities among them. Answ. 1. His Testimony is to the Church generally, but
with exception of such as walk disorderly in the Church, as appears in that.
2. He requires the Church to proceed in way of discipline against such, so as
in case they persevere in their evil Course, to cut them off from the
Communion of Saints; whence 3. it appears that in their admission they were not
discovered such; whence that which may hence be gathered is, that a Church
rightly constitute, is not presently upon her degenerating in many of her
members to be forsaken, but they so degenerating to be cut off 4. The retaining
of such in the Church, involved the whole Church in guilt and threatened wrath,
1 Cor. 5.6. and c. 11.30. so Rev. 2.14, 15, 16, 20. etc. whence we may lay down
this Conclusion, such persons are not the true matter of the Church, the
retaining of whom in the Church makes evidently for her destruction; but such
are the openly wicked and foul heretics 5. However the Church of Corinth was
by her false Teachers first staggered out of the way in something of doctrine,
and thence grew remiss in discipline for a time; yet it appears by their
speedy and sound repentance, 2 Cor. 7. that they were generally and habitually
a very holy people.

9. From the practice of the primitive Churches after the Apostles times, in
two things it appears how choice the matter of the Church then was.

1. The (...) all of their Catechumens, when any formerly heathen, wrought upon
by the preaching of the Gospel, professed their embracing of the Christian
Religion, renouncing their former folse worship, and desired the Church to take
them into her care for their spiritual state; the Church accordingly took them
into her care for instruction and edifying, but did not receive them into her
fellowship, any further then to hear the word, till they gave a good account
both of their Christian knowledge and Christian conversation, and that in time
of greatest Persecution; and all the time that they stood thus upon trial, and
under instruction rending to prepare them for admission, they were called
Catechumens; when after a certain time of trial they moved to be admitted
into Church fellowship, they were called Competents or desirers; when they were
admitted, it was by baptism, and then were they complete members of the
Church, and called the faithful; This was one sort of Catechumens; Another
sort there was; the children of Christian Parents, who having been in their
infancy baptized, yet when they were grown to years, they were under the
Churches instruction and trial, just in the same manner as the former, and
held the place and name of Catechumens, till they were for knowledge and
holiness of conversation approved experimentally by the Church; then upon
their desires they were received into Church Fellowship by solemn imposition
of hands, and so admitted to the Lords Supper, and brought under discipline,
and were now complete members of the Church; this imposition of hands being
grounded upon, Heb. 6.2. whence by the corruption of Popery, it degenerated
into that spurious Ordinance of confirmation as they called it.

2. Their severity toward the lapsed; it is well known to all acquainted with
the manner of the Church in those times, that as they diligently cast out the
scandalous, so they stood upon strict terms with them, before they would upon
their profession of repentance receive them again; this, together with the
state of those times considered, times of great persecution, it may be
gathered, that they received only such into Church Fellowship, as whom they
might conceive so principled* as to prefer the truth and purity of Gospel
Profession to their own lives. Let us here sprinkle some few Testimonies found
in the Fathers of those times, touching the purity of the Church in the matter
of it. Tertullian in his Apologetick, c. 2. alleges Pliny an heathen,
Deputy Governor under Trajan an heathen Emperor, about a hundred years after
Christ, giving this Testimony to the Christians generally, That besides their
stiff refusal to sacrifice, he found nothing in their religious worship, but
that they had meetings before day to sing to Christ and to God, and by mutual
agreement to constrme discipline, and that they forbad murder, adultery fraud,
treachery, and other wickednesses: The same Father who himself lived a little
more then two hundred years after Christ, he is much in challenging the
persecuting powers, to make good any of those crimes which they charged upon
Christians, as atheism, incest, infant-murder, treason, charge them that
they war with the name of Christians; that an innocent name in innocent men
is by them hated and persecuted.

In the 39 ohapt. of his Apologetick, thus, We are a body made up of the
conscience of Religion, of the unity of Discipline, of the Covenant of hope;
then speaking of their worship in the public Assembly, he adds for
discipline; there likewise are Exhortations, Castigations, and Divine Censures;
for with great weight is judgment past, as among those that are certain that
the eye of God is upon them, and it is the greatest fore-judgement of the
judgment to come, if any one shall so offend as that he is cast out from the
communication of prayer, of assembling, and of all holy commerce. He mentions
in the same chapter the love of the Christians to be such one toward another,
that the Heathen were wont with indignation to say of them, Behold how they
love one another, and are ready to die one for another. In the 46. chapt. of
his Apologetick he shows how they bore not with any of evil conversation,
comparing the Christians with the Philosophers. The Philosophers, says he,
have an apish affectation of the truth, and by their affectation corrupt it, as
hunting after their own praise. The Christians necessarily desire it, and
perform it entirely, as providing for their own salvation; He adds a little
after this objection; But some of ours depart from the rule of discipline; to
which he answers; they are no longer owned for Christians by us; and he
reproves it in the Philosophers, that such among them as walk not according to
the rules of Philosophy are yet called by the name, and have still the honor
of Philosophers. In his Book to Scapula, who was a Deputy Governor under the
Roman Emperor, and a persecutor, he gives this character of the Christians,
besides their unshaken piety toward God, refusing the Heathen sacrifices
against the greatest torments, We defraud none, we adulterate the marriage of
none, we handle Orphans religiously, we relieve the needy, to none do we render
evil for evil; let them who belly our profession look to it: (that is, they
who in word profess themselves Christians, but walk not accordingly) whom we
our selves refuse. Who is there that complains of us upon any other ground but
only that we are Christians? for so great innocence, for so great honesty, for
righteousness, for chastity, for faith, for truth; for the living God are we
burned.

In his Book of Repentance, chapt. 6. speaking of the necessity of sound
repentance, and that on the Catechumens part, before baptism; I deny not,
says he, the divine benefit; that is, remission of sins to be altogether
safe to those that shall go into the water; that is, that shall be baptized;
but that thou may come to that, thou must be diligent; for who will afford
thee, a man of such faithless repentance, one drop of any water? A little
after, let no man flatter himself, that his rank is yet but among the
Catechumens, as though he might therefore take liberty to sin; as soon as thou
have known the Lord, fear him; as soon as thou have beheld him, receive him;
-- is Christ one to the baptized, another to the hearers, or Catechumens? That
Laver is the sealing up of faith which faith is both begun and commended from
the faith of repentance; we are not therefore washed, (viz. baptized) that we
may cease to sin, but because we have ceased, because we are already washed
in heart; this is the first baptism of the Catechumen, entire fear. In his book
of (...) Prescriptions against the heretics, c. 41 he makes the promiscuous
matter of the Church the property of the heretics. I will not omit (says he)
the description of the heretics conversation; how frivolous, how earthly, how
humane it is, without gravity, without authority, without discipline, such as
agrees with their faith; first of all it is uncertain who is a Catechumen, and
who is one of the faithful, they go together alike; they hear alike; they pray
alike; Nay if the heathen should come among them (in their Assemblies) they
would cast that which is holy to dogs, and Pearls (though no true ones) to the
swine, their Prostration of discipline they call simplicity; our care of it,
they call an overcurious trimming, they receive all promiscuously to the Lords
Supper, -- with them the Catechumens go for perfect before they be thoroughly
instructed. He charge it upon them, that they are more in laboring for
number then due matter. No where says he are more easy terms then in the
tents of the rebels; where this very thing to be is to deserve. In his Book of
Baptism, Cap. 18. he thus speaks. That Baptism is not rashly to be betrusted,
let them know whose office it is; Give to every one that asks, has its proper
title belonging to Alms. That rather is to be heeded; Give not that which is
holy to dogs; and do not cast your Pearls to swine; and lay hands suddenly on
no man, that thou be not Partaker of other men's sins, etc. Where (by the
way) he interprets imposition of hands there to point at solemn admission of
Church Members; Thus for some gleanings out of Tertullian. The like we might
observe from others; as in Cyprian, who will have the Church to consist of the
ministry and the standing people; and against what temptations did they then
stand? and for their Communion, they were most impatient of heretics and all
scandalous. In his 55. Epist. writing to Cornelius then Bishop of Rome, about
such as having formerly fallen, were now seeking to be again received into the
Church, thus he speaks; For some, their crimes are so much against them, or the
brethren (that is the standing people,) do so firmly and stiffely resist, that
they can by no means be received (...) with the scandal and danger of very
many; -- O if thou could (most beloved brother) be here with us, when those
evil and perverse ones return from their schism, thou should see what a do
I have to persuade our brethren (the People) to Patience, that they would,
having allayed their grief of mind, consent to the receiving and taking care of
the wicked; for as they rejoice and are glad, when such as are tolerable and
less faulty return, so on the other hand they murmr and contend earnestly
when deplored Persons, and stubborn, and such as are defiled with adulteries,
or with idols, or such as are proud, come back, etc. but I will be no further
tedious in quotations of this nature. If any man desire any further
satisfaction, let him read the last Section of the sixth Chapter in the three
first Centuries. Magdeburg. Concerning the conversation and discipline of
Christians, afterward in Austins time, when some would have it, that the
Profession of the Christian faith should entitle to baptism, though
accompanied with a wicked life, He writes a book entitled of Faith and Works,
proving such a Profession to be as no Profession.

10. From the state of new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.27. from this and the last
Argument it is manifest, that before the mystery of iniquity prevailed far,
and after it shall cease, the visible Churches own no scandalous sinners of
their society; the promiscuous state then of the Churches in this degeneration,
is the outward Court unmeasured, and the Holy City trod under foot by the
Gentiles. That voice then Rev. 18.4. calling the people of God out of Babylon,
calls for the Churches separation from such; this Confusion now obtaining, being
one strain of Popish corruption, with Popery beginning and ending.

Consectary.
From this discourse of the matter of the Church; forasmuch as experience
shows that in all nations where the Gospel is preached, yet the greatest part
of men are manifestly wicked; it cannot be according to rule, that all the
people of any nation generally should be accounted of the Church, though in
word they profess the true religion, which they know little of, and care less
for; but in every nation, and Congregation or Town, a distinction ought to be
kept betwixt the Church and the world, and the two sorts of Catechumens ought
to be some, the children of the Church, and therefore baptized in infancy, upon
their due trial when come to years, received solemnly to Church Communion, as
to the Supper, Discipline, etc. Others not the children of the Church, received
upon due trial by baptism, when come to years.

This conclusion is further made good from the exercise of discipline 1 Cor.
5.9, 10, 11. If all the nation generally be of the Church, then are all the
scandalous of the nation generally the scandalous of the Church; but that they
are not; with all that are scandalous of the Church, we must refuse familiar
society, not so much as familiarly eating with them, (some peculiar relations
here reserved) and yet abide in the world; but with all scandalous in the
nation, we cannot so refuse, except we will go out of the world as the Apostle
there argues, and experience to every impartial and unblassed spirit
abundantly makes it good.

CHAP. II. Discipline is an Ordinance of Christ, for ordering the visible
Church in her several Congregations.
WE shall now briefly, (but yet so as to omit none that seem to have any weight
in them,) endeavor the answer of Objections.

1. Such as are general; as

1. That there were so many wicked among the Jews, and yet that Church was not
to be forsaken;

Answ. 1. That ministration was more carnal, and therefore a more carnal might
then pass, Heb. 9 10. As the Gospel ministration is more spiritual, Heb.
8.10, 11. so that the Gospel people may appear to be the people of that
ministration, they must in appearance be more spiritual.

2. Nor otherwhere for that time could Church Communion be enjoyed, God having
confined it to that nation, to that Priesthood, and that Temple; and therefore
though their Priests and People generally proved as great Idolaters and
Persecutors as the Church of Rome this day, yet the faithful among them must
there remain, to offer sacrifice and worship God; but in the times of the
Gospel, where any Church turns idolatrous and Persecutors of the truth, there
is liberty otherwhere to settle Church Communion purely.

3. That People were holy in their admission. 1. In Abraham's family, Genesis
18.18, 19. 2. In their national planting, Judge. 2.6, 7, 10. hence that
Testimony given of them, that they were planted a noble vine, wholly a right
seed, Jer. 2.21.

4. It was by rule provided for among them, that none externally wicked should
enjoy Church Communion; the mixture, that was beside the rule, and therefore no
plea at all. 1. None were circumcised but such as were externally holy; their
infants by descent from Abraham, being borne Church Members within the
ministration of the Covenant, the flesh of Abraham entitling that nation to the
Covenant, and there was their claim to circumcision, that they were that seed
of Abraham, whatever their immediate Parents were; and they in their infancy
had done nothing to make void that claim.

The Proselites that they might be circumcised, must give evidence of Abraham's
faith, and walk in his steps, and then they being Abraham's adopted seed, their
children had the same title to circumcision, as the children of the Jews.

In the Gospel Churches there must be a visible descent from Abraham according
to the faith, for right unto baptism, whether for our selves or seed, baptism
being the Seal of that Covenant which blesses all the nations of the earth in
the seed of Abraham by faith.

Thus they were holy in their circumcision. 2. For other peculiar Ordinances,
there was a threefold bar to such as were openly wicked.

1. Ceremonial; diverse cases of Ceremonial uncleannes which debarred
Communion in the peculiar Ordinances; and they that were most careless of the
holy things of God, would oftenest be taken in these Ceremonial snares.

2. Judicial; the same Covenant that entitled them to the Church, entitled
them likewise to that land, whence diverse sorts of wicked persons were to be
cut off from life; not only blasphemers, but idolaters; nor only murders, but
adulterers; nor only traitors, but disobedient to Parents, etc. hence the whole
nation enjoined, (as in Asa's time,) to swear a solemn Covenant for seeking
the Lord God of their fathers, with all their heart and all their soul, and to
perform it under penalty of death, whether great or small, whether man or
woman, Chron. 2.15, 12, 13. Now had the judicial law been executed according
to divine rule, partly so many wicked ones had been coct off; and partly the
rest had been so formidably warned, that here had been a great prevention of
that mixture in their Church Communion.

3. Ecclesiastical; Ezekiel. 22.26. difference to be made by Ecclesiastical power,
as well betwixt the holy and profane, (and those are moral terms,) as
betwixt the clean and unclean, (which are ceremonial terms) A general rule
for this, understood by the learned of Ecclesiastical cutting off Numb. 15.30,
31. the stranger there the Proselyte of the Covenant; further Testimony to this
rule, that the openly wicked were ecclesiastically to be cut off, is the
ordinance of excommunication among them, in the three degrees of it; Niddui
Cherem, and Maran-atha. A through discourse about this, for further
satisfaction, see in Gillaspies Aarons Rod blossoming.

Thus much for this Objection, which is wont much to be stood upon; but how
sandy a foundation it is, fit for so rotten a building, as many endeavor to
set upon it, I hope by this time appears.

Object. 2. The Parable of the tares, Matthew. 13.24. to the 31. and 37 to the 44
verse.

Answ. 1. The field is the world, v. 38. the good seed are the children of the
Kingdom, the tares are the children of the wicked one. ibid. these make the
visible Church in the world according to the mind of the parable; both these
are to grow together until the harvest, v. 30. what will hence follow? that
Persons apparently wicked, must be received into, and retained in the visible
Church? this puts the parable upon the rack, and forces it to speak what it
intends not. 1. It warrants not the receiving wicked Persons into the Church.
v. 25. 1. The husbandmmen were not so watchful as they should have been, when
the enemy sowed these tares; and it is the enemy not the Lord of the field that
sowes them. 2. Nor the retaining them; then should our Savior here be against
himself otherwhere, where he has appointed the Ordinance of Church censure
for casting out such, and that under so great a penalty, as formerly we have
seen, Matthew. 18. 1 Corinthians. 5. Revel. 2. etc.

1. If then the gathering up these tares, desired by the servants, v. 28. and
forbidden by the master, v. 29. be meant of Ecclesiastical casting out; these
cares must not be the openly wicked, but close hypocrites; yet by some of the
servants of more piercing judgments then others discerned; the reason given
may seem to favor this, v. 29. They were such as were so hardly discerned from
the wheat, that there was danger of rooting up the wheat, if these tares should
be gathered up; to this purpose Jerome witnesses, that in those countries
there are certain tares, so like to wheat in their first springing, as hardly
to be discerned from it; thus Cyprian understands it; taxing the insolency of
Novatian, who would not receive the lapsed again into the Church, though they
expressed never so much repentance; How great arrogance is this (says he) that
he should think he can do that which our Savior granted not to the Apostles,
that he should discern the tares from the wheat? -- If he will make himself
the searcher and the judge of the heart and reins, etc. Cypr. Epist. 52. but in
casting out the openly wicked, there is no danger of this.

2. Some think it not to be meant of Ecclesiastical casting out; and therefore
let the tares be granted for the openly wicked, this parable gives them no
place in the visible Church. 1. This gathering up the tares is their rooting
up, (for that expression concludes no less, lest ye root up also the wheat
with them, v. 29.) and therefore the final destruction of these wicked Persons;
but Church censure is not for destruction, (except of the flesh) but for
salvation of the Person. 2. This gathering up desired here by the servants and
by the master for the present denied, is that which shall be at the end of the
world, the final destruction of the wicked, v. 40, 41, 42. they shall not then
for the present gather them up, that is, not knowing of what spirit they are,
call for fire from heaven against them. The like interpretation is made of the
drawnet and the separation of the good from the bad, gathered together by it,
v. 47. etc.

Object. 3. Judas received the Supper, at least the Passover which was a
Sacrament; and the Sacraments belong only to those of the Church.

Answ. 1. If we shall hence conclude that the openly wicked have right to the
Sacraments, and so are the true matter of the visible Church. 1. We must deny
any such Ordinance as discipline. 2. By the same reason we must affirm that a
minister of the Church, openly known to be such an one, as has his heart set
to overthrow the Gospel, and betray the Lord for money, is to be retained in
the ministry, nay, that such an one so known beforehand is to be chosen into
the ministry; for all this Christ knew of Judas, therefore 3. Judas his
wickedness was known to Christ as God, but not as man; but for casting out of
the Church, the offense must be known to the Church, in a Church way, that is
by experience and proof.

Object. 4. The Apostles received such as offered themselves suddenly, among
the rest Simon Magus.

Answ. But yet upon such evidence, as amounted in the judgment of rational
charity, to the evidence of regeneration; for this, 1. Consider upon what
ground they offered themselves, the Word powerfully preached, and mightily by
miracles declared the Word of God. 2. What was the state of those times. 1.
They were times wherein according to former Prophecies the spirit was
plentifully powered out, by the ministry of the Apostles. 2. They were times of
great Persecution of the Christian faith; nothing of outward advantage to move,
but all to the contrary; to preach the Gospel then among the Jews, was as it
would be now to preach the truth among the Papists; to preach it then in the
other nations, was as it would be now to preach it among the Turks. If upon the
powerful preaching the truth in the maine points of religion, contrary to the
maine Popishand Turkish tenets, whereof they are most zealous, such and such in
the midst of the Popish and Turkish dominions, should against manifest and
great temptations openly embrace and profess the truth, such a Profession
would amount to another kind of evidence, then is generally pleaded for from
those examples among us. 3. God for vindicating his name against scandalous
Profession, put forth his revenging judgments against the deceitful and
hollow, as in Ananias and Saphira's case, whence many were much deterred from
joining with the Church; Acts 5.13. thus for the state of those times. Then
thirdly consider what a fair profession Simon Magus made, and for some time
continued in, which argues seemingly no small change, Acts 8.13. it is said he
believed, he continued with Philip; he was taken with admiration, etc. so
Ananias and Saphira made a fair Profession to sell their Possession for
relief of the Church. 4. When Simon discovers his rottenness, then, not till
then, Peter perceived the wickedness of his heart, v. 23. and when he
perceives it, he professes he has no lot among them, because his heart is not
right, v. 21. yet was not Peter without hope but he might repent, v. 22, and
something hopeful still does Simon appear; v. 24. And now the answer to this
instance may clear all other of the like nature. There is a fifth,

Object. 5. The scandalous mentioned in some of the Epistles, as in the Church
of Corinth; but this has been answered before in the eighth Argument; and
these are all the objections I know that have any color in them or at the
least in the answers to these, the grounds are laid for answering the rest. We
come now

2. To peculiar Objections, respecting the generality of our people in this
kingdom.

Object. 1. We are all of the Church by baptism already.

Answ. 1. From the beginning it was not so, that all should be so promiscuously
received; therefore it behooves us to return to the first pattern; what right
have they to baptism for their seed, themselves having been baptized, who had
none for themselves, were they unbaptized? 2. Ishmael and Esau were
circumcised, yet afterward unchurched; so were the Shechemites circumcised;
Many Heathens in America baptized by the Spaniard, yet none of these ever of
the Church.

3. To receive to baptism for themselves or seed gross ignorants, who
understand not the ground, nature, and end of that Ordinance, is 1. To make the
service of God in so maine an Ordinance an unreasonable service. 2. To make up
the visible Church in her several congregations by an implicit faith. 4. To
admit the scandalous in like manner for themselves or seed, is not to set the
Seal to the Covenant, but to pass it against the Covenant. 5. The Reformed
Churches receive not to the Lords Supper and other privileges of
Church Communion, such as were baptized in their infancy, but upon trial of
their knowledge and Christian conversation; which, when approved, they
solemnly admit them; understanding Imposition of hands, Heb. 6. to point at
the solemn admission of such. So Calvin upon the place, pleading thence for
infant baptism. Reply. But children may have right by former Ancestors. Answ.
1. Visible administration must have visible grounds; it must therefore upon
particular evidence appear to the Church, that such Ancestors they had; in
whose name they may have right. 2. How far may we go back, and where must we
stop? 3. Offer such reasoning to thy Prince, will it pass for current, if thou
should claim the Arms and Honor of some noble family, merely upon this
supposition, that it may be some of thine Ancestors were possessed thereof? 4.
Such as could not find their register for the line of the Priesthood, were as
polluted, put from their office, Ezra 1.62. 5. This will prevent the
distinction betwixt the Church and the world, and keep off for ever the
baptism of grown men. 6. As for the children of wicked Parents circumcised
among the Jews, this stone has been removed before, they had by Abraham
visible right under whom they fell.

Object. 2. But all sorts among us have likewise received the Supper.

Answ. 1. But the greatest part besides the rule, as is evident upon the same
grounds now pleaded against promiscuous baptism. 2. In the Reformed Churches,
when any member of one Congregation transplants to another, notwithstanding he
has received the Supper formerly in the Church whence he came, yet does the
Church to which he is come, examine and approve him for knowledge and
conversation, before they receive him to the Supper.

3. How or by what right have the Sacraments been ordinarily administered in
diverse of our Congregations, where the word has not been ordinarily preached?

From the doctrine of the matter of the Church, we may lay down some further
Practical Conclusions.

1. The Saints are to separate from the wicked, into Church Communion. 1.
Otherwise the Church cannot be made up only of its due matter; God cannot have
his Temple. 2. The Command is express for it; as we have seen in the sixth
Argument, the Saints as expressly called to this, as Abraham out of Caldea, as
the people of God out of Babylon. 3. To this separate Communion belongs far
greater blessings, then to believers in promiscuous standing, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
generally whatever blessings belong to the visible Church, may be clearlyest
expected, and are most fully bestowed upon the Church, when most truly and
purely settled in her Congregations; the presence of Christ, Rev. 2.1. his
Protection and Defense and Comforts, Isa. 4.5. the power of Christ, 1 Cor. 5.4.
When we have spoken to the discipline, we shall have further evidences of this
Conclusion.

2. No Person habitually scandalous is to be received to the Sacrament, though
he humbles himself before the Church, till some time of trial.

He is not true matter of the Church, who is not habitually in the Churches eye
righteous. But the Sacraments are peculiar Church-Ordinances.

Object. He that hears not the Church, is to be refused; but he that hears her,
is to be received; now he that humbles himself before the Church upon her
admonition, hears her.

Answ. 1. That rule If he hear not the Church, is concerning a brother, one
within, Matthew. 18.15. 1 Cor. 5.12. but no Person habitually scandalous is a
brother, as the doctrine of the matter of the Church has evinced.

2. For a brother fallen into some scandalous sin, and humbling himself; it
follows not, that he is not to be cast out, therefore he is suddenly to be
received: he is neither to be suddenly cast out, nor suddenly received to the
Sacrament, but to stand under further trial; otherwise 1. Church-admonitions
will be turned into a mere mockery, execution of censure against the most
impudent for ever prevented, who will quickly in appearance humble themselves
if that may serve the turn; such a course of discipline will in stead of
humbling, harden, like the Papists absolution, upon their formal auricular
confession and indulgences. 2. For him in such a case to desire sudden
receiving, is scandalous, an evidence that he is not humbled; which if he were,
he himself would not venture so soon upon his own heart.

Object. Matthew. 18.21, 22. with Luke 17.3, 4.

Answ. It is a Precept against revenge; it is Personal, not Ecclesiastical
forgiveness here commanded; forgiveness of the heart, not of the Court; of an
injury against me, not of a sin against God, and even betwixt man and man;
this forbids not but a man may prosecute the law against the trespasser in
diverse cases, and yet from the heart forgive him and pray for him.

3. Conclus. Hence the vanity of that argument, used by some who refuse to
join apart from the scandalous in a true way of Church Communion and
discipline; To the pure all things are pure; therefore the wickedness of
others defiles not me, receiving the Sacrament with them.

Answ. Thy sin defiles thee, and it is thy sin to keep off from the true way of
the visible Church.

Suppose in a settled Church, a Person justly excommunicate; thou should
defile thy self, if thou should receive with him, because thou violatest
the order of the Gospel; so here.

CHAP. III. The second Instruction. Discipline is an Ordinance of Christ, for
ordering the visible Church in her several Congregations.
MAt. 18.15. etc. 1 Cor. 5. 2 These. 3.6. Rev. 2.2, 14, 20. 1 Timothy 5.20. These
Scriptures perused, show us both that there is a discipline, and what it is.

For the nature and use of discipline, together with the obligation, lying upon
Christians in their places for endeavoring it, I shall gather something out of
Dr. Ames that excellent Divine. Medull. l. 1. c. 37.

1. Holy discipline is the Personal application of the Will of God by
censures, either for preventing scandals, or for removing them out of the
Church of God.

2. In the preaching of the Word, the Will of God is propounded and really
applied for begetting and increasing of faith and obedience. In the
administration of the Sacraments the Will of God is personally applied by
Seals, for confirming faith and obedience. In the exercise of discipline the
Will of God is personally applied by censures, for removing of sins which fight
against true faith and obedience.

3. This discipline is instituted by Christ, Mat. 16.19. and Mat. 18.15, 16,
17. and is therefore plainly of divine right; neither may it by men at
pleasure be taken away, diminished or changed.

4. Nay he sins against Christ the Author and Ordainer, whosoever does not what
in him lies to settle and promote this discipline in the Churches of God.

5. The persons about whom it ought to be exercised, are the members of the
visible institute Churches, without any exception, Matthew. 18.15. 1 Cor. 5.11.
and no others, verse 12. To all and only those it belongs, to whom it belongs
to receive the Sacraments. An institute Church is a particular Congregation of
visible believers, joined together by special bond, express or implicit for
exercising the communion of Saints constantly among themselves, cap. 32.

6. In those persons it has respect to sins and scandals; for it is an
healing medicine for the wounds and diseases to which the sheep of Christ are
subject, 1 Cor. 5.5.

7. Because it does effectually urge obedience to Christ, therefore not without
singular reason, a great part of the Kingdom of Christ, as he does visibly
rule his Church, is by the best Divines placed in this Discipline. Hence
likewise the Keys, (and one of them is the Key of Discipline) are called the
Keys of the Kingdom; and the operations of this Key, binding, loosing,
opening and shutting the Kingdom of heaven, have upon them the stamp of
Christ's kingly authority.

8. And this is the true reason why in so few Churches, the Discipline of
Christ, together with the Doctrine, is thoroughly settled and exercised, because
very many of those who will seem to know Christ, and to hope in him, do yet
refuse to receive the whole Kingdom of Christ, and to give up themselves
altogether unto him.

9. And as it is part of the Kingdom of Christ, so by the same reason, it is
part of the Gospel; for it is an holy manner of promoting the Gospel, appointed
in the Gospel it self; therefore they do neither receive the whole kingdom of
Christ, nor the whole Gospel, who reject Discipline.

10. But because every part of the kingdom of Christ is in its place
necessary, and that part especially which does effectually repress sin;
therefore we may not safely enough rest in those Churches which want
Discipline, except that public want be made up by private care and mutual
watching.

11. The parts of this Discipline, are two Brotherly admonition.
Excommunication.
Which in case of repentance approved to the Church, is succeeded by Absolution.

12. Brotherly admonition is to be exercised in case of any sin, for which
Discipline is appointed as a medicine, but after a diverse manner, according to
the difference of secret and open sins. In secret sins, those three degrees are
to be observed which Christ prescribed in order, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17, but in
public sins those degrees are not necessary, 1 Timothy 5.20.

13. Full Excommunication is not to be exercised, except stubbornness be added
to the sin, Matthew. 18.17. for the sinner duly admonished, must needs either
appear penitent or stubborn; the penitent is not to be excommunicate,
therefore only the stubborn.

14. When the matter may sufferdelay, it is agreeable to Scripture and reason,
that Excommunication be begun by suspending from the Lords Supper, and such
like privileges of the Church, which is commonly called the less
Excommunication.

15. But in this degree we must not rest, but repentance is by this means, and
in this space to be urged, of which if there be no hopes, we must then go on to
a complete separation from the communion of the faithful, which is commonly
called the greater Excommunication.

16. But because the stubborn sinner cannot be separated from the faithful,
except the faithful also be separated from him, and this makes for the wholesome
shaming of the sinner, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. therefore they who are justly
excommunicate, are to be shunned by all Communicants; not as to duties simply
moral or otherwise necessary, but as to those parts of conversation, which are
wont to accompany approbation and inward familiarity.

17. From the bond of Excommunication no impenitent person is to be loosed,
neither ought Absolution to be denied to any penitent; but it is not sufficient
repentance for a man to say, I repent me, I will do no more; except he
otherwise make proof of true repentance; but such tokens of true repentance
ought to appear, that the Church may be bound to rest in them; otherwise
hypocrisy is nourished, and both the Church and Christ himself are mocked.

From this discourse of Discipline, besides the nature of it, appears

1. The weight of it, binding to wrath, or loosing from it, retaining, or
remitting sins, opening the kingdom of heaven to the penitent, or shutting it
against the impenitent, casting out of the commonion of the faithful, cutting
off from the body of Christ, delivering over to Satan or readmission into the
communion of the faithful, reimplanting into the body of Christ, rescue from
their subjection to Satan; and so as all this done here upon earth, where
rightly administered, is confirmed in heaven.

2. The necessity of it; 1. Standing upon so clear a precept and institution
of Christ; therefore being a Gospel ordinance, unchangeable: 2. Being so maine
a part of the visible kingdom of Christ as Mediator. 3. From the ends of it;
for reclaiming and gaining of offending brethren; from deterring others from
the like offenses, for purging out that old leaven which might infect the whole
lump, for vindicating the honor of Christ, and the holy profession of the
Gospel; and for preventing the wrath of God which might justly fall upon the
Church, if they should suffer his Covenant and the Seal thereof to be
profaned by notorious and obstinate offenders.

CHAP. IV. The third Instruction. To the people of the Church it belongs by
divine right to choose their Officers.
THat Christ has appointed Officers in his Church for the administration of
the Word, Sacraments and Discipline, we need not prove; The confirmation of
this Proposition, that the choice of Officers is the peoples right, makes not a
little for the due settling the Church. For this, I shall do three things, 1.
Point to the Scriptures teaching this truth. 2. Add some reasons according to
Scripture. 3. Give in the testimonies, first of the Primitive, then of the
reformed Churches.

1. For the Scriptures, Acts 1.15. with 23. The Disciples go as far as is
possible for man to have an hand in choosing an Apostle, who must have his
commission immediately from God; they appoint two, and give forth lots, Acts
6.3, 4, 5. The whole multitude choose their Deacons, and present them to the
Apostles for Ordination, Acts 14.23. It is said of Paul and Barnabas when they
had ordained Elders to the Churches; the word translated ordained, signifies
solemnly to appoint to office upon the peoples vote or choice, or suffrage: So
Stephen in his Treasure of the Greek tongue renders it to make or create by
suffrage. See Calvin and Beza afterward.

2. For reasons 1. The Officers are given for the good of the Church, Ephesians. 4,
11, 12. therefore she may in a certain and ordinary way procure them, which
yet in many cases she cannot do, if she have not right to choose them. 2. They
are given to the Church, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. therefore she has a right to call
them to her self: If she depended upon either Magistrate or Patron, or any
other for a right to call her Officers, they were then rather given to them on
whom she should so depend, then to her. 3. Otherwise the Church, sc. the
company of Beseevers should be in a worse condition then any Society as to the
settling of her self in her best state; no people without rulers over them and
Officers for their good but may settle such among themselves, as the experience
of all Commonwealths shows 4. In this choice of the faithful is laid the
foundation of greater love betwixt the people and their Officers, and so the
ministry of the Officers becomes more fruitful. 5. The faithful are to hear
the true Teachers, to shun the false, to try the spirits, which imports 1.
Moral ability for choosing; 2. A right of choosing or applying themselves to the
true Ministers; add to these, Christian practice and experience; what faithful
soul makes any scruple of leaving a faithless and unedifying Minister at
home, to go abroad for enjoying a faithful and edifying ministry? which yet
might not be allowed if Christians had not a right to choose their own Officers.

3. For testimonies, 1. Of the ancient Church, Cyprian who lived a great light
of the Church, about 240 years more or less after Christ, is plentiful
herein.

As in the Scripture testimonies it appears, so in those times according to the
Scriptures, and so in the reformed Churches, Ordination of Officers succeeded
their Election. Hence Cyprian to the Presbyters, Deacons and all the people, in
the Ordination of ministers [Most dear brethren, we are always wont to advise
with you, and to weigh the manners and merits of every one by Common Counsel]
Epist. 33. according to Pamelius Edition at the beginning.

Cyprian to the people, to avoid the faction of Felicissimus and five
Presbyters siding with him; speaking of them Epist. 40.

They mindful of their conspiracy, -- against my Episcopacy, (Episcopacy
distinct from Presbytery had then place in the Church, though of a far purer
stamp then our Prelacy*) nay against your suffrage, (or Election by vote,) and
the judgment of God, renew their old opposition, etc. he justifies his own
standing by the peoples choice of him; to the same purpose upon the occasion he
speaks Epist. 55.

Cyprian to Antonianus a brother, about Cornelius chosen Bishop of Rome by the
people and the ministry. And Novatian seeking to make himself Bishop,
Cornelius is thus justified; that he was made Bishop by the judgment of God
and Christ; by the Testimony of almost all the ministry, by the vote or
suffrage of the people then present, etc. Here was the ministers testimony, but
the choice the peoples. Epist. 52. the same Cornelius he justifies against
Novatian, and that with the concurrent judgment of a council assembled upon
the same ground, the suffrage of the ministry and people. Epist 67.

Cyprian to the ministry of Spain. Cyprian with his fellow-Bishops assembled,
praises the ministry and people of Spain; that they had by lawful Election
placed Sabinus and Felix in stead of Basilides and Martial, lapsed Bishops; we
have here most pregnant testimonies and proofs of the peoples right in choosing.

They when they had met together, read letters out of Spain, desiring their
advice; where in answer Cyprian with the rest of the Bishops, first urging of
how great (...) it is that the minister or Bishop be holy, he thus speaks
further; Wherefore it behooves that with full diligence and sincere trial they
be chosen to the ministry, who are such as God may hear their Prayers.
Neither let the people flatter themselves as though they might be free from
guilt, communicating with a sinful minister or Bishop, and affording their
consent to the unjust and unlawful Episcopacy or ministry of him that is set
over them. A little after, Therefore the people obeying the Lords Commandments,
and fearing God, ought to separate themselves from a sinful Church ruler,
neither mix themselves at the sacrifices of a sacrilegious Priest, forasmuch
as they have the greatest power, either of choosing the worthy Priests (that was
the language of those times for Bishops or Ministers,) or refusing the
unworthy, which thing we see also to descend from divine authority, that the
Bishop or Minister be chosen, the people being present, in the sight of all,
and be approved worthy and fit by public judgment and testimony, as in Numb.
20.26, 27, 28. add Levit. 8.3. etc. God commands the Priest to be (...) before
the whole Assembly; that is, he teaches and shows that Ordination of Priests
ought not to be, but with the joint knowledge of the people assisting, the
people being present, either that the crimes of the evil may be discovered, or
that the merits of the good may be declared; and it may be a just and lawful
Ordination, which has been examined by the suffrage and judgment of all; he
still goes on; which thing afterward is observed according to divine Precepts
in the Acts of the Apostles, when Peter speaks to the People about ordaining a
Bishop in the place of Judas, Acts 1.15. ( Cyprian he understands those one
hundred and twenty names, the people of the Church, and makes use of this place
for the peoples Election;) he adds, and we take notice the Apostles observed
this, that not only in the Ordination of Priests, (that is Bishops or
Ministers) but of Deacons also, Acts 6.2, 3. which verily was therefore so
diligently and warily done, the whole people being called together, lest some
unworthy should have crept in; etc. he adds that it is most diligently to be
kept, from divine tradition and Apostolical observation, which among them, and
almost throughout all the Provinces is observed, that for the right celebrating
Ordinations, all the next Bishops of the same Province meet with that people to
whom the Ruler is to be ordained; and the Bishop being chosen, the people being
present, etc. -- which we find observed by you (says he) in the Ordination of
Sabinus, that the office of a Bishop was conferred upon him by the suffrage of
the whole brotherhood, and the Bishops who were present, Epist. 68. This
testimony is clear and full for many things worthy our observation. 1. That
Ordination was after Election. 2. That the people have right of choosing the
highest officers in the Church. 3. That they have the greatest power of choosing
or refusing. 4. That they have right, and it is their duty to separate
themselves from such as having been placed over them prove wicked. 5. That all
this is by divine authority. 6. That they have the same right to choose all
Church Officers. 7. That this is the way to keep out the unworthy; whence we
may conclude the people owned for true matter of the Church then, were an
understanding and holy people. Pamelius in his Annotations upon the place,
though no great friend to the peoples power here, yet proves the presence and
suffrage of the people for some ages after in Africa, Augustines Successors so
chosen; the same practice in Greece in Chrysostomes times, in Spain, in
France, in Rome, and this custom to have continued till Gregory the first,
nay till the times of Charles and Lewis Emperors; the like testimony from the
first times of all immediately succeeding the Apostles, Clemens Romanus (the
same who is mentioned Phil. 4.3.) writing an Epistle to the Corinthians and
taxing a great schism among them, casting off some of their faithful
ministers, he tells them it is an unjust thing to remove them from their public
ministry, who had been placed by the Apostles, or after them by excellent men,
the whole Church consenting, or it seeming good to the whole Church, etc.

2. For the Testimonies of our Reformers; it is well known to be the doctrine
of the reformed Churches generally; I shall give an instance or two. Calvin upon
that word (...), Acts 14.23. they two says he, viz. Paul and Barnabas created
the Elders, but the whole multitude as it was the custom of the Grecians in
their Elections, declared with their hands lifted up whom they would have. So
the Roman Historians speak many times; the Consuls who held the Assemblies
created new Magistrates, for no other reason, but because they received the
votes, and moderated the people in their choice. Institu. l. 4. c. 3. Sect. 15.
Again Paul and Barnabas are said to choose the Elders; do they this as a duty
proper to them? nay rather they permit the matter to the votes of all;
therefore in ordaining Pastors the choice of the people was free; but least any
thing should be done tumultuously, Paul and Barnabas have the leading plaes or
rule them as Moderatours; and so ought the decree of the Council of Laodicea
to be understood, which forbids the choice to be left to the people. Calv. in
Acts 14.23. Beza upon the same place, this word (translated, ordained, but
signifying as formerly we heard, to choose by hands lifted up) arises (says
he) from the custom of the Grecians, who gave in their votes and suffrages
with their hands stretched out; And the force of this word is to be observed,
(he still goes on) that we may know Paul and Barnabas did nothing of their own
pleasure, nor exercised any Tyranny in the Church. Then maintaining his own
calling and the calling of the rest of the Reformers to their ministry, First
he denies that Ordination or Consecration by Imposition of hands to be lawful,
which is used among the Papists, upon a double ground. 1. Because there was no
lawful choice before it. 2. Because the Ordainers among them deserve
excommunication, and in these two cases Ordination is void by the Canons they
boast of. Secondly he lays down the certain notes of their call, (his own
with the other ministers of the Reformation,) that they were approved of both
for life and doctrine, by the lawful Testimony of their Churches, that they
were by them chosen, and lastly with calling upon the name of God confirmed in
their ministry.

Bucer. The Holy Ghost requires, that they who are ordained to the Holy
ministry, be first tried and proved, and so far as is possible approved to
all in the Church; and this he argues from the unfruitfulnes of the ministry
otherwise; -- adds; wisely, and not according to humane wisdom only, but
divine, did Leo Bishop of Rome write, that no reason would admit, that he that
should take care of the Church, should not be both proved and desired by that
very Church, -- which Paul considering, ( viz. how much it made for the fruit
of his ministry,) labors so earnestly to preserve his love and esteem among
the Corinthians, and to restore the same among the Galatians. Bucer. of the
lawful Ordination of Ministers, p. 242.

Furthermore great care is to be had of this, that those ministers may be given
to the Churches, whom they may love, esteem and honor; and that this may be
brought to pass, no man at all is to be admitted to the sacred ministeries of
the Church, who is not before religiously tried and approved to the whole
Church where he ought to administer, p. 243. p. 244.

In this trial of those that are presented to the services of the Church, not
only is this to be required who are made fit for those ministeries by God, but
likewise that they may be acknowledged, received and accounted such, by the
Churches, their trial is so to be ordered and carried thorough, that it may be
known and thoroughly beheld by the whole Church to which any one is to serve,
who are to be received by them, as given and sent of the Lord unto them: who
are to be refused by them, as not given and sent by the Lord unto them; And
then he brings in that of Cyprian formerly mentioned. Epist. 68. Let these
suffice for instance.

Object. But the people are ignorant, irreligious, and many ways unfit.

Answ. 1. For their abilities in learning, for their judgment in the highest
and mysterious most points, and the like, who are to be chosen, they are by
learned Ministers (where it may be) to be tried. 2. There is a great use of the
guidance and direction of able and approved Ministers, for ordering the
proceeding in the choice, that it be done with due care and peaceablenesse. 3.
The People of the Church are not to be supposed ignorant, irreligious, etc.
they that are so are no true matter of the Church, nor to be owned, as formerly
this has been proved; (...) this very right and duty of the People adds a
further proof, because it belongs to them to choose their officers, therefore
they must not be such a People, and in all these testimonies we find them
supposed of another stamp. 4. Suppose that assistance of ministers cannot be
had, as in case God should enlighten with his truth a company of people in the
midst of Rome, might not they by divine charter settle among themselves a
ministry? In other cases, when the help of ministers cannot be had, the
reasons formerly given, especially the first, second, third and fifth will
conclude the Peoples right without them. Otherwise this would further ensue
after a general Apostasy, as that of the Papacy, though God should enlighten
never so many People, except withal he should enlighten some of their Priests,
there must be an impossibility of Church-Reformation. 5. Though such a
concurrence of ministers, where it may be had, is for the help of the Church,
as in the respects above named, yet may they not divest her of this native
right, to put upon her any but whom she shall choose and approve.

It is true, to a wicked People no true matter of the Church, a minister may be
sent to preach the Gospel, though they hate him, (so far from choosing him;)
but it is one thing to be a Preacher to a People, another to be their Pastor,
and ruling elder in way of discipline; Only the Saints (visible) combined, are
capable of Pastoral and disciplinary interest.

Quest. How is this right of the people preserved, to be judged by officers of
their own choosing, in the ordinary way of the Classis, when the sentence shall
be carried against an whole Congregation, by officers of other Congregations,
never chosen by them? how? was it not fairlier preserved in the way of
primitive Episcopacy? All the people choosing the Bishop and all the Ministers.
Cyprian Epist. 68. supr. So Clemens for the Ministers. Supr.

CHAP. V. The fourth Instruction. Christ has committed the power of
Discipline, not to the Officers alone, but to the Church, that is, to the
Officers and the brotherhood.
THere is in the Church of Christ a twofold power; of Order. Office.


The power of order arises from Church Fellowship, and belongs to the brethren
so joined together.

The power of office arises from Commission for rule; and belongs to
officers set over the brethren.

The power of Order is To be exercised by the brotherhood, whilst yet without
Officers; and it is the power of choosing their Officers formerly spoken to. To
be exercised by the brotherhood together with the officers; and it is the power
of Discipline in Or binding by Excommunication, for which Admonition makes way;
withdrawing partly makes way for it, partly follows upon it.
Binding by Admonition. Withdrawing. Excommunication.
Loosing; or Absolution.



The power of Order is here taken in a sense very different from that School
use, where it is distingushed from jurisdiction, or rather against it.

Admonition in case a Brother sin scandalously; Withdrawing, in case he hear
not the Admonition; Excommunication, in case of stubborn persisting in his
sin against the Admonition of the Church.

Excommunication expressed by Judging. 1 Cor. 5. Putting away. 1 Cor. 5. Taking
away. 1 Cor. 5. Purging out. 1 Cor. 5. Delivering to Satan. 1 Cor. 5. Stating
among the Heathen. Matthew. 18.17.


Loosing or Absolution in the Churches Forgiving. Upon Repentance 2 Cor. 2.7,
8. Comforting. Upon Repentance 2 Cor. 2.7, 8. Confirming her love. Upon
Repentance 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.


This power of Discipline, is one of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: The
Key is twofold, of Doctrine, Discipline;
Luke 11.52 and here the opening and shutting of the Key is the same with
binding and loosing formerly. Matthew. 16.19. with Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17, 18.

The power of discipline thus briefly declared, we now come to confirm the
instruction, that not to the officers alone, but to the Church it is committed,
that is the brotherhood with the officers.

1. It belongs to the Church, Matthew. 18.17. but the Church never signifies the
officers alone, throughout the new Testament frequently the officers and
brethren together: as in the inscriptions of the Epistles to the Church at
Corinth, etc. sometimes the people distinct from their officers; when they were
possessed of officers, Acts 15.4. the Church there distinct from the Officers
whether Apostles or Elders, and this Church the brethren, v. 22, 23. so Rev.
1.20. the stars are the ministers, and the candlesticks are the Churches;
before they were possessed of officers, Acts 14.23. there is the Church as the
candlestick, before the candle be put into it. If any man shall say that in
Matthew. 18.17. the Church signifies the officers alone, in stead of proving he
begs the question.

2. The Apostle enjoining the exercise of this power for Binding, 1 Cor. 5.
Loosing. 2 Cor. 2.
ascribes it to the brotherhood together with the officers.

First, for Binding, 1 Cor. 5. he writes to the whole Church. 1. To the same
here, to whom he inscribes the Epistle, but he inscribes it to all the Saints
in Corinth, with all in every place, as comprehended in his salutation, and
concerned in the institutions of this Epistle, though particularly sent to the
Church at Corinth. 2. The same who were puffed up when they should have
mourned, v. 2. are to be gathered together in the name, and with the power of
Christ, Paul's spirit joining with them, though he was absent in body, v. 4. to
deliver such an one to Satan, v. 5.3. The same whose glorying is rebuked, the
whole lump leavened, v. 6. are to purge out that leaven, v. 7. whence the
Apostle digresseth from public leaven, the scandalous sinner, to personal
leaven, malice and wickedness, v. 8.4. The same to whom he gives direction for
avoiding familiar society with a scandalous brother, interpreting the meaning
of a former Epistle, v. 9, 10, 11. they are to judge of those within, v. 12.
and put away from among themselves that wicked person, v. 13.

Secondly for loosing, 2 Cor. 2. the same whom he had formerly made heavy, v.
1, 2. by rebuking in the former Epistle, that from their obedience and
repentance, he might have much joy of them, when he should come to them, v. 3,
4. whom in part he clears v. 5. They are the many by whom the incestuous Person
was rebuked v. 6. and they are to forgive and comfort him, v 7.8. The same to
whom the Apostle wrote to make proof of their obedience, v. 9. with whom as he
formerly joined in binding, so now in loosing, v. 10 they are still the same,
whom formerly he had made heavy, and in whom now he rejoiced, cap. 7. v. 8. to
the end. He that can now cast such a mist, as shall darken so fair and clear
a context, and make us meet with the officers only in all this, missing the
People, I shall allow him this testimony, he has profited very well in the
school of darkness. Some footstep of the Peoples power here we had in the
ruins of discipline by the Prelates, in that the absolved Party was wont to
ask the Congregation forgiveness.

3. Every brother has a power, and his duty it is to admonish first singly,
then jointly before a witness or two, the case so requiring, and there is
weight in that admonition for gaining a brother, Mat. 18.15, 16. how comes it
to pass, that after the offense is brought to the officers, there is no weight
in the public admonition, and consequently censure of the whole brotherhood.

The end of the Censure is to shame and humble the sinner, and is there no
weight in the solemn judgment of any, nor all the brotherhood, but only of
the officers for this end?

4. If this judgment belong only to the officers, then Christ has so
instituted this Ordinance, as many times it cannot obtain its end, without the
sin of the Church; this is clear thus; in case the Church or brotherhood
apprehend the sentence unrighteous, they cannot without sin withdraw from him;
the Party sentenced, (suppose by officers proceeding as wickedly, as sometimes
our Prelates and their creatures were wont to do, passing sentence of
excommunication for refusing impious Ceremonies, or the like,) if they shall not
withdraw, the end is not obtained, the sentence not obeyed; but to say that
Christ has so instituted this or any other Ordinance, is to tax his wisdom
and holiness.

Quest. Suppose some few apprehend the sentence unrighteous, what shall they do?

Answ. Modestly declare their dissent, and for their parts forbear to act it.

5. That the Church (or brotherhood) has some share in the power of the keys,
appears by her honorable relation to Christ; the Elders are stewards, but the
Church is his wife.

Object. That is the universal Church.

Ans. Every particular Church or company of combined Saints has the whole
nature of the universal Church, and the same relation to Christ, that all the
Saints together have, 1 Cor. 12.27.

Object. Then women and children should share in the power of the keys, for
they are of the Church of believers.

Answ. This is a most trifling objection, 1. It is granted by many who make
this Objection, that the brethren have right to choose their officers, who yet
deny women and children any share therein. 2, A power may belong to such an
Order, yet not to all in that Order; the Lords Supper belongs to the Order of
believers, not to officers only; the children of believers are in
Church-account believers, yet the supper belongs not to them. I will add, that
honor which belongs to such an Order, reflects upon them in that order, who
are yet debarred Personal application; the honor of circumcision, sealing up
the Jews into Gods family, had reflection upon their women; they were of the
circumcision in opposition to the Gentiles, who were the uncircumcision, though
they could not be circumcised; it is a privilege and honor of our Nobility in
England, that they make one House of Parliament; and who can deny that the
wives and children of Nobles are concerned in this Honor, though it belongs
not to them to sit in the House?

Let us now add the testimonies first of the primitive, and then of the
reformed Churches in some of their choicest Divines. 1. For the primitive
times, Cyprian, To the Presbyters and Deacons;

As for that which my fellow Presbyters, Donatus and Fortunatus, Novatus and
Gordius wrote about, I could write nothing in answer, forasmuch as I have
determined from the beginning of my Episcopacy, to do nothing of mine own
mind, or by mine own sentence, without your counsel and the consent of my
people. But when I shall come to you, (he was now in exile,) by the grace of
God we will then deal about those things in common, which either are done, or
are to be done, as mutual honor requires, Epist. 6. at the end. The like to
this, in the 18. Epistle, about the demand of some of the lapsed, (that is
those who had fallen in time of Persecution,) desiring to be restored, having
for that end obtained the Confessors letters, (the Confessors were such as were
imprisoned for the truth.) This thing (says he) since it belongs to the
counsel and sentence of us all, I would not judge it beforehand, neither dare
I challenge to my self alone a common business.

When some Presbyters had over-hastily received some of the lapsed to the Lords
Supper, He tells them they must make account to plead their cause before
himself, the rest of the Ministers, the Confessors, and the whole People.
Epist. 10.

When he yet in exile was consulted with by letters by his Presbyters about
certain who had fallen, and were now returned, desirous to be received again
of the Church, he answers;

I cannot be judge alone in this case; many of the ministers are absent; and
this case requires exact handling, not only with my fellow ministers, but with
the whole People; for the thing is to be weighed with well-poised moderation,
and so to be sentenced, as may for after times settle an example about the
ministers of the Church, Epist. 28.

The ministry of Rome to Cyprian, ( there being at this time no Bishop at
Rome,) In this great business it seemed good to us, which thou also have
formerly handled, that the Peace of the Church be upheld; furthermore, so
conference of counsels being had with the Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons,
Confessors, and in like manner with the standing People to handle the cause of
the lapsed, Epist. 31.

Cyprian to the People, concerning Felicissimus and the five Presbyters of his
faction; By the Providence of God they undergo the punishment they have
deserved, that not being cast out by us, they should cast out themselves; --
According to your divine suffrages, conspirators and wicked men should of their
own accord drive themselves out of the Church; (he here calls the suffrage of
the people divine, not because infallible, but because it is according to
Scripture that they should have their vote) Again, They alone bear the
punishment of their conspiracy, who formerly according to your suffrages, now
according to the judgments of God, have deserved to undergo the sentence of
their conspiracy and Perverseness. To the same People; about the business of
the lapsed in general for receiving or still refusing them. Cyprian declaring
his hope shortly to be restored together with his fellow ministers; Whom being
present, (says he according to your judgment either way, (arbitrium,)
likewise, and the Common Counsel of us all, we may order and exactly handle
the things that are to be done, as once it seemed good, Epist. 40. A further
Testimony we have formerly set down at the end of the ninth Argument, for the
matter of the Church; showing at once how the People of the Church were
qualified, and what power they had for keeping out the unworthy. Epist. 55.
More Testimonies of like nature might be alleged out of the same father, but
these shall suffice.

I shall not need here to observe, how he ascribes to the People in point of
censure, as their right; counsel, consent, vote or suffrage, judgment either
way, or arbitrium, nor how general his Testimonies are, as including the rest
of the ministry; the ministry of Rome likewise giving the like Testimony.

We come now to some few Testimonies out of some of the choycest Divines of the
Reformed Churches. Calvin, Let us observe that this temper is to be held in
excommunication, that this discipline be exercised by the Common Council of
the Elders, and with the consent of the People, and this is the remedy whereby
Tyranny is prevented, in 1 Cor. 5.4. That is the warrantable proceeding in
excommunication which Paul shows, if not only the Elders do it apart, but with
the knowledge and approbation of the Church, viz. in that manner that the
multitude of the People do not rule the action, but observe it as a witness
and keeper, that nothing be done by a few at their pleasure. Institut. lib. 4.
cap. 12. sect. 7.

Bucer. This power (of the keys,) is in the whole Church, but the authority of
the ministry is in the Elders and Bishops, as of old at Rome the Power was in
the People, the authority in the Senate, in Mat. 16.18, 19. The same Author
expounding, Matthew. 18.15. etc. If the offending brother hear not the second
admonition, let his stubbornness be declared to the Church, that he may be the
third time admonished by the whole Congregation, of those amongst whom he is,
or whereof he is a part; and if he hear not the Church, being admonished by
her, let him be accounted as an heathen and Publicane. Again: of the Power of
binding and loosing, that is of shutting out, or receiving into the Church,
whether at the beginning or after wickedness committed, I have spoken before;
Mat. 16. but here it is clearly set forth that this power, that is, the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, is in the hands of all those who meet together in
the name of Christ, that is in faith; because theirs is the spirit of the Lord
and his word; for such only meet in the name of Christ, that is, trusting upon
Christ, and grow together many members into one body, etc. Then interpreting
the 19. v. -- when two of you shall agree together to ask any thing, etc. he thus
speaks of private admonition, and absolution in the hands of the brethren; the
Lord speaks here especially of praying for pardon on their behalf who had
offended. Hence therefore we may learn the fruit of private admonition and
absolution; for if two shall agree together, to beg the pardon of a sin; that
sin must be known to them both, and acknowledged as a sin, here therefore the
private admonition, or confession of that sin must have had place. Now
forasmuch as true prayer shuts out doubting of obtaining, it must needs be that
a brother may confirm a brother, that pardon is granted, and by applying it to
him, may render him secure in the Lord; hence the brethren in private,
according to Christ's institution, exercise in part the power of the keys, and
thence their right of public exercise of them, it being of the same kind, will
evidently follow, as he there speaks. It is true, says he, the Lord has
uttered this Promise concerning a few, that he might teach how he approves and
embraces us, agreeing and consenting together in himself, though we be never
so small a number; but we shall please him more, if many amongst our selves
shall agree together in him, and we shall be able to do things innumerable in
his name. The same Author. The Apostle blames the Corinthians, that the whole
Church had not appointed mourning, that is, fasting and public deprecation of
the wrath of God for this wickedness, and that she had not cast out the
incestuous Person out of her Communion, -- He did no loss solemnly exhort the
Corinthians, that after his repentance, they would receive him into the favor
of the Lord and his Church, lib. de regno Christi c. 9. p. 43. There is much
more in the same grave Author to the same purpose up and down in his works; I
shall add only one short testimony more out of Peter Martyr. We conclude says
he without the consent of the Church, (that is the People of the Congregation,)
no man can be excommunicated. loc. com. de excommunicat. sent. 9. This right
belongs to the Church, neither ought it to be taken from her sent 10.

We shall forbear further quotations, it being generally the doctrine of the
Reformers, as is well known to such as are acquainted with their Writings.

CHAP. VI.
THis Chapter shall be taken up with certain Conclusions, depending upon the
former about discipline.

1. As the Prelates, stripping both the People and the Elders of the power of
discipline, violate the Gospe-order in two maine degrees, (we may add a third,
in that they take it into their own hands who have nothing to do with it,) so
they that will have the Presbyterian Government so exercised, as all power
shall be confined to the Elders excluding the People, violate the Gospell-order
in one maine degree at the least.

2. Forasmuch as the People of the Church have a power of Church Order for the
exercise of discipline, both privately and publicly, hence we may now clearly
see of what necessity it is, that the matter of the Church be only visible
Saints according to the doctrine and explication of the matter of the Church
formerly laid down. Many there are, who loosing this Peg in the Tabernacle of
the Peoples power for discipline, they then loose another, concerning their
qualification for the due matter of the Church, and thence a third, their right
of choosing officers, and a fourth, the due limits for the Sacraments, and so
the whole frame grows ruinous, I much admire the wisdom of our king and
lawgiver of his Church, who has so ordered all, as where his Pattern is
observed, there must be a beautiful Temple; To instance in this particular,
because the People have their share in the power of the keys, and the exercise
of it: therefore they must be a knowing and a holy People, without which they
have no Principles for such duties. 2. Had this been observed, Prelacy had
never got footing in the Churches. 3. Much less Primacy over all, that which
the man of sin claims to his pretended chair; the slacking of this joint
made way for the mystery of iniquity in the world, and the infirming of it must
make for the destruction thereof.

3. In settling a disciplinary Congregation, there is the substance of a
Church Covenant, whether in word expressed or not. What is the substance of a
Church Covenant? The mutual consent of the faithful for walking together in
one Congregation, according to the rules of the Gospel, for faith, obedience,
communion in Worship and Discipline; in settling the Church in her
Congregations: here is the substance of this, these things are visibly done;
what objection then can there be of weight against the solemn profession of it
by word? 1. The Scripture seems to hold it forth, as Isa 44 5. So Israel of
old was taken into Covenant, and how often the Covenant renewed with them, even
upon singular reformations. 2. In the Primitive times the Catechumens when
received into Church fellowship, gave up themselves by solemn profession
openly expressed unto the Church. 3. When members are admitted in the reformed
Churches, they profess their purpose for religions walking in
Church Fellowship, and for subjection to the Discipline. 4. In this, as in
other cases, by open profession and covenanting, we lay a stricter tie upon our
selves, for all duties of Church Communion. 5. We do more expressly witness
our high esteem of Gods institution for Church Order and privileges,

This confederacy according to the order of the Gospel, seems to give immediate
right to the sealing Ordinances, as visible interest in the Covenant of grace
gives the first right.

1. It was not interest in the Covenant of grace alone that gave immediate
right to Circumcision, and the Passover of old, but there must be a professed
joining with the Church of the Jews in her Discipline and Policy; therefore
Job (for instance,) was not to be circumcised, because not so adjoined.

2. Where there is full communion in Church Priviledges, there must be the
exercise of Discipline for keeping that communion pure, under pain of highest
displeasure from the Lord, 1 Cor. 5. throughout; but where there is communion
in the sealing Ordinances, there is full communion in Church privileges;
therefore there must be this real confederacy for discipline.

3. If the sealing Ordinances may (at least ordinarily) be administered to such
as refuse confederacy for discipline, then may the Ordinance of discipline for
ever be refused by the Churches: but this may not be, as has more largely been
proved. Instruct. 2. cap. 3.

To me (says grave and learned Bucer,) the Church without the most frequent
use of mutual admonition, Mat. 18. ^ct. 4. p. 386
seems the same with a kingdom that is without judgment, without the use of
laws, and as a city brought indeed under the Power of the Prince, but as yet
not so orderd and settled by him, as that it should have the form of a city and
of a Commonwealth, Magistracy being put upon it, and laws settled; thus he; and
what authentic right can there be of public administering the peculiar
Privileges of the Commonwealth, to the free borne subjects in a city so
unsettled? so for the Church undisciplined.

Object. Those baptized by John, and the Eunuch by Philip.

Answ. When the time or the place was not for particular Churches, the first
right alone sufficient, as before the Temple or Tabernacle, sacrifices not
confined to place.

4. Conclusion. For settling discipline in this Kingdom, Person unfit for
Church Communion are to be left out.

This question, (whether for the true method of settling of Christ the Churches
aright in this Kingdom, Persons unfit are to be left out, or cast out,) well
cleared, will make much for true Reformation among us. To this we say two
things.

1. Supposing all such are to be cast out, they must first be left out, that
they may be cast out, leaving them out orderly making way for their casting out.

1. That they may be cast out, discipline must be settled, for it is by
discipline, that they must be cast out; that discipline may be settled, officers
must be chosen by the people of the Church; but Persons unfit for
Church Communion, 1. are not the People of the Church. 2. They are morally
unfit to choose officers. 3. They are a Party engaged, as if Malefactors should
choose their Judge; therefore they may not choose officers.

2. The discipline for casting out is to be exercised, as by the officers by an
office-power, so by the people by a Power of Order; but Persons fit to be cast
out, may not have this power and the exercise of it; this would prevent
discipline for ever, except we shall think that they will cast out themselves.

3. As in a Church where Discipline is settled, such as are formally suspended,
or to be suspended, are left out as to vote or consent before they be cast out;
so in a Church to be settled, such as are materially suspended, or to be
suspended, (as are all to whom we refuse, or should refuse the Sacraments) are
to be left out, before they be cast out.

4. If Christians in name, but scandalous in life, have not lost their
disciplinary interest till they be cast out, then neither have the scandalous
Ministers lost their ministerial interest for Discipline till they be cast
out: if so, then these Ministers with those Christians may, joining together,
set up the Prelatical Discipline Ecclesiastically valid. Whether now shall
these be withdrawn from or not, that the true Discipline may be set up? If
not, they will carry the false by number of Votes; if they may, the question is
granted, there must be leaving out before casting out.

2. They are to be left out, not cast out.

1. They only are to be cast out by Discipline in case of scandalous sinning,
who have been by voluntary confederacy under it, and accepted as fit matter of
the Church; but such were not our scandalous sinners; they were never yet under
the Discipline which we contend for, neither can they in true account, be owned
as fit matter of the Church. 1. That only they who are true matter of the
Church are objects of discipline, it is clear, because discipine is for them
within, not for them without. 2. only them who have by voluntary confederacy
come under it. 1. No man, or society of men, has Church Power over another,
without his consent first had: as the reverend Assembly speaks in answer to the
Dissenting Brethren; the mutual assent and agreement of the people among whom,
and over whom discipline is to be exercised, is the next foundation of the
exercise thereof. 2. Discipline being among the weapons of spiritual warfare,
and having to do only with the conscience, it has place only upon those who
conscientiously (in appearance at least) have owned this Discipline as an
ordinance, and thereupon, of free accord, voluntarily engaged in it. Object. The
preaching the word is to deal only with the conscience; shall it therefore be
preached only to such as voluntarily submit to hearing? Ans. The preaching of
the word is an ordinance, first proving it self, and then all other
ordinances, as Sacraments, Censures; therefore so far as it has first
convinced, others take place; 3. The people of the Church are a willing people.
4. The Discipline had no place with the Catechumens of old, notwithstanding
their personal profession, till upon their voluntary giving up themselves to
the Church, and by the Church approved they were received into full Church
fellowship. 5. The like method is used by the reformed Churches; None are under
discipline, who have not first been approved and by voluntary tender of
themselves received to the Supper.

2. The Church is so to be made up of her members, in her several
congregations, as that the smaller number is ever to be supposed to be cast out
of the greater; 1. Forasmuch as the people have their Vote in casting out; 2.
Forasmuch as the presence and censure of those who are to cast out, make for
the humbling and shameing of those who are to be cast out; but if all the
scandalous are to be cast out, it cannot be supposed that they will be the
smaller number, in several congregations.

3. Casting out supposes public, but personal admonition (if he hear not
the Church) and particularly proof of the fault' for which the sinner is to be
cast out: but how this is possible in our Nation, I shall only appeal to
experience, and common sense.

4. If all scandalous sinners amongst us be to be cast out, then are they all
the scandalous of the Church, (what have I to do to judge them that are
without?) But they are not all the scandalous of the Church; with none of the
scandalous of the Church must we familiarly keep company, and yet may we abide
in the world, but with-many of the scandalous in the Nation, we must upon
diverse occasions keep familiar company, except we will go out of the world,
(and it is the same case in all Nations of the world). 1 Cor. 5.9. with
experience.

HENCE,
The true way of Reformation amongst us, in this; that persons fit matter of
the Church, join together in Church fellowship, choose Officers with Cautions
formerly said down, and so form Congregations into a disciplinary State,
exercising discipline among themselves, leaving out the rest. From
Congregationall Churches thus settled, Combinations of Churches for mutual help
will arise; but here is now our scruple about the civil Magistrate, what
warrant Christians and Ministers have thus to proceed, except he by public
authority take order. In answer to this I lay down

CHAP. VII. The sifth Instruction. There is a Church Power formally distinct
from the Civil.
One conclusion will here be of use before we insist upon the proof of this
Instruction; And it is this; The authority and relation of Magistracy is one
and the same; whether the person of the Magistrate be Christian or not; as the
authority and relation of a father is one and the same, in both cases; It
belongs to the office of Magistracy to preserve authoritatively both Tables of
the law of God, to take order that the Subjects may live in godliness and
honesty, though only the Christian Magistrate has principles for exercising
this power in a Christian way. This premised we come to the proof.

1. From the ensigns of these Powers; the Sword of the Civil; the Keys of
the Ecclesiastical; these, as of different name and nature, so they represent
that power, whereof they are the ensigns, different.

2. From the nature of these Powers compared 1. In their Object; of the one,
the Commonwealth; of the other, the Church. 2. In their laws; of the one, such
as humane wisdom finds necessary or expedient, for the society of mankind;
of the other, only the word of God. 3. Their authority; of the one, Imperial,
commanding in their own names, as Lawgivers to the Subjects; of the other,
ministerial commanding only in the name of Christ, the only Lawgiver of his
Church. 4. In their punishments and rewards; of the one, such as concern the
outward man; as for punishments, fines, imprisonment, banishment, death, etc.
For rewards, revenues, honors, etc. Of the other, such as concern the inward
man; binding or loosing (the weapons of this warfare are spiritual,) retaining
or remitting sins.

3. From the institution of these powers; the institution of Magistracy is
divine in general. (The powers that be, are ordained of God.) The constitution
in particular is humane, in diverse nations, diverse; in some, the Government
by the king, in others by the State, in others by the People; (Be subject to
every humane creation,) 1 Pet. 2.13. The institution of Church-office, is
divine both generally, that there be officers in the Church, and particularly
that these be they and no other, 1 Cor. 12.28. the civil magistrate is nowhere
in the list, or roll of Church Officers.

4. From the conveyance of these powers. 1. The civil magistrate, (to instance
in the supreme Person,) may be by succession; Church Officers must be by
Election; the civil magistrate, (to instance in the supreme Court,) may be by
election of the people of the Commonwealth as such, whether duly qualified for
Church Government or not; Church Officers must be by election of the People of
the Church as such; and they must be qualified according to
Scripture-Characters, that they may rightly be chosen.

5. From the exercise of these powers; both these powers were exercised in
their full height, for the first three hundred years after Christ, when yet,
neither was any Church Officer a civil magistrate, neither did any civil
magistrate pretend to be a Church Officer.

6. From the dissolution of these powers; excommunication dissolves all
Church Power in the hand of a Church Officer, when rightly administered against
him; it neither dissolves nor weakens civil power in the hand of the
Magistrate, when rightly administered against him.

7. From the far distance of these Powers; a woman may be a civil
magistrate, (as Deborah in Israel, Queen Elizabeth in England,) but a woman may
not be a Church Officer; a Person may by good right be a Magistrate, yet by no
right a Churchmember, much less a Church Officer.

8. Add to these the concurrent judgment of all Churches, who have ever
avouched both in Doctrine and Practice these powers distinct.

Hence a CONSECTARY.
To the Church, as the Church, it belongs, to exercise all Church Power,
whether the civil Magistrate take order for it or not, whether he allow it or
oppose it. We shall here premise two conclusions to prevent mistake.

1. The civil magistrate is not to allow any exercise of Churchpower in his
dominions, which either is, or by him is conceived to be contrary to the rule
of Scripture, and so displeasing to God.

2. In case the Church proceed according to Scripture-rule, and is by the
Civil magistrate opposed or persecuted, she must not defend her self by
arms, but suffer in a way of welldoing.

This premised, now to the Proof of the Consectary.

1. The Church, as the Church, is entrusted with the power of discipline, a
great Gospell-Ordinance, in the exercise whereof consists a great Part of the
administration of the Mediators Kingdom, as we have seen in the second
instruction formerly; and this power intrinsecally in her, independently upon
the civil magistrate: therefore it behooves her, as she would be found faithful
in that great trust committed to her, to exercise it.

To the Church of believers, not yet furnishedwith officers in any
Congregation, it belongs to choose and settle officers, taking in what due help
of the neighbor Ministers and Congreg ations may be had. To the Church
ministerial, in her Congregations furnished with Officers, it belongs to
exercise discipline, as occasion shall be. The same right that believers have
to join together in congregations, for duties of solemn worship, the same
right have they for the duties of discipline; the same right that they have to
choose Elders for laboring in the word and doctrine, the same have they for
choosing Elders that shall rule them: the same Commission that enjoynes the
Pastors and Teachers to preach and administer the Sacraments, enjoynes them
likewise to dispense discipline, but according to the method of the Gospel.

2. The Church when in her purest state for the first 300 years, durst no more
neglect that ordinance of discipline, then any other Gospel-ordinance, though
cruelly persecuted by the civil powers; here that conclusion is of use; The
relation and authority of Magistracy is one, etc.

3. If that may be laid aside, the Sacraments must; because partaking in them
are acts of highest Church Fellowship, and the Lord allows not under severe
penalty upon the whole congregation, the retaining of scandalous sinners in
Church Fellowship, who yet cannot be cast out, but by the exercise of
Discipline.

4. The civil Magistrate must not be allowed power to abridge Christ, of the
complete administration of his visible Kingdom, but if the Church so depend
upon him for the exercise of Discipline, as without his allowance she has no
right thereto, then is this Power allowed the Magistrate.

5. The civil Magistrate has a power cumulative for the Churches good,
therefore he is promised her as a blessing; (Kings shall be thy nursing
fathers;) not privative of her good; then should he be no blessing to her; but
if in his power it be to deprive her of the power of Discipline and the
exercise of it, he has a power privative of her greatest good, her purity,
that which all the peace she can have by his means can never recompense; nay
this must needs deprive her of her peace too, as making way for all wickedness
in a short time to overgrow her, and so exposing her to the wrath of God.

There is yet another scruple sticks with some, and that is Episcopacy. They
who account that Government to be according to Scripture, know not how to
endeavor Reformation any other way.

To remove this;

1. Supposing such an Episcopacy as we find to have had place in the Church,
about two hundred years (suppose sooner) after Christ to be according to
Scripture. 1. Yet the frame of our Prelacy, made up of civil Lawyers and their
retinue, downwards, has no countenance therefrom, but must own the Papacy as
the root whence it sprang.

2. Their administration was intolerably wicked. 1. Highly sacrilegious taking
out of the hands both of Ministers and Christians, that power which Christ has
given to them, and commanded them to use in the exercise of discipline. 2.
Notoriously profane, besides their whole course, abetting profaneness, and
strengthening the hands of the wicked every where; a memorable monument hereof
we have in the Book of Liberty, of their procuring and enjoining, for the most
abominable and ridiculous, (not without palpable strains of Paganism,)
Profanation of the Lords day; another, the many, most scandalous and vile of
the sons of men, by them ordained Ministers, and highly preferred. 3. Grossly
superstitious, witness the Ceremonies new and old, so zealously by them
contended for, as if all religion had been in that will worship. 4. Plainly
idolatrous; memorable here, their Altar-worship. 5. Egregiously persecuting;
the voice of blood speaks here aloud, from Gaoles, from Pillories, even the
blood of the sincere and godly Party, generally up and down this Kingdom,
Ministers and Christians, continually under the lash of these taskemasters.
Memorable here the many precious servants of God, now in new England, forced by
their tyranny into those remote wildernesses. 6. Openly rebellious; shaking
with both hands all true foundations of civil Government, under pretense of
Prerogative, lawless ones, endeavoring the same boundless tyranny in the
State Civil, that they themselves exercised in the Church. Memorable here,
that Proclamation of their procuring and enjoining, so highly abetting and
stirring up to rebellion, set forth against the Scots, raised up by the hand of
heaven to stand for the right of civil Government, as became true Patriots
and free Subjects.

3. Suitable to their frame and administration was their admission, so far
from coming in at the true door by Christ appointed for entrance into Church
office, and accordingly by the Primitive Bishops made use of, to wit, the
Peoples Election, that they scorned to own this door, but other back-doors did
they not so much come in, as break in at, stiffely avouching this disorder of
theirs.

4, It is the right and duty of the Church, to separate from sinful
Church-rulers, as formerly we have seen both from Scripture and antiquity; how
great a necessity was there then of separating from this whole tribe, whose
foundation, frame, administration was so Apocryphal and Antichristian?

Supposing then Episcopacy distinct from Presbytery, to be according to rule,
yet was our Prelacy so little of kindred to the ancient Episcopacy, and so
contrary to the rule, as either it must not stand, or the Churches must not
stand; that we may then come to that, we must first leave this 2. Come to it in
the true way which is the free choice of the people and Ministers. That this
may be done, the people fit matter of the Church, must first be formed into
Congregations. As for that which would here further be required upon this
supposition, Imposition of hands by Bishops, in this case of so great Apostasy
as has prevailed, the necessity would sufficiently plead excuse: As suppose a
people called out of Babylon, if imposition of hands by Popish Bishops might be
had for ordaining some among them to be their Ministers, it were not worth the
having; but withal it being impossible to be had, the call and confirmation of
the Church is sufficient, as Beza pleads for the first Reformers, in Acts
14.23. But further for clearing this scruple, we lay down

CHAP. VIII. The sixth Instruction. That Bishops in office above Presbyters,
are no Church Officers of divine institution, it is pleaded by Jerome from
Scripture, and the highest Gospel-antiquity.
THere is a Divine Bishop, one and the same with a Presbyter or a Pastor or
Teacher of a Congregation, and Elder laboring in the Word and Doctrine; there
is an humane Bishop, one that pleads his office to be above the Presbyters or
Pastors office; and two things he challenges above the Presbyter. 1. Power of
Ordination. 2. Power of Jurisdiction. Jerome a learned Father, famous about 390
years after Christ, in his Epistle to Evagrius, and in his Commentary upon the
Epistle to Titus, speaks clearly to this question, both from Scripture, and
from the first Gospel antiquity; I have therefore thought fit to translate that
Epistle, and thence to observe his Arguments, from Scripture, as likewise what
he produces from antiquity, that we might at once give double light to this
question, knowing well, that where antiquity is used against the Scripture it
is nothing worth, but whereit stands fair with the Scripture, it may be a
secondary confirmation of the true meaning of Scripture, to the impartial
enquiter after truth; and an argument fully in force against the adversary,
pretending antiquity for his Error. This Epistle is directed against a certain
person who would have a Deacon to be above a Presbyter, against whom thus
Jerome;

We read in Isaiah, the fool will speak folly, I hear of one who has broken
forth into so great folly, that he would prefer Deacons before Presbyters, that
is before Bishops. For when the Apostle teaches clearly, that Presbyters are
the same with Bishops, who may endure that the servant of tables and widows,
should lift up himself swollen above them, by whose prayers the body and blood
of Christ is consecrate? Seek thou authority? Hear the Testimony, Paul and
Timothy, Phil. 1.
the Servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints in Christ Jesus which are at
Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons. Acts 20.
Will thou another example? In the Acts of the Apostles thus, Paul writes to
the Ministers (Sacerdotes) of one Church; Take heed to your selves and to the
whole flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you Bishops: (for it is the
same word here, that every otherwhere is translated Bishops) that ye might
rule the Church of the Lord, (so he reads it) which he has purchased with his
own blood. And that no man may contentiously wrangle, that there were many
Bishops in one Church, hear yet another testimony, by which it is most
manifestly proved, Tit. 1.
that a Bishop and Presbyter are one and the same. For this end I left thee in
Creet, that thou might redress the things that were wanting, that thou
mighest appoint Presbyters in every City, as I have also commanded thee; If any
man be without blame, the husband of one wife, have faithful children, 1 Timothy 4.
not accused of riot, or disobedient; for it behooves a Bishop to be without
blame, as the Steward of God. And to Timothy, Neglect not the grace which is in
thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of hands of the
Presbytery. But Peter likewise in his first Epistle says, 1 Pet. 5.
The Elders or Presbyters which are among you, I entreat, who am your
fellow-Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of
glory to come, which is to be revealed, that ye rule the flock of Christ, and
oversee it, not of necessity, but willingly, according to God, which in the
Greek is more significantly expressed, (...) Bishoping that is, overseeing them,
from whence the name of Bishop is drawn.

Do the testimonies of these so great men seem small to thee? let the
Gospel-trumpet sound, the Son of thunder, whom Jesus loved so much, who drunk
the flowing streams of doctrine out of his Saviors breast; The Presbyter to
the elect Lady and to her children, whom I love in the truth. And in another
Epistle, The Presbyter to the wel-beloved Caius, whom I love in the truth.
Hitherto Jerome.

Here we have both clearly affirmed, and strongly confirmed, that a Bishop in
office above a Presbyter, is no where to be found in Scripture, but Bishop and
Presbyter are two names of one and the same office, so that whatsoever belongs
to any Bishop by virtue of his office, the same belongs to every Presbyter, as
he is a Presbyter. For clearing both his affirmation and confirmation, we must
observe that in his time the custom of the Church, had obtained that some were
single Presbyters, others so Presbyters, as withal Bishops challenging above
single Presbyters, the Power of Ordination at the least, themselves likewise
ordained, not by single Presbyters, (as they called them,) but by Bishops; and
it is pleaded by the Advocates of Episcopacy at this day, that the Apostles
before their death ordained several Bishops, in office above Presbyters, (as
formerly we laid down,) over the Churches in several cities, and these Bishops
in continual succession ordained others; neither can a Bishop be ordained by
Presbyters, nor a presbyter without a Bishop; at least ordinarily.

Against this Jerome pleads, taxing the great error of them that would
prefer a Deacon to a Presbyter, That it is all one to prefer him to a
Bishop; for according to Scripture, the one is neither greater nor less then
the other, neither is there any such distinction of single Presbyter from the
Bishop, but they are one and the same, and this he says the Apostle teaches
clearly; and having affirmed this, he proves it by many Arguments.

1. From the granted operation belonging to the Presbyters office as such, and
therefore to every Presbyter, which is to consecrate the body and blood of
Christ. Where is the highest official operation, there is the highest office;
but in the hands of every Presbyter is the highest official operation: (for we
may not think that either imposition of hands in Ordination, or passing
sentence in excommunication, are acts of higher nature, then consecrating the
elements in the Supper, and this belongs to every Presbyter by virtue of his
office,) therefore in the hands of every Presbyter is the highest office. The
like Argument we have. 1 Timothy 5.17. Those acts which are most worthy of honor
are the highest; but such is laboring in the word and doctrine, belonging to
every minister of the word, compared with ruling challenged by the Bishop.

2. Argument from the two first testimonies, Phil. 1.1. and Acts 20. Of Bishops
above Presbyters, there is but one belongs to a city. But here are many to one
city, to Philippi, to Ephesus, and these were one and the same with Presbyters.

The denial of the Proposition he accounts contentious wrangling, whence this
discourse proceeds clear.

3. Argument from the same testimonies; The name of Bishop is equally given to
all the Elders, Phil. 1. All the ministers saluted by that name, (for what
reason can be imagined, supposing Bishops and Elders distinct, why he should
salute only the Bishops and Deacons, and leave out all the other ministers?)
Acts 20. the same who are called Elders, v. 17. are Bishops, v. 28. The same
Argument, Tit. 1.5. with the seventh.

4. Argument, from the last testimony; Where the names are used indifferently
one for another, and the self same qualifications for office subjoyned to each
name, there the self same office is set out under each name. But so it is
here. The Apostle enjoining Titus to appoint Elders, -- if any be blameless,
etc. v. 5, He gives the reason, v. 7. for a Bishop must be blameless, etc. If
Bishop and Presbyter be not one and the same, the Apostle had not reasoned at
all; might it not be replied? it is true, a Bishop must be blameless, etc. but
every Presbyter is not a Bishop;

Here we may take notice of the miserable shifts of the Jesuits, and with them
our Prelates. The names, say they, were then common, but the office distinct.

Answ. 1. Because the names were common, and that perpetually, therefore the
father here, according to all reason in the world, argues the office one and
the same. 2. Not only the names are common, but the qualifications for office,
are here one and the same under those names. The self same office is set
forth; their gloss here does yet further betray the nakedness of their evasion.
A Presbyter say they is comprehened in a Bishop, for every Bishop is a
Presbyter, (though withal he bemore,) as every Captain is a Soldier, and
therefore the names are common.

Answ. 1. Where Persons different in peculiar Calling or Commission, do yet
agree in one common denomination, it cannot be said they are one and the same;
No man faith, (though every Captain be a Soldier,) that a Captain and a
Soldier are one and the same; but here Jerome expresses according to the
Scripture, that Bishop and Presbyter are one and the same. 2. In such a
difference of Persons, the less may be affirmed indefinitely, or universally
of the greater; but not the greater of the less; it is true, every Captain is
a Soldier; but it is not true that every Soldier is a Captain; but here the
Bishop is affirmed of the Elder, Acts 20.17. with 28. and Tit. 1.5. with v. 7.
Their second shift is as miserable, (for this hold is so weak they are forced
to quit it,) That in the Apostles times the office of Bishop and Presbyter was
distinct, but both at one time conferred upon the same Persons.

Answ. 1. This is to be wise above what is written, no such thing any where
hinted. 2. The highest operations are ascribed to the Elders as such to feed,
to labor in the word and doctrine, therefore the Bishops office could not be
above theirs. 3. How miserably then had Jerome argued? What folly is this
(says he) that any man should prefer Deacons before Presbyters, (speaking of
the Presbyters of his time, when the custom of the Church had obtained that
Bishops were above Presbyters,) that is before Bishops; and thence carries on
his dispute, that according to divine institution there is no difference. Now
if this Jesuitical Allegation was true, the Answer was ready; they had in the
Apostles time the office of Presbyter and Bishop both, though distinct, yet in
one Person, as now they are distinct in several Persons; therefore Presbyters
now are not by divine institution equal to them; the truth is, it is one
office, which was then in one Person undivided, is now divided, and so shared
into several Persons.

5. Argument. From 1 Timothy 4.14. If that which is challenged peculiarly to
Bishops, belong to the Presbyters as such, then their office is not distinct;
but so it is; that which is challenged, etc. Nothing more peculiarly challenged
then Ordination, yet is that here by Jerome pleaded for the Presbyters, in this
very question, wherein he is pleading the equality of (or identity rather) of
Bishops and Presbyters. The same we may argue from Act. 13.1. etc. The
separating of Barnabas and Saul to their Ministry among the Gentiles by
imposition of hands, cannot well be conceived belonging to any other then to
those to whom it belongs to set a part by like imposition of hands, the
ordinary Ministers of the word; at least not to any inferior to those; But
Paul and Barnabas were separate to their Ministry, not by Bishops above
Presbyters, but by Prophets and Teachers who were Presbyters. Object. The
greater cannot be Ordained by the less; Paul Ordained Timothy. Answ. This
imposition of hands is of like nature, with Ordination at the least; the
Presbyters concurred with Paul.

6. Argument, From 1 Pet. 5.1.2. The Greek word (says he) (...), over-seeing
or taking the oversight, is more significant, whence the name of a Bishop is
drawn; The Argument is thus. Whatsoever operations belong to the Bishop by his
Office, the same belong to the Presbyter by his; therefore they are not
distinct Officers, but one and the same. The former part is proved thus; All
that belongs to the Bishops office, is comprehended in the word (...) which
signifies to perform the part of a Bishop; from whence the very name of Bishop
is derived; but whatsoever is comprehended in the word (...) belongs to the
Presbyters by express testimony here; they must act the part of Bishops, which
were they not the same with Bishops, would be to usurp. Therefore if not only
Ordination but Jurisdiction belongs to Bishops, the same by as authentic
Commission belongs to Presbyters or Pastors and Teachers of several
Congregations. Hence as formerly for Ordination, so for Jurisdiction, we may
observe that it is to be performed without Bishops distinct from and above
Presbyters, 1 Cor. 5. per totum, there were then no Bishops in Corinth.

Object. The Apostle there excommunicated, verse. 3. I have judged already, etc.

Answ. 1. Some (as Beza for one) hold excommunication prevented by public
rebuke, and repentance thereupon, 2 Cor. 2.6. the word (...) rendered
punishment, signifies rebuke. 2. The Apostles judgment was a judgment of
doctrinall determination, appointing them what to do, in case public rebuke or
admonition should not reclaim him; not of juridicall execution. The Church was
to be gathered in the name and with the power of Christ, to deliver, etc. 3.
Had not this Church the same power with those Churches Rev. 2? But they were to
proceed by the Apostles direction, blamed that they had suffered such and such
as the Nicolatians, Jezabel, etc. The Apostle himself not formally executing,
1 Timothy 5.17. All Church rule is distributed among the Elders or Presbyters;
therefore to the Elders, as the Elders it belongs; and Elders and Bishops are
one and the same.

Add here (what is observed) the word (...) or Bishop is never mentioned in
the New Testament as belonging to a perpetual Church officer, but the actions
therein required belong to any teaching Presbyter, are not those peculiar
actions challenged to the Bishops.

7. Argument from this last testimony, and 2 John 1 and 3 John 1. There is no
perpetual office in the Church above that which the Apostles hold in common
with the perpetual officers, laboring in the word and doctrine, and according
to which they style themselves; but that is the office of Presbyters, as is
clear in these testimonies.

All these Arguments we have here in Ierome's discourse, and thus by him made
use of; let us add the

8. Argument. The office of Pastor or Teacher, is an office of the highest
denomination after the Apostles and Evangelists have ceased. Ephesians. 4.11. 1. To
feed and to teach are higher acts then to rule in way of Discipline; 1 Timothy
5.17. 2. These are the only Ministers of the word, given of Christ to the
Church in all ages for perfecting the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
edifying the body of Christ, verse 12. But every Minister of the word is by his
office a Pastor or Teacher.

Object. But Bishops above Presbyters may be Pastors above Pastors, and
Teachers above Teachers.

Answ. 1. Those acts and the power for them whereby they challenge superiority,
cannot make them above, because they are of inferior nature to the acts of
feeding and teaching belonging to every Minister of the word.

2. All officers of one denomination, whether above them or below them, are
equal in power and office; the Apostles and Evangelists above them, equal
among themselves; the Deacons below them, equal among themselves; and what
hint is there that these middle officers should among themselves be divided
into extremes?

Thus from Scripture. Jerome now goes on to show the equality of Bishops and
Presbyters, as to their office by divine institution, partly by preventing an
objection, partly by a famous instance in the Church of Alexandria; the
objection he prevents in these words; But that afterward one was chosen, who
should be preferred before the rest, it was done for the remedy of schism,
least every one drawing the Church of Christ to himself should break it in
pieces. The Sum is this; in the Apostles times there was no difference, the
Scripture holds them forth equal; this difference was made afterward,
occasioned by schism, for the healing whereof the Church thought it expedient
to take this course; but no ground in Scripture for this inequality; and this
he expresses yet more clearly in his Commentary upon Tit. 1.5. comparing the
fifth and seventh v. together, thus he speaks. Let us diligently attend the
Apostles words, saying that thou may appoint Presbyters in every city, as I
had appointed thee, who showing what kind of Presbyter ought to be ordained in
his following discourse, thus he inferrs, for it behooves a Bishop to be
blameless, as the steward of God; a Presbyter then is the very same with a
Bishop, (says he) and before that by the instinct of the devil divisions were
made in religion, and they said among the People, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo,
but I am of Cephas, the Churches were governed by the Common Council of the
Presbyters; (these Presbyters not joined to the Bishop, as one above them, as
it is here plain, but all the Presbyters equal among themselves joining in
this Common-Counsell,) the Father goes on; but after that every one thought
those whom he baptized, his own, not Christ's; it was decreed in the whole
world, that one chosen from among the Presbyters, should be set above the rest,
to whom all the care of the Church should belong, and the seeds of schism
should be taken away.

1. Here we see that this custom came in long after the Apostles times
generally.

Object. Nay, the Apostle ordered it thus in his time; for it is said here,
when one said, I am of Paul, another, I am of Apollo, etc. Then was this course
taken; but it was in the Church of Corinth in the Apostles time, that so they
said.

Answ. That form of words Jerome here uses aptly to express the manner of
Schism, but does not point at that time, as if the Apostle had then taken this
course, as is manifest, 1. When he had proved the equality of Bishops and
Presbyters, from Epistles written after the Epistle to the Corinthians, he yet
says afterward this course was taken. 2. He does not say when the Corinthians
said thus, but when they said thus among the people, it was decreed not in
Corinth, but in the whole world. 2. And as it was after the Apostles times, so
that it had no ground in their writings, he goes on to show by some of the same
Scriptures, formerly used in this Epistle to Evagrius, which Scriptures he
further in this place insists upon. Some man may think (says he,) that this is
not the sentence of the Scripture, but my own, that a Bishop and a Presbyter
are one, and that one is the name of age, the other of office or duty; let him
read the words of the Apostle, Phil. 1.1. Philippi is of Macedonia, and
certainly in one city there could not be many Bishops, as they are called, but
because they called the same Bishops at that time, whom they called also
Presbyters, therefore the Apostle spoke indifferently of Bishops, as of
Presbyters. Yet this may seem doubtful to some men, except it be confirmed by
another testimony, Acts 20.17, 28. Mark this diligently, (says he,) how he
calling the Presbyters of one city of Ephesus, afterward calls the same
Bishops. If any man will receive that Epistle which is written to the Hebrews
in Paul's name, there also the care of the Church is equally divided among many,
forasmuch as he writes to the people. Obey them that rule over you, etc. Heb.
13.17. and Peter who from the firmness of his faith received his name, -- in
his Epistle speaks, saying, the Elders that are among you, I who am likewise
your fellow Elder, etc. 1 Pe. 5.1.2. These things I have therefore spoken, that
we might show, that amongst the Ancient, Bishops and Presbyters were the same,
but by little and little, that the miseries of dissension may be plucked up,
all the care was laid upon one. Therefore as the Presbyters know that they are
by the custom of the Church subject to him that is set over them: so let the
Bishops know, that they rather by custom then the truth of the Lords order are
greater then Presbyters, and that they ought to govern the Church in Commune;
imitating Moses, who when he had it in his Power alone to rule the People of
Israel, chose seventy, with whom he would judge the People. Hitherto Jerome
upon Tit. 1.1. whose discourse is so plain and clear, that the very reading it
over, answers all cavils started to obscure his doctrine, touching the equality
of Bishops and Presbyters by divine institution; and whereas in the close of
all he seems to parallel the Bishop and his Presbyters with Moses and his
seventy Judges, that this in parallel is according to the custom of the
Church, not according to scripture rule, is evident by the words immediately
foregoing.

CHAP. IX.
WE return now to his Epistle to Evagrius, and come to the instance of the
Church at Alexandria, further confirming the equality of Presbyters and
Bishops, when he had said (as formerly we quoted) in prevention of an
objection; but that afterward one was chosen, who should be set before the
rest, it was done for the remedy of schism, least every one drawing the Church
of Christ to himself should break it in pieces; he adds, for at Alexandria
also, from Mark the Evangelist, until the time of Heraclas and Dionysius
Bishops, the Presbyters always named one, the Bishop, who was chosen out of
themselves, and placed in an higher degree, as if an Army should make a
General, or the Deacons should from among themselves choose one whom they knew
industrious, and call him Archdeacon; For what does a Bishop, Ordination
excepted, that a Presbyter may not do?

The sum of these words is, as at Ephesus and Philippi, in the Apostles time
the Bishops and Presbyters were one and the same, so after their time, till
about two hundred and sixty years, more or less after Christ, they remained
equal in office at Alexandria, (what change soever was made sooner in some
other Churches, occasioned by schisms amongst them,) only for more orderly
Proceeding, one of the Presbyters was chosen by the rest, to be in degree above
the rest, but not in office or distinct Power, as having no peculiar
Ordination, and this man they called the Bishop; that this is the true meaning
of the words, it appears upon distinct consideration of them, (here we must
remember that his Prevention of the Objection follows immediately his Scripture
testimony; and the instance of Alexandria immediately follows that Prevention.)

1. The Conjunction also, or and, joins this example of Alexandria, to the
former of Ephesus and Philippi, (For at Alexandria also.)

2. He makes a difference betwixt Heraclas and Dionysius, Bishops, and those
before them, from Mark the Evangelist, whom they called Bishops.

3. He shows what the difference was, that whereas Heraclas and Dionysius were
by peculiar Ordination made Bishops, as in office and Power above Presbyters,
(as the like custom had obtained earlier in other Churches, as appears in
Cyprians Epistles,) they that were before, were only chosen by the Presbyters,
placed in an higher degree, and called Bishops, but had no peculiar Ordination,
(and therefore no peculiar office.) That they had no peculiar Ordination, is
manifest. 1. By the Persons by whom they were set in an higher degree, they
were only the other Presbyters. But 1. Presbyters alone say the advocates of
Episcopacy, may not ordain a Presbyter, much less a Bishop. 2. If they might
ordain a Bishop, much more might they ordain a Presbyter, and then what place
for the office of a Bishop in the Church above the Presbyter? Ordination being
one maine peculiar challenged to the Bishop. Had it then been peculiar
Ordination that had advanced these above the rest, and so invested them with a
peculiar office, it must have been Bishops, not Presbyters, by whose hands they
were lifted up. 2. By the explication subjoyned in two comparisons. 1. As if an
Army should make a General. Here the Army choosing the General, answers to the
Presbyters choosing the Bishop so called; As Jerome speaks, He that is General
only upon those terms, has no peculiar Commission, it belongs to the Prince
or State to give that; neither had he that was Bishop any peculiar Ordination,
according to the mind of this comparison, which the next comparison holds forth
more clearly; suppose the Deacons should agree among themselves to choose out
one whom they would call Archdeacon, here neither is, nor could be any
peculiar Office or Ordination conferred upon this Archdeacon. Hence Jerome
concludes, having no distinct Ordination, they had no distinct Power or Office;
and that is the true meaning of those words; for what does a Bishop, Ordination
excepted, that a Presbyter may not do? This is usually otherwise interpreted.
viz. that a Presbyter may do all that a Bishop may do, only the act of
Ordination excepted, he may not ordain. And 1. they that are for the divine
right of Episcopacy will have the exception to be by divine institution; but
this is clearly to interpret this clause contrary to Ieroms whole discourse,
both the Scope and Arguments of it. 2, Pleading the equality of Bishops and
Presbyters, or their identity rather, instanced in Imposition of hands by the
Presbytery. 3. This interpretation overthrows his discourse in this very
instance of the Church of Alexandria, whence it is inferred, as we have seen by
the natural explication of this discourse. But 2. they that are against
Episcopacy, understand Jerome to speak of the Practice of the Church in his
time; as if he should say there was no difference formerly; now there is only
this, and that not by divine institution, but by the custom of the Church. A
Bishop ordains, which a Presbyter may not do. This interpretation may stand
with his former discourse and with the truth; and this passing, there is
nothing for Episcopacy by divine right; therefore to grant this, loses
nothing of the cause in hand, but the truly natural interpretation following
upon the former discourse, which has concluded what is here inferred, seems to
be that formerly given, Ordinarion excepted, signifying without Ordination
conferred, Ordination here passively not actively taken. Sum up the discourse
in this instance of Alexandria, Every distinct Church officer has a distinct
Ordination; but these Bishops, so called in the Church of Alexandria, till
Heraclas and Dionysius, had no distinct Ordination from that of Presbyters:
therefore they were no distinct Church Officers from them.

Hence we have light discovering the truth against the three Pretenses from
antiquity, pleading the divine right of Episcopacy.

1. It is alleged, that such and such Apostles and Evangelists were ordained
Bishops of such and such Churches; among the rest, Mark the Evangelist Bishop
of Alexandria; that they ordained their Successors, and so Episcopacy has run
down in a constant course from the Apostles times.

Answ. 1. This story overthrows it self, as is observed by the learned. 1.
What place is there for ordaining Apostles and Evangelists, Bishops over such
and such Churches, who as Apostles and Evangelists, had already in every
Church, what power soever a Bishop can claim in any Church to which he is
ordained? 2. Ordination is from the less to the greater; if an Apostle or
Evangelist first, be afterward ordained a Bishop, then is the office of an
Apostle or Evangelist inferior to that of a Bishop.

Answ. 2. That there was no such Succession of Bishops, ordaining Bishops
distinct from and above Presbyters, is manifest in this instance of the Church
of Alexandria, where till Heraclas and Dionysius, a Bishop was no other but one
of the Presbyters, by the choice and consent of the rest, set in an higher
degree.

2. Another pretense from antiquity, is the Catalogues of Bishops, succeeding
each other in such and such Churches.

Answ. How does it appear that these Bishops had peculiar Ordination and above
Presbyters? there is as formal a Catalogue given in of the Bishops of
Alexandria, as of any other Church succeeding Mark the Evangelist in this
order; 1. Anianus. 2. Abilius. 3. Cerdo. 4. Primus. 5. Justus. 6. Eumenes. 7.
Marcus. 8. Celadion. 9. Agrippas or Agrippinus. 10. Julianus. 11. Demetrius.
12. Heraclas. 13. Dionysius. Whereas yet we have it clear from Jerome, that
Heraclas was the first who had distinct Ordination and Office above a Presbyter.

3. Pretense from antiquity, such testimonies as are given to the honor and
power of Bishops by the Ancients; and here above all Ignatius helps at every
turn.

Answ. 1. Forasmuch as five of his Epistles are granted by diverse advocates of
Episcopacy to be such as do evidently betray no little forgery, who shall
assure us, that those seven by them avouched in all things genuine, are so
indeed? what more unlikely, then that they should escape tampering by the same
hands?

2. Those seven most stood upon, are by very learned men (amongst others
Salmasius,) judged in the very testimonies very spurious, and that not from
blasse, but upon good grounds. 1. The arrogance of some of them; take that for
one, in his Epistle to the Trallians, What is the Bishop, but he that is
strongly possessed of all Principality and Authority, beyond all, as much as is
possible for men to be possessed? being made an imitatour, according to Power of
Christ who is God. He that can find here an Apostolical spirit breathing,
surely has little acquaintance with the Apostles writings, says Salmasius;
and indeed how unlike to that of the Apostle is it? 1 Cor. 3.5. Who then is
Paul, and who is Apollo, but ministers by whom you believed? etc. This was
Paul's way to take up schism; how contrary to this Ignatius here for the
Prevention of it? 2 Of the falsenesse of some, that in the same Epistle;
Reverence the Bishop as Christ, as the blessed Apostles commanded you. Where is
this command? That, in his Epistle to the Smyrnians, Let that be accounted a
firm Eucharist, which is by the Bishop administered, or by him to whom he shall
have committed it; it is not lawful without the Bishop either to baptize or to
offer, etc. Has not the Holy Ghost committed preaching, and baptism, and
administration of the Supper, jointly to every Presbyter? this sounds ill in
every care, except of Papist or Prelate; the Church of Alexandria had no true
baptism for about two hundred and sixty years, if this be true doctrine; as
for the Reformed Churches, they are in the same case. 3. The idolatrous strain
of some; take that in the same Epistle, In the Church is nothing greater then
the Bishop, consecrate to God for the salvation of the whole world. 4. The
impertinencie of some, take that in his Epistle to the Philadelphians; Let the
Princes obey the Emperor, the Soldiers the Princes, the Deacons the
Presbyters, those Highpriests, the Presbyters and the Deacons, and the rest of
the Clergy; and who are they I wonder, and what part of the Clergy is the
Deacon? with all the People, and the Soldiers, and the Princes, and the
Emperor, let them obey the Bishop. Setting aside other flawes, what
impertinencie is here to enjoyne the Princes and the Emperor to obey the
Bishop, when there were not at this time, nor many years after any Emperor or
Princes Christian? These are some few gleanings more of the like stamp there to
be found; that not without reason it is by the learned conjectured, that about
the beginning or middle of the second Century, was this forged Author
surreptitiously brought into the Church, about which time this kind of
Episcopacy soaring above Presbytery began.

3. How little our prelates and their party regard his writings, (only they
plead them to serve their own turn) is manifest, that we hear so little from
them of subjection to the Presbyters and Deacons, which Ignatius urges so much
in his Epistle to the Trallians, It is necessary that ye do nothing without the
Bishop, but that ye be in subjection likewise to the Presbytery, as to the
Apostles of Jesus Christ. And ye ought by all means to please the Deacons,
being -- of the mysteries of Jesus Christ. -- The Presbyters are the great
Council of God, and the Chain of the Apostles of Jesus Christ. In his Epistle
to those in Tarsus, Let the Presbyter be subject to the Bishop; the Deacons to
the Presbyters; the People to the Presbyters and the Deacons; they that keep
this good order, my soul for theirs. Much more to the same purpose up and down
in him; where Salmasius conjectures this spurious Author was about the midst,
or toward the beginning of the second century, whilst the Presbytery yet
retaind much of its authority.

Now what do our Prelates and their party here? For Presbyters, they allow them
no rule by way of jurisdiction; for Deacons, they have first changed their
office, and then ordered it so as it is never long standing, being only a
degree to Presbytery.

And indeed here this Ignatius seems to ascribe that office and power to
Deacons which the scripture takes no notice of, which has appointed them to
the service of tables, not to preach and rule in the Church (as Jerome argues;)
and this furthers discovers that this is no true Ignatius.

4. Conclude from Jerome, that before schism fell out in the Churches, and
that long after the Apostles times, the Church was governed only by Presbyters;
that the Bishop above the Presbyters was brought into some Churches sooner,
into others later; according as schism gave the occasion; that it was about
260 years, ere this change was made in the Church of Alexandria; that
wheresoever it was made, it stands not upon divine authority, but upon Church
Custom, and this by Scripture strongly proved; therefore these testimonies of
Ignatius, or whatsoever the like, so far as they plead for Episcopacy above
Presbytery, cannot stand either with the truth of the Scripture, or the
practice of the first and purest Churches.

We return to Jerome his Epistle to Evagrius; That which next follows
concerns not the matter in hand, but is against the superiority of the Bishop
of Rome, and against a perverse custom in Rome, that a Presbyter was ordained
upon the testimony of a Deacon; that which concerns the present question
follows in these words, Presbyter and Bishop, one is the name of age, the
other of dignity; whence to Titus and Timothy the Apostle speaks of the
Ordination of the Bishop and Deacon concerning the Presbyters he is altogether
silent, because in the Bishop the Presbyter also is contained; He that is
ordained from the less to the greater he is advanced; Therefore either let the
Deacon be ordained from the Presbyter, (that is, let him that is first a
Presbyter be afterward ordained a Deacon) that the Presbyter may be proved
less then the Deacon into whom he increases from a little one; or if the
Presbyter be ordained from the Deacon, let him know that he is less in gains,
greater in ministry. And that we may know that the Apostolical traditions
were taken out of the Old Testament, what Aaron and his sons, and the Levites
were in the Temple, that let the Bishops, and Presbyters, and Deacons challenge
in the Church.

Here we have two things confirming the equality of Bishops and Presbyters; in
the third place an objection is to be answered, seeming to favor their
inequality.

The first thing confirming their equality, That Presbyter and Bishop are
different names of one and the same person, in one and the same office, as
having one and the same ordination; and where it is said the Presbyter is
contained in the Bishop, the meaning is not as the less in the greater, but as
one with him; thus he expressed himself in the beginning of this Epistle; this
he has strongly pleaded all the way; thus again in his Commentary upon 1
Titus, as was formerly quoted in these words. Some man may think that this is
not the sentence of the Scripture, but mine own, that a Bishop and Presbyter
are one, and that one is the name of age, the other of office; let him read the
words of the Apostle, Phil. 1.1. etc.

The second confirmation of their equality, that Ordination is from the less
to the greater; and therefore if the Deacon be greater then the Presbyter, he
must from a Presbyter as a little one, grow by Ordination into a Deacon as a
great one; this rule destroys the foundation of Hierarchy; that the Apostles
were toward the end of their days, (and so the Evangelists) ordained Bishops
of certain Cities, every one having his proper See; then from an Apostle or
Evangelist as the less, did he by Ordination, increase into a Bishop as the
greater; but this is too absurd that a Bishop should be greater then an
Evangelist, nay then an Apostle.

The Objection to be removed follows in the last words; And that we may know
that the Apostolical traditions, etc. where he calls the superiority of Bishops
over Presbyters, then obtaining in the Church, an Apostolical tradition.

Answ. 1. There was great difference betwixt the Episcopacy that then was, and
the Prelacy as we have had it; as nothing was done without the Bishop, so nor
without the rest of the Ministers and People.

2. His scope was to prove, and clearly he has proved, that according to the
Scriptures in the writings of the Apostles, there is no inequality at all
betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, but they are one and the same.

3. The rise of their inequality he makes the custom of the Church,
contra-distinguished to the truth of the Lords order.

4. Therefore that he calls it an Apostolical tradition, it can amount only to
this; that what the Church did here, when by schisms occasioned thereto, he
conceives not contrary to Apostolical Precept, in general, (though
particularly the equality or identity rather of the Bishop and Presbyter be
abundantly held forth in their writings,) but rather that the Churches Practice
here fell under some general rule, as let all things be done to edifying, or
the like.

And here was the difference, as is observed by the learned, betwixt Jerome and
Aerius; they both agreed, that according to divine institution, there was no
inequality. Aerius would have this inviolably observed in the Church. Jerome
thought the Church had liberty to make a difference, and that it was a great
expedient against schism. Of the same mind with Jerome for equality by divine
institution, it is pleaded by some choicely learned amongst our Writers of
sacred Controversies, ( Ames and Salmasius) confessed by a learned Author among
the Papists, (Medina,) that Ambrose, Austin, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Oecumenius and Theophylact were.

This instruction then stands good, Bishops in office above Presbyters, are no
Church Officers of divine institution; according as it is pleaded by Jerome. I
shall conclude this instruction, with one question?

Quest. May the Church in any case, set up as an expedient an office in the
Church, which is not of divine institution.

Answ. No, in no wise. It was appointed that the man of fin should ascend into
his chair; thence the Church discerned not the iniquity of those beautiful
steps, by which he was to ascend; what the Church took for an expedient to
prevent schism, proved an expedient to promote tyranny. His time of falling
has been coming on, in this last age, is more and more hastening; hence this
truth making not a little for it, passes clear and current in the Reformed
Churches, that in the Church no office-Power is to be owned, but what is of
divine institution. An Argument or two to confirm it.

1. As among Jews, no order of Priests or Levites, but what was expressly
appointed of God, was to be received; so in the Gospel-Churches, no other order
of Ministeries. All by Moses there, as a faithful servant; All by Christ here,
as a faithful Son.

2. Christ is the only Lawgiver of his Church, the appointing of office is a
maine exercise of the Lawgivers power, as in the kingdoms of men, so in the
Kingdom of the Mediator.

3. All proper and essential means of worship must be of divine institution.
1. Because worship by other means is will worship, and will worship is
hateful unto God; 2. Because it is God alone who can sanctify and bless the
means of worship; man can put no isntrumental efficacy unto means, therefore
cannot he ordain them; But office, or ministry in the Church, is a proper and
essential means of worship; therefore it must be of no other then divine
institution. As for that worn Octjection of Timothy and Titus. Answ. They were
Evangelists, who as the Apostles, are succeeded by Pastors and Teachers; above
whom there is no Bishop.

Object. The Angel of the Church 2 and 3. of the Revelation is the Bishop of
each Church, a Pastor of peerlesse power in the Church.

Answ. 1. Suppose by the Angel is meant a singular person, and he an eminent
Pastor, how does it appear that he had distinct power of Ordination and
jurisdiction above the rest? Why might it not be in those Churches as in the
Church of Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist, till Heraclas and Dionysius, one
in degree and order, not in office and distinct power above the rest, to whom
the Epistle is inscribed?

2. Angel in the singular number, does not of necessity infer a singular
person; it is used in Scripture collectively diverse times, as Psalm 34.7. The
Angel of the Lord pitcheth his tents, etc. that is the Angels of the Lord pitch
their tents round about, etc. so the Revelation frequently; the seven Angels
that sounded the seven trumpets, and the seven Angels that powered out the seven
vials, were not seven singular Persons, but seven Companies or sorts of men
performing that service.

3. The Angel of the Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. must be taken collectively, or
the whole company of the ministers of the Church, as is evident, Rev. 2.24. To
you in the plural number, (...) writing to the Angel, as distinguished from
the rest of the Church.

Having seen the unwarrantablenesse of the Diocesan Bishop, we shall not need
to speak of the true officers for rule in the Church; for Pastors and Teachers,
they are doubted by none, but the Episcopal Party; for ruling Elders to them
adjoined, as it has been the doctrine and practice of the Reformed Churches
generally; so of late there are diverse discourses, easy to be met with,
fairly and clearly pleading their divine right; among the rest, the way of the
Church of Christ in New England, the Jus Divinum, etc. the sum of the survey
of discipline, by Master Hooker. I shall therefore pass to another
instruction, about particular Congregations.

CHAP. X. The seventh Instruction.
To a particular Congregation of visible Saints, furnished with officers, it
belongs to exercise all parts of discipline within it self. In it power of all
discipline, whether all power of discipline, or not.

1. The Churches instanced in Scripture, of Corinth, Ephesus, etc. thus far
they seem to have been each a particular Congregation.

1. All the ordinary officers were chosen by the People, as officers in command
to the flock in common; this appears from the doctrine of the Peoples choice
formerly; of the Church of Corinth, their ministers were chosen, (...) it
seeming good to the whole Church, in the time of Clemens Romanus.

2. In the exercise of discipline, the People generally concurred with the
officers jointly; this from the doctrine of discipline formerly; those officers
formerly by them in common chosen; and thus the Churches true liberty was
preserved.

As for that Objection, the number of Christians and officers were so great,
they could not ordinarily meet in one place for worship; the answer is, suppose
that to be truth; yet might the officers interchangeably administer to them, as
officers in common to the flock in common, as well for all public
administrations of worship, as for discipline jointly.

As for the other maine objection, variety of languages; therefore their
Congregations, must be many and fixed.

Answ. There were interpreters of languages, that those who in the Congregation
understood not their language spoken in, might by interpretation understand it;
this argues their Congregations were not fixed, according to the difference of
languages.

3. Where there are all sorts of power for discipline, there is an entire right
for the exercise of it; for power is for exercise, but in every Congregation
there are all sorts of Power; there is power of order, and power of office; and
for office-power, there are both sorts of officers, Elders laboring in the
word and doctrine, and others for rule with them; and in this they of the
Presbyterian and Congregationall way agree.

4. Where our Saviors rule may be observed, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. there is
entire power of discipline; But in every Congregation so framed, that rule may
be observed. Admonition, first single, then before a witness or two, and
lastly by the Church.

5. Where authoritative suspension may be, there may be excommunication; but in
every such Congregation authoritative suspension may be; this later is granted,
the former is thus confirmed. Where there is power of Church-admonition, there
is power of excommunication; Mat. 18.17. but where there is power of
authoritative suspension, there is power of Church-admonition. 1. Suspension
supposes such admonition. 2. Admonition is a less act of power and
jurisdiction then Suspension is.

6. Where there is right to entire Church Fellowship, in the Ordinances of
Public Worship, and private Communion, there is right for the exercise of
discipline; this appears thus; A scandalous sinner in such a society retained,
is leaven, leavening the whole lump, involving the whole society in guilt, 1
Cor. 5. therefore it is their duty, and in their power to cast him out. But in
every Congregation so framed, there is right for entire Church Fellowship, etc.
This is not questioned.

Hence to the Church of Corinth power is ascribed, and she blamed for not
casting out the incestuous Person, not because she had thus and thus many
officers, but because she was a Church entirely framed for discipline, having
in her all kind of power for that purpose.

CHAP. XI. The eighth Instruction. To a Congregation of visible Saints, not yet
possessed of officers, it belongs to possess themselves of them.
HEre are two things fall into consideration. Election. Ordination.


1. For election, forasmuch as it is the Peoples right, as such, as has been
proved in the third instruction, hence it belongs to any number of them joined
together into a congregation, by choice to call Officers to themselves.

2. If they have not this right among themselves, whence shall it be derived to
them? 1. From other Churches; but how came they by their officers? 2. From a
Synod; but a Synod is made up of the delegates of settled Congregations,
therefore Congregations must first be settled. There is the same answer for a
Classis. 3. From the civil magistrate. This has been prevented in the fifth
Instruction. 4. From the combination of diverse ministers. Be it granted that
the People now about to form into a disciplinary Congregation, and to choose
their officers, ought to consult and follow the just guidance of able and
faithful Ministers proceeding aright, in directing them; yet ought not those
ministers to appoint officers over them, whom they shall not upon their
directions freely consent to; Preachers to them, not Pastors and Rulers over
them, may they with the help of civil authority fix among them. In a settled
Congregation, where by death, or removal, or censure, only one officer is
wanting, the rest of the officers have not Power to impose another upon the
Congregation, without her choice, as is clear by the third Instruction,
formerly showing the right of the Peoples Election; but those her own officers
have greater authority over her, then any combination of Ministers not yet
disciplinarily settled in several Congregations. Much less has any one
Minister this power.

2. For Ordination. Not to dispute whether it be the formal Constitution of an
officer, or the solemn approbation of him, by the Peoples Election formally
constitute;

1. According to Scripture-rule, and thence the Practice both of the Primitive
and Reformed Churches, it ought to succeed the Peoples Election; this is clear
for a Pastor or Teacher to a Church gathered, whatsoever may be said for a
Teacher by office for gathering a Church.

2. Be it granted that the People having chosen their officers, ought to
present them, (having the opportunity,) to some approved Ministers for
Imposition of hands; it must likewise be granted, that those Ministers without
just exception against that People or their choice, ought not to refuse the
officer so presented.

3. Supposing such Ordination cannot be had, whether are the People to remain
without the public ministry, and so without the public Ordinances of worship
and discipline; or does their election and approbation alone in this exigency,
invest with office-power? Let us endeavor to frame a judgment by instance of
a case or two.

1. Suppose a company of Saints cast upon a remote Island, not near any
Churches or Ministers, and there they are to fix their habitations; may they
not, (having Persons among them fitted,) settle among themselves a public
ministry?

2. Suppose a company of People in the midst of the Roman territories,
savingly enlightened with the truth of the Gospel; 1. Ought they not, having fit
Persons among them, to choose out some for the public ministeries of the
Church? 2. Ought they in case Imposition of hands might be so obtained, to
present them to the Roman Prelates for it? Beza says no. 3. In case that they
either ought not, or it could not be obtained, might they not without it,
settle their officers among themselves?

3. In case then that a Congregation stands convinced of the true bounds of the
matter of the visible Church and the true confinement of discipline to them
within those bounds, and has fit Persons for the public ministry among them,
but can not obtain Imposition of hands upon their choice from Ministers sought
unto, as differing in judgment about the matter and discipline of the Church,
why has not this Congregation the same liberty in this case, that the others
had in the former?

Object. Here they make themselves Judges.

Answ. 1. So in the former instances. 2. What way soever they are in, or what
Government soever they are under, except they see it with their own eyes to
be according to rule, it is but blind walking, and blind obedience, and
therefore unacceptable.

Quest. In case they go wrong, and the ministry with other Christians against
them be right, what is to be done?

Answ. 1. For them, they are to obey their own consciences; though we cannot
say erring Persons have a right to obey their own consciences, yet may we say
that it is their duty. An erroneous conscience binds.

2. For the Ministry and Orthodox Christians against them; as the Church is to
proceed against Schismatics, so are they against those, in case they
themselves be in a State of discipline, and judge the offense of that moment.

Quest. Suppose they be right, and the Ministry and Christians against them
wrong.

Answ. 1. For the ministry, etc. (as formerly on the other part,) here is
their duty, though not their right, to proceed as the Church ought to do
against Schismatics.

2. For the Congregation, it is their duty and their right to proceed, as in
other cases the true Church is to hold on her way, though persecuted as
schismatic and heretical.

CONSECTARY.
With more evidence yet; A Minister consenting with diverse Christians, nay
diverse Ministers so consenting, may together with those Christians joining
with them, settle discipline among themselves; In this case here is all
intrinsecall power for settling discipline.

FINIS.

