POEMS, WC BY WC ELDRED REVETT.

Horat. Ep. lib. 2. Ad August.

-- Quia nil rectum, nisi quod placuit, sibi ducunt:
Vel quia turpe putant parere minoribus, and quae
Imberbes didicere, Senes perdenda fateri.
LONDON, Printed by E. T. for the Author. Anno Dom. 1657.

TO The best Worthy of Honor, his Noble Kinseman, ROBERT HENLY, Esquire.
SIR,
HOw much Poesy is declined from that esteem it had sometimes arrived to, the
bold in vectives of a cheap multitude, are the but too easy instances; and
nothing is so now the business of these Epistles, as the defense of Writing: we
live in the days of Tumult, and in the noise of Batteries.

Hic ego Rerum
Fluctibus in mediis, and tempestatibus Urbis,
Verba Lyrae motura sonum connectere dignor!
When no Amphion can be heard, however able to re-order the stones, and
reconcile them to their breaches, the Nine had now found a no so ingenious
Quarter, as the Macedonian gave to their farthest Relations, who (at the razing
of an obstinate City) forgot not (in the wildness of discontent and War) to
exempt (from an otherwise general ruin) the whole stock of Pindar. I have
not then presumed on this Dedication, that these sheets deserve, but that they
need, the best Patronage. They are borne in an Age enough resolved, that the
Muses make a Body Politic, but Monstrous, by bringing to it unnecessary and
superfluous Members; and in an adventitious weakeness they will come new
Argument to the tyranny of Prejudice: They will therefore owe their whole
safety to the Honor of your Name, and indeed Protection is but Complement to
an assured sufficiency. If you ^nde in some of them a too early growth, let
them find an Excuse in their Nonage, and not pass an Examination after that
of the Ferula. The rest have been the Diversion of some my more indulgent
Hours, and to my best Discourse, they wear no interests, but their own: I
had rather be thought to want the Advantages, than derive the Acknowledgement:

Alium qui recitet, and quaerit famam,
Non emere Librum, sed Silentium debet.
Where I have dealt in a Divine matter, I have not loved to loose my self in
Mysteries, or betray my Youth to an Oracle: I have therefore only glanced on
Subjects, the fittest for Phancie, and (that alone) that, of two Mites, I might
return one, a Tribute ^o Heaven.

Though I have in nothing else a satisfaction; I shall enough receive it if you
pardon the address.

Sir, Of Your, in all Obedience, Servant and Kinsman, Eldred Revett.
October 19. 1647.
To my dear Friend Mr. ELDRED REVETT, On his Poems Moral, and Divine.
CLeft (as the top of the inspired hill;)
Struggles the soul of my divided quill:
While this foot does the watery mount aspire
That Sinais living and en liv'ning fire.
Behold! my power's stormed by a twisted light
O'th Sun, and his first kindled his sight.
And my left thoughts invoke the Prince of Day,
My right to the spring of it, and him do pray.
Say happy youth crowned with a heavenly ray
Of the first flame, and inter-wreathed bay,
Inform my soul in labor to begin,
Io's, or Anthems, Poeans, or a Hymn,
Shall I a Hecatombe on thy tripod slay,
Or my devotions at thine Altar pay:
While which to adore, the mazed world cannot tell
The sublime Urim, or (...) ^racle.
Hark how the (...) hords temper our brain!
As when Apollo serenades the main,
Old Ocean smooths his sullen, furrowed front,
And Nereides do glide soft measures on it;
^hil'st The Air puts on it is sleekest smoothest face,
and each does turn the others Looking-glass.
So by thy sinewie Lyre now struck (we see)
to soft calms all storms of Poesy:
And former thundering and lightning lines
And Verse now in its Native Luster shines.
How were it thou hid within thy self? how shut
Thy precious Illiads locked up in a nut?
(Not hearing from thee) thou do break out strong
Invading (forty thousand-men) in song
And we (secure in our thin, empty, heat)
Now find our selves at once surpised and bear;
While the most valiant of our wits now sue,
Fling down their Arms, ask quarter too of you.
So cabbin'd up in its disguised course, rust,
And scurf'd all ore wi^h its unseemly crust.
The ^iamond (from midst the humbler stones)
(Sparkling) shoots forth the price of Nation's.
Ye sage unridlers of the Stars, pray tell
By what name shall I stamp my Miracle?
Thou strange inverted Aeson, that leapst ore,
From thy first infancy into fourscore;
That to thine own self have the Midwife played!
And from thy brain spring'st ^^^th the heavenly Maid!
Thou staff of him; bore him, that bore our sins,
That (but set down) to bloom and bear begins!
Thou Rod of Aaron that with one motion hurled
Bud'st a perfume of Flowers through the world?
Thou strange calcined seeds within a glass,
Each species Idea spring'st as 'twas!
Bright vestal flame, that kindled but now
For ever do the sacred fires throw!
Thus the re-iter'd acts of Nestors age
(That now had three times ore outlived the stage,
And all those beams contracted into one)
Alcides in his cradle has outdone.
But all these flourishing hues with which I die
Thy Virgin paper now are vain as I,
For 'bove the Poets heaven thou art taught to shine,
And move as in thy proper Chrystalline:
Whence that mole-hil Parnassus, thou do ^iew,
And us small Ants there dabling in its dew,
Whence thy Seraphick soul such hymns does play
As those to which first danced the first day;
Where with a thorn from the worlds ransoming wreath
Thou (stung) do Antiphons, and Anthems breath,
Where with an Angels quill, dipped in the lambs blood,
Thou sin'gst our Pellicans all-saving Flood,
And bath'st thy thoughts in ever-living streams.
Rinc't from Earth's tainted, fat and heavy steams.
There move translated youth! enrol'd ith'quire
That only does with holy lays inspire,
To whom his burning Coach Elias sent,
And the Royal Prophet-Priest his Harp has lent,
Which thou do tune in concent unto those
Clap wings for ever at each hallowed close:
While we now weak and fainting in our praise,
(Sick) Echo ore thy Halleluiahs.
Richard Lovelace.

To his Worthy Friend on his Poems.
WE claim no share, to you the Bays are due,
Who have made Poems, and Us Poets too,
While, by a brave, inimicable flight
You both dishearten, and engage to write,
Shamed at once, If not at all we try,
And yet despairing ever to come nigh;
We usher nothing to your following state,
Whether in number valued, or in weight.
You, like Your Phoenix, are your self a kind,
Not cause our flowers are to your Posies joined,
By which no Luster is on your side won,
We are the Stars in That, and you the Sun.
Rivers may urge, They swell, the Byllowie Main,
But ask! hem whence they their own waters drain.
Glasses may boast Their Office, yet they owe,
Unto our very Faces, what they show.
So little (though it seem) is any thing
That of Access unto thy Worth we bring,
Sole purchaser of thine immortal Fame,
Although the Deeds are passed in our Name.
On others here I may be thought too free,
Yet, with fair leave, I give but Right ^o Thee,
Having confessed the Trust, we add no more,
But to thy Book, we turn the Reader over.
B. H.

To his best Brother Mr. ELDRED REVETT, On his Poems, Humane and Divine.
THy pen has now flowed over, and ^ill'd the age,
With streams of wit from each luxuriant page,
Thou scorn'st to ingross thy vein like wretched pelf,
For every good's diffusive of it self;
Thy first fruits do appear to all men's joys,
Twins at the first production, hopeful boys:
And though in sense and voice they don't agree,
Esau has Jacobs hands, and smooth as he.
Thy Humane are so pure, so cleanly dressed,
Chaste as the cold thoughts of a Vestall breast;
Looked the strict abbess on, a blushing Nun,
Might drop such beads at her devotion.
When I thy ^nthems read, each lines a Rise
By which my rapt soul climbes a Paradise;
And sings with Angels Odes it lear'nt from you,
Closing them with blessed Hallelujahs too.
The are more than thine! sure some Intelligence
Did both direct thy hand and guide thy sense.
To thought above thy reach, but that we know,
Good wits (like Hagles) seldom flagge below.
Let Satyrs whet their teeth, and fork their tongue,
Thou have advantages above their wrong,
Such snakes but hiss, thy babes (like Hercules)
Even in the Cradle strangle such as these.
WILL. REVETT.

POEMS.
The Centaure.
MAn or Beast, e'n choose you whether,
Nature made you both, and neither;
Doubt (in you) might fear to err
Inoculated Character:
My double seeing eyes deny,
They through their Glasses mul^iply;
Such break the Object into more,
But the same shape's, but Echoed over,
Thou not to be divided art,
shuffled within thy either part.
No mar'l that you in dealing stick.
When I must Play you too by Trick.
Me thinks thou seemst by swords divorce,
A Trooper graffed on his Horse!
Turks that by Middle disunite
Are your Instructors to alight,
Who usher to no Woman kind,
But Ride before, your own behind.
And when you over-ridden sweat,
Walk (your own Hostler) down the Hear;
While children like that Fancy stride,
You go on Foot although you Ride.
You were when it the Gods Refined,
A piece of Cha^s left behind;
The Soul that Body does enlive,
Is Rationably sensitive;
And 'twas thy Tribe did those beget,
Are understanding Horses yet:
Thy Voice broke from thy Ivory Grate,
A Neighing, yet Articulate;
And we distinguish the Discourse,
Banks Dialoguing with his Horse.
I muse the Miscelanie Race
Should you a Siren Wench embrace;
Or Woman should you Court with Arts
Of kindred to your upper Parts.
Thy Love beyond Platonic pressed
Were merely sensual, in the rest;
More naturally or inclined,
Should you but dote on your own kind;
The are parting kisses whet you to it,
And you, as 'twere, take leave to do it;
Where what before you sued to win
The half persuasive waves as sin.
Who can Reconcile the Quarrel
Of those limbs too, to apparel?
Where a Doublet's all the suit
Or a saddle Breeches to it;
Which uncondemned, you may slack
Incensed from your Genets Back;
And with it too your own indorse,
As good a way to vex your Horse:
Me thinks those Hoofs should not be one;
but cleft into Division,
That might as they distinctly lay,
The double rather shape betray.
The ornaments of Tail and Head
Have small alliance in the Thread;
But that the less is disapproved,
They Kindred are so far removed:
The ^able needs that must supply't
To double with thy App^^^^e,
Where Members so Reb^^^ous are;
Still with the Belly vexed at War:
You drunk at, Stomach Glasses scant,
When yet that Paunch is flag'd in want;
Your throat the Pipe, but after plays
That to the Cistern Drinks conveighs:
What Flesh the Hands to Mouth prefer,
Got down, is Thracian Provender;
Till reconciling Sallades sent
By intercession both content.
Thou 'twixt a Butler placed and Groom,
A stable and a Dining room;
And as thy Hoofs the Pavement beat
This pleads it Leg, that Active Hear;
For Thee thy Cogging Host does spread
Clean Litter and a Feather bed,
And thou art laid when sleep entreats,
Half in the Matt, half in the Sheets.
Thou dream, wherein all shapes do crowd;
Fantastic offspring of a Cloud.
ODE Hastening his Friend into the Country.
(1.)
COme let us down,
Bloat with this smoakie Town,
And Broyl'd in Heat,
Of a Tumultuous sweat.
Why linger we in in course Flames, never think,
We can burn Martyrs here, but out and stink.
(2.)
Nothing but Noise
The sow're breathed Muskets Voice.
And with long blast
The Trumpet Hoarse at last.
Such still ascending Volleys thither fly,
They lay up a new thunder in the sky.
(3.)
It Is Gross as Day
Seen Complement to stay
Black-patches mend,
The Faces we attend.
That are but sleekt with sise and whited over,
The Hair and rough-cast, that was laid before.
(4.)
That Cup and then
We sleep, part again.
A Fire their reigns,
(...) scorched black, our veins;
And our Canary Faces dashed with Wines
Shot through the Windows, blaze the Tavern Signs.
(5.)
Let us Repair
To the soft winged Air,
Which spread a space,
Will gently fan the Face;
And wipe with the down penons sweat away,
Leaving them only gilded by the Day.
(6.)
Then in some Bower
Belyes the Days brighr Hour;
Where Sun has made
Squeezed in a Curd of shade.
Under a Vocal Roof of Birds weel lie
That sing's asleep, and are our Canopy,
(7.)
Or underneath
We Will Restie Fancy breathe;
That else willye
Tipled in Ecstasy:
And tune some Rhapsodie to their wild notes,
That in the Leavie Belfry Chime their Throats.
(8)
Or Harmless sack,
Drink from the Harvest Jack,
Will never Flush
Our Cheeks with guilty Blush.
And view the country Girls turn dry the Hay,
While their jet Eyes, Frowse it as fast as They.
(9.)
Glaunces they throw
To Dick at the next Mow.
At night in Flocks
Dream fine things in course smocks.
And though the Sun looks on their Face too full,
Have skins as white as Milk, and soft as Wool.
To his Honored Friend, Col, R. L. upon his second failing.
ONe Fault to you is Death again
A super-errogating sin,
And I thus fallen from all Repair,
Set Raving down by wild despair;
And as the damned already do,
Repent my sins by adding to.
To a Lady becommingly reserved.
ADmired Pattern of a Modest youth,
You must not blush to look on naked Truth!
A Body so ^aelestial cannot vex
Your Virgin-eye, like Angels without Sex;
Nor we her Gender (Madam) could divine,
Made her not Virtue (like you) Feminine:
A Filme nere so Diaphanous (her Fence)
She forfeits Eve like in it her innocence:
The Bay should be her Crown, often wanton grows
And (Ivie-like) it self her Garment throws;
But here the subtle loome unwinds to show
How I have loved, how I have honored you.
Think now my Pen (full with the Delphian) swells;
The sacred Tunnell conveighs Oracles;
You more than Woman then must know, Iv'e seen
Those of the Sex that have but women been;
And handsome too, had Hair that flowd upon it,
And Tipped with Gold, the silver of their Front;
Had Brows well-archt, whose Crescent's, though above
Borrowed their Light from Sun's that under move;
Had Rosy Cheeks, Noses well polisht too
That smelt not them because they always do,
Had Lips of Cherries, when the Wantons bit
You Would think the Fruit had truly suffered it,
Had Chinnes that flowed Into a double wave,
And Necks hid not one Beauty in a grave.
As yours, their Breasts and Hands had snow as much,
And like yours too dissolved with a Touch:
Thus over them's thrown a Tap'strie rich enough,
Lined with Hypocrisy of Darnix stuff;
And had these glorious things but turned been,
Their outsides had made betrer souls, than In:
How have I known these in a Mimick Pride,
Their Lovers into Sectaries divide;
Of Servants, Gallants, Friends, and thus they do
Make Loves Religion Independent too:
These I have liked and envied, those did gain,
Lisping Commands they might have spoken plain;
When in new Lines their Faces they drew over
Me thought they made them better than before:
As they from Posture into posture grew,
Their bodies in all Aretines they threw,
And what they made me long for, (hasty Elves)
In my default Commit they with Themselves:
But (Madam) now to you that these enhance
Whose weightiest things about them are their Fans;
When I first saw you, how me thought I saw
What prompted me to break all, give me Law;
And as you scorned to bow untainted Men,
You looked me Wild only to Tame again:
Lions ('it is said) undaunted looks of Man
Humble to fear, if not, a Woman's can;
Or what is yet more salvage, you might trust
Armed with that Majesty, a Satyrs lust;
Had Juno from her Browe thrown such a Raye
Paris had dropped the Ball he gave away:
When I apppoacht your Lips with checked desire,
I kissed a Dialogue of Ice and Fire,
And mine withdrew thence, as if passed through
The watery and the fiery Ordeal too,
Or as I Would hung on Portias coals, and then
Cooled my salute on her pale mouth again:
The Phoenix curld her flames sure in your Breath,
Her ashes yet flew there, too after Death:
Into a seat (when now retired) your eye
Had totterd me with its Artillery;
There I received its beams, whiles as they played
I in a sheet of Lightning sat aray'd;
Direr aparrel (had I raved) had bin
Than that flead Hercules, had searched within;
But that my yielding body not denide
To give it way too easy for its pride.
Your pity now called in your glorious light
That stroke my weak eyes with a ray too bright:
Your voice not humane then, my ear did brush:
Music in thunder lightened by a blush.
New dis-intranc'd. I in as bad estate
To catch the sound, mak't in articulate;
And lost your charm of words, encouraged now
By smiles among checks, scaterd on your brow,
I locked your hand in mine that strove to escape
As I had grasped it there only to rape:
Then had your front known wrinckles that might tell't
I in a frown had your displeasure spell't;
Nor can those eyes (have fire enough) it roll
VVhiter than inside Vellam in a scrowl:
Sooner the feet of Gods, the milk that Paves
The pathway to Joves court may throw in waves;
Sooner the fingers, you too roughly lay
Curle Pelops shoulder into ruffles may:
This makes me still retaint, my amorous heat
Had now resolved it self in a cold sweat
And made a luk-warm bath, love wantoned in
Paved with the Pliant Marble of your skin;
Which fain would cheat the uncteous flood and grieve
It to a shower of Tears as that took leave:
At last my joints fear (though unwilling) spread
which died the Prisoner in a bashful red.
For what it late had sufferd, when you line
With it your glove a less unruly shrine
New wonder-strook my reattentive ear
Tries if your words would shun embraces there:
But they fell linkt in such a subtle chain
My sense was fetterd without sense of pain;
(Restraint to violence) the sounds I hear
Uninjurr'd pass the dark Cells of the ear:
Though fit to rape your words Zon'd Virgins too
Drop not displaid as other women's do:
In wanton Bed-scenes they had laid before,
And prologu'd waking that sleep acted over:
Thy breath meandring in a beauteous sky
Scorns the winged Archer in those clouds should fly;
His shafts and quiver in their bosoms dipped
With liquid Gold were too divinely tipped,
In that pure Heaven, for creatures pure as fit
Thy vocal thoughts dance innocent as it,
And raise dispute, how thou can humane be
Blended with such rays of Divinity:
I cannot think thee Angel though as well
My trembling Fingers Tryall'd palpable;
Nor dare I woeman, thou do so perplexe
My thoughts with Things were never in the Sex:
Thou glorious Chaos then, wherein do lie,
Things mortal mixed with immortality;
Yet not that neither, what can I epsy,
Untuned in such a perfect Harmony?
Thus, thus thou Mount'st Transcendent, and art gone,
Struggling through Nets of Definition.
A Dial eaten with Antiquity.
Wants Time a subject that the envious Elfe
Imployes its Iron Teeth now on it self?
Each Man ( Nyles Hierglyphick) here allow'th,
Times Serpent winds its Tail into its Mouth.
On the old Tomb keeper that shows the Monuments in Westminster Abbey.
YOu that gave pence a piece for it once,
And saw a wonder thrived by stones,
I'v paid the sum, dissol'vd the spell,
Have seen't, and seen no Miracle.
One (as that Bill of Fare had fed,
Suggested stones to be made Bread)
Makes either Charity but one,
Of Him gives bread, or gives a stone;
Whose Teeth can make their Table meat
Yet grind un-blunted as they eat.
As every morsel melted one,
By Transubstantiation.
His Rod (no Prophets) at descent
Yet broaches an old Monument,
As from that aged tears did burst
Time there had staled for his Thirst.
But why! me thinks this walking sp'rit
Should loose like others appetite
At least Imaginary one,
Should fast by Imitation?
In place once Deluged with the Seas
Of Grief, he viewes those Images,
As Waters, from the earth again,
Ducaleon did his stony Men;
Or as he (a New Perseus) dead
Had statued them with Gorgons Head,
In Posture as they fought, and so
Had left them still a weapond Foe:
When in himself he lays up all
A Monumental Canibal,
And Conning over the Inventorie,
He re-intombes them, and their story;
A living-Church-yard, that oppressed
Gives up his dead too like the rest,
Spues Carcasses, as he fore-run
Graves at the Resurrection;
His belching Task performed once, then
He licks the Vomit up again;
Thus more than Man's he does enforce
Upon himself the Serpents curse.
Apple of Sodom, only skin,
Without he is, and dust within.
What Hair he does preserve from loss
Hangs on the Scull a little Moss;
His Wrinkles into Letters run:
And are his own Inscription.
My Phanste shapes him now once more
Created Adam new flesht over.
And now me thinks the carcass springs,
Informed with the Ghosts oth' Kings.
Which bustle there, and thus he is
Lined with a Metempsuchosis;
Bravely prss^st, He takes up Rooms,
Like the Demmiacks in the Tombs
His imprisonment in the Spring.
UNlocked Ianiver had now let in
Youth and sair checks to beautify the spring.
When amorous Sol smiles fetters into tears,
That each chained River on her bosom wears.
Rolled into Curls in better d'esse they pass,
As I'e had been spread, but their Looking-glass.
And leave their Banks as were Alpheus loose,
Again persuing his loved Arethuse.
With Eishes crowned, that health to freedom quaffe,
Where late yor might have engraved their Epotaph.
The sheets of snow washed in themselves awhile,
Pour from the Mountain fides to swell the Nile;
VVanton in liberty his surges slide.
Over Sunburned Egypt as he flows, it is died;
Who bring wild wealth for Pyramids that rise,
Like temples sent up with their sacrifice.
Earth her contracted Hand too open lays,
To the love-Rhetorick of Apollo^s Rays.
He melts it with his kisses, and the skin
VVinter had chopped, he Jellies smooth again;
He bales her from her Jail, where frost had once
Immured her in the VValls of her own stones:
New dis-intranc'd, she in her uncrampt Arms,
Fruit-getting Rain (that April falls in) warmes.
To make the Goddess fertile from his tower,
Jove here des^endeth in a fragrant shower.
And every Plant the longing Head thrusts on,
To free't from's Bed of Generation;
The Poppy's d' of their Velvet Maskes and dare
Now nodde to sleep, hush't by the whispering air.
VVak't from their Coffins, Becs with springs recruit.
By Chymick kisses the new flowers salute.
To welcome their approach. Our free bloods ride,
VVinter had conjured, and to Circles tide:
Returning Birds their grateful Paeans sing,
For their Repeal to the soft-breasted spring.
VVelcome to all but me,! Who joys the state
That only sees a Triumph through a Crate?
On the Burning of some locks of a Gentlewomans Hair.
MAdam, loves God invisible did lie
Gyv'd in your Tresses, and his Bow laid by;
Unless as are his hands, and now his fires,
To burn his silken fetters he inspires:
They proud of such a Pyre, Curle high and bright,
And kiss't them with a burning appetite.
Love freed takes wing, and hastes to Venus star,
Mistakes, and flies back to your flaming Hair;
Shot through the flames, he passes in a trice,
From Purgatory into Paradise;
And vows hencesorth to make that Place his sphere,
From thence to whisper love into your ear.
The Daisie.
(1)
AS it blows
The Hood it self unclasped throws
In shape a star;
But its Pride
Is to the flower, 't s not denied
To be a sphere.
(2.)
Beauty plays
From of it, eye-disabling Rays;
In red and white
That are Parts
Constituent to captive Hearts;
Make Faces bright.
(3.)
Blushes shed,
As showr's on Virgin snow had bledde.
Imbroiderie lies
Upon leaves,
From which the Morn her dress receives,
To gilde the skies.
(4.)
Nature lent
The Daisie an imperfect scent,
Yet left her Well;
We bequeath
Since to Beauties sovereign Breath,
How e're they smell.
Adonis slain.
ALas! thou were deceived Rude swine,
That thought his Ivory hard as thine!
So pliant Venus joints of silk,
Often have padled in it as Milk.
And her Rosy Palm did throw
Aside the waves that easy flow:
Thy Tusk the Calm too shook so sore
The Wallowing Flood did Circle ore;
Oh but thy Tooth to Coral Tippe
It self (alas) did rashly dippe;
And ope' the springs conveyed the twigs
There more than Flexible in sprigs.
That from the Channels bubling swell,
To brink the bloody paved Well.
Like Rubies the warm streams did spill,
Soft from the Chimists Crucible.
Shed to salute their new sad blisses,
Prankt in the scarlet dye of kisses,
They smooth and glutenously move,
Or they had surely mixed above:
But since they could not, Crawld about,
As they would vcin themselves without;
And spread in Branch a bleeding Vine,
Whose Sap and Clusters too are Wine.
Fragrant Adonis slain that How'r,
Starts an Extemporary Flower.
Barne-Elmes.
HE sure (who phancyed an Elisyan shade)
Was with the Garland crowned that he had made
That bound his browe, illustrious in its rays
And kissed the lightning blastles as the bays;
Though baffled now his cypress, yiewe may fall
And naked here strowe their own Funeral;
Their umbrage mourn too in a sadder night,
And these Elmes roof the regions of delight:
No wreath of conquest round them need be thrown
Victoriously triumphant in their own.
To which we pass as Virtue for more state
Our essence kept entire, and did translate
We furrow up no styx but calmely ride,
The silver back of a delicious Tide.
Whose watery fleece after each stroke does flit
As if the tangled Oar were caught in it
When now rolled over its dimpled smile, we tread
On native carpets to our landing spread,
And here we feed with a devouring sight;
As our return we hindered by the slight
Our cheated eyes the dissie pavement guess
Inebriated in its own excess;
Where the rich Gems of fields their luster show
And all the flowers are of an orient hew;
But that the close loom with opinion wars
You Would think the melted earth reflected stars,
Or that un-hinged Heaven inverted might
Make proud our footsteps paved with Globes of light.
The giddy sense turns the gay Firmament
As if with it, it circulary went:
But richer beauty does their sealing lie,
So merely theirs, it is a deputed sky:
And as Hyperions son over curious streams
To prick them in, he needle-points his beams;
Arm weaves in arm, and rancks exactly suit
As they had danced thus to Amphions Lute:
Had Orpheus fingers trembled here upon
His Lyre, the trees had moved in measure on.
Where the deluded Sun can no where shed
He guilds the Covering and his rays are spread
Till by the breath of Zephyrus undone,
A breese of soft-lung'd wind fans in the sun;
Which thus let fall a momentary flash,
The spangled plush does but retreating dash:
Birds that perch here their wilder freedom leese
And Volunteers are Caged in the Trees;
Tippling the places harmony, they run,
From their harsh Notes a rich division:
A spiced Air with downy bosom glide:
And over the Foliage hardly sinking slides.
(With apples blushed the cime) for their offense
Sure our first Parents were exiled hence.
Upon a Gentlewoman caught in a shower of Hail.
THe flatteries of an April day
My Chloe to a walk betray,
And since the sky no mask did hide,
Her silken clouds are thrown aside;
The Gilt the Sun throws to repair,
She sheds the Beams too of her hair.
His Courtship cares not to escape,
She knows too young yet for a rape:
His infant rays he rather tries
From the grown Luster of her eyes:
Unable so too, he does shroud,
His tender-ey'd Beams in a Cloud.
When at this Burial of the Sun
The Heavens put their mourning on;
Yet to Reta^n his Murderer, throw
A Banquet down on her below
Of Candied sweets, least she away,
Should carry thence what is left of Day.
Or else 'twas Jove himself did hurl,
Thus scattered, in a shower of Pearl.
To court my Nymph, and called in Day,
As when he with Alcmena lay:
Her burnisht Hair, her Diadems
Powderd with these Orient Gemmes;
When sheding through the Curles for Dresses,
They sometimes fall her Neck-laces;
Her Vesture they Imbroyde^ do,
And trickle down for Arm'lets too:
And some that would be over-blest
Roll between her either Breast;
But she heaves up her Bosom there
And stops the Audacious Ravisher,
To let the God know, though in's Trim,
That milky way's not free for Him:
The anger of her eye then fears,
Him into penitential tears
Now drops thrilled through her ring'd-hayr laves,
Like springs that issue out of caves.
And from her Neck (my wonder though)
How Hayle should be dissolved in snow.
On the Death of a Canarie Bird, killed with the Fall of a Cage.
Stay Harmonious soul! O stay!
That fly'st but to escape away;
Thy upper garment is forgot,
So Light (alas!) thou know it not;
Thy subtler part unkind in Fate
Stripped the substantial at the Grate:
Fearless of cold, unfledged it went
Of The pretty featherd Tenement;
That just the Confines on of Death,
Was but too Rich a Furre of Breath;
Did its part so kindly do
While alive, 'twas tunefull too.
As thy Raptures rise and fall;
We heard them, saw this Musical;
That full Deligt knew difference,
Not in the subject but the sense:
Our thirsty ears whenever Dry,
Quenched with thy Floods of Harmony;
Hung with such ecstasies upon,
Thy Ravishing Division.
The Tipled sense forgot to know,
Whether it were pleased or no:
What that had lost the eye hereaves
Still as the green plush bosom heaves;
While it pants might every sphere
More kindly Tremble, Tutored here.
Rolled thence the sugared noate,
Checkels in the Bubling Throat.
Then does a Soul of sweetness fly,
But left thee still Plurality:
But what usurious Fate could Rappe
The heavenly Legion at a Clappe?
And leave thy Carcass sadly thrown,
To Burial in m^ss it is own?
Could thy injurious prison slide,
Burthend with Voice and naught beside.
That did Heavens motions tell,
Their Echo just but Visible?
On horrid Styx thou now do float
Pirch'd on o^ Charons Oar or Boat;
Tune but thy lays in length he will hurl
And in a Calm flagge his black Curle*
Like Orpheus once at Hell, e're long
Strike thy Redemption in a song:
That then his Cittern far more clear,
(Alas) will be thy stay I fear:
Then to the shades since thou must come:
Pirch, and make them Elysium.
To Dr. F. B. on his game at Chesse,
WE read of Greeks could ten years war define
And draw it is whole design in drops of wine;
Could show where Rhaesus, where Ulysses lay,
Who stole the Horse, never touched the Fatal Hay:
This was weak Demonstration, Sir; but you
Bring us the very siege and soldiers too.
Her Suspicion.
ANd am I Monster then? it crept upon,
Me undiscerned Transmutation;
My but Appparell, ere't my thoughts had been
It must like Nessus shirt have eaten in:
Thoughts that lay blushing there, and dashed the earth,
Mantled in their own scarlet at their Birth;
^owl'd over my throat, they from themselves unspread,
Then'ts Native tapestry a deeper red.
When clothed with it (in Vocal state they ride)
My every fleece of breath is Purple died
A blush betrayed no guilt, but modest fear,
The guilt might be suspected, was not there.)
And those Cameleon-like that after fly,
From what is before them take their Livery:
Thus I Am within one bashful flame, without
That sins dark Lantern compas^es about.
As if repentance with my crimes oppressed
^ust strugled out, had spilt them on my breast.
Should the diffufive blot all overrun
^t only cassock't over Religion.
The Gemm's dark cabinet, or emblem'd in,
The baptized Aethiops unregenerate skin;
So hid's it is face, when through the Mask of Night,
Heaven Argus-ey'd shoot's out it is starry sight.
Such are your bright bauties, when you hurl,
Over them Eclipses with a sullen Curle.
My all was pure within, my breast the Grate's,
Ribbe-bound to Nunneries; my heart creates,
Of Virgin-thoughts, that could restraint obey,
But to converse with you, as chaste as they;
My blood had frost upon it, that heat repells
And only strung my veins with Isicles.
Proab'd through their every Channel, till I grew
As Dian's statue, cold, and as stiff too;
My pulse a Minute-clock, beat no Alarms,
That my congealed blood to action warmes.
Why were those coy Retreats? I never had known,
The horror startled you, had been my own;
Had not your Crystal self my Mirror been
Silver^d with Virgin, Innocence within.
Where my fixed eyes played with such active heat
They weak to Tears, with luster seemed to sweat
In their own labor, till the dire Affright,
Of mine own image, did invert my sight;
Turned up with pious Hate, if yet perchance,
My heart retained a devout ignorance;
Reason there ruled alone, Lust banished thence,
Sure circumfus'd me with the soul of sense:
Torment to my chaste mind! as I had been
A Goat-hayr'd Satyr penanc'd in my skin;
Or what I saw as in a Magic Glass,
Not my own Figure, but some devils was;
His Pride had raised again to things divine,
And had possessed you as his glorious shrine.
But I blaspheme! the substance on them plays,
Falls a dark shade perforce upon bright Rays.
The boy had crossed Fate here, no Colors been
Reflected, hence a repercussive Twin;
Thus foil we beams your shade what is from us gone,
Makes in the shadows a gradation;
Yet all are shadows still, no fault in us
That ours are dark ones, and yours Glorious;
No more then was in him, that all things can,
Yet made you; and an Ethiopian.
But I perchance wrapped in a sweet surprise
Your Cheeks to Blushes warmed with burning eyes;
And my luxurious Heart might proudly pant
As my heaved Bosom then had grown too scant.
For Rebel thoughts, or a too unctuous touch,
The Flattery to lust might hang too much
Upon my glowing fingers, that might be
The fiery trials of your Chastity:
No, my hard graspe, but proved your sinking skin,
So more than soft, I thought your soul had been
About your body wrapped, it gave such way,
And where I something found, your Body lay:
When I your hand thus felt, 'twas new delight
To try your pure transparence with my sight.
Which made it pierce more pointed, that my eye
Prevaild so far, it did your thoughts descrye;
Hid in your Bosom, and my Heart did beat
To ope' my breast (that suffered your Retreat)
Spread wide, that put together you might spell
Your Beauty, and all there to Miracle.
An old Woman weeping.
CAn those spent springs with Tears enrich
Their either now despairing Ditch?
Like those from Prison got, they slide.
A Vault trills from its weeping side;
The waters having filled their Wells,
^ye there her aged Spectacles;
Or as the Sourses had come on
^o far to Resurrection.
^o see above at this Retrive,
Had seen so long through Perspective;
^ntill impulsive drops supplye,
^o swell them to too full an Eye;
When falling from the new heaved Pile
^eliverd the are into a Nile,
More than a sev'n-Channeld, where
^hey trickle, on, as Currents are
^topt sometimes by an o're-thwart Creek,
^he Gell^'d drops in-lay her Cheek:
^o chill a Nonacris, no place
Could hold it but that hoof her Face.
The Hectors.
THese are the Hectors never known
Until their Troy was overthrown:
When now the merry Greeks define
Their battles not transerib'd in wine.
An Epithalamium.
UP tardy youth! Thy fancy deems
Too solid antidating dreams;
And thou Ixion-like art proud
In the embraces of a clowd.
Stars the fair regiments of night,
Lay their commissions down of light,
The Rose-dasht Morn does pompous ride
In the reflexes of the Bride:
See! now the lusty Gallant springs
And through a cloud of pillow flings;
Spruce as the day, a vigorous He
That rowsing scatters braverie;
Traind with gay lads sprightly flies,
To sing the Brides solemnities;
Who at the trumps miraculous greet
Starts from her Virgin-winding sheet:
And now the twitting wantons neat
With busy fingers lay each pleat:
While every pin they tremble on
With rapt Gesticulation;
And all their bosoms panting look
As if the milky calm were shook:
Now they have built her in her trim
That does with charming motion swim,
And were the East and West unknown,
Fraught with both Indies of her own:
See! how in Ring her tresses play
As they were curled in their own ray;
And shedding on her skin, the shine
Enriching warms the silver Mine:
She is advanced with pretty fear
To meet her Licensed Ravisher,
Who strikes with burning eyes her breast,
As he had fi^'d the spicy nest,
Then by degrees to settle seeks
By the established beauty of her cheeks,
And makes her spark more high and quick
With precious Gemm's of Rhetoric.
Now Hymen's tapers curle, and on
Usher the bright procession;
And now they near the temple draw,
With one Religious common awe.
The Virgins tread, and Bride anon
A so transfigured troop the stone,
As if Tertullians Angel roof
Thus descended from aloof:
The Priest's now mystic words begun
Incorporate the payr in one;
He poasts by rote, or he might miss,
That but a Devout seer is,
Her sindging eyes so deeply win
He Is almost Cassockt too within.
And now the holy charm is done,
And they to Ceremony one:
Now time is crutch'd, and pievish fears
To please too much in froward years,
The Sons faint steeds stand (panting) still
With labor of the Eastern hill.
His garish rays do (lazy) fall
Loathed, as if pestilential:
The numerous Issue of the hour
But linger, and Consumptive power
Sure Sol has heard, and lashes West
(Red with his fiery task) to rest:
And now his greater light is out,
Gives the stars leave to look about:
The tatling whisperers undescri'd
Have stolen away, to bed the Bride,
And all unpinn'd to better dress
Her in her Native gloriousness,
Whose yet reluxency does moan
As each knot were her Virgin Zone.
Undone, now tremblingly she greets
New rosing over the fragrant sheets.
See! where the groom has broken in
(With veins stretched they look black again,
The heightened blood shoots their recluse
In a long flame through every sluice,)
He views with amorous eyes that glow
As they would melt her heaps of snow;
Then drops his clothes about him shed
And breaks like lightning through to bed:
See, se! her heart does struggling shove,
And Earthquakes the fair hills above;
When white and red by flashes dwell
As if the silk were changeable:
Go happy friend! and rifle joys,
Of Virgin treasure never cloyes;
Still fresh delight will court to bed
As each night were a Mayden-head;
So quick thy soft embrace will sink,
That she would into Air you would think;
Were Marble plyant, and could fall
With a No almost touch at all,
As smooth and white she then alo^e
Lived in her Monumental stone.
Rich summ's of Girls and Boys go print
And never impoverish the Mint.
On the sight of a Lady, walkeing in an Evening, in white Sarsnet.
SO have I seen the Queen of night
Silv'ring the shades with streams of light;
From this fair brow no crescent shone
But from her self her rays were thrown;
I gues'd her then one that had been
Enjoined to wear these robes for sin;
To whom a Taper was denied
As what would not reveal but hide,
Dimmed by her beauties rare excess
As greater lights extinguish less:
But oh! she seemed so innocent,
'Twas sin to think she should repent:
She spied me, then a blush she shed
Which over her snowie garments spread,
Did far excel that which each day
The morn casts through the milkie way:
But in revenge of what I did
Her lustres from mine eyes she hid;
She soon withdrew her glorious light,
And then she truly made it night.
To his ingenious Friend, Master Maes, drawing the flowers in their successive
growth.
THy predecessor, Friend, that trave I Would Greece,
To crowd whole Nature in one labored piece,
Read and took notes from each selecter face,
'Till he composed his beauteous common place:
You Limne your Flora thus, and from each tribe
The scattered Goddess (Uniform) transcribe,
What reconciled varitie you bring:
And but one Posie make of the whole spring?
All the tautology of flowrs you sum
Into a less unrul'd Compendium,
And the vast civil Law of Nature spread
From volume draw to more sententious head;
It Is not a single Garden does appear
But the gay wealth of the transplanted year;
It Is no continued kindred that we see
But the spruce heir of every family:
Our eyes not on the same dull objects pass,
Distracted through the multiplying glass,
But still find new in giddy change that lie
Tippling in ebriated memory:
No Characters here put together spell
The Summer into Nosegay syllable,
But an unshufled line of Letters run
In Alphabetical succession,
That to the Tyro-fl^rist tabled lie
Advantage to his Primmer infancy.
The gaudy Spring here throws her wardrobe by,
And you may trace her through her Livery,
And finding how each days apparelled thence,
May cast up too her possible expense,
When I ran over the whole embroidery, all is
A painted Calendar of Festivals,
An Arc, where flowers of every kind conspire
From the wild floods of winter to retire.
The short and sweet lived season thus we see
Conveyed by pencil to posterity;
And Natures own transactions as they fell
Our nephews will read in thy Chronicle:
What a vast Blazon's reconciled by thee
Digested into rule of Heraldrie?
When the first parting bud gives it self vent
And opes for breath even stifled in the scent.
You catch the clean unsulli'd beauty grown
By your rare art the Zanye of its own;
At least from Nature the just shadows pass,
As if you Limmb'd them in a Looking-glass:
That Artist that invited Birds to fast,
Deluded by his specious repast,
Mocked by the rival shades of him of Greece,
Put forth his hand to draw aside the piece,
And lost that fame he might have done to you
By hence attempting at a Posie too:
Where the too forward Prim-Rose lank and weak,
Faintly declineth the Green Sickness cheek,
The Daisie here, blessed country girl does seem
With bosom all of straw-berries and cream,
There gold and Silver-Chalice Lillies dwell,
And the, as precious China-Blew bottle,
The Tulip nigh its tissue does display
A useless flower, and prodigally gay,
There swounding Violets with humble head
And Roses blushing all underst and spread;
Here painted July-flowers new root do take
And the still drowsy Poppey last awake.
Thus friend we see the Nymph by your rare power
Echo to her Narcissus, though a flower.
The Land-schap between two hills.
Placed on yon' fair, though beetle brow
That on the pleasures frowns below,
Let us with sprightly phancie thence
Teach the dumb Rhetoric, Eloquence;
And leave the Painters Art out-gone
Inliv'ning by transcription.
First then observe with levelled sight
Arising to this opposite;
As if the wind in billow drove
Here, and had rowld the earth in wave:
The Aspen and the Bramble heaves
And a white foam froth's in the leaves:
That spot beneath, that lies so plain
Schorch'd here and there, has lost the grain:
As Sol there dried the Beams he swet
And stained the gras-green coverlet;
That Goat the bushes nigh does browse
Seems the un-ravell'd plush to frowse;
And now let fall the eye it sees
A pretty storm of clowdy trees,
To us seem black and full of rain,
As they would scatter on the plain:
From hence the hill declineth spent,
With imperceptible descent,
'Till un-awares abroad it flow
Lost in the deluge spreads below.
An Age-bow'd oak does under-root
As it would prostrate at it is foot;
Whose thrown-out arms in length display
And a fair shady carpet lay,
On it a lad in russet coat,
His soul melts through the vocal oate;
And near that black eyed Nymph does draw
As if her eyes hung on the straw:
The scrip and leathern Bottle nigh,
(With guardian too Melampo) lie:
The flocks are round about them spread
In numerous fleece have clad the Meade;
And now our eyes but weakly see
Quite tippled with variety:
Here the grass rowls, and hills between
Stud it with little tufts of green:
There in the midst a tree does stray
Escaped, as it had lost the way,
And a winding river steals
That with it self drunk curling reels,
A cheaper flood than Tagus goes
And with dissolved silver flows.
Some way the field thence swells at ease
And lifts our sight up by degrees
To where the steep side dissie lies
supinely fast in precipices
Till with the bank opposed it lie,
In a proportioned Harmony,
As Nature here did sit and sing
About the cradle of the spring
A Frost.
IS Nature tranc'd? we cannot then
By water fetch her back again,
Our babes are Jews, or Pagan, Ice
Not Christian's, or does circumcise;
The watermen their Dyal miss
That over-spred with Crystal is,
And tides that underneath it pass
But turn within the houre-glass:
Mahomets Politician able
To make the dry land navigable
To render Rivers so might deal
Here, by no less a miracle;
We are (like Midas) cursed, and think
To quench our thirst with goblet drink,
But want his after-priviledge,
His Tagus now is solid wedge,
And Swans above their Dirges breath.
The wretched Hellespont does fear
That it again must fetters wear,
And Islands with no bounds content
Are with the Sea a continent:
Then view the shore and understand
There Is nothing lost, though writ in sand,
And the Records as deep remain,
As they would not be thawed again:
Those Grandam-bones, Deucalion posed
He had not compass now disclosed,
And she that did the riddle tell
Had thought the task the Oracle:
The earth now close-comparted all,
but an entire Mineral
Immortal Bays that knew no fall
Are silverd to their funeral;
And Poets wreathed with such as these
Write their own Metamorphoses.
Narcissus.
SPent with the day to streams the boy retires;
But these (Alas,) too flowed with liquid fires,
And who did (Coy) the Vacal Nymph escape,
Dies doting on the Echo of his shape.
Lib. 3. Ode. 3. Horat.
A just man and resolved the will
Of Citizens commanding ill,
Nor looks of the big Tyrant from's firm mind
Shake, nor the wind:
That chafes rough Adria above,
Nor the loud hand of thundering Jove,
If the world shattered fall,
The ruins strike him fearless shall,
To my honored Friend, Coll. Richard Lovelace, On his second Poems.
AS in the presence of some Prince, not one,
But rates his bliss, as he is next the throne,
To which he adds not but himself applies
To boast the Kings to him indulgencies:
Thus Sir, (as one you suffer) I appear
Not to give to your fame, but to be near.
How must I then approach? how my self show,
So just, as that I can be, just to you!
Thou great dispenser of that all we be
Who giv'st us else enough, but to thank thee
Thou have our cheaper gratitude out-went
And make us sin in being excellent.
How from thy first chaste flames thou did inspire
That earth we fashioned with Promethean fire?
And thine rise no less bright for what they lent
From the Communicative Element:
But the insinuating Rays derive
Something from us that was not primitive:
Though pure in their own essences they dwell
Not to be mixed with our corruptible;
And should we in our courser matter die
Would rise to their own immortality.
But at a kingdoms second birth though never
So much devout to the already hire,
A Nation throngs, and does (suspended) pay
Duty however unto the newer day,
Thus from adored Lucasta we come on
But to bring hither our devotion:
And though we crowd with a tumultuous pace,
We have like Janus a respective face:
Thou that immortal were enough before,
Do now but ever live, and all this ore;
And art above the Eagle that assumes
(By casting the now aged off) new plumes,
Who do thy first as vigorous not shed,
But when thou would renew thy pomp do spread.
Vast Hero that wilt not alone not die,
But lay'st steps to thine immortality,
Who do in thy applausive, Giant-wars
From thine own blessed ascent invade the Stars;
Thou have throughout divided the cleft mount,
And to thine aid with its own spire do crown't,
Though as thou grow'st near heaven it hangs the while
As in a dear expectance of the pile,
That swells no sacrilegious hight to gain
But does the weighty machine there sustain.
There then advance thy glory till our sight
Conceive thee some new disputable light;
That we cannot define from whence it streams
Although we find thee by thy warmth and beams
Ode.
(1.)
AH Chloris, see that Virgin bud
That yet did ^^'r display,
Untying of the Velvet hood
To let the sce^t away:
And the rich spirit of perfume,
Will with the Air dispersed consume.
(2.)
Haste Cloris ore't thy bosom throw
That as the breath would shed,
It there may intercepted blow
Through the fair Lilly bed:
And thence with thy new Odours so
Boldly incorporate may go.
A Lady foild.
YOu that can read a face and by it
(Natures Amanuenses) write,
Can all your subtle Art define
Upon an Heteroclite line;
Here then are some, though fairly wrote,
Which superstitious care did blot;
That who but reads to give may seem
Interpretation, and the dream:
If thus you cannot fate descrie,
Consult it is then Astronomy.
For here are stars, and thick, as (too)
A reasonable night can show;
That fixed in that heaven, thence
Derive their light and influence,
Yet in themselves so black they are,
Each seems to be a Sun-burn'd star,
Though such a noon about them they
Are dark by customary day.
Or else as at the last some write,
Stars shall not drop, but loose their light.
So these may them relate about,
And are but typically out.
Or placed on a sphere more bright,
They loose their own subscribing light:
Behold where the four horses run,
And coach in mo^rning of the Sun,
And underneath his sister slips
From him in a derived eclipse!
Sure Juno has for Argus eyes
(In recompense) made blind the skies,
Or you as fairly sighted see,
And with as many eyes as he,
You that do set your self up by,
Your glass, your own idolatry.
Why should your blinded zeal again
Against the very idol sin?
Why should you flur (where she never tript)
Quaint natures own clean manuscript?
Or are these periods to define
Your beauties each sententious line?
You loose the life thus, and are made,
Your own but picture, these the shade.
And some that paint, and keep this coil,
Are downright counterfeits in oil.
The spots (luxuriously thick)
You in a mystic order stick.
A mere but taffata in streake,
Cut on the damasque of your cheek?
Why this industrious plaistring tell
Of fores that are invisible?
He that in his fantastic wars,
Was all bemangled with no scarres,
Was surely to be practiced on
With such an application:
Can you cure beauty or apply
To feature your Chyrurgery?
But the fair Velam of a front,
That this Religion has upon it,
Creates in us devoted fears
To the mysterious characters,
This does the dear Escutcheon lie,
Of all the female Heraldrie;
And the great woman's honored in
Her own now proper Ermin-skin.
De Nympha.
HVjus Nympha Loci, sacri custodia fontis
Dormio, dum blandae sentio murmur aquae.
Parce meum, quisquis tangis cava marmora, somnum
Rumpere; sive bibas, sive lavere, tace.
The Nymph.
NYmph of this place, guard of the sacred spring,
I sleep with murmr lulled of the soft Rill:
My rest, you that the hollow marble ring,
Break not; you whether bathe, or drink, be still.
SIc Apollo deinde Liber, sic videtur Ignifer,
Ambo sunt flammis creati, prosatique ex ignibus,
Ambo de comis calorem, and ambo radios conserunt;
Noctis hic rumpit tenebras, hic tenebras pectoris,
THus Soll, then Bacchus thus the day does bring,
Both born of flames, and both of fires did spring;
Both in their hair warmth, and both Luster wind;
This breaks the fogs of night, that of the mind.
Astraea recalled.
THou Daughter of the thunderer, who
First left, the sinful earth leave too,
Smooth now (Ast^aea) thy fell brow
Now gentler, and ferener now;
Oh potent maid, all things reduce
Thee now, forthwith, in their just use:
Fit honor now, now parents too,
(Goddess) your godhead fit, have you,
Now sacred fame thy birth allows,
From Royal blood, and wealthy house,
In mighty stocks en-rouling thee,
And now that you may dutuous be,
We say, Astraea bids that which
Does please a great man, or a rich.
The Lazar.
OBserve yond thing made up of shreds, that less
Keep in his warmth, then not cloth nakedness,
As from our Sire he had as well, as sin,
The suit had his originally been.
His skin too broke with ulcers, does confess
A poverty as ragged, as his dress.
And as the body, is the chill soul too,
Oppressed with weather, shot as keenly through.
PHANTOMACHIA, OR The Goblin.
YOu that, your dear selves to affright,
With loads of shackles, scare the spright;
And that he walks, dare both maintain,
At length, and loose too in his chain.
List hither chill, with hayr upright,
To superstition of a night.
That will your blood make backward Run
In a coy Circulation.
I mons^ers sing, more then do lie,
In a Heywood's goblin Hierarchy,
And Combats that do far outdo,
The bladders Apuleius blew.
A Soldier that more straightly (one)
Had felt his pinch't-up garr son,
In his unrest of search espide,
A house luxuriously wide.
Which yet in a deep silence Rude,
Betrayed stupendous solitude.
The gates secure, with plates a slant,
As plagues had been inhabitant;
And to let in the wholesome day,
Spread through neglect some casements lay:
He rapt however in dear intent
To enter the fair tenement.
Learn that through prodigies there dwell.
It is a very shut-up hell;
And that the gates to worse convay
Pain, than those open night and day.
The Hero will (however) on,
And exercise possession;
Frightning the country at demand,
As if some Hercules would stand
At entry of the shades to fight
Against the privilege of night:
But light and fire laid in, a bed
In a fair (too) provision spread,
And that the fatal time grew towered,
The soldier draws his spell, his sword;
And wipes it where-ere dew'd, or wet,
With moisture that the scabberd swet.
As hell he did intend to tame,
With Paradises guardian flame.
At the now Suns declining Ray,
(The dusky Praemunire of day)
He comes attended by his one
Servant, to death companion.
And the spread portalls all deter,
That gape their either sepulcher.
The leaves (too) he that after draws
Seems swallowed up within their jaws.
And all good night their valor bid,
As Curtius to his gulf had rid,
Though calm; they yet examine do,
The places spacious secrets through,
And from their narrow huts distress,
In a voluptuous Redress.
Like birds delivered to the air,
(Wild) frolique in their young repair.
Fill times to one slow-stealing hand,
From twelve did now divided stand.
And now had intermediate gone,
To either hours Religion:
When what I know not, horrors run
Through shuddered apprehension.
But through the wide Room that displayes
(High) the fires cheerful flame, they raise;
And (round) the ample seat hang bright,
With the spruce taper's simpring light;
Then stand their doubtful guard upon,
In fearful expectation:
When a man's Arm appears a loof
Naked, delivered from the roof;
Immeasurably tottering ore
As it would dash upon the floor,
A leg (while they suspended doubt)
Freed from another place kicks out,
Straight all the squeesing members shed
And through the room (dispersed) spread,
So drenched, and all be slubbered ore,
With the yet freshly bleeding gore;
As some just, cruel, slaughter spent
To rags, had a huge carcass rent;
While in the midst a torn off-head,
(Rough) from the trunck dissevered
It self does from the wainscot free,
Dispatching into liberty:
That with the neck, (above) close kn't,
Does it to the bruised shoulders fit:
And then as I some snake have seen,
That peece-meale has disjoynted been:
And all in parcel scattered thrown,
Again however together grown:
The members so do wrigg'ling nigh
Their separated union tie,
And (strangely creeping up) agree
In a re-orde'rd harmony;
Till a huge statur'd man does breed,
Arising as of Cadmus seed:
That like the rest does armed stand,
Shaking a sword twined with the hand;
And (fell) the soldier thus bespoke,
Thou rashly into this seat broke.
Straight against me maintain by fight,
Thy fatally usurped right;
Unless perhaps you rather shall,
Resolve an unrevenged fall.
^he soldier wanted not advice,
^or courage in those prodigies,
^ut (with a mind not absent) drew
and forth (to him that challenged) flew
Not with a violence that might,
^etray him to disordered fight.
Nor with a fear that migh distract,
And chill him to unseemly Act;
But (undisturbed) at posture lay,
As with a foe in open day.
And now advances, now lets glide
A pass, and falls in with his side:
When fortune seemed to smile upon
The so industrious champion:
For (through his foes torn bowels slid)
His sword up to the hilts he hid,
And then expected that anon,
The fearful bulk to earth should run;
^ut in an unconcerned state,
He neither staggers in his gate;
Nor does his blood retyring seek,
To (cowardly) desert his cheek.
Or from the Orifice though wide,
^n a luxrious torrent slide.
But lay, as at new wounds, in doubt,
Whether they shall or no gush out:
While this the soldier looks upon,
With looser admiration,
His ready enemy him bored,
With his quick-at-advantage sword;
He yet not thrilled however fell on,
With a no cold suggestion.
Nor did he through his bowels feel,
The chilly through benumming steel.
When each had in a two hours fight,
Often dug his foe, far in the night,
As if at an agreed on word;
Each on the pummell rests of 's sword,
And in a necessary pause,
His straightly pent-up spirits draws.
Both from their foreheads wipe the dew,
As if the truce by purpose grew.
Mean while the servant trims the light,
Resol'd in a successive fight.
His tired (or) Master to supply,
Or his obedient Martyr dye:
And now the Combatants anew
Together (fierce) recruited flew;
The blows are thick redoubled ore
As all a trifle were before.
A slash't off knee the soldier thinks
Under his foe now doubled sinkes,
And now that he (his ribs beneath)
Does his begored weapons sheath;
He piecemeal feels his own decay,
A leg, an arm now lopt away:
And now the head (as strangely slunk)
Beleev's dissever'd from the trunck.
That unremov'd remains upon 't,
As had a German heads-man don't;
Nor had an any wound beside,
The yet unin jur'd body tried:
But the more-labour'd minds intent
The faint-by-degrees soldier spent:
His blows are with less weight laid on,
His steps low, languid motion;
(...) breath's fetched thick, his face bespread
All over with glowing fires red,
(...) there almost as it supplied
The bodies, where moisture dried:
When turned from's foe himself, with his last,
Almost left strength, he heedless cast,
As if now given-over dead,
Upon the there prepared bed,
and to his servant, all on fire
With the encounters wild desire,
Bequeathed a place wherein to prove,
His (to his deceased Master) love;
But here a shorter fight's sucess,
Both make the either hazard less:
Dor this same Crum collected he,
^o terrible his enemy.
Smites on the face, that he does all,
Amazed on the pavement fall.
Then to the bed comes and whe^s on,
To fight the-there-layd champion;
Who with weak voice commands him thence,
Since after such a times expense
^n duel; he cannot afford
A strength to raise his arm, or sword,
The other grants him rest upon
^he thus proposed condition.
That he hereafter will forswear.
That id'ly superstitious fear.
And whatever God some old-wives prate
Did from his youth insinuate
To be adored, that now his breast
With better counsel will detest.
When now the Hero, That he first
Was ready to endure the worst.
Above his then strength, would have roared,
And raised now; looked back to his sword.
The Spectar's empty shape did clear,
And in the Air thin'd dispappear.
The soldier sunk down to repose,
Not ('till the day grew old) arose,
Yet raised his servant that did snore
Not yet recovered from the floor;
But see the miracle that grew!
He not his own attendant knew.
But though by his malignant hue,
He had another task to do.
For where the wound received had been,
It an eclipse was not a skin;
But (Reconciled) the gates they tree,
And spread them to their liberty.
Then past to those that at the cell,
Do wait for their return from hell,
Their eyes upon the soldier ^well,
A strangely believed spectacle;
When his companion in his face,
Confirms the infernal place,
And to the multitude appears,
In countenance their very fears.
Ex Barclaij.

Satyrici part 1. page 36,

AN ELEGY, Sacred to the Memory of my late honored Friend, Colonel Richard
Lovelace.
PArdon (blessed shade) that I thus crowd to be
Among those, sin unto thy memory;
And that I thine unvalu'd Rel^ques spread;
And am the first that pillages the dead:
Since who would be thy mourner as befits,
But an officious sacrilege commits.
How my tears strive to do thee fairer right!
And from the Characters divide my sight.
Until it (dimmer) a new torrent swells,
And what obscured it falls my spectacles.
Let the luxurious floods (impulsive) rise
As they would not be wept, but weep the eyes,
The while earth melts, and we above it lie,
But the weak bubbles of Mortality:
Until our griefs are drawn up by the Sun,
And that (too) drop the exhalation.
How in thy dust we humble all our pride?
And bring thee a whole people mortifide!
For who expects not death, now thou art gone,
Shows his low folly, not Religion.
Can the Poetique heaven still hold on
The golden dance when the first movers gone?
And the snatched fires (while circularly hurled)
^n their strong Rapture glimmer to the world?
And not stupendiously rather rise,
The tapers unto these Solemnities?
Can the Chords move in tune when thou do dye
At once their universal Harmony?
But where Apollo's harp (with murmur) laid
Had to the stones a melody convay'd;
They by some pebble summoned would reply
^n loud results to every battery;
Thus do we come unto thy marble room,
To echo from the music of thy tomb.
May we dare speak thee dead, that would be
^n thy Remove only not such as we?
No wonder the advance is from us hid,
Earth could not lift thee higher then it did!
And thou that did grow up so ever nigh,
Art but now gone, to immortality:
So near to where thou art thou here did dwell,
The change to thee is less perceptible.
Thy but unably-comprehending clay,
To what could not be circumscribed gave way.
And the more spacious tennant to return,
Cracked (in the two restraind estate) its urne
That is but left to a successive trust,
The soul's first buried in the bodies dust.
Thou more thy self now thou art less confined
Art not concerned in what is left behind;
While we sustain the loss that thou art gone
Un-essenc'd in the separation.
And he that weeps thy funeral, in one,
is pious to the widdow'd Nation.
And under what (now) Covert must I sing
Secure as if beneath a cherub's wing:
When thou have taken thy slight hence, and art nigh
In place to some related Hierarchy,
Where a bright wreath of glories does but set
Upon thy head an equal Coronet;
And thou above our humble converse gone,
Can but be reached by contemplation.
Our Lutes (as thine was touched) were yecall by,
And thence received the souls by sympathy;
That did above the threads inspiring creep,
Any with soft whispers broke the amorous sleep:
Which now no more (moved with the sweet surprise)
Awake into delicious Rapsodies.
But with their silent Mistress do comply,
And fast in undisturbed slumbers lie.
How from thy first ascent thou did disperse
A blushing warmth throughout the universe,
While near the morns Lucasta's fires did glow,
And to the earth a purer dawn did throw,
We never saw thee in the Roll of fame
Advancing thy already deathless name;
And though it could but be above its fate,
Thou would however super-errogate.
Now as in Venice when the wanton state,
Before a spaniard spread their crowded plate;
He made it the sage business of his eye,
To find the Root of the wild treasury.
So learned from that Exchequer, but the more
To rate his Masters vegetable Ore:
Thus when the Greek and Latin Muse we read
As the but cold inscriptions of the dead;
We to advantage then admired thee
WHo did live on still with thy Poesy:
And in our proud enjoyments, never knew
The end of the unruly wealth that grew.
But now we have the last dear Ingors gained.
And the free vein (however rich) is drein'd;
Though what thou have bequeathed us, no space
Of this worlds span of time shall ere embrace:
But as who sometimes knew not to conclude,
Upon the waters strange vicissitude;
Did to the Occan himself commit,
That it might comprehend what could not it:
So we in our endeavors must, out-don,
Be swallowed up within thy Helicon.
Thou now art laid up in thy precious Cave,
And from the hollow spaces of thy grave,
We still may mourn in tune, but must alone
Hereafter hope to quaver out a groan;
No more the chirping sonnets with shrill notes
Must henceforth Volley from our trebble throtes,
But each sad accent must be humored well,
To the deep solemn Organ of thy Cell.
Why should some rude hand carve thy sacred stone,
And there incise a cheap inscription.
When we can shed the tribute of our tears.
So long till the relenting marble wears:
Which shall such order in their cadence keep.
That they a native Epitaph shall weep;
Until each Letter spelt distinctly lies,
Cut by the mystic droppings of our eyes.
ODE To Chloris forsworn.
(1.)
Often Cloris perjured you have bin,
And still are bright,
However dark within,
With out side light;
(2.)
You have forsworn the numbers ore,
Yet no less fair
Are (Chloris) then before,
in an one hair.
(3.)
No more, no more, to me protest
Your Oaths I know,
If gods take them in jest,
I will not so
The Net
What silkwo^m has (unravelled) shed
It self in snares thus subt'ly spread,
Where the deluded sight is taught
To find them but by being caught.
And hands in search that curious be,
Struggle in their captivity:
Obedient to what Lemnian sire,
Followed the finely-ductile wire;
Smaller then Gossamire, that plays,
Gay in the Sun's yet Eastern Rays:
When the rash morn hangs loosely dressed,
The air with silk sleav'd from her vest.
And every bush and tree does tear
From her jag'd Roab the threads they wear:
She that in stubborn art durst strive,
For Giant-like prerogative,
(With heavens incensed Virago) is
But foiled in Metamorphosis;
And in her tasqu's still so devout,
She frets her less-lov'd bowels out;
Now by these toils overcome, may tomb
Her self, (wound up) in her own loom.
Those thin Raw films that (early) lie,
On herbs a dewy tiffany.
^re of a courser woofe, and set
(...) a less quaintly-masqued Net.
though beams there tangled in rich draught,
that lick them up, are in them caught;
The hair of virgins big and rude,
^re boyst'rous in similitude,
and who invisibles would see,
Hence fetches his Hyperbole:
Could the flaw'd snares untwisted sling
To their first miracle of st^ing,
The tackle might that vessel thridde,
A Be could with her wings have hid;
How do those gross-linck't chains displease,
That (stubborn) can but Collar fleas.
When now a file with nearer art
Has made a gyve for every part?
The roughly here-alighting fly,
Does but the furer Captive lie;
Where a light mealy gnat may knit
The giving trammell, locked in it;
And pull for freedom, in the gin
You might make up a whisper in.
QVod tua mill domus solidas habet Alta columnas,
Quod tua marmoreo janua post nitet.
Aurea quod summo pendent laquearia tecto,
Imum crusta tegit quod pretiosa locum.
Atria quod circa dives regit omnia cultus,
Hoc animos tollit (nempe) Batave tuos.
Aedthus in totis gemmae licet omnta claudunt
Turpe est nil Domino, turpius esse suo.
To Batavus.
AThousand pillars cause your houses hight,
Lift, and your gate with marble posts is bright;
Because aloof the Roofes shine gilded ore,
And that a precious crust does pave the flore:
Cause all the Courts round with rich stuff are lined,
This therefore puffes (Batavus) up your wind.
Though through the house gems lock up all foul it is,
That nothing than the owner fouler is.
ODE.
(1.)
AH Lyce did my flames within
Thy bosom glow,
The hills above had long since been,
Without their snow.
(2.)
But unrelenting heaps there lie
That frost does hold,
And more, then in their livery,
Veins blew, with cold.
(3.)
How (Lyce) how thought may it be,
That thy each part
With winter bound, so limber the
Leaves as thou art?
(4.)
Often when I try if thou art stone
Thinking thee such,
The art of some Pygmalion,
Deceives my touch.
(5)
Then Lyce if thou art within
So only coy
Let me what kind and foft has been,
Without enjoy.
To his Noble Friend, J. R. The Prison.
HOw a no-prisoner, unconcerned, and free?
Is the soul bay l'd by its Morality?
And he that is placed upon a square content,
Becomes his fetters into ornament;
That him though (all in irons) up you roll,
His body wears them, but as that his soul,
Heroic temper! but of uncouth use,
To one without probation, a Recluse,
When the uneasy prison sets unkind;
And pinches to distress the crowded mind,
That catching at advantage to be free
Is e'n squeezed out of its mortality;
Thus the poor captive (struggling in his thought)
Pulls to the snare, and is in soul too caught,
And the dark night-piece of his sullen grot,
In adventitious shadow is one blot.
He hugges a hell about him, so more one,
As he contemplates lost fruition,
That a beam cranni'd in does value want
A coyly superstitious visitant.
To one spells torment from Remissions sent
Reversed by Hebrew of his discontent.
How does he weigh his chains then wildly thinks,
And wire-drawes into thread the massy links?
Now pining in their close embrace does waste,
As he would vanish out of them at last.
And darting at his thrifty grates small light:
He only vexes his imprisoned sight;
Till the pent wretch abhorring life does find,
A body more immortal then his mind.
But Sir in you another fate I have,
That cuts me from the humble, and the brave,
For where you mediate, you convert the cause,
And we are undisturbed, without applause,
Since dungeons, are no dungeons, that you see,
But more entire retreats to liberty:
And the sad roofs that glisten, danck with time,
Seem gilded ore with reconciled slime.
While on the pavement we uninjur'd lie,
And the moist stones sweat in their agony:
Gyves that enrobe us by your magique lie,
But speciously-phantastick misery;
Nay by deluding, we invert their powers,
And are no more their prisoners, but they ours.
As we from tumult but withdrew that thus,
A freedom more it self might visit us,
And the Restraints that we enjoy you by,
But shuts us up within a Library.
Where the blessed friendship that you there detaine's,
Makes the rich volumes prisoners to our chains.
ODE.
(1.)
COme, come and set
Upon my head
That Rosy Coroner,
And let it shed,
Until the beauty of the morn
Be round my temples worn.
(2.)
Then to the brink
That goblet fill,
I Will in the Ocean sink
So far, until,
With beams of my emergent face
The weaker dawn I chase.
Pentadii.
NOn est, falleris, haec beata, non est,
Quod vos creditis esse, vita non est,
Fulgentes manibus videre gemmas,
Aut testudineo jacere lecto,
Aut pluma latus abdidisse molli,
Aut auro bibere, aut cubare cocco,
Regales dapibus gravare mensas,
Et qui^quid lybico seca^ur arvo,
Non una positum tenere cella;
Sed nullos trepidum timere casus,
Nec vano populi favore tangi,
Et stricto nihil aestuare ferro,
Hoc quisquis poterit, licebit
Fortunam moveat loco superbus.
YOu are deceived, the life of bliss,
That you believe, this is not, this,
To see your hands with jewels spread,
Or rest upon a Tortoyse bed.
Or in soft down to sink your thigh,
To drink in gold, or scarlet lie,
Your board with Royal fare to load,
And what in Lybian fields is mowed,
Not in one storehouse to ingross:
But (not to trembling) fear a loss,
Nor change at noise of the vain Rout,
Nor swet at all at a sword out;
Whoever this but can (above)
May fortune from her seat remove.
To her taxing him for late writing to her.
THink where you see my Rhymes un-even meet
Through fear they crovvd on to outrun the sheet:
I bring you lasie numbers should have been
Thrown at your feet, when at less years and sin;
When my undrest Muse had no other fence:
Like Eve in Eden, but her Innocence:
Adam less bashful in these first of Days,
Was in his Figge-leaves then, I now in Bays.
The Tree's immortal, and had need be too;
I had not offered else one sprig to you;
Writ I on Bark, the un-paper'd Ancient's Will Not,
You Would think my languid lines were bier'd upon it:
Like wanton sinners I have hudled on;
Divinest things are latest thought upon.
But (Madam) all I ^rote, suppose in way
To you the Copy Papers of Essay.
Let no she think she is under-rated too,
They must be stars e're they be foyles to you:
Like the young Eagles, their since bassled Sun,
Your eyes preparative, I armed upon;
Those twinn's of light, I doubted to confine,
Loves Terches to a Paper-lanth^rne shrine:
Nor had I ventured yet, but that they sindge,
Not their uninjur'd Lids but guild the fringe.
You must not (blessed one) my attempt illude
In taking from you by similitude.
We represent a Deity, as we
Can happily do it, not as it should be;
Nor your compendious sweetness must you guess,
My but-enoding Glosses have made less:
Where matter is so full, and so perplex't,
The Comment's forced to out-swell the Text.
And should be printed small, had need so too
Hundred such owe Birth to a line of you.
Giganto-Machia.
THose sonn's that on their Mother scaled the clouds,
As Heirs do Honors on their Parents shrowds,
Heapt Hill on Hill to force the proud ascent,
Until Earth rose the highest Element.
The Tooth ache.
UN-passion'd Stoics, you that slight the Rack,
When your each way distended sinews crack;
Whose still calm Faces, wrinckles never deform,
And no extreme can Ruffle into storm.
Here I Will untune all your still musick't sect,
And teach your stubborn souls a dialect
Of uncouth groans, and sighs, that (rising) pine,
Close pent, and burst your streight-lac'd discipline,
And by an Ache that though you must disdain,
A tooth shall with the soul possess of pain.
Shed through the whole, and yet it is subtle ire
Shall lie in every Cranny too entire;
As were the spirit legion in it thus
Lodged singularly multitudinous,
An ache that brings defluctions too of Rhume,
As it without its tears could not consume;
Strange Trochylus! offspring of thine own Nile
Suckled at teeth sure of some Crocadile!
Thou uncouth favorite of famine fed
As insects are, that make the Mill their bread,
Thou Labyrinth'st a Tooth, and as thou scru'st,
With a continued thread of pain it clu'st;
Tipplest in Marrow, and in thy dire play
Of thousand wanderings find'st or make, a way,
Thy swarm of torments for the honey flings,
Into the fretted Comb only the stings,
An Hydra-headed Cerberus with j^ws,
There surfeited with anguish (couchant) gnaws;
Had Pelops Ivory shoulder known the guest:
His limbs in the Repair had been unblest.
Mart. Lib. 1. Epig. 48. To Flaccus.
WHat wench I would, what not? Flaccus you move;
I would not one too easy, nor too coy;
The mean and that between both I approve,
I will not what may vex, nor what may cloy.
The mute Dialogue.
I Saw two Lovers talk, my eye to hear
Deprived my Ear.
The man in manners this no silence breaks,
And blushes speaks;
The busy Nymph then (never so true before)
Was tongue all over;
Her eye exhales the vocal blood to sphere,
The Rhetoric there:
Thence showers it out in beams that he may fly
To's speaking eye.
Love equal their relief sends to both hearts,
Missives on Darts,
Until a parting sigh, that drew them thence,
Called home my sense.
In Amicitias.
VIve, and Amicitias omnes cole, verius hoc est
Quam Regum solas effuge amicitias.
Est mea mors testis, major me afflixit amicus,
Deseruitque minor: Turba cavenda simul,
Nam quicunque pares fuerant fugere fragorem,
Nec dum collapsam deseruere domum.
Nunc, and non tantum, Reges fuge (vivere doctus)
Vni vive tibi, nam morie^e tibi.
Against Friendships.
LIve and all friendships make, this is more true
Then the alone friendships of Kings eschew.
Witness my death, a greater friend me struck,
And (a to be shrin'd tribe,) a less forsook;
For my who e're peers were from the crack shrunk,
And did my house desert e're yet it lunk.
And (taught to live) now Kings alone not fly,
Live to your one self, for you so must dye.
Ode.
(1)
SEe how those full-ag'd Grapes do strain
In the deep, Crimson flood,
Would you not think to breath a vein
Would do the clustres good?
Let Us then the rich distemper free,
And frolique drink the plurisie.
(2.)
Until our cheeks as much in grain,
And stretched as sleek appear
As if the twice-born God again
Another birth had there:
And when the Vine is drawn off, we
Will our own second Vintage be.
(3.)

Ode.
To the Prisoner.
(1.)
THink but the fetters that you wear
A dress with your consent,
And what should wound, will then appear
A wanton Ornament;
He that contemns no wretch can be,
Belief creates our misery.
(2.)
Why should you therefore chide your sat
'Cause the coy Prince of day
Vouchsafes not to look through your grate,
Or cast a beam that way,
Rather applaud the Sun that he
Not pryes into calamity.
(3.)
Then render not your bed of stone
The harder by unrest;
Rocks will not melt to hear you groan
Scorn softens them the best:
And he that can ly still in woe,
Is in a calm, though all winds blow.
A New Years-Gift.
MAy Fortune (Madam) Happy too
Be Prodigally just to you.
And crown the Brow that Nature gems
In her best Native Diadems!
Saw she! she would her-self undo,
And then expect an Alms from you;
Nay, had she eyes, she would but see
Fondly to part with them, to thee:
A Good year bless you Madam! may,
That Chimist that extracted Day
From the rude Chaos, force too thence
A Momentanie Quintessence
To make up yours, 'till it appear,
Throughout but an Elixir'd year!
I kept a careful Vigil (Fair)
Upon the lagging Nights impair,
To see the trembling shadows break,
And with approaching day grow weak,
'Till scattered Attom's had undone
Them into Dissolution.
And the Rich Dawne did guilt appear
In Blushes of the Virgin-year:
I could discern the Minute kiss,
Divided that is past, and this;
When two-fac'd Janu's lips could suit
To both of them at once, salute:
That by that Crisis I might find
The pulse of Time more free and kind:
Now know the years whole state can tell
What hours shall slip what sickly dwell;
Can sound their subtle Depth e're they
Long Roapes of sand that fathom day.
And (Madam) I pronounce this year,
To you, as that first Moment clear,
That shot a Ray, was early born
To thread the Rubies of the Morn;
A happy chain will thorough play,
Of fine Enameled Night and Day.
Yet when all is done that this can do,
May it give place to better new.
The fair Nymph scorning a black Boy courting her.
Nymph. STand off, and let me take the Air,
Why should the smoke pursue the fair.

Boy. My face is smoke, thence may be guest
What flames within have scorched my breast.

Nymph. The flames of love I cannot view,
For the dark Lanthorn of thy hew.

Boy. And yet this Lanthorn keeps loves Taper,
Surer than yours that is of white paper,
Whatever midnight has been here
The Moonshine of your light can clear.

Nymph. My Moon of an Eclipse is 'frayde,
If you should interpose your shade.

Boy. Our curled embraces shall delight,
To chequer Limbs with black and white

Nymph. Thy ink, my paper, make me guess,
Our Nuptial bed would make a press;
And in our sports if any came,
They Would read a wanton Epigram.

Boy. Yet one thing sweetheart let me ask,
Buy me for a new-false-mask.

Nymph. Yes, but my bargain must be this,
I Will throw my Mask off, when I kiss.

Boy. Why should my hew thy love impair?
Let the dark shop commend the ware,
Or if thy Love from black forbears,
I Will strive to wash it off with tears.

Nymph. Spare fruitless tears, since thou must needs
Still wear about thee mourning weeds,
Tears can no more affection win
Than wash thy Ethiopian skin,

The Inversion.
Nymph. STand off fair Boy, thou will affright
My solitude with sudden light.

Boy. My face is light, thence may be guest
The truth of thy transparent breast.

Nymph. The truth of Love I cannot view,
For the full luster of thy hew.

Boy. The lustre's sooner pervious made
Then your impenitrable shade;
Whatever Noon, my day does trim,
Your thick how-ever Mist may dim.

Nymph. My Mist would fear to break away,
If you should intermix your ray.

Boy. Our curled embraces shall delight
With Limbs to shuffle day and night:

Nymph. Thy light my darkness make me fear
Our bed a Chaos would appear;
And in our sports did any pass,
They Would see the indigested Mass.

Boy. Yet one thing sweetheart let me crave,
Me for a new-false mirror have;

Nymph. Yes, but my bargain must request,
I throw my glass by, when undrest:

Boy. Why should my hue thee less delight,
Let the Star-soyles set of the night:
Or if thy love from light forbeares,
I Will strive to put it our with tears.

Nymph. Spare fruitless tears, since thou must needs
Still have on thy Transfigur'd weeds,
Tears can no more affection win,
Then over-cast thy Angel Skin.

ODE.
(1.)
OUr flames that (Chloe) did conspire
In one fair Pyramid of fire,
So subt'ly had together grown
That both and neither were our own;
And it is my wonder how you rent,
The Element in the concent.
(2.)
But mine must widdowed now burn
While from them yours (re-clining) turn,
Drawn by a more attractive Ray
That carries the spread-beames away;
To new embraces where they may
Rise wanton in their lament play.
A Prologue to a Play presented by some Gentlemen to a select company of
Ladies, on New years day last.
BLess me! A light we looked not for supplies,
A fine Familiar Starlight of bright eyes.
That dims the Tapers which would else turn blew!
But that you (fair ones!) are good Angels too:
You of our Sex and Friends, may thank the slight,
Had it but barely brought you to this sight:
A sight, that stroke like lightning yet I dare
Gather within the Fires though Circular;
When the spread beams shoot round me from such flames;
That their own Elementall pureness tames;
A cheerful light! not meant to Martyr here,
And into Scaffold turn our Theater.
Brisk Mirth to all we hope each Brow the while
(Never so severe) may polish into smile.
Expect not then we so a pass can hide,
That you might think it on the other side.
Or fright you into wounds mis-understood,
When the Tame sponge, not weapon, sheddes the blood:
This is sta^e Pedantry! nor think we can
(Trim Players) quite put off the Gentleman;
When each so genuinely Acts his Part,
As that alone, he has Himself by Heart.
To his Friend.
In troth I love the, and I fain would tell,
(But that I love thee more than so) How well.
The Siren.
Strange Thetis-waves^ submisly slide
While thou do thine own Dolphin ride,
And still expecting Peleu's rape,
Art half in thy delusive shape:
Thy upper part imperfect lies
Begot between platonique eyes,
That to whole Act could not be drawn,
But left the rest to sense and spawn,
Who views thee might believe thee well
A miserable spectacle,
Whom first the seas had overpowr'd,
and then some fish had half devoured,
The shambles reconciled, and stall
Thee a mere dispensation call,
Plump Easter, we before thee find,
Drawing an Ember week behind;
Were thou at once but served up all
To the man eating Cannibal,
He would admire the uncouth fish,
In the variety of's dish,
For thee may sheets and cloth, be spread,
Divided 'twixt the board and bed,
Thy carnal pleasures are confined,
And thou grow'st downward new inclined,
That who would ravish finds not what
It is he should devirginate.
In thy embrace were chaste delight,
But for thy hightend appetite,
That the not possible else Act,
Does to the sense of thought contract,
And fornication drawn by fires
Of lust does rise to thy desires.
Ly to thy bosom bedded over,
And through neglect show something more,
In hope of still such blessed degrees,
I will believe thee all one piece,
Or let some happy sentence stick
Thee in the earth half-buried quick;
I will make love to what is left,
And think the rest as fair bereft.
What great Apelles did intend
To draw thus low, what none should end,
And art outdone in bitter hate
^ur'd, what it could not imitate,
When from thy stern I lift my sight
To thy naked margent of delight,
Thou seem (in thine own mail bespred)
A chastely locked up Maidenhead
And as from front I thee pursue,
And to thy navel downward view,
Loosing the track that I was in:
^line eyes do run thee over again.
Oh rise but from thy watery bed,
^re thou art half discovered
(...) will believe some Venus starts,
And still attend thy other parts,
Those liquid roabes from off thee throw,
and out of thine apparel grow,
^hen naked to the middle slid
^lead modesty for what is hid.
When no curld billows on it frown
^hou lay'st thy bosoms panting down
^ore white and soft than Laedas swan,
On the less yielding Ocean,
And as thou div'st, or leave the main;
Thine eyes set stars or rise again,
He that with wax secured his ear,
(Alas) but made up half his fear,
From thine harmonious surprise
That scaled (too) not up his eyes;
When thou do with thy tresses play,
And shak'st them dry in their own Ray;
On the bright scales, the golden shower,
Like Jove descends on Danae's Tower;
Or as they cling about thee (wet)
Thou art half caught, in thine own Net.
Fair Islander that when you Lave,
Do make a Delos of a wave;
Thou that betwixt the sea and land,
Do equally divided stand.
While half upon some Rock does sleep,
Half keeps possession in the deep.
Thou laden Carache that do ride,
Half ore, and half beneath the tide.
Thou Riddle Phancie, what you please,
Dragon to thine Hesperides.
AMARANTHA.
NOw radiant Sol with flaring Hair
Had guilt the atoms of the air;
And all to earth that his eye sees
Appeared but one Golden Fleece;
The Snake un rolled in length did fling
Her curiously enameli'd Ring;
The Mary-Gold full view did take
Of her gay lover broad awake;
And pirched Birds from spray to spray
Fan with their wings the heat away:
When Amarantha too retires
Faint with the days and her own fires
To shades the leaves as she drew near,
Shudder with apprehensive fear
As if the Sun that could not win,
Without, upon them, brake within:
Nor would she here a change have known
Environed still with beams her own;
But use made the habitual dress
An unoffensive gloriousness:
She now dispersed the Clouds about,
And let her stifled shine break out;
Like water spilt the blood did seek
Luxuriously to stain her cheek;
But she corrects with wind o're-shed?
The Roses the warm Sun had spread:
When now reclining to her bed
A turf swells pillow to her head,
Where she reposes easy, as
Her cheek salutes the tufted grass:
The whispering Foliage conspires
To hush asleep her soft desires;
Her winged Musicians fear to brush
The trembling leaf with backs of plush,
And power but out their melted notes
Long molded in their Lubrick throats:
When sleep with looks aside were thrown
Did close her Eyes might blast his own;
And I with furtive steps advance
To steal the treasures of a glaunce
Where me her lightning flasht upon
Not armed for weak succession;
But recollected I ensnare
My Eye-beam's twisted in her hair
And in the subt'ler net by draughts
Snare my imperceptible thoughts.
So fill'md, no momentanie wire
Knits so but touched nor Gossimire;
Drawn so small one cannot express,
(Superlatively numberless.)
One hand here richly manackeld
The Glories of the head upheld
While through the curls the fingers play
Pretiously ringed in the ray;
And those the bright support had mis'd.
Shed harmless Snakes about her wrist:
Moved with wind they (falling deep)
With breath enlivened downward creep
To kiss the arm, but back they throw
As shrunk from the mistaken snow:
The rest were in a glorious brown
Shade about her temples throw'n
On every side as they it hem
They foyl not, that it gilded them.
Her Closed lights observe I did
Glow through the thinness of the lid,
And modest shine, that round them lies,
Blushing their newer fashioned eyes:
The rays that fringed them they dispense,
As emissary beams from thence
Whence oriental stains upon it
Blazon with Pearl the noble front
That only else by birth had been
Escutcheon'd with the Argent skin.
My smacking eyes I now dimiss
That with repeated longings kiss
Where a rich Aromatique breath
Through Lips of Coral issues:
Her breasts my sight next (tempting) win
Might suckle more without than in.
So soft my sense their bliss I barred
Least I might Pit them, looking hard;
Else ever here I could have drein'd:
When now my Infant gases weaned
Grew straight up to that hand did slide,
Stretched out and pale upon her side
A still smooth Sea, of Milkie way!
Whence her Fingers riv'lets play;
Melted Rubies there do flow
Through Saphyr pipes in floods of snow:
VWhen I was busy to re see
She awaked and blinded me.
CHARLES the Fifth, Solemnizing his own Funerals.
THat precipitious Macedonian, who
When he had done, wept he had not to do,
And the bold Caesar, that did come and eye
Some place his necessary victory,
Like snails crept to their conquests, and at death
Left their not tired fortunes yet in breath,
But wildly pinnacled this Monarch drew
His, whence, her giddy eyes (distracted) view
Their far off safety, nor durst she be won
To aid him in a yet translation,
That with a holy violence made wars,
Now having conquered men, to conquer stars;
And a I his earth and empires trampled on,
Advance him to this new invasion.
Blessed humbler of that world thou fettred'st fast,
And then thy self took'st prisoner at the last:
Did triumph over whole Nations first, that done
End'st in thine own proper ovation,
And laden now with spoils and trophys threw'st
Thy self and glorious burden safe reclu'st:
Like those (that featherd above fortunes mock)
Leave tamer use, and live upon the stock;
Or through thy stubborn tasque, now having gone,
Thou gather'st up to repetition
And the huge volume read will startle mere
In contemplation then in act before
The prodigies thou did cast up by guess
Will make thy coward faith compute them less,
And yet thou had a reach beyond all don
And left'st them with a brave ambition,
Tired with a no resistance thou did fly
To an unbroke reserve of victory,
Where thy full valor witty in repast
Revels in choicest viands at the last;
And journeying from our tumult thou dostly
Inn'd half way toward immortality,
In thy last progress (too) thou heep'st more state
That send'st thy self, thine harbinger, to fate,
And the pale tyrant wonders how it falls
That thou art left behind thy funerals,
Who in thy passage unto heaven do die
But thiter first on thine own Embassy;
Or not acquainted with the grave before
Those hidden Regions thou do thus explore
That mean a conquest there, so thine own spy,
Thou rid'st but out first on discovery.
Clear sighted Prince thy piercing eyes could see
The other side of dark mortality,
Thou mew'dst but aged pomp, Eagles of kin'
So cast their beak and plumes, and live again:
That Oriental bird, that in her spice
Burns to the parent Sun a sacrifice,
She in whom all the glorious kindred wombs
That dies at once eternal Hecatombs
Has yet that small cold interval upon
Her ashes, ushers Resurrection;
But thou liv'st on to see thy self renew,
And passing death thou keep life in view,
As with it thou in equal state did vie
Thou walk'st but hand in hand with destiny;
Strange Eagle (through the whole body spread)
That liv'st on one side, and art one side dead.
Thou torment of Mezentius that do lie
Proportioned to thine own mortality,
Thou have the grossly unslough'd snake surpassed,
That liv'st in substance, thy but shadow cast
With what unheard of ransom did thou bribe,
The hand of, fate thee barely to transcribe,
Course laws of flesh and blood thou do control,
And art Divine in something more than soul;
So the fam'd-tripple-Night begotten Son
Whom the god parent could not crowd in one,
VVound in that shirt would him inglorious tame,
Leapt to his pire, and roabd with milder flame
In his unequal mother only di'd,
Unin jur'd on his siers immortal side.
Thus would thou visit the third Heavens as well
In search, as who was wrapped by miracle,
Who rein'st successive time that thou may be
Allide to what thou seek'st, Aeternitie,
One place at once confinement is to thee,
And thou attemptest at Ubiquitie,
Thus life by thee is reconciled become
Contemporarie with privation,
At least thy hearse could nor convey to urn
Thy weight blessed Hero under a return:
And what we thought thy death was but well done
Preludeous mortification.
Ode.
To Caelia Blushing.
(1.)
BLess me, it Caelia did abash,
me to epsy,
that lightning slash
From so serene a sky.
(2.)
I cannot that it was the morn
blieve so soon:
cause it was born
At such a point of noon.
(3.)
Though Lillies in thy breast, as well
smelt too, that grow,
I could not tell
They would in Roses blow.
(4.)
Nor Caelia could I ever see
that snow did flush,
and (modest) free
From it a native blush;
(5.)
Thy bosom often too I might
a milkie say,
but found not by it,
it was a Rosy way,
(6.)
As the pure taint looked through thy skin.
me thought a lawn
had subtly bin
Over cloth of damasque drawn:
(7.)
Thou wealthy main to which we fly;
where pearls are spread
that scattered lie
Within their Orient bed.
(8.)
Thou do appear a Roman guest.
while Roses thrown
(blushing) invest,
Thee round with showr's, thine own.
(9.)
Thy breast besprinkled with a stain,
that still shed more
did straight remain
Throughout bepurpled over.
(10.)
The there concealed fire,
did higher grow,
and warm desire
Did through thy bosom glow.
(11.)
The saucy beauty of the Swan,
black at the root
no blushes can
Through the fair feathers shoot;
(12.)
But thine a more unsullied down
does overrun,
the bashful crown,
To beneath Carnation.
To Captain D. L. on his book of Fortification, and Geometry.
AS yet war not arrived at after hight
Was all but merely victory, and flight,
And the tough soldier (garrisoned in limb)
Had no retreat of strength to shelter him;
But open lay to where you would assail,
Not to be reached through trench, or single mail,
Until it grew an Art and Pallas wove,
Her reconciled garlands from one grove,
That now the Hero to new task assigned
Not more in body labored, than in mind;
While strength and judgment fights, and wit replies
By counter-stratagem, to batteries,
And thus (friend) you commence, that well apply
To the tame practice, the deep theory,
Teaching us how to measure and how far,
We move proportionably Regula,
How the fields drawn in mystic order lie
Spread with the lines of straight Geometry:
As the neat Art would into trammel get,
And for the God of war make a new net.
Ode.
(1.)
PLump father Bacchus oh recline
with thy fair clusters spread!
While (Paricides) for love of wine,
we shave thy purple head.
(2.)
Stoop with thy precious locks about!
to expiate the sin
We with what useless hung without,
will vvarm thy head within.
(3.)
If not the triaterique fate
we will invert, and do,
What (drunk) did to the Hymnist hate
in sober rage to you.
(4.)
We will mad Thracians scatter thee,
and then at Heber's shore
Our selves the subtle Serpents be,
that shall lick off the goro.
To a Lady with black hair.
THese are the dear retreats of night,
Wherein the Lover does delight,
And hither souls departed come
Unto their best Elysium,
Though sure if Dis these groves had got
Jove had not had the better lot:
Thou do as it does round thee slow
In thine own cloud (invelopd') go,
At which Alpheus stopped in rape,
Had let his Arethuse escape,
And it had though in Juno's place
(Ixion) mended thine embrace,
I could believe it night as soon,
And thou (the Queen of it) the Moon,
And might the rather think it so,
Because of the tvvin stars below,
But Light does there such noon display,
That night but seems to mantle day,
As properly I might thee name
Thine own fair picture in a frame,
As the loose hair disheveld streams,
Darkness it self does shed in beams.
As it late in braids was wound,
And up in cheaper fillets bound,
A pretty storm did seem to run
About the temples of the Sun
When it unribbond fell again,
Me thought it broke, did scatter rain,
While it is curled the circles lie
In superstitious Ebonie,
Which (fearing torment) none transgress,
And to be th'ence it is no less:
Though from all eyes once that way set
Beams run to the attractive Jet.
Ode.
To Lycoris, not to curle her hair.
(1.)
SEt not Lycoris, your each tress
The limit it may not trangress,
When you unty
The shady silk,
Love mantl'd at your breast does ly,
To suck the outside milk.
(2.)
Why must the then descending hair
Back in the banished curls repair,
That at a touch
Do gather higher,
And scarce vouchsafeing you so much
Coy from your neck retire.
(3.)
Let them Lycoris, scattered flow
N^ts through the milkie sea below,
Till they have caught
A wealthy fry,
My each inebriated thought,
That there does ripling lie.
On Mr Gambles composing of Mr Stanleyes Odes.
SUre when this Lyre was touched, fit words
Did dance in order to the Chords,
And lines in harmony thus strung,
Rise sprightly capring on the tongue;
We that but read with hoarser throats,
Do yet disturb them into notes.
And who repeates (unwitting) sings,
As echoes break from j^ngl'd strings,
So Theban walls would shaken soon,
By Batt'^ies totter into tune.
And instruments that scrued stand
Sound, struck by an unwilling-hand;
So a but peradventure sall
Awakes the fleeping Harpsycall.
Which since the Artist fing'red last,
Lay lulled in its own music (fast)
Here Is no disordring the falr mind,
Unruly matter up to bind;
Until the too much forced Zones
(Snapt) knot in short Elisions.
No crowded words in huddle meet,
That shuffle on uneven feet,
And struggling labor in their pains,
As if the verse were paced in chains.
Their very syllables as clear,
Passed (as their ayr's now) through the care*
And he that made the essence whole,
Cannot distinguish which is soul.
Where each informs the other they,
So mix in their unbody'd play.
The Phoenix.
FAr-east a grove sea-girt is read,
Whence the young day does blushing spread,
That first the early hoofs sustaines,
When the wet Carre (emergent) raines.
A happy shore, the blessed retreat
Where health takes up her wholesome seat,
No cloud above its volume hurles,
And there the weighty sleece uncurles,
But an irriguous fountain laves,
It Is vernal face with monthly waves;
That in the middle placed dwells,
And with aeternall bubling swells;
'^ill it o're-look the banck, and Rove,
In a wild freedom through the Grove.
Here keeps that bird (too blest'y free)
Immortal in mortality.
That lives a pedigree, and dies,
At once some whole posterities,
Who makes time past, and future, one
In reconciled complexion;
Who waits upon the parent Sun,
And does a trend his motion.
When the new morn does chase the night,
With Oriental-damasque light;
He thrice does taste the spring, and Rath,
Thrice in the sacred fount does bath.
Then mounts a trees removed space,
That (one) beholds the whole place;
And thence with an awaking lay,
Does erenade the rising day;
When Sols now beams do looser flow,
And noon about his shoulders throw:
Thrice does he clap his wings applause,
And thrice adoring's Ray does pause.
A bird peer to the gods, that wears,
Time out with his Returning years,
Chief of the woods, days priest, alone
Privy to secrets of the Sun,
Natures best Chronicle, time spelled,
Life and Death monasyllabled.
Not cloyed with gross repast, but free
To more immortal luxury;
Whom the Suns purely melting heat,
Does sat with a delicious sweat;
Who quaffes in-^^riated too,
The liquid ayre's el^xir'd dew:
And feeds with divine Relish on,
Rarifi'd exhalation.
A feathered diadem is spread
In golden Rays about his head,
Whose deeper flames, and beams from them,
Shine through his beaks pellucid gem:
That breaks the duskie clouds of night,
And ope's them with serener light;
Plush that enrobes the back does lie,
Distinguished with the Crocean dye:
That from above the train does wreath,
Of purple, tipped with gold beneath.
High on the wings do Rubies glow,
On rows of Emeraulds below.
Bright Sky the mail does (cloudy) deck
With the phantastique Pigeons Neck;
And the the thigh-down is stained over,
With poison of the lyrian gore:
His legs in golden scalcs are bound,
And feet with blushing Roses ^rown'd.
A bird that does no off spring need,
No heir, but does it self succeed;
Beginning where he does conclude.
In excellent vicissitude.
Life's thorough-fare, whose soul when gone
Returns by transmigration.
Who yields to fate, but to o're-come
In a reviving martyrdom;
Invading death to make him so,
Against his own black charter go,
For with a thousand years now pen't
Up in a closer Tenement.
And in a dear enlarging care,
About to leave it to Repair.
He takes flight to this wo^ld of fate,
Leaving his Isle too fortunate:
And to that Syria does fan,
From him that is called Phoenicean.
Vhere far remote he does invade
A saered solitude of shade;
And on a Cedars utmost spire,
Builds his or either nest or Pire.:
Making his Aromatique bed,
Of all the spicery does shed.
Over the Panchaian groves, and Rise
Glowing Sabaeas treasuries.
And adds to these in wealthy sums,
The Indian, and the Persick gummes;
Here twigges of frankincense, upon
The ruddy bark of Cinnamon:
There Balsamum, new Odor frees,
Mixed with hot wood of Aloes.
Chafed with dried Casia within,
And the warm scent of Benjamin:
With delicate tears of Amber wet,
And drops that precious Myrrah swet;
Crowned with what all their breathing bears
The tops that the young Nard first wears;
While in the midst he placed does shed,
The species round about him spread;
And moist with gummes dispersed lies,
To dye in his solemnities.
The Sun thus seeing him from far,
Making a stand, reins in his car;
And thus bespeaks his charge, O thou
Whose only age deceaseth now,
To thine own funerall's the heir,
That di'st in haste to thy Repair,
Who beyond thy death (alive)
Do thy triumphed fate survive,
Off (thy but worn now body) throw,
And in diviner figure go,
This said, he (scattered) does display
His bright locks, and shakes of a Ray,
That strikes with vital flame the urne,
And does the willing Martyr burn:
Who as the reeking heat consumes,
Does give his soul up in perfumes;
While yet it flames does Nature lie,
Hush't in a pious agony;
And labors with religious care,
Of loosing its eternal heir;
And Aeolus with cavernes binds,
The backs of the unruly winds:
In fear they should with lungs less pure,
Mix with the airs clean temp'rature,
Or spread clouds that might take away,
The Suns regenerating ray:
Thus in his solemn fires he dies,
And in his quiet ashes lies.
When few dividing hours got in
To put a difference between;
Whose space does intermediate lie
To either lifes-vicinity:
But a new warmth of vigor (shed)'
Does (through the limbs dispersed) spread;
And a reviving blood does flow,
And in the veins (new channel'd) go.
The undisturbed dust is stirred,
And ashes fledged new plume the bird;
Until the Phoenix in a trice
Starts from his faithful bed of spice;
And who but late departed Sire,
Does rise the offspring of his Pyre.
Then straight his bust in his new state
Devoutly does conglomerate,
And (thick) with unguents does enrobe,
The to be consecrated globe,
Bearing the sacred burden over*
To the removed Pharian shore.
Birds that his hushed attendants fly
(Innumerable) cloud the sky
Yet none of all dare: thrust before,
But far behind his flight adore:
Not one makes war, religious awe,
Creates one common peaceful Law.
In Egypt a tall Fane does rise,
Famous in the blessed sacrifice;
There Altar'd still his parent Urn,
He to the Sun does (grateful) burn;
Whence precious fogs obscure the flore
With their inconsed breathings over,
Then mists that to the Nile are broke,
Do from his seven Channells smoke;
And strongly too exhaling come,
As far as to Pelusium:
Making the air more health assume,
From the incorporate perfume.
Thrice happy bird that liv'st to see
Behind thee thy mortality,
That art so not concerned in fate
Thine age dies from thee separate:
At least your funerall's so rife,
You but undress your self of life;
And put again your body on,
By clothing Resurrection;
Thy glorious links of days are mixed,
with a Momento still betwixt:
Thou life's whole story do comprise
And all thy death's are period-wise.
Lycoris weeping.
WHen youthful April half his progress gone,
Had helped the gaudy springs embroidries on,
On the soft fragrance of a flowrie bed,
I saw the fair length of Lycoris spread;
Stifling their own, but such new sweets she lent,
As she but lay there their deputed scent:
Or as if he aven thus humbled to the ears
Of the attentive earth would whisper tears;
For she was weeping-ripe, the drops she shed,
(So brightly soft) were Crystal mellowed.
When as each fell, officious in its birth,
Some new flower starts, and latches it from earth;
Guerdon'd with the rich gem, which there does lie,
Loves precious globular Artillery:
'Till when the bowed stalk lets it roll on,
I feared it gras'd to execution:
But emissary beams so pointed run,
They strung them up by exhalation.
Till (where the Rays concentre drawn) they pass,
Into one piece of liquid burning glass;
Before those eyes, illustrious then as are
The gilded gellies of a falling star;
So not to be concealed, darting out beams,
They Native fireworks burned in their streams.
And now the earth, reeking with warmer showers,
Fresh odours rise up from the chafed flowers.
The happy dew a shorter progress seeks
Does wet the damasque Rose leaves of her cheeks;
And some to wash the Lillies idely ran,
Plea to those lav'd the Aeth opian;
That in their either beds distinctly lie,
And are both warmed and watered by her eye:
Thence on het lips the happy currents flow.
Where the drowned Currall trembles soft below.
Now to her snowy bosom they are gone,
And seem to trickle with addition:
When I reth'd back to her eyes to see,
If this were wanton prodigality;
But in those fair lights by some smarting wounds,
Their griefs seemed carved by their own Diamonds.
One Enamored on a Black-moor.
What a strange love does me invade,
Whose fires must cool in that dark shade
Round her such solitudes are seen
As she were all Retired within,
And did in hush't up silence lie
(Though single) a Conspiracy.
How did my passion find her out,
That is with Curtains drawn about?
(And though her eyes do cem'nell keep)
She is all over else asleep;
And I expect when she my sight,
Should strike with universal light.
A scarce seen thing she glides, were gone
If touched, an Apparition,
To immortality that dip't
Has newly from her Lethe slipped.
No feature here we can define
By this, or that illustrious line,
Such curiosity is not
Found in an un-distinguisht blot:
This beauty puts us from the part
We all have tamely got by heart,
Of Roses here there Lillies grow,
Of Saphyre, Coral, Hills of snow:
These Rivulets are all ingrost,
And all in one Black Ocean lost
The treasures locked up we would get
Within the Ebon Cabinet;
And he that Ravishes must pick
Open the quaint Italian Trick.
She is her own clese mourning in,
(At Natures charge) a Cypress skin.
Our common Parent else to blot,
A moal on the white mold, a spot.
Dropped it with her own Statute Ink,
And the new tempered Clay did sink:
So the fair figure does remain,
Her ever since Record in grain.
Ix^on's sometime armfull might
Swell with, perhaps, a fleece more bright;
But she as soft might be allowed,
The goddesse's deputed cl^ud;
Though sure from our distinct embrace,
Centaurs had been a dapple Race.
Thou precious Night-piece that art made,
More valuable in thy shade.
From which when the weak tribe depart,
The skillful Master hugs his art.
Thou do not to our dear surprise
Thine own white marble statue rise;
And yet no more a price do lack,
Clean built up of the polish't black.
Thou like no Pelops have supply
Of an one joint by Ivory.
But art miraculously set,
Together totally with Jet.
Nor can I count that bosom cheap,
That lies not a cold winter heap:
Where pillow yet I warmly can,
In down of the contrary swan;
Let who will wild enjoyments dream,
And tipple from another stream;
Since he with equal pleasure dwells,
That lies at these dark fontinells:
These fair, Round, spears contemplate on
So just in the proportion.
And in the lines of either breast,
Find the rich countries of the East.
They not as in the milkie hue,
Are broke into Raw streaks of blew.
But have in the more-lived stains,
The very Violets of Veins,
They rise the Double-headed Hill,
Whose tops shade one another still;
Between them lies that spicy Nest,
That the last Phoenix scorched, and blessed.
What falls from her is rather made
Her own (just) picture, than her shade:
And where she walks the Sun does hold
Her pourtrai'd in a frame of gold.
A black Nymph scorning a fair Boy Courting her.
Nymph. FOnd Boy, thy vain pursuit give over,
Since I thy shadow go before.

Boy. ^h fly not Nymph! we may pursue,
and shadows overtake like you.

Nymph. ^pass however in course away
^he night to thy succeeding day.

Boy. (...) night thou art, oh! be not gone,
^ill thou have stood a triple one:
though Jove I fear, would then invade,
^ot his Alcmena, but the shade.

Nymph. ^o should the thunderer embrace,
(...) cloud in his own goddess place.

Boy. ^o let us but commixt a while,
^istinguish one another foyl;
that to advantage we may tell,
^ow either beauty does excel.

Nymph. ^need not thy betraying light,
^o show how far I am from white;
and to the piece that nature made,
^dare be no improving shade.

Boy. ^^en my dark Angel, I can charm
^hee (circled) in mine either arm.

Nymph. ^ee! from thy slight embraces broke
^ecure I vanish in my smoke.

On Mr. J.H. His Translation of Hierocles 's Comment on the golden verses of
Pythagoras.
WHat strange Idolaters are these! that knew
So well to write the things we ought to do!
Were they acquainted with the Laws (too) Mysts
Though Sybills sometimes were Evangelists!
These are more then man's dictates! is it fit
To think they likewise had their ho^y writ?
So long they had not in a tongue unknown,
Layn hid, but in a Reverence to their own:
And the profane half-letter'd durst not trace
With their unhalow'd feet, the holy place.
Straight I my loose perusal did correct,
And at each pious clause I (shudder'd) checked:
Often I drew back, as I had thrust upon,
Awful (at unawares) Religion.
What may our best devotions transfer
Title on thee? sacred interpreter!
YVho do the Authors sense, so his, Relate
That souls did, as he taught us transmigrate;
And we that read do hear, but from the Greek
A smooth expounding English Echo speak,
In known (though) words the lines (how e're) brough forth.
Do (big) yet labor in their proper worth.
And not at mercy of deluded eyes,
Are still laid up in their own Mysteries:
But thou (still blestly prodigal) do please
To spread before us thy Hierocles.
Where we the secrets of each line espy,
Discovered in a fair Ana^omy.
Of what a treasure thou poslest did dye
Who could bequeath this public legacy;
In which we all are richer, thou do give,
(In thy providing fate) us rules to live;
And that so slippery soul at last now has
Arrived hither of Pythagoras,
After our Saviors death that we may well,
Consult, there is yet left an Oracle.
A Blush.
MAdam your guilt is too well understood
Writ in, that solemn evidence, your blood;
And in this crimson flood under pretense
Of bashfulness you drown white innocence.
That blush if you originally seek,
Was our first parent's from the Apples cheek:
Then blush, that e're you blush't, I Will think it no stain,
So strait for anger you look pale again.
Tabularium.
HOc qualecunque (viator) legis inscriptum
Scias.
Sanctisissimae Thomae Whit^aei Memoriae
Esse consecratum.
Non tam e Civitate Londinensi, quam e Dei Civitate,
Civis optimi.
Heu quam exiguum,
(Post and illius quamplurima
Nec exigua tamen charitatis officia)
Munusculum Charitatis!
HEre (Reader) lies a precious trust
Of good, and charitable dust.
This casquet heavens choice has bin,
To treasure it is dispencer in.
One who its blessings did conveigh
(Through his but Mediate hands) away:
His Alms were 'till want craved no more,
And all his stock (was) what was over,
His board stood free to entertain
Guests, though they could not bid again,
His Neighbors knew him not by strife
And he did use not injure life;
And though he could distinguish well,
He was with care conformable:
So for some one amiss thing don,
Not quarreled with Religion.
Now (Reader) go, and taught to live,
Him back (in his example) give.
ODE.
The Rosary.
(1.)
THe early Morn (as yet undrest)
Drew the red Curtains of the East;
And did betray the blushing state,
In which she lay, she thought too late:
Then starts, and Round does (scattered) hurl,
Soft, Oriental showers of Pearl.
(2.)
When my Lycoris to partake;
Delights that were the first awake;
Amid the walks of Roses went,
To catch the yet unravish't scent;
Or (when the sweet souls were bequeathed)
That new ones might from her be breathed,
(3.)
The big round dew the Plants that decks,
And loads their with-pride-humbled necks,
Did rather bend them now to greet
With their best Ornaments her feet;
And that whose duty was not near,
However did fall into a tear.
(4.)
It was the moment when each Rose
(About the fair hair to disclose)
As yet alone in the young dress,
Had slack'd the green-silk Hayr-laces:
And in the new yet freedom lay
Close, unacquainted to display.
(5.)
Here climbed the Obelisque entire
In a throughout proportioned spire,
There of like figure one Below,
Above did to new beauty blow:
A third the Ayr's each hiss receives,
Now fully numbered with its leaves,
(6.)
The Rosary the East had spread,
Now Rosey with a double red,
Or equally the flowr's the Morn.
And that the Roses did adorn:
That you could not now (whether) know
^t dawned above, or dawned below.
(7.)
The Rose and Morning do comply
In one delicious harmony,
One is their dew, one is their dress,
And Venus their one Patroness;
One were perhaps their scent if proved,
But this breaths nigh, and that removed.
(8.)
Lycoris now had seen the bud,
First in the green, and nfant hood,
Then in the childhood gay, then lie
A fair disheveled treasury:
Whose beauty must with day conclude,
And fall her dear similitude.
ODE.
For Winter.
(1.)
COuld the dead season but partake
The lusty spirit of the Vine,
His Chains of Ice he off would shake,
And find a liberty in wine:
And his cramp-bound-up sinews fit
For limber measures, would unknit.
(2.)
Wine with an active heat would warm,
and creep through every withered vein,
The youth-alone-retriving charm,
To make them plump and rise again.
And chafed with wine his head would glow,
And thaw his periwigs of snow.
(3.)
Boy let the Health then quick be tossed,
That we may take the liquor up
E're the Anticipating frost,
Have Alchymis'd it in the cup:
And when we thus well lined have bin,
We need no furs but those within.
ODE.
(1.)
THe earth first drinks the scattered rain
Thence sent to every plant,
As fast they tipple it again,
And fill the veins that want.
(2.)
The Sea does drink the condensed air,
The Sun does drink the main,
The Moon from him drinks to repair,
And fill her horns again.
(3.)
Then let us not alone stand out
But with our goblets crowned,
(Since Nature puts the health about,
Let us maintain the round.
ODE.
(1.)
HOw Cloris now I pity thee?
Whom I did late adore,
And I am less thine enemy,
Though I cannot allow
To love thee now,
At half the rate before.
(2.)
Thine eyes have lost their influence,
(not husbanding their Ray)
While like the Sun thou would dispense
An undistinguisht shine,
Without design
Lost as it did display.
(3.)
When had thou shed the golden streams
Alone but upon me,
The double quiver of thy beams,
Had had in either eye
Artillery,
Now to have pleasur'd thee.
A Frost.
IS nature tranc'd: we cannot then
By water fetch her back again,
Our babes are Jews, or Pagan, Ice
Not Christen's or does circumcise;
The watermen their Dyall miss
That over-spred with Crystal is,
And tides that underneath it pass
But turn within the hourglass:
Mahomets Politian able
To make the dry land navigable.
To render Rivers so might deal
Here by no less a miracle;
We are (like Midas) cursed, and think
To quench our thirst with goblet drink,
But want his after-prviledge,
His Tagus now is solid wedge,
And Swans above their Dirges breath,
That are cut of the half beneath.
The wretched Helespont does fear
That it again must fetters wear,
And Islands with no bounds content
Are with the Sea a continent.
Then view the shore and understand
There Is nothing lost, though writ in sand,
And the Records as deep remain,
As they would not be thawed again:
Those Grandam-bones, Deucalion posed,
He had not compassed now (disclosed;)
And she that did the riddle tell,
Had thought the task the Oracle:
The earth now close-compacted all,
Is but an entire Mineral.
Immortal Bays that knew no fall,
Are silvered to their funeral;
And Poets wreathed with such as these,
Write their own Metamorphoses.
Anni Tempestates Ovidianae.
VErque novum stabat cinctum florente Corona
Stabat Nuda Aestas, and Spicea serta gerebat;
Stabat and Autumnas calcatis sordidus Wis,
Et glacialis Hyems, canos Hirsuta capillos.
The year.
TIme that pursues it self so far,
It throws it self quite Circular,
And then as it had wound in vain.
It springs in length to curle again.
A twelve-moneth-aged Phoenix dies,
To hat^h young immortalities;
And covetous of such repair,
Departs its own apparent heir:
Invading fate on purpose for
To be its own executor,
Spring.
NOw breezes the soft wind does bring
To hush asleep the infant Spring,
Which simpring in the Cradle lies,
So tender that but nipt, it dies.
While a dispencing warmth does dress,
With care the first yet nakedness:
The Sun puts on his beams by Ice,
And melts the mirror at his Rise;
Which does unable under lie,
And waters weak'ned by his eye:
'Till with beblubber'd cheek it flows,
And (with the forehead knit up) goes.
The mountains warmly clad and trees
Do careless shed the silver fleece,
And wak'ned earth above does peep,
The sheet that hid her over, asleep.
Where long repose and balmy heat,
Had laid her in a breathing sweat.
And now the soul strait-lac'd of growth
Sruggles; and for enlargement throw'th;
And in the early buds that sprout,
Shoots an impulsive tenant out.
Birds on the callow sprigs that stir,
(Close) shudder in the native fur;
And Rath forerunners Chill appear,
In the bleak morning of the year:
The fragrant Rain the por'd earth swills,
Lukewarm from heavens Alymbeck spils.
Now the first blush begins to break,
And Roses kindly stain the cheek
Of the young Spring, that by the Sun,
Is vexed into Vermilion:
Who chafes her reeking in her spice,
Begetting his own sacrifice;
Till earth returning thanks in place,
(Supinely) breathes in heavens face:
A breath that through the concave meets,
And makes ^t but one box of sweets;
As air were gone and voidnesse barred,
By the soft lungs of bruised Nard.
Thus passing on does disappear,
The first gay Pageant of the year.
Summer.
NOw all the Damasque pride is shed,
To yellow changed, or swarthy red,
Such as does settled swell to sleek,
The nigh sleep-strangled Poppies cheek,
A sportive wind with whistling note,
Does early tune the standing Oate,
And all the fields are gilt about;
As the rich-bowel'd earth burst out,
Each gale does over them gliding sweep,
(Bearing along) spreads the bright heap,
And shows it burnished to the Sun,
Dazzled in Repercussion.
Where Ceres thus trumphant rides,
New grain along the furrows slides,
As her rich Carre did scatter streams,
And the dark earth dawned in the beams.
Until a more illustrious day's,
Shot in innumerable Rays;
That from obscurer Cavernes borne,
Irradiate a Noon of Corn:
Luster alone does not decline,
But starts in vegetable shine.
And equally the air does glow
Warmed from above, and from below.
A lazi^ hear does from them reek,
Distil^s the Roses of each cheek.
Until the vexed blush is pined,
And weathered paseness left behind;
Each Virgins bosom seems to flow,
In the then newly melted snow,
The votary no longer nice,
Thaws in her superstitious ice;
Such flames now from the dog are thrown,
His shaking sides pant in their own.
Afflicted Valleys cranny'd lie,
And let into deep hell the sky.
Our common mother Restless pines,
And (hid) shrinks from her molten mines:
The thund'rer seems to dart upon
Some new, but rasher Phaeton.
The rifled treasury Conveyed,
From off the field in bank is laid.
And the close Granaries are bright,
In sheaves that chase away their night:
Until they all Refulgent may,
Resemble those that stable day.
Thus does the jolly pomp begin,
Out-worne to hide it self within.
Autumn.
ANd fruit-oppressed Autumn now,
Beneath his wealthy load does bow,
While from his labour-fainting sides
A precious sweat of Amber slides,
Apples that round his temples play,
(Like Tantalus his) dance away;
When he his laden head does move,
The stubborn branches lift above;
The course-clad Russeting, the green,
Harvie, and purple-robed Queen:
As all were beautifully set,
But gems within his Coronet,
That sparkle his large front upon
Like a shot constellation;
As Ariadne had let fall
Her stars to crown the god withal.
From fruits a Ruddiness does flow,
And all the trees with scarlet glow;
So the bold Sun with frequent glance
Has looked them out of Countenance.
The parched earth does cheaper show,
Lies from her mantle stripped below;
As if attractive heat thus high,
Had drawn up her embroiderie,
And now the mellow fruits not want,
The price of an Hesperian plant:
That valued cannot these outdo,
Whose very leaves are golden too.
The full aged grape deep colored over,
As it now struggled in its gore,
Yet with a thirst insatiate dreines,
From its luxuriating veins:
'Till with it is own exhausted wines,
(Heavy) the feeble neck declines;
And now the blood-swolne Deity
Grown black, in his rich plurisie,
Bleeds in the press, until he fre's,
A luscious vintage of Disease.
Winter.
OLd VVinter now himself bestirres,
And gathers up within his furs.
The trees aside their garments throw,
To shift themselves in shirts of snow:
And the last beams the Sun does fling,
Washed in his moist robes (slaking) sing;
Which after him (beset) does trayle,
With Diamond-Ice, and ropes of Hail,
Whose ground not of an humbler cost,
(A glittering cloth of silver frost)
The strutting plate and stones uphold
Stiff, and inestimably, cold,
That (bustling) out of lankness throws,
And but in-sinuous Volume flows,
Where he the stubborn train does stem
Earth (crusty) crumbles at the hem;
And as it sweeps over looser flakes
It bears along dislodged cakes,
The tenant-birds with Summer gone,
Her pack't up wardrobe wait upon,
That paid a Rent to every tree
From their melodious treasury,
And snow succeeds, that seems a Down
They left in satisfaction, flown,
And now appears our silent sky
An undiscovered volary,
The softer birds not venture on
(Inhabitable Region,)
And Foul, but wing't of hoarser throats
(Natives) not civilized to notes,
Unlike those, mounting the young sky,
That soul'd the vault with harmony,
And swelled with Rapsodies our ears
Like some subordinated spears.
Coldness does so the Globe possess
It fills in abstract emptiness,
And has it self so far outwent,
It ceases to be accident.
Such frozen blood our veins does fill
The branchesspred distinctly chill,
And Isickles proportion'dly
Proab'd, through their whole Anatomy,
The blew lines proper yet are laid,
On the now marble-bosom'd maid;
And we are candied over by this
Half in our metamorphosis,
The bark let us in the weather through't,
And growth keeps warm it self at root.
Rivers that chide upon their shelves
Caught, are made fetters for themselves:
Where (deep) they purle a cream does fling
In cold excess their covering;
Till Spring with beams that suppling rain,
Cha^'d Nature brings to life again.
The Corollarie.
WEak counterfeits thus Winter wears
The Spring resolves to their first tears,
And ferching short her breath of flowers
She sinks in the hot Summer hours,
Faint Summer dulled with Autumn nigh
Indulges her own Lethargy,
And Autumn Winter cools upon
Struck in's Refrigeration.
Thus they in restless motion reel
Spoakes of the years perpetual wheel.
FINIS.
POEMS DIVINE. BY ELDRED REVET Gent.

Qui recto Coelum vultu petis, Exerisque Frontem,
In sublime fer as animum quoque.
Boeth. de con. Ph. li. 5. LONDON, Anno Dom. 1657.

POEMS DIVINE. John, lying on the Bosom of our Savior.
(1.)
SEE where the loved Disciple lies,
Pillow'd with softness of the skies:
From above the while there streams,
A glorious Canopy of Beams.
(2.)
When his eyes would up-ward peep,
The are with luster laid asleep;
His Head inebriated gay's
On's Bolster feathered with Rays.
(3.)
Such splendors from the pillow pow'^
The Hair is all a Golden shower;
As if the ravished Thoughts, now not
To be concealed, themselves thus shot.
(4.)
See I how he passes not undone
Like Enoch in's Translation
To a Bosom that bedarks
That of the blessed Patriarchs.
Hesekiah his Recoverie.
THe Sun goes backward, Judah's King has ease,
His Life's the surer now by ten Degrees.
The Ethiopian Baptized.
WHat Stars are those of Orient light
Tremble on the Brow of Night?
And their daring Beams display
Rival Glories with the day?
That baffle Time, out-stare the Sun,
Scorn to wait Succession;
No, it is an Aethiop dived these streams
Rich in spoils of Ransack't Gem's;
New-risen from the Crystal Bed,
All in Pearls aparalled;
What of Night's about his skin,
Skreens, like that too, Day within.
Christ washing Judas his feet.
(1.)
WAter the Virtue of those hands
A Crystal Heaven yet sustains;
Beauty on Juda's feet disbands
Might wash an Aethiop as it rains.
(2.)
A Virgin spring so have I seen
Through Marble Channels too conveyed
After the Pride it wantons in,
To filth-corrupted sinkes betrayed
Low as his cursed feet, (Lord) as thou bend'st
Me thinks to Hell thou e're thy death descend'st.
A penitential Hymn.
IF I be white within
Lord! it is but wi^h the Leprosy of sin,
The Furre a deep staind'd soarlet blushes over
The Roab that Pilate wore:
Nor did he me out-doe,
That Coucifie thee too.
Lord! Let thy R^sie torrent flow,
Whose richer tincture may
Pale into snow
The courser die and kindly beauty lay:
But first, Oh! squeeze mine eyes, till all appears
For thy pure blood a Channel spung'd with tears,
Oh let the drops distill
Till they have drowned this little World of ill.
Marie her ointment.
ANointed God who was before,
Mary anoints her Savior;
Her Alabaster-box does shed
The liquid Narde on's sacred head;
Where when it trickles down upon it
It sweats upon his Marble Front;
Ore's hair it spreads the unctious flood,
To arm't against after-rain of blood;
As all those little channels power
It sems dispersed in a shower;
What falls on his Necks whiter skin
Is Alabaster'd up again;
The odorous breath, though with perfume
Not stifled there does fill the room:
From this more glorious Phoenix fly
Such spices that prepares to die;
She then at's feet her-self does throw
Descending yet to Heaven, so;
When from her eyes she scatters streams
To pay the custom of those gems:
The sparks a richer luster meet
Set on his white enameld feet,
Which (trembling yet) the torrent bears
In one continued Flood of tears.
Her hair now from her bended head
A Towel falls disheveld;
That Is over those silver columns row'ld
Like a well-falling Curle of Gold:
Those Rays upon his feet thus run
Dry them by Exhalation:
And drink a Richer dew from thence,
Then her well-powred forth expense.
Judgment
LOrd! at Convulsions Earth shall shake
Our little parcels quake;
When the Glory of thy Ray
Shall chase the Heavins away:
And put the Crowded Stars to rout
Which at that day shall drop Thrust out;
Then in a fiery Deluge power
That earth must, and her filth devour,
And from their place
Shot Bilyard over it is sinful face;
And the fair Vellam of the skies too roll
Snatched into scrowle:
The Mountains then should over us turn,
Will Aerna's burn,
And the splinted Rocks then fly
Counter-Thunder with the sky,
Now the long sleep shall Death forsake,
Graves yawning wake,
Then Mercy Lord! we sink beneath thine Ire,
Nor dare we stand this Trial of thy Fire.
Confession by ingenious Penitence,
And holds open hels dark jaws, that we below
May see what Sea's of liquid Fire there flow,
That curle in Billow's still, and roar in night
Never extinguished, ever without Light.
This we unshuderd hear
Though they are brought so near
The Flames Flash to our Ear,
Then let him throw
Us Rowll'd in Bedds of Snow,
And manacle us thrice:
In Chains of Ice,
The Blood never Thril's,
Nor one Hot-Lust-inflamed vein less fills.
We hear of Snakes, Aspes, and put over their sting,
Eat Poison too like Nightingales and sing:
But Lord! in Floods of Tears here wash my soul
Least there I roll.
ZACHEUS called.
SEE! how the witty dwarf has cheated Them
Shot up in Stratagem;
That run tumultuously and Throng
Themselves from that for which they long
With what industrious strife
He now assayles
The Tree of Life?
And beats the rough bark with his Nails?
His labor here finds a Repair,
His Prospect's fair.
But now thou must again descend, for thee.
Was there no way to Heaven, but over this Tree?
It was the most direct; Thou were not out
Zacheus seeking thy blessed home about.
CAESAR'S Tribute.
IF the Image speak, the Owner here is the Odd's,
The Silvers Caesar's Coin, and Caesar's Gods.
Christ and his Disciples in the Storm.
(1.)
HOw prowdly curled the Billows come
Powderd with Foam,
Sea-Courtiers, that like Sampson wear,
Strength in their hair:
Winds their Imperious dressers fling
Their fetterd Pride in every Ring.
(2.)
But whither roll these Giant son's
Of waves on their own Pelions?
A God invading Element,
By President
The Monsters in her Womb did move,
Are spawned above.
(3.)
Now, now they lash the Vessels sides,
Where Heaven rides
To driv't on Rocks, secure in one
Salvation.
When now a bubbles archt ascent
Seems vaulted ore its Monument
(4.)
Great Neptune in it! what need pale fear,
The watery Cav'es a shelter here,
And in officious fowlds would swim
Pillow to him;
Or as he sleeps, but over-ly
His Canopy.
(5.)
Each crisped fleece the Former rides
That from it slides
Ambitious then to get before
Throws it self ^'re,
When a tenth wave insulting ly'th,
And falls to Heavens High Priest a Tithe:
(6.)
Him, now is Disciples wake, who blames
Their coward faith first, and then tames
The winds, that at his word retire,
And hush their ire:
The Billows their rude Essence too
Becalmed, undo.
Death.
DEath, thou were once a fearful thing,
And had a sting;
That now thou can not use, or if thou do
Thou shed'st a Curing Honey too,
We sometimes passed thee black enough in sin
To places where we scorched again:
Thy dark and narrow Entry is
Now but the Thorough-fair of bliss.
And we upon thee look as we
Would on thy fairly limm'd Anatomy.
Our Savior cradled in the Manger.
SEE! where the King of Glory lies
Inn'd after passage from the Skies!
Having left his sparkling Throne
To sparckle in a viler one!
What linnen-Clouds his head, o're-run,
As they could Biggon up the Sun!
With rowles his limbs are swathed about,
To keep the Rays from breaking out;
But luster un-controil'd so streams,
He Is double-mantled in his beams;
His Eyes the humble Roof (too) line
Guilt with the riches of their shine;
As if Heaven did here retire,
With all its Regiments of fire.
To baffle in a glorious dress
The pride of Herod's Palaces;
This Western-stable that out-vies
Where the sun's Carre un-harnass'd lies.
Adam, hiding himself among the Trees of the Garden.
WHy do thou Adam, hide thee ore and ore?
That were in Fig Leaves hid too much before:
That Innocence thou with the Fruit did lose?
Can thou recover in the Leaves and Trees?
That Dress does round thee treacherously fall
Thy sin sticks close (poor Adam) that is all.
Jesus wept.
(1.)
WHat mean those weaker streams
Shed from such Eagle-eyes?
What bright Sun Duels beams
And their Glory thus out-vies?
Such lustres are about them thrown.
They surely water in their own.
(2.)
This vaster Ball
Who made and wrought
And grasps it all
Composed of naught.
The fullness of all Joy now too
Creates new little Worlds of woe.
(3.)
Or He, the first of Days,
Does now ante-date the last;
These are not tears, but Rays,
Stars thus shot those Heavens cast:
No marvel they were shed upon
Thy Laz'rus resurrection.
The Water made Wine.
A Fire-got Bacchus, Ethnicks only knew,
But here he is begot of Water too.
Our Savior scourged, clothed with Purple, Crowned with Thorns.
(1)
JEsu! Can those scourges eurle
Round thee their inamord knots?
And their sad Enamel hurl
Kisses like Iskariots?
(2.)
Once thou taught'st thou were the way
Then thou were a Milkie one;
Now a Cream of blood they lay
Through a Red Sea we must on.
(3.)
Why this roab about thee thrown?
Can more Princely (Lord!) be dressed?
Richer Purples of thine own
Too too costly line this vest.
(4.)
That sharp Crown that by thee worn's
Sadly Emblemes there not do
Lillies only among thorns,
Lillies grow and Rose, too.
(5.)
He the Spicknards waste could plead
Thought not (Lord!) of this expense;
Every moist hair on thy head
Drops the world a ransom thence.
(6.)
Precious coral-Beads! that run
Strung upon the silken thread
Till they wanting fast'ning on,
Scatterd'd fall by new ones shed.
Lasarus raised by our Savior after four days lying in the Grave.
DEath! alas where is thy sting?
Thy mortal once invenoming?
Thy weakness see
Puling Anatomy.
That over this vanquished corpse did roll
And bredth'dst upon
It thy short fetched corruption?
Till thy dull weight squeezed out the vexed foul?
Now that turns thee beneath,
With a new recruit of breath,
And purges out thy noisome Aires
By smells with which the soul from Heaven repairs;
Leaving the Original to see
The coppie it left with Mortality,
And with an ante-dated bliss comes on
To this Preludious resurrection.
Jesus eating, John fasting.
HOw strangely are these perverse Jews diseased!
Nor full, nor fasting pleased.
To the Angel bringing news of our Saviors Nativitie.
(1.)
EVer-blest Intelligence!
That while the quire about thee sings.
Fann'st the Air with Redolence
From the healing in thy wings;
How thy breath does assume,
Sweet before, a new perfume
From the Odor that it brings!
(2.)
Thy beauteous wings, beauteous feet,
Heavens blessed Ambassador!
In thy tidings joy yet meet
Beauty they had not before.
Night mantled in the Ray
Of unexepected day,
Wonders her dark reign is over.
(3.)
In what state thy glories break
Thy Retinew to put on;
Lustres that do weakly speak,
Their Negotiation:
Thy livery displayes
A Rich deep fring of Rays,
May not well be looked upon.
(4.)
When thy Rosy lips give birth,
To a golden cloud of Breath,
That proclaims Peace to Earth
And a victory in Death:
New's of a Princely Boy,
Making us Coheirs in joy,
With him, that does it bequeath.
Christ walking on the Sea.
THe troubled Sea with pants does bear
Struggling beneath those blessed feet,
That tread with power Cocrceive on it
Fetters alone for Hellispont.
What Fleccie billows rolling come
Furred with the whiteness of their foam!
Such watery Quilts, are Carpets spread
Where ere the King of waves does tr^ad
The surges their curled necks upon
Would heave him to Ascension;
Their clouds such weight unworthy know,
Though Heaven is (with him) below;
The waters un-retentive are,
Or his each step had sixth a Star:
Whose Number then, the other's less,
Had put them out with light's excess.
Christ in his Baptism.
HOw does enamored Jordan throw,
His waters that do round him flow,
And his fair limbs pant upon,
As they had themselves outrun?
Each successive Heir of bliss,
Weeps and takes a parting kiss;
Every drop Constellates here
Trembling on a brighter sphere;
Gemm's themselves are well content
to make him their Ornament.
Prank't in his lusty those would Vie,
Fall, into a Tear and Dye;
Or rather crawl; with appetire,
To new Regions of delight:
Branched into Vines, a Trace they leave,
And wil'd in F^orish inter-weave.
The watrie clusters weighty bend,
And quiver at the Mazes end:
Thus the Mysterious knots contrive
Him in a weak Embrace to Give:
Whos' shine from each part as it plays,
Un-essenceth the Loomb with Rays.
Dives his Drop.
THy singed tongue suing ears are Deaf,
May sheivel up a witherd Leaf;
A watery Drop! an Orient Gemme,
Is rated now to its esteem?
Had thou afforded one cold cup,
What Riches had thou Treasured up?
The Crown of thorns on our Saviors Head.
(1.)
NOw the Giants Heavens Brow
Scaled have with ambitious Wars,
Where their spears too Riot now,
Wounding it with other stars.
(2.)
Those before did shed the Ray,
Into showers of Golden streams;
But these water-eyes, as they
Bleed their bitter pointed Beams.
(3.)
As that in the Bush of yore,
This Fire, indestructive burns;
Though the luster be all over.
Vn-consum'd remain the Thorns.
The Miracle of the loaves.
THe Widows rising Oil and Flower
That sweli'd still, as she did devour,
But weakly Typ'd this glorious Feast,
By diminution increased.
The Tear. Psalm. 6. v. 8. The Lord has heard the Voice of my weeping.
LOrd! we know the sinners sigh,
Can wing't on High!
An! his groan
Is heard loud Music to thy Throne:
But can a poor dejected Tear
Borne to the dust it soon does wear;
Be heard above where ^ngels sing,
And drown weak sounds with Antheming?
It cannot (I fear:)
The lids are vocal that open wide
To utter a Spring Tide;
And waters which with bubling Fall
Are Musical:
Yet not alone the Cataracts of eyes
Do break the skies;
We know the Tear,
That we give over here
Does hang a Jewel in thine Ear:
Then if mine eyes cannot be fluent Lord;
O let them speak one word!
Paul called.
SEe! how the zealous persecutors Breath,
Sindges the Air, belching our Fire and Death!
Him with diviner love Christ does acquaint,
And Prostrate Paul does rise created Saint.
Pilate washing his hands.
(1.)
Why all this Coil
To wash a Tile
Spread
Thorough Read!
(2.)
Blushes away!
Will new betray
Th^ck
As the Brick.
(3.)
These though you wash,
All into Plash
Still,
Glow they will!
(4.)
Thy hands too Clay
When lav'd away
Stain
Will remain.
Lazarus and Dives.
Why Dives loath'st that wretches skin?
His Ulcers break, thine spread within:
Death will strip his Hayler soul,
And thy fair sear-cloth too un-rowle:
The naked Truth that uncloath's defect,
And Lazarus will then neglect.
Peter walking on the waters at our Saviors call.
SEe! where bold Peter at his Masters Beck,
Treads on each waves submissive neck!
And when them he frisled sees,
Wrapp his feet in the soft Fleece;
And Poy'd by Faith goes to lay hold upon*
The Rock of his Salvation:
Passing with looks already over,
Bent on the object that is before.
But now the Wind in wanton luxe that blows
Builds, and as soon again o'rethrowes,
The sinuous billows rise in Caves,
And (curved) arch the under waves.
Peter and them who (Angell-like) over ran,
Puts on again weak sinful Man.
Broke with Fear, the waters fall,
And open to his burial.
When he that only can, now called upon
Lifts him to Resurrection.
Teaching his Faithless feet again
To Kick the late deceitful Main.
To the sluggard.
Forth! dull ones forth! No Lion stands to flay
The early Cock-crow frights such Beasts away.
Mortification.
Man. DEath! me thinks my nimble Clay
Might cheat thy Duller, and away:
I Will hide me from thee in Earths womb.

Death. And so antedate thy Tomb.

Man. Then strongly I can hold the chase,
And fly thee over the Earths wide Face.

Death Yet tumble in at last thou must,
And thy each steps, but dust to dust.

Man. But Craven I above can go,
And you may on your Dunghill crow.

Death. Know though the stairs Conveigh you over
Heaped Coffins to a boarded Flore.

Man. Then I can dress my self in Bays,
Secure from thee, and all thy Ways;
Immortal Bays! that never fall.

Death. Will deck thee for thy funeral.

Ascension Day.
POor Earth! it must be so, but greet
The farewell kisses of his Feet,
And he is gone!
From thy rude pavement, that had none,
But what he trodde,
To that abode.
Does sparkle o'r with precious stone;
Where all the beauty of the skies,
Wait for new luster from his eyes.
And glorious Cherubs glittering bright,
Spread their wings Fannes, before their sight!
Though more then Eagle plumed, they dare not eye,
Such killing Majesty.
But Lord! thou art not gone
Quite from poor flesh, thou once essaiedst on;
But wilt again return
With Tongues of Fire, that from the twelve shall burn
To light the Nations feet, and teach how we
May get up after thee.
Affliction.
(1.)
TIme her blithe children with their Mirth grown Red
A peevish Grand-dame calls to Bed.
Now the dark Lanthorn Night,
Does open and should her Light;
The Morn does flush,
Gone at a Blush:
Darkness again is Fed,
Soon with her daily Bread.
The brisk Hows's lead the way.
To those that dance asleep the tired Day:
(2.)
But with a poor cross-arm'd and fortuned wretch,
The lazy Hour's do yawning stretch.
Night thinks him Dead and His,
As tedious Mourner is:
The Rosy Morn
Grow's Pale out-worne:
On Woe, the bold-fac'd Day,
Does stare and Gaping stay
The Sun does fix his Eye,
'Till He does Water those of Misery.
(1.)
And with such flaring Thread Apollo Rays,
And Lo^mes the Shuttle of my Days
I lie with no Delight
In the black arms of Night
The Morning blows,
I smell no Rose
Sheds into broader Day,
Still Night with me does stay
Doubled with the approach,
When darkness lashes up her Mistie Coach.
(4.)
^ut Lord! on Tenters if I must be thrown
I Will Roll and think them yielding down,
If thou prescrib'st it me,
Healthful Phlebotomie
My veins were once
Swollen for the nonce.
When I am broke and torn,
Harrow'd enough and worn,
That thou will not Despise;
^hen let my Heart (Lord) be thy Sacrifice.
Our Savior circumcised.
(1.)
BOrne (Lord) to woe
The story of thy Age
Has too
As sad a Title Page
Thy day but now discloses,
and must it needs too break in Roses!
(2.)
Thou art the Vine,
VVilt shed enough thy Wine
O're-spread
Thy Cross and Clustered Red
The pruning-knife is letting
Thee Blood (alas!) yet at thy setting.
Ten Lepers cleansed, one returning Thanks.
OF ten were cleansed but one his thanks did pay,
And we would take too (Lord) that tithe away.
Conscience.
COnscience does Ape our changes, still so dressed
Cameleon of the Breast;
When we put off our Working-day Array,
She Is in her Holy Day:
Be all then nearly swept from sin,
And hung with Light:
She keeps her Revells too within,
As Spruce and Bright.
(2.)
Sloven we up our selves in lust she bragges
No dress, but Menstruous Rags,
And the corruption In our Bosom dwells,
Breathes out in Noisome smells.
She fearfully too Tenters all within
With Pricks of sin.
In Regulus his engine as she would Roll
And scratch the soul.
Give me a quiet Conscience Lord; but none
That is a sleepy one.
Paul's Conversion.
TIhine eyes did search abroad amiss for sin,
That now confined are by reflex turned in:
To view (blessed Paul) ills there, that call upon
Thee to bring home thy persecution.
PRAYER.
(1.)
A Fleece of Angell-downe that flies
In a golden cloud of Breath;
Still upward to the kindred skies
And above them hovereth
A Soul,
In Parcel ushering the whole.
(2.)
A most illustrious break of Day,
From the Night of Death and sin,
A Bright and Emissary Ray
Of a cheerful light within;
A Spice!
Smoaks from the Heart in sacrifice.
(3.)
A Spirit has got leave to play
From its Chains of Flesh and Blood.
A soul escaped to learn the way
To its longed for abroad;
A thought,
Then up in the third Heavens caught.
(4.)
A talking with the Holy One,
A Familiar conference:
A wrestling for a sparkling throne
Got by holy violence
A Plate.
And Clapper to Saint Peter's Gate,
The Hinderance.
(1.)
MY God! an evil Custome's not
When we would have it, just forgot
Tired with Live-long sin,
I often would rest
Gathered within
My Breast:
(2.)
But an officious thought before,
Crept in at some private door,
That lust would speak with me;
VVhispers aside
When I would be
Denied.
(3.)
THe surfets we first took to please
Hang after on us our disease.
The quarters warning not
Once wages pay,
Can them alot
Their stay,
(4.)
My God I knew the Time
My thoughts could climb
Above the Morning Lark on wing,
And singe.
(5.)
The Regions of the air
Did not impair
But pervious as a Vacuum
Become.
(6.)
Each crowded star retires
And called in's Fires
Till far above their Orbs they greet
Thy feet.
(7.)
Now flutter out their age,
Pent up in Cage;
And as Debauched Prisoners do,
They too.
Christmas Day.
(1.)
AWake! awake! the Morn
Is long since sprightly borne;
And with it is
The Prince of Bliss;
A Ray
Of Angels broak the Day.
(2.)
Aurora half asleep
Does dew-bedabled creep,
Will blushing rise
At the surprise,
To be
But her own Deputy.
(3.)
The Bethlemites at sight
Of inexpected Light
Amazed fell
With Miracle:
To keep
A Golden-Fleeced sheep.
(4.)
And they thus prostrate do
Confess Obedience too
To Him must keep
The Shepherds sheep,
To stock
^is strange inverted Flock.
(5.)
Yet this great Shepherd now
To whom the Pastors bow
At last supplies
In Sacrifice,
A meek
Lamb for the Paschall week.
(6.)
Thou do the offering do
(Lord!) whom it is effer'd to
Us Lambs-dost feed
One for us bleed
Alone
Propitiation.
Confession.
MY God my inside might no day
E're peeps into with half a Ray.
The darkness there never knew the Sun,
That puts the Negro mourning on,
But fires of lust there dwell that can
Scorch me an Ethiopian;
Related flames to those that dwell
(Black in the ugly mouth of Hell,
That Roabed in as course a smoke,
And stifled in themselves (too) choke.
My God these mists (thick Rhined) Chase
And break them with a dawne of grace,
Let my o'reflowing eyes turn in.
Till they wash off the blacks of sin,
And the clear face of Conscience twin
With the bright glass it dresses in.
Such spruceness thy blessed Dove may woo,
To house within my bosom too
That there with beauteous wings displayed
Will scatter shine instead of shade;
And my loose thoughts keep home to one
Bright heaven of meditation.
My shudder'd senses will retire,
And leave abroad no wild desire.
My bosom (Lord) one stroke dispatch,
Is tynder apt enough to catch;
I have a heart too hard as Flint
Who knows but fire is vein'd within't
Oh but thou have essayed and dark,
I have not answered in a spark.
Yet thou smit'st often, and always on,
With steels of tried ^ffliction,
But (roughly stroke) my heart was bright,
Once with some fair spread seeds of light:
Then (Lord) the fault has surely bin
In these O're-burned Rags of sin.
Oh Teach me but out on them to le^
My tears, such tynder takes when we^
The Rose.
(1.)
I saw the Rose that blew
This very morn,
Beslubber'd ^'re with dew,
As soon as born.
(2.)
The childhood I confess
Was passing sleek,
And wind did kissing press
The damasque cheek.
(3.)
When the ripe Virgin spread
The Suns fixed eye
Made her recline the head,
All modesty.
(4.)
E're courage she receives
A storm does Rush,
And scatter's all the leaves,
While yet they blush.
(9.)
Man so is born, and cries,
His cheeks as gay
His youth so charmeth eyes,
So snatched away.
On some leaves of the Holy Bible bound on either side of a Book of Humanity.
HEre, here is a mass ill blended, where the light
And darkness shuffled in one Chaos fight;
Or on each side (unmixt) the light has state.
And shows the Chaos newly separate.
The Aethicks know not the Position here
Where virtue is not in the proper sphere:
But joint extremes into the middle slide,
And virtue sliced attends on either side.
Innocents Day.
HOw grief enameled here appears!
In showers of Milk, of blood, of tears,
As the various Iris now
Had wept her bow.
Mothers eyes tears not only do,
Their breasts shed to their infants too:
Till blushing steel lets out the flood,
Curdled with blood.
What needed Canaan flowed before
With milk and honey, milk and gore!
Sad fair mixture to bequeath
Beauty to death.
Nature.
MY God if thou not pull'st us thence,
Flesh wallowes in the mud of sense,
Thy paths are clean, but ragged often,
And sloughs, however foul, are soft.
The Jews attempting to stone our SAVIOR.
(1.)
ARe these the griefs thou do express,
These are Sions cruel ones;
Peevesh rending of thy dress,
And a ruthless shower of stones.
(2.)
Keep the Laws but strict intent,
Though that thunder here be none,
Each has its Commandment,
In a table (too) of stone.
(3.)
Struck with grief unless thou melt,
As the Rook did sometime do:
When him you would kill, Compassion felt,
Those will gush out waters too.
(4.)
Why should you antedate his day,
That shall be laid in stone erewhile,
And shall thence (too) break away,
As he does now through your pile.
The good Thief.
HOw thy inverted sentence is undon,
Into salvation;
That did but mount thy Cross, and by that kiss
Step'st into Paradise.
Our Savior naked and wounded on the Cross.
THy wounds a tide,
Unto thy snowie skin dispense,
That down thy Virgin limbs does slide;
And throws a blush over innocence.
(5.)
Who Heaven's is,
Has found an unjust judge of man,
His Robes in death though (^ot amiss)
Are Scarlet furred with down of Swan.
The Widows Mites.
VVOnder close writers that by magic ty't,
To see her Creed here conjured in a mite.
The Prodigal.
STay wanton youth, that wild in Luxe,
Tyr'st witty Riot, and (once in)
Paddlest in voluptuous mudde,
Shall thy spring tide have no refluxe,
Still to the Chin
Must thou be borne up in the unctuous flood:
Sure thou wilt be weary when thou come to di^^,
(Too) with the swine.
The Sepulcher.
(3.)
SToop (viler Rocks) to wanes that rush,
Or tears more kindly-native gush,
Or red with your own Corrall blush;
That this (late) stone
As cheap an one,
Entrusted lies.
The great Exchequer both of earth, and skies.
(2.)
Man sure had harder, or had none,
This Rock had bowels but of stone,
And yet it felt Compassion;
And made him Room
In her cold Womb;
'Till the third day,
He rose and double gilt it with his Ray.
Pride.
MAn knew no pride, when brave in each respect,
Pride first began, when first began defect.
The Gadarens desiring Christ to leave their Confines.
WHy from your borders Gadaren? he slew
Alas not half the swine he left with you.
Affliction.
(1.)
HOw did the jolly current run?
Where I did tippling play,
And no thought take,
But guest the Crystal still would on;
And not my joys betray;
To this black Lake.
(2.)
The wanton curles aside, I threw
From my entangled arms,
And ravished swam:
'Till me still on the waters drew,
With the soft murmured charms
To where I am,
(3.)
I know the Angler throws his bait
To catch the easy fry,
But did not dream,
That their own water lay in wait,
And therefore (careless) I
Went with the stream.
(4.)
Thy stubborn Prophet (Lord) did cry
From the unfathomed deep,
And reached thine ears,
Oh! from this gulf but raise me, I
To drown my sin will weep
A sea of tears.
The Soul compared to a Flower.
AS the flower does tender spread,
The bright (in earth's fair bosom) head,
If it the dew and rain does nourish,
My so tender mind does flourish;
While with pleasant dew it is fed;
That is, from thy fair spirit shed,
If this it want it straight does lie
(Heavy) as in a soil that is dry.
The flower that does arise, unless
Both dew and rain it nourishes.
Ex Flamin. Metris.

Patience.
(1.)
Thou pious Angel that do dwell
Not under Roofes that shine;
But rather stand'st to prop the cell,
That does with age decline.
(2.)
When the world shattered would fall on
Our Cottages of clay:
Under the headlong Ruins gone
Thou do the Rubbish stay.
(3.)
And while the lash is falling seen
(that yet it may be broke)
Thou with thy guardian side between
do carry off the stroke.
4.
Thou turn'st on the tormentor back
the anguish of his shame:
While we tell truth upon the rack
and (Martyrs) sing in Flame.
Meditation.
1.
THou fair Asylum of the mind,
where we retire,
And from our selves a safety find;
and wild desire.
2.
A naked lodging you procure
within a heart,
And leave it a rich furniture
when you depart.
3.
Thou call in the thoughts at large
by thine arrest;
And redeliver'st them to charge,
of their own breast*
(4.)
In thy withdrawings souls debate,
(in dear discourse)
Upon their own eternal state,
and long divorce.
(5.)
Thou leave the body clean alone,
while all does rise
Within by contemplation
above the skies.
Tears.
THe seeds of penitence, that sown
Are (instant) high as heaven grown
A rainy Sunshine that appears
Less glorious, when you think it clears;
Why superstitious beads when eyes,
Have of their own such Rosaries?
When the pent soul does want its light,
This water washes clean the sight,
These are the sparks we may admire
Above the Diamond entire.
And each to Heaven does (dearer) lie,
Than unto us the precious eye.
These gems do best adorn the soul
When the shed ropes do scattered roll:
That (inexhaustibly a store)
Through prodigality are more;
And fall but from the Casker eyes,
On purpose to be treasuri^^.
A spring, that wash off only can
The sinful Ethiopian,
Where Angels dabling with the wing
Do their eternal Anthems sing,
From which though daily purged we fly,
Hemerobaptist Heresy.
Jacobs Vision at Bethel.
(1.)
ANd nights now silent wheels that glide
with sun-discover'd pace,
Hid with the mists they threw asid^
earths solitary face.
(2.)
When the good traveller oppressed,
does undisturbed, begin
To take up to his urgent rest,
his inter-cepted Inn:
(3.)
And builds up an industrious heap
(of the there scattered stone)
An Altar dedicate to sleep,
that he reposes on:
(4.)
Where richly melting in his thought,
and soft persume of Prayer,
His lids as sweet a slumber caught
as he had slept on Air,
(5.)
Now with a ravishing too theme
that does his sense unwind,
The joys of a delicious dream
Run through his beauteous mind.
(6)
A golden scale does from him rise,
the prospect of his soul,
That lifts his intellectual eyes
to where the Clouds unroul,
(7.)
And the fair Gate of Heaven lies
with bright expanded leaves,
Whence he the sacred treasuries
with ecstasy receives,
(8.)
Angels that flutter to and fro
as sweet a calm do bring
As they should ore the pillow throw
the down beneath their wing:
(9.)
Lord, could we on the quarries sleep
of hard affliction so,
We from the ragged elifts as steep,
might up with Angels go.
The Taper.
(1.)
HOw that unthrifty Taper is declinde?
the substance spent,
And dear abundance in the which it shinde
and luster lent,
And of its own betraying Flash in dread,
Within the socket hides the bankrupt-head.
(2.)
How does it wave the fires from side to side,
and bows oppressed,
Until it languid all recruits have tried
in an unrest,
Then sinks into the bed that it has wet,
And with a fever, licks up what it swet.
(3.)
See how it heavy now the best part out
does hopeless ley,
And now again in a reviving doubt
lifts up the eye:
Still the departing fires their furewell give,
And still by lucid intervals they live.
(4.)
See now the nozzle all with Flame is lined,
and the vexed elfe,
Does a consuming hell of torment find;
within it self:
Or as it there is Sepulchred does burn
The proper Ceremony of it is urn.
(5.)
The Tapers of our lives contract or spread
thus (Lord) the fires,
And a fair sheet of lightning from them shed,
as soon retires:
Howere when the whole matter shall consume
Let them my God go out with a perfume.
Our Savior crucified between two Thieves.
(1.)
LOrd from this stock mixed with a Graft unfit
what fruit escapes?
When we may equally gather from it
Thistles and Grapes.
(2.)
That people thee did a deceiver call,
thee so esteems,
No ever Virtue had among them all,
like these extremes.
(3.)
Thou the great Judge of Heaven and Earth do one
sad cross divide,
With malefactors ill disposed on
thy either side.
(4.)
Yet here thou do thy fearful day begin
and parted stand
The Goat and Sheep with the same space between,
thy either hand.
Prayers, First for the Morning.
(1.)
THe Morn her Rubie-studded Reins
now shakes on her Rathe horses mains
And with a dawne of Rosey light
does blush away the shades of night.
(2.)
Lord! let the influxe of thy grace
so through my dark breasts display,
And (by insinuation) chase
the sin-contracted night away.
(2.) For Noon
(1.)
THe Sun now to his hight aspires,
and throws East and West his fires:
The awakn'd spice perceives his shine,
and the warm bowels of the Mine.
(2.)
Lord, now inflame us with thy Love,
and let it with a vigor rise:
Until it glow and spread above
the unequal of whatever skies.
(3.) For Evening.
(1.)
NOw poasts the Conscientious day,
all Red with Modesty away
And hastes to hide her bashful light
in the foul bosom of the night.
(2.)
Lord! though the Tapers of the day
thus by succession find their Urn,
Let ours no such weak Laws obey,
but still (unintermitted) burn.
The good Thief.
(1.)
SO more than in the edge of Evening, who
e're had the days whole hire but you?
Th^^ unto Rapine did (accustomed) watch,
and thy salvation snatch:
or the third Heavens caught
Thee up (from thy example) taught:
(2.)
What a compendium thou do make of bliss?
yet do complete repentance too;
And not a cold and barren Faith thine is,
but it does likewise do,
thou plead'st the Lord's defense
Strange Orator of innocence!
The Viper on the hand of Saint Paul.
THat Viper once accursed leapt with intent,
(From his hot bed) but to die innocent,
And having kissed Paul's hand quite overcome,
Dropped to his Flames, and suffered Martyrdom,
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. line 8. read is. p. 5. l. 2. r. to p. 5. l. 3. r. there. p. 9. l. 9.
r. retain't. p 12. l. 21. r. brings. p. 13. l. 17. r. useless p. 18. l. 3. r.
eye-beams. p. 8. l. 14. r. Diadems p. 18. l. 16. r. dress. p. 21. l. 22. r. own
p. 24. l. 21^. twitt'ring. p. 25 l. penult. dele by. p. 26. l. 13. r.
reluctance. p. 26. l. 27. r. where. p. 27. l. ^ r. sight. p. 28. l. 7. r
variety. p. 30. l. 8. r. a rising. p. 31. l. 24. r. precipice p. 34. l. 24. r.
heir. p. 37. l. 27. r. stur. p. 40. l. 10. dele a. p. 40. l. 25. r. learns. p.
44. l. 7. r. resolved. l 31. r. his. p. 44. l. before the antepenult whatever.
p 45 l 9. r. terribly. p. 46. l. 1. r. thought. p 48. l. 29. r. it dimmer. v.
ult. r. ever. p. 58. l. 2. r. wont. p. 66. l. ult. r. my. p. 69. l. 5. r. burn.
p. 42. l. 7. r. sealed. p. 77. l. 33. r. lambent. p. 76. l. 6. r. believe. 119
l. before antepenult. r. mount's.

THE FIRST TABLE.
THe Centaure. Page 1. Ode. Hastening his friend into the country. Page 4. To
His honored Friend Colonel R L. on his second failing. Page 6. To a Lady
becommingly Reserved. Page 6. A Dial eaten with antiquity. Page 10. On the old
Tomb keeper, that shows the Monuments in Westminster Abbey. Page 11. His
imprisonment in the spring. Page 12. On the burning some locks of a
Gentlewonans hair. Page 13. The Daisie. Page 14. Adonis slain. Page 15.
Barn-Elms. Page 16. Upon a Gentlewoman caught in a shower of Hayle. Page 17. On
the death of a Canary-bird killed with the fall of a Cage. Page 19. To Doctor
T.F. on his game at Chesse. Page 20. Her suspicion. ibid. An old woman weeping.
Page 23. The Hectors. Page 24. An Epithalamium. ibid. On the sight of a Lady'
walking in an evening in white Sarcenet. Page 27. To his ingenious friend Mr.
Maes; drawing the flowers in their successive growth. Page 28. The Land-skip
between two Hills. Page 30. Narcissus. Page 33. Lib. 3. Ode 3. Horat. ibid. To
my Honored friend Coll. Richard Lovelace. Page 34. Ode. Page 36. A Lady
foiled. ibid. The Nymph. Page 38. Epigram. ibid. Astrea recalled Page 39.
Lazar. ibid. Phantomachia or the Goblin. Page 40. An Elogie sacred to the
memory of my late honored friend, Coll. Richard Lovelace, Page 46. Ode to
Chloris forsworn. Page 50. The Net. Page 51. To Batavus. Page 52. Ode. Page 53.
To his Noble Friend J. R. The Prison. Page 54. Ode. Page 56. Pentadii
Epigramma. ibid. To her taxing him for late writing to her. Page 57. Giganto
machia. Page 58. The Toothache. Page 59. Mart. lib. Epigram. 48. Page 60. The
Mute Dialogue. ibid. In Amicitias. Page 61. Ode. Page 62. Ode to the Prisoner.
ibid. A new years gift. Page 63. The fair Nymph scorning a black boy courting
her. Page 65. The Inversion. ibid. Ode. Page 68. A Prologue to a Play presented
by some Gentlemen to a select company of Ladies. Page 69. To his friend. Page
70. The Siren. ibid. Amarantha. Page 73. Charles the Fifth soleminizing his own
Funerals. Page 76. Ode to Coelia blushing. Page 79. To Captain D. L. on his
book of Fortification and Geometry. Page 81. Ode. Page 88. To a Lady with black
hair. Page 83. Ode to Lycoris not to curle her hair. Page 84. On Mr. Gamble's
composing Mr. Stanly's Odes. Page 85. The Phoenix. Page 86. Lycoris sleeping.
Page 91. One enamored on a Black-moor. Page 92e A black Nymph scorning a fair
boy Courting her. Page 94. On Mr. J. H. His translation of Hierocles Comment on
the verses of Pythagoras. Page 96. A blush. Page 97. Tabularium. ibid. Ode. The
Rosary. Page 98. Ode for Winter. Page 100. Ode. Page 101. Ode. Page 102. A
Frost. Page 103. The year Page 104. Spring. ibid. Summer. Page 106. Autumn.
Page 107. Winter Page 108.
The Second TABLE.
JOHN lying on the bosom of our Savior. Page 113 Hezechias recovery, Page
114. The Ethiopian Baptized. Page 114. Christ washing Juda's feet. Page 115. A
penitential Hymn. Page 116 Mari's Ointment. Page 116 Judgment. Page 118. All
these have I kept from my youth upward. Page 119. On the death of a child in
the month. ibid. Mortal Man. Page 120. Man's Insensibilitie. ibid. Zaccheus
called. ibid. Caesar's Tribute. Page 121. Christ and the Disciples in a storm.
ibid. Death. Page 123. Our Savior cradled in the manger. ibid. Adam hiding
himself among the Trees of the Garden. Page 124. Jesus wept. Page 125. The
water made wine. ibid. O^^ Savior scourged, clothed with Purple Cround with
Thorus. Page 126. Lazarus, raised by our Savior, after four days lying in
the Grave. Page 127. Jesus cating, John fasting. Page 128. To the Angel,
bringing news of our Saviors Nativitie. ibid. Christ walking on the Sea. Page
130. Christ in his-Baptism. Page 131. Dives's drop. Page 132. The Crown of
Thorns on our Saviors head. ibid. The Tear. Page 133. Paul called. Page 134.
Pilate washing his hands. ibid. Peter walking on the water at our Saviors
call. Page 135. Lazarus and Dives. ibid. To the sluggard. Page 136.
Mortification. ibid. Ascension day. Page 137. Affliction. Page 138. Our Savior
circumcised. Page 139. Ten Lepers clens'd, one returning thanks. Page 140.
Conscience. ibid. Paul's Conversion. Page 141. Prayer. ibid. The hinderannce.
Page 142. Christmas day. Page 144. Confession. Page 145. The Rose. Page 147. On
some leaves of the Holy Bible bound in on either side of a Book of Humanity.
Page 148. Innocents day. ibid. Nature. Page 149. The Jews attempting to stone
Christ. ibid. The good thief. Page 150. Christ naked and wounded on the Cross.
ibid. The Mites. Page 151. The Prodigal. ibid. The Sepulcher. Page 151. Pride.
Page 152. The Gadarens desiring Christ to leave their borders. Page 152.
Affliction. ibid. The Soul a flower. Page 154. Patience. ibid. Meditation. Page
155. Tears. Page 156. Jacobs Vision at Bethel. Page 157. The Taper. Page 159.
Christ crucified between two thieves. Page 160. Prayers for Morning. Page 161.
For Noon. Page 162. For Evening. Page 163. The good Theif, Page 164. The Viper
on the hand of Saint Paul. Page 165.
FINIS.

