The Second BOOK Of the WORKS of Mr. FRANCIS RABELAIS, DOCTOR IN Physic:
Treating of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the good PANTAGRUEL.

Written Originally in the FRENCH TONGUE, And now faithfully Translated into
ENGLISH. By S. T. U. C.

(...),

Mean, speak, and do well.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baddeley, within the middle Temple-gate. 1653.

(...)company of just that number; and that therefore the charging of the whole
Impression with it, is merely to be imputed to the negligence of the
Presse-men, who receiving it about the latter end of the night, were so eager
before the next morning to afford complete books, that as they began, they went
on, without animadverting what was recommended to their discretion: This is
hoped will suffice to assure the ingenuous Reader, that in no Treatise of the
Translators, (whether Original or Translatitious) shall willingly be offered
the meanest rub to the reputation of any worthy Gentleman, and that however
Providence dispose of him, no misfortune shall be able to induce his mind to
any complacency in the disparagement of another.

Again.

The Pentateuch of Rabelais, mentioned in the title page of the first book of
this Translation, being written Originally in the French Tongue, (as it
comprehends some of its bruskest dialects,) with so much ingeniositie, and
wit, that more impressions have been sold thereof in that language, then of any
other book, that has been set forth at any time, within these fifteen hundred
years: so difficult nevertheless to be turned into any other speech, that
many prime spirits in most of the Nations of Europe, since the year 1573.
(which was fourscore years ago) after having attempted it, were constrained
(with no small regret) to give it over, as a thing impossible to be done, is
now in its Translation thus far advanced, and the remainder faithfully
undertaken with the same hand to be rendered into English by a Person of
quality, who (though his lands be sequestered, his house garrisoned, his other
goods sold, and himself detained a Prisoner of war at London, for his having
been at Worcester fight) has, at the most earnest entreaty of some of his
especial friends, well acquainted with his inclination to the performance of
conducible singularities promised, besides his version of these two already
published, very speedily to offer up unto this Isle of Britain, the virginity
of the Translation of the other three most admirable books of the aforesaid
Author; provided that by the plurality of judicious and understanding men it be
not declared, he has already proceeded too far, or that the continuation of
the rigor whereby he is dispossessed of all his both real and personal estate,
by pressing too hard upon him, be not an impediment thereto, and to other more
eminent undertakings of his, as has been oftentimes very fully mentioned by
the said Translatour, in several original Treatises of his own penning, lately
by him so numerously dispersed, that there is scarce any, who being skilful in
the English Idiome, or curious of any new ingenious invention, has not either
read them, or heard of them.

The ERRATAES of the First Book.
Upon the margin of the first eight verses. IXLX GPX

PAge 13. line 11. for pray read pray'y p. 26. marg. for fermele r. fermee. p.
36. l. 22. for monocorsing r. monocordifing* p. 37. l. 19. for Seamsters r.
Seamstresses. p. 46. l. 16. for borne r. carried. p. 15. l. 25. for arswerfie
r. arsiversie. p. 79. l. 18. for hoparymated r. hopurymated. p. 90. l. 29. for
pursley r. parsley. p. 92. l. 5. for kiriele r. kiriels. p. 107. l. 28. for
sore r. fore. p. 113. l. 21. for charantou r. charantou. p. 123. l. 5. for
Suedevede r. gue de vede. p. 123. l. 16. for stussed r. stuffed. p. 127. l. 5.
for blade r. blades. p. 149. l. 24. for entrance r. entrance there. p. 157. l.
19. for marousle r. maroufle. p. 159. l. 7. for feet r. foot. p. 161. l. 25.
for in ran him r. ran him in. p. 176 l. 9. for elder tree r. alder-tree. p.
177. l. 21. for mae, vi r. ma vie. p. 184. l. 22. for ough r. cough. p. 186. l.
19. for sable. r. shable. p. 192. l. 8. for five r. six. p. 196. l. 18. for
vertebrae r. verteber. p. 200. l. 15. for five r. six. p. 201. l. 2. for argy.
and r. Argy, this of St. Nazarand p. 224. l 16. for gnaw r. grow. p. 242. l. 9.
for sparrow-hawks r. sparhawks. p. 251. l. 20. for they r they will. p. 253. l.
15. for lest r lost.

The EKRATA of the Second Book.
PAge 4 of the Prologue. line 17. for roll-book r. jollie book. p. 2. l. 19.
for their regular r. the irregular. p 18. l. 3. for be the r. be they. p. 26.
l. 31 for bury r. burn p 49. l. 14. for bumsquicbracker. r. bumsquibcraker. p.
77. l. 27. for thirst r. thrust. p. 80. l. 22. for patains r. patins.

Mr. HUGH SALEL TO Rabelais.
IF profit mixed with pleasure may suffice,
T'extoll an Authors worth above the skies,
Thou certainly for both must praised be:
I know it; for thy judgment has in the
Contexture of this book set down such high
Contentments, mingled with utility:
That (as I think) I see Democritus
Laughing at men as things ridiculous:
Insist in thy design; for though we prove
Ungrate on earth, thy merit is above.
THE AUTHORS Prologue.
MOst Illustrious and thrice valourous Champions, Gentlemen and others, who
willingly apply your minds to the entertainment of pretty conceits, and honest
harmless knacks of wit: You have not long ago seen, read and understood the
great and inestimable Chronicle of the huge and mighty Giant Gargantua, and
like upright Faithfullists, have firmly believed all to be true that is
contained in them, and have very often past your time with them, amongst
Honorable Ladies and Gentlewomen, telling them fair long stories, when you
were out of all other talk, for which you are worthy of great praise and
sempiternal memory: and I do heartily wish that every man would lay aside his
own business, meddle no more with his Profession nor Trade, and throw all
affairs concerning himself behind his back, to attend this wholly, without
distracting or troubling his mind with any thing else, until he have learned
them without book; that if by chance the Art of printing should cease, or in
case that in time to come all books should perish, every man might truly teach
them unto his children, and deliver them over to his successors and survivors
from hand to hand, as a religious Cabal; for there is in it more profit, then a
rabble of great pockie Loggerheads are able to discern, who surely understand
far less in these little merriments, then the fool Raclet did in the
institutions of Justinian.

I have known great and mighty Lords, and of those not a few, who going a
Deer-hunting, or a hawking after wild Ducks, when the chase had not encountered
with the blinks, that were cast in her way to retard her course, or that the
Hawk did but plain and smoothly fly without moving her wings, perceiving the
prey by force of flight to have gained bounds of her, have been much chafed and
vexed, as you understand well enough; but the comfort unto which they had
refuge, and that they might not take cold, was to relate the inestimable deeds
of the said Gargantua. There are others in the world, (These are no flimflam
stories, nor tales of a tub) who being much troubled with the toothache, after
they had spent their goods upon Physicians, without receiving at all any ease
of their pain, have found no more ready remedy, then to put the said Chronicles
betwixt two pieces of linen cloth made somewhat hot, and so apply them to the
place that smarteth, synapising them with a little powder of projection,
otherwise called doribus.

But what shall I say of those poor men, that are plagued with the Pox and the
Gowt? O how often have we seen them, even immediately after they were anointed
and thoroughly greased, till their faces did glister like the Keyhole of a
powdering tub, their teeth dance like the jacks of a pair of little Organs or
Virginals, when they are played upon, and that they foamed from their very
throats like a boar, which the Mongrel Mastiffe-hounds have driven in, and
overthrown amongst the foyles: what did they then? All their consolation was to
have some page of the said Roll-book read unto them: and we have seen those who
have given themselves to a hundred punchions of old devils, in case that they
did not feel a manifest ease and asswagement of pain, at the hearing of the
said book read, even when they were kept in a purgatory of torment; no more nor
less then women in travel use to find their sorrow abated, when the life of
St. Margarite is read unto them: is this nothing? find me a book in any
language, in any faculty or science whatsoever, that has such virtues,
properties and prerogatives, and I will be content to pay you a quart of
tripes. No, my Masters, no, it is peerlesse, incomparable, and not to be
matched; and this am I resolved for ever to maintain even unto the fire
exclusive. And those that will pertinaciously hold the contrary opinion, let
them be accounted Abusers, Predestinators, Impostors and Seducers of the
People; it is very true, that there are found in some gallant and stately
books, worthy of high estimation, certain occult and hid properties; in the
number of which are reckoned Whippot, Orlando furioso, Robert the devil,
Fierabras, William without fear, Huon of Bourdeaux, Monteville, and Matabrune:
but they are not comparable to that which we speak of; and the world has well
known by infallible experience, the great emolument and utility which it has
received by this Gargantuine Chronicle; for the Printers have sold more of them
in two months time, then there will be bought of Bibles in nine years.

I therefore (your humble slave) being very willing to increase your solace and
recreation yet a little more, do offer you for a Present another book of the
same stamp, only that it is a little more reasonable and worthy of credit then
the other was; for think not, (unless you wilfully will err against your
knowledge) that I speak of it as the Jews do of the Law; I was not born under
such a Planet, neither did it ever befall me to lie, or affirm a thing for
true that was not: I speak of it like a lusty frolic Onocratal is a bird u^t
much unlike a Swan, which sings like an Ass^s^^raying. Crotenotai^e ^r notai^e
crotte croquenotaire or notaire croque are ^^t (...) in (...) of P^otonota^re,
w^^ch (...) a Pregnotarie.
Onocrotarie, I should say Onocratal is a bird u^t much unlike a Swan, which
sings like an Ass^s^^raying. Crotenotai^e ^r notai^e crotte croquenotaire or
notaire croque are ^^t (...) in (...) of P^otonota^re, w^^ch (...) a
Pregnotarie.
Crotenotarie, of the martyrifed Lovers and Croquenotarie of love: ^uod
vidimus, testamur. It is of the horrible and dreadful feats and prowesses of
Pantagruel whose menial servant I have been ever since ^ was a page till this
hour, that by his leave I am permitted to visit my Cow-countrey, and to know
if any of my Kindred there be alive.

And therefore to make an end of this Prologue, even as I give my self to an
hundred Pannier-fulls of fair devils, body and soul* tripes and guts, in case
that I lie so much at one single word in this whole History: After the like
manner, St. Anthonies fire burn you* Mahooms disease w^^^ ^e you* the squinan^
with a sti^ch i^ your side, and the Wolf in you^ stomach trusse you, the
bloody flux seize upon you, the cursed sharp inflammation of wild fire as
slender and thin as Cow hair, strengthened with quick silver, enter into your
fundament^ and like those of Sodom and Gomorrha, may you fall into sulphur,
fire and bottomless pits in case you do not firmly believe all that I shall
relate unto you in this present Chronicle.

The Second Book of RABELAIS, Treating of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the
good PANTAGRUEL.
CHAP. I. Of the Original and Antiquity of the great Pantagruel.
IT will not be an idle nor unprofitable thing, seeing we are at leisure to put
you in mind of the Fountain and Original Source, whence is derived unto us the
good Pantagruel; for I see that all good Historiographers have thus handled
their Chronicle; not only the Arabians, Barbarians and Latins; but also the
gentle Greeks, who were eternal drinkers. You must therefore remark, that at
the beginning of the world, (I speak of a long time, it is above forty
quarantaines, or forty times forty nights, according to the supputation of
the ancient Druids) a little after that Abel was killed by his brother Cain,
the earth imbrued with the blood of the just, was one year so exceeding fertile
in all those fruits which it usually produces to us, and especially in
Medlars, that ever since, throughout all ages it has been called the year of
the great medlars, for three of them did fill a bushel: in it the Calends were
found by the Grecian Almanacks, there was that year nothing of the month of
March in the time of Lent, and the middle of August was in May: in the month
of October, as I take it, or at least September, (that I may not err; for I
will carefully take heed of that) was the week so famous in the Annals, which
they call the week of the three Thursdayes; for it had three of them by means
of their regular Leap-yeares, (called Bissextils) occasioned by the Suns
having tripped and stumbled a little toward the left hand, like a debtor
afraid of Sergeants coming right upon him to arrest him: and the Moon varied
from her course above five fathom, and there was manifestly seen the motion of
trepidation in the firmament of the fixed stars, called Aplanes, so that the
middle Pleiade leaving her fellows, declined toward the Equinoctial, and the
star named Spica, left the constellation of the Virgin to withdraw her self
toward the balance known by the name of Libra, which are cases very terrible,
and matters so hard and difficult, that Astrologians cannot set their teeth in
them; and indeed their teeth had been pretty long if they could have reached
thither.

However account you it for a truth, that every body then did most heartily eat
of those medlars, for they were fair to the eye, and in taste delicious: but
even as Noah that holy man, (to whom we are so much beholding, bound and
obliged, for that he planted to us the Vine, from whence we have that
nectarian, delicious, precious, heavenly, joyful and deifick liquour, which
they call the piot or tiplage) was deceived in the drinking of it, for he was
ignorant of the great virtue and power thereof: so likewise the men and women
of that time did delight much in the eating of that fair great fruit, but
diverse and very different accidents did ensue thereupon; for there fell upon
them all in their bodies a most terrible swelling, but not upon all in the same
place, for some were swollen in the belly, and their belly strouted out big
like a great tun, of whom it is written ventrem omnipotentem, who were all very
honest men, and merry blades: and of this race came St. Fatgulch and
Shrovetuesday; Others did swell Pa^^^rt ma^dig. ^^
at the shoulders, who in that place were so crump and knobbie; that they were
therefore called Montifers, (which is as much to say as Hill-carriers,) of whom
you see some yet in the world of diverse sexes and degrees: of this race came
Aesop, some of whose excellent words and deeds you have in writing: some other
puffes did swell in length by the member, which they call the Labourer of
nature, in such sort that it grew mavelous long, fat, great, lusty, stirring
and Crestrisen, in the Antic fashion, so that they made use of it as of a
girdle, winding it five or six times about their waste: but if it happened the
foresaid member to be in good case, spooming with a full sail, bunt fair
before the wind, then to have seen those strouting Champions, you would have
taken them for men that had their lances settled on their Rest, to run at the
ring or tilting whintam: of these believe me the race is utterly lost and quite
extinct, as the women say; for they do lament continually, that there are none
extant now of those great, etc. you know the rest of the song. Others did grow
in matter of ballocks so enormously, that three of them would well fill a sack,
able to contain five quarters of wheat, from them are descended the ballocks of
Lorraine, which never dwell in Codpieces, but fall down to the bottom of the
breeches. Others grew in the legs, and to see them, you would have said they
had been Cranes, or the reddish long-bill'dstork-lik't-scrank-legged
sea-fowles, called Flamans, or else men walking upon stilts or scatches: the
little Grammar school-boyes (known by the name of Grimos,) called those
leg-grown slangams Iambus, in allusion to the French word Iambe, which
signifies a leg. In others, their nose did grow so, that it seemed to be the
beak of a Limbeck, in every part thereof most variously diapred with the
twinkling sparkles of Crimson-blisters budding forth, and purpled with pimples
all enameled with thick-set wheales of a sanguine color, bordered with
queules, and such have you seen the Chanon, or Prebend Panzoul, and Woodenfoot
the Physician of Angiers: of which race there were few that liked the Ptisane,
but all of them were perfect lovers of the pure septembral juice; Naso and Ovid
had their extraction from thence, and all those of whom it is written, Ne
reminiscaris. Others grew in ears, which they had so big, that out of one
would have been stuff enough got, to make a doublet, a pair of breeches and a
jacket, whilst with the other they might have covered themselves as with a
Spanish Cloak: and they say, that in Bourbonois this race remains yet. Others
grew in length of body, and of those came the Giants, and of them Pantagruel.

And the first was Chalbroth

who begat Sarabro^h

who begat Faribroth

who begat Hurtali, that was a brave eater of pottage, and reigned in the time
of the flood.

who begat Nembroth

who begat Atlas, that with his shoulders kept the sky from falling.

who begat Goliath

who begat Erix, that invented the Hocus pocus plays of Legerdemain.

who begat Titius

who begat Eryon

who begat Polyphemus

who begat Cacos

who begat Etion, the first man that ever had the pox, for not drinking fresh
in Summer, as Bartachin witnesses.

who begat Enceladus

who begat Ceus

who begat Tiphaeus

who begat Alaeus

who begat Othus

who begat Aegeon

who begat Briareus that had a hundred hands*

who begat Porphyrio

who begat Adamastor

who begat Anteus

who begat Agatho

Who begat Porus, against whom fought Alexander the great.

who begat Aranthas

who begat Cabbara, that was the first inventor of the drinking of healths.

who begat Goliath of Secondille

who begat Offot, that was terribly well nosed for drinking at the barrel-head.

who begat Artachaeus

who begat Oromedon

who begat Gemmagog, the first inventor of Poulan shoes, which are open on the
foot, and tied over the instep with a latchet.

who begat Sisyphus,

who begat the Titans, of whom Hercules was born.

who begat Enay, the most skilful man that ever was, in matter of taking the
little worms (called Cirons) out of the hands.

who begat Fierabras, that was vanquished by Oliver Peer of France, and
Rowlands Camrade.

who begat Morgan, the first in the world that played at dice with spectacles.

who begat Fracassus, of whom Merlin Coccaius has written, and of him was
borne Ferragus.

who begat Hapmouche, the first that ever invented the drying of neats tongues
in the Chimney; for before that, people salted them, as they do now gammons of
bacon.

who begat Bolivora^

who begat Longis

who begat Gayoffo, whose ballocks were of poplar, and his pr... of the servise
or sorbapple-tree.

who begat Maschefain

who begat Bruslefer

who begat Angoulevent

who begat Galehant the inventor of flaggons.

who begat Mirelangant

who begat Gallaffre

who begat Salourdin

who begat Roboast

who begat Sortibrant of Conimbres.

who begat Brusbant of Mommiere

who begat Bruyer that was overcome by Ogier the Dane Peer of France.

who begat Mabrun

who begat Foutasnon

who begat Haquelebas

who begat Vitdegrain

who begat Grangousier

who begat Gargantua

who begat the noble Pantagruel my Master.

I know that reading this passage, you will make a doubt within your selves,
and that grounded upon very good reason: which is this, how it is possible that
this relation can be true, seeing at the time of the flood all the world was
destroyed, except Noah, and seven persons more with him in the Ark, into whose
number Hurtali is not admitted; doubtless the demand is well made, and very
apparent, but the answer shall satisfy you, or my wit is not rightly caulked:
and because I was not at that time to tell you any thing of my own fancy, I
will bring unto you the authority of the Massorets, good honest fellows, true
ballokeering blades, and exact Hebraical bagpipers, who affirm that verily the
said Hurtali was not within the Ark of Noah, (neither could he getin, for he
was too big) but he sat astride upon it, with one leg on the one side, and
another on the other, as little children use to do upon their wooden horses: or
as the great Bull of Berne, which was killed at Marinian, did ride for his
Hackney the great murdering piece called the Canoneprrier, a pretty blast of a
fair and pleasant amble without all question.

In that posture, he after God, saved the said Ark from danger, for with his
legs he gave it the brangle that was needful, and with his foot turned it
whither he pleased, as a ship answers her rudder. Those that were within sent
him up victuals in abundance by a Chimney, as people very thankfully
acknowledging the good that he did them; And sometimes they did talk together
as Varomenippus did to Jupiter, according to the report of Lucian. Have you
understood all this well? drink then one good draught without water; for if you
believe it not: no truly do I not, quoth she.

CHAP. II. Of the Nativity of the most dread and redoubted Pantagruel.
GArgantua at the age of four hundred, fourscore forty and four years
begat his son Pantagruel, upon his wife named Badebec, daughter to the King
of the Amaurots in Utopia, who died in childe-birth, for he was so wonderfully
great and lumpish, that he could not possibly come forth into the light of the
world, without thus suffocating his mother. But that we may fully understand
the cause and reason of the name of Pantagruel, which at his Baptism was given
him, you are to remark, that in that year there was so great drought over all
the country of Afric, that there past thirty and six months, three weeks,
four days, thirteen hours, and a little more without rain, but with a heat
so vehement, that the whole earth was parched and withered by it: neither was
it more scorched and dried up with heat in the days of Eliah, then it was at
that time; for there was not a tree to be seen, that had either leaf or bloom
upon it: the grass was without verdure or greenness, the rivers were drained,
the fountains dried up, the poor fishes abandoned and forsaken by their
proper element, wandering and crying upon the ground most horribly: the birds
did fall down from the air for want of moisture and dew, wherewith to refresh
them: the wolves, foxes, hearts, wild-boares, fallow-deer, hares, coneys,
weesils, brocks, badgers, and other such beasts were found dead in the fields
with their mouths open; in respect of men, there was the pity, you should have
seen them lay out their tongues like hares that have been run six hours: many
did throw themselves into the wells: others entered within a Cowes belly to be
in the shade; those Homer calls Alibants: all the Country was idle, and could
do no virtue: it was a most lamentable case to have seen the labor of mortals
in defending themselves from the vehemency of this horrifick drought; for they
had work enough to do to save the holy water in the Churches from being wasted;
but there was such order taken by the counsel of my Lords the Cardinals, and of
our holy Father, that none did dare to take above one lick: yet when any one
came into the Church, you should have seen above twenty poor thirsty fellows
hang upon him that was the distributer of the water, and that with a wide open
throat, gaping for some little drop, (like the rich glutton in Luke,) that
might fall by, lest any thing should be lost. O how happy was he in that year,
who had a cool Cellar under ground, well plenished with fresh wine!

The Philosopher reports in moving the question, wherefore it is that the
seawater is salt? that at the time when Phoebus gave the government of his
resplendent chariot to his son Phaeton, the said Phaeton, unskilful in the
Art, and not knowing how to keep the ecliptic line betwixt the two tropicks of
the latitude of the Suns course, strayed out of his way, and came so near the
earth, that he dried up all the Countries that were under it, burning a great
part of the Heavens, which the Philosophers call via lactea, and the
Huffsnuffs, St. James his way, although the most coped, lofty, and high-crested
Poets affirm that to be the place where Juno's milk fell, when she gave suck
to Hercules.

The earth at that time was so excessively heated, that it fell into an
enormous sweat yea such a one as made it sweat out the sea which is therefore
salt, because all sweat i^ salt; and this you cannot but confess to b^ true,
if you will taste of your own, or of those that have the pox, when they are put
into ^ sweating, it is all one to me. Just such an^ other case fell out this
same year: for one certain Friday, when the whole people were bent upon their
devotions, and had made goodly Processions, with store of Letanies, and fair
preachings, and beseechings of God Almighty, to look down with his eye of mercy
upon their miserable and disconsolate condition, there was even then visibly
seen issue out of the ground great drops of water, such as fall from a
puff-bagg'd man in a top sweat; and the poor Hoydons began to rejoice, as if
it had been a thing very profitable unto them; for some said that there was not
one drop of moisture in the air, whence they might have any rain, and that the
earth did supply the default of that. Other learned men said, that it was a
shower of the Antipodes, as Seneca says in his fourth book Quaestionum
naturalium, speaking of the source and spring of Nilus: but they were deceived,
for the Procession being ended, when every one went about to gather of this
dew, and to drink of it with full bowls; they found that it was nothing but
pickle, and the very brine of salt, more brackish in taste then the saltest
water of the sea: and because in that very day Pantagruel was borne, his father
gave him that name; for panta in Greek is as much to say as all, and Gruel in
the Hagarene language does signify thirsty; inferring hereby, that at his
birth the whole world was a dry and thirsty, as likewise foreseeing that he,
would be some day Suprem Lord, and Sovereign of the thirsty Ethrappels, which
was shown to him at that very same hour by a more evident sign; for when his
mother Badebec was in the bringing of him forth, and that the Midwives did wait
to receive him: there came first out of her belly threescore and eight
Tregeneers (that is, Salt-sellers,) every one of them leading in a Halter a
Mule heavy laden with salt: after whom issued forth nine Dromedaries, with
great loads of gammons of bacon, and dried neats tongues on their backs: then
followed seven Camels loaded with links and chitterlins, Hogs puddings and
salciges: after them came out five great waines, full of leeks, garlic, onions
and chibols, drawn with five and thirty strong Cart-horses, which was six for
every one, besides the Thiller. At the sight hereoi the said Midwives were much
amazed; yet some of them said, Lo, here is good provision, and indeed we need
it; for we drink but lazily, as if our tongues walked on crutches, and not
lustily like Lansman duchess: truly this is a good sign, there is nothing here
but what is fit for us, these are the spurs of wine that set it a going. As
they were tatling thus together after their own manner of chat, behold, out
comes Pantagruel all hairie like a Bear, whereupon one of them inspired with a
prophetical Spirit, said, This will be a terrible fellow, he is borne with all
his hair, he is undoubtedly to do wonderful things; and if he live, he shall
have age.

CHAP. III. Of the grief wherewith Gargantua was moved at the decease of his
wife Badebec.
WHen Pantagruel was borne, there was none more astonished and perplexed then
was his father Gargantua; for of the one side, seeing his wife Badebec dead,
and on the other side his son Pantagruel born, so fair and so great, he knew
not what to say nor what to do: and the doubt that troubled his brain, was to
know whether he should cry for the death of his wife, or laugh for the joy of
his son: he was hinc inde choked with sophistical arguments, for he framed
them very well in modo and figura, but he could not resolve them, remaining
pestered and entangled by this means, like a mouse caught in a trap, or kite
snared in a ginne: Shall I weep (said he?) Yes, for why? my so good wife is
dead, who was the most this, the most that, that ever was in the world: never
shall I see her, never shall I recover such another, it is unto me an
inestimable loss! O my good God, what had I done that thou should thus
punish me? why did thou not take me away before her? seeing for me to live
without her is but to languish. Ah Badebec, Badebec, my minion, my dear heart,
my sugar, my sweeting, my honey, my little C... (yet it had in circumference
full six acres, three rods, five poles, four yards, two foot, one inche and a
half of good woodland measure) my tender peggie, my Codpiece darling, my bob
and hit, my slipshoe-lovie, never shall I see thee! Ah, poor Pantagruel, thou
have lost thy good mother, thy sweet nurse, thy well-beloved Lady! O false
death, how injurious and despightful have thou been to me? how malicious and
outrageous have I found thee? in taking her from me, my wellbeloved wife, to
whom immortality did of right belong. With these words he did cry like a Cow,
but on a sudden fell a laughing like a Calfe, when Pantagruel came into his
mind: Ha, my little son, (said he) my childilollie, fedlifondie,
dandlichuckie, my ballockie, my pretty rogue; O how jollie thou art, and how
much am I bound to my gracious God, that has been pleased to bestow on me a
son, so fair, so spriteful, so lively, so smiling, so pleasant, and so
gentle. Ho, ho, ho, ho, how glad I am? Let us drink, ho; and put away
melancholy: bring of the best; rense the glasses, lay the cloth, drive out
these dogs, blow this fire, light candles, shut that door there, cut this bread
in sippers for brewis, send away these poor folks in giving them what they
ask, hold my gown, I will strip my self into my doublet, ( en cuerpo) to make
the Gossips merry, and keep them company.

As he spoke this, he heard the Letanies and the memento's of the Priests that
carried his wife to be buried, upon which he left the good purpose he was in,
and was suddenly ravished another way, saying, Lord God, must I again contrist
my self? this grieves me; I am no longer young, I grow old, the weather is
dangerous; I may perhaps take an ague, then shall I be foiled, if not quite
undone; by the faith of a Gentleman, it were better to cry less, and drink
more.

My wife is dead, well, by G- ( da jurandi) I shall not raise her again by my
crying: she is well, she is in Paradise at least, if she be no higher: she
prays to God for us, she is happy, she is above the sense of our miseries,
nor can our calamities reach her: what though she be dead, must not we also
die? the same debt which she has paid, hangs over our heads; nature will
require it of us, and we must all of us some day taste of the same sauce: let
her pass then, and the Lord preserve the Survivors; for I must now cast about
how to get another wife. But I will tell you what you shall do, (said he) to
the Midwives in France called wise women (Where be the good folks? I cannot see
them,) go you to my wives interrement, and I will the while rock my son: for
I find my self somewhat altered and distempered, and should otherwise be in
danger of falling sick: but drink one good draught first, you will be the
better for it; and beleeeve me upon mine honor, they at his request went to
her burial and funeral obsequies: in the mean while, poor Gargantua staying at
home, and willing to have somewhat in remembrance of her to be engraven upon
her tomb, made this Epitaph in the manner as follows.

Dead is the noble Badebec,
Who had a face like a Rebeck;
A Spanish body, and a belly
Of Swisserland, she died, I tell ye,
In childe-birth: pray to God, that her
He pardon wherein she did err.
Here lies her body, which did live
Free from all vice, as I believe;
And did decease at my bedside,
The year and day in which she died.
CHAP. IV. Of the Infancy of Pantagruel.
I Find by the ancient Historiographers and Poets, that diverse have been borne
in this world, after very strange manners, which would be too long to repeat;
read therefore the seventh chapter of Pliny, if you have so much leisure: yet
have you never heard of any so wonderful as that of Pantagruel; for it is a
very difficult matter to believe, how in the little time he was in his mothers
belly, he grew both in body and strength. That which Hercules did, was nothing,
when in his Cradle he slew two serpents; for those serpents were but little and
weak: but Pantagruel being yet in the Cradle, did far more admirable things,
and more to be amazed at. I pass by here the relation of how at every one of
his meals he supped up the milk of four thousand and six hundred Cowes: and
how to make him a skellet to boil his milk in, there were set a work all the
Brasiers of Somure in Anjou, of Villedieu in Normandy, and of Bramont in
Lorraine: and they served in this whitepot-meat to him in a huge great Bell,
which is yet to be seen in the City of Bourge in Berrie, near the Palace; but
his teeth were already so well grown, and so strengthened in vigor, that of
the said Bell he bit off a great morsel, as very plainly does appear till this
hour.

One day in the morning, when they would have made him suck one of his Cows,
(for he never had any other Nurse, as the History tells us) he got one of his
arms loose from the swaddling bands, wherewith he was kept fast in the Cradle,
laid hold on the said Cow under the left fore hamme, and grasping her to him,
ate up her udder and half of her paunch, with the liver and the kidneys, and
had devoured all up, if she had not cried out most horribly, as if the wolves
had held her by the legs, at which noise company came in, and took away the
said Cow from Pantagruel; yet could they not so well do it, but that the
quarter whereby he caught her was left in his hand, of which quarter he gulp't
up the flesh in a trice, even with as much ease as you would eat a salcige;
and that so greedily with desire of more, that when they would have taken away
the bone from him, he swallowed it down whole, as a Cormorant would do a little
fish; and afterward began fumblingly to say, Good, good, good, for he could
not yet speak plain; giving them to understand thereby, that he had found it
very good, and that he did lack but so much more; which when they saw that
attended him, they bound him with great cable-ropes, like those that are made
at Tain, for the carriage of salt to Lions; or such as those are, whereby the
great French ship rides at Anchor, in the Road of Newhaven in Normandy. But on
a certain time, a great Bear which his father had bred, got loose, came
toward him, began to lick his face, for his Nurses had not thoroughly wiped his
chaps, at which unexpected approach being on a sudden offended, he as lightly
rid himself of those great cables, as Samson did of the haulser ropes wherewith
the Philistines had tied him, and by your leave, takes me up my Lord the Bear,
and tears him to you in pieces like a pullet, which served him for a gorge-ful
or good warm bit for that meal.

Whereupon Gargantua fearing lest the child should hurt himself, caused four
great chains of iron to be made to bind him, and so many strong wooden arches
unto his Cradle, most firmly stocked and mortaised in huge frames: of those
chains you have one at Rochel, which they draw up at night betwixt the two
great towers of the Haven: Another is at Lions: A third at Angiers: And the
fourth was carried away by the devils to bind Lucifer, who broke his chains
in those days, by reason of a cholick that extraordinarily torment him, taken
with eating a Sergeants soul fried for his breakfast, and therefore you may
believe that which Nicolas de Lyra says upon that place of the Psalter, where
it is written, Et Og regem Basan, that the said Og being yet little, was so
strong and robustious, that they were feign to bind him with chains of iron
in his Cradle; thus continued Pantagruel for a while very calm and quiet, for
he was not able so easily to break those chains, especially having no room in
the Cradle to give a swing with his arms. But see what happened, once upon a
great Holiday, that his father Gargantua made a sumptuous banquet to all the
Princes of his Court: I am apt to believe, that the menial officers of the
house were so imbusied in waiting each on his proper service at the feast, that
no body took care of poor Pantagruel, who was left a reculorum, behinde-hand
all alone, and as forsaken. What did he? Hark what he did, good people: he
strove and essayed to break the chains of the Cradle with his arms but coold
not, for they were too strong for him: then did he keep with his feet such a
stamping stir, and so long, that at last he beat out the lower end of his
Cradle, which notwithstanding was made of a great post five foot in square: and
as soon as he had gotten out his feet, he slid down as well as he could, till he
had got his soales to the ground; and then with a mighty force he rose up,
carrying his Cradle upon his back, bound to him like a Tortoise that crawles up
against a wall; and to have seen him, you would have thought it had been a
great Carrick of five hundred tun upon one end. In this manner he entered into
the great Hall, where they were banqueting, and that very boldly, which did
much affright the company; yet because his arms were tied in, he could not
reach any thing to eat, but with great pain stooped now and then a little, to
take with the whole flat of his tongue some lick, good bit or morsel.

Which when his father saw, he knew well enough that they had left him without
giving him any thing to eat, and therefore commanded that he should be loosed
from the said chains, by the counsel of the Princes and Lords* there present:
besides that, also the Physicians of Gargantua said, that if they did thus keep
him in the Cradle, he would be all his lifetime subject to the stone. When he
was unchained they made him to sit down, where after he had fed very well, he
took his Cradle, and broke it into more then five hundred thousand pieces with
one blow of his fist, that he struck in the midst of it, swearing that he would
never come into it again.

CHAP. V. Of the Acts of the noble Pantagruel in his youthful age.
THus grew Pantagruel from day to day, and to every ones eye waxed more and
more in all his dimensions, which made his father to rejoice by a natural
affection: therefore caused he to be made for him, whilst he was yet little, a
pretty Crossebowe, wherewith to shoot at small birds, which now they call the
great Crossebowe at Chantelle. Then he sent him to the school to learn, and to
spend his youth in virtue: in the prosecution of which design he came first to
Poictiers, where, as he studied and profited very much, he saw that the
Scholars were oftentimes at leisure, and knew not how to bestow their time,
which moved him to take such compassion on them, that one day he took from a
long ledge of rocks (called there Passelourdin,) a huge great stone, of about
twelve fathom square, and fourteen handfuls thick, and with great ease set it
upon four pillars in the midst of a field, to no other end, but that the said
Scholars when they had nothing else to do, might pass their time in getting up
on that stone, and feast it with store of gammons, pasties and flaggons, and
carve their names upon it with a knife, in token of which deed, till this hour
the stone is called the lifted stone: and in remembrance hereof there is none
entered into the Register and matricular Book of the said University, or
accounted capable of taking any degree therein, till he have first drunk in the
Caballine fountain of Croustelles, passed at Passelourdin, and got up upon the
lifted stone.

Afterward reading the delectable Chronicles of his Ancestors, he found that
Iafrey of Lusinian called Iafrey with the great tooth, Grandfather to the
Cousin in law of the eldest Sister of the Aunt of the Son in law of the Uncle
of the good daughter of his Stepmother, was interred at Maillezais; therefore
one day he took campos, (which is a little vacation from study to play a
while,) that he might give him a visit as unto an honest man: and going from
Poi^tiers with some of his companions, they passed by the Guge, visiting the
noble Abbot Ardillon: then by Lusinian, by Sansay, by Celles, by Coalonges, by
Fontenay the Conte, saluting the learned Tiraqueau, and from thence arrived at
Maillezais, where he went to see the Sepulcher of the said Iafrey with the
great tooth; which made him somewhat afraid, looking upon the picture, whose
lively draughts did set him forth in the representation of a man in an extreme
fury, drawing his great Malchus faulchion half way out of his scabbard: when
the reason hereof was demanded, the Chanons of the said place told him, that
there was no other cause of it, but that Pictoribus atque Poetis, etc. that is
to say, that Painters and Poets have liberty to paint and devise what they list
after their own fancy: but he was not satisfied with their answer, and said,
He is not thus painted without a cause; and I suspect that at his death there
was some wrong done him, whereof he requires his Kindred to take revenge: I
will enquire further into it, and then do what shall be reasonable; then he
returned not to Poictiers, but would take a view of the other Universities of
France: therefore going to Rochel, he took shipping and arrived at Bourdeaux,
where he found no great exercise, only now and then he would see some Mariners
and Lightermen a wrestling on the key or strand by the riverside: From thence
he came to Toulouse, where he learned to dance very well, and to play with the
twohanded sword, as the fashion of the Scholars of the said University is to
bestir themselves in games, whereof they may have their hands full: but he
stayed not long there, when he saw that they did cause bury their Regents
alive, like red herring, saying, Now God forbid that I should die this death;
for I am by nature sufficiently dry already, without heating my self any
further.

He went then to Monpellier, where he met with the good wives of Mirevaux, and
good jovial company withal, and thought to have set himself to the study of
Physic; but he considered that that calling was too troublesome and
melancholic; and that Physicians did smell of glisters like old devils:
Therefore he resolved he would study the laws; but seeing that there were but
three scauld, and one bald-pated Legist in that place, he departed from thence,
and in his way made the Bridge of Guard, and the Amphitheater of Neems in less
then three hours, which nevertheless seems to be a more divine then humane
work. After that he came to Avignon, where he was not above three days before
he fell in love; for the women there take great delight in playing at the close
buttock-game, because it is Papal ground; which his Tutor and Pedagogue
Epistemon perceiving, he drew him out of that place, and brought him to Valence
in the Dauphinee, where he saw no great matter of recreation, only that the
Lubbards of the Town did beat the Scholars, which so incensed him with anger,
that when upon a certain very fair Sunday, the people being at their public
dancing in the streets, and one of the Scholars offering to put himself into
the ring to partake of that sport, the foresaid lubbardly fellows would not
permit him the admittance into their society; He taking the Scholars part, so
belabored them with blows, and laid such load upon them, that he drove them
all before him, even to the brink of the river Rhosne, and would have there
drowned them, but that they did squat to the ground, and there lay close a full
half league under the river. The hole is to be seen there yet.

After that he departed from thence, and in three strides and one leap came to
Angiers, where he found himself very well, and would have continued there some
space, but that the plague drove them away. So from thence he came to Bourges,
where he studied a good long time, and profited very much in the faculty of the
Laws: and would sometimes say, that the books of the Civil Law, were like unto
a wonderfully precious, royal and triumphant robe of cloth of gold, edged with
dirt; for in the world are no goodlier books to be seen, more ornate, nor more
eloquent then the texts of the Pandects; but the bordering of them, that is to
say, the gloss of Accursius is so scurvie, vile, base and unsavourie, that it
is nothing but filthiness and villainy.

Going from Bourges, he came to Orleans, where he found store of swaggering
Scholars that made him great entertainment at his coming, and with whom he
learned to play at tennis so well, that he was a Master at that game; for the
Students of the said place make a prime exercise of it; and sometimes they
carried him unto Cupids houses of commerce (in that City termed Islands,
because of their being most ordinarily environed with other houses, and not
contiguous to any,) there to recreate his person at the sport of Poussevant,
which the wenches of London call the Ferkers in and in. As for breaking his
head with overmuch study, he had an especial care not to do it in any case,
for fear of spoiling his eyes; which he the rather observed, for that it was
told him by one of his Teachers, (there called Regents,) that the pain of the
eyes was the most hurtful thing of any to the sight: for this cause when he one
day was made a Licentiate, or Graduate in law, one of the Scholras of his
acquaintance, who of learning had not much more then his burden, though in
stead of that he could dance very well, and play at tennis, made the blason and
device of the Licentiates in the said University, saying,

So you have in your hand a racket,
A tennis-ball in your Cod-placket,
A Pandect law in your Caps tippet,
And that you have the skill to trip it
In a low dance, you will b'allow'd
The grant of the Licentiates hood.
CHAP. VI. How Pantagruel met with a Limousin, who too affestedly did
counterfeit the French Language.
Upon a certain day, I know not when, Pantagruel walking after supper with some
of his fellow-Students, without that gate of the City, through which we enter
on the rode to Paris, encountered with a young spruce-like Scholar that was
coming upon the same very way; and after they had saluted one another, asked
him thus; My friend, from whence come thou now? the Scholar answered him:
From the alme, inclyte and celebrate Academie, which is vocitated Lutetia. What
is the meaning of this (said Pantagruel) to one of his men? It is (answered he)
from Paris. Thou come from Paris then (said Pantagruel,) and how do you spend
your time there, you my Masters the Students of Paris? the Scholar answered, We
transfretate the Sequan at the dilucul and crepuscul, we deambulate by the
compites and quadrives of the Urb: we despumate the Latial verbocination: and
like verisimilarie amorabons, we captat the benevolence of the omnijugal,
omniform, and omnigenal foeminine sex: upon certain diecules we invisat the
Lupanares, and in a venerian extase inculcate our veretres, into the
penitissime recesses of the pudends of these amicabilissim meretricules: then
do we cauponisate in the meritory taberns of the pineapple, the castle, the
magdalene, and the mule, goodly vervecine spatules perforaminated with
petrocile; and if by fortune there be rarity, or penury of pecune in our
marsupies; and that they be exhausted of ferruginean metal, for the shot we
dimit our codices, and oppugnerat our vestiments, whilst we prestolate the
coming of the Tabellaries from the Penates and patriotick Lares: to which
Pantagruel answered, What devilish language is this? by the Lord, I think thou
art some kind of Heretic: My Lord, no, said the Scholar; for libentissimally
as soon as it illucesceth any minutle slice of the day; I demigrate into one of
these so well architected minsters; and there irrorating my self with fair
lustral water; I mumble off little parcels of some missick precation of our
sacrificuls: and submurmurating my horarie precules, I elevate and absterge my
anime from its nocturnal inquinations: I revere the Olympicols: I latrially
venere the supernal Astripotent: I dilige and redame my proxims: I observe the
decalogical precepts; and according to the facultatule of my vires, I do not
discede from them one late unguicule; nevertheless it is veriforme, that
because Mammona does not supergurgitate any thing in my locu^s, that I am
somewhat rare and lent to supererogate the elemosynes to those egents, that
hostially queritate their stipe.

Prut, tut, (said Pantagruel,) what does this fool mean to say? I think he is
upon the forging of some diabolical tongue, and that inchanter-like he would
charm us; to whom one of his men said, Without doubt (Sir) this fellow would
counterfeit the Language of the Parisians, but he does only flay the Latin,
imagining by so doing that he does highly Pindarize it in most eloquent terms,
and strongly conceiteth himself to be therefore a great Orator in the French,
because he disdaineth the common manner of speaking; to which Pantagruel said,
Is it true? the Scholar answered, My worshipful Lord, my genie is not apt nate
to that which this flagitious Nebulon says, to excoriate the cutule of our
vernacular Gallick, but viceversally I gnave opere, and by vele and rames enite
to locupletate it, with the Latinicome redundance. By G -- (said Pantagruel) I
will teach you to speak: but first come hither, and tell me whence thou art? To
this the Scholar answered: The primeval origin of my aves and ataves, was
indigenarie of the Lemonick regions, where requiesceth the corpor of the
hagiotat St. Martial; I understand thee very well (said Pantagruel,) when all
comes to all, thou art a Limousin, and thou will here by the affected speech
counterfeit the Parisiens: well now, come hither, I must show thee a new trick,
and handsomely give thee the combfeat: with this he took him by the throat,
saying to him, Thou flayest the Latin; by St. John I will make thee flay the
fox; for I will now flay thee alive: then began the poor Limousin to cry; Haw,
gwid Maaster, haw, Laord, my halp, and St. Marshaw, haw, I Am worried: haw, my
thropple, the bean of my cragg is bruck: haw, for gauads se^k, lawt my lean,
Mawster; waw, waw, waw: Now (said Pantagruel) thou speak naturally, and so
let him go, for the poor Limousin had totally berayed, and thoroughly conshit
his breeches, which were not deep and large enough, but round streat caniond
gregs, having in the seat a piece like a keelings tail; and therefore in
French called de chausses, a queu^e de merlus. Then (said Pantagruel) St.
Alipantiu, what civette? si to the devil with this Turnepeater, as he stinks,
and so let him go: but this hug of Pantagruels was such a terror to him all
the days of his life, and took such deep impression in his fancy, that very
often distracted with sudden affrightments, he would startle and say that
Pantagruel held him by the neck; besides that it procured him a continual
drought and desire to drink* so that after some few years he died of the death
Roland in plain English called thirst* ^ work of divine vengeance, showing us
that which says the Philosopher and Aulus Gellius, that it becomes us to
speak according to the common language: and that we should (as said Octavian
Augustus) strive to shun all strange and unknown terms with as much
heedfulnesse and circumspection, as Pilots of ships use to avoid the rocks and
banks in the sea.

CHAP. VII. How Pantagruel came to Paris, and of the choice Books of the
Library of St. Victor.
AFter that Pantagruel had studied very well at Orleans, he resolved to see the
great University at Paris; but before his departure, he was informed that there
was a huge big bell at St. Anian in the said town of Orleans, under the ground,
which had been there above two hundred and fourteen years; for it was so great
that they could not by any device get it so much as above the ground, although
they used all the means that are found in Vitruvius de Architectura, Albertus
de re aedificatoria, Euclid, Theon, Archimede^, and Hero de ingeniis: for all
that was to no purpose, wherefore condescending heartily to the humble request
of the Citizens and Inhabitants of the said Town, he determined to remove it to
the tower that was erected for it: with that he came to the place where it was,
and lifted it out of the ground with his little finger, as easily as you would
have done a Hawks bell, or Bell-weathers tingle tangle: but before he would
carry it to the foresaid tower or steeple appointed for it, he would needs make
some Music with it about the Town, and ring it along all the streets, as he
carried it in his hand, wherewith all the people were very glad; but there
happened one great inconveniency, for with carrying it so, and ringing it about
the streets, all the good Orleans wine turned instantly, waxed flat, and was
spoiled, which no body there did perceive till the night following; for every
man found himself so altered, and a dry with drinking these flat wines, that
they did nothing but spit, and that as white as Maltha cotton, saying: We have
of the Pantagruel, and our very throats are salted. This done, he came to Paris
with his retinue, and at his entry every one came out to see him, (as you know
well enough, that the people of Paris is sottish by nature, by B. flat, and B.
sharp,) and beheld him with great astonishment, mixed with no less fear, that
he would carry away the Palace into some other country a remotis, and far
from them, as his father formerly had done the great peal of Bells at our
Ladies Church, to tie about his Mares neck. Now after he had stayed there a
pretty space, and studied very well in all the seven liberal Arts, he said it
was a good town to live in, but not to die; for that the grave-digging rogues
of St. Innocent, used in frostie nights to warm their bums with dead men's
bones. In his abode there he found the Library of St. Victor, a very stately
and magnifick one, especially in some books which were there, of which
follows the Repertory and Catalogue; Et primo,

The for Godsake of salvation.

The Codpiece of the Law.

The Slipshoe of the Decretals.

The Pomegranate of vice.

The Clew-bottom of Theology.

The Duster or foxtail-flap of Preachers, Composed by Turlupin.

The churning Ballock of the Valiant:

The Henbane of the Bishops.

Marmoretus de baboonis and apis, cum Commento Dorbellis.

Decretum Universitatis Parisiensis super gorgiasitate muliercularum ad
placitum.

The Apparition of Sancte Geltrud, to a Nun of Poissie, being in travel, at the
bringing forth of a child.

Ars honest fartandi in societate per Marcum Corvinum.

The mustard-pot of penance.

The Gamashes, alias the boots of patience.

Formicarium artium.

De brodiorum usu, and honestate quartandi per Sylvestrem prioratem Jacobinum.

The coosened, or gulled in Court.

The Frail of the Scriveners.

The Marriage-packet.

The cruzie or crurible of Contemplation.

The Filmflams of the Law.

The Prickle of Wine.

The Spur of Cheese.

Ruboffatorium scolarium.

Tartaretus de modo cacandi.

The Bravades of Rome.

Bricot de differentiis Browsarum.

The tail-piece-cushion, or close-breech of Discipline.

The cobled Shoe of Humility.

The Trevet of good thoughts.

The Kettle of Magnanimity.

The cavilling intanglements of Confessors.

The Snatchfare of the Curats.

Reverendi patris fratris Lubini provincialis Slabrardiae de gulpendis
lardslicionibus libri tres.

Pasquilli doctoris marmorei de capreolis cum artichoket a comedendis tempore
Papali ab Ecclesia interdicto.

The invention of the Holy Cross, personated by six wily Priests.

The Spectacles of Pilgrims bound for Rome.

Majoris de modo faciendi Puddinos.

The Bagpipe of the Prelates.

Beda de optimitate triparum.

The complaint of the Barresters upon the reformation of Confites.

The furred Cat of the Sollicitors and Atturneys.

Of pease and bacon cum Commento.

The small vales or drinking money of the Indulgences.

Praeclarissimi juris utriusque Doctoris Maistre pilloti, etc.

Scrapfarthingi de botchandis glossaccursianae Triflis repetitio
enncidiluculissima

Stratagemata francharchaeri de Baniolet.

Carlbumpkinus de re militari cum figuris Tevoti.

De usu and utilitate flayandi equos and equas authore Magistro nostro de
quebecu.

The sauciness of Countrey-Stuarts.

M. N. Rostocostojan Bedanesse de mustarda post prandium servienda, libri
quatuordecim apostillati per M. Vaurillonis.

The covillage or wench-tribute of Promooters.

Quaestio fubtilissima, utrum Chimaera in vacuo bombizant posset comedere
secundas intentiones, and fuit debatuta per december hebdomadas in Consilio
Constantiensi.

The bridle-champer of the Advocates.

Smutchudlamenta Scoti.

The rasping and hard-scraping of the Cardinals. De calcaribus removendis
Decades undecim per M. Albericum de rosata.

Ejusdem de castramentandis criminibus libri tres.

The entrance of Antonie de leve into the territories of Brasil.

De peelandis aut unskinnandis blurrandisque Cardinalium mulis.

The said Authors Apology against those who allege that the Popes mule does
eat but at set times.

Prognosticatio quae incipit Silvitriquebillobalata per M. N. the deep dreaming
gull Sion.

Bondarini Episcopi de emulgentiarum profectibus Aeneades novem, cum privilegio
Papali ad triennium and postca non.

The shitabranna of the maids.

The bald arse or peeled breech of the widows.

The cowle or capouch of the Monks.

The mumbling devotion of the Coelestine Friars.

The passage-toll of beggarlinesse.

The teeth-chatter or gum-didder of lubberly lusks.

The paring-shovel of the Theologues.

The drench-horne of the Masters of Arts.

The scullians of Oleam the uninitiated Clerk,

Magistri N. lickdishetis de garbellisiftationibus horarum canon carum libri
quadriginta arsiversitatorium confratriarum incerto authore.

The gulsgoatonie or rasher of Cormorants and ravenous feeders.

The rammishnesse of the Spaniards supergivure gondigaded by Friar Indigo.

The muttring of pitiful wretches.

Dastardismus rerum Italicarum, authore Magistro Burnegad.

R. Lu llius de batisfolagiis Principum.

Calibistratorium caffardiae, authore M. Jacobo hocstraten hereticometra.

Codtickler de magistro nostrandorum magistro nostratorumque beneventi libri
octo galantissimi.

The Crackarades of balists or stone-throwing Engines, contrepate Clerks,
Scriveners, Brief-writers, Rapporters, and Papal Bull-dispatchers lately
compiled by Regis.

A perpetual Almanac for those that have the gowt and the pox,

Manera sweepandi fornacellos per Mag. ecciam.

The shable or cimeterre of Merchants.

The pleasures of the Monachal life.

The hotchpot of Hypocrites.

The history of the Hobgoblins.

The ragamussianisme of the pensionary maimed soldiers.

The gulling fibs and counterfeit shows of Commissaries.

The litter of Treasurers.

The juglingatorium of Sophisters.

Antipericata met anaparbeuged amphisistationes toordicantium.

The periwinkle of ballad-makers.

The push-forward of the Alchimists.

The niddie noddie of the sachel-loaded seekers by Friar Bindfastatis.

The shackles of Religion.

The racket of swag-waggers.

The leaning-stock of old age.

The muzzle of Nobility.

The Apes pater noster.

The Crickets and Hawks bells of Devotion.

The pot of the Emberweeks.

The mortar of the politic life.

The flap of the Hermites.

The riding-hood or Monterg of the Penitentiaries.

The trictrac of the knocking Friars.

Blockheadodus de vita and honcstate bragadochiorum.

Lyrippii Sorbonici mor alisationes per M. Lupoldum.

The Carrier-horse-bells of Travelers.

The bibbings of the tippling Bishops.

Dolloporediones Doctorum Coloniensium adversus Reuclin.

The Cymbals of Ladies.

The Dungers martingale.

Whirlingfriskorum Chasemarkerorum per fratrem Crackwoodloguetis.

The clouted patches of a stout heart.

The mummerie of the racket-keeping Robin-good-fellows.

Gerson de auferibilitate Papae ab Ecclesia.

The Catalogue of the nominated and graduated persons.

Jo. Dyrebrodii de terribilitate excommunicationis libellus acephalos.

Ingeniositas invocandi diabolos and diabolas per M. Guingolphum.

The hotchpotch or gallimafree of the perpetually begging Friars.

The morrish-dance of the Heretics.

The whinings of Cajetan.

Muddisnowt Doctoris cherubici de origin roughfootedarum and wryneckedorum
ritibus libri septem.

Sixty nine fat breviaries.

The Nightmare of the five orders of Beggars.

The skinnery of the new start-ups extracted out of the fallow butt,
incornifistibulated and plodded upon in the Angelick sum.

The raver and idle talker in cases of conscience.

The fat belly of the Presidents.

The bafling flowter of the Abbots.

Sutoris adversus eum qui vocaverat eum Slabsauceatorem, and quod
slabsauceatores non sunt damnati ab Ecclesia.

Cacatorium medicorum.

The chimney-sweeper of Astrology.

Campi clysteriorum per paragraph. C.

The bumsquicbracker of Apothecaries.

The kissebreech of Chirurgerie.

Iustinianus de whiteleperotis tollendis.

Antidotarium animae.

Merlinus Coccaius de patria diabolorum.

The Practice of iniquity by Cleuraunes sadden.

The Mirror of baseness by Radnecu Waldenses.

The ingrainedrogue by Dwarsencas Eldenu.

Thhe merciless Cormorvnt by Hoxinidno the Jew.

Of which Library some books are already printed, and the rest are now at the
Press, in this noble City of Tubinge.

CHAP. VIII. How Pantagruel being at Paris received letters from his father
Gargantua, and the Copy of them.
PAntagruel studied very hard, as you may well conceive, and profited
accordingly; for he had an excellent understanding, and notable wit, together
wtth a capacity in memory, equal to the measure of twelve oil budgets, or
butts of Olives. And as he was there abiding one day, he received a letter from
his father in manner as follows.

Most dear son, amongst the gifts, graces and prerogatives, with which the
Sovereign Plasmator God Almighty, has endowed and adorned humane Nature at the
beginning, that seems to me most singular and excellent, by which we may in a
mortal estate attain to a kind of immortality, and in the course of this
transitory life perpetuate our name and seed, which is done by a progeny issued
from us in the lawful bonds of Matrimony: whereby that in some measure is
restored unto us, which was taken from us by the sin of our first Parents, to
whom it was said, that because they had not obeyed the Commandment of God their
Creator, they should die, and by death should be brought to naught that so
stately frame and Plasmature, wherein the man at first had been created.

But by this means of seminal propagation, which continues in the children
what was lost in the Parents, and in the grandchildren that which perished in
their fathers, and so successively until the day of the last judgment, when
Jesus Christ shall have rendered up to God the Father his Kingdom in a
peaceable condition, out of all danger and contamination of sin; for then shall
cease all generations and corruptions, and the elements leave off their
continual transmutations; seeing the so much desired peace shall be attained
unto and enjoyed, and that all things shall be brought to their end and period;
and therefore not without just and reasonable cause, do I give thanks to God my
Savior and Preserver, for that he has enabled me to see my bald old age
reflourish in thy youth: for when at his good pleasure, who rules and governes
all things, my soul shall leave this mortal habitation; I shall not account my
self wholly to die, but to pass from one place unto another: considering that
in and by that I continue in my visible image living in the world, visiting and
conversing with people of honor, and other my good friends, as I was wont to
do: which conversation of mine, although it was not without sin, (because we
are all of us trespassers, and therefore ought continually to beseech his
divine Majesty, to blot our transgressions out of his memory) yet was it by the
help and grace of God, without all manner of reproach before men.

Wherefore if those qualities of the mind but shine in thee, wherewith I am
endowed, as in thee remains the perfect image of my body, thou will be
esteemed by all men to be the perfect guardian and treasure of the immortality
of our name: but if otherwise, I shall truly take but small pleasure to see it,
considering that the lesser part of me, which is the body, would abide in thee:
and the best, to wit, that which is the soul, and by which our name continues
blessed amongst men, would be degenerate and abastardised: This I do not speak
out of any distrust that I have of thy virtue, which I have heretofore already
tried, but to encourage thee yet more earnestly to proceed from good to better*
and that which I now write unto thee, is not so much that thou should live
in this virtuous course, as that thou should rejoice in so living and having
lived, and cheer up thy self with the like resolution in time to come; to the
prosecution and accomplishment of which enterprise and generous undertaking
thou may easily remember how that I have spared nothing, but have so helped
thee, as if I had had no other treasure in this world, but to see thee once in
my life, completely well bred and accomplished, as well in virtue, honesty and
valor, as in all liberal knowledge and civility: and so to leave thee after my
death, as a mirror, representing the person of me thy father, and if not so
excellent, and such indeed as I do wish thee, yet such in my desire.

But although my deceased father of happy memory Grangousier, had bent his best
endeavors to make me profit in all perfection and Political knowledge, and
that my labor and study was fully correspondent to, yea, went beyond his
desire: nevertheless, as thou may well understand, the time then was not so
proper and fit for learning as it is at present, neither had I plenty of such
good Masters as thou have had; for that time was darksome, obscured with clouds
of ignorance, and savouring a little of the infelicity and calamity of the
Goths, who had, wherever they set footing, destroyed all good literature,
which in my age has by the divine goodness been restored unto its former
light and dignity, and that with such amendment and increase of the knowledge,
that now hardly should I be admitted unto the first form of the little
Grammar-school-boyes: I say, I, who in my youthful days was, (and that justly)
reputed the most learned of that age; which I do not speak in vain boasting,
although I might lawfully do it in writing unto thee, in verification whereof
thou have the authority of Marcus Tullius in his book of old age, and the
sentence of Plutarch, in the book entitled how a man may praise himself
without envy: but to give thee an emulous encouragement to strive yet further.

Now is it that the minds of men are qualified with all manner of discipline,
and the old sciences revived, which for many ages were extinct: now it is, that
the learned languages are to their pristine purity restored, viz. Greek,
(without which a man may be ashamed to account himself a scholar,) Hebrew,
Arabic, Chaldaean and Latin. Printing likewise is now in use, so elegant, and
so correct, that better cannot be imagined, although it was found out but in my
time by divine inspiration, as by a diabolical suggestion on the other side was
the invention of Ordnance. All the world is full of knowing men, of most
learned Schoolmasters, and vast Libraries: and it appears to me as a truth,
that neither in Plato's time, nor Cicero's, nor Papinian's, there was ever such
convenience for studying, as we see at this day there is: nor must any
adventure henceforward to come in public, or present himself in company, that
has not been pretty well polished in the shop of Minerva: I see robbers,
hangmen, free-booters, tapsters, ostlers, and such like, of the very rubbish of
the people, more learned now, then the Doctors and Preachers were in my time,

What shall I say? the very women and children have aspired to this praise and
celestial Manna of good learning: yet so it is, that in the age I am now of, I
have been constrained to learn the Greek tongue, which I contemned not like
Cato, but had not the leisure in my younger years to attend the study of it:
and take much delight in the reading of Plutarchs Morals, the pleasant
Dialogues of Plato, the Monuments of Pausanias, and the Antiquities of
Athenaeus, in waiting on the hour wherein God my Creator shall call me, and
command me to depart from this earth and transitory pilgrimage. Wherefore (my
son) I admonish thee, to employ thy youth to profit as well as thou can,
both in thy studies and in virtue. Thou art at Paris, where the laudable
examples of many brave men may stir up thy mind to gallant actions, and have
likewise for thy Tutor and Paedagogue the learned Epistemon, who by his lively
and vocal documents may instruct thee in the Arts and Sciences.

I intend, and will have it so, that thou learn the Languages perfectly: first
of all, the Greek, as Quintilian will have it: secondly, the Latin; and then
the Hebrew, for the holy Scripture-sake: and then the Chaldee and Arabic
likewise, and that thou frame thy stilein Greek in imitation of Plato; and for
the Latin, after Cicero, let there be no history which thou shall not have
ready in thy memory; unto the prosecuting of which design, books of
Cosmographie will be very conducible, and help thee much. Of the liberal Arts
of Geometry, Arithmetic and Music, I gave thee some taste when thou were yet
little, and not above five or six years old; proceed further in them, and
learn the remainder if thou can. As for Astronomy, study all the rules
thereof, let pass nevertheless the divining and judicial Astrology, and the
Art of Lullius, as being nothing else but plain abuses and vanities. As for the
Civil Law, of that I would have thee to know the texts by heart, and then to
confer them with Philosophy.

Now in matter of the knowledge of the works of Nature, I would have thee to
study that exactly, and that so there be no sea, river nor fountain, of which
thou do not know the fishes, all the fowls of the air, all the several
kinds of shrubs and trees, whether in forests or orchards: all the sorts of
herbs and flowers that grow upon the ground: all the various metals that are
hid within the bowels of the earth: together with all the diversity of precious
stones, that are to be seen in the Orient and South-parts of the world, let
nothing of all these be hidden from thee. Then fail not most carefully to
peruse the books of the Greek, Arabian and Latin Physicians, not despising the
Talmudists and Cabalists; and by frequent Anatomies get thee the perfect
knowledge of the other world, called the Microcosme, which is man: and at some
hours of the day apply thy mind to the study of the holy Scriptures: first in
Greek, the New Testament with the Epistles of the Apostles; and then the Old
Testament in Hebrew In brief, let me see thee an Abyss, and bottomless pit of
knowledge: for from hence forward, as thou growest great and becomest a man,
thou must part from this tranquillity and rest of study, thou must learn
chivalrie, warfare, and the exercises of the field, the better thereby to
defend my house and our friends, and to succor and protect them at all their
needs against the invasion and assaults of evil doers.

Furthermore, I will that very shortly thou try how much thou have profited,
which thou can not better do, then by maintaining publicly Theses and
Conclusions in all Arts, against all persons whatsoever, and by haunting the
company of learned men, both at Paris and otherwhere. But because as the wise
man Solomon says, Wisdom enters not into a malicious mind; and that
knowledge without conscience is but the ruin of the soul, it behooveth thee
to serve, to love, to fear God, and on him to cast all thy thoughts and all
thy hope, and by faith formed in charity to cleave unto him, so that thou
may never be separated from him by thy sins. Suspect the abuses of the
world: set not thy heart upon vanity; for this life is transitory, but the Word
of the Lord endures for ever. Be serviceable to all thy neighbors, and love
them as thy self: reverence thy Praeceptors: shun the conversation of those
whom thou desire not to resemble, and receive not in vain the graces which
God has bestowed upon thee: and when thou shall see that thou have attained to
all the knowledge that is to be acquired in that part, return unto me, that I
may see thee, and give thee my blessing before I die. My son, the peace and
grace of our Lord be with thee. Amen.

From Utopia the 17. day of the month of March. Thy father Gargantua.


These letters being received and read, Pantagruel plucked up his heart, took a
fresh courage to him, and was inflamed with a desire to profit in his studies
more then ever, so that if you had seen him, how he took pains, and how he
advanced in learning, you would have said that the vivacity of his spirit
amidst the books, was like a great fire amongst dry wood, so active it was,
vigorous and indefatigable.

CHAP. IX. How Pantagruel found Panurge, whom he loved all his lifetime.
ONe day as Pantagruel was taking a walk without the City, toward St. Antonies
Abbey, discoursing and philosophating with his own servants and some other
Scholars, met with a young man of a very comely stature, and surpassing
handsome in all the lineaments of his body, but in several parts thereof most
pitifully wounded; in such bad equipage in matter of his apparel, which was but
totters and rags, and every way so far out of order, that he seemed to have
been a fighting with mastiffe-dogs, from whose fury he had made an escape, or
to say better, he looked in the condition wherein he then was, like an
Apple-gatherer of the country of Perch.

As far off as Pantagruel saw him, he said to those that stood by: Do you see
that man there, who is a coming hither upon the road from Charanton-bridge? by
my faith, he is only poor in fortune; for I may assure you, that by his
Physiognomie it appears, that nature has extracted him from some rich and
noble race, and that too much curiosity has thrown him upon adventures, which
possibly have reduced him to this indigence, want and penury. Now as he was
just amongst them, Pantagruel said unto him, Let me entreat you, ( friend) that
you may be pleased to stop here a little, and answer me to that which I shall
ask you, and I am confident you will not think your time ill bestowed; for I
have an extreme desire, (according to my ability) to give you some supply in
this distress, wherein I see you are; because I do very much commiserate your
case, which truly moves me to great pity; Therefore (my friend) tell me, who
you are? whence you come? whither you go? what you desire? and what your name
is? the companion answered him in the Dutch tongue, thus.

Yunker got geb euch gluck und heil; surwar lieber yunker, ich las euch wissen
das dar mich wungraft, is it ein arm und erbamlich ding, und were wol darvon
zusagen welches euch verdrusflich zuceten, und mer zuerzelen were, wiewol die
Poeten und Oratores vortzeiten habengesagt in item sprichen: und sentenzen das
die gedecktnus des ellendz und armut vortangs erlitten, is it ein grosser lust.
My friend (said Pantagruel,) I have no skill in that gibberish of yours;
therefore, if you would have us to understand you, speak to us in some other
language; then did the drole answer him thus.

Albarildim gotfano dechmin brin alabo dordio falbroth ringuam albaras; nin
porthzadikin almucatin milko prin alelmin en thoth dalheben enfuim: kuthim
alidum alkaim nimbroth deehoth porth min michais im endoch, pruch dal maisulum
hol moth dansrihim lupaldas im voldemoch. Nim hur diavoth mnarbotim dal gousch
palfrapin duch imscoth pruch galeth dal chinon min foulchrich al conin
buthathen does dal prim. Do you understand none of this, said Pantagruel to the
company? I believe (said Epistemon,) that this is the language of the
Antipodes, and such a hard one that the devil himself knows not what to make
of it. Then, said Pantagruel, Gossip, I know not if the walls do comprehend the
meaning of your words, but none of us here does so much as understand one
syllable of them; then said my blade again.

Signor mio voi vedete per essempio che la cornemusa non suona may, se non ha
il ventre pieno: cosi io parimente non vi so contare le mie fortune, se prima
il tribulato ventre non ha la solita refectione: alquale e adviso che le mani e
li denti abbi person il loro ordine natural, e del tutto annichilati. To which
Epistemon answered as much of the one as of the other, and nothing of either.
Then said Panurge.

Lard gestholb besuavirtuisbe intelligence: ass yi body scalbisbe natural
reloth cholb should osme pety have; for nature hass visse equaly maid bot fortune
sum exaiti hesse andoyis deprevit: non yeless ^iviss mou virtiuss deprevit and
virtuiss men decreviss for anen ye ladeniss non quid. Yet less said
Pantagruel; then said my jollie Panurge.

Iona andie gaussa goussy etan beharda er remedio beharde ver sela ysser landa.
Aubar es otoy yes nausu ey nessassu gourray proposiam ordine den. Non yssena
bayte facheria egabe gen herassy badea sadassu noura assia: Aram hon davan
gualde cydassu nydassuna estou oussye ecvinausoury hin cr darstura eguy harm:
Genicoa plasar vadu. Are you there (said Eudemon?) Genicoa, to this (said
Carpalin) St. Trinian's rammer unstitch your bum, for I had almost understood
it. Then answered Panourge.

Prug frest frinst sorgdmand strochdi dthds page breleland gra^ot chavygni
pomardiere rusth pkalldracg devinier a pras. Nays: beville balmuch monach drupp
del meupplist rincq, drind dodelp up drent loch mine stzincq jald de vins ders
cordelis bur jocst stzampenards. Do you speak Christian (said Epistemon) or the
Buffoon language, otherwise called patelinots? Nay, it is the puzlatory tongue
(said another) which some call Lanternois. Then said Panurge.

Her re je sprexe andeers gheen taele dan kersten taele my dunct nochoans, al
en seg je met even ubord, myven noot velaert glenouch bbat re beglere gheest my
unyt bet mhet richeyt yet waer un je gh^voet match zunch: To which answered
Pantagruel, as much of that: then said Panurge*

Sennor de tanto hablar yo soy cansado, porque supplico avuestra excellencia
que mire alos precettos Evangelicos, para que ellos muevan vuestra excellencia
a lo que es de consciencia, ysiellos no bastaren paramo ver vuesa excellencia
apiedad, supplico que mire a la piedad natural, laqual yo creoque le mova, como
es de razon, y concesso, no digo mas? Truly (my friend) I doubt not but you can
speak diverse languages, but tell us that which you would have us to do for you
in some tongue, which you conceive we may understand? then said the companion.

Mine her, ^eendog ieg met ingen tunge talede; lyge some boeen, oeg usk wlig
creatuer: mine clee bon och my me legioms mager heb xv duyfer alliguck lalig
hwad tyng mog meest behoff rite^es* somaer sandeligh madoch dryck: hwar for
forbar me regom lyder offuer megoch besael argyffua meg nogeth off haylketieg
kad styre mine groe^ndes match lygeruss son mand Cerbero en Souppesor set^hr:
soa schalfue loeffue lenge oekyk salitgth: I think really (said Eusthenes) that
the Go^hes spoke thus of old: and that, if it pleased God, we would all of us
speak so with our tails. Then again said Panurge.

Adon seolom lechai inischar harob hal hebdeca himeher^h thithe li kikar lehem:
chauchar ublaah aldonaicho neral: To which answered Epistemon, at this time
have I understood him very well; for it is the Hebrew tongue most Rhetorically
pronounced: Then again said the Gallant.

Despotatin in panagathe, do^risy mi ve artodotis, horasgar limo analiscomenon
eme athlios, ee ento metalieme ve eleis udamos, getis de par emu ha vehre ce
homos philology pande^ homologositote logus te ce rehemetta petitta hyrpachin
opote pragma asto pafi delon esti. Eusta garnancei monon logusin hina pragmata
(hem peri emphibetumen) me prophoros epiphenete: What? (said Carpalim)
Pantagruels footman, it is Greek, I have understood him: and how? have thou
dwelt any while in Greece? Then said the drole again.

Agonou don't oussys vous desdaignez algarou: nou denfaron zamist vous mariston
ulbrou, fousquez voubrol tam bredaguez maupreton den goulhoust daguez daguez
non croupys fost bardonnoffist nougrou: agou paston tol nalbrol prissys hourtou
los echat^nous, prou dehouguys brot pany gouden bascrou noudous c^guons
goutf^e^ goul oustatoupp^ssou? Me thinks I understand him (said Pantagruel) for
either it is the language of my country of Utopia, or sounds very like it: and
as he was about to have begun some purpose, the companion said,

Iam toties vos per sacra, perque deos deasque omnes obtesta^us sum, ut siquae
vos pietas permovet, egestatem meam sol^rem^ni nec hilum proficio claman^ and
ejulans: sinite, quaeso, sinite, viri impii, quo me fata vocant abite: nec
ultra vanis vestris interpellationibus obtundatis, memores vet^ris illius
adagii, quo venture fameli^us auriculis ca^ere dicitur. Well, my friend, (said
Pantagruel) but cannot you speak French? that I can do ( Sir) very well, (said
the companion) God be thanked: it is my natural language and mother tongue: for
I was borne and bred in my younger years in the garden of France, to wit,
Touraine: Then (said Pantagruel) tell us what is your name, and from whence you
are come; for by my faith, I have already stamped in my mind such a deep
impression of love toward you, that if you will condescend unto my will, you
shall not depart out of my company, and you and I shall make up another couple
of friends, such as Ae^^^^, and Achates were; Sir, (said the companion) my true
and proper christen name is Panurge, and now I come out of Turkey, to which
country I was carried away prisoner at that time, when they went to Metelin
with a mischief: and willingly would I relate unto you my fortunes, which are
more wonderful then those of Ulysses were: but seeing that it pleases you to
retain me with you, I most heartily accept of the offer, protesting never to
leave you, should you go to all the devils in hell; we shall have therefore
more leisure at another time, and a fitter opportunity wherein to report them;
for at this present I am in a very urgent necessity to feed, my teeth are
sharp, my belly empty, my throat dry, and my stomach fierce and burning: all is
ready, if you will but set me to work, it will be as good as a balsamum for
sore eyes, to see me gulch and raven it, for Gods sake give order for it. Then
Pantagruel commanded that they should carry him home, and provide him good
store of victuals, which being done, he ate very well that evening, and
(caponlike) went early to bed, then slept until dinnertime the next day, so
that he made but three steps and one leap from the bed to the board.

CHAP. X. How Pantagruel judged so equitably of a Controversy, which was
wonderfully obscure and difficult: that by reason of his just decree therein,
he was reputed to have a most admirable judgment.
PAntagruel, very well remembering his fathers letter and admonitions, would one
day make trial of his knowledge. Thereupon in all the Carrefours, that is,
throughout all the four quarters, streets and corners of the City, he set up
Conclusions to the number of nine thousand seven hundred sixty and four, in
all manner of learning, touching in them the hardest doubts that are in any
science. And first of all, in the fodder-street he held dispute against all the
Regents or Fellows of Colleges, Artists or Masters of Arts, and Orators, and
did so gallantly, that he overthrew them, and set them all upon their tails,
he went afterward to the Sorbone, where he maintained argument against all the
Theol^gians or Divines, for the space of six weeks, from four a clock in the
morning, until six in the evening, except an interval of two hours to refresh
themselves, and take their repast: and at this were present the greatest part
of the Lords of the Court, the Masters of Requests, Presidents, Counselors,
those of the Accounts, Secretaries, Advocates and others: as also the Sheriffs
of the said town, with the Physicians and Professors of the canon law; amongst
which it is to be remarked, that the greatest part were stubborn jades, and in
their opinions obstinate; but he took such course with them, that for all their
Ergo's and fallacies, he put their backs to the wall, gravelled them in the
deepest questions, and made it visibly appear to the world, that compared to
him, the^ were but monkies, and a knot of mufled calves: Whereupon, every body
began to keep a bustling noise, and talk of his so mavelous knowledge,
through all degrees of persons in both sexes, even to the very Laundresses,
Brokers, Rostmeat-sellers, Penknife* makers and others, who, when he past along
in the street, would say, This is he; in which he took delight, as Demosthenes,
the Prince of Greek Orators did, when an old crouching wife, pointing at him
with her fingers, said, That is the man.

Now at this same very time there was a process or suit in law, depending in
Court between two great Lords, of which one was called my Lord Kissebreech,
Plaintiff of one side, and the other my Lord Suckfist, Defendant of the other;
whose Controversy was so high and difficult in Law, that the Court of
Parliament could make nothing of it. And therefore by the Commandment of the
King, there were assembled four of the greatest, and most learned of all the
Parliaments of France, together with the great Council, and all the principal
Regents of the Universities, not only of France, but of England also and Italy,
such as Jason, Philippus-Decius, Petrus de Petronibus, and a rabble of other
old Rabbinists: who being thus met together, after they had thereupon consulted
for the space of six and forty weeks, finding that they could not fasten their
teeth in it, nor with such clearness understand the case, as that they might
in any manner of way be able to right it, or take up the difference berwixt the
two aforesaid Parties, it did so grievously vex them, that they most
villanously conshit themselves for shame. In this great extremity, one amongst
them named Du Douhait, the learned of all, and more expert and prudent then
any of the rest, whilst one day they were thus at their wits end,
all-to-be-dunced and philogrobolized in their brains, said unto them: We have
been here (my Masters,) a good long space without doing any thingelse, then
trifle away both our time and money, and can nevertheless find neither brim
nor bottom in this matter; for the more we study about it, the less we
understand therein, which is a great shame and disgrace to us, and a heavy
burden to our consciences; yea such, that in my opinion we shall not rid our
selves of it without dishonor, unless we take some other course; for we do
nothing but dote in our consultations.

See therefore what I have thought upon* you have heard much talking of that
worthy personage named Master Pantagruel, who has been found to be learned
above the capacity of this present age, by the proofs he gave in those great
disputations, which he held publicly against all men: my opinion is, that we
send for him, to confer with him about this business; for never any man will
encompasse the bringing of it to an end, if he do it not.

Hereunto all the Counselors and Doctors willingly agreed, and according to
that their result having instantly sent for him, they entreated him to be
pleased to canvass the process, and sift it thoroughly, that after a deep
search and narrow examination of all the points thereof, he might forthwith
make the report unto them, such as he shall think good in true and legal
knowledge: to this effect they delivered into his hands the bags wherein were
the Writs and Pancarts concerning that suit, which for bulk and weight were
almost enough to lade four great couillard or stoned Asses; but Pantagruel
said unto them, Are the two Lords, between whom this debate and process is,
yet living? it was answered him, Yes: To what a devil then (said he,) serve so
many paultry heaps, and bundles of papers and copies which you give me? is it
not better to hear their Controversy from their own mouths, whilst they are
face to face before us, then to read these vile fopperies, which are nothing
but trumperies, deceits, diabolical cosenages of Cepola, pernicious slights and
subversions of equity? for I am sure, that you, and all those thorough whose
hands this process has past, have by your devices added what you could to it
pro and contra* in such sort, that although their difference perhaps was clear
and easy enough to determine at first, you have obscured it, and made it more
intricate, by the frivolous, sottish, unreasonable and foolish reasons, and
opinions of Accursius, Baldus, Bartolus, de castro, de imola, Hippolytus,
Panormo, Bertachin, Alexander, Curtius, and those other old Mastiffs, who never
understood the least law of the Pandects, they being but mere blockheads and
great tithe-calvs, ignorant of all that which was needful for the understanding
of the laws; for (as it is most certain) they had not the knowledge either of
the Greek or Latin tongue, but only of the Gothic and Barbarian; the laws
nevertheless were first taken from the Greeks, according to the testimony of
Ulpian. l. poster. de origin juris, which we likewise may perceive by that all
the laws are full of Greek words and sentences: and then we find that they
are reduced into a Latin style, the most elegant and ornate, that whole
language is able to afford, without excepting that of any that ever wrote
therein; nay, not of Salust, Varo, Cicero, Seneca, Titus Livius, nor
Quintilian: how then could these old dotards be able to understand aright the
text of the laws, who never in their time had looked upon a good Latin book,
as does evidently enough appear by the rudeness of their style, which is
fitter for a Chimney-sweeper, or for a Cook or a Scullion, then for a
Jurisconsult and Doctor in the Laws.

Furthermore, seeing the Laws are excerpted out of the middle of moral and
natural Philosophy, how should these fools have understood it, that have by G
-- studied less in Philosophy then my Mule? in respect of humane learning,
and the knowledge of Antiquities and History, they were truly laden with those
faculties as a toad is with feathers: and yet of all this the Laws are so
full, that without it they cannot be understood, as I intend more fully to show
unto you in a peculiar Treatise, which on that purpose I am about to publish.
Therefore if you will that I take any meddling in this pro-: cesse; first, cause
all these papers to be burnt: secondly, make the two Gentlemen come personally
before me; and afterward, when I shall have heard them, I will tell you my
opinion freely without any feignednes or dissimulation whatsoever.

Some amongst them did contradict this motion, as you know that in all
companies there are more fools then wise men, and that the greater part
always surmounts the better, as says Titus Livius, in speaking of the
Carthaginians: but the foresaid Du Douet held the contrary opinion, maintaining
that Pantagruel had said well, and what was right, in affirming that these
records, bills of inquest, replies, rejoinders, exceptions, depositions, and
other such diableries of truth-intangling Writs, were but Engines wherewith to
overthrow justice, and unnecessarily to prolong such suits as did depend before
them; and that therefore the devil would carry them all away to hell, if they
did not take another course, and proceeded not in times coming according to the
Prescripts of Evangelical and Philosophical equity. In fine, all the papers
were burnt, and the two Gentlemen summoned and personally convented; at whose
appearance before the Court, Pantagruel said unto them, Are you they that have
this great difference betwixt you? Yes, (my Lord) said they: Which of you (said
Pantagruel,) is the Plaintiff? It is I, said my Lord Kissebreech: Go to then,
my friend, (said he) and relate your matter unto me from point to point,
according to the real truth, or else (by cocks body) if I find you to lie so
much as in one word, I will make you shorter by the head, and take it from off
your shoulders, to show others by your example, that in justice and judgment
men ought to speak nothing but the truth; therefore take heed you do not add
nor impare any thing in the Narration of your case. Begin.

CHAP. XI. How the Lords of Kissebreech and Suckfist did plead before
Pantagruel without an Attorney.
THen began Kissebreech in manner as follows; My Lord, it is true, that a
good woman of my house, carried eggs to the market to sell: Be covered,
Kissebreech, said Pantagruel: Thanks to you, my Lord, said the Lord
Kissebreech; but to the purpose, there passed betwixt the two tropicks, the
sum of three pence toward the zenith, and a halfpeny, forasmuch as the
Riphaean mountains had been that year oppressed with a great sterility of
counterfeit gudgions, and shows without substance, by means of the babbling
tattle, and fond fibs, seditiously raised between the gibblegablers, and
Accursian gibberish-mongers, for the rebellion of the Swissers, who had
assembled themselves to the full number of the bum-bees, and myrmidons, to go a
handsel-getting on the first day of the new year, at that very time when they
give brewis to the oxen, and deliver the key of the coals to the
Countrey-girles, for serving in of the oats to the dogs. All the night long
they did nothing else (keeping their hands still upon the pot) but dispatch
both on foot and horseback, leadensealed Writs or letters, (to wit, Papal
Commissions commonly called Bulls,) to stop the boats: for the Tailors and
Seamsters would have made of the stolen shreds and clippings a goodly sagbut
to cover the face of the Ocean, which then was great with child of a potfull
of cabbidge, according to the opinion of the hay-bundle-makers: but the
Physicians said, that by the Urine they could discern no manifest sign of the
Bustards pace, nor how to eat double-tongued mattocks with mustard, unless the
Lords and Gentlemen of the Court should be pleased to give by B. mol express
command to the pox, not to run about any longer, in gleaning up of Coppersmiths
and Tinkers; for the Jobernolls had already a pretty good beginning in their
dance of the British gig, called the estrindore, to a perfect diapason, with
one foot in the fire, and their head in the middle, as good man Ragot was wont
to say.

Ha ( my Masters,) God moderates all things, and disposes of them at his
pleasure, so that against unluckie fortune a Carter broke his frisking whip,
which was all the winde-instrument he had: this was done at his return from the
little paultry town, even then when Master Amitus of Cresseplots was
licentiated, and had past his degrees in all dullerie and blockishnesse,
according to this sentence of the Canonists, Beati Dunces, quoniam ipsi
stumblaverunt. But that which makes lent to be so high, by St. Fiacre of Bry,
is for nothing else, but that the Pentecost never comes, but to my cost; yet on
before there hoe, a little rain stills a great wind, and we must think so,
seeing that the Sergeant has propounded the matter so far above my reach,
that the Clerks and Secondaries could not with the benefit thereof lick their
fingers feathered with gaunders, so orbicularly, as they were wont in other
things to do. And we do manifestly see, that every one acknowledges himself to
be in the error, wherewith another has been charged, reserving only those
cases whereby we are obliged to take an ocular inspection in a perspective
glass of these things, toward the place in the Chimney, where hangs the
sign of the wine of forty girths, which have been always accounted very
necessary for the number of twenty pannels and pack-saddles of the bankrupt
Protectionaries of five years respit; howsoever at least he that would not let
fly the foul before the Cheesecakes, ought in law to have discovered his
reason why not, for the memory is often lost with a wayward shooing: Well, God
keep Theobald Mit ain from all danger. Then said Pantagruel, Hold there: Ho, my
friend, soft and fair, speak at leisure, and soberly without putting your self
in choler; I understand the case, go on. Now then ( my Lord) said Kissebreech,
the foresaid good woman, saying her gaudez and audinos, could not cover her
self with a treacherous backblow, ascending by the wounds and passions of the
privileges of the Universitie: unless by the virtue of a warming-pan she had
Angelically fomented every part of her body, in covering them with a hedge of
garden-beds: then giving in a swift unavoidable thirst very near to the place
where they sell the old rags, whereof the Painters of Flanders make great use,
when they are about neatly to clap on shoes on grasshoppers, locusts, cigals,
and such like flie-fowles, so strange to us, that I am wonderfully astonished
why the world does not lay, seeing it is so good to hatch.

Here the Lord of Suckfist would have interrupted him and spoken somewhat,
whereupon Pantagruel said unto him, St, by St. Antonies belly, does it become
thee to speak without command? I sweat here with the extremity of labor and
exceeding toil I take to understand the proceeding of your mutual difference,
and yet thou come to trouble and disquiet me: peace, in the devils name,
peace, thou shall be permitted to speak thy belly full, when this man has
done, and no sooner. Go on, (said he) to Kissebreech, speak calmly, and do not
over-heat your self with too much haste.

I perceiving then (said Kissebreech) that the pragmatical sanction did make no
mention of it, and that the holy Pope to every one gave liberty to fart at his
own ease, if that the blankets had no streaks, wherein the liars were to be
crossed with a ruffian-like crew: and the rainbow being newly sharpened at
Milan to bring forth larks, gave his full consent that the good woman should
tread down the heel of the hipgut-pangs, by virtue of a solemn protestation put
in by the little testiculated or codsted fishes, which to tell the truth, were
at that time very necessary for understanding the syntax and construction of
old boots. Therefore John Calfe her Cosen gervais once removed with a log from
the woodstack, very seriously advised her not to put her self into the hazard
of quagswagging in the Lee, to be scowred with a buck of linen clothes, till
first she had kindled the paper: this counsel she laid hold on, because he
desired her to take nothing, and throw out, for Non de ponte vadit, qui cum
sapientia cadit: matters thus standing, seeing the Masters of the chamber of
Accounts, or members of that Committee, did not fully agree amongst themselves
in casting up the number of the Almanie whistles, whereof were framed those
spectacles for Princes, which have been lately printed at Antwerp: I must needs
think that it makes a bad return of the Writ, and that the adverse Party is not
to be believed, in sacer verbo dotis; for that having a great desire to obey
the pleasure of the King, I armed my self from toe to top with belly furniture,
of the soles of good venison-pasties, to go see how my grape-gatherers and
vintagers had pinked and cut full of small holes their high coped-caps, to
lecher it the better, and play at in and in. And indeed the time was very
dangerous in coming from the Fair, in so far that many trained bowe-men were
cast at the muster, and quite rejected, although the chimney-tops were high
enough, according to the proportion of the windgalls in the legs of horses, or
of the Malaunders, which in the esteem of expert Farriers is no better disease,
or else the story of Ronypatifam, or Lamibaudichon, interpreted by some to be
the tale of a tub, or of a roasted horse, savours of Apocrypha, and is not an
authentic history; and by this means there was that year great abundance
throughout all the country of Artois, of tawny buzzing beetles, to the no
small profit of the Gentlemen-great-stick-faggot-carriers, when they did eat
without disdaining the cocklicranes, till their belly was like to crack with it
again: as for my own part, such is my Christian charity toward my neighbors,
that I could wish from my heart every one had as good a voice, it would make us
play the better at the tennis and the baloon. And truly ( my Lord) to express
the real truth without dissimulation, I cannot but say that those petty subtle
devices, which are found out in the Etymologizing of patains, would descend
more easily into the river of Seine, to serve for ever at the Millars bridge
upon the said water, as it was heretofore decreed by the King of the
Canarrians, according to the sentence or judgment given thereupon, which is to
be seen in the Registry and Records within the Clerks office of this house.

And therefore (my Lord) I do most humbly require, that by your Lordship there
may be said and declared upon the case what is reasonable, with costs, damages,
and interests. Then said Pantagruel, My friend, is this all you have to say?
Kissebreech answered, Yes, (my Lord) for I have told all the tuautem, and have
not varied at all upon mine honor in so much as one single word. You then,
(said Pantagruel) my Lord of Suckfist; say what you will, and be brief, without
omitting nevertheless any thing that may serve to the purpose.

CHAP. XII. How the Lord of Suckfist pleaded before Pantagruel.
THen began the Lord Suckfist in manner as follows: My Lord, and you my
masters, if the iniquity of men were as easily seen in categoricall judgment,
as we can discern flies in a milk-pot; the worlds four Oxen had not been so
eaten up with Rats, nor had so many ears upon the earth been nibled away so
scurvily; for although all that my adversary has spoken be of a very soft and
downy truth, in so much as concerns the Letter and History of the factum: yet
nevertheless the crafty slights, cunning subtilties, sly cosenages, and
little troubling intanglements are hid under the Rose-pot, the common cloak and
cover of all fraudulent deceits

Should I endure, that, when I am eating my pottage equal with the best, and
that without either thinking or speaking any manner of ill, they rudely come to
vex, trouble, and perplex my brains with that antic Proverb which says,

Who in his pottage-eating drinks, will not
When he is dead and buried, see one jot.
and good Lady, how many great Captains have we seen in the day of battle,
when in open field the Sacrament was distributed in lunchions of the sanctified
bread of the Confraternity, the more honestly to nod their heads, play on the
lute, and crack with their tails, to make pretty little platform leaps, in
keeping level by the ground: but now the world is unshackled from the corners
of the packs of Leycester. One flies out lewdly and becomes debauched, another
likewise five, four and two, and that at such random, that if the Court take
not some course therein, it will make as bad a season in matter of gleaning
this year, as ever it made, or it will make goblets. If any poor creature go
to the stoves to illuminate his muzzle with a Cow-shard, or to buy
winter-boots, and that the Sergeants passing by, or those of the watch happen
to receive the decoction of a clystere, or the fecal matter of a close-stool,
upon their rustling-wrangling-clutter-keeping masterships, should any because
of that make bold to clip the shillings and testers, and fry the wooden dishes?
sometimes ^^^^ we think one thing, God does another; and and when the Sun is
wholly set, all beasts are in the shade: let me never be believed again, if I
do not gallantly prove it by several people that have seen the light of the day.

In the year thirty and six, buying a Dutch curtail, which was a middle sized
horse, both high and short, of a wool good enough, and died in grain, as the
Goldsmiths assured me, although the Notarie put an etc. in it; I told really,
that I was not a Clerk of so much learning as to snatch at the Moon with my
teeth; but as for the Butterfirkin, where Vulcanian deeds and evidences were
sealed, the rumor was, and the report thereof went current, that salt-beefe
will make one find the way to the wine without a candle, though it were hid in
the bottom of a Colliers sack, and that with his drawers on he were mounted on
a barbed horse furnished with a fronstal, and such arms, thighs and leg-pieces
as are requisite for the well frying and broyling of a swaggering sauciness.
Here is a sheeps head, and it is well they make a proverb of this, that it is
good to see black Cowes in burnt wood, when one attains to the enjoyment of his
love. I had a consultation upon this point with my Masters the Clerks, who for
resolution concluded in frisesomorum, that there is nothing like to mowing in
the summer, and sweeping clean away in water, well garnished with paper, ink,
pens and penknives of Lions upon the river of Rosne; dolopym dolopof, tarabin
tarabas, tu^ prut pish: for incontinently after that armor begins to smell of
garlic, the rust will go near to eat the liver, not of him that wears it, and
then do they nothing else but withstand others courses, and wry-neckedly set up
their bristles against one another, in lightly passing over their afternoons
sleep, and this is that which makes salt so dear. My Lords, believe not, when
the said good woman had with bird-lime, caught the shovelar foul, the better
before a Sergeants witness, to deliver the younger sons portion to him, that
the sheeps pluck, or hogs haslet, did dodge and shrink back in the Usurers
purses, or that there could be any thing better to preserve one from the
Cannibals, then to take a rope of onions, knit with three hundred turnips, and
a little of a Calves Chaldern of the best allay that the Alchymists have:
provided, that they daub and do over with clay, as also calcinate and burn to
dust these pantoffles, muf in muf out; Moustin moustard, with the fine sauce of
the juice of the rabble rout, whilst they hide themselves in some petty
moldwarphole, saving always the little slices of bacon. Now if the dice will
not favor you with any other throw but ambesace, and the chance of three at
the great end, mark well the ace, then take me your dame, settle her in a
corner of the bed, and whisk me her up drilletrille there there,
tourelouralala, which when you have done, take a hearty draught of the best,
despicando grenovillibus, in despite of the frogs; whose fair course
bebuskined stockins shall be set apart for the little green geese, or mued
goslings, which fatned in a coope, take delight to sport themselves at the
wagtaile game, waiting for the beating of the metal, and heating of the wax
by the slavering drivellers of consolation.

Very true it is, that the four oxen which are in debate, and whereof mention
was made, were somewhat short in memory: nevertheless, to understand the gamme
aright, they feared neither the Cormorant no^ Mallard of Savoy, which put the
good people of my country in great hope, that their children sometime should
become very skilful in Algorisme; therefore is it, that by a law rubric and
special sentence thereof, that we cannot fail to take the wolf, if we make
our hedges higher then the windmill, whereof somewhat was spoken by the
Plaintiff. But the great Devil did envy it, and by that means put the high
Duchess far behind, who played the devils in swilling down and tippling at
the good liquour, trink mien herr, trink, trink, by two of my table men in the
corner-point I have gained the lurch; for it is not probable, nor is there any
appearance of truth in this saying, that at Paris upon a little bridge the hen
is proportionable: and were they as copped and high-crested as marish whoops,
if veritably they did not sacrifice the Printers pumpet-balls at Moreb, with a
new edge set upon them by text letters, or those of a swift-writing hand, it is
all one to me, so that the head-band of the book breed not moths or worms in
it. And put the case, that at the coupling together of the buckhounds, the
little puppies should have waxed proud before the Notarie could have given an
account of the serving of his Writ by the Cabalistick Art, it will necessarily
follow (under correction of the better judgment of the Court,) that six acres
of meadow ground of the greatest breadth, will make three butts of fine ink,
without paying ready money: considering that at the Funeral of King Charles, we
might have had the fathom in open market for one and two, that is deuce ace:
this I may affirm with a safe conscience upon my oath of wool.

And I see ordinarily in all good bagpipes, that when they go to the
counterfeiting of the chirping of small birds, by swinging a broom three times
about a chimney, and putting his name upon record, they do nothing but bend a
Crossebowe backward, and wind a horn, if perhaps it be too hot, and that by
making it fast to a rope he was to draw, immediately after the sight of the
letters, the Cowes were restored to him. Such another sentence after the
homeliest manner was pronounced in the seventeenth year, because of the bad
government of Louzefougarouse, whereunto it may please the Court to have
regard. I desire to be rightly understood; for truly I say not, but that in all
equity, and with an upright conscience, those may very well be dispossessed, who
drink holy water, as one would do a weavers shuttle, whereof suppositories are
made to those that will not resign, but on the terms of ell and tell, and
giving of one thing for another. Tun^ (my Lords) quid juris pro minoribus? for
the common custom of the Salick law is such, that the first incendiarie or
firebrand of sedition, that flayes the Cow, and wipes his nose in a full
consort of music, without blowing in the Coble^ ^titches, should in the time
of the nightmare sublimate the penury of his member by moss gathered when
people are like to foundre themselves at the mess at midnight, to give the
estrapade to these white-wines of Anjou, that do the feat of the leg in lifting
it (by horsemen called the Gambetta,) and that neck to neck, after the fashion
of Britanie, (concluding as before with costs, damages and interests.

After that the Lord of Suckfist had ended, Pantagruel said to the Lord of
Kissebreech, My friend, have you a mind to make any reply to what is said? No,
(my Lord) answered Kissebreech; for I have spoke all I intended, and nothing
but the truth, therefore put an end for Gods sake to our difference, for we are
here at great charge.

CHAP. XIII. How Pahtagruel gave judgment upon the difference of the two Lords.
THen Pantagruel rising up, assembled all the Presidents, Counselors and
Doctors that were there, and said unto them: Come now (my Masters) you have
heard ( vivae vocis or aculo) the Controversy that is in question, what do you
think of it? They answered him, We have indeed heard it, but have not
understood the devil so much as one circumstance of the case; and therefore we
beseech you un^ voce, and in courtesy request you, that you would give
sentence as you think good, and ex nunc prout ex tunc, we are satisfied with
it, and do ratify it with our full consents: Well, my Masters (said
Pantagruel) seeing you are so pleased, I will do it: but I do not truly find
the case so difficult as you make it: your paragraph Caton: the law Frater, the
law Gallus, the law Quinque pedum, the law Vinum, the law Si Dominus, the law
Matter, the law Mulier bona, the law Si quis, the law Pomponius, the law Fundi,
the law Emptor, the law Praetor, the law Venditor, and a great many others are
far more intricate in my opinion. After he had spoke this, he walked a turn
or two about the hall, plodding very profoundly as one may think; for he did
groan like an Ass, whilst they girth him too hard, with the very
intensivenesse of considering how he was bound in conscience to do right to
both parties, without varying or accepting of persons. Then he returned, sat
down, and began to pronounce sentence as follows.

Having seen, heard, calculated and well considered of the difference between
the Lords of Kissebreech and Suckfist; the Court says unto them, that in
regard of the sudden quaking, shivering and hoarinesse of the flickermouse,
bravely declining from the estival solstice, to attempt by private means the
surprisal of toyish trifles in those, who are a little unwell for having taken
a draught too much, through the lewd demeanor and vexation of the beetles,
that inhabit the Diarodal climate of an hypocritical Ape on horseback, bending
a Crossebowe backwards. The Plaintiff truly had just cause to calfet, or with
Ockam to stop the chinks of the gallion, which the good woman blew up with
wind, having one foot shod and the other bare, reimbursing and restoring to
him low and stiff in his conscience, as many bladder-nuts and wild pistaches
as there is of hair in eighteen Cowes, with as much for the embroiderer, and
so much for that. He is likewise declared innocent of the case privileged from
the Knapdardies, into the danger whereof it was thought he had incurred;
because he could not jocundly and with fullness of freedom untrusse and dung,
by the decision of a pair of gloves perfumed with the sent of bum-gunshot, at
the walnut-tree taper, as is usual in his country of Mirobalois. Slacking
therefore the top-saile, and letting go the boulin with the brazen bullets,
where with the Mariners did by way of protestation bake in paste-meat, great
store of pulse, interquilted with the dormouse, whose hawks bells were made
with a puntinaria, after the manner of Hungary or Flanders lace, and which his
brother in law carried in a Panier, lying near to three chevrons or bordered
gueules, whilst he was clean out of heart, drooping and crest-fallen by the
too narrow sifting, canvassing, and curious examining of the matter, in the
angulary doghole of nastie scoundrels, from whence we shoot at the vermiformal
popingay, with the flap made of a foxtaile.

But in that he charge the Defendant, that he was a botcher, cheese-eater,
and trimmer of man's flesh imbalmed, which in the arsiversie swagfall tumble was
not found true, as by the Defendant was very well discussed.

The Court therefore does condemn and amerce him in three porringers of curds,
well cemented and closed together, shining like pearls, and Codpieced after
the fashion of the Country, to be paid unto the said Defendant, about the
middle of August in May: but on the other part the Defendant shall be bound to
furnish him with hay and stubble, for stopping the caltrops of his throat,
troubled and impulregafized, with gabardines garbeled shufflingly, and friends
as before, without costs and for cause.

Which sentence being pronounced, the two Parties departed both contented with
the decree, which was a thing almost incredible; for it never came to pass
since the great rain, nor shall the like occur in thirteen jubilees hereafter,
that two Parties contradictorily contending in judgment, be equally satisfied
and well pleased with the definitive sentence. As for the Counselors, and
other Doctors in the law, that were there present, they were all so ravished
with admiration at the more then humane wisdom of Pantagruel, which they did
most clearly perceive to be in him, by his so accurate decision of this so
difficult and thornie cause, that their spirits, with the extremity of the
rapture, being elevated above the pitch of actuating the organs of the body,
they fell into a trance and sudden ecstasy, wherein they stayed for the space
of three long hours, and had been so as yet in that condition, had not some
good people fetched store of vinegar and rose water, to bring them again unto
their former sense and understanding, for the which God be praised every where;
And so be it.

CHAP. XIV. How Panurge related the manner how he escaped out of the hands of
the Turks.
THe great wit and judgment of Pantagruel, was immediately after this made
known unto all the world, by setting forth his praises in print, and putting
upon record this late wonderful proof he has given thereof amongst the Rolls
of the Crown, and Registers of the Palace, in such sort, that every body began
to say, that Solomon, who by a probable guess only, without any further
certainty, caused the child to be delivered to its own mother, showed never in
his time such a Masterpiece of wisdom, as the good Pantagruel has done; happy
are we therefore that have him in our Country. And indeed they would have made
him thereupon Master of the Requests, and President in the Court: but he
refused all, very graciously thanking them for their offer, for (said he) there
is too much slavery in these offices, and very hardly can they be saved that do
exercise them, considering the great corruption that is amongst men: which
makes me believe, if the empty seats of Angels be not filled with other kind of
people then those, we shall not have the final judgment these seven thousand
sixty and seven jubilees yet to come; and so Cusanus will be deceived in his
conjecture: Remember that I have told you of it, and given you fair
advertisement in time and place convenient.

But if you have any hogsheads of good wine, I willingly will accept of a
present of that, which they very heartily did do, in sending him of the best
that was in the City, and he drank reasonably well, but poor Pan^rge bibbed and
bowsed of it most villainously, for he was as dry as a red-herring, as lean as
a rake, and like a poor, lank, slender cat, walked gingerly as if he had trod
upon eggs: so that by some one being admonished, in the midst of his draught
of a large deep bowl, full of excellent Claret, with these words, Fair and
softly, Gossip, you suck up as if you were mad: I give thee to the devil, (said
he) thou have not found here thy little tippling sippers of Paris, that drink no
more then the little bird called a spink or chaffinch, and never take in their
beak full of liquour, till they be bobbed on the tails after the manner of the
sparrows. O companion, if I could mount up as well as I can get down, I had
been long ere this above the sphere of the Moon with Empedocles. But I cannot
tell what a devil this means. This wine is so good and delicious, that the
more I drink thereof, the more I am athirst; I believe that the shadow of my
Master Pantagruel, engendereth the altered and thirsty men, as the Moon does
the catarres and defluxions; at which word the company began to laugh: which
Pantagruel perceiving, said, Panurge What is that which moves you to laugh so?
Sir, said he, I was telling them that these devilish Turks are very unhappy,
in that they never drink one drop of wine, and that though there were no other
harm in all Mahomets Alcoran, yet for this one base point of abstinence from
wine, which therein is commanded, I would not submit my self unto their law.
But now tell me, (said Pantagruel) how you escaped out of their hands. By G --
Sir (said Panurge) I will not lie to you in one word.

The rascally Turks had broached me upon a spit all larded like a rabbet, (for
I was so dry and meagre, that otherwise of my flesh they would have made but
very bad meat) and in this manner began to roast me alive. As they were thus
roasting me, I recommended my self unto the divine grace, having in my mind
the good St. Lawrence, and always hoped in God that he would deliver me out of
this torment, which came to pass, and that very strangely; for as I did commit
my self with all my heart unto God, crying, Lord God help me, Lord God save me,
Lord God take me out of this pain and hellish torture, wherein these traitorous
dogs detain me for my sincerity in the maintenance of thy law: the roster or
turn-spit fell asleep by the divine will, or else by the virtue of some good
Mercury, who cunningly brought Argus into a sleep for all his hundred eyes:
when I saw that he did no longer turn me in roasting, I looked upon him, and
perceived that he was fast asleep, then took I up in my teeth a firebrand by
the end where it was not burnt, and cast it into the lap of my roaster, and
another did I throw as well as I could under a field-couche, that was placed
near to the chimney, wherein was the strawbed of my Master turnspit; presently
the fire took hold in the straw, and from the straw to the bed, and from the
bed to the loft, which was planked and seeled with fur, after the fashion of
the foot of a lamp: but the best was, that the fire which I had cast into the
lap of my paultry roaster, burnt all his groine, and was beginning to cease
upon his cullions, when he became sensible of the danger, for his smelling was
not so bad, but that he felt it sooner then he could have seen daylight: then
suddenly getting up, and in a great amazement running to the window, he cried
out to the streets as high as he could, dalbaroth, dalbaroth, dalbaroth, which
is as much to say as, Fire, fire, fire: incontinently turning about, he came
straight toward me, to throw me quite into the fire, and to that effect had
already cut the ropes, wherewith my hands were tied, and was undoing the cords
from off my feet; when the Master of the house hearing him cry, Fire, and
smelling the smoke from the very street where he was walking with some other
Baashaws and Mustaphaes, ran with all the speed he had to save what he could,
and to carry away his Jewels; yet such was his rage (before he could well
resolve how to go about it,) that he caught the broach whereon I was spitted,
and therewith killed my roaster stark dead, of which wound he died there for
want of government or otherwise; for he ran him in with the spit a little above
the navel, toward the right flank, till he pierced the third lappet of his
liver, and the blow flanting upwards from the midriffe or diaphragme, through
which it had made penetration, the spit past athwart the pericardium, or
capsule of his heart, and came out above at his shoulders, betwixt the spondyls
or turning joints of the chine of the back, and the left homoplat, which we
call the shoulder blade.

True it is, (for I will not lie,) that in drawing the spit out of my body, I
fell to the ground near unto the Andirons, and so by the fall took some hurt,
which indeed had been greater, but that the lardons, or little slices of bacon,
wherewith I was stuck, kept off the blow. My Baashaw then seeing the case to be
desperate, his house burnt without remission, and all his goods lost, gave
himself over unto all the devils in hell, calling upon some of them by their
names, Gringoth, Astaroth, Rappalus, and Gribouillis, nine several times, which
when I saw, I had above six pence worth of fear, dreading that the devils
would come even then to carry away this fool, and seeing me so near him would
perhaps snatch me up too: I am already (thought I) half roasted, and my
lardons, will be the cause of my mischief; for these devils are very lickorous
of lardons, according to the authority which you have of the Philosopher
Iamblicus and Murmault, in the Apology of Bossuris, adulterated pro magistros
nostros: but for my better security I made the sign of the Cross; crying,
Hag^os, athanatos, hotheos, and none came: at which my rogue Baashaw being very
much aggrieved, would in transpiercing his heart with my spit have killed
himself; and to that purpose had set it against his breast, but it could not
enter, because it was not sharp enough; whereupon I perceiving that he was not
like to work upon his body the effect which he intended, although he did not
spare all the force he had to thrust it forward, came up to him and said,
Master Bugrino, thou do here but trifle away thy time, or rashly lose it, for
thou will never kill thy self thus as thou do: well thou may hurt or
bruise somewhat within thee, so as to make thee languish all thy lifetime most
pitifully amongst the hands of the Chirurgions; but if thou will be counseled
by me, I will kill thee clear outright, so that thou shall not so much as feel
it, and trust me, for I have killed a great many others, who have found
themselves very well after it: Ha, my friend, said he, I prithee do so, and for
thy pains I will give thee my Codpiece, take, here it is, there are six
hundred* Seraphs in it, and some fine Diamonds, and most excellent Rubies. And
where are they (said Epistemon?) By St. John (said Panurge) they are a good way
hence, if they always keep going* but where is the last years snow? this was
the greatest care that Villon the Parisien Poet took. Make an end (said
Pantagruel) that we may know how thou did dress thy Baashaw: By the faith of
an honest man (said Panurge) I do not lie in one word, I swadled him in a
scurvie swathel-binding, which I found lying there half burnt, and with my
cords tied him royster-like both hand and foot, in such sort that he was not
able to winse; then past my spit thorough his throat, and hanged him thereon,
fastening the end thereof at two great hooks of cramp-irons, upon which they
did hang their Halberds; and then kindling a fair fire under him, did flame
you up my Milourt, as they use to do dry herrings in a chimney: with this,
taking his budget, and a little javelin that was upon the foresaid hooks, I ran
away a fair gallop-rake, and God he knows how I did smell my shoulder of
mutton.

When I was come down into the street, I found every body come to put out the
fire with store of water, and seeing me so halferoasted, they did naturally
pity my case, and threw all their water upon me, which by a most joyful
refreshing of me, did me very much good: then did they present me with some
victuals, but I could not eat much, because they gave me nothing to drink but
water after their fashion. Other hurt they did me none, only one little
villainous Turkey knobbreasted rogue, came thiefteously to snatch away some of
my lardons, but I gave him such a sturdie thump and sound rap on the fingers,
with all the weight of my javelin, that he came no more the second time.
Shortly after this, there came toward me a pretty young Corinthian wench, who
brought me a box full of Conserves, of round Mirabolan plums, called Emblicks,
and looked upon my poor Robin* with an eye of great compassion, as it was
flea-bitten and pinked with the sparkles of the fire from whence it came, for
it reached no further in length, (believe me) then my knees; but note, that
this roasting cured me entirely of a Sciatick, whereunto I had been subject
above seven years before, upon that side, which my roaster, by falling asleep,
suffered to be burnt.

Now whilst they were thus busy about me, the fire triumphed, never ask, How?
for it took hold on above two thousand houses, which one of them espying, cried
out, saying, By Mahooms belly all the City is on fire, and we do nevertheless
stand gazing here, without offering to make any relief: upon this every one ran
to save his own; for my part, I took my way toward the gate. When I was got
upon the knap of a little hillock, not far off, I turned me about as did Lots
wife, and looking back, saw all the City burning in a fair fire, whereat I was
so glad, that I had almost beshit my self for joy: but God punished me well
for it: How? said Pantagruel: Thus, said Panurge; for when with pleasure I
beheld this jolly fire, jesting with my self, and saying, Ha poor flies, ha
poor mice, you will have a bad winter of it this year, the fire is in your
reeks, it is in your bed-straw, out came more then six, yea more then thirteen
hundred and eleven dogs great and small, altogether out of the town, flying
away from the fire; at the first approach they ran all upon me, being carried
on by the sent of my leacherous half-roasted flesh, and had even then devoured
me in a trice, if my good Angel had not well inspired me with the instruction
of a remedy, very sovereign against the toothache. And wherefore (said
Pantagruel) were thou afraid of the toothache, or pain of the teeth? were
thou not cured of thy Rheumes? By Palme-sunday, (said Panurge) is there any
greater pain of the teeth, then when the dogs have you by the legs? but on a
sudden, (as my good Angel directed me) I thought upon my lardons, and threw
them into the midst of the field amongst them: then did the dogs run, and fight
with one another at fair teeth, which should have the lardons: by this means
they left me, and I left them also bustling with, and hairing one another. Thus
did I escape frolic and lively, grammercie roastmeat and cookery.

CHAP. XV. How Panurge showed a very new way to build the walls of Paris.
PAntagruel one day to refresh himself of his study, went a walking toward St.
Marcels suburbs, to see the extravagancie of the Gobeline building, and to
taste of their spiced bread. Panurge was with him, having always a flaggon
under his gown, and a good slice of a gammon of bacon; for without this he
never went, saying, that it was as a Yeoman of the guard to him, to preserve
his body from harm, other sword carried he none: and when Pantagruel would
have given him one, he answered, that he needed none, for that it would but
heat his milt. Yea but (said Epistemon) if thou should be set upon, how
would thou defend thy self? With great buskinades or brodkin blows,
answered he, provided thursts were forbidden. At their return, Panurge
considered the walls of the City of Paris, and in derision said to Pantagruel,
See what fair walls here are! O how strong they are, and well fitted to keep
geese in a mue or coop to fatten them! by my beard they are competently scurvie
for such a City as this is; for a Cow with one fart would go near to overthrow
above six fathoms of them. O my friend (said Pantagruel) do thou know what
Agesilaus said, when he was asked, Why the great City of Lacedemon was not
enclosed with walls? Lo here (said he) the walls of the City, in showing them
the inhabitants and Citizens thereof, so strong, so well armed, and so expert
in military discipline; signifying thereby, that there is no wall but of bones;
and that Towns and Cities cannot have a surer wall, nor better fortification
then the prowess and virtue of the Citizens and Inhabitants; so is this City
so strong, by the great number of warlike people that are in it, that they care
not for making any other walls. Besides, whosoever would go about to wall it,
as Strasbourg, Orleans or Ferrara, would find it almost impossible, the cost
and charges would be so excessive. Yea, but (said Panurge) it is good
nevertheless to have an outside of stone, when we are invaded by our enemies,
were it but to ask, Who is below there? As for the enormous expense, which you
say would be needful for undertaking the great work of walling this City about,
if the Gentlemen of the Town will be pleased to give me a good rough cup of
wine, I will show them a pretty, strange and new way how they may build them
good cheap. How (said Pantagruel?) Do not speak of it then (answered Panurge,)
and I will tell it you. I see that the sine quo nons, killibistris, or
contrapunctums of the women of this Country, are better cheap then stones: of
them should the walls be built, ranging them in good symmetrie by the rules of
Architecture, and placing the largest in the first ranks, then sloping
downwards ridgewayes, like the back of an Ass, the middle sized ones must be
ranked next, and last of all the least and smallest. This done, there must be a
fine little interlacing of them, like points of Diamonds, as is to be seen in
the grear Tower of Bourges, with a like number of the nudinnudo's,
nilnisistando's, and stiff bracmards, that dwell in amongst the claustral
Codpieces. What devil were able to overthrow such walls? there is no metal like
it to resist blows, in so far that if Culverin-shot should come to grease
upon it, you would incontinently see distill from thence the blessed fruit of
the great pox, as small as rain: beware in the name of the devils, and hold
off; furthermore, no thunderbolt or lightning would fall upon it, for why? they
are all either blessed or consecrated: I see but one inconveniency in it: Ho, ho,
ha, ha, ha, (said Pantagruel,) and what is that? It is that the flies would be
so lickorish of them, that you would wonder, and would quickly gather there
together, and there leave their ordure and excretions, and so all the work
would be spoiled. But see how that might be remedied, they must be wiped and
made rid of the flies with fair fox-tailes, or good great viedazes (which are
Asse-pizzles) of Provence. And to this purpose I will tell you (as we go to
supper,) a brave example set down by Frater Lubinus libro de compotationibus
mendicantium; in the time that the beasts did speak, which is not yet three
days since.

A poor Lion, walking through the fortest of Bieure, and saying his own little
private devotions, past under a tree, where there was a roguish Collier gotten
up to cut down wood, who seeing the Lion, cast his hatchet at him, and wounded
him enormously in one of his legs, whereupon the Lion halting, he so long
toiled and turmoiled himself in roaming up and down the forest to find help,
that at last he met with a Carpenter, who willingly looked upon his wound,
cleansed it as well as he could, and filled it with moss, telling him that he
must wipe his wound well, that the flies might not do their excrements in it,
whilst he should go search for some yarrow or millefoile, commonly called the
Carpenters herb. The Lion being thus healed, walked along in the forest, at
what time a sempiternous Crone and old Hag, was picking up, and gathering some
sticks in the said forest, whoseeing the Lion coming toward her, for fear
fell down backwards, in such sort, that the wind blew up her gown, coats and
smock even as far as above her shoulders; which the Lion perceiving, for pity
ran to see whether she had taken any hurt by the fall, and thereupon
considering her how do you call it, said, O poor woman, who has thus wounded
thee? which words when he had spoken, he espied a fox, whom he called to come
to him, saying, Gossip Renard, hau, hither, hither, and for cause: when the fox
was come, he said unto him, My gossip and friend, they have hurt this good
woman here between the legs most villainously, and there is a manifest solution
of continuity, see how great a wound it is, even from the tail up to the
navel, in measure four, nay full five handfulls and a half; this is the blow
of an hatchet, I doubt me it is an old wound, and therefore that the flies may
not get into it, wipe it lustily well and hard; I prethy, both within and
without; thou have a good tail and long, wipe, my friend, wipe, I beseech
thee, and in the mean while I will go get some moss to put into it; for thus
ought we to succor and help one another, wipe it hard, thus, my friend, wipe
it well, for this wound must be often wiped, otherwise the Party cannot be at
ease: go to, wipe well, my little gossip, wipe, God has furnished thee with a
tail, thou have a long one, and of a bigness proportionable, wipe hard and be
not weary. A good wiper, who in wiping continually, wipeth with his wipard, by
wasps shall never be wounded: wipe, my pretty minion, wipe, my little bullie, I
will not stay long. Then went he to get store of moss; and when he was a
little way off, he cried out in speaking to the fox thus, Wipe well still,
gossip, wipe, and let it never grieve thee to wipe well, my little gossip, I
will put thee into service to be wiper to Don Pedro de Castille, wipe, only
wipe, and no more: the poor fox wiped as hard as he could, here and there,
within and withou: but the false old trot did so fizzle and fist, that she
stunk like a hundred devils, which put the poor fox to a great de^l of ill
ease, for he knew not to what side to turn himself, to escape the unsavory
perfume of this old woman's postern blasts, and whilst to that effect he was
shifting hither and thither, without knowing how to shun the annoyance of those
unwholesom gusts, he saw that behind there was yet another hole, not so great
as that which he did wipe, out of which came this filthy and infectious air.
The Lion at last returned, bringing with him of moss more then eighteen packs
would hold, and began to put into the wound, with a staff that which he had
provided for that purpose, and had already put in full sixteen packs and a
half, at which he was amazed: What a devil? (said he) this wound is very deep,
it would hold above two cart-loads of moss. The fox perceiving this, said unto
the Lion, O gossip Lion, my friend, I pray thee do not put in all thy moss
there, keep somewhat; for there is yet here another little hole, that stinks
like five hundred devils; I am almost choked with the smell thereof, it is so
pestiferous and impoisoning.

Thus must these walls be kept from the flies, and wages allowed to some for
wiping of them. Then said Pantagruel, How do thou know that the privy parts
of women are at such a cheap rate? for in this City there are many virtuous,
honest and chaste women besides the maids: Et ubi prenus, said Panurge? I will
give you my opinion of it, and that upon certain and assured knowledge. I do
not brag that I have bumbasted four hundred and seventeen, since I came into
this City, though it be but nine days ago: but this very morning I met with a
good fellow, who in a wallet, such as Aesops was, carried two little girls of
two or three years old at the most, one before, and the other behind: he
demanded alms of me, but I made him answer, that I had more cods then pence;
afterward I asked him, Good man, these two girls are they maids? Brother,
said he, I have carried them thus these two years, and in regard of her that
is before, whom I see continually, in my opinion she is a Virgin, nevertheless
I will not put my finger in the fire for it; as for her that is behind,
doubtless I can say nothing. Indeed (said Pantagruel) thou art a gentile
companion, I will have thee to be apparelled in my livery, and therefore caused
him to be clothed most gallantly according to the fashion that then was, only
that Panurge would have the Codpiece of his breeches three foot long, and shape
square, not round, which was done and was well worth the seeing. Oftentimes was
he wont to say that the world had not yet known the emolument and utility that
is in wearing great Codpieces; but time would one day teach it them, as all
things have been invented in time. God keep from hurt (said he) the good fellow
whose long Codpiece or Braguet has saved his life: God keep from hurt him,
whose long Braguet has been worth to him in one day, one hundred threescore
thousand and nine Crowns: God keep from hurt him, who by his long Braguet has
saved a whole City from dying by famine. And by G -- I will make a book of the
commodity of long Braguets, when I shall have more leisure. And indeed he
composed a fair great book with figures, but it is not printed as yet that I
know of.

CHAP. XVI. Of the qualities and conditions of Panurge.
PAnurge was of a middle stature, not too high, nor too low, and had somewhat
an Aquiline nose, made like the handle of a rasor: he was at that time five and
thirty years old or thereabouts, fine to gild like a leaden dagger; for he was
a notable cheater and cony-catcher, he was a very gallant and proper man of his
person, only that he was a little leacherous, and naturally subject to a kind
of disease, which at that time they called lack of money: it is an incomparable
grief, yet notwithstanding he had chreescore and three tricks to come by it at
his need, of which the most honorable and most ordinary was in manner of
thieving, secret purloining and filching; for he was a wicked lewd rogue, a
cosener, drinker, royster, rover, and a very dissolute and debautch'd fellow,
if there were any in Paris; otherwise, and in all matters else, the best and
most virtuous man in the world: and he was still contriving some plot, and
devising mischief against the Sergeants and the watch.

At one time he assembled three or four especial good hacksters and roaring
boys, made them in the evening drink like Templers, afterward led them till
they came under St. Genevieve, or about the College of Navarre, and at the
hour that the watch was coming up that way, which he knew by putting his sword
upon the pavement, and his ear by it, and when he heard his sword shake, it
was an infallible sign that the watch was near at that instant: then he and
his comanions took a tumbrel or dung-cart, and gave it the brangle, hurling it
with all their force down the hill, and so overthrew all the poor watchmen like
pigs, and then ran away upon the other*side; for in less then two days, he
knew all the streets, lanes and turnings in Paris, as well as his Deus det.

At another time he made in some fair place, where the said watch was to
pass, a train of gunpowder, and at the very instant, that they went along,
set fire to it, and then made himself sport to see what good grace they had in
running away, thinking that St. Antonies fire had caught them by the legs. As
for the poor Masters of Arts, he did persecute them above all others: when he
encountered with any of them upon the street, he would not never fail to put
some trick or other upon them, sometimes putting the bit of a fried turd in
their graduate hoods: At other times pinning on little fox-tails, or hareseares
behind them, or some such other roguish prank. One day that they were
appointed all to meet in the fodder-street, he made a Borbonnesa tart, or
filthy and slovenly compound, made of store of garlic, of Assa foetida, of
Castoreum, of dogs turds very warm, which he steeped, tempered and liquifi'd in
the corrupt matter of pockie biles, and pestiferous botches, and very early in
the morning, therewith anointed all the pavement, in such sort, that the devil
could not have endured it, which made all these good people, there to lay up
their gorges, and vomit what was upon their stomachs before all the world, as
if they had flayed the fox; and ten or twelve of them died of the plague,
fourteen became lepers, eighteen grew lousie, and above seven and twenty had
the pox but he did not care a button for it. He commonly carried a whip under
his gown wherewith he whipped without remission the pages, whom he found
carrying wine to their Masters, to make them mend their pace. In his coat he
had above six and twenty little fabs and pockets always full, one with some
lead-water, and a little knife as sharp as a glovers needle, wherewith he used
to cut purses: Another with some kind of bitter stuff, which he threw into
the eyes of those he met: another with clotburrs, penned with little geese or
capons feathers, which he cast upon the gowns and caps of honest people: and
often made them fair horns, which they wore about all the City, sometimes all
their life. Very often also upon the women's French hoods would he stick in the
hind-part somewhat made in the shape of a man's member. In another he had a
great many little horns full of fleas and lice, which he borrowed from the
beggars of St. Innocent, and cast them with small canes or quills to write
with, into the necks of the daintiest Gentlewomen that he could find, yea even
in the Church, for he never seated himself above in the quire, but always sat
in the body of the Church amongst the women, both at Mass, at Vespres, and at
Sermon. In another, he used to have good store of hooks and buckles, wherewlth
he would couple men and women together, that sat in company close to one
another, but especially those that wore gowns of crimson taffaties, that when
they were about to go away, they might rent all their gowns. In another, he
had a squib furnished with tinder, matches, stones to strike fire, and all
other tackling necessary for it: in another, two or three burning glasses,
wherewith he made both men and women sometimes mad, and in the Church put them
quite out of countenance; for he said that there was but an Antistrophe, or
little more difference then of a literal inversion between a woman, folle a la
mess, and molle a la fesse; that is, foolish at the Mass, and of a pliant
buttock.

In another he had a good deal of needles and thread, wherewith he did a
thousand little devilish pranks. One time at the entry of the Palace unto the
great Hall, where a certain gray Friar or Cordelier was to say Mass to the
Counselors: He did help to apparel him, and put on his vestments, but in the
accoutring of him, he sowed on his alb, surplice or stole to his gown and
shirt, and then withdrew himself, when the said Lords of the Court, or
Counselors came to hear the said Mass; but when it came to the Ite, missa
est, that the poor Frater would have laid by his stole or surplice (as the
fashion then was) he plucked off withal both his frock and shirt which were
well sowed together, and thereby stripping himself up to the very shoulders,
showed his bell vedere to all the world, together with his Don Cypriano, which
was no small one, as you may imagine: and the Friar still kept haling, but so
much the more did he discover himself, and lay open his back-parts, till one of
the Lords of the Court said, How now, what is the matter? will this fair Father
make us here an offering of his tail to kiss it? nay, St. Antonies fire kiss
it for us. From thenceforth it was ordained that the poor Fathers should never
disrobe themselves any more before the world, but in their vestry-room, or
sextry, as they call it; especially in the presence of women, lest it should
tempt them to the sin of longing, and disordinate desire. The people then
asked, why it was the Friars had so long and large genitories? the said Panurge
resolved the Problem very neatly, saying, That which makes Asses to have such
great ears, is that their dams did put no biggins on their heads, as Alliac^
mentions in his suppositions: by the like reason, that which makes the
genitories or generation-tooles of those fair Fraters so long is, for that
they ware no bottomed breeches, and therefore their jolly member having no
impediment, hangs dangling at liberty, as far as it can reach, with a
wigle-wagle down to their knees, as women carry their patinotre beads: and the
cause wherefore they have it so correspondently great, is, that in this
constant wig-wagging the humors of the body descend into the said member: for
according to the Legists, Agitation and continual motion is cause of attraction.

Item, he had another pocket full of itching powder, called stone-allum,
whereof he would cast some into the backs of those women, whom he judged to be
most beautiful and stately, which did so ticklishly gall them, that some would
strip themselves in the open view of the world, and others dance like a cock
upon hot embers, or a drumstick on a taber: others again ran about the streets,
and he would run after them* to such as were in the stripping vein, he would
very civilly come to offer his attendance, and cover them with his cloak, like
a courteous and very gracious man.

Item, in another he had a little leather bottle full of old oil, wherewith,
when he saw any man or woman in a rich new handsome suit, he would grease,
smutch and spoil all the best parts of it under color and pretense of touching
them, saying, This is good cloth, this is good satin, good taffaties; Madam,
God give you all that your noble heart desires; you have a new suit, pretty
Sir; and you a new gown, sweet Mistress, God give you joy of it, and maintain
you in all prosperity, and with this would lay his hand upon their shoulder, at
which touch such a villainous spot was left behind, so enormously engraven to
perpetuity in the very soul, body and reputation, that the devil himself could
never have taken it away: Then upon his departing, he would say, Madam, take
heed you do not fall, for there is a filthy great hole before you, whereinto if
you put your foot, you will quite spoil your self. Another he had all full of
Euphorbium, very finely pulverised, in that powder did he lay a fair
handkerchief curiously wrought, which he had stolen from a pretty Seamstresse
of the Palace, in taking away a lowse from off her bosom, which he had put
there himself: and when he came into the company of some good Ladies, he would
trifle them into a discourse of some fine workmanship of bonelace, then
immediately put his hand into their bosom, asking them, And this work, is it
of Flanders, or of Hainault? and then drew out his handkerchief, and said,
Hold, hold, look what work here is, it is of Foutiman or of Fout arabia: and
shaking it hard at their nose, made them sneeze for four hours without
ceasing: in the mean while he would fart like a horse, and the women would
laugh and say, How now, do you fart, Panurge? No, no, Madam (said he,) I do but
tune my tail to the plain song of the Music, which you make with your nose.
In another he had a picklock, a pelican, a crampiron, a crook, and some other
iron tools, wherewith there was no door nor coffer which he would nor pick
open. He had another full of little cups, wherewith he played very
artificially, for he had his fingers made to his hand, like those of Minerva or
Arachne, and had heretofore cried Triacle. And when he changed a teston,
cardecu, or any other piece of money, the changer had been more subtle then a
fox, if Panurge had not at every time made five or six sols, (that is some six
or seven pence) vanish away invisibly, openly and manifestly, without making
any hurt or lesion, whereof the changer should have felt nothing but the wind.

CHAP. XVII. How Panurge gained the pardons, and married the old women, and of
the suit in law which he had at Paris.
ONe day I found Panurge very much out of countenance, melancholic and silent,
which made me suspect that he had no money; whereupon I said unto him, Panurge,
you are sick, as I do very well perceive by your physiognomie, and I know the
disease, you have a flux in your purse; but take no care I have yet seven pence
half penny, that never saw father nor mother, which shall not be wanting, no
more then the pox in your necessity: whereunto he answered me, Well, well, for
money, one day I shall have but too much; for I have a Philosophers stone,
which attracts money out of men's purses, as the adamant does iron; but will you
go with me to gain the pardons, said he? By my faith (said he) I am no great
pardon-taker in this world; if I shall be any such in the other, I cannot tell:
yet let us go in Gods Name, it is but one farthing more or less. But (said he)
lend me then a farthing upon interest. No, no, (said I) I will give it you
freely, and from my heart, Grates vobis dominos, said he.

So we went along, beginning at St. Gervase, and I got the pardons at the first
box only, for in those matters very little contenteth me: then did I say my
small suffrages, and the prayers of St. Brigid, but he gained them at all the
boxes, and always gave money to every one of the Pardoners; from thence we
went to our Ladies Church, to St. John's, to St. Antonies, and so to the other
Churches, where there was a banquet of pardons* for my part, I gained no more
of them: but he at all the boxes kissed the relics, and gave at every one: to
be brief, when we were returned, he brought me to drink at the Castle-tavern,
and there showed me ten or twelve of his little bags full of money, at which I
blessed my self, and made the sign of the Cross, saying, Where have you
recovered so much money in so little time? unto which he answered me, that he
had taken it out of the basins of the pardons; For in giving them the first
farthing (said he) I put it in with such slight of hand, and so dexterously
that it appeared to be a threepence; thus with one hand I took threepence,
nine-pence or sixpence at the least, and with the other as much, and so
thorough all the Churches where we have been. Yea, but (said I) you damn your
self like a snake, and are withal a thief and sacrilegious person. True (said
he) in your opinion, but I am not of that mind; for the Pardoners do give me
it, when they say unto me in presenting the relics to kiss, Centuplum
accipies, that is, that for one penny I should take a hundred; for accipies is
spoken according to the manner of the Hebrews, who use the future tense in
stead of the imperative, as you have in the law, Diliges Dominum, that is,
dilige: even so when the Pardon-bearer says to me, Centuplum accipies, his
meaning is, centuplum accipe; and so does Rabbi Kimy, and Rabbi Aben Ezra
expound it, and all the Massorets, and ibi Bartholus. Moreover, Pope Sixtus
gave me fifteen hundred francks of yearly pension (which in English money is a
hundred and fifty pounds) upon his Ecclesiastical revenues and treasure, for
having cured him of a canckrous botch, which did so torment him, that he
thought to have been a Cripple by it all his life. Thus I do pay my self at my
own hand (for otherways I get nothing) upon the said Ecclesiastical treasure.
Ho, my friend, (said he) if thou did know what advantage I made, and how well
I feathered my nest, by the Popes bull of the Croisade, thou would wonder
exceedingly. It was worth to me above six thousand florins (in English coin
six hundred pounds,) and what a devil is become of them? (said I) for of that
money thou have not one half penny. They returned from whence they came (said
he,) they did no mote but change their Master.

But I employed at least three thousand of them (that is, three hundred pounds
English,) in marrying (not young Virgins; for they find but too many husbands)
but great old sempiternous trots, which had not so much as one tooth in their
heads; and that out of the consideration I had, that these good old women had
very well spent the time of their youth in playing at the close-buttock-game to
all comers, serving the foremost first, till no man would have any more
dealing with them. And by G -- I will have their skin-coat shaken once yet
before they die; by this means, to one I gave a hundred florins, to another
six score, to another three hundred, according to that they were infamous,
detestable and abominable; for by how much the more horrible and execrable they
were, so much the more must I needs have given them, otherwise the devil would
not have jum'd them. Presently I went to some great and fat wood-porters, or
such like, and did my self make the match, but before I did show him the old
Hags, I made a fair muster to him of the Crowns, saying, Good fellow, see
what I will give thee, if thou will but condescend to dufle, dinfredaille, or
lecher it one good time: then began the poor rogues to gape like old mules, and
I caused to be provided for them a banquet, with drink of the best, and store
of spiceries, to put the old women in rut and heat of lust. To be short, they
occupied all like good souls, only to those that were horribly ugly and
ill-favored, I caused their head to be put within a bag, to hide their face.

Besides all this, I have lost a great deal in suits of law: And what lawsuits
could thou have? (said I) thou have neither house norlands. My friend, (said
he) the Gentlewomen of this City had found out, by the instigation of the devil
of hell, a manner of high-mounted bands, and neckerchiefs for women, which did
so closely cover their bosoms, that men could no more put their hands under;
for they had put the slit behind, and those neck-cloths were wholly shut
before, whereat the poor sad contemplative lovers were much discontented. Upon
a fair Tuesday, I presented a Petition to the Court, making my self a Party
against the said Gentlewomen, and showing the great interest that I pretended
therein, protesting that by the same reason, I would cause the Codpeece of my
breeches to be sowed behind, if the Cour would not take order for it. In
sum, the Gentlewomen put in their defenses, showed the grounds they went
upon, and constituted their Attorney for the prosecuting of the cause, but I
pursued them so vigorously, that by a sentence of the Court it was decreed,
those high neckclothes should be no longer worn, if they were not a little
cleft and open before, but it cost me a good sum of money. I had another very
filthy and beastly process against the dung-farmer (called Master Fifi) and
his Deputies, that they should no more read privily the pipe, punchon, nor
quart of sentences, but in fair full day, and that in the fodder schools, in
face of the Arrian Sophisters, where I was ordained to pay the charges, by
reason of some clause mistaken in the relation of the Sergeant. Another time I
framed a complaint to the Court, against the mules of the Presidents,
Counselors and others, tending to this purpose, that when in the lower Court
of the Palace, they left them to champ on their bridles: some bibs were made
for them, that with their drivelling they might not spoil the pavement, to the
end, that the Pages of the Palace might play upon it with their dice, or at the
game of coxbody, at their own ease, without spoiling their breeches at the
knees; and for this I had a fair decree, but it cost me dear* Now reckon up
what expense I was at in little banquets, which from day to day I made to the
Pages of the Palace, and to what end, said I? My friend (said he) thou have no
passe-time at all in this world, I have more then the King, and if thou will
join thy self with me, we will do the devil together. No, no, (said I) by St.
Adauras that will I not, for thou will be hanged one time or another: And thou
(said he) wilt be interred sometime or other; now which is most honorable, the
air or the earth? Ho, gross pecore, whilst the Pages are at their
banqueting, I keep their mules, and to some one I cut the stirrup-leather of
the mounting side, till it hang but by a thin strap or thread, that when the
great puffe-guts of the Counselor or some other has taken his swing to get
up, he may fall flat on his side like a pork, and so furnish the Spectators
with more then a hundred francks worth of laughter. But I laugh yet further, to
think how at his home-coming the Master-page is to be whipped like green rye,
which makes me not to repent what I have bestowed in feasting them. In brief,
he had (as I said before) threescore and three ways to acquire money, but he
had two hundred and fourteen to spend it, besides his drinking.

CHAP. XVIII. How a great Scholar of England would have argued against
Pantagruel, and was overcome by Panurge.
IN that same time, a certain learned man, named Thaumast, hearing the fame and
renown of Pantagruels incomparable knowledge, came out of his own country of
England, with an intent only to see him, to try thereby, and prove, whether his
knowledge in effect was so great as it was reported to be. In this resolution,
being arrived at Paris, he went forthwith unto the house of the said
Pantagruel, who was lodged in the Palace of St. Denis, and was then walking in
the garden thereof with Panurge, philosophizing after the fashion of the
Peripateticks. At his first entrance he startled, and was almost out of his
wits for fear, seeing him so great, and so tall, then did he salute him
courteously as the manner is, and said unto him, Very true it is, (says Plato
the Prince of Philosophers,) that if the image and knowledge of wisdom were
corporeal and visible to the eyes of mortals, it would stir up all the world
to admire her: which we may the rather believe, that the very bare report
thereof, scattered in the air, if it happen to be received into the ears of
men, who for being studious, and lovers of virtuous things, are called
Philosophers, does not suffer them to sleep nor rest in quiet, but so pricketh
them up, and sets them on fire, to run unto the place where the person is, in
whom the said knowledge is said to have built her Temple, and uttered her
Oracles, as it was manifestly shown unto us in the Queen of Sheba, who came
from the utmost borders of the East and Persian sea, to see the order of
Solomon's house, and to hear his wisdom; in Anacharsis, who came out of
Scythia, even unto Athens, to see Solon; in Pythagoras, who traveled far to
visit the Memphitical Vaticinators; in Platon, who went a great way off to see
the Magicians of Egypt, and Architas of Tarentum; in Apollonius Tianeus, who
went as far as unto Mount Caucasus, passed along the Scythians, the
Massagetes, the Indians, and sailed over the great river Phison, even to the
Brachmans to see Hiar^has; as likewise unto Babylon, Chaldea, Media, Assyria,
Parthia, Syria, Phoenicia, Arabia, Palestina and Alexandria, even unto
Aethiopia, to see the Gymnosoph^sts: the like example have we of Titus Livius,
whom to see and hear, diverse studious persons came to Rome, from the Confines
of France and Spain; I dare not reckon my self in the number o^ those so
excellent persons, but well would be called studious, and a lover, not only o^
learning, but of learned men also: and indeed, having heard the report of your
so inestimable knowledge, I have left my country, my friends, my kindred and
my house, and am come thus far, valuing at nothing the length of the way, the
tediousness o^ the sea, nor strangeness of the land, and that only to see
you, and to confer with you about some passages in Philosophy, of Geomancie,
and of the Cabalistick Art; whereof I am doubtful, and cannot satisfy my
mind, which if you can resolve, I yield my self unto you for a slave
henceforward, together with all my posterity; for other gift have I none, that
I can esteem a recompense sufficient for so great a favor: I will reduce them
into writing, and to morrow publish them to all the learned men in the City,
that we may dispute publicly before them.

But see in what manner, I mean that we shall dispute: I will not argue pro and
contra, as do the sottish Sophisters of this town, and other places; likewise I
will not dispute after the manner of the Academicks by declamation: nor yet by
numbers, as Pythagoras* was wont to do, and as Picus de la mirandula did of
late at Rome: but I will dispute by signs only without speaking, for the
matters are so abstruse, hard and arduous, that words proceeding from the mouth
of man, will never be sufficient for unfolding of them to my liking. May it
therefore please your Magnificence to be there, it shall be at the great Hall
of Navarre at seven a clock in the morning. When he had spoke these words,
Pantagruel very honorably said unto him, Sir, of the graces that God has
bestowed upon me, I would not deny to communicate unto any man to my power; for
whatever comes from him is good, and his pleasure is, that it should be
increased, when we come amongst men worthy and fit to receive this celestial
Manna of honest literature: in which number, because that in this time (as I do
already very plainly perceive,) thou hold the first rank* I give thee notice
that at all hours thou shall find me ready to condescend to every one of thy
requests, according to my poor ability: although I ought rather to learn of
thee, then thou of me, but as thou have protested, we will confer of these
doubts together, and will seek out the resolution, even unto the bottom of that
undrainable Well, where Heraclitus says the truth lies hidden: and I do highly
commend the manner of arguing which thou have proposed, to wit, by signs
without speaking; for by this means thou and I shall understand one another
well enough, and yet shall be free from this clapping of hands, which these
blockish Sophisters make, when any of the Arguers has gotten the better of the
Argument: Now to morrow I will not fail to meet thee at the place and hour
that thou have appointed, but let me entreat thee that there be not any strife
or uproare between us, and that we seek not the honor and applause of men, but
the truth only: to which Thaumast answered, The Lord God maintain you in his
favor and grace, and instead of my thankfulness to you, pour down his
blessings upon you, for that your Highness and magnificent greatness, has
not disdained to descend to the grant of the request of my poor baseness, so
farewell till to morrow? Farewell, said Pantagruel. Gentlemen, you that read this
present discourse, think not that ever men were more elevated and transported
in their thoughts, then all this night were both Thaumast and Pantagruel; for
the said Thaumast, said to the Keeper of the house of Cluny, where he was
lodged, that in all his life he had never known himself so dry, as he was that
night. I think (said he) that Pantagruel held me by the throat; Give order, I
pray you, that we may have some drink, and see that some fresh water be brought
to us, to gargle my palate: on the other side Pantagruel stretched his wits as
high as he could, entering into very deep and serious meditations, and did
nothing all that night but dote upon, and turn over the book of Beda, de
numeris and signis: Plotius book, de inenarrabilibus: the book of Proclus, de
magia: the book of Artemidorus, (...); of Anaxagaras, (...); Dinatius, (...);
the books of Philistion: Hipponax, (...): and a rabble of others, so long, that
Panurge said unto him,

My Lord, leave all these thoughts and go to bed; for I perceive your spirits
to be so troubled by a too intensive bending of them, that you may easily fall
into some Quotidian Fever, with this so excessive thinking and plodding: but
having first drunk five and twenty o^ thirty good draughts, retire your self
and sleep your fill: for in the morning I will argue against, and answer my
Master the Englishman; and if I drive him not ad met am non loqui, then call me
Knave: Yea, but (said he) my friend Panurge, he is marvellously learned, how
will thou be able to answer him? Very well, (answered Panurge) I pray you talk
no more of it, but let me alone; is any man so learned as the devils are? No,
indeed (said Pantagruel,) without Gods especial grace: Yet for all that (said
Panurge) I have argued against them, gravelled and blanked them in disputation,
and laid them so squat upon their tails, that I have made them look like
Monkies; therefore be assured, that to morrow I will make this vainglorious
Englishman to skite vinegar before all the world. So Panurge spent the night
with tippling amongst the Pages, and played away all the points of his breeches
at primus secundus, and at peck point (in French called Lavergette.) Yet when
the condescended on time was come, he failed not to conduct his Master
Pantagruel to the appointed place, unto which (believe me) there was neither
great nor small in Paris but came, thinking with themselves that this devilish
Pantagruel, who had overthrown and vanquished in dispute all these doting
fresh water Sophisters, would now get full payment and be tickled to some
purpose; for this Englishman is a terrible bustler, and horrible coil keeper,
we will see who will be Conqueror, for he never met with his match before.

Thus all being assembled, Thaumast stayed for them, and then when Pantagruel
and Panurge came into the Hall, all the Schoolboyes, Professors of Arts,
Senior-Sophisters and Batchelors began to clap their hands, as their scurvie
custom is. But Pantagruel cried out with a loud voice, as if it had been the
sound of a double canon, saying, Peace. with a devil to you, peace: by G -- you
rogues, if you trouble me here, I will cut off the heads of every one of you:
at which words they remained all daunted and astonished, like so many ducks,
and durst not do so much as cough, although they had swallowed fifteen pounds
of feathers: withal they grew so dry with this only voice, that they laid out
their tongues a full half foot beyond their mouths, as if Pantagruel had
salted all their throats. Then began Panurge to speak, saying to the
Englishman, Sir, are you come hither to dispute contentiously in those
Propositions you have set down, or otherwise but to learn and know the truth?
To which answered Thaumast, Sir, no other thing brought me hither, but the
great desire I had to learn, and to know that of which I have doubted all my
life long, and have neither found book nor man able to content me in the
resolution of those doubts which I have proposed: and as for disputing
contentiously, I will not do it, for it is too base a thing* and therefore
leave it to those sottish Sophisters, who in their disputes do not search for
the truth, but for contradiction only and debate. Then said Panurge, if I who
am but a mean and inconsiderable disciple of my Master my Lord Pantagruel;
content and satisfy you in all and every thing, it were a thing below my said
Master, wherewith to trouble him: therefore is it fitter that he be Chairman,
and sit as a Judge and Moderator of our discourse and purpose, and give you
satisfaction in many things, wherein perhaps I shall be wanting to your
expectation. Truly (said Thaumast) it is very well said: begin then. Now you
must note that Panurge had set at the end of his long Codpiece, a pretty tuft
of red silk, as also of white, green and blew, and within it had put a fair
orange.

CHAP. XIX. How Panurge put to a nonplus the Englishman, that argued by signs.
EVery body then taking heed, and hearkening with great silence, the Englishman
lift up on high into the air his two hands severally, clunching in all the
tops of his fingers, together after the manner which ( alachinonnese) they call
the hens arse, and struck the one hand on the other by the nails four several
times: then he opening them, struck the one with the flat of the other, till it
yielded a clashing noise, and that only once: again in joining them as before
he struck twice, and afterward four times in opening them; then did he lay
them joined, and extended the one toward the other, as if he had been devoutly
to send up his prayers unto God. Panarge suddenly lifted up in the air his
right hand, and put the thumb thereof into the nostril of the same side,
holding his four fingers straight out, and closed orderly in a parallel line
to the point of his nose, shutting the left eye wholly, and making the other
wink with a profound depression of the eyebrows and eyelids. Then lifted he
up his left hand, with hard wringing and stretching forth his four fingers,
and elevating his thumb, which he held in a line directly correspondent to the
situation of his right hand, with the distance of a cubit and a half between
them. This done, in the same form he abased toward the ground, both the one
and the other hand; Lastly, he held them in the midst, as aiming right at the
English man's nose: And if Mercury, said the English man: there Panurge
interrupted him, and said, You have spoken Mask.

Then made the English man this sign, his left hand all open he lifted up into
the air, then instantly shut into his fist the four fingers thereof, and his
thumb extended at length he placed upon the gristle of his nose: Presently
after, he lifted up his right hand all open, and all open abased and bent it
downwards, putting the thumb thereof in the very place where the little finger
of the left hand did close in the fist, and the four right hand fingers he
softly moved in the air: then contrarily he did with the right hand what he
had done with the left, and with the left what he had done with the right.

Panurge being not a whit amazed at this, drew out into the air his Trismegist
Codpiece with the left hand, and with his right drew forth a trunchion of a
white oxe-rib, and two pieces of wood of a like form, one of black eben, and
the other of incarnation brasil, and put them betwixt the fingers of that hand
in good symmetrie: then knocking them together, made such a noise as the Lepers
of Britanie use to do with their clappering clickets, yet better resounding,
and far more harmonious; and with his tongue contracted in his mouth, did
very merrily warble it, always looking fixedly upon the English man. The
Divines, Physicians and Chirurgions that were there, thought that by this sign
he would have inferred that the English man was a Leper: the Counselors,
Lawyers and Decretalists conceived, that by doing this he would have concluded
some kind of mortal felicity to consist in Leprosy, as the Lord maintained
heretofore,

The English man for all this was nothing daunted, but holding up his two hands
in the air, kept them in such form, that he closed the three master-fingers
in his fist, and passing his thumbs thorough his indical, or foremost and
middle fingers, his auricularie or little fingers remained extended and
stretched out, and so presented he them to Panurge; then joined he them so,
that the right thumb touched the left, and the left little finger touched the
right. Hereat Panurge, without speaking one word, lift up his hands and made
this sign.

He put the nail of the forefinger of his left hand, to the nail of the thumb
of the same, making in the middle of the distance as it were a buckle, and of
his right hand shut up all the fingers into his fist, except the forefinger
which he often thrust in and out through the said two others of the left hand:
then stretched he out the forefinger, and middle finger or medical of his right
hand, holding them asunder as much as he could, and thrusting them toward
Thaumast. Then did he put the thumb of his left hand upon the corner of his
left eye, stretching out all his hand like the wing of a bird, or the finne of
a fish, and moving it very daintily this way and that way, he did as much with
his right hand upon the corner of his right eye. Thaumast began then to wax
somewhat pale, and to tremble, and made him this sign.

With the middle finger of his right hand, he struck against the muscle of the
palm or pulp, which is under the thumb: then put he the forefinger of the
right hand in the like buckle of the left, but he put it under and not over, as
Panurge did. Then Panurge knocked one hand against another, and blowed in his
palm, and put again the forefinger of his right hand into the overture or
mouth of the left, pulling it often in and out; then held he out his chinne,
most intentively looking upon Thaumast. The people there which understood
nothing in the other signs, knew very well what therein he demanded (without
speaking a word to Thaumast,) What do you mean by that? In effect, Thaumast
then began to sweat great drops, and seemed to all the Spectators a man
strangely ravished in high contemplation. Then he be thought himself, and put
all the nails of his left hand against those of his right, opening his fingers
as if they had been semicircles, and with this sign lift up his hands as high
as he could. Whereupon Panurge presently put the thumb of his right hand under
his jaws, and the little finger thereof in the mouth of the left hand, and in
this posture made his teeth to sound very melodiously, the upper against the
lower. With this Thaumast with great toil and vexation of spirit rose up, but
in rising let a great bakers fart, for the bran came after, and pissing withal
very strong vinegar, stunk like all the devils in hell: the company began to
stop their noses; for he had conskited himself with mere anguish and
perplexity. Then lifted he up his right hand, clunching it in such sort, that
he brought the ends of all his fingers to meet together, and his left hand he
laid flat upon his breast: whereat Panurge drew out his long Codpiece with his
tuffe, and stretched it forth a cubit and a half, holding it in the air with
his right hand, and with his left took out his orange, and casting it up into
the air seven times, at the eight he hid it in the fist of his right hand,
holding it steadily up on high, and then began to shake his fair Codpiece,
showing it to Thaumast.

After that Thaumast began to puff up his two cheeks like a player on a
bagpipe, and blew as if he had been to puff up a pigs bladder; whereupon
Panurge put one finger of his left hand in his nockandrow, by some called St.
Patricks hole, and with his mouth sucked in the air, in such a manner as when
one eats oysters in the shell, or when we sup up our broth; this done, he
opened his mouth somewhat, and struck his right hand flat upon it, making
therewith a great and a deep sound as if it came from the superficies of the
midriffe through the trachiartere or pipe of the lungs, and this he did for
sixteen times* but Thaumast did always keep blowing like a goose. Then Panurge
put the forefinger of his right hand into his mouth, pressing it very hard to
the muscles thereof; then he drew it out, and withal made a great noise, as
when little boys shoot pellets out of the pot-canons made of the hollow sticks
of the branch of an aulder-tree, and he did it nine times.

Then Thaumast cried out, Ha, my Masters, a great secret; with this he put in
his hand up to the elbow; then drew out a dagger that he had, holding it by the
point downwards; whereat Panurge took his long Codpiece, and shook it as hard
as he could against his thighs; then put his two hands intwined in manner of a
comb upon his head, laying out his tongue as far as he was able; and turning
his eyes in his head, like a goat that is ready to die. Ha, I understand (said
Thaumast) but what? making such a sign, that he put the haft of his dagger
against his breast, and upon the point thereof the flat of his hand, turning in
a little the ends of his fingers; whereat Panurge held down his head on the
left side, and put his middle finger into his right ear, holding up his thumb
bolt upright; then he crossed his two arms upon his breast, and coughed five
times, and at the fifth time he struck his right foot against the ground: then
he lift up his left arm, and closing all his fingers into his fist, held his
thumb against his forehead, striking with his right hand six times against his
breast. But Thaumast, as not content therewith, put the thumb of his left hand
upon the top of his nose, shutting the rest of his said hand: whereupon Panurge
set his two Master-fingers upon each side of his mouth, drawing it as much as
he was able, and widening it so, that he showed all his teeth: and with his two
thumbs plucked down his two eyelids very low, making therewith a very
ill-favored countenance, as it seemed to the company.

CHAP. XX. How Thaumast relates the virtues, and knowledge of Panurge.
THen Thaumast rose up, and putting off his cap, did very kindly thank the said
Panurge, and with a loud voice said unto all the people that were there, My
Lords, Gentlemen and others, at this time may I to some good purpose speak that
Evangelical word, Et ecce plus quam Solomon hic: You have here in your presence
an incomparable treasure, that is, my Lord Pantagruel, whose great renown has
brought me hither, out of the very heart of England, to confer with him about
the insoluble problemes, both in Magic, Alchymie, the Caballe, Geomancie,
Astrology and Philosophy, which I had in my mind: but at present I am angry,
even with fame it self, which I think was envious to him, for that it did not
declare the thousandth part of the worth that indeed is in him: You have seen
how his disciple only has satisfied me, and has told me more then I asked of
him: besides, he has opened unto me, and resolved other inestimable doubts,
wherein I can assure you he has to me discovered the very true Well, Fountain
and Abyss of the Encyclopedeia of learning; yea in such a sort, that I did not
think I should ever have found a man that could have made his skill appear, in
so much as the first elements of that concerning which we disputed by signs,
without speaking either word or half word. But in fine, I will reduce into
writing that which we have said and concluded, that the world may not take them
to be fooleries, and will thereafter cause them to be printed, that every one
may learn as I have done. Judge then what the Master had been able to say,
seeing the disciple has done so valiantly; for, Non est discipulus super
Magistrum. Howsoever God be praised, and I do very humbly thank you, for the
honor that you have done us at this Act: God reward you for it eternally: the
like thanks gave Pantagruel to all the company, and going from thence, he
carried Thaumast to dinner with him, and believe that they drank as much as
their skins could hold, or, as the phrase is, with unbottoned bellies, (for in
that age they made fast their bellies with buttons, as we do now the colars of
our doublets or jerkins) even till they neither knew where they were, nor
whence they came. Blessed Lady, how they did carouse it, and pluck (as we say)
at the Kids leather: and flaggons to trot, and they to toote, Draw, give (page)
some wine here reach hither, fill with a devil, so? There was not one but did
drink five and twenty or thirty pipes, can you tell how? even Sicut terra sine
aqua; for the weather was hot, and besides, that they were very dry. In matter
of the exposition of the Propositions set down by Thaumast: and the
signification of the signs which they used in their disputation, I would have
set them down for you according to their own relation: but I have been told
that Thaumast made a great book of it imprinted at London, wherein he has set
down all without omitting any thing, and therefore at this time I do pass by
it.

CHAP. XXI. How Panutge was in love with a Lady of Paris.
PAnurge began to be in great reputation in the City of Paris, by means of this
disputation, wherein he pre veiled against the English man, and from
thenceforth made his Codpiece to be very useful to him, to which effect he had
it pinked with pretty little Embroideries after the Romanesca fashion; And the
world did praise him publicly, in so far that there was a song made of him,
which little children did use to sing, when they went to fetch mustard: he was
withal made welcome in all companies of Ladies and Gentlewomen, so that at last
he became presumptuous, and went about to bring to his lure one of the greatest
Ladies in the City: and indeed leaving a rabble of long prologues and
protestations, which ordinarily these dolent contemplative Lent-lovers make,
who never meddle with the flesh; one day he said unto her, Madam, it would be a
very great benefit to the Commonwealth, delightful to you, honorable to your
progeny, and necessary for me, that I cover you for the propagating of my race,
and believe it, for experience will teach it you: the Lady at this word thrust
him back above a hundred leagues, saying, You mischievous fool, is it for you
to talk thus unto me? whom do you think you have in hand? be gone, never to
come in my sight again; for if one thing were not, I would have your legs and
arms cut off. Well, (said he) that were all one to me, to want both legs and
arms, provided you and I had but one merry bout together, at the brangle
buttock-game; for here within is (in showing her his long Codpiece) Master John
Thursday, who will play you such an Antic, that you shall feel the sweetness
thereof even to the very marrow of your bones: He is a gallant, and does so
well know how to find out all the corners, creeks and ingrained inmates in
your carnal trap, that after him there needs no broom, he will sweep so well
before, and leave nothing to his followers to work upon: whereunto the Lady
answered, Go, villain, go, if you speak to me one such word more, I will cry
out, and make you to be knocked down with blows. Ha, (said he) you are not so
bad as you say, no, or else I am deceived in your physiognomie, for sooner
shall the earth mount up unto the Heavens, and the highest Heavens descend unto
the Hells, and all the course of nature be quite perverted, then that in so
great beauty and neatness as in you is, there should be one drop of gall or
malice: they say indeed, that hardly shall a man ever see a fair woman that is
not also stubborn: yet that is spoke only of those vulgar beauties, but yours
is so excellent, so singular, and so heavenly, that I believe nature has given
it you as a paragon, and masterpiece of her Art, to make us know what she can
do, when she will employ all her skill, and all her power. There is nothing in
you but honey, but sugar, but a sweet and celestial Manna: to you it was, to
whom Paris ought to have adjudged the golden Apple, not to Venus, no, nor to
Juno, nor to Minerva; for never was there so much magnificence in Juno, so much
wisdom in Minerva, nor so much comeliness in Venus, as there is in you. O
heavenly gods and goddesses! how happy shall that man be to whom you will grant
the favor to embrace her, to kiss her, and to rub his bacon with hers? by G
-- that shall be I, I know it well; for she loves me already her belly full, I
am sure of it, and so was I predestined to it by the Fairies: and therefore
that we lose no time, put on, thrust out your gamons, and would have embraced
her, but she made as if she would put out her head at the window, to call her
neighbors for help. Then Panurge on a sudden ran out, and in his running away,
said, Madam, stay here till I come again, I will go call them my self, do not
you take so much pains: thus went he away not much caring for the repulse he
had got, nor made he any whit the worse cheer for it. The next day he came to
the Church, at the time that she went to Mass, at the door he gave her some of
the holy water, bowing himself very low before her, afterward he kneeled down
by her very familiarly, and said unto her, Madam, know that I am so amorous of
you, that I can neither piss nor dung for love: I do not know ( Lady,) what
you mean, but if I should take any hurt by it, how much would you be too blame?
Go, said she, go, I do not care, let me alone to say my prayers. I but (said
he) equivocate upon this; a Beaumon le viconte, or to fair mount the
priccunts: I cannot, said she: It is, said he, a beau con le vit monte, or to a
fair C... the pr... mounts: and upon this pray to God to give you that which
your noble heart desires, and I pray you give me these patenotres. Take them
(said she) and trouble me no longer: this done, she would have taken off her
patenotres, which were made of a kind of yellow stone called Cestrin, and
adorned with great spots of gold, but Panurge nimbly drew out one of his
knives, wherewith he cut them off very handsomely, and whilst he was going away
to carry them to the Brokers, he said to her, Will you have my knife? No, no,
said she: But (said he) to the purpose, I am at your commandment, body and
goods, tripes and bowels.

In the mean time, the Lady was not very well content with the want of her
patinotres; for they were one of her implements to keep her countenance by in
the Church: then thought with her self, this bold flowting Royster, is some
giddy, fantastical, lightheaded fool of a strange country; I shall never
recover my patenotres again, what will my husband say, he will no doubt be
angry with me; but I will tell him that a thief has cut them off from my hands
in the Church, which he will easily believe, seeing the end of the riban left
at my girdle. After dinner Panurge went to see her carrying in his sleeve a
great purse full of Palace-crowns called counters, and began to say unto her,
Which of us two loves other best, you me, or I you? whereunto she answered, As
for me, I do not hate you; for as God commands, I love all the world: But to
the purpose, (said he) are not you in love with me? I have (said she) told you
so many times already, that you should talk so no more to me, and if you speak
of it again, I will teach you, that I am not one to be talked unto dishonestly:
get you hence packing, and deliver me my patenotres, that my husband may not
ask me for them.

How now, ( Madam) said he, your patenotres? nay, by mine oath I will not do
so, but I will give you others; had you rather have them of gold well enameled
in great round knobs, or after the manner of loveknots, or otherwise all
massive, like great ingots, or if you had rather have them of Ebene, of
Iacinth, or of grained gold, with the marks of fine Turkoises, or of fair
Topazes, marked with fine Saphirs, or of baleu Rubies, with great marks of
Diamonds of eight and twenty squares? No, no, all this is too little; I know a
fair bracelet of fine Emeraulds, marked with spotted Ambergris, and at the
buckle a Persian pearl as big as an Orange: it will not cost above five and
twenty thousand ducates, I will make you a present of it, for I have ready
coin enough, and withal he made a noise with his counters as if they had been
French Crowns.

Will you have a piece of velvet, either of the violet color, or of crimson
died in grain: or a piece of broached or crimson satin? will you have
chains, gold, tablets, rings? You need no more but say, Yes, so far as fifty
thousand ducates may reach, it is but as nothing to me; by the virtue of which
words he made the water come in her mouth: but she said unto him, No, I thank
you, I will have nothing of you. By G -- said he, but I will have somewhat of
you; yet shall it be that which shall cost you nothing, neither shall you have
a jot the less, when you have given it, hold, (showing his long Codpiece) this
is Master John Good fellow, that asks for lodging, and with that would have
embraced her; but she began to cry out, yet not very loud. Then Panurge put off
his counterfeit garb, changed his false visage, and said unto her, You will not
then otherwise let me do a little, a turd for you, you do not deserve so much
good, nor so much honor: but by G -- I will make the dogs ride you, and with
this he ran away as fast as he could, for fear of blows, whereof he was
naturally fearful.

CHAP. XXII. How Panurge served a Parisian Lady a trick that pleased her not
very well.
NOw you must note that the next day was the great festival of Corpus Christi,
called the Sacre, wherein all women put on their best apparel, and on that day
the said Lady was clothed in a rich gown of crimsonsattin, under which she
wore a very costly white velvet petticoat.

The day of the Eve (called the vigile) Panurge searched so long of one side
and another, that he found a hot or salt bitch, which when he had tied her with
his girdle, he led to his chamber, and fed her very well all that day and
night; in the morning thereafter he killed her, and took that part of her which
the Greek Geomanciers know, and cut it into several pieces as small as he
could; then carrying it away as close as might be, he went to the place where
the Lady was to come along, to follow the Procession, as the custom is upon
the said holy day; and when she came in, Panurge sprinkled some holy water on
her, saluting her very courteously: then a little while after she had said her
petty devotions, he sat down close by her upon the same bench, and gave her
this roundlay in writing, in manner as follows.

A Roundlay.
For this one time, that I to you my love
Discovered, you did too cruel prove
To send me packing, hopeless, and so soon,
Who never any wrong to you had done
In any kind of action, word or thought:
So that if my suit liked you not, you ought
To Have spoke more civilly, and to this sense*
My friend, be pleased to depart from hence
For this one time.
What hurt do I to wish you to remark
With favor and compassion how a spark
Of your great beauty has inflamed my heart
With deep affection, and that for my part,
I only ask that you with me would dance
The brangle gay in feats of dalliance
For this one time.
And as she was opening this paper to see what it was, Panurge very promptly
and lightly scattered the drug that he had, upon her in diverse places, but
especially in the plaits of her sleeves, and of her gown: then said he unto
her, Madam, the poor lovers are not always at ease; as for me, I hope that
those heavy nights, those pains and troubles which I suffer for love of you,
shall be a deduction to me of so much pain in Purgatory: yet at the least pray
to God to give me patience in my misery. Panurge had no sooner spoke this, but
all the dogs that were in the Church came running to this Lady with the smell
of the drugs that he had strowed upon her, both small and great, big and
little, all came, laying out their member; smelling to her, and pissing every
where upon her, it was the greatest villainy in the world. Panurge made the
fashion of driving them away: then took his leave of her, and withdrew himself
into some Chapel or Oratory of the said Church, to see the sport; for these
villainous dogs did compisse all her habiliaments, and left none of her attire
unbesprinkled with their staling, in so much that a tall greyhound pist upon
her head, others in her sleeves, others on her crupperpiece, and the little
ones pissed upon her pataines: so that all the women that were round about her
had much ado to save her. Whereat Panurge very heartily laughing, he said to
one of the Lords of the City, I believe that the same Lady is hot, or else that
some greyhound has covered her lately. And when he saw that all the dogs were
flocking about her, yarring at the retardment of their access to her, and
every way keeping such a coil with her, as they are wont to do about a proud
or salt bitch, he forthwith departed from thence, and went to call Pantagruel:
not forgetting in his way along all the streets, thorough which he went,
where he found any dogs to give them a bang with his foot, saying, Will you not
go with your fellows to the wedding? Away, hence, avaunt, avaunt, with a devil
avaunt: And being come home, he said to Pantagruel, Master, I pray you come and
see all the dogs of the country, how they are assembled about a Lady, the
fairest in the City, and would dufle and line her; whereunto Pantagruel
willingly condescended, and saw the mystery, which he found very pretty and
strange: But the best was at the Procession, in which were seen above six
hundred thousand and fourteen dogs about her, which did very much trouble and
molest her, and whithersoever she past, those dogs that came afresh, tracing
her footsteps, followed her at the heels, and pist in the way where her gown
had touched. All the world stood gazing at this spectacle, considering the
countenance of those dogs, who leaping up got about her neck, and spoiled all
her gorgeous accoutrements, for the which she could find no remedy, but to
retire unto her house, which was a Palace: Thither she went, and the dogs after
her; she ran to hide her self, but the Chamber-maids could not abstain from
laughing. When she was entered into the house, and had shut the door upon her
self, all the dogs came running, of half a league round, and did so well
bepisse the gate of her house, that there they made a stream with their urine,
wherein a duck might have very well swimmed, and it is the same current that
now runs at St. Victor, in which Gobelin dies scarlet, for the specifical
virtue of these pisse-dogs, as our Master Doribus did heretofore preach
publicly. So may God help you; a Mill would have ground corn with it; yet not
so much as those of Basacle at Toulouse.

CHAP. XXIII. How Pantagruel departed from Paris, hearing news, that the
Dipsodes had invaded the Land of the Amaurots: and the cause wherefore the
leagues are so short in France.
A Little while after Pantagruel heard news that his father Gargantua had been
translated into the land of the Fairies by Morgue, as heretofore were Oger and
Arthur together, and that the report of his translation being spread abroad,
the Dipsodes had issued out beyond their borders, with inrodes had wasted a
great part of Utopia, and at that very time had besieged the great City of the
Amaurots; whereupon departing from Paris, without bidding any man farewell, for
the business required diligence, he came to Rowen.

Now Pantagruel in his journey, seeing that the leagues of that little
territory about Paris called France, were very short in regard of those of
other Countries, demanded the cause and reason of it from Panurge, who told him
a story which Marotus set down of the lac Monachus, in the acts of the Kings of
Canarre saying, that in old times Countries were not distinguished into
leagues, miles, furlongs, nor parasanges, until that King Pharamond divided
them, which was done in manner as follows. The said King chose at Paris a
hundred fair, gallant, lusty, brisk young men, all resolute and bold
adventurers in Cupids duels, together with a hundred comely, pretty, handsome,
lovely and well complexioned wenches of Picardie, all which he caused to be
well entertained, and highly fed for the space of eight days; then having
called for them, he delivered to every one of the young men his wench, with
store of money to defray their charges, and this injunction besides, to go unto
diverse places here and there, and wheresoever they should biscot and thrum
their wenches, that thy setting a stone there, it should be accounted for a
league: thus went away those brave fellows and sprightly blades most merrily,
and because they were fresh, and had been at rest, they very often jum'd and
fanfreluched almost at every fields end, and this is the cause why the leagues
about Paris are so short; but when they had gone a great way, and were now as
weary as poor devils, all the oil in their lamps being almost spent, they did
not chink and dufle so often, but contented themselves, ( I mean for the men's
part,) with one scurvie paultry bout in a day, and this is that which makes the
leagues in Britany, Delanes, Germany, and other more remote Countries so long:
other men give other reasons for it, but this seems to me of all other the
best. To which Pantagruel willingly adhered. Parting from Rowen, they arrived
at Honfteur, where they took shipping, Pantagruel, Panurge, Epistemon,
Eusthenes and Carpalim.

In which place, waiting for a favorable wind, and caulking their ship, he
received from a Lady of Paris (which I had formerly kept, and entertained a
good long time,) a letter directed on the outside thus, To the best beloved of
the fair women, and least loyal of the valiant men, PNTGRL.

CHAP. XXIV. A Letter which a messenger brought to Pantagruel from a Lady of
Paris, together with the exposition of a Posie, written in a gold Ring.
WHen Pantagruel had read the superscription, he was much amazed, and therefore
demanded of the said messenger the name of her that had sent it: then opened he
the letter, and found nothing written in it, nor otherwise enclosed, but only
a gold ring, with a square table-diamond. Wondering at this, he called Panurge
to him, and showed him the case; whereupon Panurge told him, thar the leaf of
paper was written upon, but with such cunning and artifice that no man could
see the writing at the first sight, therefore to find it out he set it by the
fire, to see if it was made with Sal Armoniack soaked in water; then put he it
into the water, to see if the letter was written with the juice of Tithymalle:
after that he held it up against the candle, to see if it was written with the
juice of white onions.

Then he rubbed one part of it with oil of nuts, to see if it were not written
with the lee of a fig tree: and another part of it with the milk of a woman
giving suck to her eldest daughter, to see if it was written with the blood of
red toads, or green earth-frogs: Afterward he rubbed one corner with the ashes
of a Swallows nest, to see if it were not written with the dew that is found
within the herb Alcakengie, called the winter-cherry. He rubbed after that one
end with eare-wax, to see if it were not written with the gall of a Raven: then
did he dip it into vinegar, to try if it was not written with the juice of the
garden Spurge: After that he greased it with the fat of a bat or flittermouse,
to see if it was not written with the sperm of a whale, which some call
ambergris: Then put it very fairly into a basin full of fresh water, and
forthwith took it out, to see whether it were written with stone-allum: But
after all experiments, when he perceived that he could find out nothing, he
called the messenger, and asked him, Good fellow, the Lady that sent thee
hither, did she not give thee a staff to bring with thee? thinking that it had
been according to the conceit, whereof Aulus Gellius makes mention, and the
Messenger answered him, No, Sir. Then Panurge would have caused his head to be
shaven, to see whether the Lady had written upon his bald pate, with the hard
lie whereof soap is made, that which she meant; but perceiving that his hair
was very long, he forbore, considering that it could not have grown to so great
a length in so short a time.

Then he said to Pantagruel, Master, by the virtue of G -- I cannot tell what
to do nor say in it; for to know whether there be any thing written upon this
or no; I have made use of a good part of that which Master Francisco di Nianto,
the Tuscan sets down, who has written the manner of reading letters that do
not appear; that which Zoroastes published, peri grammaton acriton; and
Calphurnius Bassus de literis illegibilibus: but I can see nothing, nor do I
believe that there is any thing else in it then the Ring: let us therefore look
upon it, which when they had done, they found this in Hebrew written within,
Lamach sabathani; whereupon they called Epistemon, and asked him what that
meant? to which he answered, that they were Hebrew words, signifying, Wherefore
have thou forsaken me? upon that Panurge suddenly replied: I know the mystery,
do you see this diamond? it is a false one; this then is the exposition of that
which the Lady means, Diamant faux, that is, false lover, why have thou
forsaken me? which interpretation Pantagruel presently understood, and withal
remembering, that at his departure he had not bid the Lady farewell, he was very
sorry, and would feign have returned to Paris, to make his peace with her; but
Epistemon put him in mind of Aeneas's departure from Dido, and the saying of
Heraclitus of Tarentum, That the ship being at anchor when need requires, we
must cut the cable rather then lose time about untying of it, and that he
should lay aside all other thoughts to succor the City of his Nativity, which
was then in danger; and indeed within an hour after that, the wind arose at
the North-north-west, wherewith they hoised sail, and put out, even into the
maine sea, so that within few days, passing by Porto Sancto, and by the
Maderas, they went ashore in the Canarie islands; parting from thence, they
passed by Capobianco, by Senege, by Capoverde, by Gambre, b^ Sagres, by Melli,
by the Cap di buona Speranza* and set ashore again in the Kingdom of Melinda;
parting from thence, they sailed away with a tramoutan or northerly wind,
passing by Meden, by Uti, by Uden, by Gelasim, by the isles of the Fairies, and
along the Kingdom of Achorie, till at last they arrived at the port of
Utopia, distant from the City of the Amaurots three leagues and somewhat more.

When they were ashore, and pretty well refreshed, Panurge said, Gentlemen, the
City is not far from hence, therefore were it not amiss before we set
forward, to advise well what is to be done, that we be not like the Athenians,
who never took counsel until after the fact: Are you resolved to live and die
with me? Yes, Sir, said they all, and be as confident of us, as of your own
fingers. Well (said he) there is but one thing that keeps my mind in great
doubt and suspense, which is this, that I know not in what order nor of what
number the enemy is, that lays siege to the City; for if I were certain of
that, I should go forward, and set on with the better assurance. Let us
therefore consult together, and be think our selves by what means we may come
to this intelligence: whereunto they all said, Let us go thither and see, and
stay you here for us, for this very day, without further respite do we make
account to bring you a certain report thereof.

My self (said Panurge) will undertake to enter into their camp, within the
very midst of their guards, unespied by their watch, and merrily feast and
lecher it at their cost, without being known of any, to see the Artillery and
the Tents of all the Captains, and thrust my self in with a grave and
magnifick carriage, amongst all their troops and companies, without being
discovered; the devil would not be able to peck me out with all his
circumventions: for I am of the race of Zopyrus.

And I (said Epistemon) know all the plots and stratagems of the valiant
Captains, and warlike Champions of former ages, together with all the tricks
and subtilties of the Art of war; I will go, and though I be detected and
revealed, I will escape, by making them believe of you whatever I please, for I
am of the race of Sinon.

I (said Eusthenes) will enter and set upon them in their trenches, in spite
of their Sentries, and all their guards; for I will tread upon their bellies,
and break their legs and arms, yea though they were every whit as strong as
the devil himself; for I am of the race of Hercules.

And I (said Carpalin) will get in there, if the birds can enter, for I am so
nimble of body, and light withal, that I shall have leaped over their trenches,
and ran clean through all their camp, before that they perceive me, neither do
I fear shot, nor arrow, nor horse, how swift soever, were he the Pegasus of
Persee* or Pacolet; being assured that I shall be able to make a safe and sound
escape before them all, without any hurt: I will undertake to walk upon the
ears of corn, of grass in the meddows, without making either of them do so
much as bow under me; for I am of the race of Camilla the Amazone.

CHAP. XXV. How Panurge, Carpalin, Eusthenes and Epistemon (the Gentlemen
Attendants of Pantagruel,) vanquished and discomfited six hundred and
threescore horsemen very cunningly.
AS he was speaking this, they perceived six hundred and threescore light
horsemen, gallantly mounted, who made an outrode thither, to see what ship it
was that was newly arrived in the harbor, and came in a full gallop to take
them if they had been able: Then said Pantagruel, my Lads, retire your selves
unto the ship, here are some of our enemies coming apace, but I will kill them
here before you like beasts, although they were ten times so many, in the mean
time withdraw your selves, and take your sport at it. Then answered Panurge,
No, Sir, there is no reason that you should do so, but on the contrary retire
you unto the ship, both you and the rest; for I alone will here discomfit them,
but we must not linger, come, set forward; whereunto the others said, It is
well advised, Sir, withdraw your self, and we will help Panurge here, so shall
you know what we are able to do: Then said Pantagruel, Well, I am content, but
if that you be too weak, I will not fail to come to your assistance. With this
Panurge took two great cables of the ship, and tied them to the kemstock or
capstane which was on the deck toward the hatches, and fastened them in the
ground, making a long circuit, the one further off, the other within that. Then
said he to Epistemon, Go aboard the ship, and when I give you a call, turn
about the capstane upon the orlop diligently, drawing unto you the two
cable-ropes: and said to Eusthenes, and to Carpalin, My Bullies, stay you here,
and offer your selves freely to your enemies, do as they bid you, and make as
if you would yield unto them: but take heed you come not within the compass of
the ropes, be sure to keep your selves free of them; and presently he went
aboard the ship, and took a bundle of straw, and a barrel of gunpowder,
strowed it round about the compass of the cords, and stood by with a brand of
fire or match lighted in his hand. Presently came the horsemen with great fury,
and the foremost ran almost home to the ship, and by reason of the
slipperinesse of the bank, they fell they and their horses, to the number of
four and forty, which the rest seeing, came on, thinking that resistance had
been made them at their arrival: But Panurge said unto them, My Masters, I
believe that you have hurt your selves, I pray you pardon us, for it is not our
fault, but the slipperinesse of the seawater, that is always flowing; we
submit our selves to your good pleasure; so said likewise his two other
fellows, and Epistemon that was upon the deck; in the mean time Panurge
withdrew himself, and seeing that they were all within the compass of the
cables, and that his two companions were retired, making room for all those
horses which came in a crowd, thronging upon the neck of one another to see the
ship, and such as were in it cried out on a sudden to Epistemon, Draw, draw:
then began Epistemon to wind about the capstane, by doing whereof the two
cables so entangled and impestered the legs of the horses, that they were all
of them thrown down to the ground easily, together with their Riders: but they
seeing that, drew their swords, and would have cut them: whereupon Panurge set
fire to the train, and there burnt them up all like damned souls, both men and
horses, not one escaping save one alone, who being mounted on a fleet Turkey
courser, by mere speed in flight got himself out of the circle of the ropes;
but when Carpalin perceived him, he ran after him with such nimblenesse and
ce^erity, that he overtook him in less then a hundred paces; then leaping
close behind him upon the crupper of his horse, clasped him in his arms, and
brought him back to the ship.

This exploit being ended Pantagruel was very jovial, and wondrously commended
the industry of these Gentlemen, whom he called his fellow soldiers, and made
them refresh themselves, and feed well and merrily upon the seashore, and
drink heartily with their bellies upon the ground, and their prisoner with
them, whom they admitted to that familiarity: only that the poor devil was
somewhat afraid that Pantagruel would have eaten him up whole, which,
considering the wideness of his mouth, and capacity of his throat, was no
great matter for him to have done; for he could have done it, as easily as you
would eat a small comfit, he showing no more in his throat, then would a
grain of millet-seed in the mouth of an Ass.

CHAP. XXVI. How Pantagruel and his company were weary in eating still salt
meats: and how Carpalin went a hunting to have some Venison.
THus as they talked and chatted together, Carpalin said, And by the belly of
St. Quenet, shall we never eat any venison? this salt meat makes me horribly
dry, I will go fetch you a quarter of one of those horses which we have burnt,
it is well roasted already: as he was rising up to go about it, he perceived
under the side of a wood a fair great roe-buck, which was come out of his Fort
(as I conceive) at the sight of Panurge's fire: him did he pursue and run after
with as much vigor and swiftness, as if it had been a bolt out of a
Crossebowe, and caught him in a moment; and whilst he was in his course, he
with his hands took in the air four great bustards, seven bitterns, six and
twenty gray partridges, two and thirty red legged ones, sixteen pheasants, nine
woodcooks, nineteen herons, two and thirty coushots and ring-doves; and with
his feet killed ten or twelve hares and rabbets, which were then at relief, and
pretty big withal, eighteen rayles in a knot together, with fifteen young wild
boares, two little Bevers, and three great foxes: so striking the Kid with his
fauchion athwart the head he killed him, and bearing him on his back, he in his
return took up his hares, rayls, and young wild boares, and as far off as he
could be heard, cried out, and said, Panurge my friend, vinegar, vinegar: then
the good Pantagruel, thinking he had fainted* commanded them to provide him
some vinegar* but Panurge knew well that there was some good prey in hands, and
forthwith showed unto noble Pantagruel how he was bearing upon his back a fair
roe-buck, and all his girdle bordered with hares; then immediately did
Epistemon make in the name of the nine Muses, nine antic wooden spits:
Eusthenes did help to flay, and Panurge placed two great cuirasier saddles, in
such sort that they served for Andirons and making their prisoner to be their
Cook, they roasted their venison by the fire, wherein the horsemen were burnt:
and making great cheer with a good deal of vinegar, the devil a one of them did
forbear from his victuals, it was a triumphant and incomparable spectacle to
see how they ravened and devoured. Then said Pantagruel, Would to God every one
of you had two paires of little Anthem or Sacring bells hanging at your chin,
and that I had at mine the great clocks of Renes, of Poitiers, of Tours, and of
Cambray, to see what a peale they would ring with the wagging of our chaps;
But, said Panurge, it were better we thought a little upon our business, and
by what means we might get the upper hand of our enemies: That is well
remembered, said Pantagruel; therefore spoke he thus to the prisoner, My
friend, tell us here the truth, and do not lie to us at all, if thou would
not be flayed alive, for it is I that eat the little children: relate unto us
at full the order, the number and the strength of the Army: to which the
prisoner answered, Sir, know for a truth that in the army there are three
hundred giants, all armed with armor of proof, and wonderful great:
nevertheless, not fully so great as you, except one that is their head, named
Loup-garou, who is armed from head to foot with Cyclopical annuils;
furthermore, one hundred threescore and three thousand foot, all armed with the
skins of hobgoblins, strong and valiant men: eleven thousand four hundred men
at arms or cuirasiers: three thousand six hundred double canons, and
harquebusiers without number; fourscore and fourteen thousand Pioneers: one
hundred and fifty thousand whores, fair like goddesses, (that is, for me said
Panurge,) whereof some are Amazons, some Lionnoises, others Parisiennes,
Taurangelles, Angevines, Poictevines, Normandes, and high dutch, there are of
them of all Countries, and all Languages,

Yea, but (said Pantagruel) is the King there? Yes Sir, (said the prisoner) he
is there in person, and we call him Anarchus, King of the Dipsodes, which is as
much to say as thirsty people, for you never saw men more thirsty, nor more
willing to drink, and his tent is guarded by the Giants: It is enough (said
Pantagruel) come brave boys, are you resolved to go with me? To which Panurge
answered, God confound him that leaves you: I have already bethought my self
how I will kill them all like pigs, and so, that the devil one leg of them
shall escape: but I am somewhat troubled about one thing: And what is that?
said Pantagruel: It is (said Panurge) how I shall be able to set forward to the
jusling and bragmardising of all the whores that be there this afternoon, in
such sort, that there escape not one unbumped by me; breasted and jum'd after
the ordinary fashion of man and woman, in the Venetian conflict. Ha, ha, ha,
ha, said Pantagruel.

And Carpalin said; The devil take these sink-holes, if by G -- I do not
bumbast some one of them: Then said Eusthenes, What shall not I have any, whose
paces since we came from Rowen, were never so well winded up, as that my needle
could mount to ten or eleven a clock till now, that I have it hard, stiff and
strong, like a hundred devils? Truly, (said Panurge,) thou shall have of the
fattest, and of those that are most plump, and in the best case.

How now? (said Epistemon) every one shall ride, and I must lead the Ass, the
devil take him that will do so, we will make use of the right of war, Qui
potest capere, capiat: No, no, said Panurge, but tie thine Ass to a crook, and
ride as the world does: And the good Pantagruel laughed at all this, and said
unto them, You reckon without your host; I am much afraid, that before it be
night I shall see you in such taking, that you will have no great stomach to
ride, but more like to be rode upon, with sound blows of pike and lance:
Baste, (said Epistemon) enough of that, I will not fail to bring them to you,
either to roste or boil, to fry or put in paste: they are not so many in
number, as were in the army of Xerxes, for he had thirty hundred thousand
fighting men, if you will believe Herodotus and Trogus Pompeius: and yet
Themistocles with a few men overthrew them all: for Gods sake take you no care
for that. Cobsminnie, Cobsminnie, (said Panurge) my Codpiece alone shall
suffice to overthrow all the men; and my St. Sweephole that dwells within it,
shall lay all the women squat upon their backs. Up then my lads (said
Pantagruel) and let us march along.

CHAP. XXVII. How Pantagruel set up one Trophee in memorial of their valor,
and Panurge another in remembrance of the hares: How Pantagruel likewise with
his farts begat little men, and with his fisgs little women: and how Panurge
broke a great staff over two glasses.
BEfore we depart hence, (said Pantagruel) in remembrance of the exploit that
you have now performed, I will in this place erect a fair Trophee: then every
man amongst them with great joy, and fine little Countrey-songs set up a huge
big post, whereunto they hanged a great cuirasier saddle, the fronstal of a
barbed horse, bridlebosses, pullie-pieces for the knees, stirrupleathers,
spurs, stirrups, a coat of male, a corslet tempered with steel, a battel-axe,
a strong, short and sharp horsemans sword, a gantlet, a horsemans mace,
gushet-armour for the arme-pits, leg-harnesse, and a gorget, with all other
furniture needful for the decorement of a triumphant arch, in sign of a
Trophee. And then Pantagruel for an eternal memorial, wrote this victorial
Ditton, as follows.

Here was the prowess made apparent of
Four brave and valiant champions of proof,
Who without any arms but wit, at once
(Like Fabius, or the two Scipions)
Burned in a fire six hundred and threescore
Crablice', strong rogues never vanquished before.
By this each King may learn, rock, pawn, and Knight,
That slight is much more prevalent then might;
For victory
(As all men see)
Hangs on the Dittie
Of that Committie,
Where the great God
Has his abode:
Nor does he it to strong and great men give,
But to his elect, as we must believe;
Therefore shall he obtain wealth and esteem,
Who thorough faith does put his trust in him.
Whilst Pantagruel was writing these foresaid verses, Panurge halved and fixed
upon a great stake the horns of a roe-buck, together with the skin, and the
right forefoot thereof, the ears of three levrets, the chine of a coney, the
jaws of a hare, the wings of two bustards, the feet of four queestdoves, a
bottle or borracho full of vinegar, a horn wherein to put salt, a wooden spit,
a larding stick, a scurvie kettle full of holes, a dripping pan to make sauce
in, an earthen salt-cellar, and a goblet of Beauvais. Then in imitation of
Pantagruels verses and Trophee, wrote that which follows:

Here was it that four jovial blades sat down
To a profound carowsing, and to crown
Their banquet with those wines, which please best great
Bacchus, the Monarch of their drinking state:
Then were the reins and furch of a young hare,
With salt and vinegar, displayed there,
Of which to snatch a bit or two, at once
They all fell on like hungry scorpions:
Forth'Inventories
Of Defensories
Say that in heat
We must drink neat
All out, and of
The choicest stuff;
But it is bad to eat of young hares flesh,
Unless with vinegar we it refresh:
Receive this tenet then without control,
That vinegar of that meat is the soul.
Then (said Pantagruel,) Come, my lads, let us be gone, we have stayed here too
long about our victuals; for very seldom does it fall out, that the greatest
eaters do the most martial exploits, there is no shadow like that of flying
colors, no smoke like that of horses, no clattering like that of armor: at
this Epistemon began to smile, and said, There is no shadow like that of the
kitchen, no smoke like that of pasties, and no clattering like that of goblets:
unto which answered Panurge, There is no shadow like that of courtaines, no
smoke like that of women's breasts, and no clattering like that of ballocks:
then forthwith rising up he gave a fart, a leap, and a whistle, and most
joyfully cried out aloud, Ever live Pantagruel: when Pantagruel saw that, he
would have done as much; but with the fart that he let, the earth trembled nine
leagues about, wherewith and with the corrupted air, he begot above three and
fifty thousand little men, ill favored dwarfes, and with one fisg that he let,
he made as many little women, crouching down, as you shall see in diverse
places, which never grow but like Cowes tails downwards, or like the Limosin
radishes, round. How now (said Panurge) are your farts so fertile and fruitful?
by G -- here be brave farted men, and fisgued women, let them be married
together, they will beget fine hornets and dorflies; so did Pantagruel, and
called them Pygmies; those he sent to live in an island thereby, where since
that time they are increased mightily: but the cranes make war with them
continually, against which they do most courageously defend themselves; for
these little ends of men and dandiprats, (whom in Scotland they call
whiphandles, and knots of a tarre-barrel) are commonly very teastie and
choleric: the Physical reason whereof is, because their heart is near their
spleen.

At this same time, Panurge took two drinking glasses that were there, both of
one bigness, and filled them with water up to the brim, and set one of them
upon one stool, and the other upon another, placing them about five foot from
one another: then he took the staff of a javelin, about five foot and a half
long, and put it upon the two glasses, so that the two ends of the staff did
come just to the brims of the glasses: This done, he took a great stake or
billet of wood, and said to Pantagruel, and to the rest: My Masters, behold,
how easily we shall have the victory over our enemies; for just as I shall
break this staff here upon these glasses, without either breaking or crazing
of them. nay, which is more, without spilling one drop of the water that is
within them, even so shall we break the heads of our Dipsodes, without
receiving any of us any wound or loss in our person or goods* but that you may
not think there is any witchcraft in this; hold (said he to Eusthenes) strike
upon the midst as hard as thou can with this log: Eusthenes did so, and the
staff broke in two pieces, and not one drop of the water fell out of the
glasses: Then said he, I know a great many such other tricks, let us now
therefore march boldly, and with assurance.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Pantagruel got the victory very strangely over the Dipsodes,
and the Giants.
AFter all this talk, Pantagruel took the prisoner to him, and sent him away,
saying, Go thou unto thy King in his Camp, and tell him tidings of what thou
have seen, and let him resolve to feast me to morrow about noon; for as soon as
my galleys shall come, which will be to morrow at furthest; I will prove unto
him by eighteen hundred thousand fighting men, and seven thousand Giants, all
of them greater then I am; that he has done foolishly and against reason, thus
to invade my country, wherein Pantagruel feigned that he had an army at sea;
but the Prisoner answered, that he would yield himself to be his slave, and
that he was content never to return to his own people, but rather with
Pantagruel to fight against them, and for Gods sake besought him, that he might
be permitted so to do: whereunto Pantagruel would not give consent, but
commanded him to depart thence speedily, and be gone, as he had told him, and
to that effect gave him a box full of Euphorbium, together with some grains of
the black chameleon thistle, steeped into aqua vi^ae, and made up into the
condiment of a wet sucket, commanding him to carry it to his King, and to say
unto him, that if he were able to eat one ounce of that without drinking after
it, he might then be able to resist him, without any fear or apprehension of
danger.

The Prisoner then besought him with joint hands, that in the hour of the
battle he would have compassion upon him: whereat Pantagruel said unto him,
After that thou have delivered all unto the King, put thy whole confidence in
God, and he will not forsake thee; because, although for my part I be mighty,
as thou may see, and have an infinite number of men in arms, I do
nevertheless trust neither in my force nor in mine industry, but all my
confidence is in God my Protector, who does never forsake those that in him do
put their trust and confidence. This done, the Prisoner requested him that he
would afford him some reasonable composition for his ransom: to which
Pantagruel answered, that his end was not to rob nor ransom men, but to enrich
them, and reduce them to total liberty; Go thy way (said he) in the peace of
the living God, and never follow evil company, lest some mischief befall thee.
The Prisoner being gone, Pantagruel said to his men, Gentlemen, I have made
this Prisoner believe that we have an army at sea, as also that we will not
assault them till to morrow at noon, to the end, that they doubting of the
great arrival of our men, may spend this night in providing and strengthening
themselves, but in the mean time my intention is, that we charge them about the
hour of the first sleep.

Let us leave Pantagruel here with his Apostles, and speak of King Anarchus and
his army. When the Prisoner was come, he went unto the King, and told him how
there was a great Giant come, called Pantagruel, who had overthrown, and made
to be cruelly roasted all the six hundred and nine and fifty horsemen, and he
alone escaped to bring the news: besides that, he was charged by the said
Giant, to tell him, that the next day about noon he must make a dinner ready
for him, for at that hour he was resolved to set upon him: then did he give
him that box wherein were those confitures; but as soon as he had swallowed
down one spoonful of them, he was taken with such a heat in the throat,
together with an ulceration in the flap of the top of the winde-pipe, that his
tongue peeled with it, in such sort that for all they could do unto him, he
found no ease at all, but by drinking only without cessation, for as soon as
ever he took the goblet from his head, his tongue was on a fire, and therefore
they did nothing but still pour in wine into his throat with a funnel, which
when his Captains, Bashawes, and guard of his body did see, they tasted of the
same drugs, to try whether they were so thirst-procuring and alterative or no:
but it so befell them as it had done their King, and they plied the flaggon so
well, that the noise ran throughout all the Camp, how the Prisoner was
returned, that the next day they were to have an assault, that the King and his
Captains did already prepare themselves for it, together with his guards, and
that wiah carowsing lustily, and qu^ffing as hard as they could, every man
therefore in the army began to tipple, ply the pot, swill and guzzle it as fast
as they could. In sum, they drunk so much, and so long, that they fell asleep
like pigs, all out of order throughout the whole Camp.

Let us now return to the good Pantagruel, and relate how he carried himself in
this business, departing from the place of the Trophies: he took the mast of
their ship in his hand like a Pilgrims staff, and put within the top of it two
hundred and seven and thirty poisons of white wine of Anjou, the rest was of
Rowen, and tied up to his girdle the bark all full of salt, as easily as the
Lanskennets carry their little panniers, and to set onward on his way with his
fellow soldiers. When he was come near to the enemies Camp, Panurge said unto
him, Sir, if you would do well, let down this white wine of Anjou, from the
scuttle of the mast of the ship, that we may all drink thereof, like Britains.

Hereunto Pantagruel very willingly consented, and they drank so neat, that
there was not so much as one poor drop left, of two hundred and seven and
thirty punchons, except one Boracho or leathern bottle of Tours, which Panurge
filled for himself, (for he called that his vade mecum,) and some scurvie lees
of wine in the bottom, which served him in stead of vinegar. After they had
whitled and curried the can pretty handsomely; Panurge gave Pantagruel to
eat some devilish drugs, compounded of Lithotripton, (which is a
stone-dissolving ingredient,) nephrocatarticon, (that purges the reins) the
marmalade of Quinces, (called Codiniac) a confection of Cantharides, (which are
green flies breeding on the tops of olive trees) and other kinds of diuretic
or pisse-procuring simples. This done, Pantagruel said to Carpalin, Go into the
City, scrambling like a cat up against the wall, as you can well do, and tell
them that now presently they come out, and charge their enemies as rudely as
they can, and having said so, come down taking a lighted torch with you,
wherewith you shall set on fire all the tents and pavillions in the Camp, then
cry as loud as you are able with your great voice, and then come away from
thence. Yea but, said Carpalin, were it not good to cloy all their ordnance?
No, no, (said Pantagruel) only blow up all their powder. Carpalin obeying him,
departed suddenly, and did as he was appointed by Pantagruel, and all the
Combatants came forth that were in the City, and when he had set fire in the
tents and pavillions, he past so lightly through them, and so highly and
profoundly did they snort and sleep, that they never perceived him. He came to
the place where their Artillery was, and set their munition on fire: but here
was the danger, the fire was so sudden, that poor Carpalin had almost been
burnt; and had it not been for his wonderful agility, he had been fried like a
roasting pig: but he departed away so speedily, that a bolt or arrow out of a
Crossebowe could not have had a swifter motion. When he was clear of their
trenches, he shooted aloud, and cried out so dreadfully, and with such
amazement to the hearers, that it seemed all the devils of hell had been let
loose: at which noise the enemies awaked, but can you tell how? even no less
astonished then are Monks, at the ringing of the first peale to Matins, which
in Lusonnois is called Rubbalock.

In the mean time Pantagruel began to sow the salt that he had in his bark,
and because they slept with an open gaping mouth, he filled all their throats
with it, so that those poor wretches were by it made to cough like foxes. Ha,
Pantagruel, how thou addest greater heat to the firebrand that is in us.
Suddenly Pantagruel had will to piss, by means of the drugs which Panurge had
given him, and pist amidst the Camp so well and so copiously, that he drowned
them all, and there was a particular deluge, ten leagues round about, of such
considerable depth, that the history says, if his fathers great mare had been
there, and pist likewise, it would undoubtedly have been a more enormous deluge
then that of Deucalion; for she did never piss, but she made a river, greater
then is either the Rhosne, or the Danow, which those that were come out of the
City seeing, said, They are all cruelly slain, see how the blood runs along:
but they were deceived in thinking Pantagruels urine had been the blood of
their enemies; for they could not see but by the light of the fire of the
pavillions, and some small light of the Moon.

The enemies after that they were awaked, seeing on one side the fire in the
Camp, and on the other the inundation of the urinal deluge, could not tell what
to say, nor what to think; some said, that it was the end of the world, and the
final judgment, which ought to be by fire: Others again thought that the
sea-gods, Neptune, Protheus, Triton, and the rest of them did persecute them,
for that indeed they found it to be like seawater and salt.

O who were able now condignely to relate, how Pantagruel did demean himself
against the three hundred Giants; O my Muse, my Calliope, my Thalia, inspire me
at this time, restore unto me my spirits; for this is the Logical bridge of
asses: here is the pitfall, here is the difficulty, to have ability enough to
express the horrible battle that was fought; Ah, would to God that I had now a
bottle of the best wine that ever those drank, who shall read this so veridical
history.

CHAP. XXIX. How Pantagruel discomfited the three hundred Giants armed with
free stone, and Loupgarou their Captain.
THe Giants seeing all their Camp drowned, carried away their King Anarchus
upon their backs, as well as they could out of the Fort, as Aeneas did to his
father Anchises, in the time of the conflagration of Troy. When Panurge
perceived them, he said to Pantagruel, Sir, yonder are the Giants coming forth
against you, lay on them with your mast gallantly like an old Fencer; for now
is the time that you must show your self a brave man and an honest. And for our
part we will not fail you: I my self willl kill to you a good many boldly
enough; for why, David killed Goliath very easily; and then, this great Lecher
Eusthenes, who is stronger then four oxen, will not spare himself. Be of good
courage therefore, and valiant, charge amongst them with point and edge, and by
all manner of means. Well* (said Pantagruel,) of courage I have more then for
fifty francks, but let us be wise, for Hercules first never undertook against
two; that is well cack'd, well scummered, (said Panurge) do you compare your
self with Hercules? You have by G -- more strength in your teeth, and more sent
in your bum, then ever Hercules had in all his body and soul: so much is a man
worth as he esteems himself. Whilst they spoke those words behold, Lougarou
was come with all his Giants, who seeing Pantagruel in a manner alone, was
carried away with temerity and presumption, for hopes that he had to kill the
good man; whereupon he said to his companions the Giants, You Wenchers of the
low country, by Mahoom, if any of you undertake to fight against these men
here, I will put you cruelly to death: it is my will that you let me fight
single, in the mean time you shall have good sport to look upon us: then all
the other Giants retired with their King, to the place where the flaggons
stood, and Panurge and his Camerades with them, who counterfeited those that
have had the pox, for he wreathed about his mouth, shrunk up his fingers, and
with a harsh and hoarse voice said unto them, I forsake -- od (fellow
soldiers) if I would have it to be believed, that we make any war at all;
Give us somewhat to eat with you, whilst our Masters fight against one
another; to this the King and Giants jointly condescended, and accordingly made
them to banquet with them. In the mean time Panurge told them the follies of
Turpin, the examples of St. Nicholas, and the tale of a tub. Loupgarou then set
forward toward Pantagruel, with a mace all of steel, and that of the best
sort, weighing nine thousand seven hundred kintals, and two quarterons, at the
end whereof were thirteen pointed diamonds, the least whereof was as big as the
greatest bell of our Ladies Church at Paris, (there might want perhaps the
thickness of a nail, or (at most that I may not lie) of the back of those
knives which they call cut-lugs or eare-cutters, but for a little off or on,
more or less, it is no matter) and it was enchanted in such sort, that it
could never break, but contrarily all that it did touch, did break immediately.
Thus then as he approached with great fierceness and pride of heart:
Pantagruel, casting up his eyes to heaven, recommended himself to God with all
his soul, making such a Vow as follows.

O thou Lord God, who have always been my Protector, and my Savior, thou
see the distress wherein I am at this time: nothing brings me hither but a
natural zeal, which thou have permitted unto mortals, to keep and defend
themselves, their wives and children, country and family, in case thy own
proper cause were not in question, which is the faith; for in such a business
thou will have no Coadjutors, only a Catholic Confession and service of thy
Word, and have forbidden us all arming and defense; for thou art the Almighty,
who in thine own cause, and where thine own business is taken to heart, can
defend it far beyond all that we can conceive, thou who have thousand thousands
of hundreds of millions of legigions of Angels, the least of which is able to
kill all mortal men, and turn about the Heavens and earth at his pleasure, as
heretofore it very plainly appeared in the army of Sennacherib, if it may
please thee therefore at this time to assist me, as my whole trust and
confidence is in thee alone: I vow unto thee, that in all Countries whatsoever,
wherein I shall have any power or authority, whether in this of Utopia, or
elsewhere, I will cause thy holy Gospel to be purely, simply and entirely
preached, so that the abuses of a rabble of hypocrites and false prophets, who
by humane constitutions, and depraved inventions, have impoisoned all the
world, shall be quite exterminated from about me. This Vow was no sooner made,
but there was heard a voice from heaven, saying, Hoc fac, and vinces: that is
to say, Do this, and thou shall overcome.

Then Pantagruel, seeing that Loupgarou with his mouth wide open was drawing
near to him, went against him boldly, and cried out as loud as he was able,
Thou die, villain, thou die, purposing by his horrible cry to make him
afraid, according to the discipline of the Lacedaemonians. Withal, he
immediately cast at him out of his bark which he wore at his girdle, eighteen
cags, and four bushels of salt, wherewith he filled both his mouth, throat,
nose and eyes: at this Loupgarou was so highly incensed, that most fiercely
setting upon him, he thought even then with a blow of his mace to have beat out
his brains: but Pantagruel was very nimble, and had always a quick foot, and
a quick eye, and therefore with his left foot did he step back one pace, yet
not so nimbly, but that the blow falling upon the bark, broke it in four
thousand, fourscore and six pieces, and threw all the rest of the salt about
the ground: Pantagruel seeing that, most gallantly displayed the vigor of his
arms, and according to the Art of the axe, gave him with the great end of his
mast a homethrust a little above the breast: then bringing along the blow to
the left side, with a slash struck him between the neck and shoulders: After
that, advancing his right foot, he gave him a push upon the couillons, with the
upper end of his said mast, wherewith breaking the scuttle, on the top thereof
he spilt three or four punchons of wine that were left therein.

Upon that Loupgarou thought that he had pierced his bladder, and that the wine
that came forth had been his urine: Pantagruel being not content with this,
would have doubled it by a side-blow; but Loupgarou lifting up his mace,
advanced one step upon him, and with all his force would have dash't it upon
Pantagruel, wherein (to speak the truth) he so sprightfully carried himself,
that if God had not succored the good Pantagruel, he had been cloven from the
top of his head to the bottom of his milt, but the blow glanced to the right
side, by the brisk nimblenesse of Pantagruel, and his mace sank into the ground
above threescore and thirteen foot, through a huge rock, out of which the fire
did issue greater then nine thousand and six tuns. Pantagruel seeing him busy
about plucking out his mace, which stuck in the ground between the rocks, ran
upon him, and would have clean cut off his head, if by mischance his mast had
not touched a little against the stock of Loupgarous mace, which was enchanted,
as we have said before: by this means his mast broke off about three handfuls
above his hand, whereat he stood amazed like a Bell-Founder, and cried out, Ah
Panurge, where art thou? Panurge seeing that, said to the King and the Giants,
By G -- they will hurt one another, if they be not parted; but the Giants were
as merry as if they had been at a wedding: then Carpalin would have risen from
thence to help his Master; but one of the Giants said unto him, By Golfarin the
Nephew of Mahoon, if thou stir hence I will put thee in the bottom of my
breeches, in stead of a Suppository, which cannot choose but do me good; for in
my belly I am very costive, and cannot well cagar, without gnashing my teeth,
and making many filthy faces. Then Pantagruel, thus destitute of a staff, took
up the end of his mast, striking athwart and along upon the Giant, but he did
him no more hurt then you would do with a filip upon a Smiths Anvil. In the
time Loupgarou was drawing his mace out of the ground, and having already
plucked it out, was ready therewith to have struck Pantagruel, who being very
quick in turning, avoided all his blows, in taking only the defensive part in
hand, until on a sudden he saw that Loupgarou did threaten him with these
words, saying, Now, viliain, will not I fail to chop thee as small as minced
meat, and keep thee henceforth from ever making any more poor men athirst; for
then without any more ado, Pantagruel struck him such a blow with his foot
against the belly, that he made him fall backwards, his heels over his head,
and dragged him thus along at flay-buttock above a flight-shot. Then Loupgarou
cried out, bleeding at the throat, Mahoon, Mahoon, Mahoon, at which noise all
the Giants arose to succor him: but Panurge said unto them, Gentlemen, do not
go, if you will believe me, for our Master is mad, and strikes athwart and
along, he cares not where, he will do you a mischief; but the Giants made no
account of it, seeing that Pantagruel had never a staff.

And when Pantagruel saw those Giants approach very near unto him, he took
Loupgarou by the two feet, and lift up his body like a pike in the air,
wherewith (it being harnished with Anvils) he laid such heavy load amongst
those Giants, armed with free stone, that striking them down as a Mason does
little knobs of stones, there was not one of them that stood before him, whom
he threw not flat to the ground, and by the breaking of this stony armor there
was made such a horrible rumble, as put me in mind of the fall of the
butter-tower of St. Stephens at Bourge, when it melted before the Sun.
Panurge, with Carpalin and Eusthenes, did cut in the mean time the throats of
those that were struck down; in such sort that there escaped not one.
Pantagruel to any man's sight was like a Mower, who with his sith (which was
Loupgarou,) cut down the meddow grass (to wit the Giants,) but with this
fencing of Pantagruels, Loupgarou lost his head, which happened when Pantagruel
struck down one whose name was Ri^tandouille or puddingplunderer, who was armed
cap-a-pe with grison stones, one chip whereof splintring abroad cut off
Epistemons neck clean and fair: for otherwise the most part of them were but
lightly armed with a kind of sandy brittle stone, and the rest with slaits:
at last when he saw that they were all dead, he threw the body of Loupgarou, as
hard as he could against the City, where falling like a frog upon his belly, in
the great piazza thereof, he with the said fall killed a singed he-cat, a wet
she-cat, a farting duck, and a brideled goose.

CHAP. XXX. How Epistemon, who had his head cut off, was finely healed by
Panurge, and of the news which he brought from the devils, and the damned
people in hell.
THis Gigantal victory being ended, Pantagruel withdrew himself to the place of
the flaggons, and called for Panurge and the rest, who came unto him safe and
sound, except Eusthenes, (whom one of the Giants had scratched a little in the
face, whilst he about the cutting of his throat, and Epistemon, who appeared
not at all: whereat Pantagruel was so aggrieved that he would have killed
himself; but Panurge said unto him, Nay, Sir, stay a while, and we will search
for him amongst the dead, and find out the truth of all: thus as they went
seeking after him, they found him stark dead, with his head between his arms
all bloody. Then Eusthenes cried out, Ah cruel death! have thou taken from me
the perfectest amongst men? At which words Pantagruel rose up with the greatest
grief that ever any man did see, and said to Panurge, Ha, my friend, the
prophecy of your two glasses, and the javelin staff was a great deal too
deceitful, but Panurge answered, My dear bullies all, weep not one drop more,
for he being yet all hot, I will make him as sound as ever he was; in saying
this, he took the head, and held it warm fore-gainst his Codpiece, that the
wind might not enter into it, Eusthenes and Carpalin carried the body to the
place where they had banqueted, not out of any hope that ever he would recover,
but that Pantagruel might see it.

Nevertheless Panurge gave him very good comfort, saying, If I do not heal
him, I will be content to lose my head (which is a fools wager,) leave off
therefore crying and help me. Then cleansed he his neck very well with pure
white wine, and after that, took his head, and into it synapised some powder of
diamerdis, which he always carried about him in one of his bags. Afterward,
he anointed it with I know not what ointment, and set it on very just, vein
against vein, sinew against sinew, and spondyle against spondyle, that he
might not be wry-necked, (for such people he mortally hated,) this done, he
gave it round about some fifteen or sixteen stitches with a needle, that it
might not fall off again, then on all sides, and every where he put a little
ointment on it, which he called resuscitative.

Suddenly Epistemon began to breath, then opened his eyes, yawned, sneezed, and
afterward let a great household fart; whereupon Panurge said, Now certainly he
is healed, and therefore gave him to drink a large full glass of strong white
wine, with a sugared toast. In this fashion was Epistemon finely healed, only
that he was somewhat hoarse for above three weeks together, and had a dry cough
of which he could not ^erid, but by the force of continual drinking: and now he
began to speak, and said that he had seen the devil, had spoken with Lucifer
familiarly, and had been very merry in hell, and in the Elysian fields,
affirming very seriously before them all, that the devils were boon
companions, and merry fellows: but in respect of the damned, he said he was
very sorry that Panurge had so soon called him back into this world again; for
(said he) I took wonderful delight to see them: How so? said Pantagruel:
because they do not use them there (said Epistemon) so badly as you think they
do: their estate and condition of living is but only changed after a very
strange manner; for I saw Alexander the great there, amending and patching on
clowts upon old breeches and stockins, whereby he got but a very poor living.

Xerxes was a Crier of mustard.

Romulus, a Salter and patcher of patines.

Numa, a nailsmith.

Tarquin, a Porter.

Piso, a clownish swain

Sylla, a Ferrie-man.

Cyrus, a Cowheard.

Themistocles, a glasse-maker.

Epaminondas, a maker of Mirrours or Looking-glasses.

Brutus and Cassius, Surveyors or Measurers of land.

Demosthenes, a Vine-dresser.

Cicero, a fire-kindler

Fabius, a threader of beads.

Artaxerxes, a rope-maker.

Aeneas, a Miller.

Achilles was a scauld-pared maker of haybundles.

Agamemnon, a lick-box.

Ulysses, a hay-mower.

Nestor, a Deer-keeper or Forrester.

Darius, a Gold-finder, or Jakes-farmer.

Ancus Martius, a ship-trimmer*

Camillus, a foot-post.

Marcellus, a sheller of beans.

Drusus, a taker of money at the doors of play houses.

Scipio Africanus, a Crier of Lee in a wooden slipper.

Asdrubal, a Lanterne-maker.

Hannibal, a Kettlemaker and seller of eggeshels.

Priamus, a seller of old clouts.

Lancelot of the lake, was a flayer of dead horses.

All the Knights of the round Table were poor day-labourers, employed to row
over the rivers of Cocytus, Phlegeton, Styx, Acheron and Lethe, when my lords,
the devils had a mind to recreate themselves upon the water, as in the like
occasion are hired the boatmen at Lions, the gondeleers of Venice, and oars at
London; but with this difference, that these poor Knights have only for their
fare a bob or flirt on the nose, and in the evening a morsel of course mouldie
bread*

Trajan was a Fisher of frogs.

Antoninus, a Lackey.

Comm^^us, a Jeat-maker*

Pertinax, a peeler of wall-nuts.

Lucullus, a maker of rattles and Hawks bells.

Justinian, a Pedlar.

Hector, a Snap-sauce Scullion.

Paris was a poor beggar.

Cam^ys^^, a Mule-driver.

Nero, a base blind fiddler, or player on that instrument which is called a
windbroach: Fierabras was his serving-man, who did him a thousand mischievous
tricks, and would make him eat of the brown bread, and drink of the rurned
wine, when himself did both eat and drink of the best.

Julius Caesar and Pompey were boatwrights and tighters of sh^^^.

Valentine and Orson did serve in the stoves of hell, and were sweat-rubbers in
hot houses.

Giglan and Govian were poor Swineherds.

Iafrey with the great tooth, was a tindermaker and seller of matches.

Godfrey de bullion, a Hood-maker.

Jason, was a Bracelet-maker.

Don Pietro de Castille, a Carrier of Indulgences.

Morgan, a beer-Brewer.

Huon of Bourdeaux, a Hooper of barrels.

Pyrr^us, a Kitchin-Scullion.

Anti^chus, a Chimney-sweeper.

Octavian, a Scraper of parchment.

Nerva, a Mariner.

Pope Julius was a Crier of pudding pyes, but he left off wearing there his
great buggerly beard.

John of Paris, was a greaser of boots.

Arthur of Britain, an ungreaser of caps.

Pierce Forest, a Carrier of fagots.

Pope Boniface the eighth, a Scummer Popes.

Pope Nicholas the third, a Maker of paper.

Pope Alexander, a rat-catcher.

Pope Sixtus, an Anointer of those that have the pox.

What, (said Pantagruel) have they the pox there too? Surely (said Epistemon) I
never saw so many; there are there I think above a hundred millions; for
believe, that those who have not had the pox in this world, must have it in the
other.

Cotsbody (said Panurge) then I am free; for I have been as far as the hole
of Gibraltar, reached unto the outmost bounds of Hermes, and gathered of the
ripest.

Ogier the Dane was a Furbisher of armor*

The King Tigranes, a mender of thatched houses.

Galien Restored, a taker of Moldwarps.

The four sons of Aymon, were all toothdrawers.

Pope Calixtus, was the barber of a woman's sineq uo non.

Pope Urban, a bacon-pecker.

Melusina, was a Kitchen drudge-wench.

Mattabrune, a Laundresse.

Cleopatra, a Crier of onions.

Helene, a broker for Chamber-maids.

Semiramis, the Beggars lice-killer.

Dido did sell mushroms.

Pentasilea sold cresses.

Lu^retia was an Alehouse keeper.

Hortensia, a Spinstresse.

Livia, a grater of verdigreece.

After this manner, those that had been great Lords and Ladies here, got but a
poor scurvie wretched living there below. And on the contrary, the Philosophers
and others, who in this world had been altogether indigent and wanting, were
great Lords there in their turn. I saw Diogenes there strout it out most
pompously, and in great magnificence, with a rich purple gown on him, and a
golden Scepter in his right hand. And which is more, he would now and then make
Alexander the great mad, so enormously would he abuse him, when he had not well
patched his breeches; for he used to pay his skin with sound bastinadoes; I saw
Epictetus there most gallantly apparelled after the French fashion, sitting
under a pleasant Arbor, with store of handsome Gentlewomen, frolicking,
drinking, dancing, and making good cheer, with abundance of Crowns of the
Sun. Above the lattice were written these verses for his device.

To leap and dance, to sport and play,
And drink good wine both white and brown:
Or nothing else do all the day,
But tell bags full of many'a Crown.
When he saw me, he invited me to drink with him very courteously, and I being
willing to be entreated, we tipled and chopined together most theologically. In
the mean time came Cyrus to beg one farthing of him for the honor of Mercury,
therewith to buy a few onions for his supper? No, no, said Epictetus, I do not
use in my almes-giving to bestow farthings, hold thou Varlet, there is a crown
for thee, be an honest man: Cyrus was exceeding glad to have met with such a
booty; but the other poor rogues, the Kings that are there below, as
Alexander, Darius, and others stole it away from him by night. I saw Pathelin
the Treasurer of Rhadamantus, who in cheapening the puddingpyes that Pope
Julius cried, asked him, How much a dozen? Three blanks (said the Pope:) Nay
(said Pathelin) three blows with a cudgel, lay them down here you rascal, and
go fetch more: the poor Pope went away weeping, who when he came to his Master
the Pyemaker, told him that they had taken away his pudding-pyes; whereupon his
Master gave him such a sound lash with an eele-skin, that his own would have
been worth nothing to make bag-pipe-bags of. I saw Master John le maire, there
personate the Pope in such fashion, that he made all the poor Kings and Popes
of this world kiss his feet, and taking great state upon him, gave them his
benediction, saying, Get the pardons, rogues, get the pardons, they are good
cheap: I absolve you of bread and pottage, and dispense with you to be never
good for any thing: then calling Caillet and Triboulet, to him, he spoke these
words, My Lords the Cardinals dispatch their bulls, to wit, to each of them a
blow with a Cudgel upon the reins, which accordingly was forthwith performed.

I heard Master Francus Villou ask Xerxes, How much the mess of mustard? A
farthing, said Xerxes: to which the said Villou answered, The pox take thee for
a villain: as much of square-ear'd wheat is not worth half that price, and now
thou offerest to inhance the price of victuals: with this he pist in his pot as
the mustard-makers of Paris use to do. I saw the trained bowe-man of the
bathing tub, (known by the name of the Francarcher de baignolet) who being one
of the trustees of the Inquisition, when he saw Pierce Forest making water
against a wall, in which was painted the fire of St. Antoni^, declared him
heretic, and would have caused him to be burnt alive, had it not been for
Morgant, who for his Proficiat and other small fees gave him nine tuns of beer.
Well (said Pantagruel,) reserve all these fair stories for another time, only
tell us how the Usurers are there handled: I saw them (said Epistemon) all very
busily employed in seeking of rustie pins, and old nails in the kennels of the
streets, as you see poor wretched rogues do in this world; but the quintal or
hundred weight of this old iron ware, is there valued but at the price of a
cantle of bread, and yet they have but a very bad dispatch and riddance in the
sale of it: thus the poor Misers are sometimes three whole weeks, without
eating one morsel or crumb of bread, and yet work both day and night looking
for the fair to come: nevertheless, of all this labor, toil and misery they
reckon nothing, so cursedly active they are in the prosecution of that their
base calling, in hopes at the end of the year, to earne some scurvie penny by
it.

Come, (said Pantagruel) let us now make our selves merry one bout, and drink
(my Lads) I beseech you, for it is very good drinking all this month: then did
they unease their flaggons by heaps and dozens, and with their
leaguer-provision made excellent good cheer: but the poor King Anarchus could
not all this while settle himself toward any fit of mirth; whereupon Panurge
said, Of what trade shall we make my Lord the King here, that he may be skilful
in the Art, when he goes thither to sojourn, amongst all the devils of hell?
Indeed* (said Pantagruel) that was well advised of thee, do with him what thou will: I give him to thee: Grammercie (said Panurge) the present is not to be
refused, and I love it from you.

CHAP. XXXI. How Pantagruel entered into the City of the Amaurots, and how
Panurge married King Anarchus to an old Lanterncarrying Hag, and made him a
Crier of green sauce.
AFter this wonderful victory, Pantagruel sent Carpalin unto the City of the
Amaurots, to declare and signify unto them how the King Anarchus was taken
prisoner, and all the enemies of the City overthrown, which news when they
heard, all the inhabitants of the City came forth to meet him in good order,
and with a great triumphant pomp, conducting him with a heavenly joy into the
City, where innnumerable bonefires were set on, thorough all the parts thereof,
and fair round tables which were furnished with store of good victuals, set
out in the middle of the streets; this was a renewing of the golden age in the
time of Saturn, so good was the cheer which then they made.

But Pantagruel having assembled the whole Senate, and Common Councel-men of
the town, said (My Masters) we must now strike the iron whilst it is hot; it
is therefore my will, that before we frolic it any longer, we advise how to
assault and take the whole Kingdom of the Dipsodes: to which effect let those
that will go with me provide themselves against to morrow after drinking; for
then will I begin to march, not that I need any more men then I have to help me
to conquer it; for I could make it as sure that way as if I had it already, but
I see this City is so full of inhabitants, that they scarce can turn in the
streets; I will therefore carry them as a Colonie into Dipsodie, and will give
them all that Country, which is fair, wealthy, fruitful and pleasant, above
all other Countries in the world as many of you can tell who have been there
heretofore* every one of you therefore that will go along, let him provide
himself as I have said. This counsel and resolution being published in the
City, the next morning there assembled in the piazza, before the Palace, to the
number of eighteen hundred fifty six thousand and eleven, besides women and
little children: thus began they to marc^ straight into Dipsodie, in such good
order as did the people of Israel when they departed out of Egypt, to pass
over the red sea.

But before we proceed any further in this purpose, I will tell you how Panurge
handled his prisoner the King Anarchus: for having remembered that which
Epistemon had related, how the Kings and rich men, in this world were used in
the Elysian fields, and how they got their living there by base and ignoble
trades; he therefore one day apparelled his King in a pretty little canvass
doublet, all jagged and pinked like the tippet of a light horsemans cap,
togethet with a pair of large Mariners breeches, and stockins without shoes;
For (said he) they would but spoil his sight; and a little peach-coloured
bonnet, with a great capons feather in it: I lie, for I think he had two: and a
very handsome girdle of a sky-colour and green, (in French called pers and
vert) saying, that such a livery did become him well, for that he had always
been perverse: and in this plight bringing him before Pantagruel, said unto
him, Do you know this royster? No indeed, said Pantagruel: It is (said Panurge)
my Lord, the King of the three batches, or threadbare sovereign: I intend to
make him an honest man. These devilish Kings which we have here are but as so
many calves, they know nothing, and are good for nothing, but to do a thousand
mischiefs to their poor subjects, and to trouble all the world with war for
their unjust and detestable pleasure: I will put him to a trade, and make him a
Crier of green sauce: Go to, begin and cry, Do you lack any green sauce? and
the poor devil cried: That is too low (said Panurge;) then took him by the
ear, saying, Sing higher in Gesolreut: So, so, (poor devil) thou have a good
throat: thou were never so happy as to be no longer King: and Pantagruel made
himself merry with all this; for I dare boldly say, that he was the best little
gafer that was to be seen between this and the end of a staff. Thus was
Anarchus made a good Crier of green sauce, two days thereafter Panurge married
him with an old Lanternecarrying Hag, and he himself made the wedding with
fine sheeps-heads, brave haslets with mustard, gallant salligots with garlic,
of which he sent five horse-loads unto Pantagruel, which he ate up all, he
found them so appetizing: and for their drink, they had a kind of small
well-watered wine, and some sorbapple-cider: and to make them dance he hired a
blind man, that made music to them with a windbroach.

After dinner he led them to the Palace, and showed them to Pantagruel, and
said, pointing to the married woman, You need not fear that she will crack:
Why? said Pantagruel: Because, said Panurge, she is well slit and broke up
already; What do you mean by that? said Pantagruel: Do not you see? said
Panurge, that the chestnuts which are roasted in the fire, if they be whole,
they crack as if they were mad; and to keep them from cracking, they make an
incision in them, and slit them; so this new Bride is in her lower parts well
slit before, and therefore will not crack behind.

Pantagruel gave them a little lodge near the lower street, and a mortar of
stone wherein to bray and pound their sauce, and in this manner did they do
their little business, he being as pretty a Crier of green sauce, as ever was
seen in the Country of Utopia: but I have been told since that his wife does
beat him like plaster, and the poor sot dare not defend himself, he is so
simple.

CHAP. XXXII. How Pantagruel with his tongue covered a whole Army, and what the
Author saw in his mouth.
THus as Pantagruel with all his Army had entered into the Country of the
Dipsodes, every one was glad of it, and incontinently rendered themselves unto
him, bringing him out of their own good wills the Keys of all the Cities where
he went, the Almirods only excepted, who being resolved to hold out against
him, made answer to his Heralds that they would not yield but upon very
honorable and good conditions.

What? (said Pantagruel) do they ask any better terms, then the hand at the
pot, and the glass in their fist? Come let us go sack them, and put them all
to the sword: then did they put themselves in good order, as being fully
determined to give an assault, but by the way passing through a large field,
they were overtaken with a great shower of rain, whereat they began to shiver
and tremble, to crowd, press and thrust close to one another. When Pantagruel
saw that, he made their Captains tell them, that it was nothing, and that he
saw well above the clouds, that it would be nothing but a little dew; but
howsoever, that they should put themselves in order, and he would cover them:
then did they put themselves in a close order, and stood as near to other as
they could: and Pantagruel drew out his tongue only halfwayes and covered them
all, as a hen does her chickens. In the mean time I, who relate to you these so
veritable stories, hid my self under a burdock-leafe, which was not much less
in largeness then the arch of the bridge of Montrible; but when I saw them
thus covered, I went toward them to shelter my self likewise, which I could
not do; for that they were so (as the saying is) At the yards end there is no
cloth left. Then as well as I could, I got upon it, and went along full two
leagues upon his tongue, and so long marched, that at last I came into his
mouth: but oh gods and goddesses, what did I see there? Jupiter confound me
with his trisulk lightning if I lie: I walked there as they do in Sophie and
Constantinople, and saw there great rocks like the mountains in Denmark, I
believe that those were his teeth, I saw also fair meddows, large forests,
great and strong Cities, not a jot less then Lions or Poictiers, the first man
I met with there, was a good honest fellow planting coleworts, whereat being
very much amazed, I asked him, My friend, what do thou make here? I plant
coleworts, said he: But how, and wherewith said I? Ha Sir, said he, every one
cannot have his ballocks as heavy as a mortar, neither can we be all rich: thus
do I get my poor living, and carry them to the market to sell in the City which
is here behind Jesus! (said I) is there here a new world? Sure (said he) it is
never a jot new, but it is commonly reported, that without this there is an
earth, whereof the inhabitants enjoy the light of a Sun and a Moon, and that
it is full of, and replenished with very good commodities; but yet this is more
ancient then that: Yea, but (said I) my friend, what is the name of that City,
whither thou carriest thy Coleworts to sell? It is called Alpharage, (said he)
and all the indwellers are Christians, very honest men, and will make you good
cheer. To be brief, I resolved to go thither. Now in my way, I met with a
fellow that was lying in wait to catch pigeons, of whom I asked, (My friend)
from whence come these pigeons? Sir, (said he) they come from the other world:
then I thought, that when Pantagruel yawned, the pigeons went into his mouth in
whole flocks, thinking that it had been a pigeon-house.

Then I went into the City, which I found fair, very strong, and seated in a
good air^: but at my entry the guard demanded of me my pass or ticket: whereat
I was much astonished, and asked them, (My Masters) is there any danger of the
plague here? O Lord, (said they) they die hard by here so fast, that the cart
runs about the streets; Good God! (said I) and where? whereunto they answered
that it was in Larinx and Phaerinx, which are two great Cities, such as Rowen
and Nants, rich and of great trading: and the cause of the plague was by a
stinking and infectious exhalation, which lately vapoured out of the abismes,
whereof there have died above two and twenty hundred and threescore thousand
and sixteen persons within this sevennight; then I considered, calculated and
found, that it was a rank and unsavory breathing, which came out of
Pantagruels stomach, when he did eat so much garlic, as we have aforesaid.

Parting from thence, I past amongst the rocks, which were his teeth, and never
left walking till I got up on one of them; and there I found the pleasantest
places in the world, great large tennis-Courts, fair galleries, sweet meddows,
store of Vines, and an infinite number of banqueting summer outhouses in the
fields, after the Italian fashion, full of pleasure and delight, where I stayed
full four months, and never made better cheer in my life as then. After that
I went down by the hinder teeth to comt to the chaps; but in the way I was
robbed by thieves in a great forest, that is in the territory toward the
ears: then (after, a little further traveling) I fell upon a pretty petty
village, (truly I have forgot the name of it) where I was yet merrier then
ever, and got some certain money to live by, can you tell how? by sleeping; for
there they hire men by the day to sleep, and they get by it six pence a day,
but they that can snort hard get at least nine pence. How I had been robbed in
the valley I informed the Senators, who told me that in very truth the people
of that side were bad livers, and naturally theevish, whereby I perceived well,
that as we have with us the Countries cisalpin and transalpine, that is,
behither and beyond the mountains, so have they there the Countries cidentine
and tradentine, that is, behither and beyond the teeth: but it is far better
living on this side, and the air is purer. There I began to think, that it is
very true which is commonly said, that the one half of the world knows not
how the other half lives; seeing none before my self had ever written of that
Country, wherein are above five and twenty Kingdoms inhabited, besides
deserts, and a great arm of the sea: concerning which purpose, I have composed
a great book entitled The History of the Throttias, because they dwell in the
throat of my Master Pantagruel.

At last I was willing to return, and passing by his beard, I cast my self upon
his shoulders, and from thence slid down to the ground, and fell before him:
as soon as I was perceived by him, he asked me, Whence come thou, Alc^sribas?
I answered him, Out of your mouth, my Lord? and how long have thou been there?
said he. Since the time (said I) that you went against the Almirods; That is,
about six months ago, said he: and wherewith did thou live? what did thou
drink? I answered, My Lord, of the same that you did, and of the daintiest
morsels that past through your throat I took toll: Yea, but said he, where
did thou shite? In your throat (my Lord) said I: Ha, ha, thou art a merry
fellow, said he. We have with the help of God conquered all the land of the
Dipsodes, I will give thee the Chastelleine, or Lairdship of Salmigondin;
Grammercy, my Lord, said I, you gratify me beyond all that I have deserved of
you.

CHAP. XXXIII. How Pantagruel became sick, and the manner how he was recovered.
A While after this the good Pantagruel fell sick, and had such an obstruction
in his stomach, that he could neither eat nor drink: and because mischief
seldom comes alone, a hot piss seized on him, which tormented him more then
you would believe: His Physicians nevertheless helped him very well, and with
store of lenitives and diuretic drugs made him piss away his pain: his urine
was so hot, that since that time it is not yet cold, and you have of it in
diverse places of France, according to the course that it took, and they are
called the hot Baths, as

At Coderets.

At Limous.

At Dast.

At Ballervie.

At Nerie.

At Bourbonansie and elsewhere in Italic.

At Mongros.

At Appone.

At Sancto Petro de Adua.

At St. Helen.

At Casa Nuova.

At St. Bartolomee in the County of Boulogne.

At the Lorrette, and a thousand other places.

And I wonder much at a rabble of foolish Philosophers and Physicians, who
spend their time in disputing, whence the heat of the said waters comes,
whether it be by reason of Borax, or sulphur, or alum, or saltpeter that is
within the mine; for they do nothing but dote, and better were it for them to
rub their arse against a thistle, then to waste away their time thus in
disputing of that, whereof they know not the original; for the resolution is
easy, neither need we to enquire any further, then that the said baths came by
a hot piss of the good Pantagruel.

Now to tell you after what manner he was cured of his principal disease; I let
pass how for a minorative, or gentle potion, he took four hundred pound
weight of Colophoniack Scammonee: six score and eighteen cart-loads of Cassia:
an eleven thousand and nine hundred pound weight of Rubarb, besides other
confused jumblings of sundry drugs: You must understand, that by the advice of
the Physicians, it was ordained that what did offend his stomach should be
taken away; and therefore they made seventeen great balls of copper, each
whereof was bigger then that which is to be seen on the top of St. Peter's
needle at Rome, and in such sort, that they did open in the midst, and shut
with a spring. Into one of them entered one of his men carrying a Lantern and
a torch lighted, and so Pantagruel swallowed him down like a little pill: into
seven others went seven Countrey-fellows, having every one of them a shovel on
his neck: into nine others entered nine wood-carriers, having each of them a
basket hung at his neck, and so were they swallowed down like pills: when they
were in his stomach, every one undid his spring, and came out of their cabins:
the first whereof was he that carried the Lantern, and so they fell more then
half a league into a most horrible gulf, more stinking and infectious then
ever was Mephitis, or the marshes of Camerina, or the abominably unsavory
lake of Sorbona, whereof Strabo makes mention. And had it not been, that they
had very well antidoted their stomach, heart and wine-pot, which is called the
noddle, they had been altogether suffocated and choked with these detestable
vapors. O what a perfume! O what an evaporation wherewith to beray the masks
or muflers of young mangie queans: after that with groping and smelling they
came near to the fecal matter and the corrupted humors; finally they found a
montjoy or heap of ordure and filth: then fell the Pioneers to work to dig it
up, and the rest with their shovels filled the baskets; and when all was
cleansed, every one retired himself into his ball.

This done, Pantagruel enforcing himself to a vomit, very easily brought them
out, and they made no more show in his mouth, then a fart in yours: but when
they came merrily out of their pills, I thought upon the Grecians coming out of
the Trojan horse: by this means was he healed, and brought unto his former
state and convalescence; and of these brazen pills, or rather copper-balls, you
have one at Orleans, upon the steeple of the Holy Cross Church.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Conclusion of this present Book, and the excuse of the Author.
NOw (my Masters) you have heard a beginning of the horrifick history of my
Lord and Master Pantagruel: Here will I make an end of the first book; My head
aches a little, and I perceive that the Registers of my brain, are somewhat
jumbled and disordered with this septembral juice. You shall have the rest of
the history at Franckfort mart next coming, and there shall you see how Panurge
was married and made a Cuckold within a month after his wedding: how
Pantagruel found out the Philosophers stone, the manner how he found it, and
the way how to use it: how he past over the Caspian mountains, and how he
sailed thorough the Atlantic sea, defeated the Cannibals, and conquered the
isles of Perles, how he married the daughter of the King of India, called
Presian, how he fought against the devil, and burnt up five chambers of hell,
ransacked the great black chamber, threw Proserpina into the fire, broke five
teeth to Lucifer, and the horn that was in his arse. How he visited the
regions of the Moon, to know whether indeed the Moon were not entire and whole,
or if the women had three quarters of it in their heads, and a thousand other
little merriments all veritable. These are brave things truly; Good night,
Gentlemen, Perdonate mi, and think not so much upon my faults, that you forget
your own. If you say to me, (Master) it would seem that you were not very wise
in writing to us these flimflam stories, and pleasant fooleries:

I answer you, that you are not much wiser to spend your time in reading them:
nevertheless, if you read them to make your selves merry, as in manner of
pastime I wrote them, you and I both are far more worthy of pardon, then a
great rabble of squint-minded fellows, dissembling and counterfeit Saints,
demure lookers, hypocrites, pretended zealots, tough Friars, buskin-Monks, and
other such sects of men, who disguise themselves like Maskers to deceive the
world, for whilst they give the common people to understand, that they are
busied about nothing but contemplation and devotion in fastings, and maceration
of their sensuality; and that only to sustain and aliment the small frailty of
their humanity: It is so far otherwise, that on the contrary (God knows) what
cheer they make, Et Curios simulant, sed bacchanalia vivunt. You may read it
in great letters, in the coloring of their red snowts, and gulching bellies as
big as a tun, unless it be when they perfume themselves with sulphur; as for
their study it is wholly taken up in reading of Pantagruelin books, not so much
to pass the time merrily, as to hurt some one or other mischievously, to wit,
in articling, sole-articling, wry-neckifying, buttock* stirring, ballocking,
and diabliculating, that is, calumniating; wherein they are like unto the poor
rogues of a village, that are busy in stirring up and scraping in the ordure
and filth of little children, in the season of cherries and guinds, and that
only to find the kernels, that they may sell them to the druggists, to make
thereof pomander-oile Fly from these men, abhor and hate them as much as I
do, and upon my faith you will find your selves the better for it. And if you
desire to be good Pantagruel sts (that is to say, to live in peace, joy,
health, making your selves always merry) never trust those men that always
peep out at one hole.

The End of the Second Book of Rabelais.
FINIS.

