THE TOWN-SHIFTS, OR, THE Suburb-Justice: A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at His Royal Highness the Duke of York's Theater.

Licensed, May 2. 1671.

Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the White Lion next Chancery Lane, in
Fleet Street: And William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the Lower Walk of the
New-Exchange. 1671.

TO His Worthy, and Esteemed good Friend, STEPHEN MOSEDELF, Esquire.
SIR,
THe favors I have so frequently found from your continual kindness, is the
occasion I have taken the Confidence to kiss your hand with this homely Offer
of my sincere Services. I know your Ingenuity will easily discover those
imperfections which your Generosity will as quickly pardon. But lest they
should come too fast, and fall too heavy upon your patience, be pleased to take
this truth as an allay. That it was thought on, begun, and finished, in a
fortnight: therefore unlike to appear so Correct, as in reasonable expectation
a Play should be, before it passes Stage-proof. I must confess it a great
defect of Judgment in me, and expect to be accused of much irrational
Confidence, for committing this Minor to make its way through so large a
Congregation of Critics, as appear in the persecution of all Plays. But it is
with me, as with Animals, that boldly attempt swimming, wanting reason to
apprehend the water fatal: So I (without fear of Censorious Lashes, which a
wiser Man might have expected to be the Conclusion of such an Adventure) have
plunged my self unawares into a merciless Sea of Satyrists; which I fear will
prove Fatal, if I find not protection under your Patronage.

Which is the humble request of,

Sir, Your Obliged, and Obedient Servant, EDW. REVET.

PROLOGUE.
YOu are of late, Gallants, grown so severe,
Plays on the Post are damned, before you hear:
Why should you be such strangers to remorse,
To Judge, before you try? The fairest Course,
Could we for once advise, would be to stay
And hear the Cause, before you giv't away.
But since it is so, we scorn to court a smile:
Be cruel as you can, scoff, and revile
Till you have spent your Spleens; that so you may
Want them for to condemn a better Play.
This may deserve the worst that you can say;
Would the Judicious only Critics be,
They Would do it, where there is just cause, and moderately.
But there is an up-start Crew, a Generation
Of little Fopps, Critics by imitation:
Young Men in Flaxen Wiggs, just sent to Town,
For to be cheated, and to wear a Gown.
These are the little things, perch't in the Pit,
Making of noises, which some Fools think wit:
Cry down what is now, or what e're was writ.
Be just for once, and grant me this demand;
Let me be doomed by those that understand:
Death Glorious looks, brought by a Noble hand.
Dramatis Personae.
LOvewell, Mr. Cademan. Friendly, Mr. Medbourn. Faithful, Mr. Westwood.
Leftwell, Mr. Angel. Pett, Mr. Norris. Frump, Mr. Sandford. Stingey, Mr.
Sherwood. Runwell, Mr. Whaley. Moses, Mr. Williams. Constable, Watchmen, and
Servants. Leticia, Mrs. Lee. Fickle, Mrs. Long. Betty, Mrs. Dixon. Goody Fells.
Mrs. Norris.
Plays Printed for, and sold by Thomas Dring.
LOve and Honor. Unfortunate Lovers. Raze a Wife, and have a Wife. Thierry and
Theodoret. The Woman-Hater. The Changeling. Albumazar. School of Complements.
Hero and Leander, Trag. Plays now in the Press. The Amorous Prince. Six day's
Adventure, or the New Utopia.
THE Town-Shifts.
Actus primus.
Scena prima.
Enter Lovewell, solus. THanks to ill Fortune; I have lived long enough, and
spent money enough, to make me poor in pocket, and rich in Experience; in which
expense, both of time and money, I Have learned there is nothing so great a fault,
or less a Man's Friend, that desires to live in a full Fortune, than Honesty. My
losses at Dice have sufficiently qualified me for an expert cheat in that
confounded Calling. My Conversation with those kind things, called Women, has
very well enabled me to perform the gentile profession of pimping, now, of all
Vices, most in fashion; and that blushing Fool Modesty's so much my Enemy, that
I want the confidence to wheedle a poor Tailor to take my rags off, and new
rigg me. Whilst I had money, never came a Night, but I was Ushered home by half
a dozen of the Sons of this sinful Town, to lay me safe in my Lodging, but
those went with my Money. Yet, Sot that I am, pestered with an old fashioned
Principle of Honesty, I must needs hate to do as I have been done by, though
the Devil offers me an excellent opportunity in Young Leftwell, a Fellow newly
come to a large Estate, got by his damned Father, by the fall of many a fair
Family; who has scarce wit enough to be made the sore-man of a Watch. Now,
whether it be not Religion to work upon this Animal; faith I think --

Enter to him, Friendly, and Faithful. Friend. Why, how now, Ned, pining in
poverty?


Faith. Or contriving a way to create new Clothes?


Friend. Or, art waiting here with a watery stomach, in expectation of an
Apparition of Pork and Turnips? 'Sdeath, Ned, this is the worst way of diet the
Devil could direct thee.


Love. You're merry, Gentlemen; you're merry. Sure, the Devil you spoke of,
Friendly, has made you so; has he not got up into your Garret at St. Giles's,
and bought your soul for a small morsel of Money? Why, the Spanish threepence
I left with you could never produce this spirit. You're grown witty, and
wanton; what, are you well lyned in the pocket? Come, let us see; pish, never
retreat; what a Rascal are you, to rally thus!


Faith. If your design be to search his pockets, prithee desist; for, to my
knowledge, they fell out of his Breeches a Month ago; and he could have spared
nothing better, for he has had no employment for them this twelve month.


Friend. Pox of your Trumpeters face; must you undertake to talk with your
plump countenance? I am a Rogue, if I have not seen a Butter-eating Dutchman,
that has been drowned nine days, appear like a trim Courtier, in comparison of
thee. Thou art a Fellow that would give thy Ears (for Money thou have none)
to kiss the hand of a Kitchen Wench, in hopes to find fat enough upon her
fingers, to allay the fury of thy Stomach.


Love. Leave laboring your little wits, and draw near, for I intend you two to
be of my Council.


Faith. Ned, Ned, we have always found your Counsel to be nothing but
persuasions to poverty, what a blessed thing it is to live Honest, and be
lousy; that it is better to be lazy, and lack every thing, than work in the
ways of wickedness for wealth.


Friend. The Rogue by chance has clapped upon a truth. It Is even so, Ned. We have
fed so long upon your Divinity Lectures, that we have almost forgot to eat in
earnest, and have hardly Linen enough left to harbor a Lowse. Therefore we will
have no more on it, dear Monsieur Melancholy; for my part, I Am resolved to turn
Hector, quarrel in the streets with Drunkards, and so steal Hats and Perukes;
and begin to believe it a very pious way of living; Ay, and it is very taking.


Faith. And I Am resolved to follow thee; either fight, filch, padd, or pimp;
and no longer suffer under the horrid persecutions of Poverty.


Both. So, fate you well, Sir; fare you well.


Love. If I thought you were such wretched Rascals as you are painfully making
appear, you should even pine in your poverty, e're participate in my pious, and
I hope, profitable design; but I know ye better. You hear, Gentlemen, that
Young Leftwell is come of Age, though not to Years of discretion. Do you
believe it a sin to bubble this abominable Brute out of a part of that ill got,
and like to be worse spent, Estate?


Friend. Faith, Ned, I think none at all; but how to do it, will require some
time to consider on it: I could make shift to do it with the Dye, but the Rogue
has been so cautious of that from his Cradle, that he swounds at the sight of
them.


Faith. Then Drinking will do nothing; for a pint of Ale puts a Padlock upon
his Pocket; and you may as well persuade a Presbyterian Parson to Charity, as
him out of a penny; there is no way, but to unlock his leachery by the sight of
a fine soft Wench.


Love. O hang him, he was once in Love with his Uncle's Kitchin-Maid, and, (as
he calls it) was crossed in his affection; and ever since, the Fool faints at the
sight of a Female.


Friend. But good Clothes must first be thought on; for you know we three are
at present (as a man may say) in a very threadbare condition; which this
Clod-pole hates worse than an Old Alderman does Hunting. It Is certain we shall
never be received in this garb. Ned, cannot you get the old confiding man,
sweet Mr. Sowell, to new suit us, in order to this design, with a large promise
of sudden satisfaction?


Enter Leftwell, and his Man Moses. Love. See where the Ass comes, sadled in
silk. Let Us all put on sobriety, and salute him.


Leftw. Moses, can you tie a shoe in the newest fashion?


Moses. Sir, I tied your Fathers a fore you were born, and (peace be with him)
he never disliked it.


Leftw. Come to, then, but have a care of my Corns, good Meses. How now, Ned,
no new Clothes yet; I would you were finer, that you might be fitter for my
Company.


Love. I am sorry, Sir, that my ill garb commands me from your good Company.


Leftw. Prithee Ned, what are these Tatter-demallions that attend thee? they
look like men of the forlorn hope, with half their Clothes taken off by small
shot. 'Slife, there is one has a hole shot through his Hat.


Love. Friends of mine, Sir; that you would honor in acknowledging.


Friend. Sir, your most humble Servant; I should be proud to be better
acquainted.


Left. Sir, I don't know you, nor desire to be better acquainted with you, till
you get better Clothes on your back. There Is you, and your Friend, would serve
for a couple of Scare-crows, if you could get Credit for carriage into the
Country. I Will plague that Fellow, when I was poor, he persecuted me.


Aside. Faith. Td's Death, Lovewell, I shall be constrained to kick him; I
cannot hold.


Love. O, by all means do, and starve for it.


Left. Ned Lovewell, how long have you known these Raggamuffins?


Love. Why, an't please you, Sir, about a dozen years.


Left. Always in the same Clothes, I warrant; for less time sold never have
taken 'em into so many pieces. Do you ever lie with them? Are their Shirts any
better than their Suits?


Love. You're too great a Tyrant. They are, I assure you, Sir, Gentlemen of a
very ancient Family.


Left. If their Family be as old as their Clothes, it is Ancient indeed. God
by'e, Gentlemen; if ever I see you again, I shall certainly dream of a
Dunghill. Come along, Moses.


Exeunt Left. Moses. Faith. What a damned Rogue is this? he has abused us
beyond bearing.


Love. Let him talk on; I find now what will do it. I Will strait to serious
Sowell, and solicit him to help us: Meet me about seven a Clock at the Old
House.


Both. Heavens bless thee with the spirit of effectual persuasion.


Excunt Omnes. Scena Secunda.
Enter Leticia, Fickle, Betty, in a Garden. Let. Cousin Fickle, thou have some
of the strangest humors in thee, that ever Maid was mad withal. Thou never
like a dress above half an hour, nor a man more than half a day: Thou art a
mere Proteus, and put'st thy self into as many shapes. Thou have been this one
day in six several dresses; and the last week loved, and hated, seven several
Men. No body that knows thee believes thee any thing else but distracted. We
shall have thee, e're long, fall out with Life, and dye for diversion.


Fick. And thou art (Dear Coz.) as mad the other way; thou had rather wear
thy Clothes till they are moldy, then give thy Maid the trouble of a new
tyring. That garb and Gown you now go in, is as well known as the Church, and I
believe you think it as durable; for Betty says you never intend to change it.


Betty. O fie; Madam, never trust me, if ever I talked of your Ladyship at this
unmannerly rate.


Let. Let her run on, Wench; I Am certain she will be out of love with this way of
talking quickly: I Have a mind to see if she can continue a quarter of an hour in
any one thing.


Fick. Then, Cousin, thou art mad of one Man. Thou have loved a Fellow in foul
Linen (I think he is a Gentleman) but what then? thou have loved him almost
half a year, which is a horrible thing to think on. But I am weary of the
Garden; I Will go talk of Stateaffairs to my old Uncle. Good b'ye, Coz.


Exit Fickle. Let. Go thy ways, Mad-cap: I Will undertake, before my Father can
turn about and talk two words, she will be weary of the first, and go to find new
Company.


Betty. I vow, Madam, she wearies me out of my little wits, to pin, and unpin
Curles; to add, and diminish color; to new place the Pendants: any, sometimes
at Noon day, to put on Coyfes and Pinners. I would to Heaven she were well
married, that I might not be pestered. But now I talk of Marriage, pray, Madam,
when did you hear from Mr. Lovewell?


Let. Not a great while; Betty, I Am afraid I must wear the Willow, I doubt he
has left me; what think thou?


Betty. O, Madam, I dare swear, he had rather lose his Eyes. If that Man be not
truly a Gentleman, there is no Gentility in being. It Is a thousand pities he is
poor: In spite of his low garb he will look like himself; I Will tell you,
Madam, when I have light him down stairs, and I dare swear he has not had three
shillings in his pocket, he has put half a Crown into my hand, when I was
grieved to take it. 'Twere sin, to doubt his Love.


Let. Betty, I doubt you will prove my Rival; could you find in your heart to
love him, if I should leave him?


Betty. If I could not, I wish I might dye a Maid; which would be much against
my will, Madam.


Let. Hark, does not some body knock at the Garden Gate? Go see who it is.


Betty. I go, Madam; I vow, I hope from my heart it is he.


Exit Betty. Let. I love him well; yet, if I marry him, I Am lost; and left to
languish in a life of loathed poverty, for he is poor. And it is because he has
a generous soul, he is so. My Father cannot hear of him with patience; for he
had rather wed me to a Brute, with Money, than to the best of Men, that wants
it. That Age should so defective be in Reason; as to prefer this sordid
Dunghill Earth before the best of Gallantry and worth.

Enter Lovewell. But here he comes, and Betty gone; this Baggage never fails to
leave him to all opportunities; but I Will act a Woman's part, for once; I Will
appear strange, to try him.


Love. My dear Leticia!


Let. Soft; Sir, you have been away so long, you have forgot your duty. I
pityed you whilst you knew Civility, and for that reason indulged you; and
thought to have persuaded my Maid to Marry you, and got my Father to put you
into a Farm, in hopes you would in a little time become a perfect Plough-man.
Your mis-behaviour now makes me believe now you have been one. And so good
b'ye, Sir.


Love. Dear Madam, let me conjure you. --


Let. Hold, Sir, no conjurations; if you have any thing to say, speak soberly,
and at distance: I find, allowing you too near address, begets you confidence.


Love. Will not this posture serve, as well as any?


Kneels. Let. I, truly, I think that best becomes you; now go on, Sir.


Love. Then I proceed, and beg a knowledge of my Crimes; and why I find those
killing frowns; a Cloud on that fair face, which was always wont to wear such
smiles as sweetened all my sorrows, and made me triumph in despite of tears.
Have I done ill? tell me, that I may dye: 'Twere Villainy, to live after a Crime
committed against you.


Enter to them, Pett, her Father. Pett. How Is this? Certainly, that Fellow
believes my Daughter to be the Goddess Ceres, and he is begging bread. In Faith,
I shall put you besides your Petition. De'you hear, Sir; there is nothing for
you, I can assure you.


Let. We Are both undone -- My Father -- what will you do?


Pett. Friend, what is your business here? A man would guess by your Clothes you
should have more kindness for your stockings, than to beg on your knees. It Is
ten to one, whether she had given you enough to have mended what you wore out
in your worship. But hark you, Sir; I believe, by your face, you come to
solicit her Love. Pray pack off, Sir, or I Will make my Cane walk about your
Coxcomb.


Love. Pray, Sir, will you --


Pett. Pray, Sir. Pray me no prays; but be gone, or I shall remove you at a
very unmannerly rate: Will you stir, Sir?


Love. Let me entreat --


Pett. I Will spoil your entreaties, with a pox to you. Put this Fellow out of
doors, and see him pumpt.


Let. Good Sir, have a little pity of the poor Gentleman; being hard pursued by
Bailiffs, he, to avoid them, got over the Garden Wall; and fearful he had
frighted me, when you came in, was earnestly asking pardon. Now, Sir, you know
the full of his offense, I hope you will retract your Sentence.


Pett. I thought 'twas some such Run-away-Rascal; no, he shall not be pumpt, but
turn him out to the liberty of the Law; let him pay, or to Prison, a Gods name;
turn him out of doors there.

Exit Love. Come, Daughter, I hope in a short time to have a Husband for you;
in the mean while I shall keep you from such Cattle as this; for I begin to
find this is but an excuse, to hide this beggarly Fellow's kindness. Let me
ever see you with him again, and you shall ee'ne to him for altogether, with as
many tatters as he has; for I am resolved to dis-own you.


Let. Sir, you know my affections hitherto have waited on your will, and shall
do still.


Pet. I wish they may; come in with me.


Exeunt. Scena tertia.
Enter Goody Fells, Friendly, Faithful. Fells. Good Morrow, Gentlemen; I
suppose you think I can feed upon Faggot sticks, or pay my Rent with Cheese
parings; why, what do you mean, Gentlemen? What do you mean? Must I never have
my Money? here is now seven shillings, for seven weeks lodging, and as much for
diet, and washing the little linen you have, God knows; this is money in a
poor Woman's pocket, Gentlemen.


Friend. Dear Land-lady, be mollified; let not your passion put you besides
your Reason.


Fells. Talk not to me of Reason, wretch, as thou art; give me my Money, I Will
make more than one know on it, else. Then there is that blundering Sot, your
Companion, that stands sneering, and says nothing, could come and borrow Money
of my Maid; I Will call her, to witness it.


Faith. Well, what then, Beldame?


Fells. Well, it is very well; if Young Wenches must work to lend you their
wages.


Faith. You, Dame damnable, hold your bawling tongue, in the Devils name, and
cease dunning, or I Will draw it out of your Mouth as long as my Arm.


Friend. Prithee hold thy idle prating; you must give better words, fore George
we shall get no Dinner else to day. Come, Land-lady, let me persuade you into
peace; a little time will enable us to pay you all: I have a Bill of Exchange
to receive a hundred pounds within six weeks, and it shall all wait upon thy
Command, dear Landlady.


Fells. Gentlemen, you know, Gentlemen, I am as unwilling to speak, as the
Child unborn; but when I am forced to it, you must not take it ill. I want four
shillings of my Quarters Rent for my House, to make it up five and twenty; if
you could but furnish me with that, it would do me a mighty kindness.


Faith. Pox of your old, ugly, abominable -- no more dunning.


Fells. O you Rogue, I will ask for my own, when you are hanged. Sirrah, have NOT I been fain to lend you my own Shift to wear, whilst yours was washed, to keep
you from being lousy? Don't you now weat my poor dead Husband's? I cannot
speak of him, without tears.


Weeps. Friend. Poor Land-lady, lament no more; it is true, Will was an honest
fellow, and one that lived in the fear, as a Man may say, and would drink off
his quart, or two, of Ale, as quietly as a Quaker, upon another Man's cost.


Fells. I, Mr. Friendly, you knew him. Don't you remember, when I sold Fruit
first, how he beat Christopher Crab, the Coster-monger, for calling of me
Grundy; he would not let a Lamb wrong me: he used always to call me his Monkey.


Friend. Ay, marry did he. But, Land-lady, I hear you have a Flitch of Bacon
sent you from Will's Friends.


Fells. That I have indeed, Mr. Friendly; and it is as good as ever was cut with
Knife: And if you will please to come home at dinner time, and eat a piece,
with an Egg, you shall be very welcome. It may be done homely, but I Will warrant
you cleanly.


Friend. By this light, Land-lady, I don't know a better Cook then thou art, in
all Christendom; and here is honest Tom has said so a thousand times.


Fells. It Is more your goodness, than my desert, to say so, Sir. I hope, Mr.
Faithful, you will take no notice of what I have said.


Faith. No notice in the World, Woman; get Dinner ready, we will come in time.


Excunt omnes, severally. Scena quarta.
Enter Leticia, Betty, at a distance. Let. My Servant, I Am afraid, is
something solitary, where e're he is; he cannot choose but wonder what is his,
fault; my Fathers coming in disturbed both him and me: but here I have a Letter
ready writ shall satisfy how well I love him; and that my last anger only was
to try him. How sad a thing is Love, when it wants liberty? The Man I love is
one that does deserve as much as Man may do; but yet my Father says, he that
wants Money, consequently wants Merit. What shall I do in this extremity? Love
answers thus; In having him, I live; in missing him, I dye; I must do Cupid
Justice. -- Betty.


Betty. Madam.


Let. I Have work for you to do; and such as you will take kindly: can you find in
your heart to carry this Letter to Mr. Lovewell?


Betty. Faith, Madam, not contentedly, if I thought it were not kind. Pray,
Madam, Commiserate the poor Gentleman: you have enough for your self, and him,
and twenty to attend you.


Let. I, but my Father loves him not so well as thou do. He Will not hear of
him that has nothing answerable to my full fortune.


Betty. May your Father go into another World then, and let him live no longer,
to hinder the happiness of two such real Lovers.


Let. Away, you Baggage, carry your Letter, and take this purse; desire him to
pay it where I ordered him; then bring me word, how he takes the Intelligence.


Betty. I am gone, Madam.


Exit Betty. Let. Thou active god of Love, prescribe a way To make me happy in
a Marriage day.


Exit. Scena quinta.
Enter Lovewell, Friendly, Faithful. Love. Prithee stand farther off, thy
breath stinks of Red-Herrings, enough to stifle a man. I Am ready to run mad;
never was man so miserable.


Friend. Why, what is the matter, man? Art clapped by some kind Companion? or does
thy Conscience accuse thee of living too long honest?


Faith. Or, has Sewell given a sad denial; so that there is no hopes of new
Habit?


Love. Gentlemen, though nothing you guess at is the cause of my disconte^^;
yet I can tell you that will trouble you; there is little hopes of your being
tired in new Trappings: you may live still in your leather Linings, and
increase in Cattle. Sewell proves inexorable, as to you, though kind to me.
Gentlemen, mine are making; it is very true, Gentlemen, I wish the case were
your own; yet I have something still sticks worse upon my stomach. Prithee
stand further off, thou wilt stifle me with thy breath.


Friend. Out upon you, for a fretful fopp; you have been trading with some
three-half-penny Wench, that is sweetened with a pennyworth of Pomatum, and now
your Nose allows nothing else.


Love. Prithee, Friendly, will thou tell me one thing?


Friend. Faith, I will.


Love. But will you seriously?


Friend. By this light, I will.


Love. Did you drink to day after your Dinner?


Friend. The Devil's in this Satirical Fellow; he pretends to be always
melancholy, and then he is most maliciously abusive.


Love. Ha, ha, ha.


Faith. Our business is like to be well carried on between a couple of
conceited Coxcombe. If you can live with laughting at one another, I would have
you do nothing else; if otherwise, why don't we come to the business? Have thou
persuaded the Tailor to provide us Tackle?


Love. Come, Gentlemen, I Will put you out of your pain. What de'e think he says?


Friend. De'e call this putting people out of their pain, to set their brains
upon the Rack to read your dealings with a damned Tailor, that no body knows
where to find besides your self. Prithee, be serious but one minute, and let us
be satisfied


Love. Why then I Will tell you. After I had taken a great deal of pains to find
him, and inquired at every House where they sold a sealed quart for two pence.


Faith. Well, what then?


Love. Why, then I mist him. And I assure you, never saw him since I saw you.


Friend. Faith, you have taken a great deal of pains, and made a mighty bustle,
to bring forth nothing.


Faith. I Will be hanged if he has not been drunk ever since in a Chimney corner,
with some Weavers Wife, without More-Gate; and at last been beaten out by her
Husband, and that makes him melancholy.


Enter Betty. Betty. Your Servant, Mr. Lovewell; will you give me leave to
speak one word in private with you?


Love. Pretty Mrs. Betty; I Will wait on you instantly. Pray, dear Friends, leave
me now. At Night I Will meet you, and give you (I hope) a good account of all our
concerns.


Friend. Ned, Ned, this will not do; this is a little unkind: you have had a share
in a Mistress of mine, e're now. What need you make these pretenses to put us
off? We know your meaning, never mince the matter, man; she is a very pretty
Wench; I would I were with her where thou have been.


Love. I faith, Franck, she is very civil. Let me desire you to lay aside all
thoughts to the contrary, and you shall command me any thing. Prithee leave me
a little.


Faith. Don't believe him, Franck; he will feign a hundred things to fobb us off:
but if I stir without a share in this prize, I Will be pegg'd to a post for boys
to throw rotten Pears at. Remember, Ned, you would not leave me one Morning,
when my Landress came to my Chamber.


Betty. Sir, I see you're engaged. I Am sorry I came at this unlucky time to
trouble you.


Love. Dear Mrs. Betty, I beg your pardon; I am but giving these two Bailiffs
directions about a business that concerns me* I shall have done in a minute.


Friend. I have no more heart to go, than a Man has to play at Dice the day
before he is to be hanged.


Love. Let me conjure you by all our Friendship, not to offer me this most
unmannerly affront. You don't know what injury you do me. Dear Friends desist,
she is one that waits upon a person of Quality, and a near relation of mine, and
not of that strain you take her; faith, she e'ant.


Faith. What a pox, never tell us this. I have known you my self these dozen
years, and never see any thing with you look like an honest Woman; nor will
believe this so, though thou swear it by the soul of thy dead Father. What an
idle thing is this in you, to persuade people to things so improbable, that
know the World as well as you do; To go tell us that a Wench, in this garb,
would be sent to a Gentleman's Chamber at this time o'th day, if there want a
design to do -- Fie, fie.


Friend. What harm will it do you, Ned, to let us have a little liberty with
this pretty piece of Woman's flesh? She Will be as fit for you again to morrow,
as e're she was. You know we are both sound.


Betty. Your Servant, Sir; I Will call some other time.


Love. Mrs. Betty, I Have but a little more to say now, and they will be fully
informed in my affairs. Gentlemen, either leave me, or resolve to fight me; for
I would not endure to be thus affronted by my Father. Have you forgot all
Friendship?


Friend. No, hang ye, I love you a little too well yet, to fight with you for a
Whore; and so good buy to ye.


Faith. It Is very fine, that we have lived thus long, and must now be Hectored
out of a Wench: I shall be quit with you, Sir.


Love. Gentlemen, your Servant; pray be careful in the business.


Both. We shall take care to requite you.


Ex. Friend Faithful. Love. Was ever man thus pestered by a couple of Puppys*
Aside. Now, Mrs. Betty, I Am sorry I have been constrained by the tyranny of
business, to make you stay thus long.


Betty. If it were much longer, Sir, I should not have believed it a trouble,
since it is to serve you. For I think I have a Letter here comes laden with
Love: if I thought it had not, some body else should have been the Messenger
for me; for I hate to be concerned in any thing that may diminish the content
of a Gentleman. This is the Letter; and this Money my Lady desires you to pay
where she has appointed.


Love. Mrs. Betty, I acknowledge my self much bound to you.


Reads. SIR,
I Am sorry my Father fell so unhappily upon us, that hindered my Conclusion,
which I intended as kind as I began cruel; but however I appeared then, I am
now as you have always found me, that unhappy, but affectionately, Yours,

L. P. As you love me, receive what I have sent you.


Most blessed tidings. Mrs. Betty, pray be pleased to pay my humble service to
your Lady; and let her know, I cheerfully obey her Commands.

Betty. I hope, Sir, she has laid no more upon you then you are able to bear.
Your obedient Servant, Sir.


Love. Your humble Servant, Mrs. Betty. Exit Betty. This comes kindly, and cuts
off much of my care; for I find my Mistress faithful, and here is Money to
new-Clothe me, and my two Friends.


Enter Runwell. How now, Runwell; how do thou hold out? can thou not find
in thy heart to eat?

Run. Sir, I believe I should not run away from a piece of a Roasted Horse: but
let hunger be hanged, I defy it; feed, or fast, I Will never leave you, while I
live, Sir.


Love. Here Is Money for you; when you have dyn'd, step to Sewell, the Tailor;
bid him come to me.


Run. By this hand, Sir, if he refuse to come, I Will bring him on my back.


Exit Runwell. Love. Now will I set Sewell to work for me and my ill-clad
Companions, who I am sure have gratitude enough to take it kindly. Then, my
young Squire, I Will try what may be done:
Where no game's played, there is nothing can be won.



Exit. Finis Actus primi.
Actus Secundus.
Scena prima.
Enter Pett, Leticia, Fickle, Betty. Pett. BY my troth, Girls, you spoil your
selves with lying so long a bed; it makes you look like a great-belly'd Woman
that has lost her longing. Betty, I think I must give you a Commission to bang
'em up.


Betty. I Vow, Sir, I think you must get some body else to beat me up too then;
for the Young Ladies have spoyl't me, and made me ready to lie as long as they.


Fickle. Uncle, your Man has the worst way of dressing you in the World; Sir,
he always puts your Ruff on one way. It Is an errant shame to see a Man so long
in one fashion, as you have been.


Pett. What, art thou mad, Coz? There is but one way of putting on a Ruff,
unless you would have me wear the forepart behind.


Fick. Look here, Sir, is your Ruff tied as my Whisk is? Pray, Sir, let me tie
it. I protest I Will lay twenty shillings I tie it better than Old Ralph has done.


Pett. I like it very well, good Cousin, if thou could like it to let it
alone; no body has found fault with it this twenty years, besides thee. But I
know thou will never let me alone till thou have done it; therefore, prithee
dispatch me quickly.


She pulls off one of her Ribbons, and ties it. Let. Did he receive it with
such joy?


Aside. Betty. Joy! He could have said or done no more, had I come for to
secure him of eternal happiness hereafter.


Fick. I Will be judged by all the World now, if it be'nt handsomer by a hundred
times; it looks like any Cravat. I vow, Uncle, if my Aunt were alive again, she
would a new fall in love with you.


Pett. Why, what have thou done, Cousin; tied up my Ruff like a
shatter'd-brain'd Boy with a Tassel at my Chin? Prithee give me my Point again.
A pox of your Cravats, you shall never dress me more, I Will assure you; here,
Leticia, take it you, and tie my Ruff, and let her have her Ribbon.


Fick. Well, say what you will; I Am certain the Ribbon becomes you better than
the Point. Betty, how thy Hood sits to day! I dare be whipped if thou did not
dress thee without the Glass; and this Whish sits all awry: step up to my
Cabinet, I Will lend you one of my laced ones.


Betty. I thank you, Madam; I had as liff wear this to day.


Fick. Well, do then. Uncle, pray when comes my Cousin Lett's Servant? I long
to see him.


Pett. You Will be dressing of him as soon as e're he comes within the doors, I
dare swear. But to satisfy you, the man that loves her, and whom she must love
(if she loves me) I expect to be here this Morning.


Fick. Pray, Sir, is he Young, or Old?


Pett. Why, Young, very Young; newly come of Age.


Fick. Is he a handsome man, Sir?


Pett. Very handsome, I protest, Cousin.


Fick. Has he money enough?


Pett. I, my good Girl; he has more money than twenty of the Whip-Jacks of
this Town, who walk about with a half-starv'd footboy, that has fasted three
days, and never eats, but when his Master treats a Wench.


Fick. Indeed, Sir.


Pett. I, indeed, Cousin.


Let. She Will weary my Father out of his wits.


Fick. Is he good-natured, Sir?


Pett. I, truly; I believe the Man to be of a good principle, and will be kind
to a Wife.


Fick. Did he ever learn to Dance, Uncle?


Pett. I Will answer thee no longer; thou begin'st to be very impettinent, Coz.


Fick. Will you walk in the Gallery then, Sir?


Pett. Any where, so thou will promise me not to weary me with thy eternal
rattle.


Exeunt omnes. Scena secunda.
Enter Lovewell, Friendly, Faithful, in their Gallantry. Love. Come, Gallants,
move with Majesty. And show your selves to the most advantage that may be.
Faithful, you are always looking upon your shooe-strings, like a Prentice upon
an Easter Holy Day. Hold up your Head, and look handsomely; take your Gloves out
of your pockets, and put them on your Hands. I Am afraid, if I should take this
Rogue into Company, I should be troubled to teach him the way to take off his
Hat.


Friend. Then the Rascals Peruke never stands the right way; and he makes legs
so like a Logger-head, that it would be supposed we took him out of a Mill,
where he had learnt to dance of a Malt-horse; for there is not a step that he
takes in his new shoes, but up comes a stone in the pavement.


Love. I Will undertake, should he go into a Noble-mans Hall, he would stamp a
row of black and white marble to pieces in less than half a minute: never Horse
had such hoofs.


Friend. And then he is so great a Sloven, that by that time he has worn these
Clothes but three days, they will be laced with all manner of liquour, and as
greasy as his old ones are, that the Rats have, since he left them off, run
away with.


Faith. Talk on, Gentlemen, talk on; Cloth me thus but once a Month, and I Will
for ever allow you the same privilege you now take of prating. Forgive me,
dear Patron, for I cannot choose but laugh at you, and that idle fellow, as a
couple of very impertinent fopps.


Enter Leftwell, and Moses. Left. Ned Lovewell, how do do, Boy? now I like
thee; now thou look like thy self. Faith, I was resolved to find thee out,
and to new-furnish thee at my own charge; thou will not believe how sad I have
been e're since I saw thee last. Let me look round about thee; faith, it is
mighty rich: prithee what did it stand thee in? If I can serve thee in any
thing, as far as my small Estate goes, it is all at thy Service, sweet Rogue.


Love. And I Will try you, Sir, since you're in so good a humor. Aside. Sir, I
assure you you would do me an exraordinary kindness, if you could furnish me and my
two Friends with a hundred pounds, for two or three days, no longer.


Left. Pox on him, I thought he would not have fastened; would my words were in
again.

Aside. Faith, Ned, if it will do thee a kindness, I cannot tell how to deny
it. Here it is, with all my heart.


Love. Upon my Honor I Will see it safe returned, and esteem it a very great
favor.


Friend. Faith, Sir, you have done us a very considerable kindness; and in
requital, command me any thing.


Left. Sir, if you -- 'Slife, I shall be undone; I was going to offer him as
much more, who would, certainly, have accepted it as the first.

Aside. Sir, I rejoice I had it to serve you.


Faith. Sir, I hope we shall live to be grateful, and find a way to make you
satisfaction for this more than ordinary favor.


Left. Sir, there needs none of this. But let me tell you one thing, without
offense.


Faith. No exception, I assure you, Sir.


Left. Then, faith, I think you become your fine Clothes the worst of any man
that ever wore such.


Faith. I must confess, Sir, I want the way of wearing Clothes well. I can
afford to let you prate now, but I Will make your purse pay for it.


Aside. Left. Ned Lovewell, will you assist me in a design? Faith, I am going
about to commit Matrimony. Will you help to make Love to my Mistress? I Will
assure you she is the handsomest Woman within a hundred Mile of her; and a Man
that has the way of giving good words may win her heart, as I am informed, for
I never saw her.


Love. How do you know she is so handsome, then?


Left. Why, her Father says so, and sweats he will swinge her, if she refuse to
fall in Love with me, or likes any body else.


Friend. What need you have any help, then? Your business is done to your hand.


Left. That Is true, Mr. Friendly; but I would fain have it done by fair means;
and there is Ned Lovewell knows how to work upon a Woman at will. I would fain
have him and you go to make up the Match. For his part, he will be company for
nothing but the Horses; we will not have him with us.


Faith. I am heartily glad the Cur dislikes my Company; since the profit I
intend from him binds me from beating him.


Love. Pray, Sir, where lives the Lady, and what is her name? If we can do you
any service, wee're both ready to wait on you.


Left. Dear Ned, that is kindly said, and like thy self; and you, Franck
Friendly?


Friend. Most willingly.


Left. It Is old Pett's Daughter, the East India Merchant; he lives at Hackney.


Love. Say you so, Sir? I doubt I shall set you besides the Saddle: This falls
out as I could wish: This Fool making choice of me to keep him Company, brings
me to kiss the Hand of my fair Mistress, and by that means to manage my affairs
as I could wish.


Aside. Left. Come, will you go, Gentlemen? I and my Man will walk before you,
you may easily overtake us, for Moses is as stiff as a Tree.


Both. We will not fail to follow you.


Exit Left. Moses. Friend. Lovewell, how like thou this? The Fool comes on
finely.


Love. I have a design, Franck, in hand, will make us all men. You know he has
made choice of us to be the means to make his Mistress love him. The same Lady
that he speaks of I have loved long; and she has long loved me.


Friend. Dear Ned, proceed.


Love. My fortune being spent before I thought on it, my Clothes decayed, and
having little left me to repair my ruins; all my proceedings since have been
by Proxy, excepting now and then a stolen visit over the Garden Wall; which
lately in attempting, I was taken by her Father, and turned out by Grooms;
which was the real cause of my late melancholy.


Friend. Td's death, then wee're undone; he will know you again, and so we shall
be used worse than you were before.


Faith. Thy foolish fears, Friendly, have made us fail in many a fair design.
Do you think the old fellow will know him again that he saw before but in half
a Peruke, and not Clothes enough to cover him.


Love. God-a-mercy, Blunderbuss, he bolts out sometimes to the purpose. I Will
undertake, Franck, he knows me no more than I should the Grand Seignior, if I
saw him.


Friend. So the young Squire shall be at the charge of all Entertainments, till
you have found a way to cheat him of his Mistress.


Love. Right; now let us follow him. But what shall we do with this Fellow? I Am
certain, should he undertake to walk it, he will flounder with his flat feet; and
we cannot conveniently call for clean Litter for him in a strange House.


Faith. Pox on you for a couple of Puppys; I know you dare not carry me with
you, for fear of disobliging your Bubble. I Will meet you at Night at the Devil
Tavern, for the Scene is altered since the Money came in; as long as that lasts
I Will no more of the Can Office.


Both. A match; so God b'uy, blundering Tom.


Faith. Farewell, Fopps.


Exeunt omnes. Scena tertia.
Enter Justice Frump, Stingey his Clerk, and Goody Fells. Frump. Gammer Fells,
you are a very fidling Woman, and are always worrying me and my Man for
Warrants; what cause of Action have you against these men?


Fells. Why, an't like your Worship, I have 'em upon suspicions of perjury.
It Is well known to your Worship that I understand the Law; they both swore to
me solemnly by the cross of a Book, that they would pay me my Money on Monday
Morning, and run away on Saturday Night.


Frump. That Is right, the perjury lies good in that point. But how do you know
they are gone?


Fells. Why, I Will tell your Worship, without giving your Worship the trouble of
many words, for your Worship knows I am not a Woman of many words: I wish I had
more, for the good of the poor Parish I live in; if I had, I could get Money
enough, by teaching of young Maids to talk at the Bake-house: for indeed, I
help a great many Maids to Services, an't like your Worship, that sometimes are
able to give their Mistresses but sad accounts when they come home.


Frump. Pray, Gammer Fells, fall to the business, and let me know how you are
sure your Lodgers have quite left you; for if they come again, the perjury is
void in Law.


Fells. Why, then, I Will tell you, Sir; my Maid peeped through the Keyhole, and
see 'em put up all their goods in their pockets; and she is without to justify
it.


Sting. It Is a sign they had a strong Wardrobe.


Aside. Frump. Why truly, Gammer Fells, that is a very good proof; Stingey, set
that down in your Table Book, that we may make a President of it, for we have
many of these Mystical matters come before us; have you any thing more against
these men? for I find the cause is foul of their sides.


Fells. Yes, an't like your Worship; they owe me seven shillings for Rent,
besides seven and six pence, for washing Linen; and I hope the Law will allow
me somewhat for the use of my own shift, I lent Mr. Faithful, whilst his was
washed; for I can swear he wore it out extremely.


Frump. Goody Fells, in that case the Law somewhat differs. For Littleton says,
what is lent is lent. But then there is a Statute of fifty sixth of Queen
Elizabeth that makes some provision in that case. Stingey, what is the Statute
in that case?


Sting. Why, an't like your Worship, the Statute of Queen Elizabeth is a
Statute in Statu quo; and you know, Sir, that the English of Statu quo is, what
you lend, you lose. Therefore I Am of Mr. Littleton's mind, that what is lent,
is lent.


Frump. Gammer Fells, this is the very Letter of the Law; you must lose the
loan of your smock. I, but I Will make 'em smoke for the rest. Have you made the
Warrant, Stingey?


Sting. Yes, Sir, here it is.


Frump. You must give me a shilling; Woman.


Fells. With all my heart, an't like your Worship; without offense to your
Worship, I think I know the price of a Warrant, as well as your Worships self.
I think they are all good, an't like your Worship.


She sumbles in her purse, and pays him in farthings. Frump. Stingey, direct
her how to serve it.


He pulls out his Spectacles, and reads the farthings. Sting. Carry it, Gammer
Fells, to Mr. Clowt, the Constable; he is a wholesale Cobbler, and my Masters
near Kinsman; he will be careful, for it is of great concern.


Fells. Bless your Worship; good buy to your Worship.


Frump. Goody Fells, pray do so much as change this farthing, I doubt it is not
so right as it should be.


Fells. Mr. Thomas, if you be remembered, you left a penny Roll unpaid of your
last weeks breakfasts.


Sting. Truly, Gammer Fells, I think I did; I Will pay it. Then, Sir, I must have
but five pence.


Exit Fells. Frump. This will prove a crabbed case, Stingey; let us go in, and
consider on it: I protest, it almost confounds me.


Exeunt. Scena quarta.
Enter Pett, Leticia, Fickle, and Betty. Pett. I wonder Mr. Leftwell comes not.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, here is one Mr. Leftwell desires to see you.


Pett. Desire him to walk in. Daughter, remember your Duty, and receive him
kindly.


Enter Leftwell, Lovewell, and Friendly. Left. Sir, your Servant; I come to
kiss your Hand. Wan't that a-la-mode, Lovewell?


Love. Very well; proceed, proceed.


Left. Sir, I Have made bold to bring my Friends.


Pett. Mr. Leftwell, they are welcome for their own sakes, and much more for
yours. Gentlemen, you're welcome; pray be pleased to sit down.


Both. Your Servant, Sir.


Left. Pray, Sir, which of these three is my Mistress?


Pett. This is my Daughter, Sir.


Left. Faith, Sir, I like this little Gentlewoman as well To Betty. as her; but
your Daughter has most Money, I believe; and it is that which makes the Mare to
go, as the saying is.


Love. O this damned dog! the Devil's in him.


Left. Well then, Lady; since you are she, let me look upon you.


Let. I, pray good Sir, look, before you leap, by all means.


Left. Can you find in your Conscience to affect me? If you cannot, let it
alone, I Will look for some body else; for I suppose, there will be little love
lost. Let me see you look as if you were a little out of your wits. I hear you
have a great deal of wit; I Will try you, look upon that Gentleman, he is able to
say more in half an hour than you can answer in seven year, as wise as you are.


Let. Why, has he more wit than you have, Sir?


Left. I, a hundred times, and a hundred to that.


Let. Then I assure you he is too hard for me, for I don't know what to say to
you.


Left. I thought I should put you to it But now I Will desire Ned Lovewell to take
you in hand; you shall see how much he can say more than I; I brought him to
make love for me, but in faith, I think I shall scarce find work for my self.
Ned, prithee lend me your place a little, and take you mine.


Love. Your Servant, Sir; any thing to satisfy you.


Left. Mr. Pett, you must not be angry, for I am resolved to have your
Daughter, whoever I speak to I Will but make a few pretty pretenses to the rest.


Pett. I protest, a pretty mettle'd man; I like his humor. I, I, Sir, make
your self as merry as you can.


Left. Lady, how do you like me?


Fick. So, so; you're a pretty kind of a man, but you wear your Clothes to the
worst advantage that e're I saw; your Bands are quite out of fashion. Why don't
you wear a Cravat? I fancy 'twould become you prettily, let me tie your Band
like one.


Left. Pough, let me alone, you will all foul it. I hate this fooling: you think
washing costs nothing. I never saw such a Woman in my life.


Fick. Then you should wear a lace about your sleeves; this makes you look ugly.


Left. I hope a man may look as he will, and wear what he will, for all you; it
costs you nothing.


Fick. Nay, it is nothing to me; but before I would wear such shooe-strings,
I Would tie my shoes with blew tape.


Pett. Prithee, Coz, let the Gentleman alone; he wears what likes him.


Left. I Am glad you're come to my relief, I believe I should have lost all my
Clothes else. I Will tell you this, Mistress; had you been a Man, I Would a taken
you over the face, for all your bravery.


Fick. There Is a Clown. I protest, Sir, I told him in kindness, never let me
live else.


To Friendly. Friend. Let me dye, Madam, if I don't think he deserves to be
hanged. Was ever such a dirty Rascal? Ee'ne let him alone, Madam; I would not
have you give your self the trouble to laugh at him.


Left. Ned Lovewell, how do you like her? Pray, Sir, let me have her again.
Give me your Hand, I Am a Horse if I don't love you heartily; now do you love me?


Let. How can I choose, Sir? every body must love you that looks on you.


Left. Then I Will take your Father aside, and satisfy him how I love you, and
what I intend to settle upon you; and so the work shall be done, before the
World's aware of it. Mr. Pett, I desire to spend half an hour with you in
private.


Pett. With all my heart, Sir; we will walk in, and return presently. Gentlemen,
you will pardon us, business must be done.


Let. Sir, we will take a walk in the Gallery till you come again.


Pett. Do so, Daughter.


Exeunt severally. Manet Betty. Betty. This Fool, Leftwell, produces a brave
opportunity to bring Mr. Lovewell and my Mistress together; which there had
been no way to have done without him; I hope, by this time, the affair is so
well settled, that nothing can frustrate it. This Ass shall never carry her; if
he does, both I, and all that are concerned in the Plot, do undoubtedly deserve
a most infamous death.

In Love's affairs the Women's wits are best:
I Will Club my share; let Fortune do the rest.

Exit. Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus Tertius.
Scena prima.
Enter Clowt the Constable, Goody Fells, and Faithful. Fells. A Way with him,
away with him; you're my Prisoner now: I Will have you up for my Rent, Sirrah,
and my poor Maids money out of pocket.


Faith. Ha, ha, ha.


Fells. Bring him away, Captain Clowt; do you see how he laughs at you? Thus he
served me the very Night he run away with his Clothes. Come, Sir, I Will lend you
a hand.


Faith. Mr. Constable, pray whither must I go; and what have you against me?


Clowt. Why, I have a Warrant against you for Felony, and Perjury.


Faith. At whose suit, in the Devil's name?


Clowt. At this Woman's; who is, Sir, as wise a Woman as any is in this Parish.
You had best compound the business, and make the best of a bad matter.


Faith. 'Sdeath, I Will kick --


Clowt. How do you say, you will kick me? kick me, Sir! I Would have you to know I
am the Kings Constable, and cannot be kicked by any Christian living.


Fells. I Will swear I heard him say he would kick ye; this shall come before
Justice Frump, with the rest; I warrant thee that it shall. You kick a
Constable of the Kings, and a Captain of the Trained Bands?


Faith. Pray, Mr. Constable, give me leave to speak a little.


Clowt. I tell you as I told you before, I am the Kings Constable; and it is not
my place to give people leave to speak that are my Prisoners. Therefore come
on, Sir; I charge you in the Kings name, to come on.


Fells. I, I charge you in the Kings Name to come before Justice Frump.


Clowt. Pray, Goody Fells, what Commission have you to command in the Kings
name? Are you a Constable, Goody Fells? This is very fine, i'saith; I Will have
that tried as soon as e're we come before my Cousin Frump.


Fells. Well, Sir; you're a Captain, and a Constable; and a poor Woman must not
have the liberty before you to be large in her own business, or else I could
say something. And it is not unknown to some of the Parish, that I understand
the business of a Constable as well as the best Clowt in Christendom.


Clowt. You understand the business of a Constable? Come, I Will put a question
to you. Provided, Gammer Fells, that you were upon the Watch, as I was last
night.


Fells. Well; why, what then? Pray say on, Sir.


Clowt. Well, and you take a Man upon the Watch. And you take a Man upon the
Watch, as I said before.


Fells. Under favor, Mr. Clowt, you have said nothing else to the business yet.


Clowt. Very good; The Man being thus taken, falls to play at Putt with one of
the Watchmen upon the Watch; and falling to play, they fall out; falling out,
they fall together by the ears. Presently the Watchman takes me up a brown
Bill, and beats me out his brains. Now presently after, there comes a Trial
between the Man killed, and him that killed him. Which has the Law o'their
side? Now, Gammer Fells.


Fells. The Man that was killed fell out with him that killed him; so he that
was killed, was killed Se defeddede; I know what I say, Captain Clowt. I say Se
defeddede; which is to say, much against his will; therefore the Man killed has
the right of the Law against him that killed him.


Clowt. Well, Gammer Fells, you have done more, I protest, than Justice Frump
himself could have done. If my Woman were dead, I would have thee before any
Woman in the World.


Huggs her. Faith. Land-lady, thou talk of wit enough for a Constable, thou
art wise enough to make a Justice.


Clowt. Why, Sir, there are some Constables have as much wit as some Justices.
Pray, Sir, will you walk on, or I shall be fain to Command you in the Kings
name again.


Fells. I, Mr. Clowt, I want my Money; pray let us make what haste we can.


Faith. We shall drink one glass of Wine before we go.


Clowt. To do you a kindness, Sir, we will drink one half pint: shall we, Gammer
Fells? But remember, Sir, you threatened to kick me.


Exeunt: Scena Secunda.
Enter Lovewell, Leticia, Fickle, Friendly. Let. Now things are in this
posture, Mr. Lovewell, pray have a care you put not all aside by your neglect:
my Father (I Am afraid) will make all haste to expedite this Marriage. In having
you, I venture all I have, or hope for; therefore have a little care
extraordinary for her sake that loves you.


Love. Let me not live under Heaven's light one minute after I forget the least
of your Commands, from whom I Have had such honors heaped upon me. Can you
believe I can be such a Slave, as to forget that thing is only able to complete
my happiness?


Let. I love to hear you say you love me, and it is because I do believe you do
so. Yet I am sad, and shall be, till I have escaped the fears I live in, of
being forced by my too rigorous Father to be fettered to this fool of Men.


Love. Madam, when they come back, then we shall find how far they have
proceeded; by that we may know which way to order our affairs; of which I shall
not fail by Letters to acquaint you constantly.


Let. My Father will have such an eye over me, that I Am afraid I shall scarce
er'e be out of's sight. He has been strangely Jealous and Inquisitive e're
since he saw us in the Garden last (though now I think he knows you not again)
therefore I doubt it will be very hard to have a Letter brought without his
knowledge.


Love. Betty and I have made a bargain will prevent all fear; my Man is to
pretend Marriage to her; by which means, he may still find admittance, and make
her sensible, and she you, of all my Actions, and designs: which will be weak
indeed, if not able to outdo all that your old Father, and that Young Fool can
e're contrive.


Let. I like that well. Now, Cousin Fickle, how do you find the Gentleman? Is
he well fitted? Have you looked over his Linen?


Fick. How do you find your Friend, Cousin Let? Does he woe hard for Mr.
Lovewell? I doubt he has been about his own business, I should like him the
worse else, and forget him (I mean the Fool) that threatened to beat me for
advising him to wear lace about his sleeves.


Friend. Shall I cut his tongue out for it, Madam?


Fick. For Heaven's sake do, Mr. Friendly; I Will love you as long as I live, if
you will. I believe, Cousin, my Uncle and he will make the match against to
morrow Morning, then thou art miserable: faith, rather then so, let us rise up
before he comes. Thou shall Marry Mr. Lovewell, and I Will ee'ne take Mr.
Friendly here.


Let. A match, Cousin Mad-Cap; but I doubt you cannot keep your word, nor live
so long in one mind. I protest, if thou should, I would swear thou were
never true to any thing, but Matrimony.


Friend. Dear Madam, let me kiss this hand for that kind contrivance.


Fick. Nay, one shall not mock the other; both, or none, Sir.


Friend. Both, a thousand times together; but here they come.


Enter Pett, and Leftwell. Pett. I am sorry we have made you stay thus long,
Gentlemen; but Mr. Leftwell and I have done a good work since we went: we have
set an end to wooing. Daughter, you're allowed but two days to prepare for
Marriage, and making of Wedding Clothes. I hope these Gentlemen will dance at
the Wedding.


Left. I faith, Ned, and Franck, the Lady there must Marry me, whether she will
or no. Why, you must, Mistress, for all you look so. You two shall be my
Bride-men, shall not they, Father Pett?


Pett. What you please for that, Son; the Gentlemen look like civil men, and
will do very well.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, Dinner waits on your Worship.


Pett. Come, Gentlemen, will you walk in?


Exeunt omnes. Scena tertia.
Enter Faithful, Clowt, Goody Fells. Faith. Was ever Man made thus Drunk by a
Cuckoldly Constable, and an Old Apple-Woman? Captain Clowt, the Kings
Constable, lend me your Commanding Staff to lean upon. Let me see, you laid out
all.


Clowt. Not all; Gammer Fells paid eleven pence toward the last Reckoning.


Faith. Captain Clowt, you're a drunken Dog, and I defy you, and there is an
end of the Story; therefore stand further off. What place it this? where are we?


Fells. Why, this is the Worshipful Justice Frump's House; an Honorable
Gentleman he is, I hope he will hamper you, in faith. If he don't set you in the
Stocks for being drunk, and put you into Prison for my Money, he is not the Man
I took him for.


Faith. This Old Trot has not drunk her tongue out of rune yet. You Hell-Cat,
with your Hoggs face, I Will so feague you with this faggot-stick. Enter Stingey.
How now, who is this that looks as if he had been got between a starved Quaker
and a Holy Sister, behind the door of a Conventicle? Come hither, Sir, let me
see, is your Nose made of Cheese?


Pulls him by the Nose. Sting. O, O, O.


Faith. O, say you so, Sir; I see, what e're your Nose is made of, you have a
tongue in your Head. What white-liver'd logger-head are you?


Enter Frump. Frump. How now, Cousin Clowt? I see you are an honest man, and
careful in your Office. Is this the Malefactor?


Clowt. An't like your Worship, Sir, this is the Man that made promise of
Marriage to the Maid, borrowed her Money, cheated the Mistress, wore out her
own Shift, now does, or lately did wear out her Husbands Shirt, sinfully swore
to pay her her Rent one night, and shamefully run away, without any regard to
his Oath, the next Morning. There lies the perjury, an't like your Worship.


Fells. Good Mr. Clowt, give me leave to speak in my own cause; I think I
understand the Law a little better than a Man that has not been above a Month
in his Office.


Clowt. Gammer Fells, you're a Fool in matters of Law; you know little of that:
therefore I say, that I ought (being an Officer of State) to have the
privilege of speaking, before any Woman that wears a Head.


Frump. Cousin Clowt, go on; let me have a full of the business, that I may
proceed to Sentence.


Faith. Mr. Justice, I shall wring you by the red Nose, if you listen to that
Logger-head any longer, before you hear me speak. Therefore let us have a Bottle
of Sack, and so conclude the business.


Fells. Bottles of Sack will not pay me my Rent, nor repair my Linen, nor take up
the Perjury; and that is the point I insist upon.


Faith. Why, you pernicious old Whore you; wherein am I perjured?


Frump. How, de'e call Whore in the face of Justice? Gammer Fells, bring your
Action, I Will bear you out on it. Sir, I Will tell you the Law as to matter o'that.
But hold, let us proceed to the first Indictment. Stingey, read the Indictment.


Stingey Reads. YOu stand here charged, by the name of Thomas Faithful, at
the Suit of Cicily Fells, of the Parish of St. Giles's in the Fields, in the
County of Middlesex, Widow; for Perjury, and breach of promise to the Maid of
the said Cicily, in point of Marriage, and the Sum of seven shillings, and six
pence, with lawful Interest and damages for the forbearance thereof: for
Lodging had at the House of the said Cicily; and moreover, in the sum of seven
shillings of like Money, for Laundry work done by the said Cicily.

Faith. Well, well; I Will pay it all. Little Ananias, you and I will go to a
Wench.


Sting. Pray, Sir, let me alone; I am none of those you take me for: I go to a
Wench? I Would rather dye than look upon a lewd Woman, in the way of wickedness.


Frump. Sir, guilty, or not guilty?


Faith. Honest old Rascal, do one thing well in thy life, and lend your man
Money to go with me, and have a leap; I Will never let go his Ear else.


Frump. Sir, I protest, let go my Man's Ear, and plead, or I Will have you pressed.


Sting. Pray, Sir, let go my Ear, or in earnest I Will bring my Action.


While they talk, Gammer Fells falls asleep. Clowt. Gammer Fells, awake, and
hear the Judgment of the Court.


She starts up. Fells. Tell not me of Judgment; let me have my Money, and the
Man Married to my Maid, the King paid for the Perjury, and Mr. Clowt paid for
his pains.


Clowt. His Worship must give Judgment, before the Malefactor can make payment,
Gammer Fells.


Frump. I, Goody Fells, pray be patient; fair and softly goes far, they say.
Sir, you hear that your faults are of a high Nature; I Will tell you the letter
of the Law in those cases you are now accused for. Plowden says, in his Pleas,
and Reports, that, for Perjury, you ought to pay five shillings to the Justice
you are brought before, and half a Crown to his Clerk. For Perjury is, Corpus
cum eausa, by the Statute of the Three and Thirtieth of King James.


Faith. Plowden's a Puppy, and you're an Owl; and I Will see you hanged, and the
Devil ride your starved Clerk Hackney to Hell, before you shall have one penny
of me. Justice, prithee, send for a Pint of Wine.


Frump. Sir, ask any learned Lawyer about Town, they will tell you, that Plowden
was no Puppy; pray, Sir, pay but me and my Man the Money the Statute allows us,
and I Will give you time for the payment of this poor Woman and her Maid.


Fells. Will you, faith, Justice Frump? That is fine, Justice Frump: shall I be
fobb'd off now with a promise of payment? Did I put my Cause into your hands
for help, and you to put the perjury Money into your own pocket? are you
willing, forsooth, that I must lie by the loss? Is this Justice? No, it is
Jewishly done.


Faith. To him, Gammer Fells, to him, to him.


Frump. Gammer Fells, let me have my Money, and I Will take a course for yours.
Pray, Sir, will you satisfy me and my Man, and pay for the Perjury?


Faith. Will your Worship be pleased to hear me?


Frump. If you have any thing to say for your felf, why Sentence should not
pass upon you, pray speak, and remember the payment of the perjury Money. If I have not it, it is so much Money out of mine, and my Man's pocket, I protest to
you; and that is all the Woman stands upon.


Fells. It Is false; and your Worship is little better than a Liar in saying so:
it is my own Money I want.


Frump. Woman, Woman, let your betters be served before you.


Faith. Mr. Justice, you promised to hear me speak; pray be as good as your
Word.


Frump. You have liberty to say any thing, so it be to the purpose; and pray
remember the perjury Money. Woman, you shall have satisfaction.


Faith. Then, let but Chitterlin-Chops, your Man, here, go but with me to a
Bawdy House, and I Will send you your Money due upon the perjury; my Land-lady
shall have satisfaction, and I Will Marry he Maid. I Will play your Puppy but one
hit.


Frump. Take your Cloak, Stingey, and go along with the Gentleman; it is a case
of necessity, and no sin; for we shall lose seven shillings, and six pence,
else; consider, Stingey, seven, and six pence, is Money.


Faith. Now, I Will see you all burned first, and so take your Course.


Frump. Stingey, make his Mittimus; and away with him, Cousin Clowt.


Sting. I made the Mittimus before, an't like your Worship.


Frump. Stingey, make him pay for it, and bring me in my part. Cousin Clowt,
take care of him; for I Am resolved to hamper him.


Exit Frump. Clowt. Come along, Sir; once more I charge you in the Kings name.


Sting. Pray, Sir, pay me for making the Mittimus.


Faith. I, Codds head, come hither -- Be a good Husband, and keep this till I
come again.


Gives him a box on the Ear. Sting. O Lord, how shall I answer this to my
Master?


Fells. Bring him along; I Will never leave you, till I see him safe.


Exeunt. Scena quarta.
Enter Pett, Leftwell, Lovewell, Friendly, Leticia, Fickle, Betty, in a Garden.
Pett. Gentlemen, I wish your Cheer had been better; but expecting none but my
Son Leftwell, I have provided less than I should have done, had I had warning
of your good Company.


Love. Sir, your Entertainment has been like your self, most truly generous and
Noble.


Left. I vow, Father, I have spent a shilling many a time for a dinner, between
Moses and I, and have not dyn'd half so well.


Friend. This is a very pleasant Garden, Sir; and that row of Trees adds much
to the beauty of the House.


Fick. Sir, I believe 'twould be very pretty, if the Plot were altered, and the
Trees taken down at the end, and a gravel Walk made.


Pett. If the Trees were removed to day at thy Request, Niece, to morrow thou
would wonder why they were taken down, and be for transplanting them again
some where else. I Am confident thou would not like them half an hour in any
place; therefore, prithee leave thy prating.


Let. I perceive by your humming (Mr. Lovewell) you Sing well, therefore let me
engage you to give us a Song, whilst we sit down in yonder Arbor. Nay, I will
not be denied; and my Cousin here, in requital, shall give you another.


Left. If you love me, honest Ned, do my Mistress that kindness. Come, don't be
out of Countenance, Man. Why, there is no harm in singing in Civil Company; is
there, Father Pett?


Pett. No, truly, Son, I think not.


Love. Sir, to serve you and your Lady that must be, I would sing till I had
lost my Lungs; but I am so unfitting now. Madam, your Ladyship must undergo the
whole brunt of the business.


Left. Well, Ned, when wee're alone, that word shall be something in thy way,
I Will assure thee, take my word for it; he has a Cold, and cannot sing. Pray sing
you, forsooth.


Love. Yes, pray oblige us.


Let. Sir, we believe your excuse just, and another time shall serve.


Left. Honest Ned, let me tell thee, thou sing'st as well as any Man in the
World, when thou art well; would I were a Woman, for thy sake. Thou art a sweet
Rogue. Have a kindness for him, dear Mistress.


Love. Ladies, I fear if I had sung, I should have made your Heads ache, for all
Mr. Leftwell's Commendations; but let me beg the performance of your promise,
Madam.


Let. Prithee, let us have the Song you sung to us last night; I like it very
well. Come, no excuses, but do it.

To Fick.
Fick. Since, Madam, there is no way to avoid it, I Will obey your Commands. But I
hope, Gentlemen, you will not be angry with me for making a noise.


Love. Pretty Mistress, make an end of the Prologue, and come to the matter.


Song. Let. What say you, Gentlemen, how do you approve of my Kinswomans Voice?


Friend. As I hope to live, Madam, your Voice would invite me from my Prayers
to listen to it, were I sure not to live above half an hour after.


Left. P'shaw, waw, wherein is her Voice so good, as to persuade you into an
Opinion on it; I have heard a Hogg, when a Mastiff Dog has hung at his Ear, make
better Music: I wish her Song were in her guts, so we had one of Ned
Lovewell's.


Friend. Mr. Leftwell, you do her wrong, to say she Sings not well; besides, it
calls your Judgment in question.


Left. I think I should have as much Judgment in Singing, as another Man, for
my Father taught me for two years together; there is not an old Song that ever
was made, but I can sing it.


Let. Pray, Mr. Leftwell, will you oblige me, and the rest of the Company, with
any one you can conveniently spare, now we are in the Singing humor.


Left. For thy sake, my Sweet heart that is, and my Wife that must be, I will
sing, say, or do any thing.


Friend. Pray, Sir, Sing then; she desires you that you would.


Betty. O good Sir, let us hear your Song.


Left. Not for your sake, Mistress; for you're to be my Maid within these two
days; and shall I do any thing at the request of my own Servant? No, I scorn
it.


Love. But Madam Leticia, your Mistress, and I, your Friend, desire it; pray,
Sir, let us live no longer in Expectation.


Leftwell Sings. WHen as King Henry Ruled this Land,
The Second of that Name;
Besides the Queen, He dearly loved
A Fair, and Princely Dame.
Most Peerless was her, etc.
Fick. No more of your Ballad; I protest my brains are ready to split: I had
rather be tied to a load of Iron, and be drawn after it quite through London,
than hear your Servant sing such another Sonner.


Pett. You're a foolish Gitle; this was one of the prettyest Songs in London,
when I came to Prentice first. You don't know what a Song is; Sing on, Son.


Leftwell Sings. Her Favor, and Her Face:
A Sweeter Creature in the World
Did never Prince Embrace.
Let. It Is true, the Song is good, Sir; but Mr. Leftwell's Voice is at present,
a little out of Tune; and so if he pleases, we will have the rest another time.


Left. Indeed, I have got a kind of a Cold; but when ever (if thou have a mind
to hear it) it is all at thy Service. When we two are abed together, I Will lull
thee asleep every Night, and wake thee every Morning with my Voice, because I
see thou delight'st in it.


Love. Without doubt, as much as I do to hear a little Boy beat upon a
Bartholomew Drum.


A side. Left. Father, I must be forced to take my leave of you; I have a House
to Let, in Long-Acre, that calls me away (as a Man may say) Nolens, Volens,
from you.


Pett. Nay, pray, Sir, stay, and take a small Supper here too; you and your
Friends shall be as welcome as I know how to make you; ye shall have a good
Bed, and clean Sheets; so much I dare promise you.


Left. Nay, if you promised a thousand things, I must go when I have business
to do, and there is an end of it; and so, your Servant, Sir. Good b'uy, my Dear;
prithee don't take on, I Will be here again to morrow morning. It Is to no purpose
to grieve, you will get nothing by that but your labor for your pains, in a
manner. Let me entreat you to take this parting partiently.


Let. Sir, I Will assure you I Will keep my heart as whole as I can till I see you
again.


Pett. Gentlemen, your Servant; we will wait on you to the Door. Sir, I hope you
and your Friend will do my Son the kindness, to undergo the Office of Bride-men.


Love. Sir, I shall be proud to have the honor of such Services.


Friend. Sir, I do equally esteem my happiness with his; and will not fail to
pay my due attendance.


Both. Your Servant, Sir; may you live long, and happy.


Left. Did you see my Man Moses, Mrs. Betty?


Betty. Yes; he, and old Ralph, were drunk an hour before Dinner; and are gone
to sleep.


Left. Pray, when the Rogue wakes, bid him roll home after me.


Exeunt omnes, praeter Betty. Betty. Now will I prepare my old Master to
License my Young Lover to the freedom of Visiting me; by which the whole design
cannot choose but take effect.

Assist us, Cupid, for thou know it is fit
Beauty, and Youth, should be rewards of wit.

Finis Actus Tertii.
Actus Quartus.
Scena prima.
Enter Lovewell, Friendly. Love. FRanck, the Fool comes on as I could wish;
h'as sent me a Letter, wherein, he swears he loves me most monstrously: some
way we must find out to get more money from him, the better to enable us to
cheat him of his Mistress.


Friend. My little Mad-Cap swears she will have me at the same time when you have
yours. And if her kindness but continue, I shall believe my self a happy Man;
for as I live, I love her infinitely. But prithee let us see Leftwell's Letter.


Love. He Will be here presently, he sends me word; but since you love to read a
well-penn'd Letter, this is it, Sir.


Friendly Reads. AFter my hearty Commendations, my love remembered unto you,
etc. I desire that you would prepare your self; and get Franck to do the same
(viz.) to be my Bride-men; for my Mistress vows she will not have me, unless I
can get you to be as good as your word. I would not have you fail me, for five
hundred pounds; for if you do, I shall lose a Wife worth ten Thousand. And so I
rest

Your Dutiful Friend, Leftwell.


Here Is an Epistle, with a pox; did ever man see such a Puppy?

Love. But now, suppose we should pretend our Chambers were robbed when we went
with him to Hackney, of the Money that should have furnished us with Clothes,
and necessaries, to have attended at his Wedding. What say? Wilt do well?


Friend. By this light, nothing like it; is he to meet you here?


Love. So the Messenger said.


Friend. I Will immediately put my self into a melancholy posture; but I Am afraid
thou wilt never counterfeit well.


Love. O! feat not that. Hold, here comes the Cuckco -- let us seem not to see
him.


Enter Leftwell, Moses. They pretend not to see him; but walk discontentedly
over the Stage. Left. Why Ned! why Franck! why Franck! why Ned! You see I Am not
worse than my word. I Am just for Hackney now, the Wedding Clothes are gone
before; once more, I beg you not to fail me.


Love. I, Sir, would willingly perform what Service my ability can reach to;
and so, I Am certain, would Franck here; but --


Left. But what? why, what is the matter, Man? Why, thou art grievous
Melancholy. Prithee, tell me what is the matter.


Friend. Alas, Sir, 'twill but trouble you to hear your Friend's misfortunes.


Love. For my part, Sir, I grieve not at my own, I could laugh at them; but
that I should fail you, it makes me almost mad.


Left. Prithee, dear Ned, tell me what is the matter; I protest, you make tears
stand in my eyes: let me know the cause quickly, or I shall cry outright. I
would not, I protest, for a thousand pounds, you should fail me; I shall lose
such a fortune, I shall never have again.


Love. That Is the greatest of my grief; that you, my Friend, from whom I have
found such favors, should be so great a loser in my ill luck. 'Sdeath, I could
kill my self.


Left. O, for the love of God, good Gentlemen, as you love me, and as you love
your Mistresses, let me know what troubles you; I protest, I Will tear my
Periwigg to pieces else. Ned Lovewell, will you tell me or no? or I will tear.


Love. Dear Friend, put on your Periwigg; to see you in this passion, adds to
my sorrow; and should I tell you now, I know your good nature would lead you to
repair our losses, which I hate the very thought of, knowing how far we are
already engaged to your Liberality.


Friend. The Coxcomb, I find, will be wrought upon. Dear dissimulation, how I
love thee!


Aside. Left. Never speak of that, man; if Money will make up the matter, never
be melancholy; I have just now received two hundred Guineys for the Fines of
four Houses.


Love. But with what confidence can I do this? Pray, Sir, pardon me.


Left. By this hand, either let me know what it is that troubles ye, and take my
Money to make up the matter, or I Will never come near you more, though I know I
shall lose my Mistress by it. I thought you had had more kindness for me, than
to hinder me thus of a Fortune; now you have wooed her for me.


Love. Well, Sir; since nothing will satisfy you, the case is thus. That day
we went with you to Hackney, our Lodgings were broke open, and robbed of all our
laced Linen, and almost two hundred pounds besides; so that we shall want
Money, and all things else, to furnish us to do you Service in that garb we
willingly would, had not this strange misfortune hindered our Intentions.


Left. P'shaw, and is this all? Look, here is all the Money I have about me:
I Will send Moses home for more.


Love. Alas, dear Sir, half this will serve; pray pardon me: but since you will
have it so.


Left. Why should it not be so? I say, it shall be so. Go home, Moses, fetch
the Purse that lies behind the Cabinet. I Will away to Hackney; you will come on
Thursday, before nine a Clock.


Love. Sir, we will be there before you are up, I warrant you. I do assure you I
know not what to say, that may in the least make satisfaction for so great a
favor.


Friend. Sir, I am equally unhappy in the want of words, to express my
gratitude.


Left. Pugh, I cannot Complement; you have got it, and much good may it do you;
and so farewell.


Exit Leftwell. Friend. Dear Ned, let me spit in thy Mouth for thy Ingenuity;
faith, 'twas very well done.


Love. As I live, it went against my Conscience all the while I was about it;
and I strangly wonder I went so well through with it, to wheedle a Man out of
his Money, and cheat him of his Mistress too; it is enough to damn an honest Man
to do it, and make a wise Man mad to undergo it.


Friend. 'Twere honest in no case but this; for this is but easing of a Brute
with half a Soul, of a few of his Fathers sins; and besides, if we get these
Fortunes, we may pay him his Money again. Then, for his Mistress (if she were
his, as she is yours) you do a deed of Charity, to preserve her from being bound
to a Fool; besides --


Love. Enough, enough, Franck; these Reasons are sufficient to resettle my
struggling Conscience.


Friend. But now, what is to be done, as to the Ladies? they live in expectation
of relief from us; and I long to know a way to send it them.


Love. I Have made Runwell our Agent here; and we shall have by him the Course we
are to steer. The Ladies will give full directions by him.


Enter a Messenger. Friend. Friend, lies your business with any here?


Mess. I have a Letter for one Mr. Lovewell.


Love. I am the Man; whence comes it?


Mess. The Letter, Sir, will give you satisfaction.


Exit Mes. Friend. It Is Faithful's Character, I think.


Lovewell Reads. Dear Ned,
WHen this Letter finds you, come to my Relief as soon as you can; for I am
crammed into a little Room in New Prison, where I am like to be overrun with
Lice, and stifled with stinking Tobacco. Tell Franck Friendly, that I was taken
upon a Warrant, at the Suit of our Landlady Fells, for Rent; and committed by
one Justice Frump: but the Keeper says, he will let me out upon any Bail;
provided, I pay my Fees. So fail not, dear Friend, with all speed, to rescue

Your Servant, Thomas Faithful.


Friend. O that damned Justice! he once committed me, for pissing under his
Window.


Love. Prithee, Franck, leave prating; and let us haste, to help the poor Rogue.


Friend. Was there ever such a Toothless Trot, as this? who the Devil put it
into her mind? But let us stay no longer.


Exeunt. Scena secunda.
Enter Leticia, Fickle, and Betty. Let. Cousin Fickle, there is nothing in the
World makes me admire more, than to see thee so long in one mind; that thou
should love one Man two days together, is little less than a Miracle.


Fick. And nothing but a Miracle can make me miss him, as we have laid the
Plot. If they come according to our appointment, we will be Married two hours
before my Uncle, and the intended Bridegroom, are awake; but should I miss him
to Morrow, I Would have him the next place I meet him in. My Uncle cannot hinder
me, though he may you; nor shall, from marrying any Man that I affect.


Let. O Coz, that I were but in thy Condition; and as free from the fear of a
Father! but I Vow, my heart begins to fail me; if we play this trick to Morrow,
when he misses us, he will certainly run stark mad; and turn me off, without a
penny Portion.


Fick. Dear Girl, fear not that; he may be angry for a Month, or so, but no
longer; for he has never another Child. Nature will engage him to come about
again, and give thee all; he will be as kind as ever, never fear it. However,
will thou weigh thy Fathers anger, in comparison, with the loss of gentile Mr.
Lovewell? Let me dye, if I am not ashm'd to see thee have such idle fears.


Let. The Scene is strangely altered; when thou come to counsel any body to
Love and Constancy; but Coz, do think thou can continue this humor, till
to Morrow?


Fick. Leave your tatling; for I question your resolution more than you need
mine; I could find in my heart not to let you go to Bed to Night, lest you
should lie too long in the Morning.


Let. Nay, I will never be outdone by thee, in point of promise; I will be up,
and ready to meet him; go, and be immediately Married to him, though I turn
Seamstress for my Living. Therefore come along, Girl.


Fick. Said like thy self, sweet Coz; if it be done to Morrow, we will laugh one
Day, let what will follow.


Let. Have you fully instructed Betty, that she may satisfy Mr. Lovewell's
Man, the time and place they are to meet us in? You know I left all that to
your care: has she the Letter for him?


Fick. To the full, fear not: let us in, and put our Jewels up; for if the Old
Man proves unkind, they may stand thy Friends; I Am sure he must pay me my
Portion.


Ex. ambo. Enter Runwell. Betty. Mr. Runwell, I have got such a bundle of
business here will make you mad to carry it, and your Master mad with joy to
hear it. Tell him, and Mr. Friendly, that the Ladies desire their Companys by
four a Clock to morrow Morning, at the corner of our back-gate, with a Coach.
But here is two Letters, which if you give your Masters, will save you the
trouble of telling a long Story. So pray be careful, and farewell.


Run. Mrs. Betty, Mrs. Betty; unless you pity me, my Master has utterly undone
me.


Betty. Why, what is the matter, man?


Run. Here he has set me to woo in jest, and I Am in love in earnest. Unless
you think you can love me, I am bound to wish I had never seen you; for I find
in my self I cannot live without you.


Betty. O, if that be all, leave it to me; and as I find your care in your
Masters concerns, so you shall find my love toward you, if you are in earnest.
Fare you well, Sir.


Exit. Run. This is short, and sweet; it savours something of kindness: but
what I should do with a Wife if I had one, I can no more tell, than a Tailor
knows how to make a Horse-shooe. And yet I love this little Rogue so well, that
I must have her, though Ruin were sure to follow: however I hope my Master,
when he has got his Mistress, will help us out at a dead lift. But I must make
haste.


Exit. Scena tertia.
Enter Pett, Ralph, and Betty. Pett. Ho! where are you Ralph? is the Cook come?


Ralph. Yes, Sir.


Pett. Bid him come to me; Betty, do you get Mrs. Snuff, the Housekeeper, to
make the Wedding Bed, she knows what belongs to such matters; and look that the
Hangings in the Matted Room be brusht down, and the Chare-Woman rub the rest of
the Rooms. Let every thing be done in Order.

Enter Cook. Pray, Mr. Lard, look that every thing you undertake be done
decently; spare for no cost, but call for every thing you want. I would not be
niggardly at the Wedding of my only Child. Has Mr. Plume, the Poulterer, sent
the Crammed Capons, the tame Pigeons, and the Partridges. And, Betty, step to
the Butler, and see whether he has Bottel'd the two Tearces of Claret, and the
half Pipe of Canary. Pray look about you, and let every thing be done that may
adorn the House.


Cook. Sir, let me have but Meat enough, and things convenient to carry on the
work of the day, if I don't lick my fingers after the French Mode, and make
sauce as well as any Man of my Profession, let me be put into Pye-Crust, and
sent a Sacrifice to the unappeas'd Stomachs of unsatiate Serving-men.


Betty. Sir, I Will see that every thing be ready to your satisfaction, as far as
I Am concerned, and look that the Bride be dressed before Eight of the Clock, or
the Cook shall cut me into Steaks and Stew me.


Pett. God-a-mercy, good Girl; get thee about thy business then, for thou have
a great deal to do.

Exit Betty. Mr. Lard, question not but you shall have every thing, to furnish
out a Feast for the Entertainment of a King. Command what is necessary for the
Kitchen.


Cook. Let me alone, then; I Will warrant your Worship.


Exit. Enter Leftwell. Left. Good Morrow, Father; pray, how does your Head?


Pett. Very well, Son; pray, why do you ask?


Left. Only to be satisfied, Sir, because mine aches, and turns round, as if
'twere about to look for another seat, and would take leave of my shoulders;
why, there is not a pair of hands in the House but what is in motion, to make as
much noise as they can; all the great Guns in a Sea Fight sing treble, in
comparison of the Thundering base that Reigns in every Room here. Pray, Sir,
what is your design in this? Do you intend to make me mad before I Am Married?


Pett. No, Sir; but I have a design to have my House set in Order, and to make
provision for those that shall entertain you and your Bride to Morrow; and do
you think this can be done without noises? I warrant you would have had the
Victuals sent to the next door to be dressed, and so brought through the Street
to the Table. Pray, Son, if the noise be so troublesome to you, let you and I
go to the backside of the House, and play a game at Tables; are you for Irish,
or Backgammon?


Left. No, Sir, I have sworn never to throw a Dye more, though I have played at
Dublits, and losing Lodum, before now; but I have quite left off Gaming. I care
not, if I go up stairs, and see my Mistress; A Man goes in danger of his life
here below: I, by chance, looked but into the Kitchen, and one of the Cooks
took me for a Calf, I believe; and in spite of my teeth would needs spit me.
Then my shins have been broke three times to day, by straggling Stools that
stepped out of the places they stood in this seven years, and lay now where I
never looked for 'em. I had like to have had my face washed too, by the Fellow
that cleans the Wainscoat; his Cloth was within an ace of my Nose.


Pett. Well, Son, there is no help for these things; but since you have made
choice of your Mistress for your Protectress, you may find her, and my Niece
Fickle, together at the Chamber at the end of the long Gallery.


Exeunt severally. Scena quarta.
Enter Lovewell, Friendly, Faithful, Squeeze the Jailer, as in a Prison. Love.
How now, Tom, Revelling?


Faith. O, are you come? By your favor, fellow Prisoners, I must spoil the
Dance.


Friend. Garry this Crown to the poor Prisoners; farewell, Friend. Are you
fully satisfied?


Squeez. He is discharged, and may go when he pleases.


Friend. Lord, Ned, how this Fellow looks! Let me see, what does he look like?


Love. Why, faith, he looks like a poor Whore, turned out of an Inns of Court,
half drunk, at four a Clock in the Morning.


Friend. Or like a Gypsy, that has been let down a Chimney, and drawn up again
with a Gammon of Bacon at her Breech.


Faith. Why, Gentlemen, had you been where I was, it would have made you look a
little uglier than ordinary.


Love. If thou were but a little uglier than ordinary, as thou say, a man
might endure to look on thee, Tom; but, as I live, thy Face looks just of the
color of a Red-herring, and thy hands like a Sailors, that have been steept
two days in Tarr and Tallow. And any body will swear, by thy Linen, thou have
robbed a French Lacquey.


Friend. This Fellow stinks so of Tobacco, that there is no way to make him
smell sweet, and look like a man, but to take him down to the Thames, and have
him drawn twice, or thrice, cross the Water at the tail of a Sculler.


Faith. Say you so, Signior Snowt? if you bee'nt smoak-dry'd in the same place
before you have washed your Hands for to morrow's Dinner, I Will be bound to hang
for you.


Friend. Why, was there ever such a simple sot as thou art? To have money in
thy pocket, and be sent to Prison for fourteen shillings: Why the Devil did you
not pay it? but it may be you had a mind to see the Lodging you must last live
in.


Love. If you had given her the money, she had no more to do with you; one
would imagine you want brains as well as money; but perhaps you have a fancy to
be lousy: But we will let that pass. Look, here is more money, Tom.


Faith. What, from the same hand, Ladds?


Friend. This is nothing; there is that in hand will make us all happy:


Faith. If that which is in hand will not, I don't know what will: come, what
designs have you, let me know all?


Friend. Come, we will trust you for once; we two are to be married to morrow to
two of the greatest Beauties and Fortunes within twenty miles.


Enter Runwell. Faith. Where, and to whom, dear Rogues, tantalize me no longer?


Love. Faith, Tom, I don't know yet my self; but here comes one, I believe,
will better inform me; what news, Runwell?


Run. Sir, I must have leave to take breath, before I can tell my tale; you
must be by four a Clock to morrow morning, and Mr. Friendly with you, at the
Corner -- But here is a Letter will fully inform you; and here is one for you,
Sir.


Love. By this hand, Franck, I Am afraid to look into mine, lest there should be
less in it than I expected.


Friend. I Am under the same sense of fear; prithee, Ned, open thine, and put me
out of pain.


Love. It Is better to know a man's Fate, than fear it: I Will venture.


Reads. SIR,
BE sure you fail not to meet me, and Mr. Friendly my Cousin Fickle, at the
Corner of our Garden in the green Meadow, about four of the Clock to Morrow
Morning: Provide your Parson ready at some Church in London, that may do the
business, without delay. My Consin is as well resolved for Mr. Friendly, as I
am for you.

Your Servant, L. P.
Postscript.
Pray send back your Man, that he may be with Betty; so if the business should
fail, he may be able to help us.




Love. Mine is, Franck, as I could wish; how sounds thine?


Friend. There Is all the harmony of love in it; but Ned, what shall we do for a
Levite?


Faith. Leave that to me; I Will provide Old Legit, the Reader, who is in Orders,
and will do the business as fast as a Bishop, and tie you together to Eternity.
And I can borrow the Keys of the Sexton of St. Giles's for less than five
shillings, and a full Flaggon of mild Beer. Therefore bear up, Boys.


Love. You're sure you can do this; if you fail us, wee're all undone.


Friend. Consider, Tom, our business is your own; for as the case stands with
us, so it does with you; either happy, or miserable.


Faith. Trouble your self no further; if I fail, one of you shall have my Ears,
and the other my eyes. So farewell, Friends; I Will about it instantly.


Exit Faithful. Love. Run you back to Betty, and stay there till you hear from
me.


Run. I fly, Sir.


Exit Runwell. Love. Franck, go you and provide the Coach, and I Will make every
thing else ready: meet me to night at the Devil Tavern, there we will stay till
two a Clock, and so set forward.


Friend. I Will not fail.


Exeunt. Scena quinta.
Enter Leftwell, Leticia, Fickle, Betty. Let. I should take it very kindly, Mr.
Leftwell, if you would go now, and give me leave to go to bed.


Fick. Your Bride will never get up to morrow morning to be married, if you
keep her up so late to night. Pray, Mr. Leftwell, leave us.


Left. I will not go till I please: may not I do what I will, if I have a mind
to it, with my own Wife? I believe my Father would give me leave to lie with her
to night, if I asked it.


Betty. What, before you are married? That would be a sight worth seeing
indeed. In Faith, if you will not go down, Mr. Leftwell, I shall make bold to beat
you down with the Bed-staffs: What, I Am sure my Old Master did not send you up
to day at Noon, to see us a bed. Will you be gone, and give my Mistress leave
to go to Bed? I shall beat you down with the Bed-staff else.


Let. Hold^ Betty, don't beat him, we will persuade him civilly. Pray, Mr.
Leftwell, be Civil, and do not undertake to stay longer, where it cannot be
allowed of with modesty.


Fick. Lord, Sir, is your Stomach so great, that you cannot stay till to morrow
Night, and so take lawful Possession? but press in in an illegal manner into a
place a day before you have a privilege. I assure you, the World will think
you want wit strangely in attempting it.


Left. Well, if I don't go down, and do your Etrand to my Father, Mistress, let
me live lousy, and dye upon a Dunghill. For your part, I shall turn you out
of Service to Morrow To Betty. night, like a saucy Slut as you are. And I Will
beat your sweetheart, till his bones rattle in his skin: I swear by my Sword,
I Will squeeze him like a Turnip between two Trenchers; and there is a word for
all.


Exit Leftwell. Let. Now he is gone, let us not trouble our selves to talk of
him, but make provision for the Morning's Adventure. It Is now almost twelve,
and you know they will be at the back-gate by four a Clock in the Morning; and
should we spend that time idly, it is ten to one, but it may bring us to
repentance, by unkindly failing our Gallants. Therefore let us fall to packing
up those little things we have, to help us in necessity; then sleep an hour or
two.


Fick. I protest, I Will not go to Bed for all the World; if I do, I shall
certainly lose my Lover, I always wake so late a mornings. But if Betty will
sit up, and promise to wake us, we will lie down in our Night-Gowns till that
time.


Betty. With all my heart, Madam; I Am an errant Slut, if I would not, to
promote this business, sit six days, and as many nights, up to the Chin in
Water, this cold Weather. For I have such a Faith in both the Gentlemen, that I
am very confident they will make you happy.


Let. Betty, thou shall not fail to share in my good fortune; and now go to
your own Chamber, and be sure to call us in time. You know what you have to do;
stay behind with Runwell, and be the first that misses me; and do it with all
the passion imaginable; so you will be unsuspected.


Betty. Madam, I had rather punish my self in being absent from you (since it is
your command) than be wanting in any Service I may possibly do you.


Let. That Is my good Girl; but let me kiss thee first for good lucks sake.


Betty. Good night, good Ladies.


Exit Betty. Let. Now, Cousin, we are alone, what is to be done?


Fick. Let Us sleep two hours, and rise before the Sun.


Exeunt. Finis Actus quarti.
Actus Quintus.
Scena prima.
Enter Lovewell, and Friendly. Friend. COachman, stay you there, stir not till
we come back. It Is devilish dark, Ned; not so much as a Star stirring.


Love. And cruel cold, Franck; if my love wan't very hot, 'twould never hold
out the battery of this bitter Morning. If the poor Ladies are abroad, I Am
sorry for them, I fear it bites them severely. Prithee where art? can thou
not keep close?


Friend. Why, I am by you here; but know not in what place.


Love. Faith, I thought I smelt you; but come nearer, I Will be a little unkind
to my Nose, and keep you Company at present, for want of a sweeter. But hold, I
think, wee're near the place appointed: prithee, come up; is not that the
Garden Wall?


Friend. You may as well persuade a blind man to do you the kindness, to draw
your Picture, as to ask my opinion now; for I can no more see thy hand, than I
can my own face; nor can thou see any thing, unless thou have changed eyes
with a Cat. But hark, I hear some body, and see a light yonder.


Enter the other way, Leticia, Fickle, and Betty. Betty. Cupid be kind to you,
and lend you a lanthorn, it is cruel dark: good Ladies, keep your Gowns close
about you, for I fear youl'le catch cold.


Fick. Faith, Cousin, I Am afraid to stir; would they were come, I have got the
Cramp in every one of my fingers, with cold; if I stay here but half an hour, I
shall be fitter for burying than Marriage: I Am afraid I shall lose the finger
the Parson is to put the Ring on. Pray Betty, which finger is that?


Betty. Faith, Madam, I don't know.


Fick. Nor I; if I did, I would be sure to keep that from the cold. Cousin Let.
thou look so pitifully, for want of thy Morning's Posset, that, of my
Conscience, I could cry for thee. Give me thy hand, where is it, Girl? Take
comfort, I warrant they come.


Let. I dare swear it is they; let us go a little nearer.


Friend. Art sure there is never a Ditch in the way? Would we had the Women, and
were well in the Coach again: But give me thy hand, and I Will go with thee.


Let. I vow, Cousin, my courage was almost cold; but to see thee so confident
in thy sufferings, or indeed, to do thee Justice, so constant; I now believe it
a mere shame to come short of thee. Whatever happens, I Am resolved to stay here
till they come, not to be unfix'd in my Resolutions.


Betty. Poor Mistress, I should question the Justice of the gods, should they
forget to be your Friends, and fail to help you; nay, I should think they had
forgot to further goodness, if they should let you be a loser, in prosecution
of so pure a love.


Fick. Never fear, Betty, we will through now, though froward Fate had sworn to
set a stop to it. But hark, I hear the steps of some body: would I knew who
they were; it startles me.


Let. O, Coz, now thou art faint-hearted again; it is nothing but the leaves of
the Trees that hang over the Garden Wall. Let Us walk a little further forwards.


Friend. There Is a Candle, Lovewell; let us look a little nearer: stay, is not
that Leticia?


Love. And I am monstrously mistaken, if that ben't thy Mistress, and Betty
that holds the light; look, they come nearer.


Fick. I think I heard some body say, Leticia: and I begin to lose my fear, and
will look a little further. Betty, light hither a little.


The Candle goes out. Betty. O Lord, Madam, the Candle's out, I Am undone. I
shall never find the way back to the Gate upon the Cawsey.


They come up to them in the dark. Love. Madam, Leticia, Lady; here is no body
answers. Franck, art sure 'twas they?


Friend. No, it may be we saw Angels in their shapes; 'twas either the one, or
the other, I can assure you.


Let. No, my dear Lovewell; it is too late to keep at distance, when there lacks
so little time to make us one; here is she that loves thee; and if Heaven were
pleased to lend us light, would joy to look on thee.


Love. Sweetest Leticia, why art thou shrouded in this sheet of darkness, that
ought to fear, and fly from such a Face, though it presumes on all the earth
besides? Speak but once more, that I may find thee by thy Voice; since my eyes
are unserviceable.


Friend. Ned, Ned, have you found your Mistress? If you have, lend me your hand
to find mine; for I dare as well be hanged, as stir a foot further than the
place I Am in: I Am just now up to the belly in the Horse-pond.


Let. Hold, Mr. Lovewell, let me call her: Coz, Coz.


Fick. Lord, where are you? I hear Mr. Friendly make sad complaints, but I
protest I don't know where to find him. Are you hereabouts, Cousin?


Let. I, where is your hand?


Fick. Here, and here is Betty's; I am glad I have found you: Mr. Lovewell, your
Servant; if you would speak, I should be glad to hear you, for I protest, I
cannot see you.


Love. Madam, your most humble Servant; I would Franck Friendly were as near
you as I am: poor Rogue, he lies poring up and down in the dark for you;
Franck, Franck.


Friend. Here, here, at hand; is my dear Mistress near thereabouts?


Love. She Is here, with Madam Let. and Betty. Thou art the only lost Sheep of
the Company; here, have a care, thou will blunder over some body; prithee, be
careful, take me by the hand.


Friend. I should be happy if I had it; hold, is not this it.


Love. What do you think?


Friend. Faith, I don't know very well; but I Will feel for the Roman T. that
will satisfy me the truth on it.


Love. One would have thought the spirit of Jokeing had been drencht out of you
in the Horse-pond; but here is the hand of your fair Mistress.


Friend. I, here is a hand indeed, makes me forget all wet and cold, and fear of
future Storms.


Fick. But if you stay much longer here in your wet Breeches, you will remember
wet and cold again, in spite of your Antidote; and I Am so wet with dew, that
unless you make haste, I shall dye before I Am Married; and so be put upon ugly
work in the other World; you have heard the Proverb: and besides, you will lose
my Portion, which is no poor one.


Let. Prithee, dear Coz, let us stand no longer in the cold tatling of Estates,
but haste to the Coach; have you brought one?


Love. I, and four Horses, that will hurry us to London; and a Levite that will
do the business: we shall be there by five a Clock.


Fick. I, but we shall not get into the Church so soon.


Love. The Sexton has provided a Bottle of Wine, and some other things, for
your diversion, till seven a Clock, at which time you will be mist here, and
the work will be doing there.


Let. Let Us away to the Coach then. Betty, it is something lighter now, you may
easily find the way back; and be sure you remember your instructions, you know
where to send to me; so fare thee well, good Girl.


Betty, I vow, Madam, I must weep at parting, though you are going about to do
that business I have always wished you; but assure your Ladyships, I Will serve
you both to the utmost of my power; and so the god of Love preserve and prosper
your proceedings.


Love. Friend. Pretty Mrs. Betty, your Servants.


Ex. omnes. Scena secunda.
Enter Gammer Fells, Clowt, and Mold the Sexton. Fells. I charge you, Neighbor
Mold, make a Confession before Mr. Clowt, the Kings Constable, of what you told
me last Night, as you and I sat in the Chimney Corner at my House, drinking a
dram or two of Brandy; by the same token, you took the Bottle out of my hand,
whilst I did something; but that is no matter.


Clowt. Neighbor Mold, discharge the part of a good Christian, and clear your
Conscience, by making your Confession to a Constable of the Kings; who is a
Member of State. Indeed you may object, though I am one of the Kings
Constables, you are one of his Sextons too; true, it is so; and that is in part
satisfaction: for it is unnatural for one Member to persecute another: so, if
the business were only 'twixt you and I, 'twere easily made up. But here is my
Neighbor Fells, truly, a Woman that understands the World, has been wickedly
dealt with, has a great deal of Money due to her, and much linen worn out; has
lain long in wait for one of the Men, that she says, nay, she swears,
Neighbor Mold, you told her was to come to your House this Morning, from
thence to go to Church to be Married. Therefore I command you in the Kings Name
to speak the truth.


Fells. Or else I Will have a Petition, to have you before Justice Frump.


Clowt. How, a Petition, Gammer Fells? you have forgot all your Law, as if you
had never had any. A Suppina, Woman, a Suppina; that is the only way. A
Petition? I cannot forbear laughing; I tell you, you cannot do it any other
way, but by a Suppina. Ha, Gammer Fells, you have not so good a Headpiece as
you had formerly. Well, well; Age, Age.


Enter Lovewell, Friendly, Leticia, and Fickle. Love. Now, my dear Mistress, we
are safe from all our fears; this is the Sexton's House, there we will repose a
little, then to Church.


Fells. Are you come, in faith, Sir; Seize on him, Mr. Constable, in the Kings
Name; this is the other Rogue, that owed me Money, and forswore himself. Come,
bring them all away: for, Mr. Clowt, if one body in a Company be perjured, all
the rest are guilty, and must stand in the Pillory with him.


Clowt. Gammer Fells, it is very true, you're in the right in that case; so I
command you all, in the Kings Name, to come away with me.


Love. Mistress, if any body here owes you any thing, I Will pay you presently
five times as much, if that will be any satisfaction; pray, put us to no
trouble, for wee're about earnest business.


Fells. You say honestly, Sir; pray be as good as your word, and let me have
but thirty shillings, and I Will discharge you; for I love a Gentleman, as I do
my life.


Love. Here Is your Money; so fare you well.


Clowt. Hold, Sir, hold; how shall I be discharged by the King for the perjury?
You must go fore Justice Frump, and stand the Trial.


Love. Why, who in the Company is perjured? Pray, Mr. Constable, ben't so
impertinent, but let us go about our business.


Clowt. Why, that is that Gentleman; and you being in his Company, are, with
all the rest, equally concerned. So I command you come away, in the Kings Name.


Fells. That Is true indeed, the perjury is not discharged; bring them away,
there is no remedy; I would it were in my power to do you any good: Come,
Neighbor Clowt, bring 'em along; I Am afraid you will lie by it.


Love. I Will not go along with you, not shall any of the Company. This Old Bawd
has cozened me of some Money, and I believe you intend to cheat me of more.


Clowt. Offer to draw, I Will knock down your Wench here; will you come on
quietly, in the Kings Name?


Friend. Mr. Constable, here is five pounds, let us but pass now; and we will
promise to meet you to Morrow Morning.


Fells. I wish he would, in faith; if he takes it, I shall tell Justice Frump,
and see how he will take it; perhaps he will cheat the King too. Come, come, Mr.
Clowt, the Law lies not in your Hands; if I live, I Will see 'em laid up; and if
you don't look to your Office, look to your self; shall People be perjured, and
go unpunished?


Let. Why, good Woman, what are you concerned? your debt is satisfied.


Fells. Is it so, Goody Gillyflurt, with your face full of patches? you shall
know that I am not satisfied; it is such as you make poor Men they cannot pay
their Debts: where have they picked up you and that Puppet, your Companion? I Will
have you where you shall give an account of your selves, and what business you
have with these Men.


Love. You abominable old Bawd, I Will kick you, till you curse your own
Blaspheming tongue.


Clowt. How? Do you kick an Ancient Housekeeper before the face of me the
Kings Constable? Sir, I would have you to know, you have forfeited your foot by
the Laws of the Land, therefore look to it. Neighbor Mold, I command you in the
Kings Name to assist me; have a good heart, Gammer Fells, I Will see you
satisfied. Come on, Sir.


Friend. Ned, wee're utterly undone if we go before the Justice, for he will be
sure to commit us, right, or wrong, if it be but to get his Man Money for the
Mittimus; of which he himself has the largest shate.


Love. I don't know what to do. Mr. Constable, will nothing satisfy you,
unless we go before the Justice; you would do us a favor, if you would take
our words till to Morrow; and hark you, Sir, here is five pounds to buy your
Wife a Ring.


Clowt. I protest, Sir, I would do it, though you had killed my Father, for so
much Money; but Gammer Fells will have a fling at my Plumb-Tree, and utterly
undo me, therefore I cannot do it: Pray, Sir, come along.


Friend. Pray, Mr. Constable, will you allow the Ladies liberty to go to a
Friends House, whilst we go to the Justice's.


Fells. The Ladies, with a Murrain; no, Sir, they shall go with you, and see
how they like lying in a Gaol. Captain Clowt, come along, I Will lead the way,
therefore look to the Prisoners.


Love. Well, there is no remedy; Ladies, don't be dejected though; Justice must
discharge us.


Fick. I do'nt care if the deed be done before my Uncle hears of it. You may
go; Mr. Constable, we will follow you.


Exeunt, The Scene alters. Enter again, at Frump's House. Love. Mr. Constable,
if you design our March much further, pray let us have a Coach, for the Ladies
are not used to foot it so far.


Clowt. This is the House, Sir; pray be patient, I Will have you no further.


Enter Stingey. Sting. Good Morrow, Mr. Clowt; I suppose, by the people you
have brought with you, your business is to my Master; I Will step in, and call
him; Mr. Clowt, in the mean time, pray be careful of the Prisoners.


Friend. What peaking Puppy's this, that looks as if he quartered with a
Camelion, and eat nothing but Air?


Love. By this light, he looks like one that was got by a Beggar, and has lived
ever since lousy. But who is this that looks so like a Knight Templar, with his
Chopps muffled?


Enter Frump. Frump. Stingey, the Speech I have been getting by heart these ten
days will now do me a kindness to this Company; therefore do you hold the
Paper, whilst I speak; if I chance to be out, you may put me in with a whisper,
and pretend business; for it is excellent good, and well penned by a Counsel
learned in the Law; and now I Will begin. Hum, ha. Gentlemen, I know not what you
are, nor from whence you come; you may be this, or you may be that. But for
this or that, it is no matter.


Fells. How, an't like your Worship, no matter? your Worship shall know that
the matter is considerable, both to the King, and to your self, for all these
People are perjured; and you know by that there is many a penny coming in. And
they came from Hackney, and these Wenches belong to Mr. Pett, of the same Town;
and I have sent him word of it, and he will be here presently, I presume, under
favor of your good Worship.


Frump. Woman, hold your prating, or I protest, I Will set you into the Stocks;
would her tongue were out, she has put me quite besides my Speech; where abouts
was I, Stingey?


Sting. Why, you were at, But for this, or that, it is no matter.


Frump. Then, Gentlemen, But for this, or that, it is no matter; as I was
saying before. You know the time of a Justice of Peace is precious, an Ancient
Author says, concerning the life and living of Justices; who says, their
labor is much, and their care great: therefore I command you, Gentlemen, and
Gentlewomen, that you do not weary me with long Circumstances, to unsettle my
head, but I pray be satisfied, and submit to Justice; for your offenses are of
a fearful -- What Is next, Stingey?


Sting. Consequence.


Frump. Of a fearful Consequence; and indeed, most crying Crimes, as the
learned Felton says, Libera nos Domine. But let him say what he will, he was a
Justice; I am one, and have in this House the Kings Commission that made me so.


Love. I believe your Worship's a little mistaken; sure, Sir, Mr. Felton was a
Parson, and not a Justice.


Frump. Come, come, let me tell you, there is no difference between 'em, learn
that from me. You're a Young Man, and have not seen so much of the World as
some have. But, as I was saying before, I am a Justice, and have the Kings
Commission for it.


Enter Pett, and Leftwell. Pett. Justice Frump, your Servant; I Am glad to see
you, Sir, and have made haste to do it. Gentlemen, you have done kindly by me,
I Am beholding to you; so is my Son Leftwell here. For your parts, Gentlewomen,
you shall along with me again. Good Woman, come and Dine with me on Sunday,
I Will give you satisfaction for your care. Hereafter I shall watch you both a
little better.


Fells. You are an honest Gentleman, Sir, and I Will be sure to come according to
my promise; I Am glad that it came into my heart to hinder these sweet pretty
Gentlewomens marriage with these beggarly Fellows.


Left. Beggarly enough a Conscience, good Woman; they were not so well clad as
Adam in Paradise, before I lent 'em Money to make 'em Clothes; no, not so much
as Figg-leaves, Gammer Fells: and these wretched Rascals, to reward me, come
betimes in the Morning, and run away with my Mistress, just when I should have
married her; no Devils would have done so.


Fells. O wicked Knaves; I warrant you, Sir, Justice Frump will give them their
Reward for it; to go to cheat such a pretty, sweetfac'd, likely, hopeful,
young Gentleman as you are.


Pett. Mr. Justice, your Servant. Daughter, and Neice, you have deceived me
once; but if ever you put such a trick upon me again, I Will forgive you.


Frump. Mr. Pett, I should be glad, if the Law would give me leave, to let your
Relations go; but they are equally concerned with these Gentlemen, and must go
with them to New Prison: it is pity, because they are pretty Maids; but Justice
must not be stifled.


Love. Gammer Fells, we will give you ten shillings, if you will say you mistook
the Man; and that this is not he: you will get nothing by keeping of us, nor
will Mr. Pett know how to get off his Daughter and Cousin; so you will lose your
reward there too.


Fells. In Faith I Will do it, for I love a Gentleman as I do my life.


Pett. Sir, I Will be bound to save you harmless; and I Will stay at my London
House this Month, where you may send for me at any time: and here is ten
shillings for your Clerk.


Frump. There is five for me.


Aside. Fells. Sir, your Worship, I protest, I mistook the Man, this is none of
him, I thought it was; and unless you set them all free, I Am undone; they will
sue me, they say, till I have not a groat left to help my self: Good, your
Worship, consider a poor Woman.


Frump. Gammer Fells, if you say so, I must discharge them; provided, they
gratify my Clerk, which is a thing common.


Friend. O, Sir, most willingly; there is ten shillings for him.


Pett. Well, Mr. Justice, if they are discharged, I hope these are so too. Fare
you well. Gentlemen, pray let me see you no more near my House.


Left. By my Sword, if I see you near the House again, I Will kick you both upon
the place I first meet you, though it be a thousand Miles off. So good b'uy,
honest Friends, good b'uy.


Exeunt omnes, praeter Love. Friend. Love. That this blund'ring Fellow should
tell the Sexton our names, and the names of the Ladies, and the place from
whence they came.


Friend. There was no other way in the World, to bring all out, and utterly
ruin us; we are utterly undone, Ned; and I do believe it is impossible ever to
bring it about again. Here comes the Coxcomb.


Enter Faithful. Faith. What a pox is your meaning? Always playing the Fool
thus, to send me to get a Parson, and provide every thing, and then never come:
Indeed it is like you; I kept my Levite in the Church from four a Clock in the
Morning, till 'twas nine, that he swore he was almost starved.


Friend. You have done us good Service; if you had your reward, your ears ought
to be cut, for the mighty care you took in our concerns; Indeed, you should
have satisfaction.


Love. Indeed, Thomas, you have undergone a great deal, and done more by half
then we could have desired you. If the Devil himself had given you directions,
you could not possibly have made us so miserable.


Friend. Pray tell us seriously, what have we done to you, that should provoke
you to ruin us in this damnable manner? Is it your custom, pray, to betray
your Friends in the drinking two Pots of Ale? Lord, Sir, how you look about
you, as if you had lost your way in a Wilderness. I Will warrant you don't know
what you have done, now.


Love. Not he, I Will warrant, 'twas done in his sleep; does he not use to walk,
Franck; you have lain with him? By this light, I take him to be so honesty that
he would not do such a thing waking. Were not asleep, Tom, when thou told'st
all?


Faith. Gentlemen, you have been very free, both in your Examinations, and your
Accusations, and yet I have said nothing; pray will you give me leave to speak.


Friend. I; pray, what would you say?


Faith. Why, I say, I Will be hanged if this be any thing but a design to stop my
mouth, and keep me from quarrelling with you, about the abuse you put upon me,
to make me stay in the Church starving in the cold with a great greasy Parson.


Love. No, no, Thomas, you are monstrously mistaken; for if that were all, you
know we are well enough able to deal with you; we can soon knock you down with
words. But pray let me ask you one thing: How many Pots of mild Beer did you
and Mr. Mold drink before you came to the matter; I mean, before you made the
discovery of my Name, and Franck Friendly's, and both the Ladies, and from
whence they came?


Friend. And pray let us know why you did it, and what you got by doing of it;
and whether the Devil be yet out of you, that was in you when you went about
it; pray be pleased to speak: what, are you tongue-ty'd? Don't gape, but speak,
Man.


Faith. Well, and what hurt did this do you?


Love. It has only ruined us, that is all. But why the Devil should you make a
confident of an old sottish Fellow, that is not satisfied with cheating the
living, but dead too; sure you might have done your business without giving him
a particular of our Names.


Faith. Pray, Gentlemen, how has this undone you, let me but know the meaning
on it?


Friend. Why, the Sexton overjoyed with the Money you had given him, and happy
that he had news to carry to his Neighbors, went strait to Mother Fells
(living hard by) and being drunk with her, told her I was one of the Persons
concerned; she strait gets a Warrant, and stays at the Sextons, takes him and
me, and both the Ladies; sends home word to old Pett, who, whilst we were at
your Justices, fetches them both away. Now, you have heard your Crime to the
full, pray what have you (with a pox) to say for your self?


Love. Faith, Tom, I don't know what satisfaction you can give us; unless you
will consent that we should cut your throat.


Faith. I, for Heaven's sake do it quickly; I acknowledge I deserve it, pray
dispatch, I hate to live one minute after I have been so great a Brute, to
betray my Friend by folly; I was cursed.


Friend. Prithee Coxcomb, leave raving, and let us see what may be done to bring
all about again; for being sure of the Ladies, our case is not yet desperate,
they are now at their London House; the Scene lies something nearer then it did.


Faith. To make you some part of satisfaction, I Will go and kill Leftwell.


Love. Now he talks of killing Leftwell, I Have a design in my head, may hap to
do us good.


Friend. Prithee, what is it?


Love. Why, Faithful shall send Leftwell a Challenge, and in it, unless he
meet, threaten to Pistol him, and write to me to be his Second; and then --
hark -- what do think of this, boy?


They Whisper. Friend. Faith, Ned, I think -- Pray, Sir, be quiet, we will not
have a thought of yours in the business. Ned, this would do rarely, if we could
find a way to let the Ladies know on it; how must that be done?


Faith. Why, I Will tell you how.


Friend. Prithee, good muddy brains, if thou would hold thy prating, and
say, nor do any more than you have directions from us, things may be carried on
well enough.


Faith. If a Man commits but one fault in his life, he shall be sure to hear
o'nt; pray, proceed then, and let it be purely your own, and be pox'd.


Friend. How shall they know our intentions?


Love. Why, I expect Runwell every minute, who will not fail to do it
dexterously.


Enter Runwell. Friend. See where he comes.


Run. The poor Ladies, Sir, are utterly undone if you can find no way to
relieve them; Madam Leticia is to morrow Morning to be Married to this Looby
Leftwell.


Love. Runwell, come in with me, I Will send a Letter to her of one design more,
which I hope will take; Thomas, pray provide us one Parson more presently.


Faith. I Will warrant you; if I don't, let me dye for it.


Friend. But have a care of Carousing again with the Sexton. Ned, you and I Will
go write the Challenge, and the Letter; for the Pincipal has forgot to read;
but however, I Am sure he cannot write.


Faith. My last fault makes me at present a little liable to the lash of your
ugly tongue; but I Will let you alone till the business is done, and then have at
you.

Aside. So god b'uy, I Will go find out my Doctor.


Both. Pray do.


Exeunt omnes, severally. Scena tertia.
Enter Leticia, Fickle, and Betty. Let. Was ever such an unhappy Accident as we
have met withal, to ruin our intention: If there be a god of Love, he has
very little kindness for us; dear Cousin, what shall we do?


Fick. pretend thy self sick, and so avoid it; I protest, were it my case (as
it is thine) I would rather dye, than have Leftwell, he looks so like a
Horse-courser. For my part, I Am resolved to have Mr. Friendly at one time or
other, though he owed all the Ale-wives in Town Money.


Let. Thou talk, Cousin. But prithee (if thou can) tell me a serious way.


Fick. Why then, I Will tell you; when the Parson asks, whether you will have him,
say no; then I Am sure nothing can be done: what think thou of that, Betty?


Betty. I vow, Madam, I think you direct very well. Pray, Mistress, take her
advice.


Enter Runwell. Run. Madam, my Master sends his Service, and this Letter; from
Mr. Friendly this to your Ladyship.

To Fickle. Dear Mistress, pity a poor Lover, that lives yet only in hopes that
you will make him happy. Pray look upon me; faith, I shall be lost else.


To Betty. Betty. Good Lover, let your Master be served before you. Pray,
Madam, what says Mr. Lovewell?


Let. Betty, I hope that this device of theirs will make us happy. Runwell, go
back, and tell them we will observe their directions.


Exit Runwell. Fick. For my part, if I fail in any thing, let me -- Here Is my
Uncle, and the Wise-Acre.


Enter Pett, and Leftwell. Pett. What Paper was that you put into your pocket?


Let. Only my Tailors Bill for my last Gown, Sir.


Left. Prithee, Love, let me look on it; for by that I shall know what you will
stand me in.


Let. Pray, Sir, forbear; when you come to pay for what I wear, you shall have
leave to look; till then, you have no Authority, nor shall have over me.


Left. I Will fetch you down in your Wedding shoes, in faith, for this; to Morrow
night you shall give me twenty kisses to come to Bed to you, or the Devil take
me if I do it; and you are a saucy --


Pett. Son, Son, you're too passionate; let her have her humor, for once, and
keep her Paper.


Enter to them, a Servant. Serve. Sir, here is a Letter was left just now for Mr.
Leftwell.


Left. Let me see it.


He reads. Fick. This is the Challenge; see how his color turns, Cousin.


Let. Indeed, he looks pale.


Left. Oh, I Am undone, I Am undone: I would your Daughter had been drowned ten
times her depth, before I saw her; I Am undone, I Will have none of her; I Will not
be killed for any Woman in England, not I; look here, do but look here; this is
from one of the gang of those Rogues that ran away with her this Morning: I
don't like her so well, as to lose my life for her; and these cursed Rogues
will never leave till they have killed me; undone, undone.


Pett reads the Challe ge. Fick. Pray, Mr. Leftwell, take comfort, don't snob
so, and be satisfied; you are safe enough in the House.


Left. No, Mrs. Fickle, but I an't safe in the House; the Rogue may bring a
Cannon, that may carry quite through the House for ought I know, and kill me,
so as no body shall know where to find a piece of me afterward, to tell who
hurt me; would I were a thousand Miles off. O good Ladies, speak a good word
for me, let me have some comfort from you quickly, I shall faint else.


Pett. I Protest, it is a bloody design. Daughter, I Will read it to you.


Left. O dear, Sir, if you read, I Am a dead Man; I cannot endure to hear my own
Sentence; pray, put it into your Pocket, for I protest to you with tears, and
upon my knees, that I am ready to swound at the sight of it. Sweet Sir, let me
see it no more, if you desire I should live.


Pett. Prithee Son be satisfied, I warrant I Will keep thee safe in the House
from any harm; nothing shall hurt you here.


Left. I tremble as I stand, I protest, for fear I should be blown up; I Will be
hanged, if he has not put Gunpowder into the Cellar.


Fick. Do you think so; indeed, Mr, Leftwell, it will please me mightily, to
dye in so good Company as you are; for if the House be blown up, we shall all
go together.


Left. I don't know how it may please you, but I protest, I cannot endure to
think on it; I had rather see you, and a hundred more such, blown up together,
than be a party concerned. O that ever I set my eyes on that Woman: now must I
dye for going about to do you a Courtesy.


Let. Truly, Sir, I Am sorry you're like to suffer thus for me; I had rather, I
assure you, not have you, than you should be injured:


Left. You are a couple of dissembling Sluts; I Will warrant you'de be glad to
see me hanged, to have me afterward.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, there is one Mr. Lovewell at door, very earnest to
speak with you.


Left. O, then I Am a dead Man, he is come to kill me. Pray good Ladies, pity a
poor Man, and stand before me; if I escape killing this time, I Will never go
about to Marry more.


Pett. I am ashamed to see you such a Coward; a Man, and cry? I Will send for him
in, and know his business; if I find him concerned, I Will have him secured.
Pray, Son, satisfy your self.


Left. Secure him! that will do me a mighty kindness indeed, his being secured
after he has killed me. Before he comes in, let your Servants feel in his
pockets for pocket Pistols, and Daggers, and seize upon his Sword.


Pett. That Is not much amiss, it shall be so: Go tell him, if he will suffer
that, he may come in; else he may ee'ne walk back again.


Let. Sir, I wonder what he should come for; I don't care for the sight of him,
since he seduced me last away, and brought me into your displeasure.


Pett. We shall see presently.


Enter Lovewell, and Servant. Love. Your Servant, Sir; I have suffered a very
severe search; before I could obtain admittance. I must confess you have some
reason to think ill of me; but now, Sir, I am sensible how much I had like to
have injured you, and that deserving Gentleman.


Points at Leftwell. Left. Oh, he points at me; Mercy, Mercy: dear Mr.
Lovewell, let me but live one Three or Fourscore years longer, and then you
shall find me very willing to lay down my life at your Service. O, let me not
be cut off in my prime, before I have received half a years Rent of my Estate.


Pett. Why, what do thou mean? pray be pacified; he has no design against you
I dare swear.


Left. Dear Father, stand before me though; for say what you will, I Am afraid
to trust him.


Pett. Pray, Mr. Lovewell, if you have any business, proceed.


Love. Sir, I thought my self, in point of Honor, bound to discover this
bloody design laid to destroy your intended Son-in-Law. Look upon this Letter,
Sir.


Pett Reads. Pett. I protest, Sir, I think my self much engaged to you, if we
could by your means apprehend him. My Son-in-Law has already received the
Challenge; and it seems, he has chose you for his Second.


Love. Sir, that is the thing I came about; if you will get a Warrant for him
presently, you will find both him and me together, at the Sign of the Lamb,
within two doors of Justice Frump's; I Will go before, and get him ready.


Pett. Now, truly, Mr. Lovewell, we both esteem our selves much beholden to
you, and will endeavor to make you amends.


Love. All I desire, is, pardon for my last error. Your Servant, Sir; Ladies,
your Servant.


Exit Lovewell. Left. I Am glad he is gone; for he has frighted me out of the
small sense I had.


Pett. Son, will you go along with me to apprehend him?


Left. No, Sir; I thank you for that, In Faith; I Will as soon thrust my Head into
a hot Oven, as venture my Nose an Inch without the Door, for one of these Dogs
to snap at.


Pett. Well, then; I Will take my Servants, and do it without you.


Exeunt Pett, Leftwell. Let. My Father's gone; I wish they were here now.


Betty. What shall we do with this Fool Leftwell? he will run after my Master,
and fetch him back again, when he sees us going: look where he comes sneaking,
like a Prentice Enter Leftwell. that has lost his Masters Money at play. Aside.
How do you, Mr. Leftwell? Are you resolved to be Married to Morrow.


Left. No, I Am resolved to see whether I shall live, or dye, first, by your
favor.


Some body knocks. Fick. Faith, Mr. Leftwell, I Am afraid, now my Uncle's gone,
they are come to kill you; these people knock with fury: hark, they knock
again. Look out at the Window, Betty, and bring us word who it is, before you
let 'em in.


Betty. I Will run, Madam.


Exit Betty. Left. O, Mrs. Fickle, if I have any heart, it is just now in my
Mouth. For I feel a soft thing tumbling between my tongue and my teeth.


Enter Betty. Betty. O me, Mr. Leftwell, it is Mr. Friendly, and Mr. Lovewell;
what will you do?


Left. Dear Betty, put me into any place to preserve me. O, quickly, they will
get in else, before I can hide my self.


Betty. Come along with me, I Will lock you into the Larder; come, come.


Left. Betty, I protest, if thou sav'st me this time, I Will have thee, and let
thy Mistress alone.


Let. He Is safe enough.


Betty. I Have locked up the logger-head, now I Will let them in.


Exit Betty. Let. Do, Betty. Cousin, put on your Scarf, and fit your self for
the March; delays are dangerous.


Fick. I am ready, my dear Girl; give me thy hand. I vow, I can but think, how
simply we shall look, when we come to night to lie with our Lovers.


Let. Thou art the maddest Wench that e're wore Petticoat: how should we look,
think you?


Enter Lovewell, Friendly, and Betty. Love. My dear Leticia; your generous love
has laid so many obligations on me, that nothing but the Service of an Age can
seem a Tithe of satisfaction. Which to be paid --


Fick. Pray, Sir, forbear your Complements at present, and let us make haste to
carry on the work we come about.


Friend. Bravely proposed, my pretty Mistress; if they lie lingering longer,
we will away, and laugh at them. What do thou mean, Ned? to be (at this hasty
time) telling thy Mistress, in blanck verse, that which she has been satisfied
in these six Months; how much you love her, and how much she is more than you
deserve; why, she knows both the one, and the other.


Let. Sir, their advice at this time is not much amiss; therefore let us make
haste.


Love. Betty, is the Coast clear?


Betty. There Is none but the Old Chare-Woman in the House; and she is asleep in
the Chimney Corner.


Fick. I believe Mr. Leftwell will make a foul Larder; shall we leave him under
lock and key?


Betty. Hang him, I Will leave the Key in the door, that the next that comes may
let him out.


Exeunt omnes. Scena quarta.
Enter Pett, and Moses, with Servants, at Justice Frump's House; Frump, and
Stingey. Pet. Mr. Justice, it is intolerable; a Man must stand an hour, or two,
hearing you talk Nonsense, instead of Law, to delay the time, when a Person
comes to you in haste, upon so great an occasion as this is, a matter of life
and death.


Frump. Stingey, make him a Warrant; but, Sir, a Warrant that is made upon life
and death by a Justice of Peace cannot be had for less than a Crown; if you
will be at the price of it, my Man will make it you. Sir, it is nothing to me,
the Money comes into his Pocket; I protest, I don't desire a farthing of you,
not I.


Pett. Sir, I don't value a Crown, as worth a thought; but I have been a
Justice my self, and never heard of such a thing as this.


Frump. I grant you, Sir, not by a Justice of London, but always by a Justice
of Peace of Middlesen. My Man, Sir, knows the Law, as well as most do; and he
shall swear it, if you desire to hear him.


Pett. He will not, sure. I Will give him ten shillings for the Warrant, if he will.


Sting. Pray, Sir, give me the Book.


Offers to swear. Pett. Hold, Sir, here is a Crown for your Warrant; I would not
for a World be so instrumental in thy destruction. God b'ye, Sir; I believe you
have kept me so long, I have lost my opportunity.


Exeunt Pett, and Servants. Frump. Pay me for my part, Stingey; I ought to have
six pence more than you; for indeed, there is no such price upon any Warrant.


Sting. That I know, therefore I offered to swear it, whereas you only told him
so; that the Gentleman might be satisfied.


Frump. Give me half a Crown then; and take your Hat, and fetch a quart of Ale
for your Mistress out of your Money.


Exeunt. Scena Ultima.
Enter Pett, and Servants. Pett. What, hoe! Daughter, Niece, Betty! where are
these Girls? What, would they offer to go out, and leave the House empty? Go
some of you, and see if you can find them. This idle Justice keeping me so
long, has made me miss him; but I suppose, Mr. Lovewell will at Night inform me
where I may have them. What, have you found them?


Enter Servant. Serve. No, Sir; nor any body, but the old Woman asleep in the
Kitchen Chimney.


Pett. What should become of them, and Mr. Leftwell? There can be no trick put
upon me, forsure they are all together.


Left. within. I Am here, Sir; is the House clear? Is there no danger?


Pett. Prithee, where art, Man?


Left. I am here in some place, I don't know what you call it; but it is where
the cold Meat, and the Kitchin-stuff stands.


Pett. What, are you locked in the Larder?


Left. I, Sir, the Larder; Betty locked me in two hours ago; I thank her, she
saved my life by it; but now I hope you will let me out


Pett. Moses, unlock the door.


Enter Leftwell. Left. O, Father, we have been in such a fright since you went;
you were no sooner gone, but comes Ned Lovewell, and Franck Friendly, with a
full Resolution to kill me, but Betty saved my life. I heard them carry away
your Cousin and your Daughter; whom, I believe verily they will kill for my sake;
and that will be a sad thing: but better them, than I.


Pett. This was a trick, a design; I find it now too late.


Enter to them, Lovewell, Leticia, Friendly, Fickle, Runwell, and Betty. Sir, I
was sending after you; it is well you have brought my Family home again.

Love. With all Humility we beg your Blessing, as your Son and Daughter.


Left. Ned Lovewell, In Faith, I Am glad thou have got her; now you will let me
live at quiet, I hope, and I Will forgive you all the Money I lent you. I Will
ee'ne strike in with Betty.


Pett. What, have you got my Daughter there? If you have an Estate to keep her,
it is well; you shall have none of me: therefore get you out of my sight.


Love. Sir, your Sentence is very severe; will you please but to hear me.


Pett. No, Sir, I have heard and seen too much of you already; but there is your
way out, and you may take your Lady with you, for she shall never come here
again.


Fick. Pray, Mr. Lovewell, before you go, will you hear me; my Uncle cannot
hinder me of my Fortune, part of which is at your Service.


Pett. No, Gossip, it shall never be said, that my Daughter was beholden to you
for her maintenance. Mr. Lovewell, I know you're a Gentleman, and I find you're
Ingenious; but as you have no Estate, if I could have hindered it, you should
not have Married her; but I will be satisfied, since I see it is decreed: I am
imform'd too, you have behaved your self handsomely, and honestly, and in that
believe my Daughter not quite cast away. My Blessing be upon you both; and I Am
apt to believe you will use her well, which I doubt whether Leftwell would have
done. Cousin, I wish you joy; your Portion shall be paid you when you please;
and if you learn to be thrifty, you may be happy.


Love. May Heaven, Sir, reward your kindness with continual joy; and may I live
no longer than that day when I forget to pay you most obedient Service.


Friend. Sir, I hope in a little time to let you see the Fruits of our labor,
and am resolved to make you a great Uncle, as soon as my Friend Lovewell shall
a Grand-sire.


Fick. O, Sir, these liberal promisers are always short pay-masters.


Pett. How do you intend to dispose of your self Mr. Leftwell, after your great
fright?


Left. Why, I desire you'de give me leave to Marry your Maid; a Man may have
her without danger of being Murdered, and I have always had a mind to her.


Pett. Betty, come hither, give me your hand, I Will make the Match; it shall be
done to Morrow Morning.


Betty. Now my Mistress is provided for, I begin to love my self so well, that
I cannot find in my heart to refuse a good Fortune, though it come by a Fool;
whom I believe I can baste into submission.


Aside. Sir, it shall be as you command.

Run. I Am not a whit sorry I have lost my Mistress, since I see she is better
provided; neither will I despair of making my Fortune by her favor, out of
this Ass.


Aside. Enter Faithful. Faith. Gentlemen, and Ladies, your Servant; hearing
that all things and parties are agreed, I Have brought some Friends of mine that
resolve to give you a Song and a Dance.


Friend. Honest Tom, it is kindly done; and they will, I believe, be very
acceptable to all the good Company; but we will Dance our selves, if your
Friends, as you call them, will but strike up. I wish thou had a Mistress
too, to make thy happiness equal ours.


Faith. Mine wants but little on it; for I Am resolved to live as well as you:
now you two are rich, I Will never be poor.


Friend. Thou art ours for ever, Tom.


Love. But he should keep his Hands clean, then.


Faith. What, will not Marriage tame you? Still abusive? I must stop your Mouths
with Music.


Music plays, and Dance. Pett. All excellent good, in faith; very good indeed:
pray, Son, and Nephew, walk in, and lead your Wives to Supper, for it grows
near that time; for Betty's sake, you shall be welcome too, Mr. Leftwell.


Left. Nay, I care not for whose sake it is; so I have but enough, I shall be
very well satisfied. Come, Sweeting.


Friend. If we had been unhappy in the loss of our Mistresses now, I should
have grown almost out of love with Honesty.


Love. O, there is nothing like it.
Let all that would do ill be ruled by me;
For by this President you plainly see
Fate still reserves rewards for Honesty.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
NOw, Gallants, your result; we fain would know
Whether you Judge it fit to live, or no:
This truth we will say, to mitigate its Crime,
It is his first; made in a fortnight's time.
A Critic, for that Reason, ought to give,
If not a Pardon, surely, a Reprieve.
'Twould be high Tyranny for to inveigh,
In cruel terms, against an Infant Play.
But if your Laws all mercy do deny;
He Is sure to have relief in equity:
He appeals thither, as his proper Sphere,
Nor can he be compelled to appear
In any other Court; but could he by persuasions draw
You to be kind in equity and Law;
And see it signed with all your hands, he will be,
Though now but weak, yours in Maturity.

