A Reply to the CASE Of Wapping White-Chappel.
WHereas the Hamblet of Wapping White-Chappel Aledges, that they are not the
Fourth part of the Parish of St. Mary White-Chappel. Answer. About 12 Years
since there was a Computation made, by the Books in the Office of Hearth-Money,
and then it appeared, that there was as many Houses within the lower Hamblet as
in the upper Hamblet, within 35, and it is believed, that now they are above a
Third part.

To their Alegation of the great Increase of the Poor.

The accidental Poor of the upper Hamblet, amounts to above Eight times more
than what they did within a few Years, besides a great number of Pension Poor
and Nurse-Children.

And whereas they Aledge, that they would be Exempted from Repairs of the
Church.

They have all ways Paid toward it, and have of late Years Paid 12 l. or 13 l.
Per Annum, for their Proportion.

And they do Aledge, that they have been at 700 l. Charge in Paving of their
Highways.

The upper Hamblet has expended much more, their Paved Streets being far
Wider, and more Worn, it being a very great Inlet to London; and has now 20
Rood long, and half the breadth of the Street, against the Church and
Churchyard, which was formerly Paved by an Act of Parliament made in 32 Year
of Henry the Eight, which run to Ruein, and has of late Years been Graveled
with the rest of the Highways, to save the Charge of Paving, and now there is
an Order of Sessions to Pave it, which is necessary to be don.

As to the Graveled Highways.

They all lie in the upper Hamblet, and is become very Chargeable, the Repairs
thereof last Year, and not all don that they was Obliged to do, did amount to
226 l. 6 s. 2 d. as appears upon the Surveyors Accounts upon Oath, which was
formerly Repaired for 18 l. Per Annum, they then Digging the Gravel out of the
Common, are now constrained to Buy it at a far greater Distance, and at more
Charge.

All the Gravel Highways lie in the upper Hamblet. More chargable than
formerly.
Also being Obliged by several Acts of Parliament, for the better Repairing of
them, and by an Order made at a General Quarter Sessions, to Repair more
Highways, especially one Highway of Eighty Rood long and upwards, that leads to
the lower Hamblet of Wapping White Chapel, which was never used to be don till
within these Two Years last, all which is a common Benefit to the lower Hamblet
as others.

Whereas the lower Hamblet finding the Highways so Chargeable, did endeavor to
Reduce their Charge last Year, by Nominating their own Surveyors, who for their
Proportion, did Collect upon their own Inhabitants 77 l. 19 s. 2 d. as appeared
by the Surveyors Accoumpt Ratified by the Justices of the Peace for the Tower
Divission.

They also Aledge, That their Hamblet is at great Charge with the Out-lets of
the Common-shore, and still are at great Cost in maintaining them, which
Receive and Carry great part of the Water from the upper Hamblet into the River
of Thames, and the upper Hamblet at no Charge.

The lower Hamblet liable by Act of Parliament to carry the Wtaer off the
Up-lands.
In Answer thereunto, the upper Hamblet Receives no more Benefit than what they
did before the Level was taken out of the River of Thames, and are not liable
to loss, as being the Up-Lands. The Level was Drained by Act of Parliament,
which Act remains among the Records in the Tower, by which Act the whole Level
was Obliged to Maintain the Out-lets, to carry the Water off the Up-Lands,
without which they could not Drain the Level. This has been a Tried Case at
the King's Bench Bar, that the Up-Lands are not liable to any Charge for the
Out-lets.

Also they Aledge, That they should have a Third Part of all Public Charity,
and Parish Rents.

In Answer thereunto, They have more Public Charities than the upper Hamblet,
they Receiving Bountifully from the Trinity-House, and have the Benefit of
Goods taken upon the River, and Forfeited to the Use of the Poor, from neither
of which the upper Hamblet Receive any Advantage; and as for the Rents, they
were most given for the Releif of the Poor in the upper Hamblet, by Persons
Living in the upper Hamblet within these few Years, as several Persons now
Living can Testify, and we have no Benefit of what is given to the Poor of the
lower Hamblet.

In Wapping White-Chappel Bill they are so unfaire there is no manner of
Provision made for Repairs of the Highways, but to free themselves from the
same, and other Parish Charges.

The New Parishes of St. Ann's, and St. James's do continue to Pay their
Proportion toward the Repairs of the Highways, to those Parishes from which
they was taken.

About 12 or 13 Years ago, the lower Hamblet was Presented for not Paying
their Proportion to the Highways to the upper Hamblet, and they removed it to
the King's Bench, and by a Procedendo remanded it back to a Quarter Sessions,
where they Submitted to bare their full Proportion for the Repairs of the said
Highways.

The said Inhabitants therefore hope, That in case it shall seem Reasonable to
this Honorable House, to make the said Hamblet of Wapping a distinct Parish,
yet, That the same shall be no Prejudice to the Parish of White-Chappel. But
that the said Hamblet shall still continue subject to the Repairs of the Church
and Highways of the said Parish, as formerly.


