Pantagruel's Prognostication: Certain, true, and infallible; for the Year
everlasting.

Newly composed for the benefit and instruction of hair-brained and idle
Fellows; by Mr. ALCOFRIBAS, Sewer in chief to PANTAGRUEL.

Set forth long since by that famous well-wisher to the Mathematics, and
Doctor in Physic, FRANCIS RABELAIS.

Done in the way, and by the Tables, of that Astrologer of the First Magnitude,
in the British Hemisphear, ANGLICUS.

And now of late translated out of French by DEMOCRITUS PSEUDOMANTIS.

LONDON*

THE DEDICATION TO Mr William Lilly.
Learned Sir,
I Here present thee with an ancient famous Wit of France, which yet is not
much exalted above the Meridian of thine. But in comparison of whom, all those
Dotards of old; Zoroastres of the Bactrians, and Orpheus of the Thracians, and
Pythagoras of the Samians, and Numa of the Romans, and Democritus of the
Abderites, and Agrippa of the Germans, and Merline of the Welsh, and
Nostradamus of the French, and Roger Bacon, Bungey, Lamb, and I know not how
many more of the English; were but heavy and dull Impostors, He is such a
pleasant Astrologer. And thou resemblest him in this, that although thou art
not altogether so good a Droll, yet every man when he reads thee, has a kind of
tentation to laughter. And yet thou for thy part seem so grave and serious
that thou will easily pardon the Translator of this, having thy self so
usefully rendered his jest into good earnest: and I know not perfectly whether
he were thy Original, or but an imperfect Type, or faint representation of
thee, a greater Prophet to come. Thou have all along his Style, Figures, and
Policy, and all but the profession of Drollery. Thou know as well how to
wrap thy deceits in a cloud of generalities, that they may not lie open to
discovery or reprehension. Do but look upon thy Ephemerides, and thou can
tell us very gravely that some body or other shall die next month, and as plainly
forseest the fall of some great man in August, as we mortals the dropping of a
Pomwater in Autumn. In fine, thy Prophecies are as sure as Death: for Those, as
This, are in themselves certain, but the Time, Place, Manner, and Persons, and
such petty circumstances, altogether uncertain. Thou can, like him, Prophecy
of things past or present: but it will be thy wisdom to be more sparing in
future Contingencies which depend on the will of Man; and though Heaven look
upon us with a thousand Eyes, yet it is thought not to be able to peep into
men's private Clossets, and less into the Cabinet of their Hearts; or to
discover the little Thefts of a silver Spoon or Tankard, but such as thou
imploiest thy Nimble Mercuries to steal. It Is true, There may be an unhappy
guess at these events, but it is a Casting winter or summer, Cross or Pile, on
which side to be mistaken; a mere Handy Dandy, Even or Odd, which is the
right. It Is to venture thy discretion at Passage, or, Most in three throws, in
hope thou may have the good luck to speak truth. Our noble Scholar Lord
Verul. m.
tells thee a measured verity, when he gives the reason these bold predictions
find so much Credit among us. It is because we observe when they hit, and not
when they miss; and their Faults like those of Physicians are hid under
ground, when their Cures live above it. The Candles vowed to the shrine of the
Saint that preserved the Passengers from a storm, are to be seen in their
Chappells, but they who were wrackt in the sea had no such Monuments. Nor is
the same truth more unhandsomly expressed by the wisest Historian our Nation has
brought forth, Sir Walter Rawleigh.
That Prognostications of this kind are as seed scattered in the vast Field of
Time; it is extreme ill hap, if none of them take. Sure I am, Thine are thick
sown, how thin soever they come up. If it were not so, what need our Princes
allow such excessive Pensions to maintain honorable Spies, and receive advices
from abroad, when thou an universal Agent, who lie lieger for the spears,
and art confederate with Heaven, can more cheaply preserve intelligence
above: when every Beam of the Sun is a letter, and each Mote in it a Character
for thee to uncypher and read over all the dispatches of Fate. And hence I
believe arises the angry contest between thee, and the Ignorant saucy Divines,
who pretend to understand a Heaven above Thine. They take a bare word, which
some hold to be but a weak security, and believe upon Parole: but thou will
have Gods hand and deed sealed, and delivered to thy Faith in a legible and
shining Text. There are that take thee to be not only a discoverer, but a cause
of those Effects thou fortellest. As the young Nostradamus set the City of
Pouslin on fire which he Prophesied should be burnt. And Cardan that bespake
the time of his own death, would die a volunteer at that time to keep his word.
Yet some Malicious persons suspect thee to deal not so much in Galileus his
Tubes, as thy Magical looking glass (thy Speculum Trinitatis upon Earth)
wherein to take the height of a match between two stars when they shall meet
in Cottu, and enter into the sign of Scorpio. Others take thee to be a right
Courtier of Heaven that ever keep in with the Lord Ascendant. If Saturn be
deposed, quit him for a leaden melancholy Planet, and turn thee to Jupiter in
his stead. Truly it is not unbecomming, that he who studies the measure of
Time, should serve it. As for the Country; it contends for thee as the seven
Cities for thy fellow Poet Homer. Essex pretends to thee by reason the Sun, thy
Prince, rises from thence. And Surrey, because though it be barren and dry (as
thy language) yet it is mistress of a clear Air, such as that of Assyria
where thy Brethren the Chaldeans first practiced. And in Middlesex, though most
of the Native Gentlemen have somewhat of the incivility and rudeness of
Clownes, and the eminent Clownes somewhat of the riches and pride of the
Gentlemen; yet both are content and humble themselves, and purchase thee at the
dear expense of a Teston. Only they complain thou art too negligent of the
serious affairs of thy lovers, and would read thee oftener then they carry
their Bible to Church, If thou would quit this busy trade of Policy, which
they think not so proper, and deal a little more in their beloved Husbandry.
They look upon every page of the Month to find, Cloudy Dark, somewhat Cold,
Thunder-like, Inclining to rain, or, what like an Oracle never fails, Variable
wether. They expect to hear from thee under what Sign it is safest to cut
their Cocks or their Pigs, when to plough or sow, when to plant or graft Trees
or inoculate their Vines, with the likeliest hope of fruit. They itch to be
instructed when are the Quarterly or Monthly Terms; what is the wide
difference betwixt St. Lucies might, and St. Barnabyes, and the effects of a
showry St. Swethins, or a shiny Candlemas. When a dear year is a coming, for
Sordido to hoard up his Corn. And the Epicure longs to know from thee when
Oysters are fullest and fattest; and the very minute and second, when Venson or
Lobsters go out of season. If thou did but intertaine them with these
useful discourses they swear to do nothing without thee. Not to eat or drink
without thy license. Not to go to stool unless Mercury be Retrograde. Nor to
a Conventicle but by star light. Nor to Court without enquiry, if Jupiter be
stirring. The goodwif would not sow her Leeks or Onyons but under an Egyptian
constellation: Nor keep a milch Cow without thy Heavenly Bull. Nor expect her
butter to come, unless by thy charming. Their Petitions seem to me very
reasonable: to which they add, It would do well if thou leave not out the
Effigies of the Man that is stabd through all the twelve Signs, but place it
in the room of thy Picture, and such wholesome advices in rhyme, as, Flee Bathes
and Venery, Drink wine but sparingly, and the like, These were atcheivements
fit for thy Learned adventures. These things they understand, and (I am afraid)
thy self does No more. But they are persuaded, that to cast the Nativity-water
of a Nation, and prescribe the Phlebotomy of War, or purging of a Parliament,
City, or Army is but to be a Celestial Quack, a fortune tellers at large, and a
State-Mountebanck. To conclude, I should forget the Nature of an Almanac, did
I not a little fringe it over with verses: And therefore I presume herewithall
to send you an ancient Prophesy made in Henry the 8 his time, by a Poet Laureat
John Skeleton; who, though he were as merry a Madcap as the Doctor, and his
verses appear like that play at Crambo; and that he run a poor rhyme out of
breath till it pant and expire, or hurry it on with such a strong gale, til it
touch upon the Coast of Nonsense; yet perhaps between his fits of talking idly,
he has some lucid Intervalls of shrewd and poinant expressions. Read him here
as a Prediction of our Rablais in Type, but in Truth of thee, to whom all the
world subscribes, as I do my self,

Thine Idolater, as thou art the Stars, Democritus Pseudomantis.

Skeleton upon Rabelais.
O William Lilly,
Thou Conqueror Billy,
So subtle and wily,
That art not so silly
As the Fool of a Filly,
To take a cold Gelly
On the ground that we see lie.
For a grave fixed Star,
That shines from afar,
And moves regular;
Yet asquint does appear,
And to steal a look fear,
If William be near.
He knows when they join
In Quartile or Trine,
Or in the sixth Line.
And in every Mine
On Will they do shine.
He Is their Chaplain in fine,
And household Divine.
Sans prair's, Fumes, or Unctions,
Or magique injunctions,
That cause our compunctions,
For the best of his functions
Is to pimp for Conjunctions.
He knows every season
H'as a politic reason,
Why the Beans or the Peason
Be cheap or be geason.
He knows to diseise one
Prince, fatter to grease one,
For the Stars speak no treason.
The Planets all seven,
Houses one and eleven,
To him rent-free are given.
Plots on earth he makes even,
And puts 'em upon heaven.
For better a great deal
Sage Thales might tell
The Stars in the Well,
When musing he fell,
Then the pit deep as Hell,
By the Stars to reveal.
To him the Swedes feign
To be bound for his pain;
And to bind him again
They send a gold-chain.
Then woe be to Spain,
If Will say, No rain.
So I do not entrench man,
To lend thee this Frenchman:
He once loved a Wenchman
Well as any oth'Benchman.
Then come, do not flinch man,
And bate not an inch man.
For though a Physician,
He was no Magitian,
But a Mathematician
That made inquisition
Of Natures condition.
In a doubtful position.
And thou art much such a one.
Him well you may trust,
He Is a Troth-teller just;
And never for his lust
Found Venus combust.
Nor to leap at a crust
Th'Ascendant untrust.
Nor swore he by Ods digger,
E're thought to grow bigger
By casting a Figure,
Or lying in leagure
Saw the Stars dance a jig here.
But this a fair bliss is,
A cunning man guesses,
As sage as Ulysses,
What the Serpent hisses,
Or whom Virgo kisses,
Or when the Moon pisses.
You cast the skie's water,
And find where they faulter;
Or else you but palter.
But Jack of Horologers
Ape of Amphibologers,
And friend of Philologers,
And Bat of Tautologers,
Buffone of Bomolochers,
And cream of Chronologers,
Whom all Etymologers
Call the Flower of Astrologers.
Per me Johannem Skeltonum, Poetam Laureatum.

To the courteous READER, Heal^h and Peace in JESUS CHRIST.
TAking into Consideration the infinite abuses, that are occasioned by a number
of Louvain Prognostications, made over a glass of wine; I have here now
Calculated the most certain and true One that ever was seen, as Experience
will demonstrate to you.

For without doubt, considering that which the Royal Prophet says (in the
fifth Psalm) Thou shall destroy all them that speak lies; It Is no small sin to
lie knowingly, and abuse the poor world that is curious and inquisitive after
News, as the French nation have been in all ages, as Casar writes in his
Commentaries, and John de Gravot in his Gallick Mythology, and which we
likewise see every day in France, where the first discourse that is held to
people, newly arrived, is, what news? Do you know nothing that is New? what is
the talk? what do they discourse of abroad? And so earnest and attentive they
are, that they oftentimes are angry which those that come from other Countries,
and strange places, without bringing their budget full of News, calling them
Fools and Idiots.

So that, As they are ready to enquire News, they do likewise easily believe
what is told them. Were it not a good deed to entertain some persons (worthy
of belief) and place them at the Entrance of the Country, only to examine the
News that is brought, whether it be true or no? Yes, Certainly. And thus did
my Good Master Pantagruel throughout the Countries of Vtopia and Dipsodia. And
so successful it has been to him, and his territories have so prospered,
that they have more Wine then they know how to drink; and they are feign to
throw it away, if good Drinkers and Merry boys come not from other places to
help them. Being desirous then to satisfy the Curiosity of all good fellows,
I have rounded all the heavens, Calculated the squares of the Moon, picked out
and discovered all that the Astrophils, Hypernephelists, Anemophylaces,
Uranopetes, and Obrophores ever thought of, and conferred with Empedocles
concerning it, who remembers himself to you. And all the Tu Autems I have here
digested into a few Chapters; assuring you that I speak nothing of it but what
I think, and think nothing of it but what is. And nothing else of it is true,
but what you will now read.

That which shall be said over and above, shall in Gross pass the strainer
pesle mesle: And peradventure it shall come to pass, and peradventure never.
Of one thing I give you notice, that if you do not believe all, you will do me a
very great shroud turn; for which, either here or else where you shall be most
grievously punished; and the Bulls Pisle shall not be spared upon your
shoulders. And suck in the air as long as you will, like Oysters: for
certainly, There shall be some of you well warmed, if the Rakefire does not
fall asleep. Well, wipe your noses, little ones; and, you old dotards, mount
your Spectacles, and weigh these words in the balance of the Sanctuary.

Of the Golden Number, Non Dicitur. I find none this year, for all the
Calculation I have made: Lets go forward (verte Folium).
Pantagruel's Prognostication;
Certain, true, and infallible; for the year Everlasting.
CHAP. I.
Of the Government and Sovereignty of this Year.
WHat ever those foolish Astrologers of Louvain, Norremberg, (...), and Lions
tell you; believe, That there will be no other Governor of the universal
world this year but God the Creator, who by his Divine word governs and orders
every thing, by whom all things are maintained in their nature, propriety, and
Condition, and without whose Government and power all things would in a Moment
be reduced to nothing, as out of nothing they were by him made and brought to
what they now are: for from him comes, in him is, and by him is perfected,
all beings, and all good, all life, and Motions, as says the Evangelicall
Trumpet, My Lord Saint Paul, Romans the 11. The Governor then of this year and
all others according to our true opinion will be the most powerful God, and
Saturn, Mars, Jupiter, nor other Planet, no not the Angels, Saints, nor Men,
nor Devils, shall have any power, energy, or influence whatsoever, if God of
his good pleasure does not bestow it upon them. As A^^cen says, The second
causes have not influence in any action, unless they receive it from the first
cause. Does not the good little man speak truth?

CHAP. II.
Of the Eclipses this year.
THere shall be so many Eclipses of the Sun and Moon this year, that I am
afraid (not without reason) that our purses will suffer Emptiness, and our
senses Perturbation; Saturn shall be Retrograde, Venus Direct, Mercury
Inconstant; and a number of other Planets shall not go as you would have them.
For this reason therefore, Crabs shall go sidewayes, and Rope-makers backwards,
the Joyn-stools shall get up upon the forms, The Spits upon the Andirons, And
Capps upon Hatts: Many Men's bollocks will hang down for want of a pouch: Fleas
for the most part will be black: The Bacon in Lent shall run away from the
Pease, The Belly shall go foremost, the briech shall sit down first: The Bean
shall not be found in the Cake on twelfth Night: The Ace will not be seen at
flush: The Dice shall not please although they be flattered, And the Chance one
wishes for, shall seldom come: in many places the beasts shall speak:
Shrovetide shall get his Process: One part of the World shall disguise
themselves to cozen the other, and run about the Streets like fools and mad
Men. Never was there such disorder seen in Nature, and above twentyseaven Verbs
shall be made irregular, if Priscian keep them not short. If God does not help
us, we shall have a great deal of business, but against the hair: If he be
for us, nothing can do us hurt, as says the Divine Astrologer that was ravished
into Heaven. Romans 8. 31. Si Deus pro Nobis, quis contra Nos? Nemo, Domine: for
He is too good and too powerful: Let us here bless his Holy Name for it.

CHAP. III.
Of Diseases this year.
THis year, the Blind shall see but very little, the Deaf shall hear but ill,
the Dumb shall not speak much, the Rich shall be a little better then the poor,
and those that are well better then those that are sick. Many Sheep, Beevs,
Hoggs, Geese, Hens, and Ducks shall dye. And there shall not be so cruel a
Mortality among the Monkeys and Dromedaries. Old Age shall be this year
incurable by reason of the years past. Those that have a Pleurisy shall be
troubled with great pain in their sides, They that are troubled with a
looseness shall go often to the Close-stool. The Catharrs this year shall fall
from the brain into the lower parts. Sore eyes shall be very hurtful to the
sight. Ears shall be short, and more rare in Gascony then usual; and a very
horrible Malign, troublesome, and scurvey disease shall reign this year,
almost universally, which shall make the World very much wonder, and many shall
not know which way to turn themselves. And oftentimes they shall raveningly
compose, and Syllogise upon the Philosophers Stone, and of Midas his Ears. I
tremble for fear when I think on it, for 'twill (I say) be Epidemical, (and
Averoes calls it VII. Colligent) want of Money: And by reason of the Comet last
year and the Retrogradation of Saturn, a great-Rogue shall dye in the Hospital
all pocky and scabby, at whose Death there shall be a horrible sedition between
the Cats and the Rats, between the Hounds and the Hares, between the Hauks and
the Partridges, between the Monks and the Eggs.

CHAP. IV.
Of Fruits, and the Riches that we receive from the Earth.
I Find by Albumazars computation, in the book of the great Conjunction, and
elsewhere, that this year shall be very fertile, and there shall be plenty of all
things with those that have wherewithal; but the Hops of Picardie will be
somewhat afraid of the Cold. Oats shall do Horses a great deal of good: there
shall not be much more bacon then there are hoggs, by Reason of prices
Ascendant; it shall be a great year of Snailes. Mercury does a little threaten
the Parsely, but it shall be notvvithstanding at reasonable rates. Marigolds
and Honey-suckles shall grow more then usually, and there will be abundance
of Choakey pears. Corn, Grapes, all sorts of fruits, Pease, Beans, and all
manner of Roots was never seen in such abundance, if poor peoples prayers
are heard.

CHAP. V.
Of the conditions of some People.
It Is the greatest folly in the world to think there are stars for Kings,
Popes, and great Persons, more then for poor and ordinary people: As if new
stars had been created since the Deluge; or of Romulus, or Pharamon at the new
creation of Kings. It Is that which Triboulet nor Catlette will not say, who
were nevertheless Persons of High knowledge and great Renown and perhaps in
Noah's Ark, this Triboulet was of the Race of the Kings of Castile; and
Caillete of the blood of Priam. But this error proceeds only from the want of
the true Catholic faith. Granting it then for certain that the Stars care
as little for Kings as for Beggars, for Rich folks as for Poor, I leave it to
other foolish Prognosticators to speak of Kings and wealthy persons and speak
of those of a low condition. And first of those that are under Saturn: as,
people unprovided of Money, Jealous, Dotards, Evil-thinkers, Suspicious
persons, Mole-catchers, Usurers, Farmers, Cobblers, Tanners, Tylers,
Bellfounders, Compounders of Debts, Botchers, Melancholy people, shall not have
this year all that they would have; they shall study much how to get the holy
Cross, they shall not throw their Bacon to the Dogs, and they shall often
Scratch where it does not Itch.

Those that are under Jupiter, as Hypocrites, dissemblers, Buskin-makers,
Pardon-sellers, Attorneys, Writingmasters, Scriveners, Bull-makers, Dispatchers
of the Popes Bulls, Lawyers, Capuchins, Monks, Hermits, Bigots, Santons,
hairy-handed wrynecked fellows, blotters of paper, Braggadoshoes, wearers of
long hair, Clarks of the Prison, Maker of Friars hoods, Bed-sellers, Blurrers
of Parchment, Notaryes, Counterfeits, Conveyancers, shall behave themselves
according to the money they have. And so many Church men shall dye, that 'twill
be hard to find Parsons to confer benefices upon; insomuch that many shall
enjoy two, three, four, and more. Hypocritical zeal will make a great tempest
with its ancient accustomed Noise, since the World is grown so very bad, and is
now but little foolish, as says Avenzagel.

Under Mars, as Hang-men, Murderers, Free-booters, Rogues, Bailiffs,
Recorders, Watchmen, Dead-payers, Tooth-drawers, Cut-purses, Butchers,
Coyners, Physicians, Nigars, Renegadoes, Atheists, and Blasphemers, sellers of
Matches, Boutefeux, Chimneysweepers, Churls, Colliers, Alchymists, Tinkers,
Cooks, Pedlers, Almsgatherers, Lantern-makers, Boores, shall play many notable
tricks this year: but some of them shall be very subject to be bastonadoed. One
of the forenamed shall this year be made Bishop of the Country, giving his
benediction with his feet to the Passengers.

Under Sol, as Drinkers, Fiery-faces, Gorbellyes, Brewers, Hay-makers, Porters,
Mowers, Thatchers, Packers, Shepherds, Cow-keepers, Hog-keepers, Bird-keepers,
Gardeners, Grangers Hedgers, Beggars, Cap-clensers, Stocking menders, Lazy
Rogues, Smell feasts all generally wearing their shirts tied upon their backs,
shall be healthful, and merry; and when they are invited to a Wedding shall
not have the Gout in their teeth.

Under Venus, as Whorers, Bawdes, Wenchers, Buggerers, Gallants, Frenchified
fellows, cankered boys, Rorers, Pimps, Beggarly Sluts, Chamber-maids of Inns.
Nomina Mulierum desinentia in sses ut Landresses, Tavernesses, Hostesses,
Starchers, Washers, Brokers, shall be in esteem this year. But the Sun entering
into Cancer and other Signs, they must have a care of the Pox, Gonorrhea, C --
botches, and --. The Nuns shall hardly conceive without virile Operation, very
few Maids shall have Milk in their breasts.

Under Mercury, as Cheaters, Cozeners, Deceivers, Mountebanks, Thieves, Millers,
Street-walkers, Pick-locks, Filchers, Keepers, Rimers, Charletans, Juglers,
Pedants, Anagrammatists, a Paper-maker, Card-sellers, Pirates. They would seem
oftentimes to be more Merry than they are, sometime they will put their hand in
their Pocket; when there is nothing in it; and shall be very subject to become
bankrouts, if they find not more money in their purses, then they have
occasion of.

Under the Moon as Almanac Letters, Huntsmen, Faulkners, Posts, Salters,
Lunaticks, Fools, Shallow-brains, Obstinates, Fantastical people, Carriers,
Horscoursers, Lacquies, Brokers, Tennisplayers, Glaziers, Light horsemen,
Ferry-men, Seamen, Grooms, shall not this year have many Stops. Nevertheless
there shall not many swagbellied Swissers go to Saint Hiaccho, as there did in
the year 524. Many Pilgrims shall come down the Mountains of Savoy and
Avergne; but Sagittarius threatens them with Chilblaines at their heels.

CHAP. VI.
Of the condition of some Countries.
THe noble Kingdom of France shall triumph and prosper this year in all
manner of Pleasure and delights, insomuch that strange Nations will willingly
resort thither: little delights and Passe-times will be acted there, in which
every one will take pleasure. There was never more wines seen nor more
delicate: great quantity of Raddishes in Lymosin, store of Chesnutts in
Perigard and Dauphine, Many Olives in Languedoc, great store of sand in Olone:
Much fish in the sea, Many stars in the sky, Much salt in Porridge: Plants,
Corn, Pease, Fruit, Herbs, Roots, in fields. No plague, No war, No trouble.
Good store of Poverty, Great store of Care, Much melancholy. And those old
double Ducats, Rose Nobles, Angelots, Royalls, and Sheep with the long wool,
will come in fashion again, with plenty of Seraphs and Crowns of the Sun.
Nevertheless about the middle of the Summer, the coming of some black fleas,
and corn mites, is to be feared, -- adeo nihil est ex omni part beatum; but
they must be moderated by evening collations, A take over night a medicine for
the fleas. Italy, Romagnia, Naples, Sicily, shall remain where they were the
last year. They shall dream soundly about the end of Lent, and sometimes shall
talk idly, when it is toward Noon.

Germany, Swisserland, Saxony, Strasbourg etc, shall thrive if they do'nt
break. The Pardon sellers ought to dread them. And this year many
Anniversaries shall not be founded.

Spain, Castile, Portugal, Arragon, shall be very subject to sudden
alterations: and the young as the old, shall be very much afraid to dye; and
therefore shall keep themselves warm, and often tell their Dollars if they
have any.

England, Scotland, the Easterlings, shall be but bad Pantagruelists. Wine
would be as wholesome for them as Beer, provided 'twere good and delicate. At
all tables their hopes shall be in an after Game. Saint Traignant of Scotland
shall do diverse and sundry miracls; but he shall see never the better, for all
the Candles that are offered to him. If Aries lose not his horns, the
Moscovites, Indians, Persians and Troglodites shall be often troubled with the
bloody flux, because they will not be gulled by the Romanists. By reason of the
dance of ascendant Sagittarins, Bohemians, Jews, Egyptians, will not this year
be reduced into that condition they expect. Venus threatens them cruelly with
the Kings evil in the throat: but they shall yield to the will of the King of
Butterflyes.

Escargots, Sarabogites, Canquemares, Cannibals, shall be much troubled with
hors-flies, and not much inclined to leachery, unless Guaicum be in Request.
Austria, Hungary, Turkey, by my faith, my good fellows, I know not how 'twill
be with them; and very little do I care, considering the brave entry of the
Sun into Capricorn; And if you know any more, say nothing of it, but stay
till the lame Post comes.

CHAP. VII.
Of the four Seasons of the Year: and first of the Spring.
IN all this year, there shall be but one Moon, Neither shall it be a new one.
You blades, that do not believe in God are very sorry for it. You that
persecute his holy and divine word together with those that maintain and stand
for it; But go hang your selves, never shall there be other Moon, than that
which God created at the beginning of the World; and which by the power of his
aforesaid sacred word was placed in the great firmament to light and guide
mankind by night. But hold, I will not from hence infer that she does not
show greater or lesser light to the people upon earth, according as she is near
or far off the Sun: for why, for as much as etc. Besides, don't pray to God
to keep her from the wolves, for they shall not so much as touch with her this
year I assure you. Oh! to our purpose. You shall see this season more flowers
by half than in all the other three, and he shall not be thought a fool that
in this season makes his provision of money rather then of cobwebs all the year
after. The Griffons and Chestnuts of the Mountains of Savoy, Dauphine,
Hyperboreans, that have perpetual Snows shall be disappointed this season; and
there shall be none, according to the opinion of Avicen, who says, that it is
then Spring when the Snow falls from the Mountains. Believe this, Porter. In
my time, they thought it winter when the Sun entered into the first degree of
Aries. If they reckon otherwise now, I am satisfied, and will hold my tongue.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Summer.
IN Summer, I know not what winds will be abroad, but I know that 'twill be hot
weather, and the southerly wind will reign. Nevertheless if it should happen
otherwise, we must not blaspheme God, for he is wiser then we are, and knows
better what is necessary for us then we our selves. Yeas, I Will assure you, upon
my honor, what ever Haly and his Disciples have said of it, You Will do well to
be Merry and drink in Fresco, although some have said that there is nothing
more contrary to thirst. And I likewise believe it, Contraria contrariis
curantur.

CHAP. IX.
Of Autumn.
IN Autumn, will be the vintage, or before, or after; it is all one to me so we
have drink enough. Paper will now be in season, for some that think only to
fart will bravely beshite themselves; Them and those that have vowed to fast,
till the stars appear in the sky, may now by my Grant and dispensation feed
abundantly; and in troth, they have stayed long enough. For I tell you they
have been fast enough there, this 16 thousand and I know not how many more
days ago. Hope not henceforward to catch Larks when the sky falls, for upon
my honor it shall not fall in your days. Hypocrites, Zelots, Pardonsellers,
Begging friars, and such kind of Counterfeit Companions, shall come out of
their holes; every one have a care of himself that will: beware likewise of
Arrests when you eat Fish, and from poison God keep you.

CHAP. X.
Of Winter.
ACcording to my little understanding, those will have no great wit that in
winter sell their furrs to buy wood; for the Ancients did not so, as Avenzouart
witnesses. Be not melancholy if it rain, you will have the less dust upon the
roades. Keep your selves warm, beware of Catarrhs and Colds; Drink of the
best, whilst the worst mends, and henceforward shite no more in Bed. O ho,
Poultry do you go so high to roost?

End of the Pantagrueline Prognostication.
FINIS.

