THE REPRESENTATION, PROPOSITIONS, AND PROTESTATION Of diverse MINISTERS, ELDERS
AND PROFESSORS, For themselves, and in name of many others well-affected
Ministers, Elders, and People in SCOTLAND.

PRESENTED By the Lord WARESTON, Mr. ANDREW CANT, Mr. JOHN LIVINGSTON, Mr.
SAMUEL RUTHERFORD, and diverse others;

To the Ministers and Elders met at EDINBURGH July 21.

1652.

Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler. 1652.

Unto the Reverend the Ministers and Elders met at Edinburgh July 21. 1652.
It is represented by the Ministers, Elders, and Professors under subscribing
for them selves, and in the name of many others well-affected Ministers, Elders
and People.
It is matter of unspeakable grief and sorrow, to consider how great
Indignation the Lord has let forth against us, heaping wrath upon wrath, and
making one Judgment to follow another; as the waves of the Sea, and for the
most part, the fruits thereof through the Land, have bin no other then further
departing from his ways, and dividing one from another in judgment and
affection. Our breach is wide as the Sea, and who can heal it? Spiritual
Judgments especially are multiplied upon us, Temptations abound, and Divine
Influences are restrained He has poured upon us the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle, and it has set us on fire round about, yet we knew it
not, and it burns us, yet we lay it not to heart. There is no returning to
the Lord, his hand is stretched out still; and is there not great cause to
fear, lest the glory of the Lord should depart from amongst us? It were good
for us, if we could (with Jerusalem) remember all our desirable things which
we had in the days of old, and compare them with the days of our misery and
affiction. If we look back to that which we have already attained of the Work
of Reformation (notwithstanding our short coming in the power and practice of
godliness) what purity was there of worship? What soundness of Doctrine?
Unity of faithful Pastors? order and authority of Assemblies? What endeavors
for promoving the power of godliness? for purging of the Ministry,
Judicatories and Armies? and for employing such in places of power and trust,
as were of constant integrity and good affection to the Cause, and of
blameless conversation. And again, if we consider how in place of these,
within these two years, have succeeded for unity, division, for order,
confusion, for purity of worship, outward contempt; for the power of
godliness, Atheism and profaneness; for purging of the Ministry,
Judicatories and Armies, sinful mixtures; for zeal, lukewarmnesse and
tolleration. It is too palpable, that we are far gone on in the way of
declining, having lost much of that which we had attained, and that which
remains being ready to die. If we look before us, it seems now there is a wide
door open for conjunction with all parties, in case of straits and necessities.
How subtle are the devices of Satan, to make use of the same bad principle,
for contrary ends, and may we not make use of what was said in former times, to
the declining children of this Church? How will posterity blame us that we have
not resisted the beginnings of evils? Shall not their hearts mourn, when they
shall behold so fair a Fabric, so dearly conquest, so firmly grounded, to be
so pitifully ruined be their fathers? If we look inward to our own hearts,
whether we have had most of the Lords Spirit with us in the old ways, or the
late; and whether our spirits were then more with the Lord, or now? It is easy
to judge: If we look about us on every hand, what hardening is there of
Adversaries of all sorts? what offense given to the weak, who see changes of
parties, and fear change of Principles and Interests, when they perceive
conjunction with those against whom the Covenant was made, and deserting of
these for whom it was made; and see men's interests preferred to the Lords;
sinful mixtures make way for sinful separations, and the preferring of man's
interest to Gods, makes our Adversaries to be exalted over us. Thus he writes
our sin upon our judgment; and because we trusted his Interests to his
Adversaries, therefore he gives up our interests to the power of our
Adversaries; and Judgment has entered by the door, which Policy had locked
fastest. It was the complaint of the non-Conformists of old, that Conformity
was preferred to the duties of the first and second Table; for if a Minister
were conform, gross faults were passed over in silence; and if he were not
conform, though an able, painful, and gracious Pastor, and blameless in his
conversation yet he was the object of persecution. This was held by the
non-Conformists, a sure sign of defection in the Church: We wish there were
nothing like this amongst us, and that insufficient and scandalous Ministers,
made not a Sanctuary of the Public Resolutions. What Acts are made against
Expectants, Students, and Profedors, which are not of this judgment, we desire
may be remembered; And we have it to regrate, That too many make it their
practice upon this ground, to debar such as would be useful in the Lords
Vineyard. How great influence this has also had, and may farther have in all
Elections, we need not mention. How much precious time have the public
resolutions caused to be spent in debates, and thereby many diversions from
most necessary duties, etc. is matter of great stumbling, both to the weak, and
to strangers which are amongst us, that gross ignorance and scandals are not
only to be found in Professors uncensured, but also amongst Elders; and that
many Ministers are not only careless to instruct the ignorant, and to
endeavor, that scandals may be censured, but some are openly given to the same
themselves, and not only no course taken to censure them, but some who have
been justly censured for profaneness and malignancie, are re admitted; and
unqualified Expectants in some places, put in the Ministry. The approbation of
the public Resolutions being made a main part of qualification. We hope it
will be easily acknowledged on all hands, that there has been a great
backsliding of heart from the Lord; for the which we are filled with our own
ways; We trust also that there be few that will deny, that the Lords quarrel
against us is for his broken Covenant; and therefore it is, that he has
threatened against us, as against Israel, not only that we shall not be a
Kingdom, but that we shall not be a Nation, nor a Church, but put away by a
Bill of divorce. It is high-time for us then, to search and try our ways, and
turn again to the Lord. Let us examine by what way we have departed from him,
that by the same steps we may return, wherein the Land has declined from their
sworn Covenant with the Lord, and known principles, before this ruin came upon
us; and wherein they have sithence further departed, by staying upon those that
smote them, and forsaking the Lord, the Covenanted God of this Nation. It was
unto us no small matter of grief and trouble, that the testimonies given the
last; year against the Public Resolutions of the Commission of the General!
Assembly 1650 and against the Meeting at S. Andrews and Dundee, and their
proceedings, was looked upon by many (of whom we desire to judge charitably) as
not proceeding from principles of conscience, but as a Compliance with the
Invaders of the Land. Blessed be the Lord our God, who knowing our Innocence
and integrity, has made that cloud of reproach so clear to evanish, as we
trust we are now freed from that calumny, in the judgments and consciences of
all judicious and charitable men. There is another advantage on your path, that
you are now free from the temptations; which reduced many to act and co^cur^e
in these Resolutions for necessity was mainly pretended for what was done;
which now, these temptations being removed, can have no place for a ground, to
renew and react the same proceedings. We may also add, that time has fully
discovered, and clearly determined, how ^^^^ground there was on our (...) to
oppose the ^^^^itting of these men, concerning whom the contest was the last
year, into places of power and trust over the Work and People of God. An
Overture was made to us at our Meeting in Winter last, That we would desist
from making use of any power derived from the General Assembly 1650. And we
conce^ved we had ground to expect on the other hand, that no use should have
been made of any power, by virtue of the Meeting at S. Andrews and Dundee. And
that in the mean time, endeavor should have been used for agreement, which was
assayed by us once, and again; but the advantages of the time having settled on
another quarter then that season wherein the Overture was made, did seem to
promise to such who did not well consider principles and parties. It is now
fallen out other wise, and by power from them, without any agreement you are
now conveened. In the Meeting at S. Andrews, it was earnestly desi^ed, that
there might have been an Adjournment, which through the Lords blessing might
have prevented much of the division that has since fallen out, and the
differences that were amongst us, might have been more easily removed. The
breach is now wider, and only the strong hand of the Lord can help us. If you
should now again proceed to assume unto your selves the power, and constitute
your selves into a General Assembly, we look upon it as a very great
obstruction in the way of our agreement, and (as that which for ought we can
yet see) may highten the difference: The Lord is calling to Holiness, and to
return to the Work of Reformation, and purging the Church according to the Word
of God, and approven rules of this Kirk, and not to confirm the last years
proceedings, which were the chief ground of our Divisions It is a thing beyond
all question in reason, that all doubts and objections proponed, concerning the
constitution of an Assembly, ought to proceed the constitution, and not to
follow after it. When the question is determined, sad experience may teach us,
from former times, what influence an Assembly has according to its
constitution, right or wrong; for which cause, the General Assembly 1639.
(...) determine the keeping and authorizing corrupt General Assemblies, to be
one of the chief causes of the many evils which had befallen this Church in
time of defection. We do therefore with all tenderness and due respect,
earnestly beseech, That you will ^^^eo^sly consider, how inconvenient and
unwarrantable it is for you, to constitute your selves into a General
Assembly, and to assume the Power and Authority thereof, not only when the
Authority by which you are conveened, is so much questioned, and such
prelimitations are upon the elections of Commissioners; but when you also want
the concurrence of so many Presbyteries, who are not clear in their consciences
to concur with you. And when you want the concurrence of Commissioners from
burrows, who by reason of their present in capacity, cannot send Commissioners
to sit in any Assembly. And when the far greater part of Commissions from
Presbytries, and Universities are questioned and contraverted, by Dissents and
Protestations in their meetings for Election; and some by reason of usurpation
of them who are no Presbyteries: So that we know not how few can be admitted
unquestioned Members; and besides we beseech you, consider how great a snare
your former actings which were not to Edification, have been to some people to
tempt them to the way of separation, and to the shaking of the Government of
this Church, from which as we desire to be kept free as from a course highly
displeasing to God, and impedimentall to Reformation: So we desire you may not
tempt them further, and lay new snares in the way of any, by your not right
using of so precious an Ordinance of Christ, as are the Assemblies of this
Church Upon these, and other grounds, we are constrained to make this
Application to you, That without assuming any such power unto your selves, you
would be pleased to appoint a Conference with us, wherein we may (with the
Lords Assistance.) search out the causes of his wrath against us, and freely
and friendly debate concerning our Differences, and propone Overtures, and
Remedies for removing both the one and the other: In order thereunto, we offer
these Propositions herewith communicated, for the Subject of our Conference; it
being our earnest desire, that an agreement being made, we may through the
Lords blessing, have a free, and lawful well constituted General Assembly.
And now having laid these our thoughts and desires before you, we do solemnly
obtest you by the Meekness, and Gentlesse of Christ, by his Consolations, and
the comfort of his Love, and by the fellowship of the Spirit: If there be any
bowels and mercies, by the affection which you bear to the Word of Truth, to
the Peace and Order of this Church, to the Lords precious Ordinances, and to
his people in this generation, and to the posterity, that you will take these
things into your serious consideration, and hearken to our Request. Who knows
but the Lord may have compassion on our condition, and bring the blind by a
way they know not, lead them in paths they have not known, make darkness light
before us, and crooked things straight? Even do all these things unto us, and
not forsake us.

Propositions offered to the meeting of Ministers, and others, At Edinb. July
the 21. 1652.
WHereas we, and many of the Godly in the Land, have been really scandalized,
and stumbled at the late Acts, and proceedings relating to public resolutions,
conceiving the same in the nature and intention of the Work, to have obstructed
and shaken the Work of Reformation (although we think honorably of diverse
Godly and learned men, who have been concurring in the same, and dare not judge
their intentions to be such as we think their work has been, and do allow
charity to others). Therefore for satisfaction of our Consciences, and for the
securing the Work of Reformation, for purging the Church, and for promoving the
power of Godliness, and for removing of these sad differences, and for
attaining and preserving a good understanding, We desire,

I. That they give evidence, and assurance that they approve of, and will
adhere unto, our Covenants, and the solemn Public Confession of sins, and
engagement to Duties, and all the Acts of the uncontraversed Assemblies of this
Church, for advancing the work of Reformation, in the Litterall and Genuine
sense and meaning thereof: And that in dispensing of the Ordinances, censuring
of scandalous persons, receiving of Penitents, trying, admitting, removing, and
deposing of Church officers, they walk according to the same.

II. That it may be laid seriously to heart before the Lord, how after such a
defection, and so sad judgments for it, the Lord may be restored to his
Honor, the Land to his Favor, and the like defection prevented in time coming.

III. That as we are ready in our station to follow all religious and
conscionable means and overtures for securing, and guarding of the Cause and
Work of God, against Error, Heresy, and Schism, on the one hand: So they
would hold out to us a solid Way for securing the same, against dangers from
Malignancie on the other. And, we desire to know what shall be the Characters in
time coming by which Malignants may be known, and judged.

IV. That a real and effectual course be taken, according to the established
Rule of this Kirk, for purging out, and holding out all such from being Church
Officers as have not the positive qualifications required in the Word of God,
and Acts of this Kirk; particularly, that Ministers deposed by lawful
Assemblies, who have intruded themselves, or have been unwarnantably restored
by Synods, and Presbyteries to their charges, contrary to the Form, and Order
prescribed in the Acts of Assemblies, be removed, and condign censures
inflicted, and that sufficient provision be made for preventing the like in
time coming.

V. That effectual means be fallen upon, and followed for censuring of all
Scandals, and scandalous persons, and casting out of these who shall be found
grossly, and obstinately scandalous, or ignorant, after they are made
inexcusable by sufficient means, and pains taken for their instructing, and
reclaiming.

VI. That some course more effectual then any has been fallen upon hitherto,
may be condescended upon, for putting in execution the Acts of this Kirk, anent
debarring from the Lords Table such persons, who are found not to walk suitable
to the Gospel, and have not the knowledge to examine themselves, and to discern
the Lords Body.

VII. That in the receiving of Penitents, care may be had, that none be
admitted to the public Profession of Repentance, or reconciled to the Church,
but these who are found to give such evidence of their Repentance, as is
expressed in the Acts of the Assemblies, concerning the receiving of Penitents.

VIII. That an effectual course may be taken for securing of the Work and
People of God, from the harm and evil consequences which bath already, and
may further ensue from the late pretended Assembly, at St. Andrews, and Dundee,
and the Acts thereof, and for preserving the right constitution of free
General Assemblies for time to come.

Subscribed in name of many Ministers, Elders, and Professors throughout the
Land, who desire Truth and Peace, by Mr. Andrew Cant.

Unto the Reverend, the Ministers and Elders met at Edinburgh July 21. 1652.
The Protestation of the Ministers, Elders, and Professors under subscribing
for themselves, and in name of many others well-affected Ministers, Elders and
People.
IT is so well known to diverse of your number, what peaceable endeavors we have
used without success, in order to the removing of the differences that are
amongst us, that we shall not trouble you therewith; nor how we were neglected
in the sending timeous advertisements for your last Meeting in this place,
where a desire of reconciliation was presented, but peremptorily the electing
and sending of Commissioners from Presbyteries, to keep the day indicted by the
pretended authority of the Meeting at Dundee, was concluded on as the only mean
to heal our breach; and not so much as some few days of delay could be
obtained, by these few of our number which were then present, whereby they
might give advertisement to others. We have labored with some in private, and
have given a Paper to all in public, with some Propositions, wherein we have
the concurrence of the generality of the Godly in the Land, earnestly
entreating a conference, wherein we might have opportunity with the Lords
assistance, to have laid before you the Causes of the Lords controversy
against the Land, and how we might be united in the Lord; being ready also to
have heard what you should offer to us upon the same subject; but this ye have
denied unto us, and proceeded to assume the power, and constitute your selves
into a General Assembly. It is a burden upon our spirits, and we have no
delight to be contesting with, and opposing any who profess themselves to be
maintainers of the Government of this Kirk; but the truth is (with grief of
heart we desire to speak it; for we think that it does much provoke the Lord,
and threaten his departure from the Land) that although with the renewing of
the National Covenant, and with the casting out of Prelates, and the
corruptions introduced by them, the Lord was graciously pleased to give
repentance to not a few, who were involved in that defection; yet since that
time there has always remained a corrupt party of insufficient, scandalous,
and ill-affected Ministers in this Kirk, enemies to the power of Godliness,
and Obstructers of the Work of Reformation, and purging of the Kirk, whereof
many were sworn Vassals to the Prelates (as we are able to make good by their
subscriptions to horrid oaths) this party complied with the times, and
pretended for Reformation, though they were groaning under it as a heavy yoke
which they could not endure, as did appear by their carriage and expressions,
upon several occasions, when any revolution offered them the opportunity of
discovering their minds, particularly in the time of James Grahams Prevailing,
and of the Engagement against England; and having of lategotten a greater
advantage then at any time before, since the beginning of this Reformation, by
the public Resolutions and actings of the Commission for bringing in of the
Malignant party, to places of power and trust, and bearing down of such as were
opposers of these Resolutions, and had bin faithful and straight in the Cause,
and stirring up the Civil Magistrate against them, subjecting also the liberty
of the Word in the mouth of Christ's Ambassadors for the reproof of sin, to the
immediate judicial cognizance, restraint and censure of the Civil Magistrate,
contrary to the many Acts and practices of our Predecessors grounded on the
Word of God, and our Covenants, having the countenance of King, State and Army,
and diverse worthy and gracious men (of whom we shall ever esteem honorable,
and love them dearly) upon consideration of the straits and pressures of the
time, concurring also with them in the Public Resolutions, that Party
perceiving, that they were not able to endure trial in a time of Reformation
and purging, began the last year to lift up their heads, and speak the language
of their own, being much encouraged by the Constitution, Acts and Censures of
the pretended Assembly at S. Andrews and Dundee, they have so strengthened
themselves by their practices since in the Judicatories of the Kirk, as they
now carry the determinations thereof to their own ends. And may we not with sad
hearts say, what can be expected from such of whom we have experience, how
forward they are to favor wicked men, and every evil course, to persecute
such as make conscience to seek the Lord in sincerity of heart, and suppress
the power of godliness, and to open the door of the Ministry to such as for
insufficiency, scandals, or dis-affection, have been justly deposed, and to
bring in the like. In regard whereof, we wish there were not too great cause to
make use of the words of the Prophet, I have seen also in the Prophets of
Jerusalem, says the Lord, a herrid thing, they strengthen the hands of evil
doers, that none does return from his wickedness: therefore thus says the Lord
of hosts concerning the Prophets, Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and
make them drink the water of gall; for from the Prophets of Jerusalem is
profaneness gone forth into all the land. These things we speak not to reflect
upon the Ordinances of Jesus Christ in this Land; it shall be our steadfast
purpose (as the Lord shall enable us) to maintain the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government of this Kirk, and particularly the National
Assemblies, which we look upon as a rich privilege, and special blessing from
Heaven, for suppressing error on the one hand, and profaneness on the other,
so long as they are preserved from corruption in the constitution thereof. And,
we trust, all who are acquainted with the principles and practices of our
worthy Predecessors, and of the learned and godly non-Conformists in England,
will easily see how far we are from their judgments who follow the ways of
separation. We hold it our duty, firmly to adhere to the Church of Scotland,
wherein (through the Lords goodness) we do this day enjoy the purity of Doctrine
and Worship, and the Government which Christ has appointed in his House,
though there be corruptions in the Constitution of a pretended Assembly.
Whereby we are deprived of the benefit of a free, lawful, and well constitute
Assembly for the present; where we meet with corruptions, we shall (the Lord
assisting) disclaim and oppose them. And herein we have the approbation of the
first and second Assembly of this Kirk, in the beginning of this last
Reformation; the one annulling and declaring void six several Assemblies, upon
many of the same grounds, for which we do protest against the present corrupt
Assemblies. And the other having clearly determined the keeping, and
Authorizing corrupt General Assemblies, to have been one of the chief causes
of the many evils which have befallen this Church. We trust in the Lord our
God, that our Actions shall abundantly witness for us in this respect, and so
we shall not further insist upon it. We have clear grounds in Scripture to
warrant us to plead, and testific against Corruption; and therefore being
sensible that there is a course of defection carried on in the Church, we have
endeavored, first to prevent the same, in the beginnings thereof, and
afterward to give Testimony against it, as it comes to be discovered to us; We
have since studied in a Christian, and brotherly way, to reclaim the Authors
thereof, and these that have concurred with them, and now when still we
perceive our labors and endeavors to be without success, as we profess our
adherence to former Testimonies against the late Defection, so we are
necessitated to add this upon the grounds before mentioned; and for all, or
some of the Reasons following.

I. This meeting has dependence upon, and the power and authority to which it
can lay claim; for the indiction thereof is derived from the pretended
Assembly which met at St. Andrews, and adjourned to Dundee, which being unfree,
unlawful, and corrupt, cannot derive or communicate to another that which it
had not in it self.

II. It is constitute after the same manner (for the most part) of the Members
constituted as the former pretended Assembly, of Persons which were Authors,
and Abettors of and have carried on a course of defection in this Church,
contrary to the Word of God, the solemn League and Covenant, the solemn
Engagement, and the express Acts and Declarations of the Kirk, which Persons
being under so great a scandal, are by the Acts of the Kirk incapable to be
Members of General Assemblies.

III. Because of the pre-limitation of Election by the Acts made at Dundee,
injoyning Provincial Synods, and Presbyteries to proceed with the Censures of
the Kirk against Ministers, Students, Expectants, and Professors, who
altogether opposed the Public Resolutions, or shall not acquiesce to the Acts
made at Dundee; and so excludes all who are not involved in the course of
defection, as incapable of election, which is a corrupt rule for election and
constituting Assemblies; and in pursuance thereof, there were several
pre-limitations made since by several Synods, and Ptesbyteries, in their Acts,
Ratifying the Proceedings of the pretended Assembly at Dundee.

IV. There are many Presbyteries who have expressly refused to send
Commissioners to this meeting as an Assembly and who do concur in Protesting
against the same, and where Presbyteries have sent Commissioners, the Elections
are generally contraverted, there being Protestations made, or at least
dissents entered against most of their Elections upon good grounds conform to
the Acts of the Kirk; also there be wanting Commissioners from Burrows, who in
regard of their present incapacity, cannot send Commissioners. The generality
of the godly in the Land go along with us, and approve our protesting against
this meeting, as an unlawful and corrupt Assembly.

Therefore from the zeal we owe to the glory of God, to this Cause and Truth,
the Duty of our Callings, as set for the defense of the Gospel, and according
to our Covenant, wherein we are bound to prevent, and reveal all parties and
courses contrary thereunto, from the sense of the awful judgments of an angry
God, both felt, and feared for these begun, and continued in-defections, that
we may according to the example of our forefathers, acquit our selves as
guiltless of this growing Apostacy to the present age, and transmit to our
posterity the right Constitution of free and lawful General Assemblies, and
to prevent the Lords giving a Bill of divorce to the Land. We do hereby
solemnly Declare and Protest, against the Constitution, Authority, Acts, and
Proceedings of this pretended Assembly met at Edinburgh, and particularly
against their ratifying or renewing the former defection, in the matter of
Public Resolutions, and against their entering into any the like Confederacy,
or association with any party opposite in Principles, and Practices to the
Word, Work, Covenant, Cause, and People of God in this Land, against their
appointing of Commissions, emitting of Declarations, Warnings, Causes of
Humiliation, and against their receiving and discussing of Appeals, References,
and Dissents, or doing any thing competent to a free, lawful General
Assembly, and that neither the Authority, Acts, or Censures of the meeting at
St. Andrews, and Dundee, or of this present Meeting, shall be obligatory to any
Synod, Presbytery, Minister, Elder, or Member of this Church. And we do humbly
beseech and implore the Lord our God, that he will not look upon these your
proceedings as the deeds of the representative of the Kirk of Scotland, nor
impute the same into the Collective Body; But that he would be pleased in his
mercy, freely to pardon all our transgressions. And we do further protest, that
the General Assembly 1650 be held and accounted in this Church as the last free
and lawful General Assembly; And that it shall be lawful to us, and every
one of us, to continue in the full and free exercise of our Function, and in
our Callings and stations to observe and keep the former good old Principles,
Declarations, and Acts of the lawful and free General Assemblies of this
Kirk, notwithstanding any Declarations, Warnings, Proceeding, and Censures of
the said Meetings at St. Andrews, Dundee, and Edinburgh, or any Commission
following therefrom, or any exemption thereof, by any other; and likewise that
it shall be lawful to conveen in a free General Assembly, when the Lord shall
give opportunity. And lastly, We do Protest, that it shall be lawful to us to
give in to this Meeting, or publish to the World, or to present to the first
free and lawful General Assembly this our Protestation, and to enlarge the
same as shall be found most to conduce to the honor of God, the good of his
Work, comfort of his People, and for our exoneration. In Testimony thereof, We
subscribe their presents, and do take Instruments.

The Names of the Ministers who subscribed the foregoing Protestation.
M. Andrew Cant. M. James Ker. M. Samuel Rutherfurd. M. John Scot. M. Robert
Trail. M. John Vetche. M. John Sterline. M. William Guthrie. M. John Nevay. M.
Ralph Rodgers. M. Matthew Mowat. M. Geo. Nairne. M. John Livingstoun. M.
William Oliphant. M. Ja. Guthrie. M. And. Donaldsone. M. Pat. Gillespie. M.
Robert Stidman. M. James Symsone. M. Ephraim Melvill. M. Hew Kennedy. M. John
Sinclar. M. John Cleland. M. John Gray. M. Gilbert Kennedy. M. Robert Fergusen.
M. Al. Living stoun. M. James Ferguson. M. Tho. Ramsey. M. John Crafurd. M.
William Wishart. M. Harie Simpil. M. William Jack. M. Robert Rue. M. John
Dicksone. M. Io. Macmichan M. Iam. Donaldsone. M. John Mean. M. Francis Aird.
M. James Rust. M. Robert Keith. M. Samuel Row. M. John Sempil. M. John Durie.
M. James Wallace. M. will Somervell. M. David Swann. M. John Hamilton. M.
Gilbert Hall. M. James Nisbet. Mr. Will. Somervell. M. Robert Lockhart. Mr.
Adam Kae. M. Daniel Donglas. Mr. Alex. Dunlop. M. Gabriel Maxwel. Mr. George
Gladstaines. M. Robert Broun. M. Arthur Mitchel. M. John Lithgow. M. Alex.
Turnbull. M. Robert Lockart. M. The. Wyllie. M. John Hamilton. M. James Tuedie.
M. Will. Ferguson. M. Pat. Macclellan. Sixty Seven.

Elders, Professors, and Expectants, many of whom subscribed not only in their
own Names, but in Name of others, from whom they were sent to the Meeting.
Lord Kilcudbright. Rob. Jack. Sir Arch. Iohnstoun. William Gordoun. Sir John
Cheislie. Robert Cannoun. Sir Andrew Ker. William Gordoun. William Bruce.
William Creickton. Alex. Pringle of Whitebank. Iam. Mosman. Sir walter Riddel
John Cannoun. Walter Pringle of Greenkno. John Lamb. Colonel Robert Halked.
John Thomson, Sir Tho. Nicolsone. William Meik. I. Dundas of Dudinstoun. James
Selkirk. I. Hepburne of Smeitoun. William Crafurd. Pat. Whartlaw. John
Maclinchie. Peter Rollock of Piltoun. t David Coventry. M. Arch. Iohnstoun of
Hill oun. Cap. And. Arnot. Francis Galloway. Tho. Bannatyn. Will. Broun of
Dolphingtoun. George Pringle. William Laurie of Blakewood. William Douglas. M.
John Sprewil. James Masson. Alex. Gordoun of Knockgray. David Park. Alex.
Forbes Tutor of Pitsligo. M. Will. Duguid. M: John Inglis of Cramount. Quintin
Makadam. John Cranstoun of Glenn. John Stother. Major Robert Stuart. John
Dickson. James Gray. M. John Douglas. James Kirkco. David Mure. M. Arch.
Porteous. C John Nairn. Geo. Dickson. M. Tho. Stuart. Rob. Bruce. M. John
Pearson. Edward Gordown. And. Adirson. John Myln. Patr. List^^n. Mr. James
Stuart. James Spittell of K. Alexander Mershall. M. And Ruthurfurd. James Hill.
M. Geo Walker. James Morison. Iam. Greirson. Mr. John Justice. James Hamilton.
William Falconer. John Tait. Mr. Peter Kidd. A. Iohnstoun. Andrew Kirkco. David
Matthie. Pat. Anderson. Tho. Douglas. James Melros. Jam. Bruce. Mr. Jo
Crooksbank younger. John Gordown. Mr. Alexander Janison. 95.

Besides diverse others; some of whose names could not well be read; others
being with-drawen by their necessary affairs, were not present with the rest in
time of Subscribing, and the many hundreds of the well-affected throughout the
Land, who have by these whom they sent abundantly shown their love to the
business, and will Subscribe with their own hands when they have opportunity.

The Names of the Ministers who presented these Papers.
Mr. Andr. Cant. Mr. John Livingston. Mr. Sam. Rutherford. Mr. James Guthry.
Mr. Matthew. Mowat. Mr. Sam. Row. Mr. Patr. Gillespie. Mr. James Nasmith. Mr.
Ephraim Melvil. Mr. Jam. Symson. Mr. Will. Oliphant. Mr. James Ker. Mr. Rob.
Trail. Mr. John Dickson. Mr. Rob. Keith. Mr. Thom. Wyllie. Mr. Alex.
Livingston.

The Names of the Ruling Elders, and Professors.
Lord Kirkudbright. Lord of Blair. Tutor of Pitslago. Whytbank. Sir. And. Ker
of Greenheed. Walt. Pringle of Greenknow. Sir Archibad Johnston of Wariston. J.
Johnston of Hilton. John Graham. Sir John Chiesley. Mr. John Spreul. Col. Rob.
Halket. Mr. William Ferguson. J. Dundas of Duddiston. Smeatoun Hepburn. Sir
Walter Riddell. Alex. Gordoun of Knockgray. Sir William Bruce.

These 35 were nominated and appointed by their meeting, to present the Papers.

UPon Thursday, the meeting of Protesters did divide themselves in four
several Committees, to think upon, and confer about Overtures, how to make the
matters of their Propositions practicable and effectual in their own stations,
according to their capacities. And the next morning, the mind of the several
Committees upon that matter being reported in writ. The several clerks of these
Committees were appointed to meet together, and draw up in one Paper, all that
was reported, which being done, there was another Committee appointed to meet
upon it, and to consult and advise more deliberately thereanent, and to report
their diligence upon Monday to the whole Meeting, whereby it appears that they
do really, and seriously mind the work themselves, which they prop^^^ to
others, which will appear the more by their Resolutions, when they come forth
after the Overtures are digested, and fully agreed upon.

FINIS.

