THE Lightless-Starre: OR, Mr. JOHN GOODWIN discovered a Pelagio-Socinian: And
this by the Examination of his Preface to his Book entitled Redemption
Redeemed. Together with An Answer to his Letter entitled Confidence
Dismounted. By RICHARD RESBURY, Minister of the Gospel at Oundle in
Northamptonshire. Hereunto is annexed a Thesis of that Reverend, Pious, and
Judicious Divine, Doctor Preston, sometimes of Immanuel College in Cambridge,
concerning the Irresistibility of Converting Grace.

Now as Jannes, and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth;
Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith.

But they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be made manifest unto
all, as theirs also was.

2 Timothy 3. 8. 9. London, Printed for John Wright at the King's Head in the
Old-Bayly. 1652.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
I Shall not long detain thee in the p^rch; only give we leave in a few words
to acquaint thee with the Occasion and scope of this following discourse.

For the Occasion, Mr. Goodwin having taken upon him to be a Champion in the
Tents of most Anti-evangelieall, and often-routed Errors, and in a pompous
Treatise, by him published, having thrown much defiance in the face of Truth
and her Assertors: many of them triumphing in glory after their Warfare, others
still in Conflict here below. Upon perusal of this piece of his, I found it a
mere white^ sepulcher, specious in the style and pretense of holiness, but made
up for the substance, of roiten Errors, by broken Arguments, and perverted
Scriptures seemingly supported. Whereupon I thought it very seasonable, having
by me a little Manuscript comprising certain main Truths opposite to his
Errors, to send it abroad, if through the blessing of God it might help to
establish some, and prevent those snares of death which he had spread. And I
hope the Lord has blessed it unto diverse. The Title of that small piece and the
Epistle reflecting upon Mr. Goodwin and his Book, he found himself very angry,
and in great Indignation prints an invective Letter, penned by him sitting in
the scorners chair, sends it to me, requiring satisfaction for a charge of some
particulars in mine Epistle against him. The particulars charged upon him were;
sometimes Imperial dictates, instead of Arguments; sometimes monstrous
Conclusions; sometimes wrested Quotations; sometimes uncoth Philosophy;
sometimes consequential Blasphemy: to these I may now add, frequently, packing
Sophistry. And he will needs persuade himself that his book is so clear of
these crimes, as that I had not looked into it when I put in this charge against
it Now though I had no thoughts of writing any thing against his Book, partly
conscious of mine own weakness, partly he having provoked so many of the ablest
of men, the University of Cambridge, the Assembly of Divines, and indeed the
whole Orthodox name; yet he pressing upon Me in his Letter after much scorn,
and high contempt, to give instances of my charge against him, I thought my
self in equity obliged so to do, for their satisfaction especially who have not
read his Book; for as for such as shall read it, they, if judicious, and
impartial, will easily observe the particulars over and over. Hence Iovercame
my self, otherwise unwilling to think of such an answer to his Letter, as
wherein I might give him the instances he required; but weighing withal how
useless it would be to the public, only to answer a taunting Letter, and
produce those particulars, I thought it expedient to add something further
that might be of real usefulness to Christianity, and thereupon resolved the
Examination of his Preface, which abounding with two pernicious Errors,
Socinianism and Pelagianism, was most necessary to be called to Account; as
likewise the examination of the four first Chapters of his Book, wherein is the
Foundation of his Building, but a miserable sandy one. The former through the
good hand of God upon me, I have dispatched, and here present it to thee; the
latter, I hope, though in the midst of many employments and encumbrances by
degrees to perform too, if not happily prevented by some better furnished for
the Work. Thus for the Occasion; now for the Scope: It is partly to discover
those dangerous Errors all along carried on in his Preface against the Grace of
God; and the authority of Scripture, against both which Mr. Goodwin has
enormously ex alted the Reason and Will of man: partly to lay before thee, and
clear up the main Doctrins of Gospel Truth against those his Errors. And
forasmuch as the Doctrins of the Grace of God were with much strength,
clearness, and evidence of the Spirit maintained by those famous Lights of the
Church who lived in the time of Pelagius, and the times immediately succeeding,
especially Augustine and Prosper, and the Fathers assembled in the Milevitane
Council, where Augustine was present, and in the second Arausican Council, I
have therefore distinctly laid down the several states of the Pelagian
Heresy, and the refutation thereof out of the forenamed Champions for the
Truth of Christ, not for their Authority, but for their strength, clearness,
elegancy, and excellency of Spirit, debasing Man, exalting God, and assigning
their peculiar Privileges to the Elect of God. In perusal whereof thou will
find Mr. Goodwin a son of Error, a disciple of Pelagius, and easily find a wide
difference between the spirit of his Pen, and that of these renowned Ancients,
the Assertors of the Churches Faith. Reader, I hope thou will think it worth
thy labor, when thou have made trial, to take a view of the main Doctrines of
Grace, as by such excellent hands laid out, against such dangerous and
destructive Errors, so many Ages since. As for my charge against Mr. Goodwin,
thou shall find it made good in the particulars in my Answer to his Letter,
wherein thou will find him guilty of absurdities enough, and yet the
particulars there produced are but some gleanings for Instanc^s. I have only
One thing more to advertise thee of. It is very likely Mr. Goodwin will make
what have he can to reply upon this my Essay against him. My intention is (the
Lord assisting) and as I may gain fr^^ many employments, and distractions,
leisure for the same, to go through his four first Chapters, before I will take
any notice of what he shall reply; thou shall find him in this discovery that I
have made, a Star without Light, in that which I hope to make, a Builder
without a Foundation. For where as in those Chapters should be the Foundation
of his after-discourse, what a miserable One he has there laid, I hope God
will in time discover: and indeed I cannot still but expect, that my further
endeavors will be prevented by some more strenuous Undertaker, raised up by
the Lord in zeal to his Truth, however, till such a blessing shall appear, I
shall be moving, though very slowly, onwards. Now the Lord command his blessing
upon thy spirit in the perusal hereof, sanctifying thee by his Truth.

Reader, I am Thy servant for the Truth of the Gospel, RICHARD RESBURY.

An Answer to Mr. JOHN GOODWINS LETTER, Vainly by him Entitled, Confidence
dismounted.
Sir,
WHy you had not my Answer sooner, you may find in my Epistle to the Reader,
viz. Because I intended something else besides an Answer to your Letter; which
indeed I should not have answered at all, but only to make good the
particulars of my charge, which you challenge me to. I shall therefore touch
upon other things, as no better than impertinent, generally, and hasten to that.

First, you find some exception against my reflection upon you in the Title and
Epistle of my former Book, that you never saw my face, never heard of my name
before; Your meaning, I suppose, is, to render me a son of the Earth, an
obscure and worthless man. I confess my self such an one: But what if God will
by the foolish and weak things of the World confound the Wise and Mighty? You
might have made this construction thence, that I had no animosity against your
person upon any private interest, you having never done me harm neither, which
you mention as another aggravation; but only upon the public interest of
Truth and Christianity did I touch upon you.

Secondly, whereas the main of your grief and distaste is, that I have uttered
hard sayings against the Truths of God. If they had been Truths which you
defended, you had said something. That which follows, representing me according
to the practice of the Heathen, clothing the Christians in Wolves, and Bears
skins, etc. As likewise your high scorn of my expectation to give any stop to
your Gangrene, may pass for a strain of Mr. John Goodwins Rhetorique: But
whereas you charge the Truths of God by me maintained, as monstrous Principles,
uncouth, hard, and horrid Notions concerning God, this passage I must put
amongst your consequentiall Blasphemies.

In the next place you declame against my Book as a dead Drug, lying upon my
hands; it is now in the hands of men, let it answer for it self: But whereas
you so magnify your self, as though you was another Luther, a man of such
name, weight, and worth, that great preferment is little enough to discourage
any to oppose you, you are in a pleasing dream. It is not unlikely but diverse
hands will be against you; (...) (...) what term? only as an Ishmael (...)
^nitie. After this you tell me, it (...) reasonably be thought by any thing in
my Book, that I ever looked so much as a line of your Book in the face. I see
your mighty reason deludes your self as much in your conjectures, as it strives
to do others in your Doctrines. Truly, Sir, I was not so scared with your
Medusa's head, but I durst look upon it. And still I must tell you, there are
those. Truths maintained in that little Book of mine, which overturn your
Babel. In the next place you tell me, that I, or some Factor of mine, purchased
the Outcries of two Diurnalists, whereas indeed I neither knew, nor thought of
any such thing till I saw it done: but howsoever, it is a thing of common
course, and for ought I know without offense, for them to give notice of such
Books as are newly printed.

After this you fall into a raving fit of pride and bitterness, where I leave
you to come to your self. Then you beseech me by the love I bear, or pretend to
bear to the Lord Christ (which, comparing your sweet water with your bitter, I
conceive a Pharicall profanation of the name of Christ) to tell with what
goodness of Conscience, etc. I can say that the main Truths of God, concerning
his Electing and Redeeming Grace have been highly assaulted by you. For answer,
I refer you to my instances of your consequential Blasphemies, at the end of
this my Rescript, and so your admonition here subjoyned may pass. After this
you run your descants, that I termed you an unhappy man. But, Sir, to let aside
your trifling, I therefore call you an unhappy man, because you are a bold
instrument to serve Satan against the Truth, and that not only whiles you
live, but in after Ages too, when your bones shall be as rotten in the Grave,
as your Errors are now in the World.

Next you tell me what a daring hand you have for the Truth. Happy was you if
you said true; less unhappy, if the contrary was not true, That your hand is
daring against the Truth. For the Title of your Book, Redemption Redeemed,
whether right or no, you shall be judged you say by a streighter Rule than my
notion: No doubt, and that to your shame.

In the next place, you tell me that I little know what Arminianism indeed
means. If I be amongst those that know not the depths of Satan, I am not much
the worse; but so much I know of it, as I know that Arminius and Mr. Goodwin
are Master and Scholar against the Truth of the Gospel. Then you tax me for
dictating rather than arguing. Sir, I was then doing another thing, than taking
your book to task; I doubt not but you shall find that in this following
discourse I have argued with you.

In the next place you resent it very deeply, that I should pray that the Lord
would rebuke you. Our Savior diverse times rebuked his Disciples, and Satan in
one of his great Apostles: why we may not pray that in Mr. Goodwin he would
rebuke the spirit of Error, I know not: I think we pray it in effect as often
as we pray, that His Kingdom may come.

After this you challenge me to show you, where you at all, much less
seriously, despise the peculiar Grace of God, and boldly bid defiance to it. I
answer, the whole bent of your discourse, is both against it, and against
Election the ground of it, and carried on with much defiance; And even here
where you would wipe off this spot, you show what an adversary you are to it,
by a famous contradiction. You demonstrate (you say) the peculiarity of it;
that is, in your interpretation, the signal excellency and glory of it to
consist in this, that it encompasseth the whole world about, and particularly
addresseth it self to every creature of Mankind. A worthy demonstration!
peculiar, because common; such a thing is light, because it is darkness. Would
any man have thought that Mr. Goodwins Logic could not distinguish between
particular and peculiar? And that what is common, that is, belonging to all
(suppose particularly presented and tendered) should yet be peculiar, that is,
belonging only to some?

I do not much wonder that you have proved all Orthodox Writers of Primitive
and Modern times to be with your self Pelagian, forasmuch as you can prove one
opposite species to be another, therefore the same because opposite; here is a
way of demonstration, which neither Euelide nor Arch^^ede ever dreamed of.

Concerning the saving Grace of God, you say that we hold it so decreed to them
that shall be saved, that there is an absolute nenecessity for them to embrace
it: You know that we maintain the necessity flowing from the Decree of God. In
this argument is an hypotheticall necessity. For your own Tenet here it may
well be added to your monstrous conclusions. For your challenge of the
University, here you lay down my words, where you make much a do about the word
it, when I say that you may set it off bravely, what this it should refer to.
Briefly, it is an indefinite expression very usual, as much as if I had said,
that you might set off the matter bravely. Then you deny that you challenge the
University: It is evident hence that you do; because though disjunctively you
desire their attestation or contestation, yet so confident are you, that if
your doctrine be not (as indeed it is nothing less) the Truth of God, you are an
high Blasphemer more than once.

Upon this occasion you inform me of some gracious characters found in
Arminius, and hereupon I must crave leave to inform you, that Pelagius was an
errant Heretic, though a man so far of name for Piety, that Austin in his
first Writings against him, forbore to name him, that he might preserve his
honor. By this time you are come to the particulars of my charge, and here you
are very willing to tell me that I had not read your book. Truly, Sir, I had
been a very adventurous man, if I had proclaimed you a nourisher of those evil
beasts, and had not taken notice of their dens, that I might point them out
when called thereto. Though this I will grant you (how much or little soever I
had read) a man need not read one quarter of your Book to make good such a
charge. But why did I not with one pointed Argument draw blood of this evil
beast? That which then I had to do, was only to give warning against it, and
the book by me published does afford many Arguments against your Doctrins,
though it be no formal answer to your Book.

And whereas here you twit me proverbially in these words, Is it fair for you
to say, that you never indeed read all Chrysostoms Works, whereas you never
read so much as one line of them? I shall for answer return you a few lines out
of Chrysostom, which methinks run very cross to your Doctrine (in your long
digression contended for, but all in vain) of the Apostafie of True Believers.
(...) Chrysostom. Ser. 3. in 2 Cor. 1. v. 22, 22.
(...). I care not if I English it for the Readers sake. Again by what is past,
what is to come is confirmed; for if it be he that establishes us in Christ
(that is, that suffers us not to be moved aside from the Faith in Christ) and
he that has anointed us, and given the holy Spirit in our hearts, how shall
he not give us the things to come? For if he has given the beginnings, and the
foundations, and the root, and the fountain (as the true knowledge of himself,
the participation of his Spirit) how shall he not give us the rest? For if
those things be given for these, much more he that has given these will also
give those. And if he gave us these things whilst we were yet enemiet, much
more will he freely give those things to us being made friends: Wherefore he
said not simply the Spirit, but called it the Earnest, that thence thou might
trust boldly for the whole; for except he would give the whole, he would not
have chosen to give the Earnest, and to lose it vainly, and to no end.

In that which next follows, you please your self with vain talk, then you
pick a quarrel with me for my Antithesis, when I say Mr. Goodwins boldness
will excite modesty, you like it better to oppose impudence to modesty, take
what you like; I hoped a soft word might have found pardon.

Hence you pass to the particulars of my Charge, all which I shall give you in
a Catalogue by and by, mean time touching upon particulars.

First, Imperial dictates, the sum of what you say here is, 1. That you abound
with Arguments no less than Newcastle with Coals: Well, sometimes good Homer
may be taken napping. 2. You fly upon the Assembly of Divines, as if the
Confession of Faith by them set forth was not proved. Sir, by Scripture it is
proved, but whether all those Scriptures you will allow, or not, I cannot tell;
this I know, they are many of them above, many of them cross to your reason,
and therefore it is not according to your rule to allow them.

Secondly, monstrous Conclusions, these you tell me are the genuine issue of
mine own Principles, you shall see the contrary presently. Then you give me as
my Prophets, and Founders of my Faith, in Election, etc. Calvin, Musculus,
Bullinger, Martyr, etc. And this, etc. takes in Beza, Luther, Piscat^r, Pareus,
Zanchy, Perkins, Twisse, A^es, Rivet, and whom not of savoury name and eminent
service in the Church of God, since her coming out of mystical Babylon? These
not Founders of Faith, but blessed Instructers in the Faith, and Defenders of
it; the Synod of Dort, the only Synod of eminency since the Protestant name,
you grant me a little after. Who now are the men of your Faith? What obscure
names compared with these? Armi^ius that bold corrupter of the Truth, Bertius
the Apostate, Tilenus his brother in Apostasy, Corvinus Squire of the body to
Arminius, with such like.

Thirdly, your wrested Quotations; if I should instance in the Scriptures
wrested by you, together with Authors, I must instance your whole Book -- Tolli
tota theatra jube, -- I shall therefore in this place give you a taste of
Quotations out of Authors only. The special reason of your quoting Authors,
you say is to show, that your Doctrine wants not an arm of flesh to stand by
it; that is, that it has been held by Orthodox and pious men; but the defense
of the truth by Orthodox and pious men, according to the Word of God, is the
arm of the Spirit rather than an arm of Flesh: indeed it has been only an arm
of Flesh that has stood by your Doctrines.

2. That the greatest opposers of your Doctrine were inconsistent with
themselves; in this endeavor you show not them inconsistent, but your self a
Jugler.

Fourthly, uncouth Philosophy. This by and by with the rest of his fellows.

Fifthly, Consequential blasphemies, here you want my Heifer to plow with, to
sinde out the riddle; and then you sweat and trifle, and seem to be wandering in
a filthy dream, your expressions are so immodest and unchaste. I will tell you
my riddle briefly. I suppose you rather blinded with error than sinning of
malice against the truth, and therefore your blasphemy not intentionall: but
upon supposition that they are the truths of God which you oppose, (as indeed
they are his main Gospel Truths) your revilings are so high against them, as
they amount to no less than high blasphemy, such as Paul was guilty of, when
yet he sinned of ignorance and unbelief; which I was willing to allay with the
term consequentiall; but forasmuch as you are at such a loss about that term, I
am content you substitute, blasphemy express. Neither do I pass that your
Critic Learning will here find fault with my Antithesis again.

Here you take occasion to tell me of a Triumphant Argument of yours against
Eternal Reprobation, that it contains this blasphemy in it, That God should
reprobate himself. Hem I here is a Gorgon indeed! Sir, we shall see the vanity
and ridiculous foppery of this Argument when we come to examine it in your
Book; in the mean time let me put one question to you that teach that God
created all things at once, and that from eternity, did he create himself.

In the next place you modestly and humbly (as you say) entreat me to show you
one instance of any of these, yet your humble modesty subjoyns that I may take
ten Universities to my assistance; I shall Sir give instance of every one of
them, and borrow no help in a case so obvious and gross of any one University.
But then you require an impossibility, that I would show you one spot of your
darkness, but that I would not show you darkness. Sir, whilst I show you those
things, I have nothing but darkness to show you: Indeed here ten Universities
cannot assist me to satisfy your contradiction. Then you would know why I call
your Doctrine Arminianism, and being one that loves to hear your self talk, you
run an idle wordy descant hereupon. I have showed you in the following
discourse, wherein your Doctrine is not Arminianism only, but Jesuitism,
Pelagianism, and Socinianism, as I had occasion from your Preface, and I hope
to show you more of the same kind hereafter from your Book. As for my Sermons
you have promised to destroy them by the fall of the Synod of Dort upon them,
crushing them into Atoms no doubt. Sir, when this great wrack comes, I shall
believe the Astrologers of our times, that the last Eclipse of the Sun
portended some notable thing. In the mean time I thank you that you have given
me the Synod of Dort, now for a recompense take you the Council of Trent.

You tell me the nineth to the Romans is a wrong field wherein to dig for
absolute Reprobation; but your word is no whit current with me. You add, that I
my self making my Elect ones liable to be seduced by a spirit of Error, do
little less than shake the foundation of absolute Reprobation. Here first
profanely you call them mine elect, then you argue to this purpose, this
liableness to seduction is such, as indangereth the salvation of the seduced,
or not. If not, 1. Care against it is in vain, because thus, Men whether Elect,
or not Elect, will be liable thus far at least to be seduced, though all errors
in the world were suppressed. For answer; 1. Men not elect shall certainly
deceive themselves, and be seduced by Satan to the loss of salvation. Your
limitation (thus far at least) in reference to such, is very Atheological, nor
will your Parenthesis concerning my notion salve your error here. 2. Granting
what you say for the elect, yet there is a latitude in this liableness, and
spirits of error are instruments fitted to seduce further, than otherwise they
were likely to be; and therefore care is to be had against them, because their
salvation as the end enjoins the care of all means tending to that end, and
against all things that tend to cross that end; though it be familiar to you in
spite of all Logic to argue from the end to the exclusion of the means,
whereas the end infers them; again, because the more they are seduced, the more
they dishonor God. 2. Care against it is for their hurt, say you; to this end
you add that according to my principles, all the sins of the Elect shall work
for good to them, and not only be forgiven them immediately upon the
Commission. But, 1. Where do I say they shall be forgiven them immediately upon
the Commission? 2. Suppose the sins of the Elect in the conclusion turn to
their good, even their sins not excluded that comprehensive promise, All things
shall work together for good to them that love God; What then? Then you say a
care of preventing their seduction would be a care to keep them from a certain
benefit. For answer, let me tell you out of what School you had this Argument,
truly out of the same with that profane Caviller, Romans 3. 5. and 7. who argues
thus; but our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God, therefore is
God unrighteous if he take vengeance? and if the truth of God has abounded
through my lie to his glory, therefore should I do ill to forbear lying. 2.
Your^ Sop^istry is gross and sordid, things in themselves evil, though
accidentally of good issue are to be avoided, and what puny Sophister knows not
this? Art thou a Master in Israel and know it not? And now having thus far
wandered in the first member of your distinction, you come to the second, that
if this liableness to seduction may end in the destruction of the Elect, then
Election staggers, and if so, then Reprobation too: I answer, no such
liableness do I understand, as that any one of the Elect ever did or ever shall
perish. Then you tell me, but that you are unworthy to teach me, I might have
learned from the 359. and 360. pages of your book, how impertinently I cited
these words of the Apostle, the foundation of God stands sure, there will be
time and place I doubt not, to show the falsehood of your interpretation there,
in the mean time you are unfit indeed to teach me or any man else, because you
are such a stranger to the Truth, but ere long you hope to vindicate the nineth
to the Romans from the monstrous and horrid Doctrine of absolute Reprobation.
Once again, the Lord rebuke thee thou devouring tongue: In the close, you
profess your hopes, that I will be more tender of your name and reputation; the
Lord make me tender of his Truth, and in tenderness thereof a poor instrument
in his hand to blast your errors, whereupon if your name be built, it must take
part with them. Now Sir, I have only a basket of your rotten figs and wild
grapes to present you with, accordding to the particulars of my charge.

A taste of M. Goodwins lovely Doctrines and Discourse in some few Instances
gathered here and there (for the most part in his own words, always in his own
sense, where for brevity sake the words are altered) where we have,

1. His Imperial Dictates.
1. DOubtless many persons both of men and women have been propagated and born
into the world, whose parents were not determined to their generation. page 7.
2. He (that is, God) has indeed determined indefinitely, and in the general,
that bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days, but if we
speak of any particular persons, who being bloody and deceitful came thereby
to an untimely end, neither their sin, or their suffering by an un imely end,
was determined by God. p. 9. 3. The actions and motions of natural causes are
not ordinarily by the concurrence of God determined. p. 12. The like for the
motion of brute Creatures (p. 13) in these words; Nor are the motions or
actings of the second kind of causes mentioned, as of birds, beasts, etc. any
whit more determined than of the former by the presence of God with them in
their actions, the concurrence of God with the Lamb when it runs to the dam,
and when it flies from the wolf, is doubtless one and the same. Ibid.
2. His monstrous Conclusions.
1. It is a thing as unquestionable as that the Sun is up at noon day, that
reason and understanding in men are competent to judge of the things of God, of
all of them that are contained in the Scripture, according to the degree of
their manifestation there. Praf. page 10. 2. Men that act according to the true
principles of that reason which God has planted in them, cannot but believe
and be partakers in the precious Faith of the Gospel. page 11. 3. The Scripture
knows not the Word natural, in any sense whereby it distinguishes the
unregenerate state of man from the regenerate. page 12. 4. By the Natural man,
1 Cor. 2. 14, is understood the weak Christian: by the Spiritual man, the
grown Christian: by the Things of God, only deep Mysteries. page 13. 5 God
does require of me no more belief in the Mystery of the Trinity, Incarnation of
Christ, and such like, than my reason is able to apprehend. page 17. 6. The
days of man's continuance on earth are not determined as so many and no more by
any decree of God. Book page 9. Such Decrees are fitter to make an Alcoran
divinity than Christian. page 11. 7. The Apostle Paul acquits himself and all
others of all such irregular acts whereunto they are necessitated, though by an
inward principle. page 13. 8. God might, and did absolutely determine the
giving up of Christ to suffer death upon the cross, and yet not determine
either that Herod or Pontius Pilate, or any other persons by name, should have
acted this his determination. page 23. 9. When a man's person, house, or goods
are consumed by fire, there is no competent ground to think that these were
determined by God. page 25. 10. As hands, eyes, ears, grief, repentance, etc.
are attributed unto God, which according to their proper signification agree
not to him: so Praescience or Foreknowledge, Election and Reprobation. page
29. 11. Intentions, Purposes, and Decrees, as well as Knowledge, or
Foreknowledge, are only Anthropo-pathetically ascribed unto God. page 32. 12.
God does not always decree what he purposes, and intends to effect, because
he judges it meet to act only to a certain degree of efficiency, for the
effecting and obtaining of some things, by which if he cannot effect or obtain
them, he judges it not meet to act any further. page 36. 13. God never
starveth his ends for want of means, and yet the things themselves are many
times not obtained. Ibidem. 14. The object of Gods Foreknowledge is far larger
than the object of his intentions, or decrees: the object of his decrees, only
such things which he purposes to effect without any exception: the object of
his intentions or purposes, such things only which he desires and intends
to give being unto, but with condition and limitation. page 39. 15. Love, and
Hatred, Mercy, and Justice, in God toward his Creature, do not argue any
different affection in him, but only a different dispensation, so that we may
truly affirm that he both truly hates and loves at once, one and the same
person. page 44. 16. If God reprobated any from Eternity, It must be himself.
page 45. 17. When God prevails by his Word and Spirit with men in time to
believe, and during this their believing continues the same means toward their
further establishment, he is said to have elected them. Again, when God upon
men's neglect, refusal, or abuse of the means of Grace, shall withdraw these
means to such a degree that they fall to open profaneness, etc. he is now said
to have reprobated them. page 62. 18. The love of God in Election is primarily
and directly pitched upon a certain species of men, and not upon the persons of
men, save by accident and indirectly only, and in a Consequential way; so that
it argues no change in God, though one while he love, and another while hates
the same person, because no person is the object of his Elective love, but
only as righteous, nor any person the object of his reprobating hatred, but
only as wicked. page 64. 19. The Apostles meaning in this Antithesis, not of
Works, but of him that Calls, is plainly this, not of Works, but of Faith.
page 463 20. Elect through sanctification of the Spirit etc. this implies, that
such a state and condition as this, is that very state wherein what persons
should at any time be found, God in his eternal Counsels judges it meet to
confer the honorable title of Elect upon them. Ibidem. 21. To choose us in
Christ signifies to intend purpose or decree to choose us, as being, or when we
should be in Christ by believing. Ibidem. 22. Though sober men will not, yet
God may intend, and will, that which he knows shall never come to pass. page
424. 23. When God foresaw that the good gifts which he bestows upon some men
would be abused by them, yet his love in giving is no whit less, because it is
not in his power to have done more to the preventing of such abuse than he has
done. page 426. 24. The utmost extent of the power of God is to proceed no
further in vouchsafing Grace or the means of Grace, than to leave men a power
of rejecting the Grace offered, and so of ruining themselves. page 427. 25. It
may be as truly and properly said of God, when he vouchsafes the least
sufficiency of means unto some men, as when he affords the greatest unto
others, that he does what he is able to do, as well for the one as the other.
page 430. 26. When we teach that Christ died for all men, we mean that he
wholly dissolved and took off from all men the guilt and condemnation that was
brought upon all men by Adams transgression, so that now no man shall be
condemned but for such sins only which shall be actually committed by him, o^
for such omissions which was in his power to have prevented. page 433. 27. In
this sense we desire to be understood when we affirm that God intends the
salvation of all men without exception by the death of Christ, that upon this
account he vouchsafes sufficiency of means unto all men (considered as men,
and before their wilful sinning that most heinous and unpardonable sin)
whereby to be saved. page 448. 28. All the acts and actings of God in one kind
or other are jointly and severally one and the same thing with his Nature,
Essence, and Being page 447. 29. The doctrine of Universal Redemption, reserves
Infants, and such as are defective in discretion, from the vengeance of eternal
fire. page 478. 30. This Doctrine presents God in his decree of Reprobation, as
truly and really intending the salvation of men, as in his decree of Election.
page 479. 31. Regeneration (which the Scripture appropriates only to years of
discretion) relates not to the natural generation as such, but to the
spiritual state of men, who being degenerated from the innocence of their
childhood (wherein they are, if not simply, and absolutely, yet comparatively
innocent, harmless, free from pride, malice, etc.) have need to be re-instated
thereinto. page 330. 32. For the dismembring of the body of Christ, for the
enterchange of members betwixt Christ and Satan, for the frequent repetition of
Regeneration, there is no inconvenience, nothing unworthy of God, or of Christ
in these things. page 327, 328, 329. 33. To refrain sining customarily, and
against Conscience, which kind of sin only excludes from the kingdom of God is
no great matter of difficulty to the Saints. page 337.
3. His wrested Quotations.
1. Against the transient Actions of God in time, this following Quotation out
of Peter Martyr: God moves the heart of man at a certain time, whereas he moved
them not before, which notwithstanding we question not, but he does without any
change of himself. page 48. 2. Against the infallibility of effects by
Free-working causes, this following Quotation of Austin: God so governs all
things which he has created, that he suffers them to exercise and act their
own proper motions. page 53. 3. Against the determination of the Will by any
act of God, this following Quotation out of Gaudentine: Doubtless it is no less
than high Sacrilege so much as once to think, that God, who is not only good
and just, but Goodness and Justice it self, should either command, or constrain
that to be done which himself condemns. page 54. 4. Out of Peter Martyr to
the same purpose: God indeed draws all things, but yet he yields after such a
manner that he troubles or disturbs nothing: so things, though in respect of
their natures they incline indifferently unto either side, yet are they by God
bowed more unto one. Ibid. 5. To the same purpose out of Polanus. God so
works by the means of Nature, that he works nothing contrary to their
nature, and therefore the Providence of God constrains not the will of the
creature. page 55. I forbear more to that purpose in the following pages. 6.
For Universal Redemption, out of Austin. Against the wound of Original sin,
wherewith in Adam the nature of all men was corrupted, and become dead, etc.
the death of the Son of God is a true, potent, and singular remedy; who being
not liable to the debt of death, and the only person without sin, dyed for
those that were sinners and debtors; therefore as to the greatness and potency
of the price, and as far as concerns one (and the same) cause of Mankind, the
blood of Christ is the Redemption of the whole World, but they who pass
through this world without the faith of Christ, and the Sacrament of
Regeneration, are strangers to this Redemption: therefore whereas by reason of
one nature of all men, and one cause of all men truly undertaken by our Lord,
all men may truly be said to be redeemed; yet all men are not brought (or
rescued rather) out of Captivity, the propriety of Redemption is doubtless
with them, out of whom the Prince of the world is cast forth, and who are not
more vessels of the Devil, but members of Christ, whose death is not so
bestowed upon mankind, that they who never come to be regenerate should belong
to the redemption thereof; but so, that what by one only example is done for
all, might be celebrated in particular persons by a particular Sacrament, for
that cup of immortality which was tempered and made of our infirmity, and the
divine power, has in it wherewith to profit all men, (or has indeed in it
self, that it may profit all men) but if it be not drunk it profits not. p.
524. 7. Out of the Synod of Dort. God commiserating mankind being fallen, sent
his Son, who gave himself a price of redemption for the sins of the whole
world, -- and a little after, Since that price which was paid for all men, and
which will certainly benefit all that believe unto eternal life, yet does not
profit all men, etc. And again, So then Christ died for all men, that all and
every man might by the mediation of Faith through the virtue of this ransom
obtain forgiveness of sins, and eternal life. p. 546.
I shall trouble neither you nor the Reader with any more of your wrested
Quotations, this last gives light to discover how far you are from integrity in
your Quotations; for you know abundantly the Synod of Dort understood these
general expressions not universally, but indefinitely, as did other Authors
the like expressions; we might add the same wresting of Quotations out of
Calvin and others, for falling away from the state of grace, but he that shall
instance all that you wrest, shall leave little behind.

4. His uncouth Philosophy.
1. That Is but a pretty strain of Physics, p. 1. Trees that are thoroughly and
deeply rooted in the earth, will grow and flourish though the dew or rain from
heaven should seldom or never fall upon them. 2. For future Contingents at the
same time when God knows that they will come to pass, he knows also that
there is no necessity that they should come to pass, that they may well be
prevented, in which respect in case they should not come to pass, the knowledge
of God should suffer no defeiture, p. 27. 3. Purposes and intentions in their
propriety, as in men, ever suppose that the things purposed and intended shall
be effected, no man ever intending that which he certainly knows beforehand
never will be effected; but it does not follow from hence, that purposes
attributed unto God must be attended with expectance that the thing said to be
purposed by him shall come to pass; to reason thus, God intended not the
salvation of all men, because he certainly knows that all men will not be saved,
is to reason weakly. p. 33. 4. God does not will the conversion of Peter before
he is converted, nor the glorification of Peter before he be glorified, though
he willed or rather wills both the one or the other from eternity. p. 51. 5.
God wrought as much toward the making of Peter a believer before he did
believe, as he did when he was actually brought to believe. ibid. 6. It is
impossible that God should act any thing in time other than what he acted from
eternity. p. 59. 7 Though the earth and heavens receive their beings in two
several days, yet that which God did toward their productions was done by
him at once; and though no plant of the field was actually produced before it
was in the earth, yet in respect of what God contributed toward their actual
production they were produced before. p. 49. 8. That which depends upon any
deliberate or elective act of the will of man, cannot be said to be positively,
peremptorily, or absolutely declared by God. p. 185.
5. His Consequentiall Blasphemies.
1. In case any such assurance of the unchangeableness of Gods love were to be
found in, or could be regularly deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just
ground to any intelligent man to question their authority, and whether they
were from God or no. p. 335. 2. That Doctrine which denies that Christ died for
all men without exception, directly tends to divide between the Creature and
his Creator, and to raise jealousies and hard thoughts in the former against
the latter. p. 475. 3. The same Doctrine represents God as engaged to the days
of eternity in counsels and purposes of blood, yea of the blood of the
precious souls of men, and this without any consideration or respect had to any
the future sins of those against whom it supposes him so implacably and
unmercifully engaged, p. 478. 4. The Doctrine of Perseverance has been found a
mere Impostor, an appearance of Satan in the likeness of an Angel of light.
I tell the Reader, that to these I may add your packing Sophistry, which is so
frequently found throughout your Book, as cannot but be obvious to every
intelligent Reader, I shall therefore point at some certain heads rather than
trouble my self to single out instances: Sometimes you transform your
Adversaries Doctrines; sometimes you confound the immanent and transient
actions of God together; sometimes again you confound absolute and conditional
necessity, the determination of the will of man by God with coaction; these
things and the like are nothing rare in your discourse. And now Sir, after all
this unpleasing, but necessary conflicting, I humbly beseech the Father of
Mercies to pardon unto me whatsoever it is, wherein I may have swerved from the
rule of Righteousness, as likewise to vouchsafe both to you and me such further
light and assistance of his Spirit, as that we agreeing together in the truth
and purity of the Gospel, I may cheerfully and with much rejoicing, subcribe my
self,

Your affectionate friend and brother in Christ, Rich. Resbury.
From my Study, April 17. 1652.
The lightlesse-Star. OR, Mr. John Goodwin discovered a Pelagio-Socinian.
CHAP. I.
The Examination of the Preface.

THat which we have to do in the Examination of this Preface is, to discover
the errors of it, and to clear up the truth against them. The errors wherewith
it is fraught, are of two sorts, yet near a kin, and mutual supporters each to
other; both very dangerous, and against the very heart of Christianity;
Socinian, against the authority of the Scriptures; and Pelagian against the
grace of God. According to our intention for the discovery and refutation of
these, we shall diligently insist upon those passages in this Preface, where
those monsters appear, passing by, or lightly touching upon the rest, to avoid
tediousness and impertinency: And therefore, whereas we have four parts of
this ensuing Discourse, the first, his invitation to read his book, the
second, his motives thereunto, the third a prevention of objections
there-against, the fourth an Apology for his change of judgment, as he calls
it. The first part, or his invitation we shall pass by (what ever observations
might be made, showing the spirit of the Author) as but the sounding of his
trumpet to bid battle to the truth. Upon the same account for his first motive
to read his Book, which is a long and plausible discourse against error in
general; we shall not speak much to it; only a word or two for caution about
it. It is, though a discourse against error, yet itself very erroneous. 1. In
the aim and tendency of it, which is insensibly and by covert insinuations, to
instill those errors into the Reader, which afterward are more openly
contended for. 2. In the Contexture of it, which manifests together with his
ensuing discourse, what was the aim of it. To make this clear, we shall take
notice of a passage or two in it, and then add some thing afterward expressed,
which will satisfy, concerning the aim we speak of. 1. For the insinuation
of his Socinian doctrine against the authority of the Scriptures, we have this
expression from him; That a man or woman, who have for many years professed the
Gospel, may in process of time come to discover vanity in some erroneous
principle or tenet, wherewith their judgments had been leavened, for some
considerable space formerly, and so grow into a disapprobation or contempt of
it; and yet may very possibly think and suppose, that the Gospel favors or
countenanceth it, and that otherwise they should never have owned nor approved
it. What Socinianisme is here vented, against the authority of the word of God,
we shall show hereafter; where we have occasion to insist against this error,
and therefore desire the Readers patience till he shall meet with it in due
place.

2. For the insinuation of his Pelagianisme exalting the nature of man against
the grace of God; generally his high declaiming against error, as the only
cause of sin, is secretly to undermine the doctrine of original sin, as to
the corruption of the will. Particularly, we shall transcribe a passage or two
wherein he so derives both our ignorance and sinfulness from error,
voluntarily by our selves, in our own persons contracted, as thence he
evacuates the Scripture-doctrine concerning both our natural blindness of
mind, and corruption of will, to this purpose, he has this passage, That
error, and all mis-notions of God, etc. pollute, corrupt, and imbase the mind
and understanding of a man, by their union, and communion with them; as a
person of a noble house and blood, stains his honor, and reputation by
coupleing himself in marriage with a woman of base parentage and conditions.
This is a clear insinuation, as if the understanding in the natural man was
in a state of great excellency and honor, contrary to the doctrine of
original sin concerning it, there is none that understands, etc. vain man
would feign be wise, though he be borne like a wild Asses Colt. But of this
more hereafter; Another passage of like import, speaking of erroneous and lying
apprehensions and conceits concerning God, he adds wherewith men willingly
suffer their minds and consciences to be imbased and corrupted even to a
spiritual rottenness and putrefaction. Again, that error disposes the
soul which drinks it in, and converseth with it, to a spiritual death. In
both which he supposes nothing less, then that the soul is by original sin,
through the corruption of the will in a state of spiritual death, rottenesse
and putrefaction.

And thus having showed from his discourse it self his erroneous aim and
insinuation accordingly. It is now time for me further to show the same by what
is afterward expressed, as I promised, which I shall do by quoting his own words,
which in the tenth page of this preface are these.

It is a thing as unquestionable, as that the Sun is up at noonday, that
Reason and Understanding in men are competent to judge of the things of God, at
least of some, yea, of many of them; or rather indeed of all that are contained
in the Scriptures, according to the degree of their discovery and manifestation
there: And after some instances whereby he would confirm this doctrine, he
comes to this conclusion page 11.

Therefore certainly those noble faculties and endowments of Reason and
Understanding in men, as they are sustained, supported, and assisted (here are,
as ever, words enough) by the spirit of God in the generality of men, are in a
capacity of apprehending, discerning, understanding (plenty of words still) the
things of God in the Gospel; yea, and evident it is from the Scriptures, that
men act beneath themselves, are remiss and slothful in awakening those
principles of light and understanding, that are vested in their natures, or
else willingly choke, suppress, and smother them (who may complain for want
of words, but this is his perpetual manner, which I shall not need after these
hints to take much notice of) if they remain in the snare of unbeleefe. Then
after a little more discourse he has (with reference to a text of Scripture
which will not own his inference) these words; Which clearly implies that men
who act and quit themselves, according to the true principles of that reason,
which God has planted in them, cannot but believe and be partakers in the
precious faith of the Gospel. To the same purpose in the fourth chapter of his
book, page 41. He professes his opinion, That that life and salvation, which
Christ in reality of design, and with semblable acceptance in the sight of
God, had from the beginning purchased by his death for men; did, or does (as it
were) in the first break, or dawning of it, appear and discover it self in
those principles of natural light, reason, judgment, conscience,
understanding, etc. which are found in the generality of men upon their coming
into the world: Then he tells us, That men generally, as they grow up in the
world, convert those principles of light and understanding to make provision
for the lusts of the flesh; and that partly by an un-manlike ossitancy, partly
out of an inordinate propenfity to comport with the world, they suffer their
judgments and understandings to be corrupted, adulterated, imbased, and abused
by many false and foolish Principles, and notions, which turn them quite a
side from a regular and due prosecution of that life and salvation, which is in
Christ for them, and might have been obtained by them; and that ignorance, or
incapacity rather, of the things of eternal life which is in men, they have
voluntarily contracted and brought upon themselves. By this time, Reader, thou will discern something of the mystery of iniquity lurking in this discourse of
his against error; the refutation of what is here averred, we must defer a
while, til we shall meet with it in its proper place, where, the Lord
assisting, we are resolved to grapple close with Master Goodwin, and to make it
(we hope) clear as the Sun, that he is not only a Teacher of falsehood, but
of the Pelagian Heresy; in the mean time we must follow him, as he goes on,
and in the first place we shall find him a Socinian.

CHAP. II.
Goodwin. THe second thing (*good Reader) wherewith I desire to possess and
fill thee, judgment and conscience, heart and soul, and all that is within
thee, to strengthen ttine hand to a diligent perusal of the Treatise ensuing
is, the high necessity that lies upon thee (as it does upon all the world
besides respectively) to awake, raise, and engage all those worthy faculties,
and endowments which God has vested in thee, reason, judgment, memory,
understanding, about the things of thine eternal peace; and because this Iron
I fear has of late been much blunted with the earthly conceits, and
suggestions of many, I am desirous to put so much the more strength to it; but
to me it is the first borne of wonder and astonishment, that amongst men,
professing the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the wisdom of God; yea,
amongst the Teachers themselves of this wisdom; men should be found, who
think they do God and men very good service, in persuading men wholly to lay
aside their reasons, judgments, understandings in matters of Religion, and not
to make use of, or engage any of these in their enquiries after matters of a
Spiritual, or supernatural concernment; doubtless Satan is a debtor to those
persons, who have seasoned the world with the unsavory salt of such a
Principle as this, for all the religious respects, and high entertainment, that
have of late been given by many amongst us, to all those wicked, senseless,
saplesse, hideous, and blasphemous Doctrines and Opinions, which like the dead
Froggs of Egypt make the Land to stink; for if men may not interpose with
their reasons, and judgments, to distinguish between Spirit and Spirit,
Opinion and Opinion, why should not one Spirit be believed as well as another?
and one Opinion received as well as another? or if the difference be not to be
made by the interposure and exercise of reason in a man, I demand, by what
other principle or means ought it to be made? If it be said partly by the Word
of God, and partly by the Spirit of God. I answer;


Resbury. Now he begins to come closer to his work, and by bolder steps then
hitherto, moves on to the open venting of such Doctrines, as he durst but
nibble at till now. In his first motive he has made such a long discourse
against Errors, as he begins to grow confident, that in the second, to which
he is now come, he may broach error without suspicion.

Here we have an hideous outcry against such, as teach the laying aside of
natural reason, in enquiries about matters of Religion, and of a Let it be
here observed, that he uses Spiritual, and supernatural for one and the
same, which will be of use afterward.
spiritual and supernatural concernment; and to make it sound the better, he
tells us of such worthy faculties, reason, understanding, etc. in reference to
these enquiries, as if he had never heard any thing of Original sin, the
blindness, darkness, perverseness, folly, bruitishnesse of the Natural man;
and then, as is the manner of all Seducers, and Heretics, he draws his
charge confused and in general terms, and therein vents the bitterness of
his spirit to the full against all the Orthodox, that is generally, the Ancient
Fathers, the Schoolmen of best note after them; and in the last place the
eminent Lights of the last Ages reformation, and of this present Generation,
these must be Factours for Satan, seasoners of the World with unsavory salt,
the abettors at least of all those borrid opinions, and blasphemies which have
darkened our Land. What Jesuit has a blacker mouth, or a stronger breath? But
let us enquire into his Doctrine, and the mystery of deceit working in the
bowels of it, and that by distinct proceeding in particulars, which he has
fraudulently wrapped up together in general.

1 Then it is true, that in some sense Reason is to be made use of in these
enquiries of Religion, and Spiritual concernments, as

1 Suppose an Heathen, not yet owning the true God, and his Word, he is by
arguments propounded to his reason to be dealt with; by the Book of the
Creation to prove the one true God, as likewise by extrinsecall arguments to be
drawn to read the Word of God, that by the word it self, as the Spirit shall
please to enlighten by it, he may come to own the Divine Canon, for the true
word of the true God.

2 Granting the Scripture the un-erring Word of God, in whatsoever it shall
deliver, we are diligently to employ our reason, in searching into the mind of
God by the Scriptures, as our light to enlighten, and rule to direct our
reason, as that word, which is able to make wise unto Salvation, and to make
the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work. And in two
things here are our reasons to be exercised; 1. The Grammar of the Scriptures,
or the forms of expression, to find out the truth of them. 2. The Logic of
the Scripture, or the true discourse thereof, and this in three things; the
Scope, the Context, and Selfe-consent; Scripture compared with Scripture, the
more obscure places interpreted by the clearer, and so in all the analogy of
faith held. Now, Sir, you know very well that in this sense, and upon these
terms, none of those, against whom you bend your style, deny the use of
reason, for they do not teach that men in seeking into the meaning of the
Scripture must become either fools, or madmen, or Enthusiasts. And was it in
this sense only that you require the use of reason, or in any such sense as
preserves the due authority of the Word, as for it self to be believed, as the
perfect rule, you had never raised such Tragedies about the use of reason, or
the laying it aside, as here you have; but we shall now pass to the enquiry,
in what sense it is to be laid aside, and there I am afraid we shall find you
requiring the use of it, so as to evacuate the authority of the Word, therefore
we say,

2. It is true, that in some sense man must lay aside his reason, in matters of
religion, and in enquiries after matters of Spiritual, and supernatural
concernment; as,

1 That our assent to such truths, as the Scriptures hold forth, may be the
assent of Faith, the immediate ground of it must not be the Selfe-evidence of
the thing testified by the Scriptures unto reason, but the authority of God
testifying. Hence that known Doctrine of the Schools, that the formal object
(I like as well to say the proper ground) of faith is the first truth, or God
himself revealing his mind. Hence suppose a truth taught in the Scripture is
likewise demonstrated to my reason by Philosophical arguments; (as for
instance, That God created the world, that is, made it of nothing;) so far is
my assent to this truth, the assent of Divine faith, as it is grounded upon the
authority of Divine testimony that assent which is grounded upon Philosophical
demonstration, is not Divine faith, but only Humane knowledge. He that trusts a
man no further then he sees him (as we say Proverbially) trusts him not at all.
Hence the Apostle, Through faith we understand Heb. 11. 3
that the worlds were framed by the Word of God, so that things which are seen
were not made of things that do appear. It is only the Christian, sure, not
the mere Philosopher, that by faith understands this, though happily both of
them may understand it by demonstration, but the Christian alone by Divine
testimony for its own authority assented to.

2 We may not oppose our natural conceptions to the Word of God, or make our
apprehensions beforehand the rule of what we will receive, for the Word and
revealed Will of God, and what we will reject; but what the Grammar, and Logic
of the Word holds forth, must be the rule of our apprehensions, whether we can
discern how in reason the things affirmed should be, or not (we must not
Afferre sensum Scripturae, but refer) otherwise we subject the authority of
Gods Truth to our own apprehensions, and believe him not, because he has said
it, but because we by reason see it; neither shall we ever otherwise embrace
the Word of God, for as much as the Word it self teaches many things; 1.
Above reason, Great is the mystery of godliness, says the Apostle; yet it is
no great mystery, if reason may comprehend it. What reason of men or Angels
could ever have thought of such a thing, as the three Persons of the Godhead,
as the Personal union of God and Man in the Mediator, the imputation of the
Mediators righteousness to believers; of Adams sin to his Posterity, with
many others? or who comprehends clearly these things, at least some of them,
when revealed in the Word?

2 Many things against reason, that is, cross to the apprehensions of corrupt
reason, as it is now in all natural men; The minding of the flesh is enmity
against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are Spiritually
discerned. (Your fruitless attempt to avoid the strength of this text of
Scripture, we shall consider in due place.) It is one virtue of the Word
preached, to cast down the reasonings of the natural man, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Many
others of like import we shall have occasion afterward to mention. On the one
hand such is the blindness and wickedness of man by Original sin, which
are withal daily increased by themselves and Satan; on the other hand, such is
the mysterious height, and transcendent purity of the Word of God, that man's
reason must receive light from it, is not a light, otherwise then as enlightened
by it, whereby to judge of it.

And as the truth we are now upon is evident by the Word, so is it by all
experience; name me any one people, or any one person, since man was Created
upon earth, that without the word or voice of God for direction, by the light
and ducture of reason, either worshipped the true God, or did not fall upon a
most abominable way of Worship, or light upon the Gospel-way of Salvation, to
omit all other deviations. Nay, you your self, who lean so much to your own
wisdom, and are so much in advancing the Rush-Candle of reason, against the
Sun of the Scripture, are amongst others an evidence, even in this the
Masterpiece of your reason, the Treatise in hand, of the incompetency of man's
reason not enlightened by the Word, through the Spirit, to judge of the things
of the Spirit of God, whilst you fall so wretchedly foul upon the maine
Doctrines of Predestination, Redemption, Perseverance, etc.

Now if in this sense Mr. Goodwin acknowledged that reason is to be laid aside,
why does he raise a Controversy with those, who in the other sense, formerly
specified, not only grant, but urge the use of it? But that Master Goodwin in
this sense denies the laying it aside, and exalts it as the Judge of the Word
beside, and above the word, seems in the first place not obscurely insinuated,
in the second place openly expressed, by some passages of his Pen.

For the first not obscurely insinuating it, what shall we say to that Doctrine
of his, which he says is much to be observed, Page 5. of this Preface? That a
man or woman, who have for many years professed the Gospel, may in process of
time come to discover vanity in some erroneous Principle, or Tenet, wherewith
their judgments have been leavened for some considerable space formerly, and
so grow into a dis-approbation or contempt of it, and yet may very possibly
think the Gospel favors, or countenanceth it, and that otherwise they
should never have owned, nor approved it.

Hence it appears, that in your account error may be discerned by reason,
which yet shall be thought by the Gospel to be owned, so that the Gospel
shall not be the rule by which to judge of truth and error, but reason shall
be the rule by which to judge, whether the Gospel it self (to wit, that
sacred Writ which is received in the Church of God for the Gospel) be true or
false. Then you go on to the same purpose; Now when a person shall be brought
into the snare of such a conceit, or imagination as this, that the Gospel in
some of the veins or carriages of it, teaches, or asserteth things that are
vain. But before you go any further (allowing the Divine authority of the
Gospel) it is unpossible that such a conceit should have place, that the
Gospel in any of the veins or carriages of it should assert any thing that is
vain. He goes on; Or if no good consistency with reason or truth; here is your
rule, to judge of any opinion in matters of Faith, and that whereby the Gospel
it self must be called to an account, the consistency or inconsistency of it
with reason; so far it must be truth, as vain man's blind reason judges it
consistent with it self. You conclude, He is in a ready posture to throw from
his soul all credence of the Divine authority of the Gospel, and to esteem
it no better then a Fable devised by men; so far then as you comprehend by
reason, the things taught in the Gospel, to be agreeable to reason, neither
above it, nor cross thereto, so far you will embrace the Gospel; if any
thing you find in it otherwise, you are in a ready posture to esteem it no
better then a Fable: I doubt you are so indeed by your discourse here, and
other-where, for most certain it is, that there are many things in the Gospel
both above your reason, and cross to it.

But Sir, allowing the divine authority of the Gospel, It is impossible that
any man should discover an error in matter of faith, and religion, but he
therein discernes it to be dis-owned and condemned by the Gospel, and the
Gospel it self was the rule and the light whereby he discovered it; and the
fruit of his discovery will not be (as you reason here) the blame of the
Gospel, but of his own former ignorance of the Gospel. But if here you have
not spoken openly enough, you have discovered your self fully, page 335. of
your book, where disputing against a maine Gospel Truth, namely, the
unchangeable love of God to the Saints, your words are these. Besides whether
any such assurance of the unchangeablenesse of the love of God, to him that is
godly, as the objection speaks of, can be effectually and upon sufficient
grounds given unto men is very questionable; yea, I conceive there is more
reason to judge otherwise then so. But let us hear what you say next; Yea,
(that which is more, it is indeedmore then enough) I verily believe that in
case any such assurance of the unchangeablenesse of Gods love were to be found
in, or could regularly be deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just ground
to any intelligent and considering man to question their authority, and whether
they were from God or no. Now have you spoken out; evident it is, as the light
of the sun, that you make man's reason (blind and corrupt as it is) a rule
above the Scriptures, whereby to try them, and the only touchstone of them;
for that which may be found in, or regularly deduced from the Scriptures, must
needs be the voice of the Scripture in concordance with it self, by what rule
now shall we question it, but that of our reason, as above it?

Now Sir, you must give me leave to tell you that your own pen has proclaimed
you a very Socinian. And now let us see, whether this conclusion leads, even to
the utter overthrow of the Scriptures: By the same reason that you may question
this doctrine, found in, or regularly deduced from the Scriptures, you may
question any other, and the authority of the Scriptures thereupon; a ready way
for all Heretics and erroneous Teachers. The Papists may question the
authority of the Scripture, if Gods hatred against Image Worship, may be found
in, or regularly deduced from the Scriptures; you may question the authority of
Scriptures, if holiness of life, or whatsoever other truth (as well one as
another) may be found in, or regularly deduced from them. Let me advise you a
more compendious way to maintain your errors against personal election, and
reprobation, against the dominion of God therein expressed, against the
confinement of redemption to the elect, against the perseverance of the Saints,
against the efficacious influence of grace upon the will of man; and even this
error concerning the light and ability of the natural man, for discerning and
applying the things of the spirit of God, held forth in the Gospel; trouble
not your self to torture the Scriptures, that they may seem to witness for
you; but for as much as they speak so much against you, question their
authority, and whether they be from God, or not. And why should you not do as
your elder brethren of the Socinian-family have done before you? Let us first
see their doctrines, as like to yours, as one egg is like another, what says
Smalcius? It is certain, that whatsoever is contrary to reason, is neither
extant in the holy Scriptures, neither can it be gathered from them, De Christo
vero and naturali Dei filio, C. 6. What says Ostorodius, another head of that
Tribe? If reason or understanding expressly prove the Trinity of persons in God
to be false, how may it come into the mind of any man, right in his wits, that
yet notwithstanding it is true, and may be proved by the Word of God? Now add
Mr. Goodwins doctrine, and see if it speak not the same language. I verily
believe (by the Secinian not Apostolical faith) that in case any such
assurance of the unchangeablenes of Gods love, was to be found in, or could
regularly be deduced from the Scriptures, it was a just ground to any
intelligent and considering man, to question their authority, and whether they
were from God or no? These doctrines, plainly allow not the Scripture in the
Grammar and Logique of it, the rule and light to guide and conclude man's
reason; but exalt the reason of man, as judge above it; whence, whatsoever
Article of faith they dispute about, nothing is more usual with them then this
objection, this or that is false, because contrary to reason.

We have now seen their doctrines, let us see their deductions, which likewise
must be yours, your doctrine being the same. Hence they proceed to deny many
Articles of the faith, because contrary to reason, at least in their
apprehensions. The Racovian Catechism, the body of their Theology, or Heresy
rather, rejects the doctrine of the three persons in one essence, p. 49. the
two natures in the one person of Christ, page 55. Danies that Christ by his
death satisfied for us, and merited eternal life for us, page 261. And all,
because these are contrary, say they, to right reason. Smalcius against
Franzius opposes Original sin, because (if he say true) it is utterly
contrary to reason, that an innocent person by once sinning should infect all
his posterity. These for a touch of your Doctrine, and whither it leads.


CHAP. III.
Goodwin. COncerning the Word of God, it is to be acknowledged, that this is to
be in special manner interessed in all our dijudications between Doctrine and
Doctrine, Opinion and Opinion, in matter of Religion.


Resbury. Why do you not acknowledge it the perfect rule?


Goodwin. And that this is the fire which must try every man's work of what
sort it is, and must separate the vil^ from the precious.


Resbury. Do not you sit then as a Refiner by fire, of this fire it self, by
your reason, so as to reject any thing that may be found in the Scripture, or
regularly deduced therefrom?


Goodwin. But as the Plummet and Rule do not measure the work of the
Architect, or discover whether it be true and square, or otherwise of, and by
themselves, but as they are regularly applied hereunto, either by the Workman
himself, or some other, capable of making such an application; however true it
may be that a sufficient test or proof of the work cannot be made without the
use of the Plummet and Rule about it. In like manner, though the Word of God be
of sovereign use and necessity for the measuring of Opinions and Doctrines,
and for the discovery of what is straight, and what crooked in them, yet he
that desires to reap the Spiritual benefit, and advantage of the usefulness
of it in this kind; must first understand the mind and sense of God in it
aright; and secondly, Be dextrous, and expert in making a due application of
it, being rightly understood, to the Doctrines, or Opinions, the soundness or
unsoundnesse whereof he desires to understand by it.


Resbury. To what end are these waste words? 1. The Scripture is the rule, and
reason is the eye; but as the Scripture is the rule, so is it the light too, by
which this eye must be enlightened, otherwise it is too dark to apply this
rule. It is by the Scriptures that a right understanding is had of them, and a
dextrous faculty for applying them, they being the means by the Holy Ghost
appointed, and sanctified, for enlightening and sanctifying the reason of man.
The Scripture is not only a rule for trial, a^ is that of the Architect, but
for instructing too; it is such a rule, as gives rules for instructing and
directing in all matters of Religion, and even for the use of it self, as a
rule; and indeed that you may the less wonder hereat, all Arts are such rules,
as give rules for understanding themselves.

Suppose this Geometrical question was to be debated', whither in a right
angled Triangle the square of the Hypolemise be equal to the square of the
sides? I think you will grant, that we must fetch the demonstration from
Geometry it self, and the demonstration must conclude us; we must not say,
though this proposition be demonstratively concluded in Geometry, yet we will
question it, only indeed here is the difference; A Geometrical demonstration
renders the conclusion not only agreeable to Principles, and former
propositions in Geometry, by which it is demonstrated, but withal clear to
reason; but the conclusion of a Divine truth by Scripture is many times obscure
to reason, though clearly agreeable to Principles, and other Doctrines in
Scripture, because even those Principles and Doctrines proving it, are to man's
reason* not for want of light in them, but through the blindness of it
obscure. Yet shall reason see the legitimacy of the proof, from Principles and
Doctrines, in Scripture laid down, when it has very obscure apprehensions,
both of the thing contained in the conclusion, and the things contained in the
Principles and Doctrines proving it; these things faith believing upon the
authority of the word affirming. 2. You deal with the Scriptures, as he, that
because the rule and plummet does not verify the judgment, which he made by
his eye at a guess, he will therefore by his eye question the rule and plummet
themselves; whilst you take liberty to question the authority of the
Scriptures, and whether they be from God or not, upon supposall of something
found in them, or regularly deduced from them, which relisheth not with your
reason.


Goodwin. For first, it is not the letter, or form of words, as separated, or
considered apart from the spirit, notion, or sense of them, that is the
touchstone, or rule of trial for Doctrines, yea, the letter and words are
only servants to the sense and notion, which they contain and exhibit, and
were principally, if not only, delivered by the Holy Ghost unto men for this
end, that by them the sense, mind, and Counsel of God in all the
particulari^ies of them, which are held forth in the Scriptures, might be
communicated and conveyed to the reasons and understandings of men; so that in
case a man had the sense and mind of God upon the same terms of certainty and
of knowledge, without the letter on which he has it, or may have it by means
of the letter, he should be as richly, as completely qualified, hereby to
discern between Doctrines, as he now can be by the opportunity and advantage
of the letter.


Resbury. Words to no purpose still; 1. If the Letter and words of the
Scripture be servants to the Sense and Notion, and so forth, as you declare,
then is not that sense, which the letter and words exhibit (that is, the
Grammar of the Scripture) in conjunction with the scope, context, and
concordance thereof, that is, with the Logic of the Scripture, by man's reason
to be questioned, but reason is to be captivate to the authority thereof. 2. I
hope you do not think of any way for obtaining the sense and mind of God,
otherwise then by the letter; if an Angel from Heaven should preach any other
Doctrine, let him be accursed.


Goodwin. Now if the Scriptures themselves be upon no other terms, nor in any
other case serviceable, or useful unto men, for the trial of Doctrines and
Opinions, but only as and when they are clearly understood by them, it clearly
follows, that whatsoever is requisite and necessary to bring men to a true
understanding of the Scriptures, is of equal necessity for the distinguishing
of Doctrines, and to interpose, or be made use of in all affairs and
concernments in Religion; if then the reasons, judgments, and understandings
of men must of necessity interpose, act, argue, debate, and consider before the
true sense and mind of God in any Scripture can be duly apprehended,
understood, and believed by men, it is a plain case that these are to be used,
and to be interessed in whatsoever is of any religious consequence, or
concernment to us. That the mind of God in the Scriptures cannot be duly
apprehended, received, or believed by men, but by the acting and working of
their reasons, minds, and understandings, in order hereunto, is evident from
hence, viz. because the mind of God cannot be thus apprehended, or believed by
men, but by means of an intellectual or rational difference tasted, or
resented by them, between this mind of his, and all other minds, meanings, or
senses whatsoever, that may be supposed to reside, or be in the words.


Resbury. If you was not a man, whose ear is chained to the music of his
own Tongue, you might spare the greatest part of your words, and yet speak as
much as you do. In what sense Reason is to be used, in what sense to be laid
aside, we have seen already, as likewise the use and necessity of the Word of
God, for begetting in man's understanding that intellectual, or rational
difference tasted, or resented by him which you speak of, the Word being the
rule and light to the understanding, as to matters of religion.


Goodwin. For example, If there be another sense to be given of such, or such a
passage of Scripture, either contrary unto, or differing from that, which I
conceive to be the mind of God here, which has the same rational, or
intellectual savor and taste with this, that is, which as well suits with the
words, agrees with the Context, falls in with the scope and subject matter in
hand, is as accordable with Scripture-assertion elsewhere, co^ports as clearly
with the unquestionable Principles of reason, and the like; how is it possible
for me in this case to conceive or believe, especially with the certainty of
faith, that my sense is the mind of God, and consequently the true sense of
that place, rather then that other, which has all the same Characters,
Symptoms, and Arguments of being the mind of God, which none has, therefore
it must needs be by the exercise and acting of my reason and understanding, and
by the report which they make of their discoveries in their enquiries, that I
come regularly to conclude, and to be satisfied, that this is the mind of God
in such or such a Scripture, and none other.


Resbury. 1 In our enquiries into the true meaning of any text of Scripture,
the word it self by the forms of expression, scope, context, and agreement
with Scripture-assertion elsewhere, is our Card, and compass, by which reason
is to steer her enquiry, not reason the Judge above, or against the word.

2 Such an example do you here give, and so do you state it, as it labors of
a most evident contradiction. For how is it possible that two different, much
less contrary senses, should have* the same intellectual taste, or savor,
should as well suit with the words, agree with the context, and have those
other Characters, which you name, one as another? Secondly, suppose such a
thing possible, how is it yet possible that reason should determine which is
the true sense? If both senses have both Scripture and reason equally for them,
as is here supposed, whence shall reason frame a judgment for this rather then
that, or for that rather then this? I believe you made great haste, when you
made so little speed. One thing further let me mind you of, that whereas you
begin with intellectual savor and taste, and conclude with the unquestionable
principles of reason, you might in both have spared your pains, for where the
other Characters are found, they will conclude the sense, and if reason shall
discern them, she must needs see there is reason to conclude with them.


Goodwin. If it be here objected, and demanded; But is it meet, or tolerable,
that the reason of man should judge in the things of God? or that the
understandings of men should umpire, and determine in his affairs? I answer;

1 If God pleases to impart his mind, and Counsels in his Word and writing
unto men, with an injunction, and charge, that they receive and own them, as
from him, and that they take heed they do not mistake him, or embrace either
their own conceits, or the minds of others, in stead of his, in this case for
men to put a difference by way of judging and discerning between the mind of
God, and that which is not his mind, is so far from being an act of
Authority, Presumption, or unseemly Usurpation in men, that it is a fruit of
their deep loyalty, submission, and obedience unto God. When Christ enjoined
the Disciples of the Pharisees, and the Herodians, to render unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are Gods; he did not
only give them a warrant, and Commission to judge and determine what, and which
were the things of God, as well as which were the things of Caesar, but laid a
charge upon them also, to put this warrant in execution; and this not only by
judging actually which were the things of God, but by practicing and acting
also, upon and according to this judgment.

2 To judge of God, and of the things of God, in the sense we now speak, is
but to acknowledge, own, and receive God, and the things of God, in their
transcendent excellency, goodness, and truth, and as differenced in their
perfections respectively, from all other beings and things; the poorest and
meanest subject that is may lawfully, and without any just offense, judge his
Prince, yea, or him that is made a lawful Judge over him, to be wise, just,
bountiful, etc. at lest when there is sufficient ground for it.


Resbury. Here according to your manner, you spin out your discourse by
trivial Objections, and Answers; for your answer it is true, allowing the
Scripture the honor to guide and rectify reason by her assertions, and by her
authority to conclude it: but both the Objection and Answer tedious, because
impertinent.


Goodwin. If it be yet further demanded; But is the reason or understanding of
man competent to judge the things of God, as (for example) to determine, and
conclude what is the mind of God in such or such a passage of Scripture, or in
such and such a case? Does not the Scripture speak of men in their natural
condition, calling them darkness? affirming likewise, That the light shines
in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not? and elsewhere does it not
inform us, that the natural man perceives (or receives) not the things of
the Spirit of God, because they are foolishness unto him? neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned? And how many Heathen
Philosophers, Heretics, and others undertaking to judge of the things of God
in the Gospel, by the light and strength of their own reasons, and
understandings, have miscarried, to the everlasting perdition of their own
souls, and as is much to be feared, of many others also? to all this I answer
by degrees.


Resbury. More spinning still; He that has an opinion to broach that may not
abide the light, must not presently lay it down in terms, but by winding
discourses and fetches about usher it in. Master Goodwin is no Novice at this
Artifice. Hence we had before such a long and plausible discourse against
Error in general, wherein were couched many insinuations against the
darkness and impotency of the natural man's understanding; then a confused and
cl^morous Discourse about the necessity, interest, and use of reason in matters
of Religion, and of a Spiritual or supernatural concernment, till at last he
came boldly up to vent his Socinian Error. After which again, no little
impertinent objecting and answering, and having by this time, as he hopes,
discomposed the judgment, and scattered the intention of his Reader, he is now
hastening to speak out, what he durst but mutter all this while, and make for
at a distance, by way of glancing, rather then asserting his Pelagian Doctrine,
for which even his Socinian Doctrine has been making way, and must still be
employed in this service. And now good Reader, we are approaching that corrupt
Tenet of his, which we gave notice of at the end of his Discourse against
Error, and which we then promised to call to account in its proper place.


CHAP. IV.
Goodwin. IT is a thing as unquestionable, as that the Sun is up at noon day,
that reason and understanding in men are competent to judge of the things of
God, at lest of some, yea, of many of them, or rather indeed of all that are
contained in the Scriptures, according to their degree of discovery and
manifestation there; for does not God himself own them in this capacity, when
he appeals, and referres himself unto them in several of his great and
important affairs, authorizing them to judge in the case between him and his
adversaries? And now O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge I pray
you betwixt me and my Vineyard, what could have been done more to my
Vineyard, that I have not done in it. So again, Hear now O house of Israel,
are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal? In these and such like
appeals, ^e supposes the persons appealed unto to be as capable, or (however
as well capable, of the equity and righteousness of his ways (and
consequently to be in a regular capacity of justifying him) as of the
unworthiness, and unrighteousness of their ways against whom he stands in
the contest. So our Savior, to the chief Priests and Elders in his Parable,
When the Lord therefore of the Vineyard comes, what will he (or rather, what
shall he) do unto those Husbandmen? they say unto him, he will miserably
destroy those Husbandmen, and let out his Vineyard unto others, who shall
render him the fruits in their season; We see these Priests and Elders, though
men of great unworthiness otherwise, and far from believing in Christ, were
yet able to award a righteous judgment, and such as our Savior himself
approved, yea, and put in execution not long after, between him and his
Husbandmen; so in another place to the Hypocritical Jews, Ye Hypocrites,
ye can discern the face of the sky, and of the earth, but how is it that ye
do not discern this time? yea, and why even of (or from) your selves judge
ye not what is right? in which passage (amongst other things) be clearly
implies these two.

1 That had they set their minds upon things that most concerned them, they
were in a sufficient capacity, by the direction and help of those Characters
and Signs, which their own Prophets had long before delivered, clearly to
have discerned, that the days and times in which they now lived, were indeed
the days of their Messiah.

2 That (...) from themselves, that is, out of natural and inbred Principles,
whereby they were enabled to judge of things commodious, and expedient for them
in like cases, they were in a capacity to have come to this issue and
conclusion; That it was now high time to comprimise that great and weighty
controversy, which had of a long time been depending between God and them, by
Repentance. The Apostle Paul wills the Corinthians in one place to judge what
he says; in another, he directs, That in their Churchmeetings the Prophets
should speak, two or three, and that the rest should judge; in both which
places ^e clearly supposes in them a competency of Judicature, or discerning
about spiritual things. And when in his defense before Agrippa, be demands of
him, and the rest that were present, Why should it be thought a thing
incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? he clearly supposes, that
the Resurrection it self of the dead, which yet is one of the great and deep
Mysteries of the Gospel, was nothing, but what they consulting with the light
of reason, and understanding in themselves, (for they were not supernaturally
enlightened) might judge probable enough, and no way unlike to be effected. When
God commands, and calls upon all men every where to repent (and so to believe)
he must either suppose them in a capacity to distinguish, and discern between
the things, whereof he would have them repent, and so between what he would
have them to believe, and what not; or else speak unto them as no otherwise
capable of such his Commands, then the stones in the earth, or Beasts of the
field; and how then is the Commandment holy, just, and good? therefore
certainly those noble faculties, and endowments of reason, and understanding in
men, as they are sustained, supported, and assisted by the Spirit of God in the
generality of men, are in a capacity of apprehending, discerning, and
understanding the things of God in the Gospel.


Resbury. We have here an Answer to the Objection, first begun with an hardy
and venturous assertion, with great confidence set off, that the natural man
may discern of all the Truths of God contained in the Scriptures, according
to their degree of discovery, and manifestation there, that is, according as
they are more or less clearly laid down there; That it is affirmed here of
natural men, is evident both from the Objection it self, and the Answer in
diverse passages of it. Secondly, This assertion endeavored to be proved by
several instances, but neither any of them, nor all together reach the proof,
there being nothing at all in them thus applied, but mere fallacies.

1 From the part to the whole; Suppose these instances were obvious enough to
the Natural man, it does not therefore follow that he can discern all
Scripture-truthes, this is too slender an induction of particulars to prove the
general; And as all of them together labor of this fallacy,, so the last
instance particularly. Suppose the natural man may discern some things to be
believed, and repented of, it does not thence follow, that he may discern all
things of that kind.

2 From unequals, as if equals; 1. The Natural man has light to discern some
particulars of the Law of God unto Conviction, yet in diverse cases this light
is very glimmeting, and vanishing; it does not hence follow that he has light
to discern all the Mysterious truths of the Gospel. Instances belonging to
the Law are, the first, second, and third. 2 By Natural light may in diverse
cases a Prophecy fulfilled be discerned, comparing the event with the
Prediction of it. Thus in the fourth instance might the days of the Messiah
have been discerned by the Jews, who owned, and conversed with those
Prophesies, which foretold them, and that being discerned, a granted duty
likewise, depending on it, must needs be discerned, as that the Messiah was to
be embraced, and sins to be repented of; but neither does it hence follow, that
all Gospel Mysteries might be discerned: as for your observation (...) the
meaning may very well be, why not without a Monitor? 3. Suppose by Natural
light the Omnipotency of God may be discerned, and thence the possibility of
the Resurrection of the dead (for that is it the Apostle urges;) why should it
be incredible to men, as though impossible with God? Still will it not hence
follow, that more Mysterious Gospel truths may be discerned, though many
Attributes of the Divine Nature may in some measure be discerned by Natural
light, and works thereon depending; yet does it no wise hence follow, that
therefore all Gospel truths are discernable; of this kind is the fifth
Instance, there being a great disparity betwixt these and those.

3 From the Argument to the Question, this in the fourth Instance, the Question
to be proved is of Natural men, the instance here for proof of it is of the
Saints; an Argument altogether impertinent. Ignoratio Elenchi.

4 From the Object: The Command of God, to the Adjunct related to it, man's
ability for discerning it, the Command, or Expostulation aequivalent: Why do
ye not discern? and why of your selves do ye not judge? and when God calls
men to believe, and repent, he must suppose them in a capacity to distinguish
and discern betwixt the things, etc. For answer hereto from the command of
discerning, to the power of discerning, there is no consequence, except God who
commands, give that power, man commanded cannot understand many maine things;
otherwise why does David pray so earnestly, that God would open his eyes, that
he may behold the wonderful things of his Law* Psalm. 119. ver. 18. That he
would give him understanding, that he might keep his Law, ver. 34? Why does the
Apostle pray for the Ephesians, That God would give unto them the spirit of
Wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of Christ, that the eyes of their
understanding being enlightened, ^^ey might know what is the hope of his
calling, 1 Ephesians. 17, 18? Why does the same Apostle teach, That the Natural
man cannot know the things of the Spirit of God? adding the reason, because
they are spiritually discerned; If the Natural man can discern all the
truths of God, all Gospel Mysteries. In a word, to argue from the command in
general, to ability for performance in things of Spiritual nature is an old
Pelagian error; the Lord commands the Jews to make to themselves new hearts,
but otherwhere he declares himself the Maker thereof; to circumcise their
hearts, but otherwhere it is his promise to do it. Christ commands the Jews
to believe on the light, John 12. 36, yet could they not, as being hardened, and
of whom it was long since Prophesied that they should not 39, 40. A thousand
instances might be given to confirm this truth: but we shall have more
occasion afterward; in the meanetime, when the Pelagians were thus wont to
argue, from the command to the power, as Austine every where refutes them, by
the promise of God to work in the Elect by peculiar grace, what he requires,
and by the prayers of the Saints, and by their thanksgivings, and the like; so
he lays down this general conclusion. Nothing do I see in the Holy
Scriptures commanded by the Lord to man, for the proving of his free will,
which may not be found either to be given of his goodness, or to be desired,
for manifesting the aid of Grace, Lib. 2. contra d^as, Episto. Pelag. c. 10.
And in his Book, De correp. and gratia, c. 2. Against that Pelagian clamor,
why are we commanded to turn from evil and do good, if we do it not? but
God works in us both to will, and to do: he answers; Let the Sons of God
know, that they are acted by the Spirit of God, to act what is to be acted, and
when they have acted it, to him let them give thanks, by whom they were acted,
for they are acted that they may act, not that they may act nothing, and this
is showed to them, what they ought to act, that when they have acted, as they
ought to act, that is, with love, and with the delight of righteousness, they
may rejoice to have received that sweetness, which the Lord has given, that
the earth might bring forth her fruit; but when they act not, whether by not
doing at all, or by not doing out of love, let them pray that they may receive
what yet they have not, For what shall they have that they shall not receive,
or what have they that they have not received? A little after, Cap. 3. he
concludes, that in the command man is to take notice what he ought to have in
the reproof, that it is his own fault that he has it not, in prayer, whence
he is to receive what he would have.

5 From Disparates, as one and the same, he affirms such a knowledge in the
power of the Natural man, as whence he may repent and believe, nay must, for
thus he inferres; that men, who act and quit themselves according to the true
Principles of that reason, which God has planted in them, cannot but believe,
and be partakers of the precious faith of the Gospel; and repentance he
requires before faith, as is evident in that passage of his, God calls upon all
men every where to repent, and so to believe; if they cannot but believe, and
that they may believe they must repent; then from this knowledge in the
Natural man's power, both faith and repentance necessarily ensue. That this
knowledge is in the power of the Natural man, according to his Doctrine, is
evident, because the Objection and Answer is about the Natural man, whence he
inferres this conclusion.

Now for answer, here is the fallacy, he confounds that knowledge which may be
in the Natural man, with that which cannot be but in the Spiritual.

There is a twofold knowledge about Spiritual things: The 1 Natural. 2
Spiritual.
The former Historical, or of Logical apprehension of Propositions rather then
of things; or of Propositions only distinctly, of things contained in the
Propositions confusedly, and afar off; as when a man reads an History of
persons, places, etc. but sees them not with his eye.

The latter Iniuitive, or of Spiritual Vision, the things themselves in the
light of the Spirit, beheld, as it were by Vision, distinctly, and at hand; the
former like that knowledge which the Queen of Sheba had of Solomon in her own
Country, only by hearsay; the latter, like that which she had of him at
Jerusalem, by the sight of her eyes, 1. King. 10. 4, 5, 6, 7. then she
believed, then she admired, not till then. This is the knowledge, whence
springs faith, and repentance, and this is peculiar to the Saints, 1 Ephesians. 17,
18. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. Mat. 16. 17.


CHAP. V.
Goodwin. YEa, and evident it is from the Scriptures, that men act beneath
themselves, are remiss, and slothful in awaking those Principles of light and
understanding, that are vested in their natures, or else willingly choke,
suppress, and smother them, if they remain in the snare of unbeleefe; Pray
for us, (says Paul so the Thessalonians) that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and evil men, for all men have not faith. By unreasonable (or as
the word signifies absurd) and evil men, he plainly means, not men who
naturally, or in actu primo were unreasonable, such as those, were not like to
endanger him, or to obstruct the course of the Gospel; but such as were
unreasonable, Actu secundo (that is) persons who acted contrary to the light
and principles of reason, and hereby became (...), industriously evil, or
wicked; that there were such persons as these abroad in the world, he gives
this account, For all men have not faith; which clearly implies, that men who
act, and quit themselves according to the true Principles of that reason, which
God has planted in them, cannot but believe, and be partakers of the precious
faith of the Gospel. To this purpose that passage in Chrysostom is memorably
worthy; As to believe (the Gospel) is the part of a raised, and nobly ingenuous
soul; so (on the contrary) not to believe is the property of a soul most
unreasonable, and unworthy, and depressed, (or bowed down) so the so^^ishnesse
of bruit beasts.


Resbury. Reader, here we must grapple close with him; observe in his own
words what here he says about the understanding of the Natural man, and his
power to make use of it for repenting, and believing: now one of these two he
must needs affirm, either that he may so use his natural understanding, as
thence, without any peculiar and higher work of the Spirit of God, he may
repent, and believe, or rather he must; or else upon such use of it, as he may
make, he shall certainly receive such a work of the Spirit upon his soul, as
thence not only may, but must faith and repentance be produced: whether of
these he affirms, I charge it with 1. Evident falsehood, 2. With Pelagianisme.

First, for the falsehood of both these I shall use only four Arguments to
evince it.

I.

From the doctrine of Natural corruption.

If we be not sufficient of our selves, as of our selves, to think a good
thought; If there be none in the state of natural corruption that understands,
that seeks after God; If that that is borne of the flesh be flesh; If in this
flesh there dwells no good thing; If the natural man receives not the things of
the Spirit of God, but they are foolishness unto him, neither can know them,
because they are Spiritually discerned; If the flesh, and the lustings thereof
be contrary to the Spirit, and the lustings thereof; If in the regenerate with
the flesh, the Law of sin is served in opposition to the mind, serving the
Law of God; If vain man though he would feign be wise, yet is borne like a
wild Asses Colt; If the natural man be dead in trespasses and sins; If he be
darkness; If the minding of the flesh be enmity against God; If it be not
subject to the Law of God, neither can be, so that they that are in the flesh
cannot please God; then in neither of those senses is faith and repentance in
the Natural man's power.

But the Antecedent, or the former is true.

Therefore the Consequent, or the latter.

As for those frivolous exceptions, which you have against some of these
particulars concerning natural corruption, we shall blow them away when we
come to them, for they are light chafe.

II.

From the Doctrine of the Natural man's subjection to Satan.

If Satan be the Prince of the world, the god of the world; If the course of
the world in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, be
according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that works
effectually in the children of disobedience; If Satan, the strong man, have
such possession of the Natural man, as without the peculiar work of the Holy
Ghost, as the stronger, he cannot be dispossessed.

Then is not repentance, and faith, in either of the two named senses in the
power of the natural man.

But the former is true.

Therefore the latter.

III.

From the subjection of the Natural man to the Law, as the Covenant of Works.

If in this estate of natural corruption and subjection to the Devil therein,
all Natural men be under the Law, as the Covenant of Works, and the Law only
reveals sin, and wrath, stirs up and increases finne, but gives no
strength against it; When we were in the flesh, the motions of sin, which
were by the Law, did work in our members, Romans 7. 5. Sin took occasion by the
Commandment, and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence, ver. 11.

Then as formerly.

But the former is here true likewise.

Therefore the latter.

IV.

From the Doctrine of Regeneration.

If Regeneration be (as the word sounds) a New Birth, a birth of the Spirit, in
opposition to the natural Birth, as the birth of the Flesh; a birth not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God; a
quickening of such as were dead in trespasses and sins; a resurrection from the
dead, a new creation; If none can come unto Christ except drawn of the Father;
If not of works that we have done, but of his own grace; If not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God who shows mercy; If a calling out of
darkness; If translating from the power of darkness, a taking away the heart
of stone, and giving a^ heart of flesh. Then as formerly.

But the former is true.

Therefore the latter.

Further consideration of the falsehood of this Doctrine we shall have in that
which follows, showing the Pelagianisme of it.


CHAP. VI. Now for the Pelagianisme of this Doctrine.
1 SUppose it acknowledge no supernatural grace, (and therefore no grace) but
only toying with the word Grace, ascribes saving virtues and operations to
Nature, and an assistance from God, proportioned and attemper'd to the heedfull
exercise and improvement of natural abilities, then is it evidently Pelagian,
and that of the first stamp.

But if this be not the spirit of this Doctrine those conclusions here laid
down are very closely expressed.

1 That men act beneath themselves, (and here he speaks of the generality of
men) are remiss, and slothful, in awakening those Principles of light and
understanding that are vested in their Natures, or else willingly choke,
suppress, and smother them, if they remain in the snare of unbeleefe.

2 That men who act, and quit themselves according to the true Principles of
that reason which God has planted in them, cannot but believe, and be
partakers of the precious faith of the Gospel. Let us now add a further
explication in his own words presently after, and this will yet more clearly
appear to have been his meaning which we here suppose; his words are as
follows. That about the efficacy of the Grace of God vouchsafed unto men,
there is a great abuse of the word Natural, and so of the word Supernatural,
a word not found in the Scriptures, either formally, or vertually; (the gross
falsehood whereof we shall see in due place) and that the Scripture knows not
the word Natural in any such sense, wherein it should distinguish the
unregenerate state of a man from the regenerate, (as false as the former, as in
due time shall be demonstrated.) Now this Commentary of his own is so manifest
for the sense we here suppose, as needs no insisting upon; for if the efficacy
of Grace be not supernatural, then neither is Grace it self as the Principle,
nor any effects of Grace, as to believe, repent, etc. supernatural; for the
principle, operation, and effects are all of one kind, natural or
supernatural; and so Grace is nothing else but a natural endowment, and
improvement.

But then, what shall be his meaning afterward in his explication of the
Parable of the Talents, where he speaks thus: That in case men will stir up,
and lay out themselves accordingly, in the improvement of such abilities and
gifts, as shall from time to time be vouchsafed to them, they may by virtue of
the bounty, and gracious decree of God in that behalf, attain, and receive
from God what proportion, and measure of the Spirit and Grace of God they can
desire.

I answer; The work of this Spirit of Grace upon their hearts, if it be
supernatural, he contradicts himself, who will not allow that word either
formally, or vertually about the efficacy of Grace; if he do not contradict
himself, this work of the Spirit must be nothing slse but such an influx, as
is attemper'd, and proportioned to man's Natural acting, and therefore
natural. But this was the frequent manner of his great Apostle Pelagius, to
play fast and loose at every turn with the words Grace, and Nature. I much
suspect that very Doctrine of Pelagius, which Austine lays down in his own
words, Lib. de great. Christi, etc. c. 4. to be here touched: We, says
Pelagius, distinguish thus these three; In the first place we appoint, to be
able; in the second, to will; in the third, to be; To be able, we place in
Nature, to will, in free Choice, to be, in effect. That first, to be able
belongs properly to God, who has conferred it upon his Creature; the two
others, that is, to will, and to be, are to be referred unto man, because they
descended from the fountain of Free will; therefore in the will, and in the
good work, the praise is of man, yea, both of man and God, who has given to
him the possibility of the will it self, and of the work, and who always
helps that possibility it self with the aid of his Grace, but that men may be
able to will good, and to finish it, this is only of God. See now what Austine
here advertiseth, concerning Pelagius his Concession of Grace, (which, how
rightly it suits Master Goodwin, let the Reader judge. Whenever (says he) we
hear that he confesses the aid of Divine Grace, we ought to know, that he
neither believes our will, nor our action to be helped hereby, but only the
possibility of the will, and work; which alone of these three he affirms that
we have of God, and this in nature, as is manifest.

CHAP. VII.
2. SUppose it acknowledge no habitual grace upon the will renewing it, nor
effectual acting, and determining it, but all the assistance of grace
acknowledged (be it natural or supernatural) is only for inlightening the
understanding, and exciting the will to determine it self; whence it may come
to pass, that the will may, as to the event, obey, or not obey the call of
God. This is partly no more then what Pelagius acknowledged, partly opposite to
that grace, which the Orthodox Fathers maintained against him.

1 Observe here, that he puts all upon the Understanding, as if all the
assistance of grace necessary, was only for enlightening it.

2 That Pelagius himself was driven to acknowledge thus much, and withal,
exciting grace, whatsoever he meant thereby.

3 That the Fathers opposing his Heresy, required and maintained that grace,
which by supernatural efficacy, did not only inlighten the understanding, and
excite the will; but likewise did, by an efficacious impression, give both a
new and spiritual power to the will, as likewise the acting of that power; and
the same grace that gave the power, gave likewise the acting of that power, and
was both preventing and effectual, and peculiar, and of infallible issue for
conversion, and therefore not common to those who were converted, with those
who were not, but peculiar to the converted. But let us see the truth of what
is here asserted.

And first, What Pelagius acknowledged (as much for ought I can discern as Mr.
Goodwin,) August. lib: de gratia Christi contra Pelag. and Caelest. chap, 10.
Thus reports him, When he had a long time affirmed, that not by the aid of
God, but of our selves in our selves, the will is made good; he objected
against himself, out of the Epistle to the Philippians chap. 2. and how (says
he) shall that of the Apostle stand, It is God that works in us, both to will
and to do; Then, that he might, as it were, answer this objection, which he
saw so vehemently against his opinion; going on he adds, He works in us to
will what is good, to will what is holy, whilst he inflames us, who are addicted
to earthly things, after the manner of the dumb beasts, loving only the things
present, with the greatness of the glory to come, and with promise of rewards;
whilst by the revelation of wisdom he stirs up the listlesse Will to desire
after God, whilst he exhorts us to all that is good. To the same purpose, c. 7.
and c. 41.

2 What Austine requires in his answer hereto, when he had first discovered his
subtlety, that all that he intends here, by revelation of wisdom, and
exhortation may be nothing else but (according to his former doctrine)
Effectual and determining grace upon the Will.
the law of God and doctrine of his word; (as all that Mr. Goodwin means by his
concession of grace is nothing but what is natural) He adds, But no such grace
will we own: Let him at length acknowledge that grace, whereby the greatness
of the glory to come, is not only promised, but is withal believed, and hoped
for; nor only is wisdom revealed, but withal it is beloved; nor only is all
that is good exhorted to, but persuaded; for all have not faith, who by the
Scriptures hear the Lord promising the Kingdom of heaven; neither are all
persuaded, who are exhorted that they would come to him, who says, Come unto
me all ye that labor. No potential grace but what is effectual, that grace
which gives to be able to obey the call of God, gives effectually to obey. The
grace of Christ not common, but peculiar to all those and only those, who are
converted by it. The power of conversion from God.
But who they are that have faith, and who are persuaded to come to him, he
has shown clearly enough, where he says, No man can come unto me, except the
father draw him; and a little after, where he speaks of unbeleevers, I have
said unto you (says he) that no man can come to me except it be given him of
the father, John 6. 44. and 65. This grace Pelagius must confess, if he will
not only be called, but likewise be a Christian. Hearken to this Mr. Goodwin,
least your Christianity be called into question. And chap. 12. speaking of the
same grace; by this grace, says he, we not only know what to do, but we do
what we know; nor only do we believe what we should love, but we love what we
believe. Then he goes on chap. 13. If this grace must be called doctrine, let
it be so called, but so, as that we believe, that God poures it into the soul
more deeply and inwardly by an unspeakable sweetness, not only by those who
plant and water outwardly, but also by himself, who gives the increase in
secret, so as not only to show the truth but to bestow love. For so does God
teach those who are called according to his purpose, giving at once both to
know The teaching of divine grace, effectual upon the will.
what they should do, and to do what they know; whence the Apostle to the
Thessalonians 1 Epistle 4. 9. But concerning brotherly love, ye need not that
I write unto you, for ye are taught of God to love one another: And that he
might prove that they were taught of God, he adds presently, And indeed ye
do it toward all the brethren, which are in Macedonia; Showing this to be a
most certain evidence, that they are taught of God, if they d^e what they are
taught. After this manner, Are all taught, who are called according (...)
purpose, as it is written in the Prophets, They shall all be taught of God.

But he that knows what he ought to do, and does it not, has not yet
learned of God according to Grace, but according to the Law; not according to
the Spirit, but according to the Letter. Then chap. 14. speaking of the same
effectual teaching of grace, Of this manner of teaching, says he, the Lord
says, Every one who has heard and learned of the father, comes to me;
whosoever therefore has not come, it is not rightly said of him, he has heard
indeed, and learned that he should come; but he will not do what he has
learned: In no wise is it The efficacy of grace determining the wi^ in its
motion, and operation takes not away the liberty of the will
rightly said of that manner of teaching, whereby God teaches through grace;
For (if as the truth speaks) every one, who has learned, comes; whosoever
comes not, he has not learned; but who sees not, that each one comes and
comes not, by the liberty of the will? but this liberty may be alone, if it
comes not; but if it come; assisted it must be; and so assisted, as not only
that it may know what is to be done, but that likewise it may do what it
knows. And hence, when God teaches not by the letter of the Law, but by the
grace of the spirit; he so teaches, that what any one has learned, he does
not only see by knowing, but also desire by willing, and perform by doing;
and by that divine manner of teaching, even the Will it self, and the
operation it self, not only the natural possibility of willing, and working
is assisted. For if only our power was helped by grace, the Lord would have
said thus, Every one who has heard, and learned of the father, may or can come
to me: but he says not so, but does come to me: A power of coming Pelagius
places in Nature, or even as he has now begun to speak, in Grace, of what
kind soever he accounts it, by which, as he says, the possibility it self is
helped, That aid of grace which gives the power of coming to Christ, gives the
act likewise.
but to come is now in the will, and the work; But it follows not, that he
that can come does come, except he will it, and do it.

But every one who has learned of the father not only can come, but does
come, where there is now both the advance of possibility, and the affection of
the will, and the effect of the action.

Reader, It is easy for thee to observe from these testimonies out of this
most learned and pious Father, how powerful upon the will, how effectual in
the work, how infallible, how peculiar, the grace of God is, according to what
I affirmed before, and all with clear evidence, and much strength of Scripture
made good: But indeed this great assertion of Grace does so abound in this
doctrine, which he does most strenuously maintain, that it is very hard to make
an end of quotations out of him, not so much for his authority, as for his
demonstration by Scripture, and his singular excellency in discussing it. We
shall add a little more, and but a little. In his book de grati^ and lib.
arbitr. c. 16. It is certain, that when we Effectual grace upon the will
determining it in its motion.
will, we will, but it is he who makes us to will what is good; of whom it is
said, that the will is prepared of the Lord: of whom it is said, It is God who
works in us both to will and to do. It is certain, that when we do, we do,
but he makes us to do, affording most effectual strength to the will; who
has said, I will make you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my
Judgments and do them: When he says I will make you to do, what says he
else, but that Habitual and renewing grace upon the will together with effectual.
I will take from you the heart of stone, whence ye did not; and will give you
an heart of flesh, that you may do. And what is this, but I will take away
your hard heart, whence ye did not, and I will give you an obedient heart,
whence you may do? here we have both the renewing, and acting of the will; and
this certainly and infallibly. To the same purpose, cap. 17. Speaking of Peter,
that he had no strong love, when he denied his Lord, and yet he had a small and
imperfect love, when he said to the Preventing and subsequent grace, operating
and cooperating grace, preventing and operating; whence the first act of grace
subsequent, and cooperating; whence the following act, to which following
acts, this grace is preventing, and operating, subsequent, and cooperating,
only in respect of the first preventing and habitual grace all along.
Lord, I will lay down my life for thee, for he thought he could do what he
felt himself to will. He adds, And who had begun to give that, though small
love? but he, who prepares the will, and perfects by working with us, what he
begins by working in us: Because he, as the author, works in us to will, who,
as the finisher, works with us, when we will. Whence says the Apostle, I am
confident that he, that has begun a good work in you, will perfect it to the
day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1. 6. Therefore that we may will, he works without
us; but when we will, and so will, as that we do, he works with us: But
without him, either working that we may will, or working with us, when we will,
we have no strength to the good works of piety. Chap. 18. upon that text of
Scripture, Let us love one another, for love is of God, 1 John 4. 7. Why is it
said, Let us love one another, for love is of God, but because by the Command
free will is admonished to seek the gift of God; When it is said, Let us love
one another, there is the Law; when it is said, for love is of God, there is
Grace: Grace makes us lovers of the Law, but the Law it self without Grace
makes us only offenders. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you; If ye
have not chosen, doubtless ye have not loved, for how should they choose him
whom they loved not?

And Chap. 19. In John, the light says, Behold what great love the Father has
given us? In the Pelagians, darkness says, We have love of our selves; which
if they had true, that is, Christian love, they would know whence they had it,
as the Apostle knew, who said, We have not received the spirit of this world,
but the Spirit of God, that we might know the things that are freely given us
of God; John says, God is love; and the Pelagians say, that they even have God
himself, n^^ of God, but of themselves. And when they confess, that we have
the knowledge of the Law from God, they will have love to be of our selves;
neither do they hear the Apostle saying, Knowledge puffesh up, but charity
(or love) edifies. But I must take off my hand, he is so abundant in all his
Polemique Writings against Pelagius, and his followers, that the Quotations
would be Voluminous which might be taken out of them; I shall therefore
conclude with the determination of the Milevitane Council, at which Austine
himself was President, and subscribed, Can. 4. Whosoever shall say, that the
Grace of God by Jesus Christ our Lord, helps against sinning in this regard
only, because by it the meaning of the Commands is revealed, and opened to us,
that we might know what we ought to desire, and what to eschew, but that by it
is not performed, that what we know ought to be done, we also love to do, and
are enabled thereunto, Let him be Anathema; for when the Apostle says,
Knowledge puffes up, but charity edifies, it is very wicked to believe, that we
have the grace of Christ for that which puffs up, but that we have it not for
that which edifies, when both is the gift of God; both to know what we ought to
do, and to love that we may do it, that charity edifying, knowledge may not
be able to puff us up; but as it is written of God, That be teaches man
knowledge, so is it written likewise, that Love is of God. Here we have the
Doctrine of the Church in that age against the Heretics in this point.

CHAP. VIII.
3 LEt what Grace soever, how true and genuine soever, be acknowledged from God
to man, yet that Doctrine that teaches, that it is given according to men's
merit, in the sense of the Fathers against Pelagius, is Pelagian; but such is
Mr. Goodwins Doctrine. Evident it is, that he makes faith, and whatsoever he
calls Grace, so to depend upon the good use of the natural understanding, as
upon that account it is given unto men, how far, and in what sense soever it
is given; and as evident it is, that no good use can be made of the
understanding in order to Grace, without some good use of the will; for except
a man will, he shall not, without the use of his will he cannot provoke, and
stir up himself, so much as to meditate of God, and the things of God; but
whosoever teaches Grace to be given upon, or for the improvement of the
Natural will in any kind or degree, falls under that so famously damned
Doctrine of Pelagius, That Grace is given according to merits; for clearing
this, let us briefly represent the Pelagian Heresy in its fourfold state, and
the Doctrine of Austin, and other Fathers, and in them the Doctrine of the
Church there-against.

In the first place, Pelagius denied all aid of supernatural Grace (which Mr.
Goodwin denies at this day, if he mean as he speaks) affirming, that the
natural strength of Free will was sufficient to fulfill the Commands of God,
and to obtain eternal life, denying Origin all sin to the last.

In the second state he admitted the aid of Grace, but 1. He acknowledged this
aid only in the Law, and external Doctrine, as also in the example of Christ.
2. He ascribed only this to it, that by it man might more easily fulfill the
Commands of God, which without it he could fulfill. He likewise by Grace
understood remission of sins.

In the third state, he at least seemed to admit inward illumination of the
understanding, Many Learned men hold, that at length he came to this, a
special work of inward illumination by the Spirit above what he acknowledged
in the second state; but he that shall weigh well what Austine says, Lib. d^
Gr. Christi, c. 7. 10. 22, 23. 41. may well doubt of it.
and inward excitation of the will; but this likewise, that man might be able
the more easily to fulfill the Commands of God, which without it he might do,
ever denying the infusion of grace into the will, withal holding, that this
Grace was given according to merit, that is, upon the good use of Natural
power before hand; against this Grace thus limited, we have out of Austine, and
the Milevitan Council newly spoken.

The fourth and last state was in the hands of certain Pelagian Bishops, who
wrote two Epistles against Austins Doctrine, which he answers in four Books;
their Doctrine the Father lays down in these words: They will have the desire
of good in man to begin from man, that the grace of finishing may follow the
merit of this beginning, if yet this at the least they will have.

They differ from the last recited, in this; That they require this Grace, as
simply necessary to the consummation of those virtues, the beginnings whereof
were in Nature; but for the first motion unto good they required no internal
grace; of this, Austine, Lib. 2. Contra duas Epistolas, Pelag. l. 8, etc. where
after the stating of the question, in the prosecution of his answer, he
strongly concludes all along against them, and therein against Mr. Goodwin,
(taken in the best sense) that he that teaches, that any the least motion to
good in man prevents the Grace of God, he teaches that ^^igmatized Doctrine of
Pelagius, that Grace is given according to merits, which as otherwhere
formerly, so here again he with much clearness refutes.

The Question is stated in these words: Now Subduing Grace.
that is the thing which we have to attend, whether or no God inspires into man
unwilling, Man unwilling, and resisting, by Grace made willing, and consenting,
the least desire of good how small and impe^fect soever from grace
and resisting the desire of good, so that now he be not resisting, he be not
unwilling, but consenting unto good, and willing good. A little after, for this
they think is to be objected against us; That we say, God inspires into man
unwilling, and resisting the desire not of how great good soever, but of
imperfect good. It may be then that they themselves so far keep a place for
Grace, that they think without it a man may have a desire of good, but that
good imperfect; but for perfect good, he cannot more easily have the desire of
it by Grace, but without Grace he cannot at all have the desire of it. Having
thus stated it, he refutes the Pelagian tenet.

But so likewise they say, the Grace of God is given according to our merits,
which in the East Pelagius fearing to be condemned, by the Acts of the Church
condemned; for if without the Grace of God, by us begins the desire of good,
that beginning shall be merit, (see here in how large a sense the Fathers take
Merit in this Controversy) to which as of due the aid of Grace comes, and so
the Grace of God shall not be freely given, but our merit shall be given.

But the Lord, that he might answer Pelagius yet to come, says not without me
something ye may do, with much ado, but he says, Without me ye can do
nothing. And that he might answer these likewise yet to come, in the same
Gospelsentence, he says not, without me ye can finish nothing, but, ye can
do nothing, Joh. 15. for if he had said finish, they might have said, That the
aid of God was necessary not to begin that which is good, this being of our
selves, but to finish it; but let them hear the Apostle too, for the Lord,
when he says, Without me ye can do nothing, in this one word comprehends the
beginning, and the end. But the Apostle, as the expounder of the Lords saying,
distinguishes each more plainly, saying, Because he that has begun a good
work in you will finish it, until the day of Christ Jesus, Philip. 1. But in
the Holy Scriptures, in the same Apostle, we have found yet more then this,
whereof we speak, We now speak of the desire of good, which if thou wil^c have
begun by the will of man, but perfected by the Lord. See what may be answered to
the Apostle, saying, for, we are not sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God.

To think any thing, says he, to wit, good; but to think is less then to
desire, for we think all that we desire, but we do not desire all we think,
because sometimes we think what we desire not.

Since therefore it is less to think then to desire, for a man may think of
good which as yet he desires not, and afterward may by profiting desire, what
before without desiring he thought of, how unto that which is less, that is to
think any thing that is good, we are not sufficient as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God, and unto that which is greater, that is, to desire any
thing that is good are we sufficient by our free will, without the Divine aid?
for neither here does the Apostle say, not that we are sufficient to think
what is perfect, as of our selves, but to think any thing, (says he) contrary
whereto is nothing: Whence is that of the Lord, Without me ye can do nothing.
Then alleging the misinterpretation of Prove. 16. 1. by the Pelagians, where
they read, The preparation of the heart is of man, and interpret it, that it
belongs to man, to prepare the heart; that is, to begin good without the aid
of Divine grace.

Far be it from the sons of the Promise (says he) so to understand it, as
though when they hear the Lord saying, Without me ye can do nothing, they
should, as it were, convince him, and say, Lo, without thee we can prepare the
heart; or when they hear from the Apostle Paul, Not that we are of our selves
sufficient to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God.
They should as it were convince him likewise, saying, Lo, we are sufficient of
our selves to prepare the heart, and by this, to think some good; far be it
from any so to understand it; but the proud defenders of their own free will,
and the forsakers of the Churches faith. Man prepares the heart, but not
without the aid of God who touches the heart; he concludes this Chapter with
this memorable sentence.

Many good things God does in man which man does not; but none does man, which
God does not make man to do. Then c. 9. Therefore the desire of good would not
be in man from God, if it was not good; but if it be good it is not, but from
him in us, who is unchangeably good. For what is the desire of good, but love?
of which John the Apostle speaks without any doubtings, saying, Love is of
God; neither the beginning thereof of our selves, and the perfection thereof of
God, but if love be of God, the whole is unto us of God; for God keeps us from
that madness, that in his gifts we should make our selves first, and him last,
because his mercy has prevented me; for if without him we can do nothing,
truly we can neither begin, nor finish. That we may begin, it is said, His
mercy shall prevent me; that we may finish, it is said, His mercy shall follow
me; then in the close of this Chapter, speaking of man's purpose; The good
purpose of man, (says he) subsequent grace assists, but except grace had gone
before, it had not been. The care of man likewise, which is said to be good,
though when it has begun to be, it is helped by grace, yet does it not begin
without grace, but is inspired by him of whom the Apostle says, But thanks be
unto God, who has put the same care for you in the heart of Titus; if it be
the gift of God, that one man has care for another, whose gift else shall it
be, that a man has care of himself? Then c. 10: which since it is so, I see
not any thing in the Holy Scriptures commanded man of God, whereby his free
will is proved, which is not found either to be given of his goodness, or to
be required for the demonstration of the aid of grace; neither does man at all
begin to be changed from evil to good, by the beginning of faith, but as free
mercy, and that which is not owing to him does it in him.

CHAP. IX.
THis leads us to an after state of Pelagianisme The Massilian state of
Pelagianisme.
in the hands of the Massilians, which was much one and the same with that in
the hands of these Pelagian Bishops.

Of them, and their tenets, we have in Prospers Epistle to Austin about the
Relics of the Pelagian Heresy, as likewise in the Epistle of Hilary of
Arles. That opinion of theirs, which we shall here take notice of, as falling
in with this lost state of Pelagianisme, and pertinent to our present
business, we shall lay down in Prospers words; (if I be not deceived they
speak Mr. Goodwin) Thus he relates. Some of these do so far not decline
from the Pelagian paths, that when they are constrained to confess that Grace
of Christ which prevents all humane merits, le^t if it be rendered to Merits, in
vain should it be called Grace, this Grace they will have to belong to the
condition of every man, wherein the Grace of the Creator does so order him, who
before deserved nothing, as not existing of a free and rational will, that by
the discerning of good and evil, he may direct his will both to the knowledge
of God, and to the obedience of his Commandments, and come to this Grace,
whereby in Christ we are borne again, to wit, by the power of Nature, by
asking, seeking, knocking, that therefore may he receive, therefore may he find,
therefore may he enter in, because he used the good of Nature well; so that he
deserved to come to this saving Grace, by the help of initial grace? Let Mr.
Goodwins doctrine be considered, where he denies the word Supernatural as
formerly, and his conclusions, upon which we are all this while, together, with
his explication of the Parable of the Talents, and see wherein he differs from
these here described.

Hilary relates it thus, They agree that all men perished in Adam, neither can
any man thence be freeed by his own free will; But this they affirm to be
agreeable to truth, and meet to be preached, that when the occasion or
opportunity of obtaining salvation, is declared to them that are utterly down,
and never able by their own strength to rise, that by that merit, whereby they
may will, and believe, they may be healed of their disease, and may obtain the
increase of faith, and the effect of their through holiness: But to begin any
work, much less to finish it, they grant that no man is sufficient to himself.
Then he adds to this purpose, That to believe, and will their own healing by
Christ, to seek to the Physician for cure. These things they number not
amongst works, but these they will have to prevent the healing grace of Christ.

Upon the relation made in these two Epistles, Austin wrote his book, De
praedestinatione sanctorum, and de bono perseveranti^, where he with great
strength and clearness refutes these opinions, proving at large, what Prosper
briefly hints in his Epistle, that in those relics of the Pelagian pravity,
is nourished a strein of no mean virulency, if the beginning of salvation shall
be evilly placed in man; If the will of man shall wickedly be preferred before
the will of God; If therefore any man shall be aided, because he would, and not
therefore he would, because he was aided; If he that is originally evil, shall
evilly be believed to begin the receiving of good, not from the highest good,
but from himself, If God be pleased from some other thing then what he has
given.

We have therefore thus showed the several states of the Pelagian Heresy,
that our new Pelagians, the Arminians might be unmasked.

And because the Doctrine of Grace is so excellently cleared by Austin, and
some other Fathers against these sacrilegious Tenets, I shall yet bring some
things more out of their rich treasures. Austin therefore, lib. de
praedestinatione sanctorum, c. 2 thus states the Question, That according to
his adversaries, faith is not given of God to us, but it is increased by God in
us, by that merit whereby it begun of us. Against this he argues.

1 Here they depart not from that Doctrine which Pelagius himself was forced
to condemn, in a Court of Bishops in Palestine, to wit, That the Grace of God
is given according to our merits; As though it belonged not to the Grace of
God, that we have begun to believe, but rather belonged to his Grace, which for
our beginning is added to us, that we should believe more fully and perfectly;
and hence we in the first place give the beginning of faith to God, that the
fulfillings of it may be recompensed to us, as likewise whatsoever else we
faithfully ask. But against this, why do we not rather hear, Who has first
given to him, and it shall be recompensed again unto him? for of him, and
through him, and to him, are all things, Romans 11. The beginning it self of our
faith then, of whom is it but of him? for it is not, this excepted, of him, are
all the rest, but of him, and through him, and to him, are all things.

2 Truly was it said of the Apostle, To you it is given not only to believe,
but to suffer for Christ; he shows both to be the gifts of God, because he
says both are given; neither does he say, that ye might more fully and
perfectly believe in him, but that ye might believe in him.

3 Neither did he say that himself had obtained mercy, that he might be more
faithful, but that he might be faithful, for he knew, that he did not first
give the beginning of his faith to God, and had the increase thereof
recompensed to him, but by him was he made a believer, by whom he was made an
Apostle: For being averse from the faith, which he wasted; and most vehemently
adverse thereunto, he is of a sudden converted unto it, by a more powerful
grace: Nor only made of unwilling, willing to believe; but of a persecutor, a
sufferer, in the defense of that faith, which he did persecute, For unto him it
was given of Christ, not only to believe on him, but likewise to suffer for
him: And therefore commending that grace, which is not given according to any
merit, but makes all good merits (we saw formerly in how large a sense the
Fathers understand this word Merit) he says.

4 Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God. Let them attend here, and weigh these
words well, who think the beginning of faith is from our selves, the
accomplishment from God. For who does not see, that thinking is before
believing? for no man believes any thing, unless he have first thoughts that
it is to be believed; For although certain thoughts do most hastily, most
swiftly fly before the will of believing, and it presently so follows, that
it does even most closely, as it were, accompany them, yet must it needs be,
that whatsoever is believed, is by a preventing thought believed, although to
believe is nothing else but to think with assent; for not every one that
thinks, believes: when many therefore think, that they may not believe; but
whosoever believes, thinks; and by believing thinks, and by thinking believes.
Wherefore as to things that belong to religion and godliness, of which the
Apostle spoke, if we be not sufficient to think any thing, as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God, certainly we are not sufficient to believe any
thing, as of our selves, which without thinking we cannot, but our sufficiency,
whereby we begin to believe, is of God.

CHAP. X.
From these Scripture-Texts he proceeds to Scripture-arguments, we shall lay
them down in his own words, for in better we cannot.

WE must take heed, Brethren, lest man extol himself against God, when he 1.
From Gods promise to Abraham.
says, that he does that which God has promised.

Is not the faith of the Gentiles promised to Abraham? and he, giving glory to
God, believed most fully, because he that had promised was able to perform, he
therefore performs the faith of the Gentiles, who is able to perform what he
promised.

In the tenth Chap. speaking of this same thing, It is (says he out of the
Apostle) of faith, that according to grace the Promise may be firm to all the
seed; not from the power of our will, but from his own Predestination, for he
promised not what men, but what himself would do, because though men do
those good things which belong to the Worship of God, he makes them to do the
things he has commanded; they make not him to do what he has promised,
otherwise that the promises of God may be fulfilled, it is not in the power of
God, but of man, and what is promised by the Lord, is by them returned to
Abraham; but so did not Abraham believe, but he believed, giving glory to God,
because he that has promised is able to do; he does not say to foretell, he
does not say to fure-know, for the deeds of another he may foretell, and
foreknow, but he says he is able to do, and therefore not the deeds of
others, but his own.

We return now to the second Chapter, The whole of faith from God.
where it follows; Furthermore, if God work our faith, acting in our hearts
after a wonderful manner that we may believe, shall we fear left he should
not be able to do the whole? and therefore man shall challenge the first part
to himself, that he may merit to receive the last from him? See if any thing
else be done by this means, but that the Grace of God, which way soever, may
be given according to our merit, and so Grace shall be no Grace, for thus it is
returned as due, it is not freely given; for this is owing to him that
believes, that by the Lord faith it self may be increased, and faith increased
may be the reward of faith begun.

Neither do they observe when thus they speak, that that reward is imputed to
believers, not according to Grace, but according to debt. (We see here again
the large signification of the word Merit, for any thing that may be supposed
in man of himself, as a motive to God for giving his Grace) But why the whole
should not be ascribed to man, that he that could begin what he had not, might
himself likewise increase what he had begun, I cannot at all see, but only,
because they cannot resist most manifest Divine testimonies, by Godliness from
faith.
which faith, whence godliness takes its beginning, is showed to be the gift
of God; As, according as God has distributed to every one a measure of faith;
and, peace to the Brethren, and love, with faith from God the Father, etc.
Unwilling therefore to oppose these so clear Testimonies, and yet willing that
of himself it should be unto himself that man believes, he does, as it were,
compound with God, that part of his faith he may take to himself, and part he
may leave to him; and which is yet more losty, the first he takes to himself,
that which follows he gives to him, and in that which he says belongs to them
both, he makes himself first, and God last.

Of that mind was not that godly and humble 2. From differencing grace.
Teacher, most blessed Cyprian I mean, who said, In nothing may we glory, for
as much as ours is nothing; which that he might show, he brought in the Apostle
saying, But what have thou that thou have not received? but if then have
received, why do thou glory as if thou had not received? By which testimony
especially was I also convinced, when I had been in the like error, thinking
faith, by which we believe in God, not to be the gift of God, but of our
selves, to be in our selves, and that by it we obtained the gifts of God, for
living soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world.

This testimony therefore of the Apostle, where he said, for the repressing of
man's haughtiness, What have thou that thou have not received? suffers not any
of the faithful to say, I have faith which I received not. But neither may
this be said, Although I have not perfect faith, yet I have the beginning
thereof, whereby I first believed in Christ, because here likewise the answer
is; But what have thou that thou have not received, and if thou have received,
why do tho^ boast, as if thou had not received? In this most evident
intention of the Apostle, whereby (as by the context it appears) he speaks
against the pride of man, that no man may glory in man, and therefore not in
himself, but in the Lord, to imagine the natural gifts of God, whether entire
and perfect nature, as in its first condition it was gifted, or whatsoever
relics of corrupt nature, I think it too absurd; for by these gifts, which
are common to all men, is one man differenced from another? Here he first said,
Who has made thee to differ? then he adds, What have thou that thou have not
received? because a man pu^t up against another might say; My faith has made
me to differ, my righteousness, or whatsoever other thing. This good Teacher
meeting with such thoughts, What have thou, says he; that thou have not
received? Of whom? but of him who has made thee to differ from another, to
whom he has not given, what he has given unto thee; But if thou have
received, why do thou glory, as if thou had not received? Is he doing any
thing else, but that he that glories may glory in the Lord? But nothing is so
contrary to this intention, as for any man so to boast of his merits, as though
he had done them to himself, and not the Grace of God; but that Grace which
differenceth the good from the bad, not that which is common to good and bad.

From Election, many hear the word of 3. From Election*
truth, some believe, others gainsay; these therefore will believe, these
will not, who knows not this? who denies? But for as much as in some the will
is prepared of the Lord, in others it is not prepared, verily we must
distinguish what comes from his Mercy, and what from his Judgment. What Israel
sought (says the Apostle) he obtained not, but the election has obtained, and
the rest were blinded. Behold Mercy and Judgment, Mercy in the* election,
which has obtained the righteousness of God; but Judgment upon the rest
which were blinded, and yet these, because they would, believed; these because
they would not, did not believe; therefore Mercy and Judgment are done even in
the wills themselves; for Election is of Grace, not verily of Merits. Therefore
freely has the Election obtained what it has obtained, there was not
something of theirs that went before, which they first gave, and recompense was
made to them, for he saved them for naught, but to the rest who were blinded
(as it is not there concealed) retribution was made.

All the ways of the Lord are Mercy and Truth, but his ways are unsearchable;
unsearchable therefore are, his Mercy, whereby he freely acquits, and his
Truth, whereby he justly condemns, cap. 7.

But happily they say, the Apostle distinguishes faith from works, and Grace,
he says, is not of works, he does not say, it is not of faith, true; but
Christ says, Faith likewise is the work of God, Joh. 6. So therefore the
Apostle distinguishes Faith from Works, as in the two Kingdoms of the
Hebrews, Judah is distinguished from Israel, when as yet Judah is Israel; for
ye are saved by Grace through faith, and that not of your selves, it (even
faith) is the gift of 4. From the efficacy and peculiarity of Grace, depending
upon election.
God, and faith is not of works, lest any one should boast, and all that the
Father has given me shall come unto me. What is this shall come to me, but
shall believe in me? but that it may be done, the Father gives; No man can come
to me, except the Father, which has sent me, draw him: And they shall all be
taught of God, and every one that has heard of the Father, and learned, comes
to me. If every one that has heard of the Father, and learned, comes, truly
who comes not, has not heard of the Father, nor learned: for had he heard, and
learned, he would come.

Far removed from the apprehensions of the flesh is this School in which the
Father is heard, and teaches to come to the Son. There is likewise the Son
himself, because he himself is the Word of the Father, whereby he so
teaches; neither deals he with the ear of the flesh, but of the heart; there
is together likewise the Spirit of the Father, and the Son, for neither does
he not teach, nor does he teach apart, because we say, the works of the
Trinity are inseparable, and he is verily the Holy Ghost, of whom the Apostle
says, Having the same Spirit of faith. Far removed (I say) from the
apprehensions of the flesh, is this School, in which God is heard, and
teaches; we see many come to the Son, because we see many believe in Christ,
but where, and how they have learned this of the Father we see not, verily this
grace is secret, but that it is grace who doubts?

This Grace therefore, which by Divine bounty is after an hidden manner given
unto Grace preventing. subduing, renewing, effectual.
the hearts of men, is by no hard heart refused, because it is therefore given,
that the hardness of the heart may first of all be removed; when therefore the
Father is inwardly heard, and teaches to come to the Son, he takes away the
stony heart, and gives a heart of flesh, as he promised by the Prophet Ezekiel.
36. for so does he make the sons of the Promise, and the Vessels of Mercy,
which he has prepared unto glory; why therefore does he not teach all that
they may come to Christ? but because all whom he teaches, in mercy he
teaches; but whom he teaches not, in Judgment he teaches not, because, he
will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens; but he
has mercy, bestowing good, he hardens, recompencing according to desert. But
why he teaches not all, the Apostle opens so far, as he thought fit to be
opened, Romans 9. 22, 23. Hence it is that the word of the Cross is foolishness
unto them, that perish, but to those that are saved, the power of God. All
these God teaches to come to Christ, all these he will have saved, and to come
to the knowledge of the truth; for if he would have taught those to come to
Christ also, to whom the word of the Cross is foolishness, without doubt even
they had come too, for he neither deceives, nor is deceived, who says, Every
one that has heard, and learned of the Father, comes to me; far be it
therefore that any man should not come who has heard, and learned of the
Father.

When therefore the Gospel is preached, some believe, some do not believe; but
they that believe whilst the Preacher sounds without, they hear, and learn of
the Father within; but they that believe not, they hear without, not within,
neither do they learn; that is, to the one it is given to believe, to the
other it is not given, which afterward is more openly spoken; No man can come
to me, except it he given him of the Father. Therefore to be drawn by the
Father to Christ, and to hear and learn of the Father, is nothing else but to
receive the gift of the Father, whereby to believe in Christ. For he did not
distinguish Hearers of the Gospel from no Hearers, who said, No man can come
to me, except it be given him of the Father; but Believers from unbeleevers:
Faith therefore both begun and finished, is the gift of God; and that this gift
is given to some, and not given to all he cannot doubt, who will not oppose
most manifest holy Scriptures.

Chap. 12. When we come to little ones, and to 5. From the salvation of Infants.
the Mediator betwixt God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, all assertion of
humane merits going before the Grace of God, falls to the ground, because they
are not distinguished from the rest by any good preceding merits, that they
should belong to the deliverer of men, nor he by any preceding humane merits,
(when he is a man also) was made the deliverer of men.

For Infants; Original sin being by the Grace of God forgiven, or by the
Judgment of God not forgiven, when they dye, they either pass by Regeneration
from an evil to a good state, or by Original corruption, from an evil to an
evil state. And Lib. de bono persever. Whereas the Apostle says, It is not of
him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy; who
releeves little ones, whom he will, when they neither will, nor run; those whom
he chose in Christ before the world was made, as to whom he freely would give
Grace; that is, no merits of theirs, whether of faith, or works preceding;
whom he wills not to releeve, he releeves not, of whom in his own
predestination he has otherwise judged; secretly indeed, but justly, for there
is no iniquity with God, but his judgments are unsearchable, and his ways
past finding out. As of those two twins (Jacob and Esau) of whom the one is
taken, the other is left, their end is different, their merits the same; in
whom yet so the one is freed by the great goodness of God, that the other is
condemned without any iniquity in God; for is there iniquity in God? in no
wise; but his ways are past finding out; therefore let us without wavering
believe his mercy in those that are freed, his truth in those that are
punished; neither let us search things unsearchable, nor think to trace what
is untraceable.

Now whereas it was objected by the Massilians, or Semi-Pelagians, that Infants
were dealt with according to future merits foreseen, if they had lived; First,
he rejects this as a most absurd conceit; that any should be judged not only
according to his merits whilst he was in the Body, but according to those
merits which he should have had, if he had been longer in the Body, (by merits
here as frequently, he means only deeds, good or evil) whence it should come
into their thoughts (says he) whose wills are not contemptible, wondering, and
astonished, I cannot find. A new kind of absurdity, says Prosper, relating
it, to imagine things to come which are not to come, and that what things are
not to be, should be fore-known, and that what things are fore-knowne should
not be done. After his rejection of this Opinion, he refutes it, both in his
Book De praedest, and de bono Persever. and other-where I shall gleane a
little, Lib. de praedest. Sanct. Cap. 12. We shall all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
What he has done (says he) not what he might afterward do, but whence this
should come into the mind of such men, that things to come, which are not
things to come should be punished, that to merits of Infants should be
honored, I cannot tell. To this time of the Body belongs Original sin.

2 Why then may we not say, that the Gospel is preached in vain, with so much
labor and sufferings of the Saints; if men may be judged, even those that have
not heard the Gospel, according to that contumacy, or obedience which God
fore-knew they would have had, if they had heard? and so Tire and Sidon should
not have bin condemned, because, if those wonderful things and signs had been
done amongst them, (which were done in those Cities to which the Lord speaks of
this matter) they had repented in sackcloth and ashes, Lib. De Bono persever.
c. 9.

3 Then neither may we rejoice in those whom we know to have departed in a
right says, and a good life, lest they should be judged according to some
wickednesses, which they were to commit, if a longer life had been granted to
them; neither are they to be grieved for, and detested, who have finished this
life in infidelity and wretched manners, because happily, if they had lived, they
would have repented, and have lived in godliness, and according to those
things they were to be judged, Epist. 107.

These two Arguments are in force against our Adversaries, because they hold,
that a righteous man, a true believer may fall utterly, and finally from Grace,
and that it is in the power of the unrighteous to repent.

Our Savior himself is likewise a most 6. From the person of the Mediator.
clear light of Predestination and Grace, he the Mediator of God and man, the
man Christ Jesus, which that he might be, by what foregoing merits, whether of
Faith, or Works, did his humane Nature obtain? Give answer I pray, that man,
that he should by the word Coeternall with the Father, be taken into the unity
of Person, and become the only begotten Son of God, whence might he merit this?
What did he before, what believed he, what asked he, that he should come to
this unspeakeable excellency? Let man reply against God here, if he dare, and
say, and why not I? and if he shall be answered, O man, who art thou that
reply against God? and yet shall not refrain, but shall increase his
impudence, and say, What do I hear? Who art thou, O man? when I am, what I
hear, that is, a man, which he is likewise, of whom I am speaking, and why am
not I the same that he? But he is such an one, and so great by Grace; Why is
Grace different where Nature is common? certainly there is no acception of
persons with God; what, I say not Christian, but madman would speak thus?

In our Head then may the fountain of Grace appear, whence according to the
measure of every one, it diffuseth it self through all his Members; by that
Grace, from the beginning of his faith, is any man made a Christian, by which
Grace from his beginning was that man made Christ, and of the same Spirit was
this man borne again, of which he was borne. As therefore he the only one is
predestined to be our Head, so we many are predestined to be his Members.
Let Humane merits here be silent, which have perished by Adam, and let that
Grace of God reign, which reigns by Jesus Christ our Lord, the only Son of
God our Lord; whosoever he is, that in our Head can find the foregoing Merits
of that singular Generation, let him inquire in us his Members, the foregoing
merits of multiplied regeneration; for that Generation was not recompensed to
Christ, but given, that free from all Obligation of sin, he should be borne
of the Spirit, and the Virgin; so that we should be borne again of Water, and
the Spirit, it is not recompensed to us for any merit, but freely given, for he
has made us to believe on Christ, who has made Christ for us, on whom we
believe; he makes in men the beginning of faith, and the finishing in Jesus,
who has made the Author of faith, and the finisher Jesus, Lib. de Predest.
Sanct.

Lib. de Great. and Lib. Arbit. c. 14. Thus he states the Question. But when
these, not Defenders, 7. The corruption of Nature expressed in hardness of heart.
but blowers up, and tumblers headlong of free will, have been convinced, that
neither the knowledge of the Law of God, nor Nature, nor only the remission of
sins, is that Grace which is given by Jesus Christ our Lord, but it makes that
the Law be fulfilled, (scil. Evangelically) that Nature be healed, that sin
reign not, when in these things they are convinced, they betake themselves to
this, that which way soever they may endeavor, to show that the Grace of God is
given according to our merits, for they say, that though it be not given
according to the merits of our good works, because by it we perform good
works, yet is it given us according to the merits of a good will; because, say
they, the good will of man praying goes before, before which was the will of
man believing, that according to these merits might follow the Grace of God,
hearing and answering prayer. In answer whereto.

If Faith be only of Free Will, and not given of God, why do we pray for
those that will not believe, that they may believe? which we should do
altogether in vain, did we not most rightly believe, that the Almighty God
could convert to believing, even wills perverse and contrary to faith. The Lord
knocks indeed at the door of free Will, when it is said, To day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts, but unless he could take away the
hardness of the heart, he would not say by the Prophet, I will take from them
the heart of stone, and give unto them a heart of flesh; which that it was
prophesied of the New Testament, the Apostle shows clearly, where he says,
Ye are our Epistle, written not with Ink, but with the spirit of the living
God; not in Tables of stone but in the fleshly tables of the heart, 2 Cor. 3.
Can we say then without manifest absurdity, that the good Merit of a good Will
in man has gone before, that the heart of stone might be pulled from him; when
this very thing, the heart of stone, signifies nothing else, but a most
obstinate Will, and is altogether inflexible toward God? For where a good will
goes before, now verily the heart is not stony.

Lib. de great. Christic. 7. Where we have first 8 From the increase of sin by
the Law in the natural man.
Pelagius his doctrine of Grace: God (says he) assists us by his doctrine and
revelation, whilst he opens the eyes of our hearts, whilst that we might not be
taken up with things present, he shows unto us things to come, whilst he
discovers the snares of the devil, whilst he enlightens us with his various and
unspeakable gift of heavenly grace. And then concluding this profession of his
with a kind of absolution; He that says this (says he) does he seem to thee
to deny grace? Now follows Austins Answer, where he shows, the increase of
sin in the natural man by the Law, This is (says he) to place the grace of
God in the Law and Doctrine. Hence it appears he acknowledges, that grace by
which God shows, and reveals what we ought to do, not whereby he gives unto
us, and aides us that we may do; Whereas the knowledge of the Law, if the help
of grace be wanting, is of force only hereunto, that the command may be
transgressed; F^r where there is no law, says the Apostle, there is ^o
transgression, and I had not known lust, had not the Law said, thou shall not
lust, and hence, so different is the Law from Grace; that not only is it of no
advantage, but withal, of greatest damage; when Grace helps not, the Law
commands, rather then affords help; it teaches that the disease is, it
heals not: Nay, therefore rather because it is not healed, it is increased,
that with greater care and diligence the medicine of grace may be sought after.

More fully to this purpose, lib. de great. and lib. de arbit. c. 11. How is it
that these vainest of men, and most perverse Pelagians say, that the law is the
grace of God, whereby we are assisted not to sin? What is it that these
wretches say, who without all doubt say contrary to so great an Apostle? He
says, that sin receives strength against man by the Law, and that it kills him
by the command, though the commandment be holy, and just, and good, and that
by good it works death to him, from which he should not be freed, if the
Spirit did not quicken, whom the Letter kills: Yet these unteachable ones,
blind against the law of God, and deaf against the voice of God, they say the
killing lett^r quickens, and contradict the quickening spirit.

Epistle 107. ad Vitalem, upon that Text, Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us
from the power of darkness, 9 From the subjection of the natural man to the
devil.
etc. How had we (says he) free will to decline from evil, and do good, when
it was under the power of darkness, whence, as the Apostle says, God
delivered us? He it was then that made us free; This power of darkness, what
is it, but the power of the devil and his angels? who, when they had been
Angels of light, not abiding in the truth by their free Will, but falling from
it, became darkness; to this power of darkness therefore is mankind
subjected, by the ruin of the first man, in whom we all fell, who by this
power was persuaded to transgression. This power of darkness, the devil, who
is likewise the Prince of the power of the air, works in the hearts of the
children of unbeleefe (or disobedience:) This ruler of darkness ruling them at
his own will, which neither has he free to do good, but hardened to the
utmost of evill-willing, in way of punishment for his wickedness; What is it
then that this power works in the children of distrust (or dis-obedience) but
his own evil works first of all? and above all, distrust and unbeleef;
whereby they are enemies to the faith, by which he knows they may be cleansed,
they may be healed, they may be born again in eternity, or unto eternity, most
perfectly free, which he most vehemently envyes unto them.

And therefore some of them, by whom he desires more fully to deceive, he
suffers to have some, as it were, good works, for which they are praised; but
because the Scripture says most truly, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and
without faith it is impossible to please God, not men: This Prince endeavors
nothing so much, as that they may not believe in God, and that they may not
come to the Mediator by believing, by whom his works are destroyed. But the
Mediator enters into the house of this strong man, that is, having mankind
under his dominion; and first, he binds him, that is, he bridles and restraines
his power with the stronger chains of his own power, and so he rescues all
his vessels, which soever he foreordained to rescue, freeing their Will from
his power, that he not hindering, they may believe upon him with free Will:
Wherefore this is the work of Grace not of Nature; the work I say of grace
which the second Adam brought to us, not of nature, which the first Adam in
himself quite destroyed; the work of Grace taking away sin, and quickening the
dead sinner, not the work of the law, showing sin, but not making alive from
sin; this is the work of grace, which whosoever receive, are made friends to the
wholesome doctrine of the holy Scriptures, though they were enemies, not the
work of the same doctrine, which whosoever hear and read, without the grace of God
are made worse enemies thereof. Whence the Lord Jesus distinguishing believers
from unbeleevers, that is, the vessels of mercy, from the vessels of wrath; No
man, says he, can come to me, except it be given him of my father, and
presently as he said this, his disciples were offended at his doctrine, who
afterward followed him no more: let us not say therefore, that Doctrine is
Grace, but let us acknowledge Grace, which makes Doctrine profitable, which
Grace if it be wanting, we see that doctrine is even hurtful. 10 From the
thanksgiving and prayers of the Saints, and of the church.


Lib. de praedest. Sanct. c. 19. The Apostle gives thanks to God for those that
believed, not verily because the Gospel was preached to them, but because they
believed, I (says he) having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and love to
all the Saints, cease not to give thanks for you, etc. Ephesians. 1. their faith
was new and lately begun by the preaching of the Gospel, which faith being
heard of, the Apostle gives thanks to God for them: if he should have given
thanks to man, for that which he either knew or thought was not performed by
him, it would have been rather flattery or mockery, then giving of thanks, Let
us not be deceived, God is not mocked, faith, even beginning, is his gift, that
the Apostles thanksgiving be not deservedly judged false or of false glorying.

The like instance for thanksgiving, he brings from 1 These. 2. Then for Prayer,
c. 20. That the beginning of faith is the gift of God, the Apostle admonishes
us saying, withal praying for us, That God would open unto us the door of his
word, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds, that I may
make it manifest, as Iought to speak, Col. 4. How is the door of the word
opened, says he, but when the sense or understanding of the hearer is opened,
that he may believe? and faith being begun, he may admit those things which are
preached, and disputed for building up of wholesome doctrine, least the heart
being shut up by unbeleefe, he may disallow and reject the things that are
spoken: whence to the Corinthians, I will stay at Ephesus (says he) till
Pentecost, for there a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there
are many adversaries, 1 Cor. 16. What may we here understand, but that the
Gospel being there first of all preached by him, many believed? and there were
many adversaries of the same faith, according to that of the Lord, No man comes
unto me, except it be given him of the father, and to you it is given to know
the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, to them it is not given: The door
then is open in them, to whom it is given; but there are many adversaries of
them, to whom it is not given.

More fully yet, Epist. 107. to Vitalis, will thou forbid the Church to pray
for unbeleevers, that they may be believers, for those that will not believe,
that they may will to believe? for those that dissent from his Law, and
doctrine, that they may consent thereto? that God may give unto them what he
promised by his Prophet, an heart to know him, and hearing ears? which they
had certainly received, of whom our Savior says, he that has ears to hear
let him hear? What, will thou not, when thou hear the Minister exhorting the
people to pray to God, or himself with a loud voice praying, that God would
compel the unbeleeving Nations to his faith, say Amen? What will thou blame
the Apostle Paul for having such desires for the unbeleeving Jews, Brethren
says he, my hearts desire and Prayer to God for Israel, is, that they might
be saved? The same Apostle to the Thessalonians 2 Epist. 3. Finally brethren
pray for us, that the word of God may run and be glorified, even as it is with
you, and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men, for all men
have not faith; How should the word of God run and be glorified, but by the
conversion of them to the faith, to whom it is preached? since he says to
believers, as with you, surely he knows, that this is done by him, whom he
will have prayed unto, that he may do it; as likewise that he may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men, who should not believe,
notwithstanding their prayers; wherefore he adds, for all (...) (...) (...)
says. Because they were to believe who were ordained to eternal life, but God
makes such as do not yet believe to believe, by the prayers of believers, that
he may show i^ i^ he that does it. In the same Epistle, more toward the
^ginning, In vain and for fashion sake, rather then truly, do we pour out
prayers to God for such (speaking of Infidels) if it belong not to his Grace,
to convert to his Fai^^ the Wills of men contrary to the Faith; (...) vain and
for fashion sake, rather then truly do we give thanks to God, with gr^^^
representation of joy, when any of them believe, if he do not work this in
them. We pray not at all, but make a feigned show of prayer if we believe,
that not he, but we our selves do the things we pray for; we give no^ thanks
at all, but make a feigned show of thanks, if we do not think, that he does
that, for which we give thanks; And whilst with men we ^fend free will, with
God we loose the benefit of prayer; and we do not render tr^^ praise, whilst
we do not ackowledge true gr^^^.

If we will truly defend Free Will, let us no^ oppose that whereby it is made
free; for he that opposes Grace; by which our Will is freed to decline from
evil, and to do good, he will have his Will to be still captive. A little
after upon that Text, who has delivered from the power of darkness: So it
com^^ ^o pass th^^ neither are they made believers but by fre^ Will, and yet
by hi^ Grace are they made belee^ers, who from the power of darkness freeed
their Will? So the grace of God is not denied, but is showed to be true,
without any humane merits foregoing, and free Will is so defended, as that it
may be well settled with humility, not by haughtiness cast headlong, and he
that glories not in man, whether any other or himself, but in the Lord he may
glo^.

CHAP. XI.
To this l^st state of Pelagianisme in the hands of the M^ssili^ns we may
subjoyn the Doctrine of a certain Abbot in his thirteenth Collation published
by Cass^an, against whom Prosper has vindicated the truth according to the
Doctrine of Austin, in his book^ contra Collatorem; we shall glean a little
^ere* yet so much as shall state the error, and refu^e it.

Collator. THE beginning not only of acts, but even of good thoughts is from
God, who both inspires in us the beginning^ of an holy Will, and withal gives
us the strength and opportunity of finishing those things which (...), rightly
desire. A little after, not a little ^ssing this assertion of his own, It is
not easy(...)humane reason to discern, how the Lord gives to (...) that ask,
is found of those that seek, and c^, unto those that knock; and again, is
found of those that seek not, appears openly amongst those, who asked not for
him.


Prosper, Here as by an inscrutable diversity is a defi^ition brought in, by
which it is taught, that ^any come to grace without grace, and that some have
this affection of asking, seeking, and knocking by the watchfulness of free
Will, which yet in others, is with so great froward^esse affirmed to be blinded,
as that it cannot ^e called back by any exhortations, except it ^e brought over
unwilling, by the force of him that draws it; as though this was not done ^y
the whole work of manifoldly-various grace in the minds of all, that of
unwilling, ^hey are made willing. This Disputer has quickly forgotten his
former definition, etc.

Thou have no fuller agreement, neither with the Heretics, nor with the
Catholics (that is the Orthodox) they defend the beginnings of ^ree Will, in
all the righteous works of men; We believe the beginnings of good thoughts ^o
come forth always from God: but how is ^t that thou do not observe thy
self to fall unto that damned opinion? That, whether thou will or not, thou
shall be convinced to say, that the grace of God is given according to ^ur
merits, when some thing of a good work from men themselves shall go before
(as ^hou affirmest) for which it shall obtain grace.


Collator. Neither yet does any man enjoy health when he would, ^r is ^e freed
from the disease of his sickness at the desire of his will.


Prosper. Thou teach therefore that a man cannot indeed of himself lay hold
on health bu^ that he has of himself the desire of health, an^ of his own
accord only, comes to the Phisitia^ and th^^ this very thing, that he does com^
is not of the Physician; As though the soul^ it self did not languish; and she
being sound^ provided a remedy for her body: But the whole man by her, and with
her is fallen into the depth of his misery, where till she receiv^ the
knowledge of her calamity by the Phys^^ian, she delights to lie always loving
her errors, and embracing falsehood for truth whose first step to health is,
that she begin t^ displease her self, and to hate her old weakness, the next,
that she desire to be healed, and know by whom she is to be healed; which
things do so go before her health, that by hi^ are they planted in her, who is
about to heal^ her.


Collator. These two, the Grace of God, and Free Will, se^^ indeed contrary the
one to the other, but they both agree together; and that we ought to have an
eye t^ both alike, we gather by the law of piety, least withdrawing one of
these from man; we may seem to have transgressed the rule of the Churches faith.


Prosper. The Churches Rule is, the Apostle publishing it, No man can say that
Jesus is the Lord but by the 1 Cor. 12.
holy ghost.

The Churches Rule is, But what have thou (...) thou have not received? but if
thou have receive^ 1 Cor. 4.
it, why do thou boast, as if thou had not received it?

The Churches Rule is, By the grace of God, I (...), that I am, and his grace
^as not in vain in me, 1 Cor. 15*
(...) I labored more th^n they all, yet not I, ^ut the ^e of God, which was
with me. And I have ob^ed 1 Cor. 7. 25
mercy of the Lord to be faithful.

The Churches Rule is, That we have this trea^t 2 Cor. 4. 7.
in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power ^y be of God and not of
us.

The Churches Rule is, By grace yes are saved Ephesians. 2.
brough faith, and that not of your selves, it is the ^ift of God, not of
works, least any man should ^st.

The Churches Rule is, In nothing be ye terri^ed Phil. 1
by your adversaries, which is to them a cause of ^erdition, b^t to you of
salvation, and that from God; ^se to you it is given through Christ not only
to ^eleeve in him, but also to suffer for him.

The Churches Rule is, Work out your own sal^tion Phil. 2.
with fear and trembling, for it is God that ^orketh in you to will and to do
according to his good ^easure.

The Churches Rule is, Not that we are of our 2 Cor. 3.
^elves sufficient, to think any thing, as of our selves, ^t our sufficiency
is of God.

This Rule God establishes, saying, No man John 6.
(...) come to me except it be given him of the father: And All that the father
has given me shall come unto ^e; And Without me, ye can do nothing. And Ye
John 15. Luke 10.
^ave not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and no man ^th known the father but
the son, and be to whom ^e son will reveal him. And As the father quick^s
the dead, so the son quickens whom he will. And blessed art thou Simon
Barjonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this to thee, but my father
which John 5. Mat. 16.
(...) in heaven. By this rule the Will is taken from ^o man, because the
efficacy of grace works not this in the wills of men, that they be not; b^ that
of evil, they be good; and that of unbe^ leeving, they be believing; and they
who we^ of themselves darkness, are made light in the Lord; that which was
dead, is quickened that which was down, is raised; that which was lost, is
found: This we believe, the gra^ of our Savior does in all men whomsoev^ who
are delivered from the power of darkness, (...) translated into the Kingdom
of the Son of Gods lov^ without the exception of any person.


Collator. When God sees us will to turn toward good, (...) meets us, he
directs us, he strengthens us.


Prosper. Who sees not this Doctrine assigns meri^ to free Will, by which
grace is prevented, upon which grace waits, as an handmaid, rendrin^ desert,
not bestowing a gift, which doctr^ was in a Synod of Bishops in Palestine by
Pel^ gius himself condemned with a curse; for in him who begins to will good,
and desir^ to* depart from iniquity, and errors, w^ profess the grace of God
works this very^ thing.


Collator. We are not to believe that God created man such (...) one, as that
he never could will, nor do good, for t^ would he not have permitted him a
free will, if he (...) granted to him only to will, and to be able to do evi^
but neither to will, nor to be able to do good.


Prosper. That the first Man was created upright, without all sin, in whom
the nature of al^ men was created together, there is no doub^ and that he
received such a free will, that if he would not forsake the Lord assisting him,
he might persevere in that good, which naturally he had received, because he
would: and by the merit (hear the large sense again of this word merit, for a
good work) of voluntary perseverance arrive at that blessedness, that neither
would he, neither could he fall into a worse condition, but by free will it
self, by which, as long as he would, he continued good, he departed from the
Law propounded to him, neither did he fear the punishment of death denounced
against him, forsaking God, and following the Devil, rebellious against the
Lord his Preserver, obsequious to the enemy his destroyer.

Hitherto we have had an excellent and clear passage, about man's uprightness
by Creation, now follows the like for his corruption by the fall; Adam
therefore was, and we all were in him; Adam perished, and al perished in him,
The Son of man came to seek and save, that which was lost, Luke 19. for in that
ruin of the Universal Transgression, neither the substance of man's nature,
nor the will is taken away, but the light and ornament of virtues, of which by
the deceit of the envious one, it is stripped naked, but those things being lost
by which he might have come to an eternal, and inamissible incorruption of
soul and body, what remained to him, but only what belongs unto temporal life,
which is wholly of Damnation and Punishment? wherefore it behooves that they,
that are borne of Adam, be borne again of Christ, lest any man be found in
that Generation which is lost; the first Man lost faith, lost continence, lost
love, is des^oyled of wisdom, and understanding, is void of counsel and
strength, and by wickedly following after higher things, is cast down from the
knowledge of truth, and the piety of obedience, not so much as fear to
himself remaining, that he might abstain from things forbidden, at least
through the fear of punishment.


Collator. That he might show the possibility of good to be in Man, reproving
the Pharisees, he says, Why do ye not of your selves judge what is good?
which verily ^e would not have said, had he not known, that they were able by
Natural judgment to discern what was right. This is one of Mr. Goodwins
grand objections, as we have seen before, let us now see the answer.


Prosper. Now he ascribes not only the willing of good, but the possibility
too, to free will, as though therefore understanding was required of them,
therefore Righteousness was demanded, because they can bring forth these
things, from the endowments of Nature, not from the gifts of God; but these
things are commanded man, that by the very command of God, whereby what he has
received is charged upon him, he may acknowledge that he has lost it by his
own fault, and therefore that the requiry of it is not unequal, though he be
unable to pay what he owes; but let him fly from the Letter-killing, to the
Spirit-quickning, and that ability which before he found not in Nature, let him
seek from Grace, which if he do, i^ is the great mercy of the Lord, if he do
it not, it is a just punishment of sin.


Collator. It cannot be doubted, but there are in every soul naturally some
seeds of virtues, planted there by the benefit of the Creator.


Prosper. Then did Adam only transgress, and in his sin no man (beside)
sinned, then are we conceived in no iniquities, neither did our Mothers bring
us forth in any sins; we were not by nature the Children of wrath, neither were
we under the power of darkness, but virtues naturally remaining in us, we were
rather the Children of peace and light. God is principally virtue, to whom it
is no other thing to have virtue, then to be virtue; of him when we are
partakers, Christ dwells in us, who is the virtue of God, and the wisdom of
God, Faith, Hope, Love, Continence, Understanding, Counsel, Courage, and all
other virtues dwell in us; but when we go^ back from this good, all things
arise contrary to us, from us; for Beauty departing, what succeeds but
deformity? Wisdom going away, what stays behind but folly? where
Righteousness reigns not, what bears rule but iniquity? The seeds therefore
of virtue, which by the benefit of the Creator were planted in us, were by the
transgression of our first Father over-turn'd, neither can they be had, but by
his restoring who gave them; for the nature of man is reformable by the former
thereof, and capable of those good endowments which it had, that by the
Mediator betwixt God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, in that very thing which
remains to it, it may recover what it has lost; but there remains to it a
rational Mind, which is not virtue, but the dewlling place of virtue; for by
the participation of Wisdom, Justice, and Mercy, we are not Wisdom, not
Justice, nor Mercy, but wise, and just, and merciful, which good things,
though our rational (Soul) be possessed of Vices, and we transgressing, the
unclean Spirit has seized the Temple of God, yet may they again flow
together into our rational (Soul) by him who casts forth the Prince of this
World, and binding the strong Man, takes away by force his vessels, and the
spirit of this world being chased away, gives unto us that Spirit which is of
God, that we may know the things that are freely given us of God; but he that
has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Thus far against any seeds
of good in man by nature since the fall; then he shows the ground of mistake
in his Adversary, as follows; But I conceive he is deceived with the semblance
of truth, and mistakes, through a show of false virtues, whilst he thinks that
those good endowments, which cannot be had, but by the gift of God, are found
even in the minds of the wicked; therefore, to wit, because many of them are
followers of righteousness, temperance, continence, and kindness, all which
they have not in vain, nor unprofitably, and much honor and glory do they in
this life obtain by them; but because in those pursuances they serve not God,
but the Devil, though they have a temporal reward of vain glory, yet do
they not belong to the truth of those blessed virtues. And it is most manifest
that in the minds of the wicked no virtue dwells, but all their works are
unclean, and polluted, they having not Spiritual, but Natural, not Heavenly,
but Earthly, not Christian, but Devilish wisdom; not from the Father of
Lights, but from the Prince of Darkness, whilst by those very things, which
they could not have, but by the gift of God, they are brought into subjection
to him who first departed from God; he therefore that says, that the seeds of
virtue are naturally in every soul without the work of Grace, what does he
endeavor to show, but from those seeds some twiggs of merit sprouting, going
before the Grace of God?

These few gleanings I have made out of Prospers Dispute against the Collator,
as pertinent to the Argument I have in hand, concerning the utter impotency of
the Natural man, to any thing that has order to, and connection with eternal
life; as likewise concerning the preveniency, efficacy, and peculiarity of
Grace; I shall shut up this Discourse with certain determinations of the
second Arausican Council, which Council was held about the middle of the
fifth Century.


Canon 3. If any man says, That the Grace of God may be conferred by Humane
invocation, but not that Grace it self makes that it be invoked by us; he
contradicts the Prophet Isaiah, or the Apostle saying the same, I was found of
those that sought me not; I appeared openly to those, who asked not for me.


Can. 4. If any man contends, That God expects our will that we may be cleans'd
from sin, but does not confess, that by the infusion and operation of the
Holy Ghost it is brought to pass in us, that even we will be cleans'd, he
resists the Holy Ghost, affirming by Solomon, that the Will is prepared by the
Lord; and he resists the Apostle wholsomely preaching that, It is God that
works in us to will, and to do, according to his good pleasure.


Can. 5. If any man says, that as the increase, so the beginning of faith, and
the very affection of believing, by which we believe upon him, who justifies
the ungodly, and come to the Regeneration of Baptism, is not in us, by the
gift of Grace; that is, by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, correcting our
will, from ^nfidelity to faith, from ungodliness to godliness; but naturally
he is an Adversary to the Apostles determinations, blessed Paul saying, We are
confident that he that has begun this good work in you, will finish it,
until the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that, to you it is given for
Christ, not only to believe, but to suffer for him; And, ye are saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. For they that say,
that faith whereby we believe on God is natural, do after a sort define all
that are strangers to the Church of Christ, to be Believers.


Can. 6. If any man says, That Mercy from God is bestowed upon us, believing,
willing, desiring, endeavoring, laboring, watching, caring, asking, seeking,
knocking, without the Grace of God, but does not confess that it is wrought in
us, by the infusion and inspiration of the Holy Ghost, that we may believe,
will, or be able to do all these things as we ought to do, and does subjoyne
the aid of Grace, either to humility, or man's obedience, and does not agree
that it is the gift of Grace it self, that we are obedient and humble; he
resists the Apostle saying, What have thou that thou have not received? and by
the grace of God I am that I am.


Can. 7. If any man avouch, That by the strength of Nature we can think any
good that belongs to the Salvation of eternal life, as we ought, or that we
can choose, or consent to the saving, that is, Evangelicall preaching without
the illumination, and inspiration of the Holy Ghost, who gives unto all
sweetness in consenting to, and believing the truth; he is deceived by an
Heretical spirit, not understanding that voice of God in the Gospel, saying,
Without me ye can do nothing; and that of the Apostle, Not that we are
sufficient of our selves, to think any thing, as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God.


Can. 8. If any man contend, That some may come to the grace of Baptism by
Mercy, others by Free Will, which, as it is evident, is depraved in all that
are borne of the transgression of the first Man; he is proved an Alien from the
right faith; for he does not affirm that the free will of all men is weakened
by the sin of the first Man, or certainly he thinks it so hurt, as that yet
some may be able to search out the Mystery of eternal life by themselves,
without the revelation of God; which, how contrary it is, the Lord himself
proves, who testifies, not that some men, but that no man can come unto him,
but whom the Father draws. As he says likewise to Peter, Blessed art thou
Simon, the son of Jonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee,
but my Father which is in heaven. And the Apostle, No man can say, that Jesus
Christ is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.


Can. 9. It is of the gift of God, both when we think rightly, and keep our
feet from falsehood and unrighteousness, for as often as we do good, God
works in us, and with us to work.


Can. 10. The Divine aid is always to be implored, even by the regenerate,
and the Saints, that they may come to a good end, or that they may abide in a
good work.


Can. 19. The nature of man, though it should remain in that integrity wherein
it was Created, yet could it in no wise keep it self without the aid of the
Creator, whence since without the Grace of God it could not keep safe that
health which it received, how without the Grace of God shall it restore what it
has lost?


Can. 20. Many good things are done in man, which man does not, but no good
things does man, which God does not make man to do.


Can. 22. No man has of his own, but a lie and sin, but if any man have truth
and righteousness, of that fountain it is, which we ought to thirst after in
this wilderness, that being, as it were, bedewed with some drops from it, we may
not ^aint by the way.

To the same purpose with these, is the five and twentieth Canon, which because
it is something long, and we have in these sufficient, I forbear to transeribe.


CHAP. XII.
ANd now, Reader, thou may tax me for my prolixity in this Argument, let me
plead my excuse in a word or two. 1. We shall be shorter in many other things
hereafter, which, we may the better be, because we have been so long here. 2.
Thou have by this discourse something to recompense the length of it; as 1. The
several states of the Pelagian heresy declared: 2. The doctrine of natural
corruption, how utterly impotent unto all saving good man is thereby, dead in
sin, under the power of the devil, altogether in the dark about, averse from,
adverse to the things that according to the mystery of godliness accompany
salvation. 3. The doctrine of saving grace, if thou be any thing attentive
thou may observe that,

1 For the nature of it, It is by the supernatural operation of the spirit,
plainly of divine original, and extraction, in opposition to what is natural
to fallen man.

2 For the Subject of it, that the Understanding is the subject of internal
illumination by the holy ghost; that the Will is the subject of renewing, of
regenerating, of quickening, of so^ing, of subduing, of healing, of rescuing,
of effectual, of determining, of transforming, of clean^ing, of infranchising
Grace.

3 For the Distinctions of Grace.

First, Prevenient, and Subsequent; that prevenient grace, finds many
unwilling, and resisting; makes him of unwilling, willing; of resisting,
obeying: that subsequent Grace carries on, what by prevenient Grace was begun
in man; that subsequent grace, though in reference to that first grace, whereby
conversion was wrought, it be subsequent, yet in reference to all after
gracious operations by man, it is prevenient all along.

Secondly, Operating, and Cooperating, operating the same with prevenient, and
cooperating the same with subsequent; so that cooperation is on Gods part all
along, in reference to all gracious operations by man, pre-operation, and on
man's part it is sub-operation; Man all along depending upon the grace of God,
upon the inspiration of the holy Ghost; so as the whole of every gracious
operation, and work in, and by man, is of God; and by man moving under the
power and efficacy of the divine motion, upon his understanding and will, as
the lower wheel, under and by the motion of the higher, the whole motion by
both performed.

Thirdly, Sufficient and effectual, not only sufficient or habitual grace is
from God^ but Effectual or acting grace, upon the Will of man; the Lord giving
not only a power to will, but to will it self, and to do; certainly and
infallibly determining the will of man, without all impeachment of its
freedom, nay, raising it thereby to its greatest freedom, being delivered
from the bondage of sin and Satan, by the son made free: nay, where ever there
is sufficient grace, to wit, a power for saving operation, there is likewise
effectual grace, thence the operation it self certainly and infallibly.

Fourthly, Common and peculiar grace. Saving grace, or grace of saving kind is
common to all the regenerate, and peculiar to them only, this is evident from
the last.

Add hereto, those celebrated doctrines against the Pelagians, belonging to
the doctrine of prevenient, and subsequent, operating and cooperating,
sufficient and effectual grace. 1. That the grace of God is not given
according to man's merits; That is, takes no rise from any thing in man, but is
altogether free, preventing all good, and is the author of all good in man. 2.
That grace is given to every act, a new inspiration of the holy Ghost upon the
will of man, for producing every holy operation in Man.

Add further, for perseveting grace, that it depends upon election, is a fruit
of it, and that the election of God and Grace thereon depending, is merely
arbitrary, no other account to be given thereof then merely his will. And
herein thou may behold those remarkable doctrines of the Schools, in the
hands of the best Schoolmen.

1 Concerning original sin, that man by the fall, was in the first man,
wholly dispoiled of supernaturals, stripped of the garments of grace (which they
have from Ambrose) and sorely wounded in his naturals, and then distinguishing
the soul into a double region; the higher, that of the Understanding and Will,
the lower that of the Sense and Appetite, and distributing the sensual
Appetite, into two Faculties, the concupiscible, we may call it, the desiring
faculty; and the Irascible, we may call it the attempting faculty. They have
found four sore wounds in the soul of man by original sin: In the
Understanding, ignorance; in the Will, wickedness; in the Desiring Faculty
(whose proper virtue it is to be rightly affected toward things pleasing to
sense) Concupiscence, viz. Inordinate desires after such things; in the
Attempting Faculty, (whose proper virtue it is to contend against evil, and
for good, with wrestling against difficulties) weakness.

2 Concerning the Grace of God. 1. That grace is the fruit of election. 2. That
the acceptance of grace is the fruit of election. 3. That grace is the leader
of the Will. 4. That not only exciting, but aiding grace, that is renewing,
and acting grace must be acknowledged. 5. That the beginning of every good
work. 6. That the progress of every good work. 7. That the consummation of
every good work. 8. That the whole of every good work is from God. 9. That
faith, and every Theological or Christian virtue is by divine infusion and
inspiration. 10. That man cannot without the aid of grace, resist temptation
one moment, with many others of the like kind, wholely agreeing with the
doctrines of the Fathers formerly all edged.

Hence likewise, we may observe the doctrine of the merit of congruity, and
that so highly extold by the Jesuits, and Arminians, that he that does what
lies in him by the strength of nature, toward eternal life (Mr. Goodwins own
doctrine in that paragraph we have been upon all this while) shall thereby
obtain grace at the hands of God; are one and the same, and both of them one
with that of Pelagius, and for which he has past for an Heretic this one
thousand two hundred years; that grace is given according to merits, and thus
by the best of the Schoolmen is this Doctrine censured.

Reader, these things and much more, if thou be any thing attentive, thou
may in this Discourse observe excellently cleared, and strongly proved by
Austin, Prosper, and the Fathers in the forementioned counsels. I have now
done with this Paragraph; as for that saying of Chrysostom, with which he
concludes here, it is true, but impertinent. It is the property of a soul
unreasonable and unworthy not to believe, but such are the souls of all
natural men.

CHAP. XIII.
Goodwin. SEcondly, Whereas it was objected, that men in their natural
estates, are by the Scriptures termed darkness, and in this respect presented
as unable to comprehend the light of the Gospel: I answer, there is in the
controversies about the extent and efficacy of the grace of God vouchsafed unto
men, as great abuse of the word Natural (and so of the word Supernatural, a
term not found in the Scriptures, either formally or vertually) as there is of
the word Orthodox, in this and many others. The Scripture knows not the word
Natural, in any such sense or signification, where in it should express or
distinguish the unregenerate estate of a man, from the regenerate: Our
Translators indeed render (...)(...) (in the Scripture adjoining, of which a
(...) presently) the natural man, but quo jure nondum liquet. And however the
whole carriage of the context round about, makes it as clear as the light (as
I have elsewhere argued and proved at large) that it is not the unregenerate
man, but the weak Christian, that is there spoken of, and termed (...), as a
little after (in the same contexture of discourse) he is termed (...), carnal,
and (...), a babe or youngling in Christ. If therefore, by the natural estate
of men, the objection means the unregenerate state of men, according to the
whole compass and extent of it, and under all the differences which it
admits, I absolutely deny that the Scripture any where terms natural men,
darkness.


Resbury. 1 The word Natural (and so Supernatural) is as much abused, as the
word Orthodox, that is, they are both rightly used in the sense which he
opposes.

2 How vainly he quarrels at the translation of the word (...), Natural, and
falsely interprets it of the weak^ Christian, we shall see in its proper place:

3 Whereas he denies the word natural to be found in Scripture in any such
sense as should distinguish the unregenerate state of man from the regenerate,
and the word supernatural in the argument of the efficacy of grace to be found
either formally or vertually: I must charge this bold assertion of his, 1. With
selfe-contradiction. 2. With notorious falsehood. 3. With rank Pelagianisme.

First, With selfe-contradiction: page 9. of his Preface he charge them with
great errors, who will have reason laid aside in enquiries after matters of a
spiritual and supernatural concernment, which he there makes the same with
matters of Religion; what is then spiritual, and what is of religious nature,
by your own confession there, is supernatural. But all Christian graces
(Faith, Hope, Love, etc.) are spiritual and of religious nature; therefore,
grace and the efficacy of it, are supernatural. Vertually then at the least,
this word supernatural is found in Scripture, in this argument of the efficacy
of grace, for those graces are by the efficacy of a gracious influx, and in
them is there an efficacious virtue of spiritual nature, otherwise, how are
they spiritual?

2 With notorious falsehood, so obvious, that was not the sword upon his right
eye utterly darkening it, I cannot imagine how such a doctrine should have
escaped his pen. Let us bring it to the touchstone of the Scriptures, singling
out of many texts a few, John 3. 5, 6, 7, 8 Is not there a first, and second
birth; the first natural, the second supernatural? and is not this the effect
of grace? is it not by divine impression upon the soul by the spirit of God,
that any one is borne of the spirit? John 5. 25. The hour is coming, and now
is, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that ^eare
shall live. Is not the conversion of a sinner here set forth to be a spiritual
resurrection? and is not a spiritual resurrection both as spiritual (by your
own grant) and as a resurrection supernatural? Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. Is it not a
supernatural work, To quicken such as were dead in trespasses and sins, to
raise them up together with Christ, and make them sit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus? This union with Christ, and these spiritual
advancements of the soul in Christ, are they not supernatural, and by the
efficacy of grace? Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. Is not that change, In putting off the
old man, in being renewed, and putting on the new man, which is created, etc.
by the operation, and efficacy of Grace, and is it not supernatural? 1 Cor. 2.
9. to the 15.

Is not that revelation of the spirit discovering what eye has not seen, etc.
Searching the deep things of God, things as far above the spirit of the
natural man, as the things of man, are above the spirit of a beast? Things
which the spirit of the World, that is, that spirit which is common to men,
cannot discover, things, that can no otherwise be discovered but by Spiritual
light, things, which the Natural man therefore cannot receive, because they
are Spiritually discerned; Is not the revelation of these things supernatural?
A revelation which flesh and blood makes not, Titus 3. 5. The washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. Does it report nothing
supernatural to your ear? We might add, 2 Cor. 5. 17. that new Creation
there; and Iam. 1. 18. that new generation there; and Job. 6. 44, 45. that
drawing, and teaching of the Father, with many others of like kind; are all
these natural, nothing in these above the power and operation of Nature, and
that in this corrupt state? By this time I hope it appears, that the word
Natural belongs to the unregenerate, and that Regeneration is by supernatural
operation, and that the unregenerate, or Natural man, as such, is in Scripture
Language darkness.

Thirdly, with rank Pelagianisme, I call it rank, because thus far it
agrees with the first and second state formerly declared, as to admit no
supernatural operation upon the Soul, for conversion, or recovery from sin,
if this be not your meaning, I pray disclose your Riddle, for no man I think
can judge otherwise by your words.


Goodwin. Those Ephesians of whom the Apostle says, They were sometime
darkness, had been not only, or simply unregenerate, but had walked in sins
and trespasses, according to the course of this world, and after the Prince
that rules in the Air, that works effectually in the Children of
disobedience, by whom their understanding had been darkened, and they possessed
with many false, wicked, and blasphemous conceits concerning God, and the
Gospel, etc. All which imply on unregenerate estate most dangerously encumbred,
and from whence it argued the high and signal grace and favor of God, that
even they should be delivered. The Jews also, (Joh, 1. 5.) are termed
darkness upon a like account, viz. because they were strangely and desperately
prejudiced, and pre-possessed with erroneous Notions, and conceits against
Christ, and about the estate of their Messiah's first coming unto them, they
expecting the form of a great Monarch, rejected, and Crucified him in the
form of a Servant; it was this darkness, which they had through an oscitant,
loose, and sensual converse with their own Scriptures, voluntarily suffered
to grew, and spread it self upon the face of their minds and understandings,
that was a snare upon them, and occasioned the sad event here mentioned, viz.
That when the light shone upon them (i. e. when sufficient and pregnant means
were vouchsafed unto them, to have brought them to the knowledgement of their
Messiah) they comprehended it not, i. e. did not by the means of it come to
see, and understand that, for the sight and knowledge whereof it was given
them; for that (by the way) is to be observed, that the Evangelist does not
say, that the darkness, in which the light shined, could not, or was not able
to comprehend it, but only that it did not comprehend it.

Now it is a known Principle in reason, that a Negatione actus, ad negationem
potentiae non ^alet argumentum, there may be a defect in action, or
performance, where there is no defect of power for action. And the very
observation and report which the Evangelist makes of the Non-comprehension of
the light by the darkness, in which it shone, plainly enough imports, that
the defectivenesse of this darkness, in not comprehending the light, did not
consist in, or proceed from any Natural or invincible want of power to
comprehend it, but from a blindness voluntarily contracted, and willingly, if
not wilfully persisted in; for how can it be reasonably supposed, that this
Evangelist, who flies an higher pitch then his Fellows, in drawing up his
Evangelicall Tidings for the use and benefit of the World, should in the very
entrance of his Gospel, and whilst he was thundering out on high, (as one of
the Fathers speaks) the Divinity of Christ, insert the relation of a thing
that had nothing strange, nothing more then of ordinary and common observation
in it? or is any thing more then ordinary, or what is most obvious, that men
do not fly in the Air like Birds, or that Fishes do not speak on the earth
like men? Or is it a thing of any whit the more savoury consideration then
these, that men void of all capacity, and destitute of all power to comprehend
the light, should not comprehend it? but that there should be a Generation of
men, whom it so infinitely concerned to comprehend the light, to acknowledge
and own their Messiah being now come unto them, and who withal had a rich
sufficiency of means to have done the one, and the other, should
notwithstanding be so stupid, and unlike men, as not to comprehend this light,
nor to acknowledge or own this their M^ssiah, is a matter of high admiration,
and astonishment, and the mention of it very commodious, and proper for the
subject of the discourse which the Holy G^^st had now in hand (as might be
showed more at large) but I fear the Reader has more then his burden of an
Epistle.


Resbury. 1 Here you answer certain Objections against your new Doctrine, and
in the first place (if I mistake not) you contradict your self, by the genius
of your discourse, granting that in the Call of the Ephesians there was a
supernatural work, for as much as you affirm that their state, which was of
darkness, was not such as natural to fallen man, whom you will have, it
seems, merely in his Natural state, a Child of Light rather then of
Darkness (as Prosper upbraides the Collator) so that howsoever nothing
supernatural be required, for bringing men to faith and repentance generally,
yet here it must be admitted; if so, then is the word supernatural vertually
found in the Scriptures.

2 Your supposall of their unregenerate state so dangerously encumbred above
the unregenerate state of the generality of men, that thence this difference
should arise, That though they were darkness, yet these are not, is false and
frivolous; for,

1 These very sins and trespasses, whence you argue the special aggravation of
their condition, were the very same wherein the whole world walked -- according
to the course of the world, and in the same subjection to the Devil was the
world -- according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that
wrought in the children of disobedience; Such were all unregenerate, needs must
the course of the world be according to that Prince, who is the Prince of the
world, the god of the world. Nay, the Apostles, and first converted Jews,
borne and bred in the visible Church, before conversion, had their conversation
among them, and were children of wrath together with them; here was then
nothing peculiar to them in their unregeneracy of force to quit the Natural
man of this charge of darkness.

2 These sins and trespasses, wherein they walked were the fruits of Natural
corruption, whereby all men are dead in sin, they here, though dead in
actual sins, yet dead by original sin; Thus the Apostle describes this
sinful conversation to be in the lusts of the flesh, and a fulfilling the
wills of the flesh, and of the mind, all these sins of theirs were the works
of the flesh; and what is the flesh but corrupt Nature found in all men, to
them derived from the first man? Ioh. 3. 6. That which is borne of the flesh,
is flesh, diametrically opposed to the Spirit, which is the fountain of
Spiritual light and life; and that which is borne of the Spirit, is spirit;
without which Spiritual birth, Nicodemus his gross apprehensions there, show
the darkness of the Natural man; this flesh, or corruption of Nature, called
likewise the Old man, made up of many deceitful Lusts, the fountain of this
evil conversation, Ephesians. 4. 22. called by the same Apostle, The Law of the
Members, contrary to the Law of the mind, but of the mind renewed (for
otherwise, walking in those abominable ways whilst unregenerate, they
fulfilled the desires or will^ of the mind, in fulfilling the will of the
flesh, called, The Body of death. Likewise, Romans 7. through which the Natural
man is dead; nay, so much as remains of it in the Spiritual man, so much
death there is still, as the Apostles complaint testifies; this the fountain
of whatsoever sins the Apostle, now regenerate, was pestered with; the
fountain then of all sins, and only of sin in unregeneracy. The deadly
strength of this corruption we see further by singular instance in David, a
Person so holy, yet how upon advantage and surprisall did it prevail against
him, to put forth those deadly fruits of Adultery, and Murder, which sins he
derives from Natural corruption, that had seized him in the womb, Psalm. 51.
Further, the Apostle charging corruption of Nature upon all Mankind, Jews and
Gentiles, not one excepted, Romans 3. he makes up his charge of most hideous sins
-- Their throat an open Sepulcher, the poison of Aspes under their lips, their
mouth full of cursing and bitterness, their feet swift to shed blood, etc.
because of those strong inclinations which are in all men through Original
sin, to these great transgressions; and where ever sins of this, or any other
kind are actually committed, they are the fruits of this corruption; where they
are not committed, it is from the restraining hand of God, at least, upon men.
It was then by the corruption of Nature common to all, that these Ephesians
were dead in trespasses and sins, covered over therewith, as with the deadly
streams of that spring of death running over them; but the state of death is a
state of darkness to the utmost. Add, that all unregenerate men, in the state
of death and darkness, through corruption, are likewise in the possession, and
under the dominion of the Prince, and of the power of darkness, by whom the
remainders of Natural light (which is far from Spiritual, holy, saving
light are more and more darkened, and the capacity of Historical light more
weakened; the Doctrine then of the Natural man's darkness, even in a state of
death maintained, as we saw before by the Fathers, against the Pelagian^,
stands firm upon Scripture-foundations, against which your attempts are as
vain, asimpious; so much for your first instance.

Now for the second Instance of the Jews, you say, 1 Ioh. 5. it is manifest
that darkness is there charged upon all men made by him, ver. 3, 4, 5. and is
not the like charge of darkness upon all? otherwhere, 1 Cor. 2. 12. 14. and
Job 11. 12. vain man would feign be wise, though he be borne (he is so by
nature then) like a wild Asses colt. The men of your Doctrine are deep in this
condemnation of vain men: to no purpose then is your Discourse, applying this
darkness to the Jews only, telling us of these and these things more then
ordinary in them, making for this darkness in them; As for your observation,
that the Evangelist does not say, (the darkness could not, but did not
comprehend the light) you discover high Pelagianisme again, for though you
interpret this of the Jews, whose unregenerate estate you will have by strong
and desperate prejudices against Christ to be much more encumbred, then is the
unregenerate state of men generally, yet you will not allow that these could
not comprehend that light.

2 This observation of yours is very vain* as appears by your trifling
argument, viz. That the consequence holds not from the denial of the Act, to
the denial of the Power. For,

1. From the universal denial of the act, without exception, the consequence
holds strongly to the denial of the power, because God gives no power in vain,
but here is an universal denial of the Act, as we have seen by the context;
this non-comprehension being charged upon all men, and it is evident in
experience, except Mr. Goodwin, shall produce that natural man, which
comprehends this light.

2 The Power it self is otherwhere, and that very clearly denied, as we have
but now seen, in our discourse of natural corruption, and the natural man's
subjection, to the powers of darkness in consent with which Scriptures this
must be interpreted.

As for your following Discourse it is not worth a deaf nut, though you
flourish it as much as you can: an ill face needs a good dress; trivial
matter must have words to set it off; the sum of your Rhetorication is, that if
there be that natural darkness and impotency upon all men, it was impertinent
for the Evangelist to charge it upon the Jews, especially when he was entering
upon Gospell-doctrine, beginning with that high and maine doctrine, the
Divinity of Christ. But 1. His charge is here upon all men as we have seen, not
upon the Jews alone, 2. Is it such a wonder, that he that is about to set
forth Christ, as man's redeemer, should teach the doctrine of natural impotency
and corruption, without which all other doctrines of Christ were in vain? you
may do well upon the account of your proper reasoning, here to strike out the
two first, and half the third chapter of the Epistle to the Ro^ant, your
self, and brethren in error with you, are proof sufficient how necessary that
doctrine is, when notwithstanding it is so plainly and frequently taught, yet
it is so strange to you; and now what was your drift in your former plausible
discourse against error is manifest, namely, that which we there mentioned to
undermine the true doctrine of natural darkness, and impotency. You conclude
this Section, That you fear the Reader, has more then his burden of an
Epistle: you need not doubt it, except there had been more truth and worth in
it.


CHAP. XIV.
Goodwin. Thirdly, Concerning that Scripture (1 Cor. 2. 14.) but the natural
man perceives not, etc. if, Reader, thou conceivest there is any thing in it
spoken with any intent to disable Reason or Understanding in a man so far as
to divest them of all capacity and power for the apprehending, conceiving, or
believing any the things of God; yea, or particularly, of such of the things of
God, the discerning and believing whereof is of absolute necessity for
salvation; thou may if thou please, deliver thy judgment from the mistake
by the perusal of a few pages in a discourse formerly published, where thou will find this passage of Scripture opened at large, and driven home to its
issue, here I clearly demonstrate these three things.

1. That the place speaks not of the natural, i. e. of the unregenerate man,
but of the weak Christian, the babe in Christ.

2. That the things of God here spoken of are not such things, the knowledge or
discerning whereof is of absolute necessity to salvation, but the high or deep
things of God, of the true and worthy discerning of which, only the Spiritual
man, i. e. the strong and well grown Christian is De praesenti, and immediately
capable.

3. (And lastly) that the incapacity of these things of God which is here
asserted to be in the Natural man or weak Christian, is not an utter or
absolute incapacity, or such, which by a diligent use of means he may not very
possibly and according to the ordinary course of providence out-grow, but only
a present or actual incapacity or indisposition, which is regularly, and (at
it were) of course curable: these things I there evince from the express
tenor, and carriage of the context.


Resbury. For his explication of 1 Corinthians. 2. 14.

1. He says, the place speaks not of the Natural i. e. the unregenerate
man, but of the weak Christian, the babe in Christ. That the place speaks of
the Natural or unregenerate man, is evident against his demonstrations he tells
us of, which indeed are of no affinity with Euclia's, we have only night for a
vision in them.

1. Of him that has not the spirit of God, v. 11. But the spirit of the world
opposite to the spirit of God, v. 12. 2. The things of the Spirit of God are
foolishness unto him, and what things are these? why the things that are held
forth in the preaching of Christ crucified, v. 2. Now to whom is the preaching
of Christ crucified foolishness? to them that perish, V. 18. But to them that
are saved, the power of God, to the uncalled, i. e. the unregenerate,
foolishness, but to the called of God, the power of God, and the wisdom of
God, v. 23, 24.

2 The things of God here (he says) are such, as are not absolutely necessary
to salvation, but the high and deep things of God. But 1. The things absolutely
necessary to be known, are as high and deep as any; the Trinity of the
persons, the union of the two Natures in the Mediator, the oblation and
intercession of Christ, the imputation of his righteousness, etc.

2 These are the things absolutely necessary to salvation, for they are the
things in the preaching whereof, Christ crucified is preached, v. 2. the things
of the hidden wisdom of God ordained to the glory of the Saints, v. 7. the
things freely given of God to the Saints, v. 12. Whereas you say in the close
here, that the spiritual man only, that is, the strong and well grown Christian
is, de praesenti, and immediately capable, etc.

1 If only the strong and well grown Christian be the spiritual man, then is
the mere natural man a weak Christian, and so all the world by nature
Christians, i. e. believers: welcome all, Turks, and Insidels, to Mr. Goodwins
Church.

2 Whether do you allow the spiritual man, to be above the natural man or not?
if not, (as indeed you cannot, if you will be constant to your self as here,
so formerly, neither can you deny it, if you will be constant to your self, as
formerly we observed; but you are a famous self-subverter, then is the Natural
man capable, de praesenti, etc. Contrary to your own interpretation of the
Apostles express doctrine here; if you do allow him above the natural man,
then you grant the word Supernatural vertually in that sense, wherein you
formerly denied it; so that you are full of interwoven contradictions, at every
turn refuting your self.

3 You deny here an utter incapacity of these things in the Natural man, etc.
but such as he may out-grow, according to the ordinary course of providence.

1. Your Doctrine is evidently false. 1. These things of the spirit of God are
discerned by another light, and another principle then the Natural man has, He
neither knows, nor can know them, says the Apostle, because they are
spiritually discerned: and this light of the spirit, specifically distinct from
the light of Reason in the Natural man, as the light of reason is from the
light of Sense in the bruit beast, v. 11. And this spirit the world has not
(therefore not the Natural man) v. 12. Formerly he made such an observation, as
this, his refuge, that the Evangelist said, not Darkness could not, but did
not comprehend the light, which, how slender a refuge it was for him we there
saw: here the Apostle is express, Cannot, yet he attempts an evasion. There is
no end of this man's sophistry, nor can be upon his principles, that the Grammar
and Logic of the Scripture must veil to his Reason.

2 Your Doctrine here (as all along) is purely Pelagian: for you acknowledge no
such incapacity in the Natural man, of discovering all Gospel Truths leading to
salvation, but what by the diligent use of means he may overgrow, etc.
therefore of himself, not only may he make use of the means, but so make use
of them, as that thence, he shall certainly be savingly enlightened: Which must
be one of these ways.

1 Either the seeds of natural light shall hereby grow up into a saving light,
so Nature improves it self into Grace, and this is according to your Doctrine,
that there is nothing supernatural in the efficacy of Grace; and this is highly
Pelagian, for it makes Nature Grace, (Sub laud Naturae, latent inimici
Gratiae) and Nature before this improvement must be Grace, in the seed, as by
it, it becomes grace in the fruit, Or,

2 By this use of means, he shall procure the giving of saving light and grace
from the hand of God, which is still the Pelagian doctrine, that the grace of
God is given according to man's merits; but still it is a Riddle to me, how you
can allow thus much, and make good your doctrine, against the supernatural
efficacy of grace.

As for your gloss upon 1 Cor. 3. 1. It is evident the Apostle calls them
carnal, opposed to spiritual; not absolutely, as formerly he had opposed the
natural man, but in part, therefore he adds by way of limitation, babes in
Christ; but when he expostulates with them v. 3. are ye not carnal, and walk
according to max? he there implies, that the mere man is wholly carnal, for as
much as the weak Christian, so far as he is carnal, he is according to man,
and wherein he walks carnally he walks according to man.


Goodwin. 4 (And lastly to the Objection) concerning Heathen Philosophers, and
others of great parts, and natural endowments of reason, wit, understanding,
etc. who either rejected the Gospel, as a Fable, as the Philosophers, or else
perverted and wrested the truth thereof in many things to their own
destruction, and possibly to the destruction of others, as Heretics; I answer,
when I affirm and teach, that Reason, or the intellectual part of a man is
competent to apprehend, discern, subscribe unto the things of God, and of the
Gospel, my meaning is not to affirm withal, that therefore men of these
endowments, though never so excellently enriched with them, must of necessity
apprehend, discern, or subscribe unto these things; Reason, and understanding
even of the greatest advance in man, will serve men for other ends and
purposes, besides the apprehension and discerning the things of God in the
Gospel, and may accordingly be improved and employed by them; yea, they may be
employed against the Gospel, and made to war and fight against the truth of
it: it is a saying of known truth concerning all things that have not an
essential connection with a man's sovereign good:

Nil prodest quod non laedere possit idem. i. e. Nothing there is so profitable,
But to do mischief is as able.


Because some men suffer themselves to be bewitched with a corrupt desire of
drawing away Disciples after them, and for the fulfilling of such a Lust speak
perverse things (as the Apostle speaks) it does not fellow from hence, that
therefore they were in no capacity, or in no possibility of speaking the truth,
and refraining from the teaching of perverse things.

Aristotle speaking of riches, says, That it is unpossible that he should have
them, who takes no care to have them; So are we to conceive of the knowledge
and true discerning of the things of God in the Gospel, in what capacity
soever men are, either for ability, or means otherwise for attaining them, it
is unpossible that ever they should actually attain to them, unless they be
careful, and shall bend the strength of their minds and understandings in
order to the attainment of them. Now the Heathen Philosophers (more generally)
became vain in their imaginations, as the Apostle speaks, i. e. they spent
themselves,, the strength of their parts, time, and opportunities upon matters
of a low, or secondary concernment, and which they apprehended to have a more
ready and certain connection with their own honor, and esteem amongst men,
and did not charge themselves, their gifts, or parts, with that worthy and
blessed design, which the Apostle calls the having of God in acknowledgement;
upon this their unnatural unthankfulness toward God, uttering it self in
their addition of themselves, to studies, speculations, and enquiries of a
self concernment with the neglect of him, (...) their foolish heart was
darkened. Concerning Heretics, it is a common Notion amongst us, that these
from time to t^me were turned aside from the way of truth, by some unclean
Spirit or other; as Pride, Ambition, Envy, Voluptuousness, or the like; if
these Spirits once enter into a man, they will soon call in, and take unto
themselves other spirits worse then themselves; I mean spirits of error and
delusion, to advocate for them, and plead their cause: as for the mistakes and
miscarriages in judgment of good men, upright (in the maine) with God, and the
Gospel, about some particular points they are to be resolved into several
causes, of which we shall not now speak particularly, only this I shall say,
whatsoever any man's error, or mistake in judgment, is about the things of the
Gospel, it is not to be imputed to any deficiency on Gods part, in the
vouchsafement of means unto him, competent, and sufficient, as well for the
guiding into, as for the keeping of his judgment in the way of truth, but into
some deficiency, neglect, or incogitancy of his own, which he might very
possibly have prevented, or overcome. But --


Resbury. For the sum of this Paragraph concerning the Philosophers, and
Heretics, you say in the first place, That though they were able to apprehend
the things of the Gospel, yet does it not follow that they must; but 1. We
have seen that no Natural man is able. 2. Find one that ever did advance his
reason to apprehend the Gospell-Mystery without the Spirit of illumination,
revealing it by the Word, if not one, then none could, for from the Universal
denial of the Act, to the denial of the Power, the consequence is undeniable.
3. Whether might those Philosophers (according to your apprehension) without
the word of the Gospel, have found out in the Book of the Creature the
Gospell-Mystery, or might they so improve their reason about inquiry after God?
That thereupon he must send his Word unto them, thereby enlightening them?
whether soever of these you take, you fall into the Relagian Heresy, as we
often formerly evinced against your Discourse of the same batch with this.

As for your instance of men bewitched with a corrupt desire of drawing
Disciples after them, and speaking perverse things; pardon me, if I be apt to
believe that you speak feelingly, and from selfe-experience.

2 You teach that men must bend their minds and intentions to Gospel-enquiries,
that they may have the knowledge thereof; It Is true, so does the Spiritual man:
But the Natural man wants Principles for bending his mind thereto, as
discerning nothing worthy in them, and his heart's set against them.

3 You say, That God punishing the Philosophers for their unthankfulness,
addicting themselves to other things, etc. their foolish heart was darkened:
this is true too, but the conclusion you aim at here, scil, that therefore
they were able to have addicted themselves to Gospel-enquiries is both false,
and Pelagian, as has been proved before; as supposing that man is able to
perform all his duty.

As for Heretics, it is true, you say, They are led aside by some unclean
Spirit, therefore must I always suspect an Heretic, though his conversation
be never so specious, to be but a whited Sepulcher; whereas in the close of
this Section you say, That whatsoever any man's error, etc. be, it is not to be
imputed to deficiency on Gods part, in the vouchsafement of means; I answer,
deficiency sounds culpably, and therefore not to be imputed to God; but evident
it is, that God does not) yet without deficiency vouchsafe the necessary means
of Gospel-knowledge, to many denying his Word, to more his Spirit, who have no
more, nor otherwise deserved this denial, then those to whom he affords both,
who is sought of those that asked not for him, and found of those that sought
him not, of whom it is, as of him that shows mercy, not of him that wills, nor
of him that runs.


Goodwin. Secondly, concerning the Spirit of God, by which alone, and in
opposition to reason many affirm and teach, That the things of God, and
matters of Religion are to be apprehended, discerned, and known; I answer,
that such an Opinion as this, is a conceit as uncouth, as ^ulpably weak, and
ill-coherent with it self, as lightly can be; for if only the Spirit of God
within me apprehends the things of God, and I my self apprehend them not (and
apprehend them I cannot, but by my reason or understanding, having no other
faculty, where with to apprehend or conceive them) such an apprehension of them
relates not at all unto me, nor can I any whit be said the more to apprehend
them, because the Spirit of God apprehends them in me; then I may, or might, in
case the same Spirit should apprehend them in another man; That which another
man meditates, or indicts in my house without imparting it unto me, no whit
more concerns me, then in case be should have meditated or indicted the same
in the house of another man. Besides, the Spirit of God being but one and the
same infinite, and invisible Spirit in all men, he cannot with any tolerable
propriety of speech, nor with truth, be said to apprehend, discern, and
concerve that in one man, which he does not after the same manner apprehend,
discern, and conceive in another, yea, in every man; therefore if there be any
thing more apprehended, or discerned of the things of God, in one man then in
another, the difference arises not from the different apprehensions of the
Spirit in these men, but from the different apprehensions of these men
themselves, and this by their own reasons and understandings, they having (as
has been said) no other faculties, principles, or abilities wherewith to
apprehend, but these.


Resbury. You affirm here, That many teach that by the Spirit of God alone, in
opposition to reason in man the things of God are apprehended: who those many
are, or one of those many, I know not; the Doctrine of your known Adversaries
is, That by man's reason are the things of God apprehended, but that they may be
savingly so, reason must be Spiritually enlightened, and the whole soul
sanctified, and that by preventing and differencing Grace, so that all you say
further in this Section are wast words; you may make great webs, if you spin
thus plentifully, yet when all is done they will be but Cobwebs.


CHAP. XV.
Goodwin. IF it be demanded, But is any man able without the presence and
assistance of the spirit of God, to discern the things of God, or to judge
aright the matters of Religion? I answer,

1 Plainly, and directly to the heart (I suppose) of these, who make this
demand, No: The spirit of God has such a great interest in, and glorious
super-intendency over the Minds, and Spirits, Reasons and Understandings of
men, that they cannot act or move regularly, or perform any of these
operations or functions that are most natural and proper to them, upon any
worthy or comely terms, especially in matters of a spiritual concernment, but
by the gracious and loving interposure and help of the spirit; for
(questionless) the intellectual frame of the heart and soul of man, was by
the sin and fall of Adam wholly dissolved, shattered, brought to an absolute
Chaos, and confusion of ignorance, and darkness, to a condition of as great
impotency to do him the least service, in order to his comfort or peace in any
kind, as can be imagined. So that if the Reasons and Understandings of men quit
themselves in their actings or workings with honor, or with any due proportion
to their benefit, comfort, or peace; it must needs be by means of that
gracious conjunction of the spirit of God with them, which is a veuchsafement
unto the children of men, procured by him, who raised up the Tabernacle of
Adam, when it was fallen, Jesus Christ blessed for ever, in respect of which
vouchsafement purchased by him, and given unto men for his sake, he is said to
in lighten every man, coming into the world: so that what light soever of
truth, what clear and sound principle, or impressions of Reason or
Understanding soever is since the fall, to be found in any man, is an express
f^utt of the Grace, that is given unto the world, upon the account of Jesus
Christ, and is reinvested in the soul, by the appropriated interposure of the
spirit of God, the gift whereof upon this account, is so frequently and highly
magnified in the Scriptures. Yea, not only the habitual residency of all
principles of light and truth in the soul, is to be attributed unto the Spirit
of God, as supporting and preserving them from defacement, but also all the
actings and movings of the rational powers of the soul, according to the
exigency, ducture, and import of them, as in all right apprehensions of things,
in all legitimate and sound reasonings, and debates, whether for confirmation
of any truth, or the confutation of any error or the like, But --


Resbury. Here we have a Question and an Answer, for the Answer we have much to
observe, and contend against it.

1 You say that you Answer to the heart of those, etc. then, as is your
perpetual manner, upon this Argument, you Cant in high words, and general
expressions: Briefly, that you may answer to the heart of those, that hold the
truth against you; You must Answer two things, first that the soul must be
renewed by habitual grace. Secondly, That so renewed, it must be acted by
effectual grace.

2 You grant the utter dissolution of the intellectual frame by Adams fall,
hereby no doubt you think to find out an evasion from the charge of
Pelagianisme: We shall see how well you will acquit your self of this charge
in the examination of your doctrine: in the mean time, here is deep silence
about the will of man, and about the sensual appetite: do you grant the Will,
as to supernaturals, wholly dispoiled, as to naturals deeply wounded? do you
deny the lustings of the sensual appetite in the state of innocence against
right reason? Or do you with the Jesuitical School hold such lustings natural
to that state?

3 You lay down your maine doctrine that there is such a light vouch safed to
all men, by the procurement of Jesus Christ, as that according to your former
doctrine, every man in the world may improve it to faith and repentance. Here,

1 We must take notice of an unsound dropping of your pen by the way, and upon
the by: Christ you say, raised up the Tabernacle of Adam; this, no doubt to
insinuate, that all men without exception, are redeemed by him; But by your
leave Sir, it is the Tabernacle of David, that he raises up, as he took upon
him the seed of Abraham: but men of unsound doctrines, have no mind to hold
fast the form of sound words.

2 For the doctrine it self, which you ground upon Ioh. 1. 9. It is such, as
that Scripture will not at all countenance. 1. They give a very fair
interpretation of the place, and as to me it seems genuine, who understand by
this light, natural Understanding, and Reason bestowed upon man by Christ, as
God, and man's Creator, which natural light still remains, though much obscured
by the fall in man, without which he was not man; and of this light Christ, as
the Son of God and Author of nature, is the Author unto every one borne into
the World; Thus Calvin (and with him others) resolving the place thus, The
Evangelist setting forth the divinity of Christ, shows him to have been the
Creator of all things, v. 3. And because man is the choicest piece of the
creatures here below, and we are most affected with truths concerning our
selves, he set forth Christ not only as the Author of being to all creatures
in general, v. 3. but particularly instanceth in man, whose being i^ of the
best beings; a life, and this life, of the best of lives; a rational. and
intellectual. In him was life, he is life of himself; and he is the spring or
author of life, to all living creatures: more particularly, of that life of
light, which the rational creature, Man, lives, v. 4. the same light with that,
v. 9. The Author of which light, the Creator of man, John testifies him to be
giving witness to his Godhead, He that comes after me is preferred before
me, for he was before me, v. 15.

Of this light Austine speaks, Tract. 2. in cap. 1. Joan. This life was the
light of men, did he say the light of beasts? -- There is a certain light of
men, whereby they differ from beasts. Let us now see, and understand what is
this light of men. Thou differest not from a beast, but by thy Understanding;
whence art thou better then the beast? from the image of God; where is the
image of God? in the mind, in the understanding. If therefore thou be
better then a beast, because thou have a mind, by which thou understandest what
the beast cannot understand, and thence thou art a man, that thou art better
then the beast; The light of men, is the light of minds; the light of minds,
is above minds, and excels all minds. This was that life by which all things
were made, here then the Creator of man is set forth his restorer.

2 If we must suppose it supernatural Light, then must we limit the Subject
enlightened thus; He enlightens every man that comes into this world, who is
enlightened; that is, there is no other fountain of Light but he, to all that
are enlightened; here we may fitly bring in that illustration of that eminent
light, Austin upon that text, They shall all be taught of God; who when he had
according to truth interpreted it only of the Sons of the Promise, and the
Vessels of Mercy, according to Election -- he adds for further clearing. But
as we speak rightly, when we say of any Schoolmasters who is alone in the
City, this man teaches all, not because all learn, but because none learn but
of him, whosoever do there learn; so we rightly say, God teaches all men to
come to Christ, not because all come, but because no man comes otherwise, Lib.
de praedest. Sanct. chap. 8. so here, Christ enlightens every man that comes
into this world, not that every man coming into the world is enlightened, but of
all comers into the world, whosoever is enlightened, he alone is the
enlightner; though as I said the former interpretation seems most genuine; but
whether the former, or this, or whatsoever other interpretation may be the
truth, it is evident, that Mr. Goodwins, who will have such a gift of
illumination vouchsafed by Christ unto all, as that every man may improve to
faith and repentance, cannot be the truth.

1 From the context here, for notwithstanding this light, and enlightening, such
is the darkness both of the world, and of his own, the Jews, as,
comprehended not this light, or rather laid no hold upon it, as knew him not,
(...) received him not, these only excepted, who (...) distinction from, and
opposition to the rest, were not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
^or of the will of man, but of God; therefore well says Austin, speaking of
that light shining upon this darkness; As when a blind man is placed in the
Sunshine, the Sun is present to him, but he is absent from the Sun; so
every fool, every unrighteous, every wicked person is blind in his heart,
wisdom is present to him, but being present to a blind man, it is absent from
his eyes, not because it is absent from him, but because he is absent from it,
Tract. 1. in c. 1. Joan. here was a beaming forth of this light upon such, and
about them, in his works and word, but they neither discern it, nor have any
power so to do, because they are blind though in the midst of Sunshine.

2 From the whole Doctrine of Natural corruption, and the grace of Conversion
throughout the Scriptures; even all those Scriptures, whence you gather, That
the intellectual frame of man was so shattered by Adams fall, are bent against
all unregenerate persons, showing not what they had been by Adams fall, if
Christ had not been, but what they are, this notwithstanding, before
regeneration; therefore.

1 For the Doctrine of Natural corruption, all men are thereby before
regeneration flesh, in which dwells no good thing, wherein it is impossible to
please God; which, enmity against the Law of God, contrary in its lustings to
the Spirit, all dead in sin, all darkness, all children of wrath, all in
subjection to Satan, all under the Law, all borne as wild Ass^^ Colts, all
such as cannot receive the things of the Spirit of God, as savor only the
things of the flesh, etc. whereas if your Doctrine was true, the Scripture must
have affirmed the contrary to all these, either that by Nature we are not
flesh, or not so wholly in opposition to the Spirit; but that in the flesh some
good thing dwells, that we may by Nature please God, that we are in amity with
the Law of God, compliant to the motions of the Spirit, alive from sin,
light, children of peace, free from Satan's bondage, borne under Grace, borne
the Children of wisdom, such as can receive the things of the Spirit of God,
as savor, or have those Principles, whereby we may savor the things of the
Spirit, etc.

2. For the Doctrine of the Grace of conversion, the Scripture says;

1 That it is supernatural, quickening Grace, Grace by which we are borne anew,
Grace raising from the dead, Grace anew creating; but according to your
Doctrine, there should be no such thing, as the Grace of conversion, or
Regeneration, but only a progress of Natural virtues, faith and repentance,
but the fruits of the seeds of light in Nature; for this light you make a
common vouchsafement to all, and the word Natural you will not allow to
difference the unregenerate man from the regenerate: so that in the building of
your Babel, here is nothing but confusion of speech, from confusion of things,
Grace is Nature, and Nature is Grace; Natural is Spiritual, and Spiritual is
Natural; and which is yet admirable, Spiritual is with you too supernatural.

2 It is altogether free, and preventing; as there is a supernatural Grace of
Conversion, so this grace, as altogether independent upon any thing in man,
therefore is of God. 1. As of him that shows mercy, merely because he will
show mercy, and will have compassion, on whom he will have compassion; in
opposition to man willing, or to man running. 2 As of him that is sound of those
that sought him not. 3. As of him that by this grace of his makes the
difference betwixt the converted and unconverted, so as the glorified Saints
shall owe unto God, not only what they received in common with the damned, but
that wherein they excel the damned; who has made thee to differ? 4. As of him
that calls, not only of the foolishest, and weakest, and basest, and most
despised in the world; but even of the worst of men, 1 Cor. 6. 9. And Mr.
Goodwin himself tells us how desperately encumbered the unregenerate state of
the Ephesians was. Now according to your doctrine, all must be contrary; man
must begin, and God must follow; man must first give, and God must recompense
again; whatsoever it is, that you shall please to call the grace, or the work of
conversion on Gods part, it must be vouchsafed unto those, who by the
improvement of that common, original, natural grace you tell us of; that light
vouchsafed to all in their natural birth, have sought the Lord, have willed,
have runned, and so they having received that common Posse (Pelagius his own
grace) shall make themselves by the good use of it, to differ from those, who
for not using it, are not converted. 3. It is effectual and peculiar the saving
grace of God in Jesus Christ, is not potential but effectual, wherever it
gives the power, giving the deed likewise, not common but peculiar, given only
to those, who are indeed saved by it, No man can come to me, except the father
draw him, and I will raise him up at the last day; without this drawing, here
is no power of coming; whosoever is drawn, surely comes, and is surely saved;
All are not saved, All come not, neither then could all come, or any, but those
that do come; this grace then is at once, preventing, effectual, and
peculiar. And indeed the peculiarity of it, is evident from the former heads,
He has mercy, on whom he will have mercy, there is a distinction of the heirs
of mercy from the rest, Who has made thee to differ? differencing therefore
peculiar grace, you has he quickened, you, not all, etc. Thus we have seen the
vanity of your Interpretation, and if we add the Heresy too, we shall do you
no wrong; For, whether you confound Grace and Nature; or which way soever you
make Grace to arise from Nature, or to depend upon any thing in the natural
man, you cannot possibly quit your self of palpable Pelagianism. The least
charge that can be against you is, that grace is given according to merits, in
that sense wherein Pelagius was refuted and condemned: The very Doctrine of
Pelagius you teach, for a common power of repentance in all men, against the
supernatural efficacy of converting grace, against the preveniency, and
peculiarity of it, against the natural man's darkness and impotency; and you
offer fair against original sin, whilst you tell us, that ^e are all borne so
vested with light and pow^^. And you think to carry all, as if you were no
consort of his: only because you have a new fetch for it, which, how slender
^n o^^e it is, I hope by this time appears.

What you add toward the end of this Section, about the actings and movings
of the ^ationall Powers, by the spirit of God; you do so hover in generals,
and only put off with a parcel of fine words, as all that I shall yet say, is
to pray you to speak plainly, and particularly; you use the same Artifice, and
Cant most extremely; Afterward in the first Chapter of your book, when you
should lay down your express doctrine about the divine influx and concourse;
we must try if we can hunt you out of your holes there.


CHAP. XVI.
Goodwin. 1. THough the spirit of God contributes by his assistance after that
high manner, which bath been declared, toward the right apprehending,
understanding, discerning the things of God by men; yet this no ways proves,
but that they are the Reasons and Understandings of men themselves, that must
apprehend, discern, and understand these things; and consequently, must be
provoked, raised, engaged, employed, and improved by men, that they may thus
apprehend, and discern, notwithstanding all that assistance which is
administered by the spirit: otherwise, nothing will be apprehended or discerned
by them. Nor will the assistance of the spirit, we speak of, turn to any
account of benefit, or comfort, but of loss, and condemcondemnation unto men,
in case their Reasons (...) Understandings shall not advance, and quit
themselves according to their interest thereupon.


Resbury. This may pass as impertinent. It is the Reason of man that must
apprehend, etc. But it is Reason sanctified, that apprehends savingly, man must
stir up his own soul, but it is by the work of the sanctifying spirit,
that so he does effectually. These things have been proved abundantly already.


Goodwin. 3 In case the Spirit of God shall at any time reveal (I mean, offer,
and propose) any of the things of God, or any spiritual Truth unto men; these
must be apprehended, discerned, judged of; yea, and concluded to be the things
of God, by the Reasons and Understandings of men; before they can, or ought to
receive or believe them to be the things of God; Yea, before such a revelation
can any ways accommodate, benefit, and bless their soul. When our Savi^^^
speaking of that spirit to his Disciples, says, And he will show you things to
come: And again, he shall receive of mine, and shall show them unto you (Joh.
16. 13, 14.) he supposes that they (viz.) with their own Reasons and
Understandings, were to apprehend and judge of the things that should be thus
showed unto them, to have been showed unto them by the spirit of God, and not
to have proceeded from any other Author. Yea, in case men shall receive the
things of God themselves, for the things of God, or of the spirit of God,
before their Reason and Understanding have upon rational grounds, and
principles judged them to be the things of God: yet can they not receive them
upon these terms, as the things of God, I mean, as the tnings of God ought in
duty, and by command from himself to be received by men; or so as to benefit,
or i^^ich the soul by their being received. For as God requires of men to be
praised with understanding, (i. e.) out of a rational apprehension, and due
consideration of his infinite worth and excellency; so does be require to be
believed also, and they that believe him otherwise, believe they know not what,
nor whom, and so are brethren in vanity, with those that worship they know not
what, and build Altars to an unknown God; to trust or believe in God upon such
terms, as these, is, being interpreted, but as the devotion of a man to an
Idol; yea, the Apostle himself arraignes the Athenians of that high Crime, and
misdemeanour of Idolatry upon the account of their sacrificing to an unknown
God.


Resbury. This is of the same Spirit, Error, and impertinency with the last;

1 The Spirits revelation, he interprets his Proposal; This is just Pelagius
his revelation, proposal by his word and doctrine.

2 The things by the Spirit proposed must be discerned the things of God, by
our own reasons, etc. Who doubts this? but (which he means not) by our own
reasons enlightened, by renewing and peculiar Grace; he says, They must be
received upon rational grounds, true reason being by Scripture enlightened.


Goodwin. 4 And lastly, The interposure and actings of reason and understanding
in men, are of that sovereign, and most transcendent use, yea, necessity, in
and about matters of Religion, that all the agency of the Spirit,
notwithstanding a man can perform (...) thing, no manner of service unto God
with accep^ nothing in a way of true edification to himself, with their
engagement and service. First, I stand charg^ by God, not to believe every
Spirit, but to try the Spirits, whether they be of God; I demand, b^ what rule
or touchstone shall I try any Spirit? wh^ or upon what account shall I reject
one, as a Spirit (...) error, falsehood, and delusion; and do homage (...) my
judgment and conscience to another, as the Spirit of God? If it be said, I
ought to try the Spirits by the Scriptures, or Word of God; I demand again,
But how shall I try my touchstone, or be sure that that Principle, notion, or
ground, which I call the Word of God, and by which I go about to try the
Spirits, is indeed the Word of God? There is scarce any error that is abroad
in the Christian world, but freely offers it self to be tried by the Word of
God, as well as the true Spirit of God himself; i. e. by such meanings,
senses, or conclusions, as it self confidently asserts to be the Word of God;
i. e. the mind of God in the Scriptures; so that I am in no capacity to try
such a Spirit, which upon such an account, as this, pretends his coming forth
from God, unless I be able to prove, that those senses, ^eanings, and
conclusions, by which be offers to be tried, are not indeed the Word of God.

Now it is unpossible that I should prove this merely, and only by the
Scriptures themselves; because unto what place or places soever I shall have
recourse for my proof, or trial in this case, this Spirit will reject my
sense and interpretation, in case it makes against him, and will substitute
another, that shall not oppose him. Nor can I reasonably or regularly reject
his sense in this case, at least as an untruth, unless I apprehend some relish
or taste therein, which is irrational, or some ^on which j^rreth with, or
grateth upon some (...) principle (...) other of reason within me; for as (...)
^e one hand, what Doctrine or Notion soever clearly ^^cordeth, and is
commensurable with any solid and (...) ^ted Principle, or ground of reason
within me, (...) ^by demonstrably evinced to be a truth, and from God; so on
the other hand, what Doctrine, or saying s^r bears hard, or falls foul upon
any such Principle, must of necessity be an error, and somewhat that proceeds
from Satan, or from ^n, and not from God.


Resbury. 1 The same things most impertinently still over and over, an endless
waster of words.

2 By what rule or touchstone shall henry any Spirit, or Doctrine? he answers,
If it be said by the Scripture, but how shall I try this touchstone? I answer,
By it self, as the rule, by reason, as the eye, enlightened and guided by this
rule, according to the Grammar, and the Logic of it; He objects, That it is
impossible to prove the truth, or disprove an error merely by the Scriptures,
because still the question will be about the sense of the Scripture; I answer,
By the Scripture alone, as the rule, by reason, as making use of this rule, but
so, as in making use thereof it be guided by this rule, and resolves all
conclusions into the authority of this rule, is the truth to be proved, or
errors disproved, and the sense of whatsoever controverted text discussed, and
cleared.

As for that which you add about irrational last, and grating upon reason,
etc. for as much as you do not object reason to the Word, but oppose it
thereunto, and advance it there-above, and will have reason the touchstone of
the Word, beside and above the Word; you show your self, as formerly, a most
impure and profane Socinian, by all good men to be abhorred; and whilst you
plead so much for reason, you are a man mad with reason, no way solving those
difficulties, which you pretend upon supposition, that the Scripture shall be
the touchstone; for let us suppose reason the touchstone, must you not be at
the same loss, your adversary denying that to be according to the principles
and grounds of reason, which you affirm to be according to them? But here is
no such difficulty, as you pretend; for allowing the Scripture the Touchstone,
you shall by some Scripture-truthes, wherein both your self and adversary
agree, clear the controverted text, and resute his errors about it, that he
must either yield to the truth therein, or deny what he affirmed, and overthrow
his own foundations.


Goodwin. The reason hereof is clearly asserted by the Apostle in these words,
For God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace; from whence it appears,
that God is not divided in himself, or contradictious to himself, so as to
write or assert that in one Book, as in that of the Scriptures, which he
denies or opposes in another; as viz. That of Nature, or of the fleshly
tables of the heart of man; but whatsoever he writes, or speaks in the one,
he writes or speaks nothing in the other, but what is fairly, and fully
consistent with it.


Resbury. A doughty reason, God is not the Author of confusion; true, but man
is, who has so corrupted his reason, as he has night for a vision, and gropes
in the dark like a blind man. It is one thing, what God wrote upon the nature
of Man in his Creation, who made man upright; another thing, what man has
written upon his own nature by the Fall, who has found out to himself many
inventions; what the Devil likewise has written upon his mind, by deluding
suggestions. You may remember formerly a piece of discourse much like this of
yours, by your elder Brother the Collator, with whom Prosper has to do,
confounding the state of Man by Creation, with his condition since the Fall;
and Prospers answer to him. It is admirable to see, how the same spirit, that
possessed Pelagius, and his Disciples of old, speaks the same things, and uses
the same Arguments in Mr. Goodwin, One borne out of due time, so many Ages
after.

In the praise of five things did they craftily couch their sacrilegious
Doctrine, at so great enmity with the Grace of God, as Aug. observes, Lib. 3.
contra duas Epist. Pelagian. viz. In the praise of the Creature, of Marriage,
of the Law, of Free Will, and of the Saints. How often do we hear Mr. Goodwin
extolling man, and the noble faculties of reason, understanding, etc. in man?
and here, from the Law of Nature, and from the Wisdom of God, he thinks to
extol the reason of blind, corrupt, wretched, selfe-confounded man, against
the Grace of God; I hinted to you before what a fair offer you made against
Original sin, I believe your Doctrine about it is; That it is wholly taken
off from man, by that glorious vouchsafement of light, you told us of, by Jesus
Christ, to every one that comes into this world, but your darkness about that
light, and the darkness of Mankind about things of the Spirit of God, that
light notwithstanding we have lately seen.

As for the fleshly tables of the heart, we know no such, but in the
regenerate, when the Lord shall have taken away the heart of stone, and given
an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36. You may remember how Austin concludes hence, as
formerly we alleged him, that the will of man is wholly adverse, and
inflexible unto good, before the effectual and peculiar work of regeneration;
and where then shall be that provoking, and stirring up of reason,
understanding, etc. you tell us of so often, in the Natural man? We told you
before, how ill-pleasing it was to you, to hold fast the for me of found words;
I do not wonder at it, it is not for your advantage; I perceive if we might
have a new Scripture see forth by your superlative reason, we should have the
text much altered, for the Taberna^le of David, the Tabernacle of Adam, for the
heart of stone, the fleshly tables of the heart:


Goodwin. Upon this account it is a grave and worthy advertisement of Master
Perkins, in his Epistle before his Treatise of Predestination; It is (says he)
also requisite, that this Doctrine (he speaks of Predestination, Election, and
Reprobation) agree with the(...)of co^^on reason, and of that knowledge of God,
which may be obtained by the light of Nature; In (...) ^ing of his ^e ^^^arly
supposes, That what^ should be taught by any in the mysterious and high p^ts
of Predistination, otherwise then according to the Scriptures, and the truth,
may be clearly disproved by this, viz. The disagreement of it with the c^on
grounds of reason, and of that knowledge of God, which the light of Nature
shines into the hearts of men: if himself had kept close to this Principle of
his own, in drawing up his judgment in the point of Predostination, the world
had received a f^rre diff^ring, and better account from his ^en of this
subject, then now it has; But if his sense were, That the heights, and depths
of Religion, (for so we may call the Doctrines of Election, and Reprobation,
etc.) (...) nothing in them but what agrees with the grounds and principles of
common reason, and with the Di^^ates of Nature in men, and consequently may be
measured, discerned, and judged of by these, he did not conceive, that matters
of a more facile and ordinary consideration were above the capacity and
apprehension of reason.


Resbury. For Master Perkins his. Testimony, and your Descant upon it, you do
but wander, 1. He builds the doctrine of Predestination upon the Word of God,
in opposition to the judgments of men, his words are these; The Doctrine of
Predestination, and of the Grace of God, is to be built up out of the Word of
God, and not out of the judgments of men. Then he adds out of Hilary, God
cannot be known but by God, of God must we learn whatsoever we are to
understand concerning him, because no otherwise is it known then by him as the
Author. After this he adds further; It is requisite likewise, that this
Doctrine agree with the natural knowledge of God, and the Principles of common
understanding, such as these, and then lays down diverse.

Now whereas you make a double inference hence; I Concerning the Doctrine of
Predestination it self; 2 Concerning all other Doctrines not so high and
mysterious, I will return for answer to you, your own Arminius's words to
this Proposition of Mr. Perkins, viz. Against this I contend not, only let this
be added, where we cannot agree about these (common notions) by reason of
darkness over-spreading our minds, and the weakness and diversity of humane
judgments, (which thou rejectest, says he to Perkins) there let us have
recourse to the first (the Word of God) for the definitive and peremptory
suffrage, as that which is above all other.

You see here, 1. Arminius himself utterly turning his back of that Doctrine,
which your inference pleads for; you will have the Doctrine of Predestination
tried ultimately at the bar of Reason, he at the Scripture bar. 2 His
reason for it; whereas we hear from you of nothing but light, shining from God
upon the hearts of men, and the great capacity of that noble faculty of reason
in man, so frequently boasted of; He acknowledges such darkness
over-spreading the minds of men, as common notions, and men's judgment
acaccording thereto, are not to be rested in, but from them to the Word of God
must the appeal be made for final determination.


Goodwin. It was the saying of Augustine, That God has bowed down the
Scriptures to the capacity of Babes, and Sucklings; Tertullian has much upon
this account to excellent purpose; in one place (speaking of the Soul being
yet simple, rude, and unfurnished with any acquired knowledge, either from the
Scripture, or other Institution) he demands why it should be strange, that
being given by God it should speak out (or sing) the same things, the
knowledge whereof God gives to his Children; not long after he admonishes the
Gentiles, that neither God, nor Nature lie; and thereupon that they may believe
both God, and Nature; wishes them to believe their own Souls; A little after
he says, that the Soul he speaks of, has the words (and therefore the
inward senses and impressions) of Christians, whom notwithstanding it wishes
that it might never bear, or see; Elsewhere having mentioned some expressions
of affinity with the Scriptures, as often coming out of the mouths of Heathen, he
triumphs over them, as it were, with this acclamation; O the testimony of a
soul naturally Christian! nor does Calvin himself say any thing less then
all this, when he says; That God has implanted (or inwardly put) the seed of
Religion in the minds of men, doubtless the seed sympathizeth richly with
that body, which springs and grows from it: But these things by the way. All
impressions, all principles of Light and Truth, which are found written in the
hearts and consciences of men, are here written by the finger of God himself;
therefore what Spirit, or Doctrine soever symbolizeth in notion, and import,
with these or any of them, must of necessity be of the same parentage and
descent with them, there being no original parent or father of light, and
truth, but God only. And on the contrary, what doctrine or spirit soever,
puts any of these principles to sorrow or shame, and does not lovingly
comport with them, hereby declare themselves to be of a spurious and ignoble
race: As Christ reasoned with the Jews, If God were your Father, ye would
love me, For I proceed forth, and come from God, but because they bated him, he
concluded them to be the children of the devil.


Resbury. As for your testimonies out of Austin, Tertullian, and Calvin, you do
but make use of your old fallacy, from the part to the whole; the Scripture is
in some things bowed down to the capacity of babes; is it in all things so? all
milk, no strong meat? Did Austin think the Reason of man, competent to search
out, and give a reason of all Scripture truths? this by name, about
Predestination, and the execution thereof? let us hear himself upon this
Argument, De verbis Apostol. Sermon. 11. The Potter has power over the clay to
make of the same lump one vessel to honor, another to dishonor: will thou
dispute with me? nay, wonder with me; cry out with me, O the depth of the
riches, let us both agree in fear, that we perish not in error; Oh the depth
of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how incomprehensible are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! Search things unsearchable, do
things impossible, corrupt things incorruptible, see things invisible, his
judgments are unsearchable, let it suffice thee, and his ways past finding
out. So (...) Teri^ians testimonies, the soul has the ^owledge of some
things, impressions of some things belonging to Christians; but you may (...)
soon get oil out of a flint, as out of these testimonies wring your
Conclusion: That all Divine Truths may be known by the natural man, by reason
of their agreement with the dictates of the natural understanding, as it is
now in the state of mankind, since the fall. For Calvi^ his seed of religion,
you would feign discourse into fruit, but your Discourse is neither the shining
of the Sun, nor rain from heaven upon it.

1 The seeds of some truths are writ upon the heart of man, as knowledge, but
these of the Law, not of the Gospel; -- the Wisdom of God hid in a mystery,
etc. flesh and blood has not revealed, etc. No man can say Jesus is the Lord,
but by the spirit: the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of
God, neither can do, etc. What man knows the things of man? etc. -- the
spirit of God, not of the World, etc. The Natural man darkness, through
corruption, by Satan further darkened.

2 The knowledge he has by nature of those things of the law is very obscure,
evanid, and clouded with many errors, and those invincible otherwise, then as
by the discovery of the word diligently consulted.

3 The highest knowledge the Natural man can attain to, with whatsoever help
of the Word of God (without the renewing and peculiar work of the spirit,
vouchsafed only to the Saints, whereby they become such) is but historical,
not intuitive, of logical apprehension, not of spiritual vision, and
therefore such a knowledge, as is a great stranger to faith and repentance.

4 All saving fruit of this knowledge is utterly prevented, and the tendency of
it to eternal life stifled, choked, and perverted in every natural or
unregenerate soul; and therefore how richly soever the seed sympathizeth with
the body which springs from it, yet no such body shall spring from those seeds
in the soil of an unregenerate soul, partly through darkness, and error, and
partly through pravity and perverseness; therefore your conclusion here is most
impertinent, wherein you so insist upon the goodness of these seeds in their
own Nature, and in reference to their Author, God, as you overlook the
badnesse of man, the subject of them through the corruption of his Nature, so
full of darkness, falsehood, and enmity against the truth of God, as thence
these seeds must needs rot under the clods, except the soil be supernaturally
changed.


CHAP. XVII.
Goodwin. COncerning the mystery of the Trinity, the incarnation of God, or the
Son of God, the conception of a Virgin, with some other points of like
consideration, commonly pretended to be against, or at least above, and out of
the reach and apprehension of Reason; I clearly Answer.

1 That they are every whit as much; yea, upon the same terms, out of the
reach of faith, as of Reason, For how can I believe (at least upon good
grounds, ^d as it becomes a Christian to believe) that which I have no
reason, nor am capable of apprehending any reason; nay, for which there is no
reason, why I should believe it? If it be said, I am bound to believe the
doct^ines specified, because they are revealed by God: I answer, That this is a
rational ground, whereof my Reason and Understanding are thoroughly capable,
why I should believe them; the light of Nature clearly informs me, that what
God reveals or speaks must needs be true; and consequently worthy and meet
to be believed. If it be further said, But Reason is not able to apprehend or
conceive how three should be really and essentially one, and the same; how a
virgin should conceive and bring forth a Son, etc. I Answer, That no faith or
belief in such things as these, is required of me, nor would be accepted with
God, i^ case it were in me, above what I am able by Reason to apprehend and
understand. As I am not able by my Reason to apprehend the particular and
distinct manner how the three persons subsist in one and the same divine Nature
and Essence: So neither am I bound to believe it; that which I am bound to
believe in this point is only this, That there are three who do thus subsist,
(I mean in the same divine essence) and for this, my Reason is apprehensive
enough why I should believe, viz. Because God himself has revealed it (as
has been said) If I should confidently believe any thing more or further
concerning the Trinity of persons (commonly so called, and there is the same
reason of the other points mentioned) then what I know upon the clear account
of my Reason and Understanding, it would be presumption in me, and not faith;
and I should contract the guilt of those whom the Apostle charge with in
truding (or advancing themselves) into the things which they have not seen [i.
e. rationally apprehended and understood.] But


Resbury. 1 Whereas you say, these mysteries here mentioned of the Trinity,
Incarnation, and the virgins conception, are pretended to be against, at least
above Reason, it seems you deny even these to be above the reach of Reason in
fallen man, which yet in your discourse immediately ensuing, you grant in deed
though not in terms: but contradictions are no rare things in your discourse.

2 Whereas you say they are every whit as much; yea, upon the same terms out
of the reach of Faith, as of Reason:

1 It is false, for Faith has the proper, and immediate ground of believing
them, the authority of the Word revealing them; But Reason has not an
immediate ground of discerning them, viz. such a light, as whereby they of
themselves are visible to the natural understanding, therefore when they are
within the reach of Faith, yet are they not within the reach of Reason upon the
same terms.

2 You equivocate, for seeming to carry on your former doctrine, you relinquish
it. Formerly you made Reason the touchstone of the Scriptures; and whatsoever
text of Scripture should not be found to agree with Reason, and to be relished
by it, must be rejected: here you make the Scripture to be above the trial of
Reason, as appears by that which follows: For how can I believe? etc: If it
be said I am bound, etc. This is a rational ground, etc. the light of Nature,
etc. Here you grant that Reason is to believe what the word affirms, merely
for the authority of the word. But 1. This is contrary to your former doctrine,
requiring that Reason find a rational taste and savor in the thing it self
to be believed. 2. Here Reason believes, rather then discernes the thing
believed; it discernes the ground of believing, but not the nature or manner of
the thing believed: therefore as before, the thing believed is not upon the
same terms, out of the reach of Faith, as of Reason.

3 Whereas you object, That Reason is not able to apprehend or conceive how
three should be really and essentially one and the same, etc. and then answer,
no faith or belief in such things as these, is required, etc. Let me ask you
this one thing; Is it not a fruit of natural corruption, by the fall, that we
apprehend no more toward the distinct knowledge of these things? If so, then
are you bound to know, and knowing to believe more of them; and your discourse
about believing more then you apprehend, how unacceptable it would be, falls to
the ground. But here again you discover that Popish and Pelagian leaven; that
God has no right to require of man any more, then man has power to perform;
as formerly you argued from the command of God to the faculty of man. As for
your Interpretation of Colos. 2. 18. I cannot receive it, intruding into the
things which they have not seen, is in true interpretation, which they have not
seen in the doctrine of the Scriptures.


Goodwin. 2 If it be yet demanded, but is it not contrary to the grounds of
Nature, and so to Principles of Reason, that a virgin should conceive a child;
and if so, how can such a doctrine, according to what you have asserted, be
received as from God, or as a truth? I Answer; It is no ways contrary to
Reason, nor to any principle thereof, that God should be able to make a virgin
to conceive, but very consonant thereunto; (...) the Apostle Paul supposed it
credible enough (as we lately heard) even in the eye of Reason, that God should
make the earth bring forth her dead alive: indeed that a virgin should conceive
in a natural way, or according to the course of ordinary providence, is
contrary unto Reason, but this Religion requires not of any man to believe;
nor does it bear hard at all upon any Principle of Reason; that God should be
willing to do every whit as great and strange a thing as tha^, (I mean as to
cause a virgin to conceive) for the accomplishment of so great and glorious a
design, as the saving of a lost world. Nor is it contrary to Reason or any
Principle thereof, that God or the first Being, being infinite, should have a
manner of sulsisting or being, far different from the manner of subsistence,
which is appropriate to all created and finite beings, or that this manner of
subsisting which is proper unto him, should be unto men incomprehensible. But
most consonant it is to Principles of Reason, when God himself has pleased so
far to reveal that appropriate and incomprehensible manner of his
subsisting, as to declare and say that he subsisteth in three, that men should
accordingly believe it so to be.

So that most certain it is, there is nothing in Christian Religion, which so
far as it concerns men to know and believe, but what fairly and friendly
comports with that Reason and Understanding which God has given unto man, and
what by a diligent and conscientious use of these noble faculties be may come
to know and believe, at least so far as to salve his great interest of
salvation.


Resbury. This Section is of the same stamp with the former; the sum of it is
this, That it is agreeable to Reason, to conceive of God, that he is, and that
he can do above the course of Nature, and comprehension of Reason, and that
when God shall declare that such is his being, and his doings such, it is
likewise agreeable to Reason to believe him upon his word. But

1 Who denies this, but Mr. Goodwin and his associates in error? This is the
very Doctrine of your adversaries, against which you dispute.

2 This no way agrees with your former Doctrines. 1. That which affirms, that
all men have that light of Reason and Understanding, which according to Gods
dispensation toward all men, they may improve to saving Faith and Repentance;
For saving Faith requires the knowledge of these mysteries, which you grant
here come only so far within the reach of Reason, as that when God has
revealed them, it is rational to believe his Word; without which, Reason could
never find them out: But the greatest part of the men of the world have not the
Scriptures. 2. That which affirms Reason to be the touchstone of the
Scriptures; you said but lately of Predestination, that whatsoever should be
taught about it, otherwise then according to the Scriptures, and the truth,
might be clearly disproved by the grounds of common Reason. You affirm page
16. That whatsoever doctrine or saying bears hard, or falls foul upon any
undoubted Principle or ground of Reason within you, must of necessity be an
error: Now this principle and ground of Reason must be such, as in the account
of men generally passes for such a principle or ground. Now doubtless, that
three should be essentially one, bears hard upon whatsoever grounds of Reason
in you, or any man since the fall: That a Virgin should conceive, bears hard
likewise upon Reason; I am sure it did so in the blessed virgin her self, Luke
1. 34. therefore according to your doctrine formerly laid down, these
mysteries should be rejected, and indeed the whole doctrine of godliness,
which the Apostle tells us is a great mystery, and therefore bears hard upon
Reason.

Neither do you salve your former discourse when you say, it does not bear hard
upon any principle of Reason, that God should be willing to do as strange a
thing, as to cause a virgin to conceive: For because the thing it self bears
so hard upon Reason, and is so strange; therefore according to your former
doctrine, the word affirming it, should be rejected. So for the manner of his
subsistence, three in one, because it bears so hard upon Reason, as you here
grant, that it is incomprehensible, according to your former doctrine, it ought
not to be believed, as you know upon that very account, your good friends, the
Socinians, believe it not; But when you meet with such instances as you dare
not deny; as these now in hand, and yet they cannot be made to close with your
doctrine, then you wind out of your own doctrine it self, yet so, as you
would seem still to hold it. In other instances, as about Election, and
Reprobation, Redemption, Renovation, the perseverance of the Saints, you will
hold stiffly to your grand doctrine of the pre-eminence of Reason, because the
doctrine of personal election, and reprobation, and the dominion of God
therein, relisheth not with your Reason; because the dependence of redemption
upon election, and the doctrine of the Saints perseverance, and of the
efficacy, and peculiarity of grace relish not with your Reason, therefore they
must be rejected, though the Scriptures be as evident for them, as for the
Trinity and Incarnation. And he that should argue with you, as you do here;
that it is not contrary to Reason, neither does it bear hard upon any principle
of Reason, that God should have a dominion, to man incomprehensible, would be
rejected by you upon this account, that such a Doctrine it self was not
according to Reason. Look over your conclusion, concerning the unchangeable
love of God to the Saints; and your questioning of the Scriptures, in case they
either in terms, or by just consequence, avouch the same, page 335. of your
book formerly alleged, and tell me if it be not as I say.

As for the close of your Section. 1. That there is nothing in Christian
Religion, etc. but what fairly comports, etc. To this, I oppose this assertion,
formerly made good, That in Christian Religion, there are many things above,
many things cross to man's corrupt Reason. 2. That by a diligent and
conscientious use, etc. I have formerly showed at large, what putid
Pelagianisme is here obtruded.


Goodwin. 2 Look how many precepts, exhortations, adm^nitions, I stand charged
by God to submit unto, and practice, I am under so many charges and engagements
from him likewise, to exercise my Reason, and understanding. 1. To apprehend
aright the mind of God in every of these respectively, left when he injoyneth
me one thing, I through mistake should do another. 2. To consider how, when,
and in what cases I am commanded by him to do this or that. 3. (And lastly to
pass by other particulars.) To gather together, and call up upon my soul all
such motives and considerations, which I am able, whereby to provoke, stir up,
and strengthen my self to the execution, and performance of all things
accordingly. When God commands me to strive to enter in at the straight gate,
to seek his kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, in the first place; To
labor for the meat which endures to everlasting life; To be a man in
understanding: (To omit other precepts of like nature without number) he
commands me consequentially, and with a direct, clear, and necessary
implication, to rise up in the might of my reason and understanding, in order
to the performance of these things, nor am I capable of performing the least of
these great, and most important commands, in any due manner, but by
interressing my Reason, Judgment, and Understanding, and this thoroughly, and
effectually, in and about the performance: The truth is, I stand bound in duty
and conscience toward God, and in faithfulness to mine own soul, neither to
believe any thing at all, as coming from God, which I have not, or may have, a
very substantial ground in Reason to believe, comes indeed from him; nor yet
to do any thing at all, as commanded by him, unless there be a like ground in
Reason to persuade me that it is indeed his command.


Resbury. Many waste words still, according to your manner. One passage or two
we must call to account.

1. God commands you, you say, in such and such precepts, to rise up in the
might of your Reason, etc. We hear in Scripture of the weakness of Reason,
as to the things of God, not sufficient of our selves to think a good thought,
etc. We hear of the might of the Word Preached, to cast down the strong holds
and reasonings in man against the things of God: But where this mighty Reason
dwells, I would willingly ask Mr. Goodwin, but that I fear he will send me
Racovia.

2. Nothign may you believe as coming from God, which you have not very
substantial ground in Reason to believe comes from him; the like for
obedience to his Commands: If you meant Reason enlightened, and sanctified by
the Word and Spirit, thence believing upon the authority of the Word, your
meaning was the same with theirs whom you oppose; but your meaning is, Reason,
by its own light, receiving or rejecting the Word it self according as such
and such Doctrines, are above or not above, contrary, or agreeable to the
apprehensions of the Natural man, as we have clearly found you out formerly,
and to this you have been answered over and over, according as your tautology
has given occasion.


Goodwin. I confess (good Reader) I have presumed at somewhat an unreasonable
rate upon thy patience, in detaining thee so long with the Argument yet in
hand; But the sense of that unconceiveable mischief and misery, which I most
certainly know have been brought upon the World Christian, (at least in our
Quarters of it) and which lies sore upon it at this day, by means of the
reigning of this Notion, and Doctrine amongst us, That men ought not to use,
but lay aside their Reason in matters of Religion; lies so intolerable sad and
heavy upon my spirit, that I could not relieve my self to any competent
degree, with saying less then what has been said, to relieve the world, by
hewing in sunder such a snare of death cast upon it, most assuredly all the
ataxies, disorders, confusions, seditions, insurrections, all the errors,
blasphemous opinions, aposta^ies from the truth and ways of holiness, all
trouble of mind, and sad workings of conscience in me; all unrighteousness,
and injustice, all bribery and oppression, all un-man-like selfe-seeking and
prevaricating with public interests and trusts; all covetousness and deceit,
and whatsoever can be named in this world, obstructive, destructive, to the
present comfort and peace, to the future blessedness and glory of the sons and
daughters of men, proceed and spring from this one root of bitterness and of
death: they neglect to advance and engage home their Reasons, Judgments,
Understandings in matters of Religion, to employ and improve them according to
their proper interests and capacities in these most important affairs.


Resbury. Your tongue is your own, in way of apology for your wandering
discourse: hitherto you tell us of the deep apprehensions you had of that
unconceiveable mischief, etc. brought upon the world by that doctrine, That
men must lay aside their Reason in matters of Religion; a mere Hob-goblin of
your own making, that you may have something to pelt at. How Reason is to be
laid aside, and how not, we have showed distinctly formerly; not as you
represent; as if men should look at it as their duties to be Idiots and mad men
in seeking into the things of God.

As for those Ataxies, etc. hence they are, That men have been so bold to
oppose their own corrupt reasonings against the word of God, instead of
following the light and guidance of it, and captivating their fleshly reason to
the Doctrines of Faith.


Goodwin. O Reader, my mouth is open unto thee, my heart is enlarged (now for a
recompense in the same, I speak unto thee, as a dear Brother in Christ) be
thou also enlarged, say unto the world round about thee, Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light; doubtless
the world should soon find it self in another manner of posture then now it
is, and see the whole Hemisphere of it filled with the glorious light of the
knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, if the inhabitants thereof, every man from
his quarters, would be persuaded to rise up in the might of his abilities,
those heavenly endowments of reason, judgment, understanding, wherewith God,
by Jesus Christ has re-invested them to seek after him, by enquiring
diligently into, by weighing narrowly all those things, as works of Creation,
works of Providence, inscriptions upon the Soul, and especially the sacred
word of extraordinary revelation, wherein, and whereby God has drawn near
unto men, and (as it were prepared) postured, and fitted himself on purpose to
be found and known, and this as well in the excellency of his Grace, as of his
Glory, by all those who upon these terms seek after him. The time was when
the Spirit was not given, because Christ was not glorified in Heaven; the time
now is wherein the Spirit is not given unto the world, according to the
preparations, and royal bounties, and magnificence of Heaven, because he is
not glorified on earth by the worthy employment of the means, abilities,
opportunities vouchsafed unto men; the Word of God makes it one argument of the
wickedness, and sensual ways of men, that they have not the Spirit; yea, the
Apostle Paul by charging the Ephesians to be filled with the Spirit, clearly
supposes it to be a sensual strain of a voluntary unworthiness in men, if
they have not a very rich and plentiful anointing of the Spirit.


Resbury. A word or two to this wordy Paragraph.

1 Say unto the world awake, etc. Say you to your Reader. But for as much as
this sleep is the sleep of death, as is here evident, in that the waking from
it, is standing up from the dead; where is now that mighty Reason,
Understanding, Judgment, you have so often told us of, (as here again you do)
in the natural man?

2 The time now is (you say) wherein the spirit is not given unto the world,
according to the preparations of the royal bounty, and magnificence of heaven,
because, etc. this is (as formerly we have seen at large) the Pelagian doctrine
so famously branded; that grace is given according to our merits, the Popish
doctrine of the merit of congruity: the Jesuitical doctrine, That he that does
what in him lies by the strength of Nature, shall thereby obtain Grace.

3 The Word of God (you say) makes it one argument of the wicked and sensual
ways of men, that they have not the spirit, Judge. 5. 18, 19. what then? you
add; yea, the Apostle Paul by charging the Ephesians to be filled with the
spirit, clearly supposes it to be a voluntary strain of sinful unworthiness
in men, if they have not a very rich and plentiful anointing of the spirit.

Answ. 1. These Ephesians were regenerate, and spoken to as regenerate;
therefore this concludes nothing for the natural man.

2. It Is true, what you say concerning the Natural man, but false that you
would conclude, that therefore the Natural man has power to obtain this
anointing of the spirit; from man's duty, to his ability, is a mere non
sequitur. It is the duty of the natural man, to fulfill the law of God
(otherwise the transgression of the Law is not sin) yet it is impossible for
him. The flesh is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be. It is the duty
of the natural man when the Gospel is preached to him, to come to Christ, and
a sinful strain of voluntary unworthiness, that he comes not; Ye will not
come to me that ye might have life, says Christ to the Jews, rebuking them:
Yet none can come to him except the Father draw him; and this drawing of the
Father is not according to any preparation of man drawn; He will have mercy on
whom he will have mercy, and compassion on whom he will have compassion; It is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy. It is the duty of the natural man, to receive the things of the spirit
of God revealed in the Gospel, which yet he cannot do, without the renewing
work of the spirit, whereby he becomes a spiritual man, because they are
spiritually discerned But to obtain this renewing work of the spirit, is not
in his power, has no dependence upon any thing by him done in order thereunto.
The wind blows where it lists, thou bear the sound thereof, but know
not whence it comes nor whither it goes; so is every one that is born of the
spirit.


CHAP. XVIII.
Goodwin. HE that lives up to those principles of light, which God has vested
in him, is underthe beatificall influence of that most rich promise of Christ;
To him that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundantly; By him that
has (in this promise) is meant (as clearly appears from the tenor of the
Parable immediately preceding) such a person, who uses, imployeth, improveth
that which he has, hereby declaring that he has what he has; nor is that
which he is here said to have, any thing of a Spiritual or supernatural
import, this likewise is evident from the said Parable, for here one of the
three, who all had received talents, one, or more, all which talents must needs
by the course of the Parable be supposed to be of one and the same kind; nor is
the least intimation of any difference, especially of any specificall
difference between them, is said to be an evil and sloathfull Servant,
notwithstanding his talent, and because of his sloathfulnesse, to be cast into
utter darkness; these are no Characters (especially in the judgment of those,
with whom we are to conflict in the ensuing Discourse) of persons that had
received any thing saving, or supernatural. But by that which is here promised
to be given, and that in abundance, to him that has, must of necessity be
meant somewhat, that is of a spiritual and saving nature; this also is evident
from the carriage of the same Parable, where the Servants who had received the
talents, and employed them faithfully (by whom are typified our Sa^iours, (...)
those that have, as was lately said) are graciously invited by their Master
into this joy, Enter thou into thy Masters joy: So to the other, enter thou
into thy Masters joy.

Now if either God or Christ, be signified or meant by the Master of these
Servants (as I suppose no man questions, but that either the one or the other
are typified hereby) by entering into their joy, cannot be meant a receiving of
greater measure of natural gifts or endowments, nor of receiving any reward,
which belongs to persons qualified only with such endowments; as these, but
salvation or eternal blessedness and glory; if so, it roundly follows, that
by what Christ promises shall be given to him that has (in the sense
declared) is meant somewhat of a saving consequence, as regenerating Grace, the
sanctifying Spirit of God, Faith, and the like. And promising not only, or
simply, that to him that has shall be given, but further, that he shall have
abundantly, he clearly signifies, that in case men will stir up, provoke, and
lay out themselves accordingly in the improvement of such abilities, and gifts,
which shall from time to time be vouchsafed unto them; they may be virtue of
the bounty and gracious decree of God in that behalf, attain and receive from
God what proportion or measure of the Spirit of Grace, and of God they can
desire, therefore they that teach men to be merely passive in matters of
Religion, and forbid them the use of their Reasons and Understandings, as
unlawful, and dangerous, in these affairs; how prudently soever they may
consult their own carnal ease, honor, and worldly accommodations by such a
doctrine, yet herein they say to men (in effect) be not excellent, let it never
be said that the God of heaven has made you rich or great.


Resbury. Mr. Goodwin has here led us to that famous Scripture, the Parable of
the Talents, a Scripture so much abused by the whole nation of the Jesuits, in
whose steps the Arminians tread, and amongst them this Author.

1 Let us see his Interpretation hereof. 2. The true Interpretation.

1 For his; It labors with two very great diseases. 1. Self-contradiction. 2.
Pelagianisme. 1. For selfe-contradiction, spiritual and supernatural, are here
one and the same with him; as appears in these words. Nor is that which he is
said to have, any thing of a spiritual or supernatural import. A little after
saving and supernatural are one and the same with him, ^n these words. These
are no characters of persons that had received any thing saving or
supernatural. Presently after spiritual and of saving nature are one and the
same in these words. By that which is here promised to be given, must of
necessity be meant some thing of a spiritual, and saving nature,: and this in
opposition: to natural, in these words; by entering into the Masters joy cannot
be meant a receiving of a greater measure of natural gifts or endowments, nor
of receiving any reward which belongs to persons quallified only with such
endowments as these. But salvation, or eternal blessedness and glory: If so,
it roundly follows, that by what Christ promises shall be given, etc. is meant
somewhat of a saving consequence, as regenerateing grace; the sanctifying
Spirit, faith and the like, thus he; Whence it is evident, that grace is not
here natural, that what is natural is not saving, that regenerating grace is
spiritual and supernatural given upon the improvement of natural endowments:
but how does this accord with his former Doctrine, about which he labored so
much that in the argument of the efficacy of grace, the word supernatural was
no where in Scripture so much as vertually found, that the word natural
distinguishes not the unregenerate from the regenerate, etc.

We observed formerly that what he speaks here presently after concerning men's
attaining what proportion and measure of the Spirit o^ grace they can desire
upon the improvement o^ such gifts and abilities as they shall from time to
time receive, does involue him in a contradiction to what he there had taught;
if he here mean the work of the Spirit, to be any other then such an influx
as is attemperd and proportioned to man's natural acting, and therefore
natural, but if that be his meaning, then does he contradict himself here,
making all that is saving to be supernatural as we have now observed, but he
has drunk deep of an intoxicating cup, wonder not if he Stagger like a
drunken man.

2. For Pelagianisme, as plain and palpable as may be; that regenerating
grace, the sanctifying spirit, faith and the like is given to men upon the use,
employment and improvement of natural endowments, which is that Stigmatized
doctrine of Pelagius so notoriously refuted and condemned, as formerly has
been cleard; where we had this very doctrine in the hands of the Massilians
related by Prosper charging them therein with high Pelagianisme, only Master
Goodwin has another fetch for it, that new vouchsafements by Jesus Christ unto
all in their natural birth, he tells us of, which how miserable a shift it is,
has formerly been discovered.

But that we may have the whole mystery of Master Goodwins doctrine about this
point, and see his vain, and selfe-subverting Sophistry. I shall add and
examine a notorious passage, Page 329. and 330. of his Book, the sum whereof
is as follows.

1. Regeneration (says he) imports a reiteration of some generation or other.
I answer, regeneration is a generation over andabove a former generation. 2. It
cannot import a repetition of natural generation: true, therefore it must
import a repetition of spiritual generati^n. False it is, (as will appear by
and by) a spi^tuall generation over and above the natural generation, a
repetition, if he will needs have that word of generation, but not of natural
nor ^pirituall generation, but only of the genus com^on to both, one opposite
species succeeding another. He goes on, 'Naturall and spiritual ge^eration are
contra-distinguished the one to ^he other, 1 Pet. 2. 23. and John 3. 6. True,
and ^hence your discourse will come to naught as will ^ppeare by these Scriptures
mentioned when we ^ave heard your conclusion, for which you are ^aking way in
these words, viz. Now I suppose there can hardly be any instance given where
the introduction of one contrary form or quallity into the subjectis termed a
repetition of the other; as for example, calefaction is never termed a
repetition of Frigefaction. Pitiful Sophistry: No such thing is here
pretended; the spiritual birth is a repetition, not of the opposite species or
contrary form, as you phrase ^t, to wit, the natural birth, but only of the
genus birth. As Calefaction succeeding Frigefaction, is a repetition, not of
Frigefaction, the opposite species, but of alteration, the genus.

Now comes your conclusion, but it is an evil ^gge of an evil bird, a false
conclusion; from a false discourse; you conceive that regeneration relates not
to the natural generation, as natural; but unto the spiritual state and
condition of men in respect of their natural condition an^ birth. But the
Scriptures newly mentione^ prove two things utterly destructive of this
conclusion of yours. 1. That men by natural generation have nothing
spiritually good in them* but the contrary, and that to the utmost* 2. That
regeneration relates to the natural generation, as miserably corrupt and
sinful, the our Savior shows the necessity of regeneration or the second
birth, because by natural generation or the first birth we are so sinful; it
being the birth of the flesh in opposition to the birth of (...) Spirit, 3 John
6. with the Context; thus Pe^ opposes regeneration as that generation which
(...) of incorruptable Seed, to natural generation (...) that generation which
is of corruptable Seed; evident^ that both he and our Savior opposes the
latter i^ its excellency to the former in its wretchedness and therefore in no
wise relates to the forme^ according to any excellency in it to be repeated^ In
laying down this conclusion, you tell u^ that men generally in the days of
their youth^ degenerate from the innocence of their childe^ hood and younger
years, and corrupt themselves with the principles and ways of the world whence
you give us to understand, that regeneration appropriable only to persons
living t^ years of discre^^on, is a repetition of that spiri tuall purity,
which in their natural birth they had; but,

1. Natural birth, and that as it relates, to regeneration has no more
innocence or spiritual purity in it, then what the flesh imports in utmost
opposition to the Spirit.

2. This degeneration you speak of from the spiritual excellency of their
natural birth, (...) it such as whereby spiritual life received in ^e
natural generation is extinct or not? if not; ^en a man yet living may be
borne again to ^e same life, which you grant most absurd, al^wing Nicodemus
discourse for good in this ^oint, and it is most manifestly absurd to every ^e.
If it be extinct; then 1. What is the advan^ge of it, and so to what end was it
vouchsafed (...) men? 2. Regenerating grace prevents all ^bilities in man,
finding him wholly dead, as (...) spiritual life; where then is that mighty
^eason, understanding, etc. you are wont to tell (...) of, and those
endowments, and ability for ^he improvement of them which here in your
explication of.

This Parable you mention, in order to regenerating grace, you further tell us
that in and upon their spiritual state, in respect of their natural
generation, they are if not simply, you do not say (though) but (if) not
simply, and absolutely, yet comparatively innocent, etc. whereby it appears
that you have a good mind, simply, and absolutely to deny original sin in
them. And in respect of these qualifications, in grace and favor with God,
upon the account of the death and sufferings of Christ; formerly we heard from
you of a saving light vested in the natures of all upon this same account; the
vanity of which doctrine we have discovered.

Now you tell us of a state of Favor wherein upon the same account all
children are, and the proof we must expect in your second part, in the mean
time the same arguments which refuted your former opinion, refute this too with
the same breath, and we must hear the Apost^ telling us that we are by nature
the children of wrat^ But you will here say something to confirm i^ Mat. 18.
1, 2, 3. Whence you infer a wreste^ conclusion, that unless we shall say that
children are in such a state of favor with God; w^ shall make our Savior (in
effect) to say, tha^ unless his disciples be like unto those who ar^ in a
state of condemnation, they cannot be saved: But this according to your usual
wringing rather then concluding. For answer, 1. O^ Savior compares them in
their qualification* not in their state or condition. 2. This comparison will
not conclude infants in a saving state (...) for first, though in humility
negative, rather then positive, they must be like children, yet that is not
all: they must not only be free from pride, ambition, etc. as children through
the incapacity of their tender age are, but further, they must have a humble
and remorsefull sense of sin, with contrition and selfe-loathing, an high
esteem and true impression of free grace pardoning, withal, faith,
repentance, etc. which children have not, secondly, they grown to years of
discretion, cannot in this humility wherein they are compared be like children,
but from a principle of regeneration, whereas in children it is only through
incapacity of their age; therefore such qualifications in persons of years,
conclude higher for them, then in Infants. As children are radically rational,
though in their infancy reason cannot express it self in many fruits: so are
they radically sinful, and that unto death in sin, though sin in that age
cannot express it self as to many fruits of it.

In the next place you anticipate an objection which you could not but so that
your doctrine is liable to; not any thing you say that has ^^e^ said upon this
last account, supposes children to be begotten or borne without original
sin, then you add, only that indeed has been said, which supposes that,
that sin which is in children, is taken away by the death of Christ: So that
they are generally whilst children, in the favor of God through Christ,
notwithstanding that sin which is in them, which is as much as to say, they
are borne without the guilt of original sin. Death (according to your
doctrine here) reigns not over those that have not sinned after the Similitude
of Adams transgression; again, that state of corruption by natural birth
which you allow is far different from that which the Scripture teaches; yours
is but such a state as is found in the regenerate, as is notwithstanding that
corruption, a saving state; the Scripture teaches it such a state of flesh, as
without regeneration changing that state there can be no salvation. One passage
I had almost forgot, whereas you say regeneration is appropriable only to
persons grown to years of discretion, allowing what has over and over been
proved, that without regeneration there is no person in a saving state, it will
hence follow, that so many children as are saved are regenerate.

Hitherto Master Goodwins interpretation (with the examination of it,) which we
had good reason to set down in contradistinction to the true interpretation
which now follows. And it is such as will evidence it self clearly to suit
with the Parable, and is withal the sense of the Fathers generally who have
spoken to it; as likewise, (at least the prime sense) of diverse Modern
Divines of the best note: See the text, Mat. 25. 14. to the 31. to which is
Parallel, Luke 19. to the 28.

The maine parts of this Parable are three: the

First, Of a man, (a noble man Luke 19. 12.) traveling into a far Country (to
receive a Kingdom Luke, ibid) and committing to his servants his goods, and
these goods (talents, Mat. 25. 15. pounds, Luke 19. 13.) by them to be employed
for increase to their Lord. verse. 14. 15.

This noble man is Christ, this far Country heaven, his journey thither, his
ascension; the Kingdom he is gone to receive, the Kingdom of glory at the
resurrection; these servants, the Ministers of the Gospel, these talents or
pounds the doctrine of the Gospel, committed to their Ministry; their
employment for increase, the faithful discharge of their Ministry, with
deligent labor against manifold hazzards, whereby the Gospell-Kingdome of
Christ takes place in the world and is enlarged, as in the Parrable Luke 12.
41. to the 49. the servant there is not the Christian in general, but the
Minister of the Gospel, viz. the Steward of his Lords house, whom upon his
faithful discharge of his trust in the household, his Lord will make him Ruler
over all that he has, verse 42. with 44. So here the servants are the same; si
Ministers of the Gospel, to whose trust the Lord has committed the mannaging
and improvement of his estate, si his Kingdom here upon Earth, till his next
^g, whom upon their faithful discharge of this their trust, he will in like
manner advance to further Rule, as in the third part of the Parrable is
expressed, verse. 21. and 23.

Quere. But what may the inaeqality of the talents here signify?

Answ. In Parables there are some essential parts, some amplifications for
ornament; the essential parts are of special signification, in close
connection with the scope, the amplifications of more general signification,
which if they should be too presiesly restrained, would many times pervert the
true interpretation; as to give one instance. In the parable of the rich man in
Hell, he is represented as taking care for his friends upon earth, that they
may not come into those torments; we may not hence conclude that the damned in
hell, have a loving affection toward, and a tender care of their friends yet
living in the world, such an amplification no essential part I conceive the
inaequality of the talents here to be of this general signification, that the
Lord does in much wisdom, and with due circumspection commit the Gospel
ministry to the Ministers thereof, good and bad; of the like consideration is
that which immediately follows viz. to every one according to his several
ability; that is ingeneral, the Lord requires a faithful discharge of their
Ministry, from every one of them; even the meanest, but he that should give
such a special interpretation as this; that even those Ministers who prove
unfaithful, and inbane condemnation in the end, had the least charge committed
to them, and the least opportunities of Gospell-ministration, should swerve
from the truth; therefore to show that this is no special part of the Parable,
in Luke there is no inaequality of the pounds, nor different ability of the
Servants mentioned.

The second part of the parable verse. 16. 17, 18. the carriage of those
servants in the absence of their Lord; two of them trade with their talents and
make increase; these are the fruitful Ministers, who give diligent heed to the
work of the Ministry which they have received of the Lord, their increase is
the fruits of their labors in the conversion and edification of souls, in
planting and propogating the Churches of Christ; By the faithful discharge of
the Gospel ministry, the Kingdom of Christ in the world increases, as when
leaven is put into dough, the Mass increases, or as when a grain of
Mustardseed grows into a spreading tree. The third diggs into the earth and
hides his Lords money; this is the unfaithful Minister, who neglects the
charge committed to him, the doctrine of the Gospel, by Christ committed to
his hand, as a lighted candle, which he puts under a bushel, or under a bed,
so that it gives no light to the house; the unfruitful Steward that gives not
the family their meat in due season; too sloathfull to endure the labors of
the Ministry, too fearful to abide the hazards, and undergo the sufferings,
too worldly and sensual, to mind the spiritual concernments thereof, with
the necessary neglect of the things of this life. Now ensues the third part of
the Parable, the return of this Noble man, his calling these servants to
account, and rendering to them according to their carriage in his absence, v.
19, to the 31.

The return of this Noble man, is the coming of Christ to judgment; his
reckoning with his servants: his calling the Ministers of the gospel to
account; A word of weighty caution here to them: with them shall Christ begin,
in the day of judgment: The accounts of the first and second here, are the
accounts of the faithful ministers, the ministry in their hands has been
fruitful, the recompense rendered them by their Lord, making them rulers over
many things, and receiving them into his joy, is the State of glory conferd
upon them; a state of highest honor and fullest joy, agreeable hereunto is that
of the Apostle. 1 Thessal. 2. 19, 20.

The account of the third servant, is the account of the evil and unfruitful
Minister who to color his own sloth and wickedness, charge the Lord with
austerity and unrighteousness; the manner of hypocrites, and wicked ones, to
cast their faults upon the Lord, guilty at once of disobedience and insolence.
The labors and hazards which are indeed required of the faithful Minister, he
looks at as intolerable, and therefore takes and easier course, but to the
destruction of himself and his hearers, repining in his spirit against the
Lord, who has made the ministerial charge so laborious and hazardous, verse.
24, 25.

The answer of his Lord unto him. verse. 26, 27. is such, as makes way for his
condemnation out of his own mouth Lu. 19. 22. Because he had such hard thoughts
of Christ, to whom he must give account, he should therefore have used his
utmost diligence to have fulfilled his ministry; Christ shall need no other
testymonies against the wicked then their own at the day of judgment, nay
their own mistakes and evil apprehensions of him, shall yet be testimony
sufficient against them to condemn them, and justify him in their
condemnation. But who are these exchangers here? the hearers of the gospel
preached, by the faithful preaching of the gospel, many hearers are gained
unto the Lord, others are left more inexcusable, both making for the glory of
Christ at the great day, and therefore the faithful Ministers, a sweet savor
of Christ unto God, in them that are saved, and in them that perish, 2 Cor. 2.
15.

The sentence of judgment is begun, ver. 28. That trust and honor which was
conferd upon him, shall be taken from him, and conferd upon the faithful
minister, what is that? the glory of the faithful minister in the fight of men
and angels, shall receive increase from the condemnation of the unfaithful;
Stripped of all that honor which sometime was vested in him, the confirmation of
this sentence, verse. 29. He that has; not only what the Lord committed to
him, but what he required of him, the increase of his talents, to him shall be
given glory, as a a recompense of his faithfulness, and he that has this
recompense of glory, shall receive increase, and it shall be abundant to him,
from the condemnation of the wicked, and unfaithful servant, as by the
destruction of the vessels of wrath is made known so much the more, the riches
of glory on the vessels of mercy. Romans 9. 22, 23. On the contrary from him that
has not, viz. that which the Lord required; the increase of his talent; shall
be taken away even that which he has, viz. that honor which he received from
Christ, committing to his trust the Gospel Ministry, and which in the eyes of
men by virtue thereof he bore in this world, which now shall end for ever in
utmost shame and torments, v. 30. and so as from the Glory of the faithful
Minister his misery shall increase; as hence weeping and gnashing of teeth to
the wicked Jews that they see Abraham, Isack and Jacob and all the Prophets in
the Kingdom of God, and themselves thrust out. Luke. 13. 28. so that every
way, to him that has, shall be given, and from him that has not shall be
taken away even that which he has. And now I appeal to the Judicious reader,
if this be not a natural interpretation of this Parable, and what is there now
in it, for the improvement of natural indowements to the obtaining of
regenerating Grace.

This Section he closes with a false charge, as if his adversaries taught men
so to lay aside reason and understanding as to be merely passive in matters of
Religion, with avile slander, as though they consulted their own worldly
concernments in holding the truth against him and his fellows, with Laodicean
pride assigning unto man his excellency upon these terms, that upon the
improvement of his natural abiilites, preventing regenerating grace he is made
great by God. If I should now show what by regenerating grace the men of his
Confideracy understand, his error would yet further appear, but the
digression would be^ too long: Only this passes as an Article of Faith
amongst them. That all the operations of God being performed, which he uses
for working Conversion in us, yet so does Conversion remain in our power as
that we may not be converted. So that all the efficiency they acknowledge in
converting grace, is to give us a power of Conversion, not Conversion it self:
which how contrary it is to the truth, and with how much clearness the
efficacy of grace certainly and infallibly working Conversion it self is by
the Fathers in the Pelagian controversy demonstrated, I shall not need here to
say, if the Reader bear in mind what has been said above.


CHAP. XIX.
We have done with his Motives to read his Book: Now follows the third part of
his Preface, viz. A prevention of Objections against the reading thereof; In
this and the next which is likewise the last part, we shall not need to spend
much time, there being little but impertenencies, beside what has been
answered before, we shall therefore touch upon such things as are observable,
and as the Case shall require, insist sometimes more largely.

Object. 1. That he teaches the possibility of the Saints final Apostasy, he
teaches more then the possibility thereof, so that it many times comes to
pass; for answer hereto he refers to the ninth Chapter of his Book; but the
judicious Reader will find there as every where else nothing but Errors.

Object. 2. That he exalts nature to the prejudice of free grace, he answers
hereto as follows, which we shall set down in his own words, as formerly we
have done (because this is a passage that requires distinct Examination,) and
then accordingly examine it.

Goodwin. Concerning the Grace of God and the freeness thereof, I hold and
teach nothing but what fayrely and fully accords with these positions.

1. That the original or first spring of the salvation of the world, and so of
every particular person, that comes to be saved, was in and from the Grace, the
free Grace and good pleasure of God.

2. That the whole method or systeme of the Councels by which and according to
which God effects and brings to pass the salvation of all that are saved,
did proceed wholly and entirely from the same grace and good pleasure.

3. And more particularly, That the gift of Jesus Christ for a Mediator and
Savior unto the world, and so the Grant or Promise of Justification and
salvation unto men, by or upon believing, issued solely and wholly from the
same grace.

4. That men by nature and of themselves, i. e. Considered in and under such a
condition, as they were brought into by Adam, and wherein they should have
subsisted (in Case they had ever been borne, and lived in the world.) Had not
the free grace of God in Christ interposed to relieve them and better their
Condition, have no strength or power, not the least inclination or propension
of will, to do any thing, little or much acceptable unto God or of a saving
import.

5. That notwithstanding this restoration or healing of the natural condition
of man by the free grace of God, yet there is not one of a thousand, possibly
not one throughout the whole world but so far corrupts himself with the
lusts of the flesh and ways of the world, that without a second relief from
the free grace of God, as, viz. in his patience and long suffering toward him,
ever comes to repent or believe, or to persevere believing and so to be saved.

6. That it is from the free and undeserved grace of God, that any person of
mankind, is so much as put into a Capacity of believing or has power and
means vouchsafed unto him sufficient to enable him to believe.

7. That a man is put into this capacity of believing by an irresistible acting
or working of the free grace of God.

8. That when any man by virtue of the power and means vouchsafed unto him by
the free grace of God comes actually to believe, the exercise and acting of
this power proceeds also from the free grace and good pleasure of God, so that
no man ever believes without a present and actual assistance from the free
grace of God, in order to this his believing, over and above his ability or
power to believe.

9. (And lastly) That the Act of believing whenever it is performed by any
man, is so inconsiderably and at so low a rate of efficiency from a man's self,
that (to help apprehension a little in the case) suppose the Act of believing,
could be divided into a thousand parts or degrees, nine hundred ninety and nine
of them are to be ascribed unto the free grace of God, and only the one
remaining unto man; yea this one degree of the Action is no otherwise neither
to be ascribed unto man then as graciously supported, strengthened and assisted
by the free grace of God.

The Reader will find none of these Positions contradicted by any thing
affirmed or denied in the di course: I attribute as much as possible can be
attributed to the free grace of God, in and about the Act of believing, salving
the attributablenesse of the action unto man himself, in the lowest and most
diminutive sense that can well be conceived. It is man that believes, not God;
therefore so much efficiency about it must be left to man, as may give it
denomination of being his.


Resbury. Reader, one word in general; does not he seem to speak fairly for
grace here? but never did any man play more fast and loose with sound and sense
of his doctrine, then this Author does; how Orthodox soever any of these
positions may be in their sound, not any one of them is so in the sense by him
intended.

Read over his-first Position and his second, which are very general, and the
third where thou have some explication of the former; then add the sixth, and
thou have a further explication; they all together come to this. That God of
his mere good pleasure appointed that all believers should be saved by Jesus
Christ; that of the same good pleasure or grace, he gave Jesus Christ for the
world; that by him all men are in their natural generation put into a Capacity
of believing, and have means sufficient afforded them for salvation: that in
all this God has an equal respect of grace to all men. By this time then thou
may discern, how different this grace which he teaches, is from that Grace
which the Scriptures teach, viz.

1. That God chose from all eternity by a special Decree of peculiar grace,
the persons of those unto salvation, who in the end are saved* this Decree
(wherein the grace of it appears) not founded upon Faith or Works, or any
thing in Man foreseen, but merely upon his own good will and pleasure, that
according to this Decree, he gave them to Christ, and Christ for them, by his
Redemption to bring them certainly to salvation; that of the same mere grace
he does in his own time effectually call them, thereby discriminating them in
their actual state and condition, as formerly he had in his Council, from the
rest of men; in their Call uniting them to Christ, blessing them with all
spiritual blessings in him to the effectual obtainment of salvation.

2. It is such grace as which notwithstanding the greatest number of persons by
far to whom it belongs, perish everlastingly; for he makes it equally belong
to all the world, the greatest part whereof by far (I think he will not deny)
perishes.

For the fourth Position; The sin and misery of Man's condition in Adam, is
merely notionall: He does not allow, that one man living is in that condition
by his natural conception and birth; whereas the Scriptures teach and with
them the Fathers against the Pelagian heresy, that all men are borne in that
condition, and remain therein till they be regenerate by the peculiar grace of
God, as we have formerly seen at large.

For the fifth: 1. He teaches the Pelagian power of the natural and
unregenerate man, casting a false gloss over it of restoration and healing,
as we discoursed above.

2. He teaches the Pelagian method of Regeneration, that Grace is given
according to Man's merit. This second relief from the free grace of God, being
nothing but his patience and longsuffering, through which man being spared,
mak^ such use of his natural endowments and common principles, as thereupon
the Grace of Rege^^ration (whatsoever it is to which he vouchsafes that name)
is given, as we saw lately in his explication of the Parable of the Talents.

For the sixth and seventh: What is here affirmed, we must understand of all
Men at their birth or conception rather, according to his explication of 1 John
9. formerly. And so Original sin, at least that which he himself granted by
Adam in his fourth Position here is prevented to all men, never takes hold of
any; the very thing by Pelagius maintained, and in him condemned; only a new
fetch for it.

For the eighth: As in his Preface hitherto and in his following Book,
whenever he has occasion to speak to the influx of God for the operation of
grace in man; he hovers in the Clouds and keeps in Generals (well acquainted
with that rule Dolus in Universalibus.) So here he tells us of a present and
actual assistance; but if the Reader here conceive that he grants an
effiicacious impression upon the will of man, by the spirit of God, determining
it to the Act of believing and working in man to believe, he deceives himself;
for against such a doctrine he raises bitter Tragedies.

For the ninth: He denies the whole act of believing to be from God, and he
renders his reason, because then it could be Man's act. The falsehood of this
position, and the vanity of the reason annexed may thus appear.

1. For the position: God is the Author of all being, he being the only
Creator; but every part or degree of the act of believing (supposing it divided
into whatsoever parts) is something, a being Contra-distinguisht to nothing: If
Man be the Author of any part, whereof God is (...) Man creates.

2. God is the Author of all good, he being the one unchangeable and necessary
Good. He good of himself, all other things by participation; but every part of
the act of believing is good; therefore from God the only foundation of all
good.

3. The Act of believing is specially good; all parts of that act are uniforme
in nature; therefore if Man be the Author of any part, whereof God is not, Man
apart from God is the Author of something specially good.

4. If Man may be the Author of one part of being, of good, of special good;
why not of more? Why not of the whole? and so Man shall be the Creator of the
noblest operations; why should we then have inferior operations for God to be
the Author of, and not deny him the Author of all or any?

2. For the Reason: That God is the Author of the whole, does no way deny Man's
efficiency, or take the denomination of the act from him: Where causes are
subordinate, the whole effect is produced by both; thus when in writing the
teacher guides the learners hand, they both write the whole, every letter, and
every part of every letter. In the motion of higher and lower wheels, the
less within the greater, the whole motion is performed by both; In causes thus
subordinate, but of different kinds, the denomination is from the dependent
cause. Thus when the Plummet moves the wheel of the clock round, we say the
wheel, not the Plummet turns round; but the Plummet is the first mover. Thus
when the Earth springs forth her fruits, God is the Author of them, of all and
every part of them; yet the Earth springs them, though he produce them; he
springs them not, but makes her to spring them. The denomination of the action
ever belonging to the inferior cause, because in it is the principle whence the
action Emergeth: In the production of Faith then, God works, and man works, and
Man not one part only, but the whole, but this in subordination to God who
works the whole likewise; yet Man believes, not God, because in Man is the
principle whence the act of believing issues: His will, but his will by grace
renewed; His will the principle which believes: Grace renewing the will the
principle by which he believes: He believes in whom is the act of believing
produced; It is not produced by God in himself, but by influx from himself in
Man.

It is no immanent action in God, but in Man, in him produced by a transient
action of God upon him. Therefore I say with Austin; It is certain that when
we will, we will, but it is he that makes us to will that which is good, who
works in us both to will and to do. So that it is certain that when we
believe, we believe; but it is he that makes us to believe, and that not in
part, but in whole. Appositely Bernard, ascribing all that is good in man to
the grace of God; Not partly grace (says he) and partly free will, but each of
them by an undivided work, performs the whole.This, the whole; and that, the
whole; but as the whole is in this, so the whole is from that: Excellently
Austine, proving not only the whole of Faith to be from God, but the denial of
it to be Pelagianisme. Having first proved Faith to be of God, he adds (as
formerly we have quoted him) Furthermore if God work our Faith, acting in our
hearts in a wonderful manner, that we may believe, shall we fear least he be
not able to do the whole? Now follows the Pelagian^sme of the denial. And
therefore Man challenges to himself the first part of it, that he may deserve
from him to receive the last. S e if any thing be done by this means, but that
the grace of God, one way or other may be given according to our merits; and so
grace shall not be grace.

Then in the prosecution of this discourse, he blames the pride of Man, that he
will (as it were) Compound with God, so as to challenge part of his Faith to
himself, and leave part thereof to God; and which is yet more arrogant, he
will take the first part to himself, (and pray say Mr. Goodwin if this be not
your part) leave the following part to God: and in that which he says belongs
to them both, he makes himself to go before, and God to behind.

Thus have we seen the vanity, fraud, and Error of your positions; as for the
close of this Section, it may well pass for Smoke, and so may indeed all that
follows, in the rem^ining objections and answers I shall therefore briefly touch
upon them, for there is nothing material in them.

3. Obj. That your doctrines are ro^ten Errors.

You answer for the two doctrines more largly handled in the following book. 1.
That you prove they were never cast out of the Church by any Council reputed
Orthodox, till the Synod of Dort.

An. 1. It seems you have so much modesty and conscience as to grant, some
other of your doctrins, such as these here in your Preface that have been cast
out by Councels, reput^d Orthodox, which indeed is true; to set aside that at
Carthage, and that at Jerusalem, where Pelagius was condemned, we have seen the
Milevi^ane, and second Arausican formerly rej^cting them.

2. For those two doctrins you are forced t^ confess that by the Synod of Dort
they were rej^cted, which was the greatest Protestant Synod that has been held
since the time^ of Reformation.

3. What if they were not by any other, nor had been by that? Can you name no
great Errors by your self confessed so to be, but what have been by some or
other Council reputed Orthodox by Orthodox men, cast out?

2. For those two doctrines, you say they were taught by all O^thodox
antiquity, and Calvin himself and who not? this is the true spirit of your
fore Fathers; thus Julian the Pelagian would have John of Constantinople a
teacher of the same doctrine with himself; but do you not read the detection
of his falsehood, by Austin, with all bringing upon him the whole stream of the
Orthodox to refute him? and do you not sadly resent your own danger, least in
time you may hear; Haec verba tua quo proficiunt, nisi ut appareat, vel
quomodo de hac causa scire neglexeris Catholicorum sententias, Sermonesque
doctorum, vel si eos nosse curasti, qu^ fraud coneris circumvenire nescientes?
Si nesciens, hoc fecisti, cur non miseram re^^uis imperitiam? si sciens cur non
sacrilegam deponis audaciam? Contr^ Julian. Pelagi. lib. 1. Thus the Massylians
or Semipelagians, alleged that what Austin taught about the call of the Elect
according to the purpose of God, in his writings against Pelagius, was contrary
to the doctrine of those most famous teachers in the Church which had been
before him. Prosp. in Epist. ad Augustinum; but Augustines answer thereto
quoting Cyprian, Ambrose and Nazianzine teaching the same doctrine with him,
and concluding the like of the rest generally, you are not ignorant of. lib de
bono persev. C. 19.

4. Object. These discourses are full of niceties, etc.

One of your Answers, is, that for your self, you go no further then you feel
the ground firm under you: but your firm ground we have sound bogs and
quagmires more then once; when you come to a soft place (you say,) you tread
lightly; indeed you have your Reserves sometimes when you come to a knot; I
beeleeve this doctrine of divine influx, or concourse, is one of your ^oft
places, you are wont to Skin it over so fairly.

Another of your Answers, is, that your adversaries have occasioned these
subtilties, forsaking the grounds of reason, etc. whereas the truth is, Men of
corrupt judgments, your friends, have by opposing their reasonings to clear
Scripture occasiond them.

5. Object. Some plead a Non-necessity of enquiring farther about this argument.

You answer to this purpose; 1. That the treasure of divine wisdom is not
exhausted, but that we may make further discourses. But I answer, the truths by
you opposed are so fully cleard long since, that should an Angel from beaven
teach your doctrines, those that are taught of God, would see ground enough to
reject him. 2. You boast of something done by you above all that went before
you; I know it not: pray point us to your (...). Then you proclaim the trophies
of your party; whereas indeed, the church has in diverse ages triumphed in the
ruin of your Errors, and so she will do to the end.

6. Object. That these opinions have been held by a less religious generation
of Men.

You answer that in such and such Chapters you have disproved the Objections.
Take the last word here for me, till those chapters be disproved.

7. Object. Armianisme, Pelagianisme, Socinianisme.

In answer whereto, you are upon your old false string, and would make us
believe, that Calvin himself, the Synod of Dort, and I know not who, had sore
fitts of Arminianisme. I return you here to my answer to your third Objection.

Now follows the fourth and last part of your Preface, which is your Apology, I
had almost said for your Apostasy; but let it pass in your own words
concerning your change of judgment; but forasmuch as your Arguments are only
general, and upon a false supposition, that you have changed from Error to
truth, and no other then what any Desertor of the faith might use, I spare the
fruitless pains of answering any thing at all to them.


FINIS.
De Gratiae Convertentis Irresistibilitate.
Thesis Exmii tum pietate, tum eruditione Theologi, D. D. Ioannis Praestoni,
Collegii Immanuelis in Academia Cantabrig. quondam Praefecti.
1. Gratiae convertens non est resistibilis.

2. Decretum dei de permissione peccati, non tollit libertatem in peccando.

MIHI in animo erat hanc secundam tractasse: Sed ea paululum muta^a, mutato
etiam consilio nonnullas ob causas, quas palam proferre non libet, institui
istam de irresistibilitate gratiae explicare dicendo, and confirmare.

Verum est quidem Arminium profiteri saepiuseule, tantum se gratiae tribuere,
quantum quisquam unquam fecit alius; nihil a quoquam unquam dici de gratiae
efficacia, quod non ab ipso etiam dictu^ sit; immo quicquid fingi vel
excogitari potest ad explicandas and illustrandas gratiae vires, id se
agnoscere; falso igitur de eo spargi, se in gratiam dei injurium esse, and
libero arbitrio plus nimio tribuere: Idem apud Augustinum Pelagium de se
pro^itentem reperietis. Interim tamen and illud verum, Totam hanc efficaciam
gratiae quam verbis extollit and amplificat adeo, Stante Arminii sententia,
pendere ab hominis voluntate; quippe quae pro innata sua liberate potest hanc
gratiam recipere vel rejicere, ea uti vel non uti, eam denique vel efficacem
reddere vel irritam facere: nec posse aliter fieri nisi abolere velimus
libertatem Voluntatis, ejusque naturae inseparabiles proprietates destruere.

Ne quis suspicetur, me falsam illi affingere sententiam; legantur ejus verba
in tractatu qui inscribitur Declaratio sent. Arm. pa. 181. Quae haec sunt:
Gratia (inquit Arm.) sic describitur in scriptura ut ei resisti possit; ut in
vanum accipi possit: ut homo comittere possit quo minus ei assentiatur: ut homo
possit ei non cooperari: ergo irresistibilis quaedam vis and operatio gratiae
tribuenda non est. His verbis an non diruit Arminius id quod prioribus
aedificarat? id aliorum sit judicium.

Non ignoro quantum Arminiani cavillantur circa hoc vocabulum (irresistibilis)
a Calvino aliisque nostris Theologis usurpatum, clamantes, secundum hanc
nostram sententiam, homines stipites fieri; in actu conversionis nihil eos
agere, sed tanquam lapides ab alio moveri and agi; imo non homines credere, sed
deum in hominibus credere and re^^piscere. Sed quam falso haec nobis
affingantur, and quam vere liceat dicere Arminium plus detrahere gratiae dei
quam Jesuitae, facile aspicieti^ si dabitis mihi veniam eorum sententias
fideliter recensere, easque paucissimis inter se confer: nam his 4
praestitis, absolvam orationem. 1. Recitabo sententias adversariorum. 2.
Explicabo quid nos sentiamus. 3. Rations addam quibus nostra sententia
stabiliatur. 4. Diluam objectiones, saltem unam vel alteram ex praecipuis,
quibus ea oppugnari solet.

Quod ad primum attinet; Jesuitae quidam affirmant, omnibus etiam reprobis dari
vel mediate sufficientem gratiam; electis vero and iis solis dari gratiam
efficacem, quae certo and infallibiliter suum finem consequitur. S quaeratur
autem, qua in re ponant hujus gratiae efficaciam? Resp. non in physica
determinatione voluntatis, sed in morali suasione, non quavis, sed congrua ut
appellant, i. e. secundum eas circumstantias loci, personae, temporis oblata,
quibus deus, qui omnes voluntatis inclinationes ab aeterno perspectas habet,
praevidet voluntatem certo and infallibiliter esse assensuram. Distingunt
igitur inter gratiam sufficientem and efficacem. Jis quos deus elegit ad vitam,
vi illius absoluti decreti intendit, non solum suggerere suasionem
sufficientem, sed eam offerre tempore congruo, quando novit vocatum certo
obsecutur^m deo vocanti: quos autem non elegit, iis etiam offert suasionem
sufficientem, sed tempore non congruo, and quando certo praevidet, eos non
obtemperaturos vocationi divinae.

Unde colligitur hanc esse sententiam Jesuitarum;

1 Vocationem efficacem sequi non praecedere decretum electionis, adeoque
decretum esse absolutum and non conditionatum.

2 Conversis and non conversis non dari eandem and aequalem gratiam; sed eam
quae datur electis, sempe efficaciorem esse, etsi non ^espectu sui, tamen
respectu congruitatis, quam habet ad voluntatem hominis convertendi.

3 Omnes convertendos certo and infallibiliter converti, idque vi solummodo
gratiae convertentis; alios vero certo and infallib^liter non converti, idque
non solummodo, quod ipsi nolint, sed ob defectum congruitatis gratiae oblatae;
quae grati a etsi quoad substantiam, ut aiunt, sit sufficiens, ita ut possint
ejus adminiculo converti si velint; tamen quoad circumstantias non est
sufficiens, quia tempore congruo non offertur. Sic enim Suarez: Moralis suasio
e^st abundans, non sufficit: Physica determinatio nimia est; tollit enim
libertatem: sed in congruitate quadam tota gratiae efficacia consistit. Haec
Jesuitae.

Arminiani autem, etsi videntur asserere, initium, progressum and perfectionem
omnis boni operis, gratiae tribuendum esse; ita ut nemo, sine gratia
praeveniente, concomitante and subsequente, boni quicquam cogitare, velle aut
facere possit: tamen cum haec omnia modo resistibili fieri contendunt, ita ut
in potestate voluntatis sit, gratia is it a u^i ad sui conversionem, vel non uti,
palam est eos haec omnia de gratia, in speciem tantum, non vere and ex animo,
profiteri. Hoc facile patebit, si opinionem Arminianorum sigillatim explicuero.

1. Primo igitur codcedunt, intellectum illustrari a divina gratia
irresistibiliter.

2. Aff^ctus etiam, reformari et accendi eadem gratia, idque irresistibiliter.

3. Voluntatem etiam ita excitari per gratiam assistenitiae, vt iam sit
expedita, cum prius esset impedita; jam soluta, cum prius ligata; iam
experrecta, cum prius essent sopita. Sed voluntatem renovari, eamque physice
inclinari a deo ad bonum, vel in voluntatem aliquam qualitatem vel habi^u^
sanctitatis infundi, unde propendeat magis in opera bona quam mala, prosus
negant Arminiani; quippe quod si aliquid ex his concederetur, destru eretur
naturalis libertas voluntatis, de cujus libertatis essentia est, ut positis
omnibus requisitis, possit agere vel non agere: Videantur ipsissima eorum
verba, Coll. Hag. page 298. In mentem (inquiunt) infusus est habitus scientiae,
in affectus infusa est sanctitas, ut spes, metus, etc. At in voluntatem non
potest talis infusio fieri, quippe quae ex se libera est ad volendum bonum vel
malum. Hinc (inquiunt) prius exci^atur moralis suasio in intellectu, sed vi
gratiae p^aevenientis. 2. huic sansioni voluntas assentire potest, sed vi
gratiae concomitantis 3. Et in actum producit hunc assensum, sed vi gratiae
subsequentis. His tamen omnibus istam cautionem diligenter subjungunt; etsi
voluntas nihil horum sine gratiae auxilio praestare potest; tamen est in
potestate voluntatis huic gratiae obniti, eam avertere, impedire, reijcere si
velit; nec fieri posse aliter, servatis na^uralibus proprietatibus voluntatis.
Sic status questionis explicatur a Ioh. Arnoldo adversus Bogermannum page 263.
Positis omnibus operationibus, quibus ad conversionem in nobis efficiendam Deus
uti^ur, manet tamen ipsa conversio ita in nost^a potestate, ut possimus non
converti.

Hac sententia pofita, coguntur Arminiani haec dogmata defendere, a veritate
magis aliena, quam ipsa Iesuitarum.

1. Defendunt decretum conditionatum fidei prae^cientiae innitens; nam cum
voluntas, positis omnibus Dei actionibus, possit ^e convertere vel non, credere
vel non, necesse est ut Deus prius praevideat, qui credituri sint and qui non,
quam aliquo^ eligat ad vitam, alios destinet ad interitum: Jesuitae autem
ponunt decretum absolutum, and fidem esse fructum vel effectum illud consequens.

2. Iesuitae concedunt majorem gratiam quoad modum iis omnibus praeberi qui
convertuntur, quam iis qui non. Arminiani contra; majorem etiam (quoad modum)
saepe communicari non conversis, quam conversis.

3. Hinc etiam Arminiani ordinary refundunt partiale principium conversionis
in humanam voluntatem (quicquid verbis profitentur contra) cum Iesuitae illam
totaliter tribuunt Dei (...) and beneplacito.

4. Hinc etiam Arminiani statuunt gratiam convertentem and vivificantem non
esse conversorum and electorum propriam, sed aliis etiam esse communem.
Iesuitae vero, vocationem congruam, (in qua gratiae efficaciam statuunt,) esse
electis peculiarem, fatentur.

5. Censent Iesuitae, omnes eos infallibiliter and certo converti, quos
Spiritus Sanctus convertere intenderat. Arminiani id pernegant. Vnde vulgo ausi
sunt dicere, Spiritui sancto resisti posse, etiam tum, quando hac intention
operatur in homine ut convertat eum.

His praemissis, jam nostra sententia quae sit, breviter exponam.

Ut autem distinct intelligatur quid nos sententiamus, sciamus oportet,
conversionem hominis his quatuor gradibus absolvi.

1. Deus infundit in totum animum, adeoque in ipsam voluntatem, habitum vel
qualitatem sanctitatis eam regenerantem, eamque constituente^ ex mala bonam, ex
nolente volentem; unde, quod ^net ad naturam voluntatis, integrum manet;
co^rigitur autem id quod corruptum est.

2. Ab hac q ualitate ita infusa, statim emergunt in voluntate inclinationes
quaedam incompletae, omnem rationis advertentiam praevenientes, motibusque (qui
a scholasticis pimo-primi appellantur) simillimae. His enim voluntas non vult
complete and executive aliquod bonum, sed inchoate and incomplete tantum
inclinatur, and propendet in bona opera, quae Deo placent: unde non tam
volitiones, quam velleitates dici debent.

3. Inclinationes istae intellectui proponuntur objective; unde intellectus eas
expendit, de iis ratiocinatur and consilium capit, tandemque, cum eas ratas
fecerit per dictamen suum ultimum and conclufivum, proponit voluntati ut
eligendas.

4. Postquam istae inchoatae inclinationes, ortae ab infusa gratia, subierunt
censuram intellectus, and praevio ejus judicio fuer^nt comprobatae; tum demum
voluntas elicit velle completum and executivum, ex quo immedite sequitur
conversio; vel potius Ipsum velle illud est conversio hominis ad Deum. His
quatuor perficitur hominis conversio. Hic primum, scilicet receptio habitus
gratiae infusae est irrestibilis quidem; sed nec est libera, nec voluntaria:
voluntas enim mere passive se habet in ipsa receptione; ergo, non libere.

Secundo; Scilicet, inclinatio orta vel fluens a gratia, est irresistibilis;
Physice enim, and non moraliter, fluit a voluntate, gratia formata and imbuta.
Est tamen voluntaria; active enim producitur a voluntate: non tamen libera est,
quia deest adhuo unum ex requisitis ad libertatem, scil. praevium judicium
intellectus.

Tertio; Scilicet, judicium int^llectus de hac inchoata and incompleta
inclinatione, est irresistibile; intellectus enim gratia divina illustratus,
irresistibiliter and infallibiliter comprobat hanc inclinationem: est etiam
eousque liberum, quousque intellectus est capax libertatis.

Quarto: Cum intellectus edidit dictamen suum ultimum and conclusivum, tum
voluntas, uti dixi, elicit completum velle and executivum, quod est ipsa
actualis conversio ad Deum.

Hoc autem velle est tum irresistibile tum liberum, adeoque ipsa conversio est
and libera and irresistibilis.

1. Irresistibile est; quia non solum necessitate consequentiae, sed etiam
consequentis sequitur Physicam inclinationem voluntatis praeeuntem, and ultimum
dictamen intellectus illud probans and confirmans. Liberum etiam est
propriissime, habet enim requisita ad libertatem; voluntas enim in hoc velle
active se habet, non passive.

2. Non elicitur nisi a morali suasione, id est, non nisi praeeunte judicio
intellectus aestimantis in utramque partem, quid fieri satius esset. Omne enim
velle activum and completum, cui praecedanea fuit hujusmodi ratiocinatio and
aestimatio intellectus de objecto oblato, vere and proprie liberum dici deb^t.
Illa enim definitio, liberum esse quod, positis omnibus requisitis ad agendum,
possit agere vel non agere, est definitio in cerebro Jesuitarum solummmodo
consita, quod fundamentum habet nec apud Patres, nec apud Veteres Philosophos,
imo nec apud Antiquiores Scholasticos, quos tamen Suarez conatur quasi obtorto
collo trahere in suam sententiam.

Sic habetis nostram sententiam, secundu^ quam homo convertitur
irresistibiliter, tamen libere. Quam ut adhuc magis perspicue intelligatis,
hinc ^equuntur haec Theoremata, illis Arminianorum and Jesuitarum contraria.

1 Non dicimus liberum arbitrium vel facultatem voluntatis quoad spirituale,
esse semivivam and sem^mortuam, ut volunt Arm. Coll. Hag. page 300. vel se
habere ut locomotiva in eo qui compedibus ligatur, vel visiva facultas in eo
qui in locum aliquem tenebricosum compingitur, ut volunt Pontificij: sed
asserimus facultatem voluntatis quoad bonum vere spirituale, penitus extinctam
esse, sicut facultas vitalis in homine mortuo, locomotiva in occiso, visiva
inexoculato

2 Illi etiam defendunt, voluntatem tantum excitari a gratia morali vel
assistenti eam pulsante and commonefaci^nte, non autem mutari a gratia
habituali eam sanante and regenerante; ipsorum enim haec sunt verba, Ni^il
obstat quo minus vel sola gratia moralis, id est moraliter suadens, homines
animales spirituales reddat. Nos vero arbitramur, voluntatem etiam vivificari
and regenerari ab infusione gratiae habitualis, id est, novae qualitatis
voluntati impressae, quae se habet sicut intrinsecum principium voluntatem
informans and mutans: unde fluunt omnes bonae and inclinationes and operationes.

3 Illi statuunt, in actu conversionis voluntatem tantum active, se habere. Nos
sustinemus, voluntatem in primo actu conversionis, partim passive, partim
active, id est, prius passive, dein active se habere; ideoque cum Deo
cooperari; non partim naturali facultate, qua pollet, partim supernaturali a
gratia trans^unte accepta; sed potentia totaliter supernaturali; and infusa and
vivificante gratia collata, juxta illud August. Uelle a nobis habemus; sed been
velle, and in part, and in toto est a gratia.

4 Arminiani existimant gratia^ spiritus vivifica^ and quicquid aliud ex part
Dei requiritur ad hominis conversionem, tam reprobis communicari quam electis;
idque hac intention, ut serventur; alioquin Deum agere siumulate and
hypocritice, cum iis verbum offert: legantur eorum verba Coll. Hag. page 308.
Nos interim statuimus gratiam Dei vivificam, quae voluntati sanandae and
regenerandae apta sit, electis esse peculiarem, iisque vi decreti electionis
impertiri, in hunc finem, ut salvi fiant; aliis vero denegari, idque ideo quod
Deus eos non servare secum statuerit.

5. Aiunt illi voluntatem a gratia vivifica excitatam, posse agere vel non
agere; ad Deum se convertere vel non; quia alioqui non esset libera; libertatem
enim esse, cum positis omnibus requisitis vel omnibus Dei actionibus, possit
agere vel non: unde illud Corvini contra Tilen. page 337. Gratiam non ita
instruere voluntatem viribus, quin semper maneat in potestate hominis iis uti
vel non. Nos contro dicimus, voluntatem non posse tum physicae motioni a gratia
profectae, tum divinae suasioni ab illuminato intellectu ei exhibitae, reniti
vel refragari, sed necessitate consequentis ductum Dei sequi, juxta illud
Augustini; Liberum arbitrium non potest Deo salvum facienti resistere.

6. Illi dicunt, voluntatem a gratia excitatam, proprie cooperari cum Deo, esse
causam coordinatam, concausam, causam partialem, causam concomitanten, etc.
eamque ita influere in effectum, ut si non influat, effectus nullo modosit
secuturus. Nos contra dicimus, voluntatem cooperari quid^m, sed ut causam omni
modo subordinatam, and dominio Dei, ut principalioris agentis, penitus
subjectam: adeo ut non proprie coagen^ and cooperans dici debeat; sed potius
prius acta agit se, and prius mota movet se, and prius Deo conversa convertit
se ad Deum.

7. Defendunt illi, non posse Deum nos modo irresistibili convertere, nisi
etiam convertamur in truncos and stipites, ideoque quasi continua motione acti,
non ipsi agamus quicquam, sed Deus omnia in nobis: contra, nos dicimus, truncos
and stipites facultates, quibus acti ipsi simul agant, minime habere: homines
vero esse agentia libera; adeoque facultate^ habere, ratione cujus acti a Deo
ipsi simul agunt; unde vere and agere, and se convertere dici oportere:
voluntas enim ex mala in bonam mutata, and ex nolente volens facta, habet in se
intrinsecum principium been volendi: unde dominiu^ sui actus quo se convertit
ad Deum, ei propriissime tribui debet; etsi enim gratia Dei sit principium quo,
tamen voluntas hominis est principium quod, omnia operatur; J^idem, etsi Deus
sit causa efficiens conversionis prima and totalis, tamen voluntas est causa
efficiens proxima, and totalis etiam, in genere causarum secundarum. Ergo,
sicut effectus solent tribui causis seeundis and creatis, etsi agunt virtute
causae primae: sic conversio propriissime tribuenda est voluntati, etamsi
totaliter agat virtute Dei and gratiae convertentis.

8. Ultimo negant illi, irresistibilitatem gratiae divinae and libertatem
voluntatis humanae posse simul consistere. Nos vero dicimus, conversionem esse
irresistibilem, tamen Irresistibilit^^ liberam. Sed distinguimus de irre-
distinguitur. sistibilitate gratiae.

1. Alia est, qua gratia regenerans a Deo infusa recipitur a voluntate; and
ha^c irresistibilitatem (scil. receptionis) fatemur nos incompossibilem esse
cum liberate.

2. Alia est, qua inclinatio instigans ad bonum spirituale modo quodam physico
promanat a voluntate gratia formata; and hanc etiam motionem dicimus
irresistibiliter elici and voluntary, sed non libere.

3. Alia est irresistibiltas, qua voluntas, tum motioni physicae a gratia
profectae, tum suasioni intellectus eam comprobanti, necessario quidem, i. e.
necessitate etiam conseque^tis, ^a quam certitudinem diximus, assentitur: and
hanc irrestibilitatem dicimus, optime posse cum liberate consistere; quip^e
quod contineat in ea duo ista, in quibus libertas consistit.

1. Quod voluntas, in eliciendo hoc ultimum velle, active se habet, non passi^e.

2. Quia praecesserit moralis suasio vel judicium intellectus aestimantis in
potestate hominis esse conversionem propositam, id est, oblatum objectum
accipere vel rejicere. Nam statuimus, quicquid fit in actu conversionis, vel
per meram receptionem, vel per physicam determinationem, non esse liberum; sed
omne velle quatenus and active elicitur, and ex rationabili sausione promanat,
eatenus solummodo liberum esse; idque hoc freti fundamento, quod ratio sit ad
opposita, i. e. sola ratio est radix and fundamentu^ omnis libertatis; unde
omnis actus voluntatis, in quem ratio influxerit, liberrimus est.

Videtis jam quae sit nostra sententia, in qua explieanda diutius immorati
sumus, quia hujus sententiae explicatio est praecipua ejus confirmatio, and
contrariae refutatio: praeterea, omnium difficillimu^ est, quid statuun^ illi
qui Arminium sequuntur hac in causa, exprimere, quia verbis adeo speciosis and
dubiis sententiam suam tegunt and involvunt.

Restant argumenta quibus nostra sententia confirmari debet, quae breviter
perstringam. Duo autem nobis sunt Probanda.

1. Dari posse infusionem qualitatum vel habituum in voluntatem; quod illos
pernegare, ante probatum est: quippe quod hujusmodi infusio destruat prorsus
and tollat ejus libertatem and naturam.

2. Habituali and vivi^ia gratia ita infusa, converti nos a Deo modo certo and
nobis irresistibili.

1. Dari infusionem hujusmodi gratiae renovantis and sanantis voluntatem,
eamque inclinantis and determinantis ad alterum oppositorum in actu
conversionis, vel hinc constat; quod omnes Theologi ponunt in voluntate
habitualem aversionem a Deo, and habituale^ conversionem ad sen^ibilia and
carnalia: haec autem habitualis corruption naturae, solo gratiae merae
excitantis auxilio sanari non potest: Morbi enim, ut corporales, sic
spirituales non curantur nisi contrariis; habitualis ergo corruption, non nisi
habituali qualitate voluntati impressa, mutari potest. Recte igitur Prosper:
Interior sensus non aperitur ad spiritualia praestanda, donec fundamentum fidei
and fervor dilectionis in cord plantetur.

2. Nisi concedatur*, hujusmodi habitualem gratiam infundi in voluntatem, unde
illa modo physico inclinetur ad bonum, nullum erit in homine formale
principium, a quo actus boni possint elici: sicut enim in corporalibus, nemo
videt nisi prius oculum habeat, nec audit nisi aures habeat: sic in
spiritualibus, nemo videt nisi prius Deus oculos dedit ad videndum, nec audit
nisi cui aures ad audiendum; eadem ratione, nemo ad Deum se convertere potest,
nisi habeat novum cor, i. e. novam voluntate^ ad convertendum, Deumque
diligendum: unde enim illud in scripturis, Arbor mala malos fructus, bona bonos
fructus profert? nisi ut inde intelligamus voluntatem bonam fieri oportere,
priusqua^ opus aliquod spirituale praestare possit; Quod gratia sanante and
regenerante, non autem gratia excitante and moraliter suadente fieri necesse
est.

3. Supponatur, voluntatem corruptione habituali deformatam, posse solo auxilio
gratiae excitantis ad actus spirituales eliciendos elevari, esset tamen id
contra illa^ suavitatem providentiae divinae, quae ab omnibus Theologis
praedicatur. Deus enim voluntate^ sic dispositam non suaviter promoveret, sed
quasi obtorto collo raptaret ad opus, a qua adhuc abhorret ejus inclinatio.
Ergo, Magis consentaneum est ut ponamus in voluntate habitualem quandam
propensione^ ad bonum spirituale, quod non a gratia excitante, sed ab
infusione^ habitualis gratiae praestare potest.

4. Fatentur omnes, voluntatem non renatam nullam in se habere principium ve^e
spirituale; tamen actum convertendi ad Deum non negabunt esse ordinis vere
spiritualis and supernaturalis; quomodo autem voluntas solo pulsante gratia
excitata, non autem gratia regenerante mutata, constituitur in ordine agentium
supernaturalium, ego quidem non intelligo.

5. Quaeram, quid illud sit, quod verum pium and sanctu^ constituit? non
simpliciter actus pij and boni; actus enim non denominat subjectum tale, ut
loquitur Philosophus; ergo, habitus sit oportet, unde homo sanctus and pius
dicitur: Habitus aute^ iste situs non est in irrationali animi part; ea enim
non est culpae vel virtutis susceptiva proprie, sed participative tantum, in
quantum scil. rationalis animi pars in eam redundat. Si autem in rationali poni
debet, non est in intellectu collocandus; nemo enim est vir bonus vel malus
quod bona vel mala tantu^ intelligat, ut optime observat Aquinas; sed ideo
dicitur unusque vir bonus vel malus, quod ea velit quae mala vel bona sunt.
Relinquitur ergo habitum sanctitatis non posse nisi in voluntate collocari,
utpote quae proprissiime est subjectum susceptivum tu^ habitualis sanctitatis,
tum habitualis corruptionis and rebellionis ei contrariae.

6. Unde facilitas and promptitudo in operando, si voluntas per se indifferens
sit and aequaliter inclinata in utramque partem? nam sicut ex malis actionibus
contrahitur macula, unde habitualiter disponitur ad malum: sic ex bonis
actionibus inficitur anima meliori tinctura, unde habitualiter inclinatur ad
bonum, idque exclusa operatione gratiae pulsantis and excitantis.

7. Amor^m Dei vel charitate^ non esse merum actum, sed habitum permanente^,
omnes melioris notae Theologi fatentur: habitus autem iste non in intellectu
locu^ habet, quia affectus est; nec in sensuali appetitu qui ad amore^
spiritualem elevari nequit: Reliquu^ est ergo, eam esse voluntati peculiare^,
adeoque eam habituum vel gratiae habitualis propriissime capacem esse.

Ultimo. Quam absurdam est, concedere totum hominem mortuum esse in peccatis,
ita ut ad bonu^ aliquod vere spirituale aspirare nullo modo possit: defeendere
tamenvolunta^e^, quae est (...) ipsius animae, auriga omnium facultatu^ domina
and regina humanorum actuu^, illud denique principium quod ^onitatem and
malitim spiritualem impertitur omnibus operibus ab homine praestitis; quam
absurdu^ inquam est, statuere hanc facultate^, nec spiritualem fuisse ante
lapsum, nec carnale^ post lapsum, sed ^u^ corruptionis per primum peccatum
invectae, tum donorum spiritualiu^ in hominis regeneratione infusorum, esse
penitus expertem? Facile esset pluribus absurdis obruere hanc sententiam, sed
haec sufficient. Ex his omnibus satis constat, infundi in voluntatem, vel in ea
imprimi novam qualitatem vel habitum gratiae; quod ab Arminianis acerrime
negari, ex ipsorum verbis supra probatum est.

Qui tamen adhuc dubitat, utrum haec sit eoru^ ^ententia, legate Coll. Hag. p.
298. versione Bertii: ubi de industria and consulto defendunt, non in
spirituali morte, separari dona spiritualia ab hominis voluntate; nec ante
illam morte^, nimirum in statu innocentiae, eidem fuisse insita; quippe quod si
hujusmodi donis inclinaretur voluntas in alter^tram partem, tolleretur ejus
libertas, quae in eo consistit, quod aequaliter se flectere possit in utramvis
partem, positis omnibus ad agendum requisitis.

Restat nunc brevi probandum, Deum, sive immediate, sive mediate tum gratia
infusa tum morali suasione, peccatores irresistibili quodam modo ad se
convertere.

Sed haec cautio praemittenda est: hoc Vox (Irresistibiliter) explicatur.
vocabulo (irresistibiliter) non intelligere nos, vim aliquam voluntati
illatam, ejusque naturae repugnantem: sed inseparabilem tantum efficaciam
gratiae divinae quae suaviter quidem and secundum modu^ ejus naturae inclinat
voluntatem; ita tamen certo and necessario (intelligimus eam necessit^tem, quam
modo certitudinem diximus) ut a voluntate eludi nequeat.

1. Veritas hujus sententiae vel hinc patet, quod passim in Scripturis, Deo
soli ejusque (...) and beneplacito tribuitur peccatoris conversio vel
regeneratio; homini ipsi autem, omnis vel minima cooperatio adimitur, Romans 9.
Non est volentis vel currentis, sed miserentis Dei; Ille cujus vult, miseretur;
and quem vult indurat. Quod vere dici non posset, si homo possit pro liberate
sui arbitrii, positis omnibus Dei actionibus ad conversionem requisitis,
gratiam Dei vivificam in vanum accipere, (ut loquitur Arm.) eamque irritam
facere. Observetur etiam his verbis, non solummodo Deo soli tribui, quod hic
resipiscat, ille obduretur, sed hominis voluntate^ and conatu^ prorsus excludi
quo minus aliquas habeat parts in hoc negotio. Non est, inquit, volen^is vel
currentis, sed miserentis Dei. Sicut rota non ideo been currit, ut sit rotunda,
sed quia prius est rotunda, ideo been currit: sic homo non ideo vult vel
currit, ut deus ejus miserescat eumque regeneret per gratiam spiritus
vivificam, sed quia prius miseretur, ideo vult and ideo currit in via justitiae.

2. Secunda ratlo sumitur ab infallibili connexione effectus cum causa, i. e.
conversionis cum gratia convertente and vivificante: nam si gratia haec
vivifica semper attingit suum effectum, nec cuiquam offertur, nisi in quo
efficax sit, ad animam ejus sanandam and regenerandam; necesse est, ut
praevalentem quanda^ and irresistibilem operationem ei tribuamus; gratiam autem
istam, nunquam non finem suum assequi in omnibus quibus communicatur, patet ex
multis scripturae locis. Johan. 6. ver. 37. Quicquid dat mihi pater, ad me
venit. Ier. 31. v 33. Converte me, and ego convertar: unde colligitur,
cuicunque infunditur gratia homini convertendo apta, eum certo and
infallibiliter conversum iri; alioquin non posset sic Deum alloqui, Converte
me, i. e. fac quicquid tu adminiculo spiritus and gratiae tuae infusione facere
soles, et ego convertar; fortassis enim voluntas, cui integrum est gratia^
accipere and rejicere, eam irritam faciat. Ide^ patet ex Johan. 6. v. 45.
Quicunque a patre audivit et didicit, is veniet ad me, i. e. quicunque ita
audivit, and a Deo doctus est, simul gratiam spiritus vivificam imbiberit and
acceperit, is certo veniet ad me; unde liquet, gratiam homini convertendo
idoneam nunquam frustrari, sed modo quodam insuperabili effectum suum consequi,
ita ut ab humana voluntate nunqua^ eludi possit. Quod porro confirmatur a
natura gratiae, and a modo illo praepotenti quo Deus eam infundit in cor
humanum; nam si gratia sit effectus infinitae potentiae, sicut est; and eadem
virtute homo regeneratur, qua Christus suscitatus est a mortuis; tum Deus eam
humanae voluntati ingenerando, exerit omnipotentem illam virtutem, cui nulla
facultas creata obniti vel resistere potest.

3. Accedit and hoc Argumentum. Gratia Dei ita est causa efficiens
conversionis, ut nullam omnino causam sociam and coordinatam secum admittat,
etiamsi causam sibi subordinatam (scil. humanam voluntatem) adjunctam habeat.
At vero si voluntas quando excitatur a gratia assistentiae, ut appellant,
possit ei resistere, potest etiam eidem assistere; si illi obniti, potest etiam
cum eadem eniti ad eundem effectum producendum; denique si eam irritam facere,
tum eam efficacem reddere: ideoque potest esse causa coordinata cum gratia Dei,
in primo actu suae conversionis eliciendo. Deum autem suo solius and unius
opere, exclusis omnibus causi^ coordinatis, homines regenerare vel convertere,
adeo liquido constat, ut probatione non egeat: nam passim habetur in
Scripturis, Deus convert^t, and Deus dat resipiscentiam, and Deus circumcidit,
auferens cor lapideum, and substituens carneum in ejus locum. Denique Deus
regenerat, and sua virtute resuscitat a morte peccati (omitto vim
similitudinis, sicut nemo ad sui resurrectionem, and ad sui generationem
confer quicquam potest: sic neque ad regenerationem and resurrectionem
spiritualem) Deus, inquam, haec omnia praestat; sed ei soli tribui non possent
si haberet causam ita secum cooperantem, ut si illa nolit, nullus hujusmodi
consecutus sit effectus. Ad haec verissimum est illud, quod dicitur a
Scholasticis; Deus est causa totius entis i. e. etiamsi peccati (quod non est
ens, sed defectus entitatis facultati, vel actui debitae inesse) causa non sit
efficiens Deus, sed deficiens voluntas; tamen omnis boni operis, (in quo
genere, prima conversio est praecipuum) si plenissimum sit entitatis; vel si
totum sit ens, sicut est; hujusmodi (inquam) operis totius Deum esse causam,
necesse est. Deus enim solus est causa totius entis, ubicunque reperitur; etiam
ipsius peccati, in quantu^ ens est, Deum esse causam, omnes Theologi agnoscunt.
Quamobrem e^si voluntas sit causa efficiens conversionis secundaria and
subordinata, unde hortantur nos scripturae, nosmet convertere, corda nostra
circumcidere, and sic deinc^ps; tanquam causa tamen coordinata vivificae
gratiae Dei resistere, eamque in vanu^ accipere, (ut loquitur Arm.) nullo modo
potest. Addo, etiamsi Deus socium admitteret in hoc opere, tamen voluntatem,
quae est prorsus depravata and mortua in peccatis, non posse magis cum gratia
excitante and pulsante cooperari, quam cadaver fricacionibus praeparatum and
dispositum, potest se ipsum resuscitare, actu^que vitales ex se exerere. Sed ut
hanc rationem finiam, supponatur, posse voluntatem una cum Dei gratia
cooperari, vel non cooperari, pro innata liberate, quantu^ tamen, stante hac
sententia, derogatum erit de Dei gloria, and homini arrogatum, plusquam par
est? Merito gloriari potest, suum velle tantu^ contulisse ad regenerationem, ut
si noluisset, nunquam sequutura fuisset. Sicut enim is, qui commonefactus ab
alio, dat eleemosynam, is illud opus bonu^ plus sibi refert acceptu^, quam
suadenti and excitanti: sic is, cujus voluntas tantum pulsata and commonefacta
a gratia assistentae, se ad Deum convertit, is suam conversionem plus (vel
aequaliter saltem) sibi tribuit, quam gratiae divinae, quae nunquam id effectum
datura fuisset, nisi ipse ei consensisset, ejusque suasionem ratam fecisset;
cum in ejus potestate esset, eam irritam reddidisse.

4. Quarta ratio inde sumitur, quoth decretu^ electionis (quo Deus secu^
statuerat, quosdam selectos ex massa communi servari) absolutum sit; suum ergo
effectu^ necessario and infallibiliter consequitur. Decretu^ electionis esse
absolutum, ita ut Deo eligenti nihil obversetur in electis praevisum, sed omnes
conditiones ad salutem requisitas, in eis ipse operari absolute decreverit,
adeo clare patet ex multis scripturae locis, ut vix probatione egeat. Nam si
Non nos Deum eligimus, sed ille nosmet, John 15. si ideo electi, u^ essemus
sancti, non ideo sancti ut eligeremur; si Iacobum eligerit potius quam Esavum,
cum utrique condition omnin^ essent pares and aequales, ad Romans 9, si vocatio
efficax and fides justificans sint fructus vel effectus praedestinationis, non
conditiones praecedaneae, ad Romans 8. denique si sola and unica ratio decreti
sit merum Dei beneplacitum; (Quorum vult miseretur, and quos vult obdurat) tum
necesse est, Deum absolute decrevisse quosdam servare, and in eum finem
gratiam, sanctitatem and fide^ ijs impertire. Quod vero Deus ex his concessis,
convertat omnes electos modo ab ijs irresistibili, vel hinc liquet, quod si
illi resistere possint gratiae ijs convertendis aptae and idoneae, ad hunc
finem communicatae ut converterentur: tum eludi possit a creatura absolutum hoc
and peremptorium Dei decretum, quoth existimare fas non est. Nec est, ut nunc
obijciant pari ratione, and eos quos Deus reprobaverit, irresistibi^iter
peccare. Negamus enim rationem utriusque eandem esse: nam etiamsi Fides sit
effectus praedestinationis, tame^ infidelita^ non est effectus proprie dictus
reprobationis; cum fides requirat causam efficientem per se, quae vere and
proprie influit in suum effectum: ad infidelitatem autem non requiritur causa
efficien^, sed deficiens (quippe quae sequitur ad merum defectum and absentiam
causae illius a qua fides efficeretur.) Sicut ad illumniandum aerem requiritur
Sol vel alia causa efficiens, influens in illum effectum; sed ad obtenebrandum,
absentia Solis sufficiat: pari ratione, etiamsi peccata reproborum sequuntur
etiam infallibiliter, ex determinato Dei consilio qui eorum eventum decrevit,
tamen conversio and fides sequuntur absolutum Dei decretum, modo multum
dissimili: Peccata enim sequuntur infallibiliter quidem, necessitate tantum
consequentiae, id est, Deo non omnino causante vel efficiente, sed tantum
permittente: fides vero and bona opera, eitam necessitate consequentis: ut pote
quorum deus propriissime author dici debet, secundum omnes Theologos. Nemo enim
unquam dixerit homines credere, regenerari, ad Deum converti, bona opera
praestare, deo tantum permittente, sed etiam causante et operante. Si vero hoc
nobis concessum fuerit (sicut necesse est ut concedatur) fidem and conversionem
sequi absolutum Dei decretum necessitate consequentis, i. e. necessitate
efficiente and cooperante, non video quomodo negari possit, came modo quodam
irresi^tibili in nobis fieri; cum enim aliquod agens ita agat in patiens, ut
necessario vincat, is proprie dicitur agere irresistibiliter: sic Deus, si ita
convertat peccatorem ut is necessario convertatur necessitate consequentis, tum
eum convertit irresistibiliter, i. e. modo cui patiens cedere necesse est. Vnde
miror, eos qui negant electionem ex fide praevisa pendentem, defendere tamen
conversionem fieri modo resistibili, ut etiam frustrari possit.

5. Quinta and ultima ratio haec sit. Si conversio fiat modo illo resistibili,
sicut ab ijs describitur qui Arm. sequuntur; tum electio divina non potest esse
certa, secundum ipsorum principia; utpote quae pendeat a mutabili hominis
arbitrio, quod (ut describitur ab Arminio) ausim dicere, a Deo ip^o praevideri
non posse. Supponatur enim (quod illi substituunt fundamentum illius
praevisionis) Deum perfect praevidere omnes modos, quibus voluntas vel
deordinari vel ad bonum inclinari possit. Supponatur etiam Deum praecognoscere
omnia objecta vel circumstantias, quae possunt voluntati illo modo offeri vel
exhiberi. Denique supponamus etiam, Deum exploratum habere, quomodo unumquodque
objectum vel circumstantia apta sit movere voluntatem, eamque huc vel illuc
suadendo impellere; tamen fi haec sit conditio voluntatis, ut positis
quibuscunque objectis, etiam pofita quac^nque aptitudine in his objectis vel
circumstantijs ad inclinandam voluntatem huc vel illuc; illa tamen pro
intrinseca liberate possit agere vel non agere: Non video, quomodo Deus
praevidere possit, quid voluntas certo and infallibiliter sit operatura, i. e.
utrum se convertet ad Deum, necne: non quod Deus ex aliqua^ impotentia non
possit expiscari quid voluntas conatura sit, sed quia id non est simpliciter
scibile; nam Non potest esse major certitud^ in cognitione quam in objecto;
unde sic argume^tor. Si certum sit voluntatem gratiae oblatae assensuram esse,
tum ^alsu^ est dictu, volunt^^m positis omnibus Dei actionibus, posse se
convertere vel non convertere. Contra, si incertum sit, utrum voluntas huic
gratiae r^sist^t, necne; tum ea, quam de illa habet Deus, praescientia certa
esse nequit; nam scibile est mensura scienti^: ergo, scientiam ^sse veram, and
tamen plus esse certitudinis in cognitione quam in re cognita, ^mplicat
contradictionem; sicut implicatur contradictio, si quis dixerit, mensuratum
esse majus vel minus mensura, tamen eidem aequale esse. Ad haec etiamsi verum
sit, Deum cognoscere omnes modos, secundum quos voluntas been vel male
inclinari potest; tamen si voluntas sit omnimodo indeterminata, admittens
nullum determinans, sive intrinsecum, sive extrinsecum, sive creatum, sive
increatum, ut illi defendunt, implicat contradictionem, ut ab ipso Deo
definiatur aliquis certus modus, quo illam deordinari vel recte ordinari
contigerit. Ex his omnibus colligitur, si gratia convertens moveat voluntatem
modo ab illa resistibili, non posse Deum infallibiliter praesc^re qui credituri
^int, qui non; unde ex consequenti, omni^ e medio tol^^retur electio. Ergo,
reliquum est,

Gratiam convertentem m^do irresistibili tum a Deo communicari, tum a nobi^
accipi.

Supersunt plures aliae rations, sed and objectiones, quas recitare and
refellere institui: sed satius mihi ^rit filum orationis imtempestive
abrumpere, quam injurium esse tum in auditores, tum in doctissimos opponentes.

FINIS^
Reader, these following are the most material s^ips escaped the Press, which
thou may do well to correct with thy pen before thou read the book.

In answer to Master Goodwin^ Letter.
Page 2. for discourage, read encourag^. p. 7. for (...) r. (...) p. 25. (...)
declared r. decr^^d.

In the Book.
Page 14. line. 27. for i^ read of. p. 17. l. 14. for, And why (...). At least
why. p. 20. l. 21. for Hipol^mis^ r. Hipolenuse. l. 21. r. Squares. p. 24. l.
7. for None r. Min^. p. 40. l. 20. for closely (...). loo^^ly. p 47. l. last
but on^, for Assertion r. A^^rtour. p. 50. l. 35 for Praesident r. Present. p.
57. l 25. for lost r. last. p. 71. l. 2. for wills r. wits. l. ^0. for to r. so
the. p. ^3. for fuller, r. full. p. 96. l. 11. for many r. Man. (...). 117. for
addition r. addiction. p. 135. l. the last for Object r. Subject. p. 143. l 16.
for as knowledge r. as to knowledge.


