Some stop to the GANGRENE OF ARMINIANISM, Lately promoted by M. John Goodwin'
in his Book entitled, Redemption Redeemed. OR, The Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation IN SIX SERMONS Opened and cleared from the old Pelagian and late
Arminian Errors.

By RICHARD RESBURIE, Minister of the Gospel in Oundle in Northamptonshire.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the King's Head in the OLD-BAYLY. 1651.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THou have here a small piece presented to thy view, which has above these
three years lain concealed with the Author, as thou may perceive by the
Imprimatur; neither had it yet looked abroad, had not those main Truths of God
in it asserted concerning his Electing and Redeeming Grace, whereon especially
the throne of his glory is raised, wherein is the peculiar treasure of his
Saints, been of late by the daring hand of that unhappy man M. John Goodwin, in
his wretched Treatise by him called, (but miscalled) Redemption Redeemed, been
so highly assaulted. In the first place my hearty Prayer is, The Lord rebuke
him; and if that peculiar grace which for the present he so seriously
despises, and so boldly bids defiance to, shall yet magnify it self in
saving him, though by fire, yet let the zeal of the Lord for his own most
precious truth burn his work, for it is stubble: Nay, when ever that grace
shall visit him indeed, with the discovery of the truth, as it is in Jesus, his
own hands will be forward to pull down what he has built. In the second place
my hopes are, and indeed my confident expectation, that the Spirit of the Lord
shall send forth some faithful assertors of his Truth, not only to encounter
him, but to confound his Doctrine, and for the good of his Elect ones in this
Nation, such of them as through weakness of judgment, and unskilfulness in the
mystery of Christ, are liable to be seduced by such a Spirit of Error, (only
the foundation of God stands sure,) to strike his weapons out of his hand, as
they have been already struck out of the hands or his great Masters Arminius
and Corvinus, and the rest of that mischievous faculty: Neither has he, for
ought I can (and without partiality) discern, at all repaired their loss,
only concealing it from vulgar eyes, he treads with confidence in their beaten
steps, and that nothing may want to set it off bravely, challenges an whole
University to remove him. (Doubtless such modesty and ingenuity, must needs be
the character of the Spirit of Truth in him:) In the mean time till a further
Antidote shall be prepared by a more skillful hand, I have adventured to
administer this which lay by me, if the Lord may please to bless it for some
check to that spreading poison. And this let me say, though it be no Answer
directed (...) to his Book, for it was composed long before his discourse saw
the light, yet does it mainly insist upon the foundation of all, viz. the
Decrees of God, endeavoring to clear according to the Scripture, (the only
key of this Mystery,) the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, which being
once well settled, his errors about the following Doctrines, that of Redemption,
the perseverance of the Saints, etc. are smitten at the root; withal in the
prosecution of those forenamed Decrees, the other Doctrines controverted fall
in to be discoursed; neither have I declined the maine Objections which by the
Arminian Family are wont to be made about these Doctrines; so that the
substance of the whole Controversy is therein handled: But the best account I
can give hereof, is briefly to set down the order of the Treatise, which is as
follows.

In the first and second Sermon is handled the Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation jointly, and this in opening the ninth Chapter to the Romans, from
Verse. 1. to 24. wherein the Absolute Decree is maintained. In the third Sermon
the Doctrine of Election apart, and therein Absolute Election further asserted.
In the fourth Sermon the Doctrine of Reprobation apart, and therein Absolute
Reprobation proved. In the fifth Sermon those Texts of Scripture cleared which
are wont mainely to be objected against the Doctrines in this Discourse
maintained, and therein the Arminian Doctrines, 1. About the antecedent and
consequent Will: 2. About the improvement of naturalls, for the obtainment of
spiritualls, examined. In the sixth and last Sermon three other Objections are
answered; 1. That which charge the former Doctrine as making God the Author
of sin. 2. That which charge the same Doctrine as rendering God cruel, or
at least not so merciful as the Scripture represents him. 3. That which
charge it with despoiling man of the liberty of his Will, and indeed here is
the Diana. In these Objections are the knots; I have therefore singled them
out, not that I have such an overweening opinion of my self, as to think my
self amongst the ablest to unite them, but indeed very far below many of my
brethren. But, 1. It is not fair dealing with a Controversy to pass by the
main Objections: 2. I hope what is here said in answer to them may not be
without fruit, for the further establishment of some in the Truth. 3. I was
willing hereby to give occasion to some one or other Scribe in this our Israel
more thoroughly instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, to bring out of his
treasure things new and old, for setting these precious Truths of God more
fair in the eyes of his people: And here I now thank Mr. Goodwin, whose
darkness, I doubt not, will occasion more light, his boldness (confident I
am) will excite modesty; I will not say, what an edge his sometimes imperial
dictates, instead of Arguments, (as is the Arminian mode) sometimes his
monstrous Conclusions, sometimes his wrested Quotations, sometimes his uncouth
Philosophy, sometimes his consequentiall Blasphemy, will put upon the spirits
of some whom the Lord shall honor to rescue his Truth out of his hands, only
I am persuaded the zeal of the Lord will do it: Which, and a fruitful
blessing thereupon, shall be the earnest Prayer of

(Reader) Thy Servant in and for the Truth, Richard Resbury.

THE FIRST SERMON.
Romans 11 Chap. verse 7. But the Election has obtained it, and the rest were
blinded, or hardened.


THe Apostle is here taking up again the same discourse which in the ninth
Chapter he had begun, and hitherto continued; now winding up all toward a
conclusion.

For our more distinct understanding of it, we must first observe the occasion,
then the discourse it self.

The occasion; an objection which might arise from the Jews refusal of the
Gospel, which the Apostle does so prevent and answer, as in his answer he does
clearly open the great mystery of eternal Predestination.

The Objection arises thus; The Apostle having formerly preached the truth of
the Gospel, in that maine Article of justification by faith alone without the
works of the Law: Hence this Objection; if that be truth, and the only of
life; how comes it to pass that the Jews Gods covenanted Israel generally
refuse it? sticking to the Law for righteousness to life: Hence it will follow
that God has made void his Covenant settled upon Abraham for himself, and his
seed, in that he has now cast off his people; the seed of Abraham, this in the
first verse (I say then has God cast away his people?) But then they assume,
but God has not made void his Covenant; therefore they conclude against the
truth of the Gospel, that justification is not by faith, as the Apostle taught.

For answer; The Apostle retaining the truth of the Gospel; first disclaimes,
then refutes the objection.

First he disclaimes it, (God forbid) God makes good his Covenant to the
utmost. Secondly, He refutes it. 1. By special instance of himself, For I
also am an Israelite etc. verse. 1. this concludes God has not cast away all
his people; but what if some? Therefore in the second place, he answers by
distinction, vindicating the faithfulness of God, that not one of his
Covenanted ones has he cast away: the sum of his answer here is this; of the
people of God, so by outward call, and within the outward administration of the
Covenant; some he foreknew, others he did not foreknow; these whom he foreknew,
are his people indeed, to whom not only the outward administration, but the
spiritual and eternal blessings of the Covenant do belong; these he has not
cast off, the rest he has; yet herein his faithfulness not liable to
exception, for as much as they never were truly his Covenanted ones, only
pretenders to, and seemingly in the Covenant. This is the summary meaning of
those words, verse. 2. God has not cast away his people which he foreknew: (By
the way observe, if any of Gods covenanted ones should fall short of eternal
life, making defection from the truth; the Apostle leaves God under that guilt
which the objection here charge him with (viz) that he breaks Covenant, and
casts away his people contrary to the undertaking of his Covenant;) but this by
the way against that horrid Tenent of the Saints final apostasy.

The Apostle having thus answered by distinction, he goes on; first confirming,
then concluding his answer; in the conclusion likewise explaining what he meant
by this foreknowledge of God concerning his people.

For confirmation that God has not cast off his people whom he foreknew, he
instanceth the Churches state in Elijah's time, from the 2d. to the 5th. verse.
The sum is this, though the whole Nation in general fell off from God to
abominable Idols, and no where true worshippers appeared, yet then had God his
reserved number, cleaving to the truth, and obtaining life. The conclusion is
verse. the 5th. by application of the former instance; the sum this: though at
this present time the Nation of the Jews generally oppose the Gospel, and
bring damnation upon themselves; yet there is a remnant according to the
Election of grace who embrace the Gospel, and find life; where together with
the conclusion, we have his interpretation, the people whom God fore-knew are
they whom he elected, and that of mere grace and peculiar favor: And then
verse. the 6th. having descanted upon this grace, that it shuts out works.
(Works then are as inconsistent with the grace of Election, as with the grace
of justification, with that free favor whereby God chooses unto life before
all time, as with that whereby in time he puts into the state of life, and
therefore works foreseen have no more to do in Election, (it being the only
way wherein they in time to be performed, can be represented to that degree
which prevents all time, then works done, have to do in justification) but to
return; the Apostle having inferred, that because Election is of grace, it must
therefore shut out works; and this with special aim at the error of the
reprobate Jews, who stood so much upon works: he does in the 7th verse. resume
the conclusion, differencing first betwixt Israel in common, and the Elect of
of Israel: the Election here being the same with the remnant according to
Election, verse. 5. Then betwixt the Elect and the rest from the Elect, by
Israel in the former part of the verse understanding the rest of Israel from the
Elect in the latter part, who were blinded, or rather hardened, for so the same
The verb derived rather from (...) Callus then from (...) Caecus: and what if
it signify (when blindness) most properly that kind of blindness which is by
thick filmes and hard scales over the eye?
word (...) is otherwhere usually rendered, John 12.40. where it is differenced
from this signification of blinding, and Mark 6.52. it having in it the
signification of a brawny hardness; and so it answers more expressly to the
Apostles Doctrine, otherwhere, as Romans 9.18.

The way thus cleared, we have two things to observe in the words.

1. The difference betwixt man and man founded in the breast of God; some are
Elect, others the rest from the Elect, even amongst his own people. So by
outward call; some his people whom he fore-knew with the knowledge of peculiar
love; others his people whom he did not foreknow.

2. Then different condition for eternal life, who are thus differenced in the
breast of God; the Elect shall certainly have life: (The Election has obtained
it) the rest are hardened unto death. (And the rest were hardened) we shall
conclude both in this following Doctrine.

There is this difference between man and man founded in the breast of God;

Before we proceed to confirm the Doctrine, it will be necessary to premise some
cautions.

1. In handling this Doctrine, we shall be cast upon the deep things of God,
matters of high adoration, even to amazement, for it is a great Mystery we have
in hand: so the Apostle concludes admiring and adoring, Romans 11 33. and
therefore here we must bespeak all sobriety of spirit, with fear and trembling;
and indeed there it behooves us to bespeak it, where it is to be had, even at
the throne of grace by faithful prayer.

2. We shall meet with many things to startle humane reason, against which it
will cavil endlesly. So Romans 9 14. God is charged with unrighteousness, and in
verse. 19. with tyranny by man's corrupt reason: Here therefore we must resolve
setting our own wisdom apart, to follow step by step the Clue of the Word,
which alone is able to guide us into this Maze; so to hear (what God speaks)
though never so contrary to our apprehensions (and affections too) as to stop
all curious and unwarranted enquiries; and where he makes an end of speaking,
there must we make an end of enquiring, remembering the incomprehensible
greatness of God, and his absolute dominion over us: so the Apostle, Romans 9.20.

3. Many things we are like to meet with, which many are likely most
dangerously to abuse; some to licenciousness, others to insolent murmurings
against the Lord, and indeed according to this difference betwixt man and man
held forth in this Doctrine: this Doctrine it self in the prosecution of it, is
like to have a different work, opening the eyes of some, striking others
blinder then they were; softning some, hardening others. But first, forasmuch as
God has in his Word revealed it, we may and must enquire into it, only stint
our enquiries by the Word.

2. This Mystery truly conceived is of most excellent use; the spring of true
comfort, the foundation of true humility, that which gives light to other
Mysteries of the Gospel, makes very much for clearing the free and peculiar
grace of God, which is indeed the life of the Gospel; is the Maul to beat in
pieces, the Rock to split many the most dangerous Errors against the truth of
the Gospel, and therefore so much in all ages opposed by the Devil and his
Agents.

3. There is the same different fruit of all the truths of God, when they are
preached; they are to some the favor of life to life, to others, of death to
death; yet are we the Ministers of the Word in preaching of them, unto God a
sweet savor in Christ, both in them that are saved, and in them that perish.

4. The children of God must not therefore be denied any part of their food,
because the children of the wicked one will poison themselves with it; much
less must they be denied their chiefest food.

These things thus premised, we return to the Doctrine, the confirmation whereof
depends upon the description; first of Election, then of Reprobation, as out of
the Scriptures they are to be gathered, and by the Scriptures to be opened; But
forasmuch as in the 9th. to the Romans this Mystery is most fully spoken to, both
for Election and Reprobation, from the first to the 24 verse. and what the
Apostle here speaks in the 11 Chapter, has dependence upon what he had
disputed in the 9th. Chapter, It therefore seems very expedient, briefly to
open the Scripture in the first place; then to descend more particularly to the
Doctrine of Election and Reprobation apart, confirming each particular as we go
along out of the 9th. to the Romans first opened, adding as occasion shall be
other Scripture Testimonies: Now for this Chapter, The Apostle prevents and
answers the Objection formerly mentioned, as in the 11. Chap. resumed, which
was made against the truth of the Gospel from the Jews rejection of it: in the
first 23 verses, arising in his answer to this great Mystery, which he first
asserts, and then cleares all the way by propounding and refelling Objections
against it. In the five first verses, and the former part of the sixth, we have
the Objection not in terms propounded, but in the answer insinuated, the sum of
them being this; Though the Jews generally refusing the Gospel, fall short of
eternal life, and are indeed accursed from Christ; yet the word of the
Covenant made betwixt God and them, with their Fathers, stands firm, and God
fulfills his Covenant to the utmost; whence it is manifest what the Objection
is, to which this answer is given, the same with that which was formerly
mentioned, (viz.) If that be the Gospel which the Jews refuse, and by refusing
miss eternal life, then is the Covenant of God of none effect; in which
objection, there is first a supposition of the Jews rejection. 2. An inference
thereupon of Gods unfaithfulness.

The Apostle grants the supposition, denies the inference; grants the
supposition in the five first verses, not expressly affirming the rejection of
the Jews, but rather taking it for granted, expresses his mavelous grief for
it, in the three first verses; where observe the Apostle in the third verse,
covertly shows what is the state of that people, in wishing himself accursed
from Christ for their sakes; it is as much, as if he had wished himself in
their stead, so they might thereby have become Heirs of blessing; It is
impossible that man only should be man's Redeemer, yet so high a strain of love
does the Apostle here run, that for the salvation of the Jews he would undergo
that wrath, which for man, lay upon man's Redeemer, a love so like to the
Mediators love was in that breast, as sometimes the like in Moses toward the
same people; Moses their sometimes Typical Mediator: the Apostle having thus
express his griefs, shows the special reasons of it, partly his interest in
them, verse. the third; partly their interest in God, in those many precious
privileges they received peculiarly from God, verse. the 4th. and 5th. And
having thus granted the supposition, he denies the inference, verse. the 6th.
Not as though the word of God had taken none effect; this word is the word of
the Covenant, I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, Genesis 7.7. as appears
by the following discourse: the meaning then is, the Covenant of God remains
firm, notwithstanding the general apostasy of the Jews, which the Apostle
proves by a threefold instance, all tending to this, to limit the Covenant to
the true Heirs of it; the first instance in the posterity of Jacob, the common
Father of the Jews; All are not Israel that are of Israel; Israel in the first
place signifies Jacobs Genuine posterity, according to the purport of the
Covenant. In the second place, it signifies Jacob himself, the meaning then is;
that for Jacobs posterity, all are not faederally his children, that are his
children naturally; they are not all his children as he is Israel (the name of
his prevailing with God for the blessing) that are his children according to
the flesh; But for light to this and the following instances; let us observe
how a people may be said to be in covenant with God in a double sense,
according to one of which, all Jacobs posterity generally were in Covenant; but
according to the other, only the remnant according to Election: a people
therefore may be in Covenant with God. 1. According to the outward and common
administration of it; so all Jacobs posterity was in Covenant, separate by
outward call, and sealed up by Circumcision to the Lord. 2. According to the
special and primary intention of it, which is eternal life, and all blessings
effectual thereunto; and so not all the posterity of Jacob was in Covenant:
The former may fall short of life notwithstanding that Covenant Interest, as
not fulfilling the condition of the Covenant; the latter cannot; the covenant
for them undertaking the condition, and therefore the faithfulness of God is
engaged not only to give them life upon believing, but to give them to believe
unto life.

The second instance is in the posterity of Abraham, who was the head of the
Covenant, Genesis 12.3. Galat. 3.8.
in whom all the families of the earth should be blessed; here the Apostle
again distinguishes betwixt the natural, and Faederall offspring, according
to that second sense of Covenant Interest, newly laid down, Neither because
they are the seed of Abraham, (by natural descent) are they all children,
according to the Covenant, which he proves by Scripture testimony, settling the
Covenant upon Isaac and his posterity, excluding Ishmael, Christ with all
believers.
But in Isaac shall thy seed be called; then verse 8. makes an exposition of
that Text of Scripture, where the children of the flesh are the same with the
seed by natural descent, and the seed the same with the children of the
promise or Covenant, viz. they in whom the Covenant shall effectually be made
good, and both these the same with the children of God. Thirdly, he confirms
his Exposition, verse 9. quoting Genesis 18.10. the sum of his confirmation
comes to this; That as Isaac was borne not by the strength of Nature, (for
Abraham's loins and Sarahs womb were now dead) but by virtue of the Promise,
so it is with all the faederall offspring of Abraham, not in that they are from
him by natural descent, and therefore not all that naturally descend from him,
but in that they are his offspring, according to the Promise, (and only to
some the Promise belongs) are they the blessed seed: The Observations.

1. The maine intention of Abraham's Covenant is eternal life.

2. They who are the proper subjects and true heirs of this Covenant, do
effectually obtainlife.

3. It is in the Tenure of this Covenant, not only to give life upon condition,
but withal effectually to fulfill that condition.

4. Though the greatest part of those that are under the outward administration
of the Covenant fall short of life, yet does the faithfulness of God remain
inviolable, forasmuch as all the true subjects and proper heirs of the
Covenant do certainly obtain life.

These are all clear from the Objection, that if the Jews fell from the state
of life, the Covenant was void, and the answer, preserving the firmness of the
Covenant, in that the proper heirs of it have life.

The third instance follows in Isaac's family, in the 10, 11, 12, and 13.
verses, taken out of that History, Genesis 25. v. 23. where first the Apostle
cleares it of those exceptions which might be made against the former
instance, verse. 10. Secondly, he lays down the same difference tending to the
same purpose betwixt Jacob and Esau the sons of Isaac, that he had formerly
laid down betwixt Isaac and Ishmael the sons of Abraham, v. 12. and 13.
Thirdly, the ground of this difference, verse. 11. where he opens the great
Mystery of predestination.

1. For exceptions against the former instance, these two might be made: First,
Isaac was borne of the freewoman, Ishmael of the bondwoman. Secondly, after
Ishmael was borne, was the promise of the blessed seed made; and therefore no
wonder if the Covenant was settled in Isaacs posterity only; but it is otherwise
in Jacobs posterity, the common Father of the Israelites; these exceptions are
prevented, verse. the 10th. Jacob and Esau were both by one Father, and one
Mother, at one birth; yet as the word of promise unto Sarah, settled it upon
Isaac and his posterity, so the word of the Oracle to Rebecca upon Jacob and
his.

2. The difference is laid down, verse. 12. where it is manifest from the
question in hand. 1. That this difference is not such as is common to Jacob,
with all his posterity on the one hand, and Esau with all his on the other
hand, because it is brought to prove the difference, that has place in the
posterity of Jacob himself; (All are not Israel that are of Israel)

2. That it is not so much a civil as a spiritual difference; because that
which concludes Jacob in the saving Covenant, and with him that seed of his;
that not only is of Israel, but is Israel; excludes Esau and his posterity
that Covenant, it being the maine instance Vindicating the faithfulness of God
in making good that Covenant, notwithstanding the Jews generally fell from the
state of life, in as much as the remnant amongst them obtains life: this
difference is further both confirmed and cleared, that it is spiritual, (the
servitude of Esau importing his exclusion from that Covenant, he in this
answering Ishmael in the former instance) verse. 13. their different condition
proceeding from the Law of God to Jacob, and his hatred of Esau; which love and
hatred applied to the question in hand, is manifest to be eternal love and
hatred, in order to eternal life and death.

The Apostle singularly taught of God, sees more in this hatred of God toward
Esau, then the desolation of his earthly inheritance expressed by the Prophet, 1
Mal. 3. Nay in that desolation as an outward pledge he reads the Lords eternal
hatred, which is yet further manifest by the ground of this difference, which
now comes to be considered.

3. The ground of this difference verse. 11. where the Apostle first denies the
ground of this difference to be in their works, which he confirms by
observation of the time, when the testimony of their different condition was
given; they being yet unborn etc.

2. He so denies it to their works, as he ascribes it unto God; Not of their
works, but of him, that is of God; Therefore so denied of their works, as
likewise of themselves: the original and supreme ground of their difference
not being of themselves but of God.

3. It is so of God, as that it is of his purpose of Election and Reprobation;
For the purpose of Election it is here laid down; the purpose according to
Election, being as much as the purpose of Election, or that purpose whereby God
Elects; for the purpose of Reprobation, it is here diverse ways insinuated.

1. In the specifying of this purpose of Election, which because it is a
purpose of choice in regard of Jacob, must therefore be accompanied with a
purpose of refusal in regard of Esau, which purpose of refusal, is the
purpose of Reprobation.

2. In the removal of works as the ground of their difference, as well evil
works denied the supreme ground of Esau's servitude, as good of Jacobs
Dominion, of Esau's hatred, as of Jacobs love.

Therefore another ground must be found for Esau's condition, as well as for
Jacobs, which can be no other then what is hinted concerning Esau, in that
which is expressed concerning Jacob.

3. The different state and condition of the parties here instanced; if only
the purpose of Election as it is here expressed, had been understood, well might
beloved Jacob as the object of it be mentioned; but what place for hated --
Esau, in reference to Election? That the Apostle then gives this double and
contrary instance, removes what might be imagined grounds in themselves from
both; (from Esau especially, that which alone might be conceived a ground in
him) ascribes the condition of the one expressly to Gods purpose as the
original ground; it must needs be that the contrary purpose of God, is
likewise the original ground of the others condition; hitherto, that it is not
of works, that it is of God; that it is so of God, as of his purpose of
Election and Reprobation: Now follows, 4. It is so of the purpose of Election
(on Jacobs part) as that it may (...)
abide. And therefore 5ly. So of God according to the purpose of Election, as
of him that calls; in our Call we receive faith, and that renewing work of
the spirit, whereby we are brought into the state of life; it is then so of God
according to the purpose of Election, as of him that by virtue of that purpose
gives faith, and brings into the state of life, by the renewing of the holy
Ghost; and thus his Election remains firm for the issue of it, eternal life
to the Elect, as borrowing nothing, depending on nothing in man, but
undertaking and giving all: hence it is manifest, when the Apostle shuts out
works, he shuts out as well works foreseen as done, because expressly for
Election; so denies it to be of works, as that it shall be of God; but if of
works foreseen, it was of our selves, so of God as of his purpose, which (we
shall see by and by) cannot be built upon any thing but himself; so of his
purpose as that it may abide without change, and therefore must have a surer
foundation then works foreseen, or indeed any thing foreseen in man: and
therefore so of God according to his purpose, as of him that calls; therefore
shuts out not works only, but faith too; faith not only acted but foreseen.
1. It is not thus, not of works, but of him that believeeth; but not of works,
but of God. 2. Nor thus; not of works, but of him that justifies; but thus,
not of works, but of him that calls; justification supposes faith, in our
call we receive faith; it is then of God according to the purpose of Election,
not as of him that fore-sees either works or faith, but as of him that gives
faith; and therefore cannot foresee it antecedently to his purpose, but in his
purpose of giving it: And now that the fore-light of evil works, or of any
thing in man, is not the first ground of his perishing condition; but in Esau's
case evil works foreseen have no more to do, then wrought, as to the point in
hand we shall make it appear in these two Conclusions.

1. That the different purpose of God electing some, refusing others; in the
first ground of their different state, who embracing the truth are saved, and
who rejecting the truth are damned.

2. That this purpose is not built, does not stand nor depend upon any thing in
man, but is wholly of it self.

These two Conclusions as they are clearly to be made good from the Apostles
discourse hitherto, so will the confirmation of them make good the thing in
hand.

For the first we have seen it in Jacob and Esau, and they are special
instances to conclude the general question about the Jews, the Nation
generally refusing the Gospel, and so perishing, the remnant embracing it, and
so obtaining life, as is clear by the Apostles discourse, which afterward he
enlarges to all mankind.

For the second, (setting aside that the Apostle has carried the purpose of
Election and Reprobation, in a parrallel strain) let these arguments conclude
it.

1. Whatsoever is done, God either does it as the first worker, or permits it
to be done, as the supreme Ruler. It Is clear, if God will neither have an hand
in doing it, nor suffer it to be done, it cannot be done; Enchrid. ad laurent.
c. 95.
Nothing is done without the will of the Almighty that it should be done, he
either suffering it to be done, or himself doing it; Augustine further,
whatsoever is permitted to be done, as the evil of sin, requires some
concourse of God, (In whom we live, and move, and have our being) for
production of that act, to which as by man done, sin cleaves inseparably;
otherwise second causes in producing their acts, should move independently upon
the first cause, and the Creature should Create.

Therefore only so far does God foresee before all time, what shall be in
time, as he sees his own will, either for the doing it, or permitting it to be
done, for affoording that concourse without which it cannot be done.

The will of God then before all time, that is, his decree or purpose for the
being of such or such a thing in time must be the ground of his foresight that
it shall be, and therefore in order of nature before it, and so his purpose
merely of himself: For still whatsoever can be imagined foreseen, as that
which shall be, to move his will, that it may be foreseen, as that which shall
be, must of necessity suppose his will that it shall be.

For further clearing this truth, (though indeed it is a truth that shines so
clearly in its own light, as well might forbid all further clearing) consider,
of things that are not; Some are only possible, and may be, (God can raise up
children to Abraham of the stones;) Some are future, and shall be, both known
to God: But how is this knowledge differenced? All things possible he knows in
his own power; all things future in his decree.

Secondly, if God foresee what shall be, in order of nature before his decree
that it shall be, otherwise then in his decree, then is he dispoiled of all
liberty, both in his decree, and for his decree. 1. In his decree; if he will
decree, he has his rule beforehand from the creature, what he fore-sees
antecedently to his decree shall be; therefore because it shall be, does he
foresee that it shall be, then has he no liberty left to decree otherwise,
but either his decree must be frustrate, or contradictions must be true; Such a
thing shall be, and therefore God has foreseen that it shall be; the same
thing shall not be, God has decreed that it shall not be: But for as much as
both these cannot be true, God must be content to stand under the most fatal
necessity that is imaginable; The sum of the Stoic fate was, Once he
commanded, he obeyes always.
Semel jussit, semper paret, here it is Nunquam jussit, semper paret; he must
obey what is prescribed by the creature, even there where subjection is fatal
bondage in the determination of his will, how unseasonably are the adversaries
of the truth wont to raise clamours against that necessity which man stands
under upon supposall of Gods decree? That second causes should by the first
cause be determined, so as upon supposition of the first causes
predetermination, to work only to that issue which is predetermined, (the same
conditional necessity being undeniable upon their own supposition of
foresight:) In the mean time for the manner of their workings, rational and
free agents left free in their working, the same decree that determines them to
one issue, determining them likewise to work freely to that issue; all this is
orderly and fair: The first cause herein having its due pre-eminence, the
second cause in due subjection, yet without all impeachment, but to lay the
first cause under the seconds foot, and that when in its weakest state; not in
being, but that which shall be, is to raze the everlasting foundations: Thus is
God dispoiled of liberty in his decree. Secondly, What liberty has he for it?
Such a thing shall be, is so foreseen of him before his decree; what place is
there now for his decree? in his decree he plays but an after-game, it will
be, whether he decree or no; how is this beseeming the Divine Wisdom to decree
that which is sure enough to be, before he determine any such thing? To what
end is such a decree?

Thirdly, by the different condition of men, according to Gods different
purpose of Election and Reprobation, is God finally and eternally glorified; if
then God has not determined merely of the Counsel of his own Will, and
according to his purpose within himself, their difference with the whole order
of it; he has not of himself determined his own state of eternal glory, but
it comes to pass occasionally from the creature, as he light upon it
peradventures, according to the uncertain working of the sickle creature, it
is so now, it might have been otherwise: Adam fell, so way was made for the
eternal manifestation of Gods revenging Justice, and sparing mercy in Christ,
he might have stood for ought that God determined, and so, for ought that he
determined, such a way of glorifying himself might not have been; so all the
great works, man's final state, Gods final glory, the giving of Christ, the
whole method of salvation by Christ, are occasional from the creature, not
originally from the Counsels of God, but as the creature hapt to put him upon
these things: But is there any thing more primely clear both in Scripture and
to true Reason, then that the first things in Gods aim in order to all his
works is his glory? Did he not make all things for himself? Are not all
things of him, from him, to him? Is not he the supreme great, and therefore all
things must be subservient to his glory? Is he not the supreme good, and
therefore lovely above all? therefore loves himself above all? therefore makes
and orders all things for his own glory? There is a natural obligation of
justice to himself whereby he cannot but set up his own glory, as the white to
which all his works shall be directed, that then being first in his eye, as
the end of all, and that way whereby he is unto all eternity glorified, being
pitched in his counsels, he must needs order and administer all things making
thereto, and therefore by virtue of his own glory decreed, he decrees the
whole Series from the first step to the last tending thereto. Hence then it is
manifest, that this purpose of his for the different state of man, it is merely
of it self, above all works good or evil, faith or unbelief, above the
foresight of all, comprehending these within it, appointing and ordering them;
which will yet be further clear by the Apostles discourse.

THE SECOND SERMON.
ROMANS 11.7. But the Election has obtained it, and the rest were hardened.

Ver. 14. to the 19. follows an Objection, with the Answer.


THe Objection, ver. 14. the Apostle knowing how endlesly the flesh will cavil
against this truth, lays down and prevents an Objection here, What shall we
say then, is there unrighteousness with God? This is the charge of man's
corrupt reasoning against God, arising from the Doctrine of Predestination.

The sum of the Objection is this: If God deal so unequally with them that in
themselves are equal, then is he unrighteous, but according to the Apostles
Doctrine so it is; for their works good or evil come not at all into account
with God as Motives to his Will one way or other for his decree; therefore he
is unrighteous.

For answer; 1. The Apostle detests the consequence of the proposition. Though
God deal so unequally (in regard of his decree) with those that in themselves
are equal, yet far be that blasphemy from any to charge him with
unrighteousness.

2. He Vindicates the righteousness of God: 1. In points of Election, verse.
15.16. Verse. 15. By that sovereign liberty which God has for willing, and
decreeing mercy to whom he pleases, merely because he pleases, for which he
quotes Exodus 33.19. whence verse. 16. he lays down a general conclusion; So
then it is not, etc. the meaning; it is not by any, either good desires in man
(it is not in him that wills) or good endeavors of man, (it is not in him
that runs) that God is prevented in his decree, but his decree is wholly of
it self; for mercy, because he will have mercy; (But of God that shows mercy.)

2. In point of reprobation, the Apostle shows the same Liberty of proceeding
merely according to the will of God in the instance of Pharaoh, for which he
quotes Exodus 9.16. and thence conclude a full and equal liberty in God, both
for Election and Reprobation.

1. For the instance of Pharaoh verse. 17. Two things are affirmed. 1. That God
raised him up, which comprehends his bringing into the world, his preservation,
his advancement to the Throne, his singling out to stand in opposition against
the Lord, his obfirmation in that wickedness of his -- 2. The end of it, that
God by powerful destroying such a wicked Tyrant, might glorify his great name.

2. Now that God made use thereof the same liberty appears: First by the
connexive particle (for) which relating to the former verses, where that
Liberty had been asserted insinuates here the like. 2. By the conclusion, verse.
18. which avoucheth the same liberty here as formerly in Election; and the
Apostle drawing this conclusion for that part of it which concerns Reprobation,
from the 17. verse. as appears by the illative particle (therefore) he gives us
to understand, that what is said of Gods raising up Pharaoh is so to be
conceived, as that therein that sovereign liberty whereby God proceeds merely
according to his will is imported.

Observations.
1. From the Objection; How hardly flesh and blood relisheth the true Doctrine
of Predestination, it will rather rise up to a peremptory and blasphemous
charge of unrighteousness against the Lord then yield to it. The pride of man
will not endure the true Doctrine of justification, neither the pride nor guilt
of man the truth of Predestination; hence in all ages is found so much
opposition, in St. Austins time by the Pelagians, after him by their
successors; since the time of Reformation, Stapleton, Bellarmine, and the whole
Nation of the Jesuits, with other perverse Heretics, as Castellio against
Calvin and Beza. Arminius against Perkins; and now the Heretics of our times,
who have made a compound of the former Errors against this truth.

From the Objection and the answer together.

1. That the Apostle laid down as well the Doctrine of Reprobation as of
Election, in the former verses; because this Objection thence arising takes in
both, and the answer Vindicates God in both.

2. That what was formerly taught by the Apostle in the instance of Jacob and
Esau, for the dependence of their different condition originally on the decree
of God, concerns not only themselves and the Jews, but all men, because here
are general conclusions laid down, verse. 16 18. and in Pharaoh an instance of
such as are out of the Church, so that all the world as well as they of the
visible Church, are differenced by Gods decree.

3. That neither works good or evil, faith or unbelief, so much as foreseen
prevented the decree of God, but were prevented by it; for if so, 1. There had
been no place for this objection, the Apostle in stating it, teaches us his
meaning in the 11th v. to shut out all respects in the Creature If God loved
Jacob upon faith or good works foreseen, hated Esau upon unbelief, or evil
works foreseen, here had been no place, no not so much as for corrupt reason to
question Gods righteousness; for then had he dealt unequally, not with those
who were equal, but unequal in his sight.

2. For the answer to the Objection, it Vindicates the Lord upon another
ground, his sovereign power of dealing with man herein merely according to his
will; how easily had the Objectors mouth been stopped by mentioning their
different qualifications foreseen, if that had been the truth?

4. Whatsoever the Scripture holds forth for the will of God, we are thence to
conclude it just, or (if it arise above the respects of justice in the usual
sense, which supposes an object of reward) at the least not unjust: So the
Apostle, because it is Gods will to have mercy on whom he will, and harden whom
he will; that is to ordain whom he will unto mercy, and whom he will unto wrath
hardening thereunto; this ordination of his arising above all good or evil, so
much as foreseen in the Creature, he therefore concludes it just; suppose we
can no more comprehend the righteousness of God in such away of his, then we
can the mystery of the Trinity; we must not therefore deny it to be his will,
because we cannot fathom the righteousness thereof, but because the Scripture
affirms it his will, we must conclude it righteous.

5. That not only comparative Predestination is above all different respects
in the creature, but single above all respects, whether in Election or
Reprobation,

Some grant that thus far it is clear in the Apostles discourse, that Jacob and
Esau were equal, as represented to the decree of God; and what difference was
betwixt them flowed originally from the decree, and therefore God in choosing
one, refusing the other proceeded merely according to his will, that if the
question be, why did he choose Jacob rather then Esau? or why did he refuse Esau
rather then Jacob? no other answer is to be given but merely his will: This for
comparative Election and Reprobation, but then for single; they think there is
in all men a necessary qualification one and the same; the consideration
whereof is in order of nature, before the decree either of Election or
Reprobation, and that is the corruption of nature over all men, all alike;
hence they make the object of Predestination man fallen, not comprehending
within it, the creation and the fall, but stating it below both.

Against this opinion, the three arguments formerly used to prove the purpose
of God to be wholly of it self, will conclude; we shall have further occasion
to discuss this more fully upon the next verses; for the present, let us see
how far what the Apostle has here argued makes against it, concluding rather
the decree of Predestination to arise above both the fall and the Creation, and
to have for it is object, man not as yet Created, in divine consideration.

1. From the Objection; there had been little reason for it, had fallen and
sinful man been the Object; For when all had deserved to perish, what color
of unrighteousness was there, that God should decree the saving of some in
mercy, leaving others to perish according to their desert?

2. From the answer; The Apostles answer is from Gods sovereign liberty of
disposing of man according to his Will: but had fallen man been the object, an
answer more satisfying the adversary, less liable to exception had been ready
at hand to this purpose; for as much as all men have deserved to dye, had God
so determined of all he had been just, that he ordaines some to life, it is his
mercy.

3. From the following discourse which clearly sets forth man as not yet
created to be the object, raising this decree of God above both the fall and
the creation; and being the continuance of the Apostles former discourse,
concludes the Apostles meaning the same, in the former discourse.

Verse 19. Why does he yet complain? who has resisted his will? The meaning,
by what right does God find fault with man, and punish him for his sin,
forasmuch as it is his will to harden him in sin? the former Objection charge
God with unrighteousness; this with tyranny. For answer.

The will of God is his Decreeing will. The will of God is his declaring will.
His decreeing will determines what shall be; his declaring will shows, 1. What
is man's duty. 2. What God accepts when it is performed; it is here the
decreeing will which no man can resist, his declaring will is so often
resisted, as sin is committed; and the strength of the objection is in this,
that man in resisting his declaring will, viz. what he commands, and in the
performance whereof he would be well pleased; does yet not resist his decreeing
will, so the Objection clearly formed is this; If God have decreed that man
shall sin and be hardened in his sins, and no man can resist this decree of God;
by what right can he punish man for his sin? For answer, the Apostle grants
what the objection alleges; denies what it would conclude, by pleading Gods
absolute sovereignty over man; and in his sovereignty, his liberty for
disposing of man, merely according to his will, his will no way taking rise
from any thing in man; and this by checking the insolency of man in thus
contesting with his Creator, forgetful of his Dominion over him, which by
comparison is illustrated verse. 20. and and this comparison specified, and
further cleared by instance of the Potter and his clay, ver. 21. 1 1 1 1 The
Potter, God. The Clay, Mankind. 2. 2. The Potters power over the Clay. Gods
Dominion over man. 3. 3. The Clay in the lump not yet formed into Vessels.
Mankind not as yet Created. 4. 4. Of the same lump. Of mankind equally
represented. 5. 5. One Vessel to honor, another made to dishonor. One man
created for eternal life, another for the day of evil.

Now let us see from this Objection, and the answer to it; whether man fallen,
or man not yet created, be the Object of Predestination? whether the sin of the
first man, and in him the corruption of all men be considered before the
decree? or whether the decree of God comprehend within it, the sin both of the
first man, and of all men; this by certain steps.

1. The objection taking for granted, that men are hardened in sin according to
the decreeing will of God, it is not denied by the Apostle, but justified: but
whether does the consideration of sin in the parties to be hardened, move God to
that decree of hardening them; or does that sin for which they are hardened, fall
within the decree of God?

Ans. Though God foresee that they shall fin before, he will harden them in
their sin, their hardening being a judgment upon them for their sin; yet does
not the foresight of that sin go before his decree of hardening in sin, but
he decrees of his mere pleasure. 1. To permit them to sin, in order to
hardening. 2. To harden them in sin order in to condemnation.

1. Otherwise there was no place for this Objection, for it is granted on all
Hands, that upon sin committed it is just with God to harden, and it will
follow by like reason, that upon the foresight of sin to be committed; and this
without the decree of God, it may be just with God to decree to harden; and
there is no more color of objecting against God in this latter, then in the
former.

2. Neither otherwise does it suite to the Apostles former discourse; the
decree whereby God wills the hardening of the Reprobate, is the same with that
whereby he hated Esau, as is clear by the thread of the Apostles discourse,
from verse. 13 to 19. but that rises above all respect of sin to be committed,
v. 11.

Hitherto we have gained this step, that those actual sins in recompense
whereof, by the righteous judgment of God, the Reprobates are hardened unto
death, fall within the decree of God, are not foreseen without his decree, as
Motives to his decree, but are by him decreed with intention of hardening for
them.

But then secondly, Does not the consideration of natural corruption by the
fall, go before this decree of God, and thence the justice of God more clear,
that though he decrees to permit to sin in order to hardening; yet is it only
sinful man so considered in his decree, fallen into a state of sin without his
decree, that he so decrees to permit to sin?

Answer, But then still what place for the Objection?

That God may harden men for sins committed is granted on all hands, that he is
not bound to recover fallen man; but may leave him to commit those sins for
which he is hardened, is likewise granted, that he may find fault with, and
punish with eternal wrath hardened sinners, is likewise granted, supposing then
the corruption of nature in the eye of God before his decree of hardening the
Reprobate; there is no place for this Objection, except we shall say that God
must decree either not to suffer fallen man further to sin, or not to harden
any sinners in sin, or not to punish hardened sinners; but this is contrary to
what by all is granted.

Thus far the Objection makes for man, considered as not yet created, to be the
Object of Predestination.

Now for the Answer: It will make it yet more clear. Where 1. The Apostle
pleads Gods absolute power over man, by right of Creation, verse. 20.21. 2.
Expostulates for further clearing, 1. The special end. 2. The righteous
execution of his decree, v. 22.23.

1. He pleads his absolute power and sovereignty or dominion, verse. 20. who art
thou that answerest again, by way of contestation with God: God is so far above
thee, and has that Dominion over thee, that he is not liable to give an
account of what he does concerning thee.

2. This power over man, not as created (much less fallen) but as to be
created: shall the thing formed, fay to him that formed it, why have thou
mademe thus? We here see by the Apostles answer, the mind of the Objection,
which was to charge God with Tyranny: that he decrees to harden the Reprobate
in sin, upon supposall that this decree of his rises above the consideration
of man as created; and in his decree of Creation, he has this intention: Why
have thon made me thus? which is yet more expressly in the next words, what
power the Potter has to make Vessels for different use, honorable or
dishonorable: the same power has God to Create men, some for salvation,
others for destruction, Prove. 16.4.

Now suppose man fallen had been the Object, a ready and satisfying answer had
been rather from Gods righteousness then dominion: to this effect, that though
God decrees to harden to Reprobate in sin, yet he sees them first as sinners,
and that without his decrees.

2. He decrees to harden them in a certain order. 1. Not to recover them from
their sinful state, but suffer them to multiply their transgressions. 2. To
harden them by way of righteous judgment for those transgressions of theirs,
according to this order of the decree; that it takes it use from the sin of man
antecedently to his decree; the plea of Gods righteousness must clearly have
satisfied even a cavilling adversary,: for who can doubt but when man has
fallen without his decree, God is not bound to recover him from sin; or that
when his transgressions are multiplied, the Lord may not harden him, that is,
withold such works of his Spirit as he formerly afforded him, after sinful
man's manifold abuse of them, and deliver him up fully to his own heart and
Satan. That alone which requires the plea of Gods power is, that the first step
here is according to Gods decree, and his decree of Creation is accompanied
with this intention: It is well observed by learned Camero, that for the
properties of God, some of them are conversant about the object already
constituted, such are his mercy and justice, some about the constitution of the
object, such are his wisdom and power, the power of God is here so pleaded,
not as supposing man created and fallen in the knowledge of God, but to be
created and to fall by the decree of God; the apprehension then of man
considered as sinful, to be the object of this decree, it is first against the
nature of the Apostles argument here, which is power, or dominion, not justice.

1. It is against the prosecution of it; 1. Shall the thing formed say to him
that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? according to that conception it
should have been thus rather, Shall the thing deformed say to him that formed
it, Why have thou marred me thus? 2. Has not the Potter power of the same
lump, etc.?

1. They who will have the difference to arise from faith or works foreseen,
suppose here not one and the same lump, but two, and those very different lumps.

2. They that will have man as fallen, the object of Predestination, will not
allow the Potter power to make vessels for dishonor of any other lump then
that which is first corrupt and marred, just contrary to the purport of the
Argument; Where is the Potters power then over his clay?

Thus we have seen from this Objection and Answer to it, man considered as not
yet created, the object of Predestination: Let us now add another Argument
from the Angels.

The purpose of Election and Reprobation for the Angels has them for the
object as not created, or it is of works; one of these two must needs be,
because there is not in any one Angel fallen the corruption and fall of the
rest, as in man; but that it should be of works is to be denied upon the same
grounds that it is denied for man, they that grant that in man it is not of
works, yet will have man considered as fallen the object, are here troubled to
extricate themselves; for if it carry with it many absurdities, that man's
Election or Reprobation should be of Works or Faith so much as foreseen, as
they grant it does, the same must likewise be granted in case of the Angels for
works.

If it may without absurdity be granted for the Angels, that they are to be
considered in the purpose of God as to be created, then may it likewise in man,
and if it may it must, for the Scriptures sound clear enough that way, only
they, for avoiding as they think, some absurdities, interpret them another way.

Let us add another Argument to clear the Doctrine of absolute power in this
point.
If in another case of equal concernment the Lord proceeds according to his
absolute power, then without all absurdity is it to be granted here; but so it
is: For instance.

1. The imputation of Adams sin to all his Posterity; By what rule of
regulated justice am I (conceived in the womb five or six thousand years after
Adams sin) charged with that sin of his? Would this be warrantable betwixt man
and man, that by the Fathers offense against his Prince, all his succeeding
Posterity throughout all generations should be liable to death? Or indeed any
of them who were not so much as borne or conceived when the Father committed
his trespass? Will it be said in case such a Covenant be made, it is
warrantable? But by what rule may such a Covenant be made? or if made, how not
more warrantably broken then kept?

2. Imputation of man's sin to Christ, and in him punishing the sins of all
the Elect: Might any Prince hang, draw, and quarter the most innocent and noble
Peer in the Kingdom, and even the Kingdoms heir, and the son of his
loins, thereby to acquit a company of wretched Traitors? Yet all this most
just in God, because he has this absolute power over man, and even over the
humane nature of Christ, that Christ was willing to undergo this, alters not
the case in point of justice, for hereunto he as man, was appointed and created
by the Father, and if it had been possible that Christ, as man, could have
refused it, he had therein sinned.

What is it then that carries so many to pitch upon the corrupt Mass?

1. A mere fallacy, for as much as Election is a decree of mercy, Reprobation
of justice; the one for saving, the other for condemning fallen and sinful
man; therefore here is sin considered before the decree, sparing mercy, and
condemning justice, necessarily supposing finne.

Answ. 1. All that can hence be concluded is, that the decree determines that
sin shall be before either the salvation of the Elect, or the condemnation of
the Reprobate; but not that the consideration of sin as that which shall be,
is before the decree, or the foresight of it a motive to the Decree it self;
see a clear instance: The decree of Election is a decree of saving all and
only persevering believers, (for those of years;) of Reprobation for
condemning all and only impenitent sinners; therefore salvation supposes
final perseverance in faith, and condemnation final impenitency in sin, and
that according to the decree, yet the decree it self does not suppose them,
and take its rise from them, but comprehends them, and ordaines them, otherwise
it was of works, (faith in this consideration putting on the nature of works,
as making the purpose to be of the called rather then of the caller) contrary
to the Apostle, Romans 9. v. 11. This mistake supposes whatsoever is required to
the execution of the decree in the last act of it, must before-seen without and
before the decree as a motive to it, whereas the decree it self ordaines
whatsoever makes for the execution of it in the last act. Another familiar
instance: A man purposes to leave his name behind him when he dies in a
legitimate offspring, this cannot be without a wife; now according to that
mistake he must foresee that he shall have a wife before he purposes any such
thing, and the foresight hereof must be a motive to him for purposing so to
leave his name in his Posterity; whereas it is clear in true consideration,
that because he purposes so to leave his name, he therefore purposes to take
a wife, nor does he any other way see beforehand that he shall have a wife
then in his own purpose: That decree which determines the end, comprehends
likewise the means to that end, otherwise it would be a decree to no end, a
purpose to no purpose.

2. Because the sin of man is in order of time before either his salvation,
or condemnation, that God might be glorified in his sparing mercy upon some, in
his revenging justice upon others; therefore must that intention of his sin
be in order of nature after Gods intention of so glorifying himself, for
whatsoever makes for the accomplishment of the end, as the means thereto, is
appointed in order to, and by virtue of the end it self fore-appointed. Hence
that well known rule, What is first in intention, is last in execution;
Instance, A man builds an house in such a place, of such a form, of so many
rooms for himself to dwell in, the last thing here in execution is his
dwelling in the house, but it was the first in his intention, and therefore for
the convenience of his dwelling did he provide materials, build it in such a
place, in such a form, etc. Hence if God foresee the sin of man, as that
which should be, before he decreed the glorifying himself in the salvation or
condemnation of sinful man, then did he intend to permit sin (without which
permission it could not be, and therefore without the intention to permit it,
could not be foreseen) before he intended so to glorify himself, but the
permission of sin being first in intention, must be last in execution;
therefore man must first be condemned or saved, and then permitted to sin: So
great an absurdity does that mistake run upon.

Therefore to conclude; 1. Election is a decree for sparing niercy, Reprobation
for revenging justice, rather then of them, each of them being an act of
absolute and arbitrary power, favoring or refusing to favor, merely at
pleasure.

2. Yet there is a twofold justice in God.

1. Toward himself, whereby he does for himself whatsoever his wisdom
dictates to be for his own glory.

2. Toward the creature, whereby he disposes good or evil to it upon
certain conditions.

In the former sense Election and reprobation both are acts of justice, God is
to be justified in whatsoever he does beseeming his wisdom for his glory.

In the latter sense they are for justice and mercy, rather then of them. This
for the first ground of that mistake.

2. A needless fear; they are afraid to affirm that God decreed and willed
the fall of Adam, lest they should thereby make him the Author of sin.

Answ. 1. To be the Author of sin is so to act as to stand under the guilt of
sin, to be under the guilt of sin supposes subjection to a law against
which we act: Now let such a law be showed against which God offends in
^^^^^ing that man (take it of the first man, and his first sin) shall sin.

2. Does not God will the fall of Adam? How then?

1. Is it against his Will? But he is Omnipotent.

2. Is it without his Knowledge? But he is Omniscient.

3. Is it beside his Will? But 1. Not one hair from the head, nor a sparrow to
the ground, nor the issue of the lot in the lap without his disposing. 2. Then
did he not determine what should be the end of man, when he intended to create
him, nor what his course; by the same reason the same is to be said for the
Angels, nor how he would be glorified in the small state of men and Angels,
nor the giving of Christ, nor the Gospel in the world, the whole Economy of
man's salvation and condemnation, of the Kingdom of God here, and in heaven, of
redemption by Christ, and thereupon his glory, all originally beside the will
of God ordered occasionally: I had as lieve subscribe to that wild Philosophy
which teaches the world to be made of the casual concourse of Atoms, as to
this more wild Theology, which teaches the whole administration of this
world, and that to come, to come about merely casually and occasionally.

We have formerly upon Romans 9. v. 11. in the first Sermon laid down three
arguments, proving the purpose of God to be merely of it self, which will here
fully conclude that both the sin of the first man, and all sins whatsoever are
decreed by God, let us form them to this particular.

1. He decrees to permit sin, (otherwise he could not so much as foresee it,
as was there manifested; again, whereas he in time permits it, if he did not
before all time will to permit it, it is with him according to man's weakness,
counsels arise in his breast a new) therefore he decrees that sin shall be upon
his permission, the permission of sin cannot be conceived to have no further
end, but that it should rest merely in the act of permission, and indeed the
permission of sin does involve the being of it upon permission.

Further, forasmuch as there is no evil but in good, and in every sinful act
we have to consider the act, and the sin cleaving to the act, the act and that
which is good he works, who is the first cause, the fountain of being and
goodness, in whom we move, the sin cleaving to the act he permits: Hence in
Joseph's sale by his brethren, the crucifying of Christ, the despoiling Job of
all he had, etc. the will and the hand of God are owned; If God had not willed
the crucifying of Christ, (and what greater sin?) how had he willed the
salvation of man by Christ? which yet he willed from all eternity, Ephesians. 1.4.
Again, if God willed not the fall of Adam, (and it the mother sin) how did he
will the salvation of man by Christ? it being the first step making way
thereto; this leads to the

2. He that from all eternity wills that end which cannot be brought to pass
without the being of sin, he wills that sin shall be, but God wills that
end, the glorifying his sparing mercy tempered with his justice in Christ, in
the salvation of some, his revenging justice in the condemnation of others; and
this way of glorifying himself necessarily supposes sin, there being no
place for that kind either of mercy or justice without sin; therefore he
wills that sin shall be, and the first sin as well as any other, without
which the other had not been: Hence

3. Though sin be not good but evil, yet that sin should be it is good, good
forasmuch as it is necessarily conducible to his glory, he having set down in
the counsel of his Will in such a way to be glorified, but God wills all good,
therefore he wills that sin shall be: Sin is evil, therefore it falls not
under the Will of God to approve it, that sin should be is good, therefore it
falls under the Will of God to decree it. Hence Enchirid. c. 69.
S. Austin, It is not to be doubted but God does well, even in suffering to be
done whatsoever things are evilly done; for this he suffers not but by a
righteous judgment, and truly whatsoever is righteous is good, although
therefore those things which are evil, in as much as they are evil are not
good; yet that not only those things which are good, but which are evil too,
should be, is good: Enchirid. c. 100.
Whence after a wonderful and unspeakable manner, it is not brought to pass
beside his Will, that even against his Will is brought to pass not beside his
Will decreeing, which is against his Will approving.

4. For that Argument taken from the liberty of God both in and for his decree,
apply it here to his Will, when he permits sin, whether the first sin, or any
other, and it will conclude his will necessarily determined beforehand by the
creature, except we will grant, that he freely of himself decreed those sins
to be; many other Arguments might be added. As,

5. Otherwise the Will of God is not the first in the order of causes, is
capable of motives from without, both which are clearly against the perfection
of the Divine Nature, otherwise God is not so perfectly happy, but there is a
happiness imaginable beyond his happiness: It is greater happiness that all
things whatsoever be fully according to his Will, then that any thing be beside
it; and therefore forasmuch as God is perfectly happy to the greatest
perfection imaginable, it must needs be his Will that those things should be,
which yet he approves not as good, but approves as good, that they though not
good, but evil, be.

Another Objection yet against this absolute power in God: Did God make man to
damn him, and to this end decree that he should sin?

Answ. The Scripture does not much abhor from such like expressions, He made
the wicked for the day of evil, vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, etc.
but not according to the meaning of this Objection does it use them, which
holds forth thus much, as if the torments of perishing sinners should be the
Terminus acquiescentiae in the breast of God, that wherein he rests, as wherein
he has obtained his end, as willing their condemnation for it self.

God wills the condemnation of the Reprobate from himself, and for himself,
not for it self; for it self, he neither wills the condemnation of the
Reprobate, nor the salvation of the Elect, but he wills all things, and has
made all things that are made for his own glory; therefore he has not made
man either to damn him, or to save him, in that sense, but having determined
to glorify on the one hand his mercy tempered with his justice; on the other,
his revenging justice in man's final condition, he must needs determine
thereupon, as the entire means without which that end could not be brought to
pass, both to make man, and to permit him to linne, and to recover some from
sin, and save them, to harden others in sin, and condemn them; so that the
condemnation of the Reprobate is not the end of Gods decree, but part of that
means whereby the end, the glory of his revenging justice is accomplished;
therefore when it is said, he made the wicked for the day of evil, it is said
withal, he made all things for himself, vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction, withal that he might show forth his wrath, and make his power
known. And now we are come to the second part of the Apostles answer, where he
expostulates first, the supreme end: 2. The righteous execution of Gods decree.

1. The supreme ends: What if God willing to show forth his wrath, and make his
power known, v. 22. and that he might make known the riches of his glory, etc.?
v. 23.

We have have seen formerly that which occasions the Objection, v. 19. must
needs be the decree of God, in that it arises above the fall and creation of
man: To this therefore the Apostle has respect; Which, first, he justifies by
the ends God propounded to himself, The glorifying his justice and mercy. The
glory of God is the end of all, Romans 11.36. as all things from him, so all
things to him; and as God is to be glorified of all, so is he all manner of
ways to be glorified, in all his Attributes displayed, his Wisdom, Power,
Holiness, Mercy, Justice, etc. this is by Divines called the good of the
Universe, by Universe understanding all things created as one entire frame, so
making (as it were) a clear Looking-glass, wherein the Majesty of God shines
forth, the good of the Universe that resplendency and luster of the Divine
Majesty, in the manifestation of his perfections in all things: The wisdom of
God therefore dictating this way for the glory of his Mercy and Justice, (those
attributes into the glory whereof all the works of his hands are finally
resolved) God is hereby justified in his decree; and indeed this is the only
Justice which can have place in the decrees of God, that he decree nothing but
what is beseeming his own wisdom for his own glory, (Justitia condecentiae) and
therefore the proposal of such an end as his wisdom suggests to be for his
glory, does alone justify God. Yet so does he decree to glorify his Justice,
as withal his Power, or his dominion over his creature, which referrs still to
the liberty of his decree; so that whereas it is affirmed, that they are
vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, this has respect to Gods intention,
ordaining them to be such as the Potter makes at his pleasure his vessels, some
for honor, others for dishonor; in vain is that objection, that they are
fitted of themselves, which is so far true that they corrupt themselves, and
are so fitted for condemnation, but withal here is reference to Gods
intention, because his power or dominion is thus shown over man to be created,
as the Potters over his clay, according to Prove. 16.4.

2. The righteous execution, God condemns not till they have sinned, nay, he
indures them sinning against him with much long-suffering, nay, we may add
that which other Texts of Scripture hold forth, he condemns none, but withal
they condemn themselves, in the midst of all their questioning the justice of
God, and cavilling against it, their own conscience gives testimony to the
righteousness of God in condemning them. Here then we are to distinguish
betwixt the decree and the execution of it; In the decree the Sovereignty, and
therein the liberty of God has place, and only that righteousness whereby he
is just to himself, in being true to his own glory; In the execution of his
decree, his righteousness toward his creature has place, in his decree he is
not moved by any respect of sin, in the execution of his decree he punishes
not but for sin; his decree therefore is so absolute as withal regular:
absolute in it self, regular for execution, as above sin, and all respects of
sin, so much as foreseen as a motive to his will: So it is his will that for
sin, and for sin only shall the reprobate be condemned, and the end of his
decree being the glory of his ustice, he can no other way condemn then for sin.

Thus have we seen the Apostles discourse of this great Mystery, which being
opened we shall be the clearer and briefer in the rest.

THE THIRD SERMON:
ROMANS 11.7. But the Election has obtained it, and the rest were hardened.


WE shall now proceed to confirm the Doctrine:

1. For that part of it which speaks to Election.

2. For the other of Reprobation.

1. For Election let us thus describe it.

It is the eternal decree of God whereby he has of mere love and good
pleasure, ordained effectually to eternal life, and all blessings making for
life in Christ, a certain number and those the fewest of men, to the praise of
his glorious grace.

In this description we have these particulars to observe.

1. That Election is the decree or purpose of God.

2. That it is his eternal decree.

3. That it is for eternal life.

4. That it is of persons, and that a certain and determined number singled out
by name.

5. That it is of the fewest of men.

6. That it is of love and good pleasure.

7. Of mere love and arbitrary pleasure above all respects in man.

8. That it is as for eternal life, so for all blessings making for life in
Christ.

9. That it is effectual hereunto.

10. That it is to the praise of the glorious grace of God.

1. That it is his purpose or decree, two words the Scripture here uses. 1.
(...) purpose, Scilicet. a setting down before hand, Romans 9.11. Romans 8.28. his
purpose, and the counsel of his will, Ephe. 1.11. 2. (...), his distinguishing
purpose, translated Predestination; it imports to ordain before hand, such as
within certain bounds and limits are to receive what others without those
bounds shall not partake of, Ephe. 5.11. Romans 8.29. the eternal distinction
and separation betwixt man and man, for their final state having here its
first rise.

2. It is his eternal degree; If his decree, an immanent act in the breast of
God, it must be eternal; nothing is new in God, though all things be new from
him: if this discourse shall not be so clear to some, Scripture testimony is
clear, Ephe. 1.4. Chosen us before the foundation of the world, so the Kingdom
prepared for them, Mat. 25.34. and the redeemer to bring them to that Kingdom,
The word translated foreordained is (...) foreknown, 1 Pet. 1.20. Whence it is
clear that foreknowledge in Scripture language is not a mere prescience, but
points out the decree of God; for who can think that God foresaw in the humane
nature of Christ any thing antecedent to his decree, whereby he was moved to
unite it personally to the Son; so as in the divine person of the Son should
subsist?
1 Pet. 1.20.

3. It is for eternal life, Stapleton the Jesuit (and he has others even
amongst our selves to follow him) would put off what the Apostle has about
Election, Rom 9. as though what is there spoken, aimed at the inheritance of
the Land of Conaan, the birthright etc. and not at eternal life, and they
will have it, that what the Apostle there spoke of Gods love to Jacob, and
hatred of Esau, concerned Jacob and all his seed in common, and Esau and all
his: and therefore to reach no further then the inheritance of Canaon for Jacob
and his seed, and the destruction of Esau's inheritance, as expressed by Malachi.

But that it is for eternal life, is very clear. 1. In the 9th. to the Romans
by diverse Arguments.

1. From the Objection which was about the Jews refusing the Gospel, and so
missing of eternal life; the Apostle in his wish, insinuating clearly as much,
and in the following answer disputing upon that supposition.

2. The Apostle makes the distinction, which he derives from Election and
Reprobation in Jacobs own seed, v 6. which he backs with the like distinction,
in Abraham's and Isaac's Family; then deriving all from Gods different decree,
gives Jacob and Esau special instances thereof.

3. The Apostle instanceth for Reprobation in Pharaoh, wherein if any man shall
think he aimed not at eternal condemnation, which yet the Testimony of his
hardening may evince, his following discourse will conclude it, and clearly
determine this controversy; and therefore,

4. The Apostle concludes the Reprobate Vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction; and the Elect Vessels of Mercy, fitted for glory.

5. What he speaks of Vessels of mercy fitted for glory, he applies to the
called of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews: and can any man now possibly
persuade himself that this is meant only or mainly of outward privileges? as
thus in the 9th, so in the 11th. Chap. where the Apostle resumes the same
Objection, and answers it in the same manner, distinguishing betwixt the Elect
and the rest.

1. He opposes the Elects obtaining to the hardening of the rest, and does not
hardening with the following Testimonies against them, verse. 7.8, 9, 10. relate
to eternal wrath: then must Election also relate to eternal glory. Further,
what the hardened Jews, through their fall miss of; the called Gentiles,
together with the Elect Jews obtain; and what is that? Not the Land of Canaan,
outward birthright, or any such outward privilege etc. but Gospell-salvation,
verse. 11. Reconciliation, verse. 15. and is not the surrogation of the Gentiles,
the planting of them into the Covenant of life? Many according to outward
administration, the Elect amongst them, by effectual vocation: Again, what
shall be the main of their restoring, verse. 25.26. only outward privileges?
Nay but that state of salvation by embracing the Gospel which the Gentiles now
are in, the Gentiles fullness herein depending upon the Jews return. And as
these Scriptures wherein this controversy is expressly handled, are clear; so
for other Scriptures, Romans 8.29.30. there is the chain of eternal life;
whereas Election is the first link, so glory is the last: the intermediate,
all such as tend to glory; as here the Chain, so otherwhere the Book of
eternal life, Reu. 13.8. and 17.8. and 20.12.15. and 3 5. and Phil. 4.3.
Objection, that 3 Rev. 5. supposes Election changeable, that their names who
are enrolled may be blotted out.

Answ. The unchangeableness of Election will hereafter be fully cleared; in the
mean time to prevent mistake, this is spoken after the manner of men, and
suitable to the metaphor, to blot out of the book of life, is no more but to
deny it to him, or not to plead eternal life on his behalf; and so make
manifest, that though his name seemed to be written in that book; yet it never
was a like instance which must receive this interpretation, we have Mat. 13.12.
Concerning the knowledge of the Gospel Mystery. Whosoever has not, from him
shall be taken, that which he has, that is, that which he seemed to have, Luke
1.18. But if he but seemed to have it, and had it not, how can it be taken from
him? only thus, it shall be made manifest that he did but seem to have it, but
had it not in truth: But to return, Election is called the book of Life;
therefore it is for eternal life; agreeable hereunto the Elect are likewise
said to have their names written in heaven; add to this that which is clear in
the Scripture, that the Land of Canaan, the birthright etc. were outward
pledges of the eternal inheritance, Heb. 11.9.10. and the Apostlesdiscourse of
Esau's subjection to Jacob, Romans 9. setting forth therein the difference of
their spicituall state in order to eternal life, as we have now seen in
showing the Apostles Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, there to reach to
eternal life, and death clearly conclude as much, a pledge of Esau's
spiritual servitude, according to the mind of the Oracle, we have in the loss
of the birthright profanely despised by him, Genesis 25.32. etc. 4. That it is
of persons; and that a set company and determined number singled out by name in
the counsel of God.

1. The disourse of the Apostle, Romans 9.11. clearly holds forth this, the sum
whereof is, that whereas the greatest part of the Jews refused the Gospel to
their own condemnation, a remnant embraced it unto salvation; the supreme
ground of this difference was the different decree of God, loving some in order
to eternal life, hating others in order to eternal death, of which Jacob and
Esau are singular instances; and by virtue of this different decree, some are
called and carried on to the enjoyment of life; others hardened unto death,
agreeable to the former Election, Romans 8.28.29.30. The purpose of God pitcheth
upon some for life in the first place, whence he administers the whole method
of life to them.

2. It is manifest by that metaphor, whereby so frequently Election is expressed,
viz. The book of Life; It is not a Statute book, setting down the Laws, or the
way of Life; but a Register, wherein are enrolled the Heirs of Life.

3. The following particulars concluding it, every one apart together jointly.

1. That is of the fewest of men, if it be not of persons, but of the way of
life; thus as some would have it, (believers shall be saved, unbelievers shall
be damned, not determining who shall believe and be saved, who shall not
believe and be damned;) then is it not either of the fewest or of the most, but
either of all alike, or of none alike.

2. That it is of love and good pleasure.

3. Of mere love and arbitrary pleasure; love must needs relate to persons: So
in the instance ( Jacob have I loved) mere love and arbitrary pleasure must
arise above all different respects, either existent or foreseen in men: now
there is no place for this love, in case it be not of persons, but only a
decree setting down upon what terms and in what way men shall saved.

4. That it is as for eternal life, so for all blessings tending thereto; for
if the faith and holiness of those that are saved, and all other graces and
privileges depend upon this decree, and are the fruits of it; then it must
needs be, that this decree first pitcheth upon the persons, before they be
considered as believing and holy; and because God has set them apart in love,
as upon whom he will glorify his grace, therefore he gives those graces and
privileges to them.

5. That it is effectual to eternal life; for then is not the decree
suspended upon man's obeying the call of God, and persevering therein, but by
virtue of this decree, he does effectually obey, and persevere.

6. Herein is the glory of divine grace, that he makes Vessels of honor (finds
them not such) having before prepared them (in his eternal counsel) unto glory;
It remains therefore that we prove these particulars, which do at once both
confirm the former, and further open this great Mystery of Election: Therefore
5. It is of the fewest of men; Here is one particular that man's reason is not
willing to hear of, but for this, the Scripture is express, Mat. 20.16. First,
If we compare those who are outwardly called, with those who are not, we shall
find the fewest called; for about the first 4000 years, how was the world
generally overlooked in point of out ward call, Act. 17.30. (...), God was then
pleased so to overlook the Children of men, as not to declare his will to them,
or call upon them to repent by his word or voice; for several ages, some
special families of Seth's line, of whom Noah: afterward one little Nation of
the Jews derived from Abraham, Psalm. 147.19. and 2 Since the times of the
Gospel, how many great Nations (and even at this day) unto whom the word of
God is not made known? but all the Elect are called; for those of years
generally by an outward call (and even their infants in their Church state, and
faederall interest have an outward call.) All of them inwardly so called as
justified, and in conclusion glorified, Romans 8.30. Now that Gods Election
raigns generally amongst those that are outwardly called for themselves and
their Children; it is clear enough, because he has appointed his word and
Sacraments the means of life; and generally where he has chosen to the end,
he has likewise chosen to the means, otherwise the means would not be so
choice and excellent blessings, so highly to be prized as the Scripture sets
them forth; if then generally the Elect be outwardly called, and amongst such
as are called outwardly Salvation takes place, and these are the fewest, then
are the Elect the fewest; but here is yet another step, all the Elect are in
time inwardly and effectually called, and only who are in time so called, are
Elect before time; But of those many that are called outwardly but a few thus,
hence but a few saved, so Romans 11. a remnant according to Election.

6. It is of love and good pleasure, 1. (...) Love, Romans 9.13. with the 11.
verse, (...), good pleasure, Ephesians. 1.5. and 9. this love expressed in singling
out, and fore appointing to life, of the same meaning (...), Romans 8.29.11. Romans
2. with 5, the people whom he fore-knew, the remnant according to Election; to
know in Scripture phrase importing to embrace in love, (after ye have known
God, or rather are known of him, he knows (Scil.) he approves the way of the
righteous, on the contrary to the wicked, I know you not,) so 1 Pet 1.2. and
20. so 2 Timothy 2.19. there (...), the Lord knows (as those whom he has in
special manner loved, and built upon the sure foundation of life his own
purpose) who are his. 2. It is his decree of distinguishing love, love with
choice so embracing these as refusing those; this (...) Election holds forth,
limiting his love and good pleasure, for life to such as he has in his purpose
gathered apart from others; (...)
what (...) Predestination, or rather praefinition is to (...) purpose, the
same is (...) Election to (...); to love and good pleasure.

7. It is of mere love and absolute pleasure, not upon either good works, on
faith foreseen, this is clear. 1. From the 9th. to the Romans verse. 11. where
the Apostle makes Election the purpose of God, as of him that calls, and for
this end that it might abide: Now it is the effectual call of God that gives
faith, and in this call is that renewing work of the holy Ghost, whereby the
Elect are brought into the state of life, and principled for good works in
order to life; and this call of God is a sure and unmovable foundation of
eternal life to the Elect, as borrowing nothing of man, but depending wholly
upon the unchangeable purpose of him, in whom is no change, neither shadow of
turning; forasmuch then as in our call we receive faith, and the spirit, and
Election is of God as of him that calls, he neither fore sees faith nor good
works in any after-called ones, antecedently to the decree of Election; but in
his decree of giving them, it is that he fore-sees them.

2. Those arguments used in the explication of the 11th. verse. toward the
latter end of the first Sermon, to prove this general conclusion; That no
purpose of God can depend upon any thing without himself, will here conclude.

3. That discourse in the second Sermon, from almost the beginning to the end
of that Sermon, proving that not only comparative Predestination is above all
different respects in the Creature, but single above all respects, and thence
concluding that not man considered as fallen, but considered as not yet
Created, must be the object of Predestination, will here likewise conclude.

4. This absolute and arbitrary pleasure of God is really and experimentally
made manifest, in his dispensations to the Children of men, (why did he choose
one Nation of the Jews to be the only Nation of the Covenant; and therefore
the people amongst whom generally his secret Election reigned, over-looking all
the Nations of the world beside? did he foresee independently upon his decree,
greater inclinableness to faith and holiness in them, then in all the world
beside? I think no man will be willing to own so wild a conceit: I am sure
Moses tells them the contrary, Deuteronomy. 9.4.5. why does he send the Gospel since
the door of faith has been opened to the Gentiles, to such a people rather
then to another? Is he not therein found of those that sought him not? why did
he in such an age first make known the mystery of the Gospel, to all Nations
for the obedience of Faith, and so for life, by Jesus Christ; which mystery
till that time was kept secret from the beginning of the world, Romans 16.25.26?
what is here to be said? but even so O Father, because so it seemed good in
thine eyes.

5. It is the Election of Grace, Romans 11.5. and therefore not of works, verse.
the 6. if Election, not of works, then not of works foreseen; for Election
being Gods eternal purpose, as formerly has been proved, and the Apostle in
his whole discourse, disputes upon that as a granted principle, there could be
no other way whereby it might be supposed of works, then of works foreseen; if
not of works foreseen, then not of faith foreseen, because faith here puts on
the nature of works, as being a qualification in our selves, commending us to
God by that which has prevented his free gift, Hence:

6. Upon the supposal of faith and works, or faith alone foreseen, the
Doctrine of free grace is wholly undermined in the foundation; nothing more
frequent in Scripture, then that our Call is of grace, 2 Timothy 1. and 9. Faith
is the gift of God, Ephe. 2.8. Grace always so interpreted as to shut out
works, to forbid glorifying, (yet matter of glorifying granted; if there be any
thing in our selves before it be given of God to commend us to him;) Now to
what end is all this, if we have prevented the free gift of God, even from all
eternity, by foreseen faith and works, engaging his purpose for us?

7. It is manifest in the instance of Christ, the head of the Elect, that God
proceeds in his Election according to his absolute and arbitrary pleasure; what
reason can be given, other then merely the absolute will and good pleasure of
God, that the man Christ, conceived of the God of David; a mortal man, should
in the womb be made the head of the Angels, the only begotten Son of God, the
image and glory of the Father; the light, righteousness, and life of the world?
Can any man make himself believe there could be any thing foreseen in the
humane nature of Christ, to move the Lord thus to purpose concerning him? In
the Churches head says S. Austin, we have a most clear evidence of most free
Election; that it is thus of mere love and arbitrary pleasure, not of faith or
works foreseen, is yet further manifest by the next main particular.

8. God in his purpose of Election decrees as life, so all spiritual blessings
making for life, to be freely given us in Christ, Romans 8.29.30. there the whole
method of salvation is derived from Election, Ethe. 1.3.4.5. we are blessed
with all spiritual blessings according to Election the foundation of all; and
of the giving of Christ in whom we receive all, thence our holiness verse 4.
our adoption verse. 5. our redemption, the forgiveness of our sins, verse. 7.
the discovery of the Gospel mystery, verse. 9. our title to eternal life, verse.
11. the word there used (...), we are taken by lot, or have our lot assigned
us, further hinting to us, how little the will of man has here to do.

Object. We are Elected in Christ, but we are no otherwise in Christ then by
faith (Ergo) our faith foreseen is the cause of our Election.

Ans. 1. We shall give the true meaning; we are Elected in Christ, that is, we
are Elected to receive in him united to him as the members to the head, all
blessings prepared for us in our Election; Christ is not the motive of Gods
decree, but the means of accomplishing it: Thus the Apostle, 1 These. 5. and 9.
2. We shall confirm it, that it must be so understood.

1. Christ himself is ordained the mediator of the new Covenant by virtue of
Election, Romans 4.16. The Apostle there shows that God in contriving the
Covenant of grace, whereby Christ is the head and mediator, had a special eye
to the Elect seed; that seed to whom, to all whom the Covenant shall be sure
for life. Christ was not then the motive to Gods decree, but for their sakes to
whom he had drereed life, did he ordain Christ a mediator, and in his hand the
Covenant of Grace.

2. Faith whereby we might be conceived to be represented to the decreeing eye
of God as in Christ, is given us by virtue of Election, therefore no otherwise
foreseen in us then in that decree, whereby God has determined to give it us,
Acts 13.48. John 10. verse. 26.27. because they are Christ's sheep, they hear his
voice and believe, in their effectual Call; therefore his sheep before their
call; that is according to Election, whence it proceeds originally that they
hear and obey his Call: Hence Tit. 1.1. The faith of Gods Elect; as faith, so
holiness, or whatsoever might be imagined to commend us to God.

1. All depending upon faith, therefore if faith be not praevious to the
decree, neither is holiness.

2. We have seen before our holiness depends upon our Predestination thereto.

3. Otherwise we rather choose God in Christ, then God us, John 15.16.

4. Then were Election of works contrary so expressly to Romans 9 11. Hence we
learn the true meaning of those Texts of Scripture, 2 These. 2. and 13. and 1
Pet. 1.2. in both which it is said, we are chosen in sanctification of the
spirit (for so it is in the Original) etc. that is, we are chosen that by the
sanctification of the spirit, etc. (to which sanctification we are likewise
chosen) we might obtain glory: from this particular then thus concluded it is
further manifest, both that Election is of persons, and that it is absolute.

9. As it is for life, and all blessings making for life; so it is effectual
unto life, not one, nor other of Gods Elect shall ever finally miscarry, but as
only they, so every one of them shall most certainly have life.

1. The purpose of Election is firm, unchangeable, irrevocable, 2 Timothy 2.19.
and Romans 9.11. that it may abide, therefore has it so unmovable a foundation,
the will of God alone, Heb. 6.17. (...) The immutability of his counsel, that
which can never be otherwise placed as the word imports.

2. By virtue of Election, they are most certainly preserved against all
temptations, that though in themselves before their call they be children of
wrath for their present state, after their call through weakness and remaining
corruptions, they might a thousand times mis-carry: yet by virtue of Gods
unchangeable Election. (...). They shall every one of them in due time be
called effectually. 2. They shall be upheld after their call against all
temptations, and surely brought to glory.

1. That they shall be every one of them effectually called, besides what is
clearly confirmed by those Scriptures which were brought to prove the eighth
particular; we shall add a further testimony or two, John 37.38.39, 40. where
we may observe; 1. That it is from the gift of the Father originally, that we
are delivered unto the care and custody of Christ; we are the Fathers by
Election, before we be Christ's by redemption, and therefore not chosen because
foreseen as redeemed by Christ, and applying by faith his redemption; but
because chosen, therefore given into the hands of Christ, that by him we might
be redeemed.

2. That every one of the Elect as they are given of the Father, so they shall
certainly come to Christ; there is their effectual Call; not only shall they
have a power to come, but actually they shall come.

3. That every one of them thus coming shall certainly have life; all this
verse. 37. which is further confirmed, 38.39.40. So in the 44. and 45. verses,
there are these conclusions.

1. No man can come to Christ, but he that is drawn of the Father.

2. Whosoever is drawn comes.

3. Whosoever being drawn comes, shall have eternal life; these in the 44.
verse, the promise in the latter end of the verse (I will raise him up at the
last day) necessarily supposing that he that is drawn comes, which is further
confirmed and cleared in the 45. verse. where the drawing of the Father is
interpreted his teaching, where two things are affirmed.

1. That they shall all (viz) all that the Father has given to Christ, be
taught of God.

2. This teaching of his is such an heart-teaching, that every man that has
been thus taught of the Father comes: Hence it is manifest;

1. That the Elect have an effectual, and therefore a peculiar teaching of the
Father, there is not one common aid to all, upon which they are left to
difference themselves who have received it; whosoever partakes in this teaching
he does come, all come not, therefore all have not been thus taught; hence St.
Austin, If every one which has been taught comes, then must it needs be, that
he that comes not, has not been taught: Again, Lib. de. predest. sanct. c. 8.
what is that? Every one that has heard and learned of the Father comes to me;
but this, there is none which hears and learnes of the Father but he comes to
me; for if every one which has heard of the Father and learned, comes
certainly; whosoever comes not, has not heard of the Father and learned; for
had he heard and learned, he had come.

2. That as they are by divine teachings effectually called, so they do finally
persevere, and every one of them obtain life, they are so drawn of the Father
and so taught by him, as they are raised up at the last last day, and that unto
glory as is manifest, in that this raising is a fruit of the Fathers drawing to
Christ, and by comparing verse. 44. with 39. and 40.

3. It is here further manifest, that only the Elect to whom it is given to
come, have the power to come to Christ, whosoever comes not, have not the power
of coming.

No man can come except he be drawn of the Father, be that is drawn does come;
whence the discourse lies clear, all that are drawn come, all that have power
are drawn; therefore all that have power come, but all come not, therefore all
have not power, only the Elect (viz.) those that are given of the Father to
Christ come, therefore they only have the power of coming. As for the
Objection, Ioh. 17.12. it is too light, they would argue thence that some given
of the Father to Christ, according to Election may perish.

1. It is contrary to verse. 2. of this 17. Chapter, and to Ioh. 6.37. etc. as
formerly we have seen.

2. The form of speech there used, will not infer necessarily that he was given
of the Father; sometimes such a form of speech is used in sound exceptive from
the proposition foregoing, but in the true meaning exclusive of it, so Mat.
12.4. It was not lawful for David and those that were with him, except ((...))
only the Priests to eat the Shewbread, this sounds as though some of David's
company were Priests; the meaning is, it was not lawful for any of them in
ordinary case, because there were no Priests to eat of that bread; so here,
none that the Father has given to Christ shall perish, except Judas the son of
perdition: The meaning according to the former instance may very well be, that
whereas the other Apostles because given of the Father shall surely be kept to
eternal life, Judas as not being one of those that were so given, is a lost man.

3. Grant him given of the Father, yet is it to be understood of another
giving, then that which is according to eternal Election.

1. He is given in regard of outward state, as all are that are outwardly
called, and make profession of Christ, though few of those be chosen.

2. In regard of Apostolical Function, in which sense he is said likewise to be
chosen, Joh. 6.70. but for that giving, wherein is laid the foundation of
eternal life formerly spoken of, had he been so given to Christ, he had never
departed from him, Joh. 1.2.19. and when Christ speaks of that Election he
expressly shuts out Jadas, Joh. 13.18.

Hitherto that all the Elect shall in time be effectually called.

2. They shall be upheld after their call against all temptations, so as they
shall certainly persevere in the grace of their call unto eternal life: These
Scriptures which prove their call, do likewise confirm their certain obtaining
of eternal life, as we have seen in the opening them; add to them 2 Timothy 2.19.
and Mat. 24.24. and Rev. 13.8. and Rev. 17.8. and Rev. 20.15. and Romans 8.33,
34. etc. All which Scriptures clearly show that the sure foundation of life and
perseverance in grace received unto life is laid in Election, so as not any one
of Gods Elect shall ever fall short of life; it was with special eye to the Elect
that the Covenant of Grace was ordained, and so contrived, that by that
Covenant life might be sure to them, Romans 4.16.

Before we pass to the tenth and last particular, from the Doctrine of Election
hitherto opened, we may take notice of two or three misshapen Monsters
nourished in the Arminian Doctrine.

1. The uncertainty of called man's spiritual and final condition.

2. The uncertainty, or rather impossibility of Gods foreknowledge thereof.

3. Temporary Election and Reprobation.

1. For the first: It being inconsistent with the liberty of man's will,
(according to their Doctrine,) that God should in the call of a sinner determine
his will by the work of the holy Ghost, so as that it cannot come to pass but
the sinner shall obey his call: And for perseverance in the grace of his call, the
liberty of man's will requires (say they) that when God has done all that he
does for any, yet may man for the issue not persevere. Hence it must needs
follow, that all is at mere peradventure, whether any one of all the sons
and daughters of men should be saved or not? whether ever there should have
been any Militant Church upon earth, or Triumphant in heaven, or not? whether
Christ should have taken our nature upon him; his offices, have done and
suffered all in vain, or not?

2. For the second: For as much as man's condition both for grace here, and
glory hereafter, depends upon the use of his will, embracing or resisting the
call of God, continuing in, or falling from the grace received in his call, and
they will not allow that God shall by his decree particularly determine how this
or that man shall use his will, and they require it as essential to the liberty
of man's will, that he may as to the event, embrace or refuse the motions of Gods
Spirit, whether in his call, or after it; how can it be that what is no way
certain to be, as having no certain foundation neither in God nor man, can be
certainly fore-known, the certain foreknowledge of that which is no way
certain and determined, involving a contradiction? Hence they are wont to
decline this argument of Gods foreknowledge, and sometimes some of them spare
not to deny it.

3. For the third: Hence it must follow, that the Election of any person cannot
be till the last moment of life; the reprobation of any person not til the time
of obstinacy in sin; for they make faith and final perseverance therein,
substrate to election; unbelief and obstinacy in sin substrate to
reprobation: Now this must be either actual, or in the foreknowledge of God,
but in the foreknowledge of God it cannot be, according to their Doctrine, as
we but now proved; therefore it must be actual, and so election and reprobation
not eternal, but in time; therefore no decrees or imminent acts of God. Hence
they speak sometimes not much incongruously to this result of their Doctrine;
Arminius tells us of an external act of reprobation, and we hear from his
followers, and those of greatest note, that Election is not confirmed from
everlasting; that it is revocable, that men sometimes of elect become
reprobate, and of reprobate elect, etc. What portents of opinion these are,
even Qualia credibile est rictu ruct ass trifauci
Cerberon and stygii monstra tremenda lacus.


The former Doctrine with clear evidence of Scripture, truth has already
manifested, to the praise of his glorious grace, or to the praise of the glory
of his grace, Ephesians. 1.6.

There are four things in the decree of Election, making much for the glory of
his grace.

1. That it is to such great blessings in Christ, the greatest of blessings,
and the foundation of the rest; Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. 6.

2. That it is so effectual thereunto, as in the building of the Temple at
setting up the topstone there was loud acclamations of grace, Zach. 4. so here
in the accomplishment of all blessings prepared in Election, when God shall be
admired to all eternity in those that believe, 2 These. 1.10. in his decree of
Election, the foundation of faith and all blessings consequent upon faith, shall
this admiration ultimately fix.

3. That it is so free in opposition to all works and faith in man, it being
and abiding wholly of him that calls not believers, but unto faith, nor the
holy, but to holiness, as formerly has been declared.

4. That it is peculiar, it so imbraceth some, as refuses others, that it is
accompanied with the decree of Reprobation, Romans 9.22, 23. there is nothing
more ravishing the heart of a believer, whether here or in heaven, then this
consideration, Why did God set his love upon me, and choose me unto life,
refusing so many others.

They that pretended much to the advancement of free grace, are for universal
grace, universal redemption, and such an election (or no election rather) as
may stand therewith, betray no little ignorance (how wise soever they seem in
their own eyes) of the grace of God indeed, and the true arguments of his glory
arising from his grace.

THE FOURTH SERMON.
ROMANS 11.7. But the rest were hardened.


WE now come to the Decree of Reprobation.

1. For the word, opposite to Election, Isai. 41.9.

2. For the thing, it may be gathered partly from the precedent Doctrine of
Election, partly from express Scripture concerning it.

It is the eternal decree of God, whereby he has, merely because he would,
hated the rest of men, (the same is true of the Angels, but we confine our
discourse to man) besides his Elect, so as to appoint them to dishonor and
destruction for ever by sin, for the glory partly of his sovereign power
over man, partly of his revenging justice upon perishing sinners, and lastly of
the riches of his mercy upon his chosen and saved ones.

This description will be clearly made good in the particulars of it, by looking
back into the former discourse, that we shall not need to be long upon it.

1. That there is in God a decree opposite to the eternal decree of Election,
is manifest, Romans 9.11. as has by a threefold argument been proved, in opening
that Verse in the first Sermon, as likewise by opening the 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Verses at the beginning of the second Sermon, and the second Observation upon
them. (I must here, and diverse times hereafter in this discourse of
Reprobation, refer the Reader to what has been spoken in opening the ninth to
the Romans, etc. both because repetitions of the same thing would needlessly
increase the bulk of this discourse, and breed confusion in the understanding.)

2. That it is his decree of hatred, this hatred opposed to electing love is
manifest, Romans 9.13. that it is such an hatred, as refers to the exclusion out
of the Covenant of life, and to eternal death, is there proved in handling the
third instance upon Ver. 10, 11, 12, 13. jointly in the first Sermon, as
likewise in the third Sermon almost at the beginning, in handling the third
particular, that Election is for eternal life: The proof thereof carrying
along with it the proof of this too, that Reprobation is for eternal death.
But for our more distinct apprehension, we have here three things to consider.

1. Wherein this hatred consists.

2. Who are the objects of it.

3. What is the ground of it.

For the first, it consists in two things: 1. The decree of permitting sin, in
order to hardening in it: 2. The decree of hardening in sin, in order to
condemnation for it; or rather in the decree of God for two things. First, for
permitting of sin, in order to hardening in it: And secondly, for hardening in
sin, in order to condemnation for it.

That God decrees the being of sin in the world, has been proved by diverse
arguments toward the end of the second Sermon, and that it be by his
permission, without which it could not be. Now further, for the Reprobate he
decrees the permitting of it in order to hardening, and their hardening in it in
order to their condemnation: Hence the method whereby the Reprobates are
carried on to condemnation, which is according to the decree of God opposite to
Election, is by hardening, Romans 9.18. (He will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy) looking back-wards to his love of Jacob, and fore-ward to the honor,
verse. 21. and glory, 23. of the vessels of mercy prepared thereunto, as those
on whom he would make known the riches of his glory. (And whom he wills he
hardens) looking back-wards likewise to his hatred of Esau, and for-ward to the
dishonor of (v. 21.) his wrath and power against, v. 22. the vessels of wrath
fitted for destruction, which by abusing the long-suffering of God toward
them, they in the end incur, so Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained it, the
rest were hardened.

By divine permission, then to fall into sin is common to the Elect with the
Reprobate, and that both in Adam and themselves, but with different aim on
Gods part, and different fruit or issue on man's, by the sins of the Elect, way
is made for their Redemption by Christ; by the sins of the Reprobate, way is
made for their final hardening in sin, and so for eternal death, that as the
love of God to the Elect is expressed, 1. In their effectual call. 2. In their
final perseverance; so his hatred to the Reprobate, 1. In leaving them to
their sins 2. In final hardening in sin. For further clearing this point in
hand, let us resolve one question.

Q. What is it to harden in sin?

Ans. It is the exercise of righteous judgment by God upon sinners, whereby he
gives them over so fully to the power of their own lust, and to the dominion of
Satan, that they are no longer capable of spiritual good, but on the contrary,
not only by all temptations to sin, but by the most powerful means against
sin they shall grow worse and worse.

We read of a twofold hardening, one befalling the Disciples of Christ; Mark 6
52. this expresses it self in sottishness, opposite to due apprehension,
(...), they understand not, concerning the loaves, the other peculiar to the
Reprobate, expressing it self in stubbornness, opposite to due submission; thus
Pharaoh as, yet exaltest thou thy self against me? Exodus 9.17. It is this that
we here speak unto.

Concerning this three things.

1. What is the state of a sinner thus hardened? It is this, he is no longer
capable of spiritual good, etc. So with Pharaoh, when the Apostle instanceth
as an example of Reprobation, he still grew worse and worse by all the great
works of God before him, and upon him, after every new plague, his heart
hardened anew, Exodus, 7.2.3.4. when the Magicians were forced to confess the
power of God against them; still his heart hardened, Exodus 8.19. so the
Reprobate Jews, Isa. 6.9.10. with Mat. 13. v. 14.15. their hardness of heart
went on against all that they heard and saw in the word and works of God by
the Prophet, by Christ himself, and his Apostles, sottishness and stubbornness,
both prevailing in them.

2. What is Gods way of hardening the Reprobate? he gives them over so fully,
etc. as it is in the description; here are two particulars especially to be
taken notice of.

1. He gives them over fully to the power of their lusts, and this he does by
withholding those works of his spirit, for enlightening, convincing, awing,
enclining, which formerly he afforded: There is a time when even the Reprobates
(many of them) are in regard of means offorded, and the works of Gods spirit
upon them, by the means in a fair way for life, but they abusing that light
and those motions of the spirit,; the Lord withholds those works of his, no
longer restraining them as formerly, but suffering them to run headlong into
all wickedness wholly biased by their lusts; hence God is said to harden
them, John. 12.40 referring to that of Esaias 6.9, 10. he thus giving them over,
and they are said to harden themselves, Mat. 13.15. (their eyes have they
closed, conmpare the Context) they given over increasing in stubbornness
against the Lord, so in the History of Pharaoh; sometimes God is said to harden
his heart, sometimes he is said to harden his own heart.

2. He gives them over to the dominion of Satan (whom they have chosen rather
to serve then God) as the instrument of his wrath, to blind them more, to smite
them with further hardness of heart, to infuse into them, and stir up in them
more enmity against God, thus 2 These. 2.10, 11.12. God gives over such as
received not the love of the truth, etc. to the effectual delusions of Satan,
with certain aim at their damnation, thus 1 Samuel 16.14. and 18.10. and 19.9.
there is an evil spirit from the Lord stirring up Saul to rage and murder, an
evil spirit, therefore the Devil, from the Lord, therefore he had commission
from God (as the lying spirit in the mouths of Ahabs Prophets had) and Saul was
given up of God, to the effectual working and dominion of that evil spirit.

3. The Lord as the supreme mover acts them thus destitute of his grace, and
wrought upon by Satan; hence the Lord is said to harden, to fatten, to
strengthen, to turn the heart of the Reprobate unto evil; so for turning their
hearts, Psalm, 105.25. (of the work of God upon the wills of men, moving them
when they move sinfully, he himself free from their sin, see more fully in
answer to the first Objection in the last Sermon.)

3. The ground of this hardening work, it is their former sins; therefore we
say it is the exercise of the Lords righteous judgment upon sinners when he
hardens, though the decree of permitting fin in order to hardening, and of
hardening in order to condemnation, rises above sin either acted or foreseen as
that which shall be, the Lord in this decree of his seeing that it shall be as
formerly has been proved; yet the execution of this decree in hardening, ever
follows sin committed, so 2 These. 2. because they received not the love of the
truth, there was their sin, God gave them up, etc. there their judgment, so
Romans 1.24.26. Thus have we seen wherein this hatred consists, further clearing
up to us, that such a decree there is, and thus, and in this method do we
understand that which is expressed in the description, that God appoints the
Reprobate to dishonor and destruction for ever by sin. Hence they are called
vessels for dishonor and of wrath, fitted to destruction, Rom 9.21.22. Hence
the Apostle tells us by clear insinuation, that some are appointo wrath, 2 These.
5.9. speaking of it as the great happiness of himself and the Saints there,
that God had not appointed them to wrath, some he had appointed thereto, hence
Jude 4. Certain men foreordained, or fore-written to that judgment: as
Election is the book of life, so Reprobation of death, the names of the
Reprobate there Registered for destruction, in vain it is objected that
fore-writing there is nothing but Enochs fore-prophesying, verse. 14. For

1. How does it appear that Enochs Prophecy was written?

2. In that they in S. Judes time were by Enoch prophesied of so many ages
before, it is manifest they were so many ages before ordained to judgment, and
if so many ages before, then from all eternity; there being no imaginable
reason why in that age God should first decree it, setting aside that all the
decrees of God are eternal, and that his love of Election, and hatred of
Reprobation are not at all of works done or foreseen. Hence 1 Pet. 2.8. There
are certain men appointed formerly, or put ((...)) to stumble at the Gospel,
disobedient thereto, hence Prove. 16.4. the wicked are made for the day of
evil; God in the Creation of man, has the condemnation of the Reprobate for
his own glory in his eye, therefore are they vessels designed to dishonor and
destruction when the Lord forms them, Romans 9.20, 21, 22. Hitherto that there
is such a decree of hatred in God concerning the Reprobates, and wherein it
consists. Now

2. For the Object of this hatred, who are these Reprobates here spoken of?

Ans. All but the Elect.

1. The Election has obtained (says the Apostle) but the rest were hardened,
speaking of the Jews; but in his following discourse he divides the whole world
into these two ranks, as has been formerly observed, in the second Sermon, the
second observation upon the Context, from the 14. to the 19. verse. of the ninth
to the Romans.

2. Forasmuch as he has chosen some, and but some to life; either he has
determined all the rest to death, or else there are some men on whom the Lord
has past no certain determination, either for life or death; not for life,
then he had chosen them, not for death as is here supposed. Then 1. He
determines not how he will be finally glorified by them. 2. Nor what shall be
their ^mall state. 3. Nor what their way and course shall be in this life, but
this is to make void a great part of his providence; then by the same reason
the like may be affirmed of the Angels, and so the Kingdom of his providence
still more straightned, and he in effect denied the Univerall and supeam Ruler.

3. The deccree of Reprobation for some has been already proved, and there
being no reason any where hinted in the Scriptures, nor easily imaginable why
some of the non-Elect should be Reprobate, and not all; It must needs be
granted of them all.

4 Forasmuch as in Election, life and all blessings for life are prepared, and
all depends upon Election that makes for his glory, and all men in the
conclusion are saved or damned; hence it must needs be that all but the Elect
are Reprobate, so Rev. 20.15. the condemnation of all those that perish at the
day of judgment is ultimately derived from their non-Election; whence it is
manifest that upon Election depends eternal life originally. We may therefore
say of all but the Elect, as it is Hab. 1.12. but we shall not need further to
insist upon this, there being very few, if any, who grant the Reprobation of
some, but they grant it likewise of all but the Elect.

3. For the ground of this hatred, why does God decree to permit the rest of
men besides the Elect to sin, with certain aim at their hardening in sin, and
to harden them in sin, with certain aim at their condemnation for sin?

Ans. There is no ground at all but his own will for his own glory: therefore
we say he has hated merely because he would: for this the Apostle is clear,
Romans 9.

1. Expressly removing all works of man, so as to ascribe all to the purpose of
God, v. 11.

2. Expressly resolving the difference betwixt the Elect and Reprobate merely
into the will of God, verse. 15. to 24. The fuller clearing of this Scripture,
making good the matter in hand, see in the first Sermon, beginning at the 11.
verse. of this ninth to the Romans thence to the end of the second Sermon, where
we shall find upon the 11. verse.

1. Three arguments to prove that the purpose of God must be wholly of it self.

2. The Apostles whole discourse both in raising and refuting Objections from
verse. 14. to verse. 22. clearly proving it.

Hitherto that Reprobation is Gods eternal decree, that it is his decree of
hatred, that it is his decree for permitting to sin, with certain aim at
hardening in sin, for hardening in sin with certain aim at condemnation for sin,
that the object of this decree is all to a man, besides the Elect.

Now follows the end of it, his own glory,

1. In his sovereign power over man.

2. In his revenging justice upon perishing sinners.

3. In the riches of his mercy upon his chosen and saved ones.

That the glory of God is the end of all, that he is all manner of ways in all
his attributes to be glorified; that whatsoever his wisdom dictates to be for
his glory must be brought to pass: see toward the end of the second Sermon,
where we have spoken to the second part of the Apostles answer, Romans 9.22.23.

Now these attributes, the glorifying whereof the Lord had in his eye,
especially in the decree of Reprobation: Are

1. His sovereign power over man, considered neither as pure, nor impure, but
not as yet created; his decree ordaining the rest but the Elect, unto sin, and
destruction by sin, Romans 9.20 21. And this is more fully discoursed, and (I
think) clearly proved in the second Sermon, beginning toward the beginning of
the Sermon, at the fifth observation there, continuing to the end of the
Apostles plea for Gods absolute power, and the opening of that plea, verse.
20.21. It is likewise further cleared in this Sermon where this hatred of God
is opened, that which we have but now been upon.

2. His just wrath, or revenging justice upon perishing sinners, together with
his power or might for their destruction, verse. 22. where we may observe.

1. The power mentioned in this verse, is his (...), that is, his might for
execution of his judgment upon the Reprobates to their destruction; the power
mentioned verse. 21. is his (...), that is right or authority; this referring to
the Creation of Man, God has right to Create man to what final state he
pleases, and accordingly to order him thereto, that to the condemnation of
sinful man.

2. The Reprobate are vessels of wrath fitted or prepared for destruction,
which neither only nor mainly relates to themselves, as corrupting themselves,
and so bringing damnation upon themselves, though it be true that so they do,
but it primarily refers to God and his aim in their Creation, as is manifest
both by the Metaphor: The Potter prepares or fits the Vessel of dishonor for
it is dishonorable use, and by the former discourse, which has been
large-spoken to, agreeable to the Scripture otherwhere, Prove. 16.4. he has
made the wicked man for the day of evil, in his decree of Creation, then he
had his final destruction in his eye, and therefore whatsoever should make for
it, so 1 Pet. 2.8. and Jude 4.

3. His mercy toward his Elect, verse. 23. this has been formerly spoken to,
at the end of the third Sermon, upon that part of the description of Election,
to the praise of his glorious grace.

THE FIFTH SERMON:
ROMANS 11.7. But the rest were hardened.


HAving laid down the positive doctrine of Reprobation, we come now to answer
Objections.

1 Express texts of Scripture.

2. Other arguments fastening in the Adversaries opinion, great absurdities
upon the Former Doctrine.

1. For the Texts of Scripture, they are mainly these, wherein there is as much
seemingly for them, as in all other texts of Scripture, 1 Timothy 2.4. where it is
said, Gods wills the salvation of all men, and that they should come to the
knowledge of the truth, 2 Pet. 3.9. where it is affirmed that God is not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, Ezekiel.
33.11. where the Lord affirms with an oath, that he has no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live, Ezekiel.
18.23. the Lord has no pleasure at all that the wicked should dye, and verse.
32. he has no pleasure in the death of him that dies: These Scriptures they
are wont vehemently to urge an edge, the Lord say they here declares himself
positively, he wills all to be saved negatively, not willing that any should
perish; further, that they might be saved, he wills their saving knowledge and
repentance as having no pleasure, no none at all in the death of a sinner, no
not of him that dies, but the contrary that he turn and live; and for this the
Lord engages his own life.

For Answer.

1. We must give general answers to those Scriptures wrested by them jointly.

2. Particular answers to them severally.

Ans. 1. Consider on the other hand what has been formerly cleared by
Scripture: that some the Lord hates in order to condemnation, this hatred, his
decree for permitting sin in order to hardening, for hardening in sin in order to
condemnation; this decree arising above all respects of sin in man, though not
without respect of sin in him: that as the Potter of the same lump, makes some
Vessels to honor, some to dishonor; so the Lord out of mankind equally
represented to his decree, not as yet Created, fits some for glory as vessels
of mercy; others for destruction as vessels of wrath, that the different
decrees of Election and Reprobation, are the original ground of that
difference which is found in the spiritual and eternal state of men, (the
Election has obtained, the rest were hardened) That in both these the will of
God raigns; I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and whom I will, I
harden; that some were of old ordained, fore-written to this condemnation, Jude
4. that as God has made all things for himself, so the wicked man for the day
of evil, Prove. 16.4. that some are appointed or set to stumble at Christ, and
his word, disobedient thereto, 1 Pet. 2.8. and these opposed to the Elect or
chosen people, verse. 9.

We must so interpret the Scripture as it may stand with it self; and therefore
so the former Texts of Scripture, as that we overthrow not these, and the main
truths held forth in them.

Ans. 2. By distinction of the will of God.

The will of God is taken two ways, sometimes for his decreeing will, or will
of intention; sometimes for his declaring will, or will of administration.

1. His Decreeing will determines what shall, or shall not be, of this Psalm.
115.3. and Romans 9.19. whatsoever he wills by this, is certainly brought to pass;
whatsoever is not brought to pass, it is most certain he thus wil'd it not;
for this will of his cannot be frustrate, as the Psalmist affirms, and the
Apostle grants; for this will, all the most cross wills of men and Devils to
his commands, fulfill it. Lib. de Corrept. and great. c. 14.
To will and to nill is so in the Liberty of him that wills or nills, as that
he can neither hinder the will of God, nor overcome his power: S. Austin.

2. His declaring will shows what is man's duty, what being done or undone, God
approves or disproves, it is expressed, partly in commanding, partly in affording
means; the Lord herein dealing with men, speaks after the manner of men, what
they command, or for what they afford means, it is commonly (though not
always) their intention it should be done: This will is so often frustrate, as
the command is broken, or the means abused; this will respects not always the
event; when God commands Abraham to offer Isaac, here is his declaring will for
it, it was Abraham's duty to go about it, God approved of his ready obedience,
but that Isaac should be sacrificed, he intended not, as is manifest by the
issue; this is not properly his will, but the sign of his will, as to us,
which sometimes agrees to his will of intention, sometimes not; in respect of
the Event, it being many times his decreeing will, that his declaring will
should not be fulfilled; which (besides other cases, as in that of Abraham for
offering up his Son) is always when sin is committed; of this will, Levit.
13.34. I would, ye would not; I would, by all my Prophets formerly, now by my
self; I called upon you, and afforded you means for turning to me, ye would
not, ye have resisted my call, and abused the means afforded you.

Hence when God is said to will the salvation of all, not that any should
perish, not the death of him that dies etc. either the note of universality
(All, not any) is so to be limited, or the Will of God, so to be distinguished,
or both, as nothing may be ascribed to the will of Gods intention, but what
certainly comes to pass in the event.

This conclusion therefore we lay down for further answer to those Texts of
Scripture jointly, and to all of the same purport: God never intended the
salvation of any, but those who are and shall be saved; for then should his
will of intention be frustrate, which that it cannot be.

1. We have seen Psalm. 115.3. Rom 9.19.

2. The truth of this conclusion will appear by enquiry into that will of
intention, which in God they imagine for the salvation of all without
exception, it is either a complete and determinate act of the will of God, or a
natural inclination in him, not in complete operation.

If the former, then is he not unchangeable, first determining all men to life,
then reversing that determination; but with God there is no change nor shadow
of turning, neither can there be, all change proceeding from imperfection,
whether of wisdom, or power, or happiness, therefore God wills not now one
thing, then another, though he executes his Will part by part, and time by
time, but his Will is always one and the same constant act from all, to all
eternity.

But the adversaries here choose the latter rather, affirming it a natural
inclination in God, not in complete operation, to this end distinguishing the
Will of God into antecedent, or foregoing, and consequent, or following.

The antecedent they define a natural inclination in God, whereby he wills the
salvation of all, before he considers a certain act (as Adams sin) or some
certain acts, as other sins in man: The consequent will whereby he determines
actually the condemnation of many, this determination issuing from the last
judgment of Divine Wisdom, upon the consideration of certain acts in the
creature foreseen as those which shall be, without his decree that they shall
be. For answer.

1. If this distinction were admitted, it could not reach; for this which they
call the consequent Will of God, has it not taken place in the breast of God
long since? Has not God to this day considered of all things that can fall
within consideration concerning his creature, in order to eternal life or
death? Or, by what slow degrees do they conceive the consideration of God to
move forward? Nay, can they form to themselves such gross apprehensions of
God, as that he should not have considered all things considerable before the
world was? If so, then his consequent will is past for the condemnation of many
by their own grant.

2. This distinction is not to be admitted, as that which transformes God into
a worthless Idol; Being,

1. Against the simplicity of his spiritual nature, whereby he is what he is
purely, and completely in act: And this is manifest from the perfection of his
nature, the more all pure inclinations are in operation, the more perfection
there; in Angels and men the more not only an inclination to the love and
fear of God, etc. but the more actual love and fear is found in them, the
more perfect is their state; what light is in the Sun, it always actually
shines; But the nature of God is a nature of utmost perfection, therefore no
inclination in him, but what in complete operation; hence he has been by all
Divines Orthodox in this point of the perfection of his nature accounted a pure
Act.

2. It is against the perfection of his Wisdom, there is no time nor moment can
be considered, wherein God does not actually consider whatsoever can fall
within consideration concerning the creatures acts, and all things thereupon
depending, and therefore no moment can be considered wherein God does not
completely and determinately will whatsoever he wills concerning his creature.

3. The Conclusion stands good from the power of God; If he wills the salvation
of all, and has power in his hand for it, then all shall be saved: It is a
ruled Case, Quod volunt potentes agunt omnes, whatsoever any one really wills,
if he have power in his hand he will do it; what is further imaginable for doing
a thing but will and power? What says Arminius here? he wills the salvation of
all, but mode convenienti, after a fit manner: For answer briefly; The
salvation of all either may be brought to pass after a fit manner, or it may
not; if it may, then still the argument stands good, he wills it, and it may be
fitly done, and he has power to do it, why is not then done? And indeed that
it might be done after a fit manner if he pleased, is manifest, because after
the same manner he gives grace to some, and perseverance in grace, he could do
it to all; If it may not be done after a fit manner, and yet according to their
supposall God wills it, then he wills something which cannot be done after a
fit manner; how great an absurdity is here fastened upon the Will of God, which
is the rule of all clear, righteous, and fit proceedings? This is a will
beseeming a child rather then God; Or, what will they say further? Though he
wills it, yet for as much as it makes more for his glory that all be not saved,
therefore all shall not be saved.

Answ. But if it makes against his glory that all should be saved, then he
wills it not, if God could will what makes against his own glory, and that way
whereby he has determined finally to be glorified, he could sin against
himself; according to this supposall, there are lines running cross in the
breast of God, and he is at strife with himself. That what the Poet speaks of
the weak elements amongst themselves, these Prophets speaks of the one,
perfect God.

Frigida pugnabant Calidis, humentia siccis,
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.
Cold things with hot, moist things with dry did fight,
Soft things with hard, and weighty things with light.
This last expressly, weighty things with light, his former Will, as a thing of
no weight, making against the weighty aim, and way of his own glory, (which
is the end, and measure, and rule, and poize of all) must give way to this
latter Will, as that wherein there is true weight.

4. From the happiness of God; Bradwardina, l. 1. c. 1.8 part Corollarii.
If he be perfectly happy, whatsoever he wills shall certainly be brought to
pass, happiness is an entire and perfect good, and it is more happy to have
whatsoever is willed, then to want it; for if the wanting of one thing willed
does not in any degree diminish happiness, then neither does the want of
another thing willed, for nothing added to nothing makes but nothing still,
then neither does the want of a third, fourth, and so on in the conclusion then
he may be as happy who has nothing that he wills, as he that has all things
that he wills: But this common sense abhors.

5. From the Knowledge of God; If from all eternity he knows who shall be
condemned, then did he will their condemnation, and that antecedently to this
knowledge, he therefore knowing it, because he has willed it; for whatsoever
he knows as that which shall be, he knows either in it self, or in himself;
he knows it not in it self, whilst as yet it is not, but nothing but
himself was before the creation of the world, therefore nothing in it self
could then be known to him.

Object. But as we see what is present in certain moments of time, so he in his
eternity comprehending at once and together all time, (for his eternity is the
entire possession together and at once of a boundless life) sees before all
time whatsoever is in any part of time.

Answ. That in his eternity he may see any thing in it self, there is required
not only the existence of his boundless life together and at once but the
co-existence of the thing it self to be seen, and therefore as man sees not
any thing in it self in one moment of time, which is not in that moment, but
shall be in an after moment, so neither does God see any thing in it self
before all time which is not, but in time, otherwise he should see time in it
self before all time; which is a contradiction, and here is no shadow of
imperfection in God, but an impossibility in the thing; and what is here said
for the thing it self, is as clear for all created causes of the thing, they
cannot in themselves be seen before all time, they themselves being but in
time, what he knows then from eternity as that which shall be, it is in
himself that he knows it, if in himself, in his will.

1. In God there is a threefold knowledge First, an apprehension of the nature
of things, this may be shadowed by those forms which we find in our own
minds, when we think of any thing merely according to the simple nature of it,
as when a builder has the Platform of a house in his mind, but proceeds no
further, either to determine it shall, or shall not, may or may not be built:
thus in the Divine Nature there is the apprehension of all things, possible,
impossible, possibilities, and unpossbilities, but that herein he does not
determinately know what shall be is manifest, because thence it would follow,
that he apprehends no more then the things that are, and shall be.

1. The knowledge of what is possible, what may or may not be determinately;
and this he knows in his own power, whatsoever is possible to be done, is
therefore possible, because he has power to bring it to pass; but herein does
he not determinately know what shall be, because then he should be of power to
do no more then he does.

3. It remains then that the knowledge of what shall be, is founded in his
will; how did he know the world should be, and should be this and no other,
before it was? in his mind are thousands of other forms and representations,
and he was able to have made it of annother form, and other kind of Creatures,
so that here he could not know it should be, and that it should be this; but
herein he knows both that it should be, and that it should be this, and no
other, because he wil'd that it should be, and that it should be this, that it
is: If God knew then from all eternity, that all should not be saved, and who
they were, herein he knew it, because it was his will that all should not be
saved, and that these should be they which should not be saved: But as has
been formerly noted, the Arminians are very creperous in point of Gods
knowledge of the state of man, in order to eternal life, allowing no
determinate and certain ground of it, either in God or Man.

Thus much for answer in general to these Scriptures jointly, now more
particularly.

1. To those two Scriptures, 1 Timothy 2.4. where it is said God would have all
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, and 2 Pet. 3.9.
where it is said, that God is not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance: these Scriptures free themselves from that general
interpretation, so he that wills that all shall be saved, as he wills that they
should come to the knowledge of the truth; so he is not willing that any should
perish, as he wills that all should repent; But is it the Lords will of
intention, or his decreeing will, that all without exception should come to the
knowledge of the truth, and to repentance? the contrary is manifest.

1. From the denial of means.

2. From the denial of his spirit to many who have the means.

1. For the denial of means. 1. He affords not to all the necessary means;
instances of this are so evident, as cannot be gainsaid: for the first 4000
years well nigh, the world generally was over-looked, the means of knowledge,
the discovery of the Covenant of God, only in the Church, and that Church shut
up first in the families of the Patriarchs, afterward in the little nation of
the Jews; hence that of the Apostle, Acts 17.30. and 16. Romans 25.26. hence the
Jews so startled when the door of faith was set open generally to the Gentiles;
The Apostle Peter himself, must by a Vision from heaven, be taught the counsel
of God, for the call of the Gentiles, Act. 10.

Since the coming of Christ, to this day, is the Gospel preached in every
Nation without exception? are there no Pagan Nations in the world?

2. He has sometimes denied the means to those whose hearts he has seen less
obstinate in case the means had come to them, then others unto whom he has
sent the means, and left them to perish in the obstinacy of their hearts
against the means sent; thus it was betwixt Tire and Sidon, on the one hand,
and Capernaum on the other, by our Saviors own Testimony.

Object. All in Adam were taken into the Covenant of Grace.

Ans. 1. If it was true, it reaches not, how shall his posterity in after
generations, come within the call of Grace, or to the knowledge of the Gospel,
merely upon that ground that Adam was once possessed of it for them.

2 It is utterly false, for then should Adam have been a root of Gospel
righteousness to his posterity, whereas it is Christ in opposition to Adam,
that is so, Romans 5.

Object. They had the means of knowledge in their Ancestors long since, who
by their unworthy working have lost them, for themselves and posterity.

Answ. 1. If that was granted, it would not thence follow that God would that
their posterity should come to the knowledge of the truth.

2 This supposes their Ancestors a common Stock, forfeiting for their
posterity, Gospel privileges all the world over; but it is plain that there
were some Nations which never had the Gospel among them, till many years after
the death of Christ.

Object. The Creation holds forth so much of God, that if man would improve it
so far as he might by the power of nature, God would then reveal the Gospel
to him, and give him preventing grace; and this law he made with Christ, for
the merit of his passion, so that thus all men have the means of saving
knowledge initially in the Creature, and it is in their hands to improve those
initiall means to the obtaining of the ultimate means in the word of the
Gospel, hence they teach that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, preach the Gospel
Romans 10.

Ans. This Tenent is merely Jesuitical, overthrown by the more Orthodox of the
Papists themselves, by these, or some of these following Arguments.

1. God in revealing the Gospel, is found of those that sought him not, etc.
Romans 10.20.

2. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy, Romans 9.16. whereas according to this Tenent, only to him that
by the improvement of natural power, wills and runs, mercy should be shown.

3. He will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens,
Rom 9.18. where the original ground of salvation is ascribed merely to the
will of God, but according to this Tenent, his will is suspended upon man's work.

4. Who made thee to differ? and what have thou that thou have not received? 1
Cor. 4.7. the graduall difference found amongst the Saints themselves, is from
God by what they receive; much more that specificall difference betwixt Saints
and Sinners.

5. The greatest of sinners who have most abused their natural Talents, as
Publicans, Harlets; and such as the Apostle reckons up, 1 Cor. 6.9.10. are
called, when many more restrained, and better qualified for moral virtues are
passed by. Non habeo etc. There is nothing that I can behold in choosing men to
saving grace; should I in my thoughts be permitted to the trial of this
Election, but either greater wit, or smaller sins, or both; let us add if you
please, bonest and profitable acts; whosoever therefore he is, who is entangled
and defiled with the smallest sins, (for from all who can be free?) and of
quick wit, and accomplished with the choicest acts, seems a fit man to be
chosen to grace; but when I shall thus determine, so will he laugh at me, who
has chosen the weak things of the world that he may confound the strong, and
the foolish things of the world, that he may confound the wise, that I
beholding him, and with shame corrected, laughed at many, who both compared with
some sinners, are more chaste, and with some fishermen, are Orators, etc.
Angustine. Ad Simplic. Lib. 1. ad finem fere.

6. According to this supposition, there is no place for preventing grace, but
it is prevented debt, when a sinner is converted, so that it overthrows it
self; not grace, because it is of works, and so not preventing, because
prevented by foregoing works, in the improvement of natural powers.

Object. But it is for the merits of Christ, and therefore of grace.

Ans. But where it is of works, it is not of grace, says the Apostle;
therefore this, has Christ no more merited, it (being the overthrow of grace)
then that we should be justified by works; by both which, grace would be made
no grace: as for that Text, Romans 10.18. compared weth the 19. Psalm, it is a
most ridiculous wresting, to apply it to this purpose; It is plain there, that
they whose sound goes forth, etc. are the Apostles, and sent teachers preaching
the word of the Gospel, to the ear; by whose preaching faith is immediately
begotten, upon hearing, verse. 14.15.16, 17 not the Sun, Moon, and stars,
holding forth the works of God to the eye, by which men are remotely prepared
for the Gospel, and faith by it; and what is alleged out of the 19. Psalm,
is spoken allusively; the course of the Gospel in the hands of the Apostles and
their Successors, compared to the course of the Sun in the sky: Thus much for
the denial of means.

2. For the denial of his spirit in regard of saving operation, to many who
enjoy the means: The same word preached is to one the savor of life to life,
to another the savor of death to death; whilst some are converted, others are
hardened: observe here,

1. It is God that makes the difference. 1 Cor. 4.7. the effectual call of a
sinner in saving illumination, faith and repentance is the gift, Ephe. 1.17.
and 2.8. Phil. 1.29. 2. Tim. 2.29. Ezekiel. 36.26.27.

2. It is of mere grace, without respect of former works, 2. Tim. 1.9. Romans
11.5.6. Romans 9.11.

3. The Lord herein uses an absolute liberty, Jo. 3.8.

4. He gives in the call of a converted sinner, both the power, and the acting
of that power; to such as are not converted he gives neither: the former part
of this is clear by the forementioned Texts, proving it to be his gift; both
the former and the latter is clear, Joh. 6.44.45. no man can come without the
fathers drawing and teaching; therefore where this is not, there is not so much
as the power, but where this is; not only can they, but they do come; hence
the conversion of a sinner is an effectual and a peculiar work of God; and if
God did the same for those who are not converted, which he does for those that
are, they should be converted too; but this we have seen before.

5. The Lord in this proceeds according to his decree, for converting some, by
hardening others against the means, Romans 9.18. for conversion, Act. 13.48. Romans
8.30. Ephe. 1.4.5. for hardening, Ioh. 12.37. to the 42. that the Jews were not
converted by the powerful ministry of Christ, was hence, says the Evangelist;
because the Lord had long before determined their hardening, and foretold it;
Esaias in his time beholding the glory of Christ, as he was to be revealed by his
coming in the flesh, and preaching, (adding miracles to his Sermons) to the
Jews; prophesied of these Jews, that they by his word and works should be
hardened: Hence then it will be manifest upon the summing up of these
particulars, that by all here, cannot be meant every one without exception; not
so much as the declaring will of God, in affordding the means being for all in
that sense; much less his decreeing will, according to which he dispenses
himself thus differently, both in affording and applying the means; we will
here conclude with Lib. de Genes. ad literam. c. 10.
S. Austin, God could (says he) turn the will of the wicked into good, he
could it is plain, because he is omnipotent, why therefore does he not? because
he will not; why he will not, it is with himself, (penes ipsum est) for we
ought not to be wise above what behooves. Here the wisdom and Sovereignty of God
betake themselves to their height, he that will here strain his eye, shall
lose his sight; he that will needs be sounding these depths, shall lose his
plumb; he that will search out the majesty, shall be overwhelmed with the
glory. Thus much for the particular Answers to those two Scriptures jointly,
now in the last place to each apart.

For the first, 1 Timothy 2.4. It is manifest by the Context, it is meant of all
ranks and orders of men, whether Kings, and those in Authority, or Subjects,
and those under Authority, (as in Gal. 3.28. no difference of Nation, sex,
condition, exclude from Christ) and there was special reason from the state of
those times for the Apostle to speak to this; The Kings and Rulers of the
world being then great persecutors of the truth, and professed enemies to it,
it might seem labor in vain to pray for such a deplored kind of men;
therefore the Apostle uses this reason, that of that order of men as well as
others, God has his Elect whom he will save.

For the second, 2 Pet. 3.9. To usward says the Apostle, who are these? The
Apostle an Elect and Believing person writing to the dispersed Jews, who for
the Gospel suffered persecution, themselves Elect Believers and sanctified, 1
Pet. 1.1, 2. and 2 Pet. 3.1. The sum then is this, God delays the day of his
great judgment, that he might first gather in all his Elect ones, not willing
that any of them should perish, and as this is applied to them of that
generation amongst the Jews, so it looks further to that harvest of Gods Elect
amongst them, which in their great call, yet to come, is to be gathered in,
Romans 11.28. etc.

For the other two Scriptures, Ezekiel. 33. and 18.

1. The Lord wills not their death by his declaring will, for as much as he
has commanded them to return, and given them means for it.

2. For his decreeing Will, the Lord by it wills not their death, according to
the purport of their charge against him, to which here he answers.

They charge the Lord, first, as unjust, punishing the children for the Fathers
offenses, the children themselves free, Ezekiel. 18.2. Secondas unmerciful, as
though inexorable against repentant sinners; this the Lord shows to be
charged against him in his answer to them, chap. 18. mentiening so often that
the wicked returning shall find mercy, and both these we find charged upon him,
chap. 33. unmercifulness, v. 10. injustice, v. 17. had this charge been true,
the Lord had delighted in the death and torments of perishing sinners, as a
Tyrant delights in the blood of his Subjects, had not willed their death as a
righteous judge wills the death of a Malefactor. The Answer then is, That God
does not so will the death of a sinner, as that he is liable to the Charge of
Injustice, condemning without fault, or to the charge of unmercifulness,
inexorable against repenting sinners, but for their just and true
encouragement, has he so fully expressed himself, not to will the death of a
sinner, no not of him that dies, in the mean time upon immovable grounds
formerly laid down, the Lord wills the death of those that die, for the glory
of his own power and justice, seen in their condemnation.

[The like Answers in general are to be given to those Seriptures so
frequently alleged, and as often perverted, for Universal Redemption; which
Scriptures the adversaries are wont to object against the Doctrine of
Predestination. Further and particular answers, 1. The main Texts alleged by
them, do of themselves, together with the Context afford: 2. The Analogy of
Faith in many fundamental Doctrines clearly taught in the word of truth,
amongst which this of Predestination has the leading place; in which whosoever
is truly instructed, is surely anchored against that windy error.]

Hitherto we have answered these two last Scriptures, Ezekiel. 18. and 33. upon
supposition that eternal death was there spoken of, whereas it is indeed
temporal judgments which they there complain of, and about which the Lord
cleares himself, as is manifest, Ezekiel. 18.2. with Jer. 27. to the 31. verse.
and Ezekiel. 33. from the 24. to the 30, verse. where it is evident, the desolation
of their Land was the matter of their quarrel and complaint, they were so far
from complaining, that God had given them over to hardness of heart, ordering
them thereby to eternal death, as that they justify themselves as suffering
undeservedly; That was indeed the complaint of an humble and repenting people,
Isai. 63.17. but these were quite of another strain. To this the sum of the
Lords answer is; That they are the Authors of their own woe, he is so far from
taking pleasure in their undeserved sufferings, that would they be righteous
they should be free from misery, to this end has he commanded them to turn
from their iniquities, and afforded them means for the same, that obeying they
might live. A great stir the Arminian Nation is wont to make with these Texts
of Scripture, disputing all the while upon a false interpretation, and merely
perverting the question here held forth.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
ROMANS 11.7. The Election has obtained it, and the rest were hardened.


WE come now to other their maine Objections, which tend upon supposall of the
former Doctrine, either to accuse God, or excuse Man

Object. 1. Say they, according to this Doctrine of Reprobation, God must be
the Author of sin, and so be guilty of sin, and this they urge upon three
grounds especially: 1. In that he decrees it, thence there is a necessity of
man's sinning. 2. In that he acts in it, producing as the first cause those acts
in and by man, to which sin cleaves inseparably. 3. That unto Adam he denied
that grace, without which it could not be, that as to the event be should
persevere in working righteousness.

Answ. What is here alleged as the grounds of this Objection, is owned by this
Doctrine, but the charge of the Objection is denied, as having here no footing.

1. For the decree; -- 1. That God decrees that sin should be, has formerly
been proved, but that hence he cannot be concluded the Author of sin is
evident, because the decree, as such, is an act immanent in himself, not
immanent upon the creature, it being the property of immanent acts to put
nothing in the object. -- 2. There is upon the decree of God a necessity of
man's sin, as Lib. 6 de Genes. ad literam. c. 15.
Austin says well, The Will of God is the necessity of things: But, 1. It is a
necessity not absolute, but upon supposall, or conditional, not of compulsion,
but of consecution, for as much as God has so decreed, it cannot otherwise
come to pass but man shall sin, yet does he sin freely, choosing so to do,
acting neither by constraint, nor from a principle of natural necessity; but
of this we shall speak more in answer to the third Objection, which charge
this necessity as inconsistent with the essential liberty of man's will. 2.
There is a necessity of the same kind for man's sinning, if we grant that God
fore-knowes his sin, if God fore-knowes that man shall sin, then must it
needs so come to pass, otherwise God fore-knowes that shall be, which shall
not be, but this clearly involves a contradiction: We must then either grant a
conditional necessity of man's sinning, or deny Gods prescience. 3. Upon
supposall that man shall sin without the decree of God, God himself stands
under the like necessity, a necessity upon supposall, or of consecution, for as
much as man shall sin, and is so fore-knowne of God, or whether so
fore-knowne or not, there is now no liberty left to God for preventing man's
sin, so that whilst we fear to lessen man's liberty, by allowing him to
stand under a conditional necessity arising from God, we fear not to lessen
Gods liberty subjecting him to the like necessity arising from man.

2. For Gods acting in the sins of men.

Answ. 1. That the great Creator as the first cause produces all motion in all
creatures, seems not obscurely to be taught by the Apostle, Acts 17.28. as he
is set forth the Author of life, in him we live, of being, in him we have our
being; so of motion, in him we move, and as the Apostle quotes there Aratus one
of the Heathen Poets, so sutably another of the Poets sings, Est Deus in nobis,
agitante calescimus illo; God is in us, he moving we wax warm.

To me it seems one of the four letters of his Name Jehovah, to be the Author
of all being, and therefore of all operations, in all creatures their
operations, not being nothing, and to ascribe to any creature only upheld, not
moved by God, to produce its own motion seems to transfer Divinity to the
creature, and derogate from it in God. I should think the motion of the
creature, in dependence upon the Creators moving, to be like that Engine, Ezekiel.
1. -- 16. a wheel in the midst of a wheel, the motion of God incompassing the
creatures motion, and moving it within it self: And I would further make this
Quaere, Does God uphold all and every being? I do not know that this is by any
denied, divine conservation and sustentation of whatsoever is; but if motion be
upheld by him, it is produced by him; for it being a successive entity or
being, how is it otherwise upheld then by Production? and if life be upheld,
motion is; this term, life, including this term, motion, life being in the
living creature, the supreme and universal principle and power of operation
actually in operation. But to insist no longer upon this; we affirm clearly,
as that which comes closer to the present question and concludes it, whatsoever
becomes of this discourse, for all creatures in all their motions depending
upon God.

2. That God as the supreme and universal Governor acts the wills of men,
turning them which way he pleases in their motions, is clearly expressed in
Scripture, and there is not a little depending upon this truth both for our
duty and comfort.

1. For Scripture-testimony, Prove. 16.1. What are the preparations of the heart
there, but the thoughts, desires, and inward workings of it? These are from the
Lord, Prove. 21.1. What is there said of the Kings heart is as clearly to be
affirmed of the hearts of other men: What more express? It is in the Lords
hand, like the rivers of water, he turns it which way soever he will; Is any
thing more easily turned this way or that way, then a watercourse? So easily
does the Lord turn the hearts of men, how are they turned but by their own
motions? They so move then by their own principles, as the Lord is the first
and supreme mover, Psalm. 106.46. He turned the Enemies hearts to pity his
people, and he gave them favor in the sight of the Egyptians, Exodus 11.3. So
he likewise had before turned their hearts to hate his people, and to deal
subtly with his servants, Psalm. 105.25. further testimonies (though these
might well suffice) will come in as we shall show the duties hereon depending,
which we now come to in some few instances.

2. Hereupon therefore it is our duty.

1. To seek after the Lord that we may know him, and give up our selves to him;
it is further manifest by these testimonies, how we are to understand that of
the Apostle, In him we move, the Apostle thence requires this as the duty of
all men living, having these experimental witnesses within them of their great
Creator, in their life, being, motion, they are not, they stir not without him.

2. To glorify God with all humble adoration, as the great Lord in whose hands
is our breath, and whose are all our ways, Dan. 5.23. all our ways, even to
the preparations of the heart, and all the motions and issues thereof, as we
have seen.

3. To take heed with sear and trembling to the motions of Gods spirit in us,
in the things that concern salvation, that we neglect them not Phil. 2.12.13.
for as much as we cannot act but as acted by God, and he acts us by our own
wills; first principled by his grace, then moved by his grace, then moved by
his spirit; take heed we be not wanting to second these motions of his in us.

4. To pray unto God that he would incline our hearts to himself, and to his
ways, Cant. 1.4. Psalm. 119.35.36. Jer. 31.18.

5. To praise God for whatsoever good inclinations and operations we have found
in our hearts, 1 Chronicles 29.14. for two things does David there bless God. 1.
That they had what to offer. 2. They had hearts wherewith to offer; the
willingness of their hearts was from the Lord, as well as all that store they
had to offer, and this he further acknowledges in prayer, verse. 18.19.

Other duties we might instance in, as humility; as in the last example, verse.
14. What am I, and what is my people? In giving the most to God, they received
the most, in that they received hearts to give, etc. But I forbear instances,
only one special case making for our no little comfort, in times of greatest
temptation, by the prevailing of wicked men against us.

The Lord has as well their hearts as hands in his power, to make them pity
us, favor us, as we have seen; he has made promises to this purpose, Prove.
3.4. So when any man's ways please the Lord, he will make even his enemies to
be at peace with him; and it must not now remain in the hand of man, whether
the Lord shall be true in his promises or no, which it must do, if he do not
act and turn the hearts of men as he pleases; Jacob trusted to this when he
made that prayer, Genesis 43.14. supposing Joseph to be some godless-Egyptian. Now
let any man judge whether these testimonies, and duties thereupon depending,
import no more but this; that God conserves man, and upholds his faculties,
propounds objects, and persuades, then stands a looker on, leaves it merely in
man's power to act, or not to act; this way, or that way; so as for the event,
it may or may not not be, this or that, nothing certain or determined.

Hence then we affirm, that God as the great Creator and universal Ruler,
produces all operations, and motions in the heart of man, even those to which
in man sin cleaves unavoidably Much more to this purpose, see lib. 5.
contra. Julia. c. 3.
God works in the heats of men to incline their wills whithersoever he will;
whether to that which is good for his own mercy, or to that which is evil for
their merits, St. Austin. But now to answer the Objection, How then is he
himself free from sin?

1. God works as the supreme mover, man as the proper subject; that is, in whom
is the principle of the sinful action: this is one step clearing God in the
case in hand, to make it plain by instances; The Sun shining upon a Dunghill,
raises a stink; the Sun stinks not, but the dunghill in which is the
principle of the stink, and it is by the operation of the Sun that it stinks:
sinful man is as the dunghill, God as the Sun. A Clock false made, moved by
the poise striks false; the poise moves true, though the clock strike false. By
the shining of the Sun upon a false Dyall, the hours of the day are falsely
given, the Sun is true in his course, yet without his motion the Dyall would
not lie. A skillful writer using a pen with an hair in it, for fair letters,
blots are made; yet he writes according to as exact art with that, as with the
cleanest pen, the fault is only in the pen. A skillful Musician plays upon an
Instrument out of tune, the music jarres, the instument sounds amiss; yet he
shows no less skill, neither transgresses the laws of Music any more, then
if he played upon a well tuned instrument. Sinful man is the false Clock, the
false Dyall, the blotting Pen, the jarring instrument; God in his motion is the
Poyse, the Sun, the Writer, the Musician; from God is the motion, in man is the
principle of the evil in the action.

2. God works as the Author of nature, man as a moral Agent: that is, as
standing under a law, which whilst he observes, or violates, his action is free
from fin, or sinful, sin being the transgression of the Saw of God: now those
actions are the same considered as natural, which as moral differ extremely,
and God works uniformely in those actions which are naturally the same, though
morally very different, and in point of good and evil, contrary. Instance,
Adam eating the forbidden fruit, does the same thing in natural consideration,
which he had done in eating the same, had it not been forbidden him; yet then
had his eating been a lawful and blameless action, whereas now it was most
sinful: nor only the outward action of eating, but his will and desire of
eating (supposing him to have willed, and desired it not forbidden) has been
the same in nature that it was when he desired it forbidden; yet in one case
free from sin, in the other deeply guilty. Whence rises this difference; not
from the different exertion of natural power, or a difference in the operation
of his will as natural, but from his different condition; because he is in one
case under a law forbidding, from which in the other he was free: Now God here
works as the Author of nature, and uniformely; the difference of man's condition
varies not his operation: as the Sun shines uniformely upon a Dunghill, and
upon a Garden, though the effect be contrary; the weights move uniformely the
true, and the false clock, etc.

Another instance; suppose one man in heat of affection slay his adversary
justly, another unjustly his friend; here is innatural consideration, one and
the same action in both, the same exertion of natural strength outwardly in
the motion of the Arm, the same animosity inwardly stirred up in the motion of
the will; therefore the operation of God, who works as the Author of nature one
and the same for kind in both; the difference in moral consideration is found
only in the men, the one acting according to the law of God, the other
contrary to it.

3. God works according to a pure rule, man contrary to a pure rule, Gods rule
is the dictate of his own wisdom, for his own glory; whatsoever the wisdom of
God represents as making for his glory, that God wills and acts accordingly:
now it is plain by the issue, and by Scripture testimony, that the wisdom of
God has suggested the way for his final glory, in man's final state, such as
supposes the sin of man, making way for that glory; God therefore according
to this rule, both determines that man shall sin, and acts sinful man in those
actions of his, to which as in, and from man, sin cleaves unavoidably. Man's
rule is the Law of God, man in sinning, though he fulfils Gods intention (for
who has resisted his will? the Jews in crucifying Christ, did whatsoever the
hand and counsel of God had before determined to be done) which is not his
rule; yet he acts against his law, which is his rule; and therefore God acting
according to his pure rule is blameless, man working contrary to his pure
rule, guilty.

The third ground whereupon they will have the Doctrine of Predestination
formerly asserted to charge God as the Author of sin, is, That unto Adam wa
denied that grace, without which it could not be, as to the event, that he
should actually persevere in his righteousness.

Ans. To affirm that God is the Author of sin, is granted on both hands
blasphemy, and therefore whatsoever the Scripture teaches concerning Gods
dispensations to man about the first sin, or fall of Adam: this conclusion
cannot thence be inferred that God is the Author of sin. Now all the question
is, what the Scripture here teaches: This say we, That unto Adam was denied
that grace, without which it could not be, as to the event, that he should
stand, and this we clear by these following steps.

1. Adam was created in the Image of God, Genesis 1.26. that is [whatsoever more
is comprehended] in righteousness and true holiness Ephe. 4.24. herein was that
state of habitual righteousness, whereby he was able to do whatsoever good he
should will to do: all the faculties of his soul were fitted to work according
to the rule of righteousness without any interruption; it was not then with
him, as it is now with the regenerate, Romans 7.18. with whom to will is present,
but how to perform that which is good they find not; he had withal by that
habitual righteousness a power to will that which was good, even all that
good which God according to his law engraven on his heart might require at his
hands, free from any principle byassing him to evil: and this power, and this
righteousness, had all his posterity in him.

2. That he was denied the grace whereby he should actually stand, is manifest
by the event; fallen he is, but God was able to have afforded him that
effectual grace, whereby his fall had been prevented, as he has dealt with
the Angels, who keep, and for ever shall keep their first standing; and had
that grace been afforded him, he had stood, for it is a contradiction to say he
had that grace, whereby he should not only be able to stand, but should
actually stand; and yet grant that he stood not, he had then both a power to
will all that was good and to do all that good which he should will; but to
will, and to do that for which he had a power, was not given unto him. A sound
eye has the faculty of seeing, there is the power; but that it may actually
see the object before it, it must have light: An Instrument truly made and
tuned, has in it the power and principle of sounding harmoniously; but that it
may yield it is harmony, the skillful touch of the Musicians hand is necessary:
Hence St. Austin, Lib. de correptione and great. c. 11.
The first man had not that grace by which he never could be evil; but that
grace he had in which if he would abide, he never should be evil. Such an aid
of grace he had, as which he might forsake if he would, and in which he might
abide if he would: not such as whereby it might come to pass, that he should
will to abide. Then comparing it with that aid which believers receive in
Christ; so much greater is that aid which is given by Jesus Christ our Lord,
unto whom it seems good to God to give it, that not only we have that,
without which we cannot persevere, although we should will; but so great, and
such that we shall will: for there is in us by this grace of God, both in the
receiving and holding with perseverance that which is good, not only to be
able to do that which we will, but also to will that for which we are able.

Cap. 12.
Again, To the first man, who in that goodness wherein he had been made
upright, had received to be able not to sin, to be able not to dye, to be
able not to forsake that goodness; was given an aid of perseverance, not by
which it might come to pass that he should persevere, but without which he
could not be able by his free will to persevere: but now to the Saints
predestined unto the Kingdom of God, by the grace of God not only such an
aid of perseverance is given; but such an one, as that to them perseverance it
self is given; not only so, as that without that gift they cannot persevere;
but so, as that by this gift they may not but persevere. Much more to the same
purpose frequently in him.

3. It could not be that he should have that grace, whereby as to the event he
might stand, as to his own fitness he had by his habitual righteousness a
power of standing, he was habitually fitted for it; but that it might stand, as
to the event, there must be further a vigorous influx from God, of light upon
his mind, of holiness upon his will actuating his habitual power; Now that
this should be afforded him, it could not be, that being supposed for which the
Scripture is clear.

1. That God knew certainly that he should fall; that man is put to a very hard
shift, who shall deny Gods certain knowledge from all eternity of Adams fall,
or of any event whatsoever; and the free confession hereof would be refutation
enough to most men's apprehesions (the impression of Gods perfection, as for
other Attributes, so for knowledge, deing deeper set upon the heart of man,
then by a little miserable Sophistry to be wiped out) of that unlucky opinion,
which can be no otherwise supported then by despoiling God of his essential
properties. Now if God knew certainly that Adam should fall, then it cannot be
that he should have that aid of grace whereby he might as to the event stand;
for then God should know certainly that that should be, which yet certainly
might not be, namely, Adams fall, whereas for as much as God knows certainly
that it shall be, it may not for the event, but be.

2. That God has decreed his fall; If God had decreed that Adam should fall by
his permission, (and in that decree of his own permission it was that he knew
certainly that Adam should fall) then could it not be that Adam should have
that grace whereby as to the event he might stand; for then Gods
Administrations to man might make void his own decree, but that God had so
decreed we have formerly proved: Let us gather up a brief discourse about it.

1. That God decreed the making and ordering all the works of his hands for
his own glory, as the end of all, is most unquestionable.

2. That he decreed particularly that glory which comes to pass from his
creature; either that particularly, or another particularly, or lastly, none
particularly, but his glory generally, and indefinitely; not another
particularly, it is too absurd to say that he decreed what comes not to pass,
and decreed not what comes to pass, such an apprehension does at once utterly
overthrow his wisdom and power; neither did he decree his glory only generally
and indefinitely, that apprehension necessarily supposes a defect in his
wisdom for dictating distinctly and particularly the way of his glory, and
ascribes unto God the weakness of man discoursing from generals to particulars,
which is always accompanied with, and supposes imperfect knowledge and power.

3. That he decreed his own glory comprehensively, to wit, all that glory in
every particular which arises to him from the creature, this is clear (to
wave other Arguments) from the two former particulars, because his glory is the
end of all his works, as his glory particularly as it comes to pass.

4. That glory of his in the final state of man being such as supposes sin,
(for how shall some be saved in mercy, others in justice condemned without
sin?) and particularly Adams fall, and in him all his posterity, it must needs
be that God decreed that glory of his, and that way of his glory.

Object. But why does God give a righteous law in charge to Adam, inables him
with habitual righteousness for the fulfilling of that law, and yet determines
that he should not fulfill it.

Answ. We have from clear and unshaken principles but now proved that God has
decreed that way of his glory, or the glory of those Attributes in man's final
state which necessarily supposes sin, not to the decree, but to his glory; but
if God had not made man righteous, and given him a righteous law in charge, and
left him to the violation of that law, there could have been no sin in man;
herein is sin, man transgresses that law which he is commanded to observe,
and for fulfilling whereof he had a power, Adam in himself, and we in him

Object. By what right does God condemn may for sinning, when he has first
decreed, and then his dispensation toward man is according, that he shall not
have that grace without which it cannot otherwise come to pass but he shall
sin?

Answ. But by what right does dust and ashes lift up its head against the great
Creator in these bold enquiries?

1. Whatsoever appears by the Word of God to be his Will, there is no place for
this enquiry; By what right? The Will of God being the rule of righteousness;
Nay, Lib. 1. de Genesis Contra. Manich c. 3.
so the highest rule of righteousness, that whatsoever he wills, in as much as
he wills it, it is to be accounted righteous: wherever therefore this question
is asked, Why has the Lord done thus? the answer must be, because he would:
but if thou shall go on in asking, but why would he? Thou now seek
something greater and higher then the will of God, which cannot be found
Augustine.

2. The Lord here stands upon his dominion over man as his Creator, and
thereupon checks the insolency of this enquiry: Nay but O man who art thou that
reply against God? Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, why
have thou made me thus? or has not the Potter power over his Clay? etc. It is
too high a pitch for man to soar, to call his Creator to the Bar, and there
implead him face to face.

3. The Lords proceeding here by virtue of his Dominion, is a depth that must
with trembling be admired, cannot be sounded. O the depth! Romans 11.33. Will thou acknowledge no more in the most mysterious ways of God, then what thy
reason can graspe?

1. See the refutation of thy pride in the most common things of natures course
every day before thine eyes, Ioh. 38 give a clear answer to, and make a clear
demonstration of those Geomerrical, Physical, and optic Problems there; here
let me make the challenge to thee, which sometimes learned Lib. 1. c. 1.
Corolari part 32. vertus principium.
Bradwardine, that great Asserter of the cause of God, against thy fore-father
Pelagius made to the prond Philosoper deriding Christians, because they
believed what the Scripture affirmed, though they could not make it good by
reason: Tell me thou Philosopher (says he) what it is that thou know
thoroughly? not theleast mote in the Sun beams, nor the least grain of dust of
the earth, nor the least drop of water; in the least material quantity,
infinite lines, figures, superficial, corporcall, diverse in quantity, quality
and kind are contained; and therefore answerably infinite conclusions
Geometrical, orderly succeeding, so as that the latter cannot be known but by
the former; infinite Arithmeticall conclusions, in orderly dependence likewise:
of these, many conclusions in themselves demonstrable, how many know thou?
Nay, let all the Philosophers be joined together, how many of these infinite
conclusions know they? a very few; there remains therefore very many, not one
whereof for their difficulty, and your meanness does any of you, or all of you
together know: A little after, the least spark of fire, does it not by
enlightening and warming make infinite or numberless circles of light, and
spheres containing and contained, as likewise crossing one another; numberless
lightsome Pyramids likewise, and Pyramids visuall, and those very different one
from another; numberless likewise lightsome and visuall beams incident,
reflex, refract, in which are contained infinite cenclusions, Geometrical,
Arithmeticall, and perspective; and who can fully know all these? In the same
place he argues, how much less can thy finite little soul comprehend the
great God, who is every way infinite? Nay, blush thou Philosopher, and be
ashamed to own so small a God, as that thou so small, by thy mind so small,
should search him out quite through, should ransack all his secrets,
should have a comprehensive knowledge of him. Thus he.

2. Because thou art a christian, let us go one step higher. Can thou
comprehend by reason all the mysteries of faith? what? that of the three
persons in the one Godhead? the generation of the Son? the procession of the
spirit? what of thy saviors Incarnation? the distinction of the two natures
united into one person? As for those, who, because they cannot by reason
comprehend, do therefore deny these main Articles of our Faith; my charity is
not easy enough to call them Christians. I will conclude with St. Austine,
Thou a man requirest of me an answer; why, but I am a man too, De verbis
Apostol. Sermon. 20.
let us therefore (...) bear him who says, Nay but O man who art thou? thou
ask a reason, a will tremble at the depth: thou arguest, I will wonder:
dispute thou, i will believe; I see the depth, the bottom I cannot reach: S. Paul
rested, because he found where to shut up with wondering; be calls them the
unsearchable judgments of God, and do thou come to search them? He calls
them those ways of his which cannot be traced, and will thou needs trace them?
How much better, and more Christian was it, to captive our reason to faith,
believing what the Scripture says, even then when our reasonlesse reason
replies, How should these things be?

Object. Is not this great Cruelty in God to appoint his Creature by his decree
to destruction? and here they are wont to raise a mighty outcry, and by odious
comparisons to aggravate this Charge; Tigers (say they) and Bears, and all the
most savage Creatures, are kinder to their young then so.

Ans. To clear the question. 1. God appoints not the innocent, but the guilty
creature to destruction; though the foresight of sin be not before his decree
for sin, and destruction: yet his decree appoints that sin shall be before
destruction, and destruction shall be for, and by sin.

2. To refute the Objection.

1. Must they not acknowledge that by Gods permission man sins? that by Gods
appointment the sin of one man has cast the whole world into a state of
condemnation? that in the issue, the greatest part of mankind is destroyed?
that sometime the whole world was given up to reigning sin, and perished
generally in their (...) eight persons excepted? that for many ages the Lord
suffered all Nations to walk in the wa^es of their own hearts, without God,
without hope in the world? that to this day he (...) many Nations to perish
without he knowledge of Christ, there being no other name amongst men whereby
salvation is had? that many to whom the Gospel is sent, are hardened by it? when
as yet it was in the power of the Almighty to have prevented all this, and that
without any the least trouble to himself. Now if Gods dominion over his
Creature, does not absolve him of trial at the Bar of natures Law in the
Creature (as this objection would bear in hand) how will they avoid this charge
of cruelty against him granting what they must grant? would (...) not be
cruelty in the Creature, and against the law of nature, to see their young ones
torn in pieces before their eyes, in case they could prevent it; especially
without any hazard or trouble?

After the same manner they argue, in charging God as the Author of sin; it is
sin in man to wi^^ that another should sin; therefore to suppose of God, that
he wills that man shall sin makes his the Author of sin; so they conclude, if
this be just arguing, there is no sin in the world, but God must be the
Author of it, whether he will it or not (if we can imagine that God permits sin
besides his will) for it is sin in man to permit another to sin, when he has
power in his hand, (and that without the least trouble to himself) to prevent
it.

2. Is there the same kindred and Consanguinity betwixt God, and all the sons
and daughters of men without exception, that there is betwixt the living
Creatures, and their young ones? it is true we are his offspring, or of his
kind, Act. 17.29. inasmuch as we have our life and being in him, and were
created in his image; but to be his sons and daughters, depends upon his
Covenant in the hand of Christ, made on the behalf of the peculiar and chosen
seed; now for them let the whole world perish, not one of them shall miscarry,
Romans 4.16. Ioh. 8.35. Ioh. 11.52. 2 Timothy 2.19. Esaias 53.10.

3. Their own objection falls in full weight upon their own heads, who teach
that ruinous Doctrine of final apostasy; that they who are truly the children
of God, having embraced his Covenant by true faith, may yet fall from the state
of life totally and finally, and so perish for ever.

4. Wherein does this cruelty appear? that God should condemn hardened sinners,
is that cruelty? no; that he should harden wilful sinners, viz. give them up to
hardness of heart as a punishment of their former sins, is that cruelty? no;
that he should not recover from sin; all the Sons and Daughters of Adam without
exception, is that cruelty? no; that he suffered Adam to sin, and imputed his
sin to his posterity, is that cruelty? no; All these things they grant,
Scripture-evidence being so clear for them; though some of them, true sons of
their Father Pelagius, would gladly, if for shame they durst; and some have put
shame here) deny the imputation of Adams sin, and so original sin; in one of
these two then, or in both together, must be the cruelty, that unto Adam was
denied that aid of grace, without which it could not be, as to the event that
he should stand; that God decreed antecedently to the foresight of sin, the
sins of men; but it has been proved already that this is no cruelty in God,
but the charge of cruelty hereupon is blasphemy in man. Instance; But at the
least God is not so merciful, according to this Doctrine, as the Scripture
sets him forth. Reply 1. And how is he so powerful, and so perfect as the
Scripture represents him, if any thing fall out beside his decree and the full
purpose of his will? 2. The Scriptures which speak most this way have been
cleared already, and therein we have discovered how inconsistent it is with the
nature and happiness of God, that in any thing his will should be frustrate.
3. There are two sorts of mercies, 1. Common, in the blessings of this life;
these are to all the children of men, Acts 14.16.17. 2 Peculiar in the
blessings of eternal life, those which shall surely make for it; here the
Apostle avoucheth a difference, Romans 9.18. and this founded merely in the will
of God, verse. 11.13. these are only to the Elect, Ephe. 1.3.4 and how clear
the current of Scripture is for this, has formerly been abundantly made good
the greatness of the Lords mercy is declared extensively in the former, that
they are to all, even to those who live and dye his enemies, intensively in the
latter. 1. That they are so excellent in their nature. 2. That they are so
peculiar; as we have formerly seen at the end of the third Sermon. So that if
the Holy Ghost knows by what argument to commend the mercies of God to man; he
that denies the former mercies to belong to all, or affirms the latter to
belong to all, derogates from the mercies of God indeed.

These are the two main Objections made against the former Doctrine, accusing
God: a third now follows tending to excuse man.

Object. 3. The former Doctrine takes away the liberty of man's will, and so
quits him of all sin; liberty of will being necessary to every sinful action.

Upon two grounds do they conceive the liberty of man's will overthrown. 1. In
that God has decreed his sin. 2. In that God moves his will, when he wills
sinfully, the motion that is from God upon the will of man, determining it in
its operation: whence man must sin of necessity, and therefore not freely, and
so his sin is no sin; the objection against the liberty of man's will is the
same, in actions not sinful.

Ans. 1. For the decree.

1. It is most clear by Scripture, and has been formerly proved, that the
actions of man's will both good and evil, are decreed by the Lord. Let us here
only give some special and remarkable instances. 1. For good actions,
embracing the call of God in the conversion of a sinner is decreed, Romans 9.11.
Romans 8.28 30. Acts 13.48. the faith and obedience of converted sinners, in an
holy course is decreed, Ephe. 1.4. 2 These. 2.13. The obedience of Christ
fulfilling the will of God in performing the great work of man's Redemption, was
decreed, 1 Pet. 1.20. Heb. 10.7. for evil actions: The crucifying Christ by
the Jews and Romans was decreed Acts. 4.27. Absoloms incest was decreed, as is
manifest in that it was foretold by God, 2 Samuel 12.11. and generally
whatsoever was foretold, as that which should certainly come to pass, and not
conditionally (as Nineve his destruction) must needs be decreed, for if God
have not determined, that either by his works or permission, whatsoever he has
foretold shall come to pass, then may his word be falsified: hence then the
bitter persecutions of the Church by her wickedest adversaries, the faith and
patience of the Martyrs, in all ages is decreed. To instance in the rage of
mystical Babylon; the faithfulness of the Virgin-company, the true Church of
Christ, overcoming her temptations: to instance further, in the Kings of the
Earth, first subjecting themselves unto that whore, afterward hating and
destroying her, in the conversion of the Jews, and with them the fullness of
the Gentiles; these are all foretold as those things which should certainly be,
and therefore were they all decreed; and how much of the will of man, and the
workings thereof, is in all these things who can but see?

2. Yet hence is no infringement of the liberty of man's will, because the
decree as such, is an action in the breast of God, makes no change in man, or
in his condition, till it come to excution.

3. The decree establishes man's liberty, forasmuch as God has decreed that
man shall will, it is now beyond all peradventures that he shall will, for the
counsels of God shall stand; but how certain soever it is that he shall will, so
certain it is that he shall work freely; for to will, is in the motion of the
will to work freely; to will, and not to act with liberty of will, is a
contradiction: not only all things and operations, but their different kinds
and manner also fall under the decree of God; who as he has fitted necessary
causes to work necessarily: as the fire burns necessarily, so has he likewise
fitted voluntary, and contigent causes to work voluntarily (that is freely) and
contingently.

Object. But what God has decreed unist necessarily come to pass, other wise
his decree might be frustrate.

Answ. It must necessarily come to pass, that is, it must of necessity come to
pass, yet not necessarily, that is by necessary operation, but on the contrary,
if it depend upon a free and contingent cause, it must of necessity come to
pass, freely and contingently, here is only a necessity of the event, not of
the manner of production, and therefore a necessity of consequence, not of the
cause, a necessity neither natural nor violent, and the necessity of
consequence we have formerly seen must be granted, or we must both deny Gods
foreknowledge, and make him stand under that kind of necessity, which we think
it an unworthy thing that man should stand under.

Object. But may one and the same effect, both necessarily and contingently
come to pass?

Answ. It may, the necessity being rightly understood, viz. not simple, or
absolute, but respective or conditional: Instance, 1. In the actions of God,
he creates the world freely, it was in his liberty whether he would create a
world or no, whether this world or no; yet upon supposition that he has
decreed it, it is now necessary that it be in time created, neither can it
otherwise come to pass but this world must be created. 2. In the actions of
man; when Christ was crucified, his legs were not broken, that the Scripture
might be fulfilled which had formerly affirmed, that not a bone of him should
be broken, God having so determined as by his Word was declared, it could not
be that they should be broken, yet did the soldiers forbear to break them
voluntarily and contingently, they were neither naturally nor violently
necessitated to forbear. Another instance, whether in the actions of God or the
creature, what is done, must of necessity be done, it is impossible that a
thing should be done, and not done at once; yet if there be any free or
contingent act in the world, which is granted on all hands, liberty and
contingency must be granted to stand with that necessity. This Objection is yet
further cleared by these two following Rules.

1. All effects produced by the creature are necessary or contingent, according
as the creature it self, the next cause is in its manner of operation: Natural
agents are necessary causes, as fire, the Sun, they work necessarily, the fire
in burning, the Sun in shining, producing always the same action for kind,
heating, inlightning, working to the utmost of their power, therefore their
effects are necessary. Voluntary agents are free and contingent causes, they
work freely and contingently, they so act one way, as that they have an
intrinsical power to act another way, so will, as that they have a power to nil,
so nil, as that they have a power to will the same thing as they shall like or
dislike; and therefore their effects are free and contingent.

2. In regard of God, the first cause, all effects in the world are both
necessary, and contingent, or free; in regard of his intrinsicall liberty,
whereby he may choose whether he will produce them or not they are free, or
contingent; so for the shining of the Sun, and the burning of the fire, though
they be necessary effects in regard of the Sun and fire, their next causes, yet
are they contingent in regard of God, in whose liberty it is to afford or
withold his influx for their production: So the Creation of the world, all
effects depending immediately upon the Will of God, Angels, or Men, are in
regard of their immediate causes free and contingent; all the most
casuallevents, as the lot in the lap, in the same regard contingent; yet all
these upon supposition of Gods decree, are necessary. Thus much for the decree,
and the necessity thence arising.

2. That the will of man is moved by God, and by that motion of his determined
in its operation, does not take away the liberty of man's will.

For clearing this, we must take notice of a twofold liberty; there is the
liberty of 1. Independence 2. Choice.


1. The liberty of Independence, where the will so acts, as it is not acted by
any higher cause; this is peculiar to the will of God, he only is independent,
upon any other in the motion of his will; the wills of all men and Angels are so
under his dominion, as that they are moved by him; this has formerly been
proved, as to men, that God as the great Creator and universal Ruler, moves
the wills of men which way soever he pleases: many more arguments might be
brought to demonstrate that the liberty of man's will must admit the effectual
motion of God upon it; so acting it as acted, may act, especially is this
cleared in the Doctrine of Conversion and Perseverance; but to insist upon
these would be an unseasonable digression, especially the thing in hand having
been already proved.

2. The liberty of choice; where the will in its operation does what it likes in
the light, and upon the sentence of the practical understanding, there are two
acts of the will, to will and to nill, to choose, to refuse: Now herein is the
liberty of the will expressed: 1. That in these operations it does what it likes,
it wills with liking, it nills with liking; yea with liking does it nill even
the object which it dislikes, and therefore it so wills or nills the present
object, as that it has power at the present to will what it nills, or to nill
what it wills; was there an impression of liking upon it contrary to what is,
yet though it have this opposite power at the same time, it has not a power to
produce opposite acts at the same time, it being impossible that a prevailing
liking, and disliking of the same thing should stand together at once. 2. That
it act in the light and upon the sentence of the practical understanding, that
is, the understanding as it shows and determines wherein is our happiness or
good for the present most desirable, and what makes necessarily or mainly for
it; this must needs be required to the liberty of the will, because the will is
a rational appetite, and therefore cannot otherwise will or nill, then as the
understanding represents the object good or evil; and therefore whatsoever it
wills it wills as good, cannot will any thing as evil, for then it should act
not as a rational appetite that is, not as the will; it is true, that the
understanding mistakes many times good for evil, and evil for good, whence
good is either true or apparent, but whatsoever it is that the will chooses,
it is that which the understanding represents as good, and therefore though the
will have a power when it wills the present object to nill it, if it should
like so to do, yet so long as the understanding represents it good to will it,
and evil to nill it, it cannot like to nill it.

Hence it is manifest, how man in the operation of his will, differs from
necessary Agents, whether natural Agents, as the fire, or sensitive as the
bruit beast; they are determined by the force and instinct of nature: natural
Agents without either apprehension or choice, or any shadow of either;
sensitive Agents have only the light of sense according to which they like or
dislike, and therefore not so much a true choice as a shadow of it; man in the
operation of his will, does what he likes or dislikes in the light of the
understanding. Now to apply this to answer the objection, the liberty of
Independence being peculiar to God, where this liberty of choice is, there is
all that liberty of will which is found in the Creature, Angel, or man.

Object. But how does determination to one part stand with this liberty of
choice?

Ans. There is a double determination 1. To one of the contrary objects, good
or evil, morally understood; that this may stand with the liberty of the will
is clear: On the one hand, God himself, Christ, the Angels, the glorified
Saints, can will only that which is good; neither have they power to will what
is evil; yet in them is the highest liberty of will, without which there is no
holiness. On the other hand, the Devil, the damned, the hardened, we may add
all the unregenerate, can only will that which is evil yet in all these the
will is free, (naturally free, though morally enslaved) without which there was
no sin; determination then to one of these contrary objects, takes not away the
liberty of the will. 2. There is a determination to one of the contrary acts,
to will or to nill; neither does this take away the liberty of the will, for
then the exercise of its liberty should take away its liberty, when ever it
either wills or nills, it is for the present not indifferent about the object,
but determined; now as the Adversaries suppose the will to determine it self
unto, and in its own operation, thereby not destroying, but exercising its
liberty, so we affirm that God by his motion determines it, moving it by its
own principle, and according to its own nature, that is, by the understanding
determining it to its operation, and so moving it, as in the virtue, and by the
efficacy of his motion it does whatsoever it likes in the light of the
understanding, with a power to the contrary if it should like; so that
whatsoever is required to its liberty, stands fair with the motion of God
determining it; and the more firmly it is in its operation fixed to the
object, the more fully does it exercise its liberty, as liking more vehemently
what it does, but still in the light of the understanding.

These are the main Objections, where the Answers to these shall satisfy; what
Objections remain, will prove but wash way, where satisfaction is not received
about these, it will be but lost labor to proceed to others.

FINIS.
June 5. 1648.
Imprimatur

John Downame.

ERRATA,
Page 1. line 18. for only of life, read only way of life, p. 4. l. 7. for
(...) degree r. decree, p. 5. l. 30. for into this maze, r. in this maze, p. 7.
l. 12. for the Scripture, r. that Scripture, p. 12. l. 30. for Law, r. love, p.
15. l. 26. for fore-light, r. foresight, l. 33. for in the first ground, r. is
the first ground, p. 19. l. 13. for it peradventures, r. it, at peradventures,
p. 31. l. 23. for harden to Reprobate, r. harden the Reprobate, l. 32. for it
use, r. its rise, p. 32. l. 24. for 1. r. 2. p. 50. l. 29. for apart together,
r. apart, and altogether, p. 52. l. 10. for line of whom, r. line excepted of
whom, p. 56. l. 2. and 3. for glorfying, r. glorying, p. 57. l. 21. for whereby
Christ, r. whereof Christ, p. 59. l. 17 for two John, r. 6. John, p. 65. l.
9.10. for to the praise, r. 10. To the praise, p. 70. l. 24. for understand, r.
understood, l. 33. for when, r. whom, p. 75. l. 20. for, makes for his glory,
r. makes for glory, p. 80. l. 8. for urge an edge, r urge and edge, p. 89. l.
3. for 1. r. 2. p. 90. l. 8. for he that wills, r. he wills, p. 93. l. 10. and
13. for acts r. arts, p. 94. l. 27, for is the gift, r. is his gift, p. 95. l.
17. for by hardening others, r. by; hardening others. p. 106. l. 12. for heat, r.
heart, p. 107. l. 17. for Saw r. Law.

Some other small slips there are, and diverse mis-pointings which I omit.


