THE CHVRCHES TRIVMPH OVER DEATH. Opend in a SERMON Preached September. 11. 1660.
at the Funeral of the most Religious and ver. tuous Lady, The Lady MARY LANGHAM.

By EDWARD REYNOLDS D. D. now Bishop of NORWICH.

(...),

1 Cor. 15. 55. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for John Baker at the sign
of the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

To his ever Honored and most worthy Friend Sir James Langham K.
SIR,
IT has not been without a special providence of God, that this Sermon
preached above a year and an half since, at the Funeral of your most religious
Lady, should now by your earnest desire, come abroad unto public view. For
hereby a just Account is given to the world of those deep and permanent
Impressions of Love, Sorro^ and Honor, which the memory of so matchless a
Consort have made upon your soul, when a wound so long since inflicted, does
not yet cease to bleed afresh upon the continually recurring thoughts of so
inestimable a loss. I have read in the Civil Law, That if a woman married again
before the expiration of ten months after the death of her former Husband, she
did Subire maculam Infamiae: But after such a space of time, it was presumed
she might overcome the pressures of so great a sorrow, and yet still retain her
Honor. You have passed over double that time, and yet not at all out of an
unmanly softness, but out of a just and most judicious esteem of those eminent
graces, which did so beautify the soul, and perfume the name of that excellent
Lady, you do, not without redoubled Honor, often resume the view and sense of
that divine stroke whereby you were deprived of so unvaluable a Treasure. Nor
am I my self without a special Advantage acrewing unto me by this Publication,
having so good an opportunity to let the world know that great debt of Honor,
Love and Thankfulness wherein I stand bound to your noble Father, your self,
and all the branches of that worthy Family for those many Favors, those real
and great bounties, which ever since I have had the Honor of an acquaintance
with you, have been, and yet are enmulated upon me: I have no other way of
paying back the Tribute which I ow to you all, then by beseeching the God of
Grace to make all his Grace abound toward you all, and plentifully to supply
you with the choicest ^f his heavenly Treasures, according to his Riches in
Glory by Jesus Christ, which is the unfeigned prayer of

Your most faithful Friend And Humble Servant, Ed. Norvic.

THE CHURCHES TRIUMPH OVER DEATH.
ISAIAH XXVI. 18, 19. We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as
it were brought forth wind, we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth,
neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen.

Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise: awake
and sing ye that dwell in the dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the
earth shall cast out the dead.


THe holy Prophet having in the foregoing Chapter set forth many gracious
Evangelical promises, does here in this celebrate them with a song of solemn
and public thanksgiving, blessing the Lord for his salvation to his Church,
and his severity against the enemies thereof.

Whereupon we find the Church entertaining many holy Resolutions, as fruits and
expressions of that her joy. She resoves to trust in the Lord for ever, in
regard of his strength and fidelity toward his people, and of his power and
jealousy against their enemies, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. She resolves to wait upon God
in the midst of judgments, upon the remembrance of that Name of his, whereby
he made himself known to his people in Egypt, Exodus 34 6, 7. as a God able to
give being to every promise, and by his truth and power to perform what his
mercy had covenanted to do for her, Micah 7. 20. ver. 8, 9, 12. And this
confident waiting upon God in trouble is commended ab opposito by the contrary
disposition of wicked men, whom favors and mercies cannot persuade to learn
righteousness, ver. 10, 11. She resolves to submit to Gods fatherly Government
alone, and to renounce all other usurping and tyrannical Lords, who had
exercised domination over her, in reregard of Gods judgments executed on them,
and his mercies renewed to his people, v. 13, 14, 15. She resolves to pour out
her prayer unto God in the midst of all present troubles, acknowledging her own
impotency, and the miscarriage of all her own carnal counsels and contrivances,
and thereupon trusting no longer in her self, but in God which raises the
dead, ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. Lastly, after all these pious dispositions and noble
resolves, she concludes her song with a triumphal Epinicion and insultation
over all her enemies, and with an assurance that as they should die and not
live, fall and not rise, their persons and their memories should perish, ver.
14. so she should live, and rise and sing, and flourish, as the herbs buried in
the Earth, when the dew of Heaven falls on them to refresh them, ver. 19.

Some refer the words to the Babylonian Captivity, wherein they were as dead
bones in a grave, Ezekiel. 37. 11, 12. without any strength, wisdom, or visible
hope of being ever delivered.

Some to the afflicted state of the Church under the Gospel, and the Rest or
Sabbath which the Lord would give them at the last, out of all their labors
and sufferings, Heb. 4. 9. Rev. 20. 2.

Some to the last Resurrection and the faith of the Church touching that. And
there is nothing more usual then for the Church and holy men therein to support
their hearts above their incumbent afflictions, and to secure to themselves,
the comfort of promised deliverance, notwithstanding all the seeming
improbabilities thereof, by the general doctrine of the Resurrection. See Job
19. 25, 26, 27. Isa. 66. 14. Hos. 6. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 9. Irenaeus lib. 5. cap. 15.
30. Tertul. de Resurrect. c. 32. Hieron. and Cyril in loc.


Whatever was the particular state of the the Church then, certain it is, that
in the general the words extend to the Resurrection of the faithful, and are so
interpreted by the Ancients, Irenaeus, Tertul. Hierom, Cyril, Augustine, Aug.
de Civ. dei lib. 20. cap. 21. Calvin Institut. l. 2. c. 10. sect. 21. l. 3. c.
25. sect. 4.
and by learned moderns Expositors.

The sore affliction here of the Church is compared to the pangs of a woman in
travel, who earnestly cries out, and striveth to be delivered; a frequent
allusion to express any exquisite pain by, Isa. 13. 8. Jer. 13. 21. She had in
this her sore distress, cried with strong groans and cries unto God to be
delivered, but all in vain, she brought forth nothing but wind, pain without
profit, Jer. 12. 13. Wind is an usual expression, whereby the Scripture
describes frustraneous events, Jer. 5. 13. Hos. 8. 7. 12. 1. the womb of the
Church miscarried, and brought forth, flatum pro faetu, they looked for
salvation and deliverance, but they were totally disapointed, they had the
pains of a traveling woman but not the comfort of a child born, John 16. 21.
when they looked for deliverance from one calamity, they fell into another; or
as some render it, instead of bringing forth a child, or working any
deliverance, they were delivered of their own spirit, or gave up the Ghost. The
next words are a litteral explication of the metaphor, We have not wrought any
salvation or deliverance. All our conceptions and cries end in vanity and
disappointment. All our Hopes touching the ruin of our enemies, ver. 14. are
come to nothing, they are not fallen. But we are dead men, very carcasses, we
dwell in the dust, we are as low as calamity can make us.

Now above all this misery the Church by faith lifts up her head, in the
assurance of a glorious Resurrection. She turns away from the view and sense
of her own sufferings, from the conceptions and parturitions of her own
Counsels, and carnal contrivances, and with a triumphant. Apostrophe turns to
God.

Thy dead men shall live] The pronown is very emphatical, for they are the
words of the Church to God, as appears by the continuation of the context, from
ver. 16. so it is not meant of all, but of Gods dead men, whether figuratively
in any desperate clamity, or really in their graves, For the words will extend
to both.

Shall live] or do live, are prisoners of hope, have a seed of life in them,
even in the grave. It is the Apostles similitude and illustration, 1 Cor. 15.
36, 37, 38.

With my dead body] In the Original it is thus. My dead body, They shall live;
by an usual Enallage of the number, every one of my dead bodies shall live.
Some make it an expression of the Prophets faith, applying to himself the
comfort of that common salvation, Calvin.
preaching nothing to them which he was not in his own particular assured of.
Sasbout.
Some take it as an Answer of Christ to the Churches faith, as if it related to
that, Mat. 27. 52, 53. I conceive them to be the words of the Church still,
comforting her self in the assurance of Gods mercy to every one of her mystical
members, which assurance is expressed by a kind of Hypotyposis, calling the
dead to come forth out of the dust, and to rejoice for her deliverance.

For thy dew is as the dew of Herbs] Thy divine word, power, and promise is
able to do unto us as dew unto herbs, though they seem outwardly dried up and
dead, yet having a vital Root, they do by the fall of the dew send forth their
Leaves and beauty again. Now God has more care of us then of herbs, and his
spirit more efficacy then the dew, and therefore however we may be withered and
consumed with calamity and death, yet he will raise us up again, and cloth us
with beauty and glory. Thus the Scripture often argues from natural to
supernatural things, Jer. 31. 35, 36. Jer. 33. 20, 21. Psalm. 89. 36, 37. 1 Cor.
15. 36. And this similitude of dew reviving and refreshing decayed herbs we
frequently meet with, Prove. 19. 12. Isa. 66. 14. Hos. 14. 5, 6.

And the earth shall cast out the dead] as a woman does an untimely birth. The
Grave shall be in Travel with the dead, (...).
the Apostle seems to point at such a Metaphor, Acts 2. 24. and shall be
delivered of them. Another version thus, Thou shall cast the Giants in the
earth. They who here as Giants did trample on the Church, and were formidable
unto her, shall then fall and perish, when thy people shall awake and sing, as
ver. 14. so elsewhere, They shall take them captives whose captives they were,
and they shall rule over their oppressors, Isa. 14. 2. the sons of them that
afflicted them shall come bending unto them Isa. 60. 14. 65. 13, 14.

In the words we observe two general parts 1. The Churches complaint under very
great calamity and disappointment, ver. 18. 2. Her triumph over all her enemies
and sufferings, ver. 19. The complaint being expressed by the metaphor of
conception and parturition intimates. 1. The Greatness of their affliction.
2. The Contrivances they used to procure deliverance from it. 3. The
disappointment of them all; we have brought forth wind, as elsewhere ye shall
conceive chafe, and shall bring forth stubble, Isa. 33. 11.

In the Triumph we may consider, 1. The Matter of it, Deliverance from the
lowest to the best condition, from death to life, from a carcass to a
Resurrection, from corruption to glory, from dust to singing. 2. The Reasons of
it, 1. In regard of the subject, Mortui tui, Gods dead men, Cadaver meum, the
Churches dead body. 2. In regard of the Author and virtue whereby it should be
effected, the Word, the Power, the Spirit of God metaphorically expressed, Ros
tuus, Thy dew is as the dew of herbs.

From the first general the Prophets complaint we may observe three things.

1. That the Lord exercises his own people, yea his whole Church sometimes
with sore and sharp afflictions, with the pangs and throws of a woman in
travel. Sometimes we find them in a house of bondage in Egypt; sometimes in a
Grave in Babylon; often oppressed with Philistims, Midianites, Cananites,
Ammonites, Edomites, Syrians, under the tyranny of the four great Monarchies of
the earth. So the Christian Church first under the persecutions of the Heathen
Emperors of Rome, and then under persecutions of Antichrist and her witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth 1260. years. Rev. 11. 3. 12. 6.
As Christ first suffered and then entered into glory, Luke 24. 26. so must his
Church, Romans 8. 17. Christ has a double Kingdom, that of his patience, and
that of his power, we must be subjects under the Kingdom of his patience,
before we come to that of his power. The Church must pass through the Sea and
the Wilderness to Canaan, they must be in a working and suffering condition,
before they come to the Rest or Sabbath which remains for them, Heb. 4. 9.
David's militant Reign must go before Solomon's peaceable Reign.

Our sins must this way be mortified. Our faith, hope, love, patience,
humility, Christian courage and fortitude be exercised. Our conformity unto
Christ evidenced. The measure of the wickedness of the enemy filled. The glory
of God magnified in supporting them under, in delivering them out of all their
afflictions, and raising them up when they are at lowest.

Therefore we should not esteem it strange when we fall into diverse
temptations, or see the Church of God in the world in a suffering or dying
condition, 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13, 17. Jam. 1. 2. If we will have Christ for our
husband, we must take him for better for worse. 1. His afflictions are short,
and but for a moment, Isa. 54. 7. 2 Cor. 4. 17. 2. Sanctified by the Spirit of
glory and of God resting upon us, 1 Pet. 4. 13, 14. 3. Seconded with grace and
the power of Christ to support us under them* 2 Cor. 12. 9. 4. Operative unto
peace, righteousness and glory, Romans 8. 28. Heb. 12. 11. 5. Not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18. 6. Proportioned to
our need, 1 Pet. 1. 6. and to our strength, 1 Cor. 10. 13. If we will come to
glory we must go the same way unto it as Christ did, the way of holiness, and
the way of sufferings, Act. 14. 22. and surely if there be enough in a woman's
child to recompense the pains of her travel, John 16. 21. There will certainly
be enough in the glory to come to recompense all our pains, either in our
obedience or in our afflictions.

II. We might here note, That even Gods own servants in time of trouble and
calamity are very apt to betake themselves to their own conceptions and
contrivances for deliverance; they are big oftentimes with their own counsels,
and in pain tobring forth and execute their own projections, in order to the
freeing of themselves from trouble. Genesis 12. 13.
Abraham, Genesis 20. 2.
when he was afraid of Pharaoh and Abimelech dissembled his relation unto
Sarah; David fearing Achish the King of Gath fained himself mad, 1 Samuel 21. 11,
12, 13. when he feared the discovery of his adultery, he gave order for the
killing of Uriah, 2 Samuel 11. 15. one sin is the womb of another. When Asa was
in danger from Baasha King of Israel, he bought his peace with the spoils of
the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 16. 1, 2. when Jonah was afraid of preaching destruction
to Ninive, he fled unto Tarshish from the presence and service of the Lord,
Jonah 1. 3. when Peter was afraid of suffering with Christ, he flies to that
woeful Sanctuary of denying and forswearing him, Mat. 26. 69 -- 74. thus the
fear of man causes a snare, Prove. 29. 25.

This therefore is a necessary duty in time of fear and danger, to look up (as
the Church here after disappointment by other refuges, does) with a victorious
and triumphant faith unto God, Isa. 8. 13.
and to make him only our fear and our dread, not to trust in fraud and
perverseness, or to betake our selves unto a refuge of lies, Isa. 30. 12. 28.
15. but to build our confidence upon that sure foundation, on the which he that
believes shall not need make have. If we lean not upon our own understanding,
nor be wise in our own eyes, but in all our ways acknowledge him, and trust in
him, and fear him, and depart from evil, we have this gracious promise that he
will direct our paths, Prove. 3. 5, 7. the more we deny our selves, the more is
he engaged to help us. But when we travel with our own conceptions and will
needs be the contrivers of our own deliverance, it cannot be wondered if the
Lord turn our devices into vanity, and make our belly prepare wind and deceit,
Job 15. 35. as it here follows. We have brought forth wind, we have not
wrought any deliverance, all our endeavors have been vain and succeslesse.

III. Carnal Counsels and humane contrivances are usually carried on with pain,
and end in disappointment, and do obstruct the progress and execution of Gods
promises unto us. If we would go on in Gods way, and use the means which he
has directed, and build our faith and hope upon his promises, we have then his
Word to secure us, his Spirit to strengthen us, his Grace to assist us, his
Power and fidelity to comfort us, we have him engaged to work our works for us,
and his Angels to bear us in our Ways. But when we seek out diverticles and
inventions of our own, when we will walk in the light of our fire, and in the
sparks which we have kindled, Isa. 50. 11. and be wise in our own conceit, Romans
12. 16. and walk after our own thoughts, Isa. 65. 2. no wonder if we be
disappointed, and made ashamed of our own counsels, Hos. 10. 6. when we sow the
wind, it is not strange if we reap the whirle-winde, Hos. 8. 7. And therefore
it is our wisdom to cease from our own wisdom, as the wise man exhorts, Prove.
23. 4. in as much as the Lord has pronounced a curse upon those that are
prudent in their own sight, Isa. 5. 21. whom usually he disappointeth, Job. 5.
12.

We have considered the Churches complaint, her anguish, her disappointment.
Now in her Triumph we are first to view her deliverance, and then the causes of
it.

In the deliverance is a Gradation both in the misery from which, and in the
condition unto which they are restored. For the former, 1. It extends unto dead
men, whom to quicken exceeds the power of nature. But we do not use to give men
over, and lay them out for dead as soon as their breath fails them, some
diseases look like death; therefore the deliverance goes further unto Cadaver
meum, my carcass, which the remainders of vital heat have forsaken, laid out,
carried away, severed from the living, hastening to putrefaction. But death
makes yet a further progress, this carcass must be had out of sight, lodged
in the bowels of the earth, and there dissolved into dust, his house must know
him no more, Job 7. 10. and yet even here when death has carried a man to the
end of his journey, and landed him in its own dominion, so far shall the
deliverance extend. The Damsel whom Christ raised was mortua, though yet in the
house amongst the living, Mark 5. 35. The widows son gone a little further into
the Region of death, coffined up, laid on the Biere, carried out from the
House, a Carcass, Luke 7. 14. Lazarus in deaths den, Inhabitator pulveris, as
far as death could carry him, yet raised up, John 11. 38, 44. so there is a
gradation in the Terminus a quo of this deliverance. There is likewise a
gradation in the Terminus ad quem, the condition unto which they are restored.

1. They shall Live, and this is a favor though one stay in prison.

2. They shall Rise, their life shall be to an exaltation; the wicked shall live
again, but it shall be to die again; but these dead shall live and rise, their
life shall be an advancement to them.

3. They shall Awake, like a man out of sleep refreshed and comforted, Psalm.
17. 15.

4. They shall sing, as victors over the grave, never to return thither more.
So we have here, 1. The sad condition of the Church. 2. The great mercy and
power of God to them in that condition.

Their sad condition in the former of these two gradations.

1. They are dead men, in a condition of death, their whole life a conflict
with mortality. And though this be not a calamity peculiar to them, (for death
feeds equally upon all) and though there be a great alleviation in their
being Mortui tui, The Lords dead men; yet in some respects we find the weight
of mortality on the Churches side. Wicked men meet many times with an (...),
live in pleasure, and then die in ease, spend their days in wealth and jollity,
in vanity and folly, and go suddenly to the grave, die only once and together,
Job 21. 13. whereas holy men have complained of dying daily, 1 Cor. 15. 31. of
being in deaths often, 2 Cor. 11. 23. of being compassed about with death,
Psalm. 18. 4. The wicked have no bands in their death, Psalm. 73. 4. they are at
an agreement with it, have as it were hired it not to disquiet them, Isa. 28.
15. they put it far from them, Amos 6. 3. whereas good men have their souls
often drawing nigh to the grave, Psalm. 88. 3.

Dead, then here they are, 1. Quoad mortis praeludia, all the forerunners and
harbingers of death common to them with all others, sorrows, sicknesses,
distresses, and infirmities of all sorts.

2. Quoad vitae exitum, they end their days in the same manner as other men;
the wise man as the fool, Eccles. 2. 16. Psalm 49. 10. thus in common, good men
and bad. But godly men

3. Are dead quoad affectus, Their affections and meditations are upon death.
Wicked men feed and fat their lusts, fetch out all the sweetness that sin has
in it. Whereas holy men mortify their earthly members, crucify the flesh with
affections and lusts, are ever dying to sin and the world, Romans 6. 11.

4. They are dead, quoad seculum, crucified to the world, Gal. 6. 14. and
therefore hated by it, John 15. 19. nothing to be looked for from it, but
persecution and tribulation, John. 16. 33. as men have done to the green tree
so they will to the dry, Luke 23. 31. suffering belongs to the essence and
calling of Christians, 1 Pet. 2. 21. they are hereunto appointed, 1 These. 3. 3.
They are in his sense properly Mortui tui, the Lords dead men; for worldlings
are not sufferers by calling and profession as true Christians are. They are
not in trouble as other men, Psalm 73. 5. Job 21. 7 -- 13.

II. From Mortui tui, it proceeds to Cadaver meum; and such they are not only
by dissolution after death, but by condition before it; used like a dead
carcass, exposed to contempt and dishonor, as the refuse and offscouring of
men, Lam. 31. 45. 1 Cor. 4. 13. trodden under foot, Isa. 63. 18. Psalm. 119. 51.
had in derision, Jer. 20. 8. Jer. 20. 8.
filled with contempt, Psalm. 123. 3. made as the ground and as the street for
proud men to go over, Isa. 51. 23. thus the righteous is an abomination to the
wicked, they loath him as a man would do a dead carcass, Prove. 29. 27.

III. From dishonor they proceed to a kind of despair; They are Habitatores
pulveris, they dwell in the dust, they are not only dust by constitution, Genesis
3. 19. and by dissolution, making the Grave their House, and their bed in
darkness, Job 17. 13. but further by estimation, they judge so of themselves,
abhorring themselves, and putting their mouths in the dust, Job 42. 6. Lam. 3.
29. they are valued so by others, Isa. 10. 6. as the mire of the streets. This
is the sad condition of the Church sometimes in this world under persecution
and captivity, so they were in Babylon as dead bones in a grave, Ezekiel. 37. 11,
12.

By all which we learn what to look for in the world when we give our names to
God. The usage not only of strangers and enemies, but even of dead carcasses,
to be buried in contempt and dishonor. The way to life lies through the
country of death, as the way to Canaan through a sea and a wilderness; no
scorns, no graves must deter us from a godly life, if ever we hope for a
blessed resurrection. Neither may we think it strange when we meet with
troubles in the world which are but the preludes and prefaces unto death, nor
when one evil is over, may we sing a requiem to our souls as if all were
passed, but look for vicissitudes and successions of sorrow, for clouds after
rain, till we are landed in the Country of death. And since our tenure in this
world is so obnoxious both to encumbrance and uncertainty, we should die to the
world while we are in it, as those who are very shortly to be translated from
it, and having no abiding station here, be careful to look after that City
which has foundations, and so to acquaint our selves before hand with death by
meditation on it, and preparation for it, that it may not come as a messenger
of wrath, but as an Harbinger of glory, that in our death we may be Mortui tui,
The Lords dead men, and prisoners of Hope, the Spirit of Christ in us being the
earnest and seed of a Resurrection unto life.

We have considered the sad condition of the Church expressed by our Prophet in
that Emphatical Climax, Dead men, a Carcass, Inhabiters of the dust. Let us
next take a view of the mercy of God in her deliverance, a deliverance not
only commensurate to her troubles, but victorious over them, dead indeed, but
she shall live; a carcass, but she shall arise; asleep, but she shall awake;
in the dust, but she shall sing. So there is mercy fully answerable to the
misery, no temptation without an issue, no calamity without an escape.

1. Vivent Mortui, or as others read it, Vivant. True both. They do live, They
shall live. They have life in death, and that life shall work them out of death.

1. They do live in death. Wicked men are dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5. 6.
dead in Law under the sentence of the curse, as Adam was legally dead by guilt
and obnoxiousness the same day that he did eat the forbidden fruit. Dead in
conscience under the pain of that sentence, and under the bondage of deserved
and denounced wrath, Heb. 2. 15. Heb. 10. 27. dead in sin, under the power of
Lust, Ephesians* 2. 1. Psalm. 14. 3. their throats Sepulchers full of rotten words,
Romans 3. 13. their hearts Sepulchers full of unclean affections, Matthew. 23. 27,
28. their lives Sepulchers full of dead works, Heb. 6. 1. But mortui tui, the
Lords dead men live even in the Kingdom and Country of Death.

1. They live in praeludiis mortis, in all the forerunners of death; in the
greatest calamities they bear up their hearts in the favor of God, which is
better then life, Psalm. 63. 3. 2 Cor. 6. 9. In these things, all these things;
we are Conquerours, more then Conquerours, Romans 8. 37.

2. They live in Regno mortis, in the Kingdom and Country of death; when death
has possession of them, they live still: you are dead, and your life is hid,
Col. 3. 3. The death of a Christian is not the taking away of life, but the
laying up of life; as a Parent takes the Child's money, and keeps it for him: He
that believes shall live, though he die, John 11. 25. As Abel being dead, yet
speaks, Heb. 11. 4.

Yea, their very bodies, though dead to them, do live to God, for he is the God
of the living, Mat. 22. 32. therefore the Jews call their burying places Domus
Viventium. 1. They live in the Promise and Power of God, Mat. 22. 29. 2. They
live in the Life of Christ their Head; whether we wake or sleep we live
together with him, 1 These. 5. 10. as we are risen with him, and sit with him in
heaven, Col. 3. 1. Ephesians. 2. 6. 3. They live in the Seed of the Spirit of
Holiness, whose Temples they are, which is in them a pledge and seminal virtue
of Resurrection, Romans 8. 11. compared with 1 Cor. 3. 16. 6. 19. In which
respect the Apostle compares the bodies of the faithful unto Seed, I Cor. 15.
42. to note, that by the Inhabitation and Sanctification of the Spirit, there
is a vital virtue in the body to spring up and awake again.

Thus even in the state of death, we have vitam Absconditam, Col. 3. 3. hidden
out of our sight and sense, as seed in the Furrow, as a jewel in the Cabinet,
as an Orphans estate in the hand of his Guardian, hidden with Christ the first
fruits, and in God the Author and Fountain of Life. Thus vivunt, they do live.

And further, vivent, they shall live; for our life in Christ is not a
decaying, but a growing and abounding life, Joh. 10. 10 therefore it will break
forth into the similitude of Christ's glorious Body, in whom it is hid, as the
Corn grows into the likeness of that seed wherein it was originally and
virtually contained, Joh. 12. 24. Col. 3. 4. Phil. 3. 21. 1 John 3. 2, 3. Of
natural life we cannot say, I live, and I shall live, for natural life runs
into death, as Jordan into the dead Sea: But of Christian life we may say, I
live, and I shall live; it is a life which runs into life, though through the
way of death; as the waters of the Caspian Sea are said through subterraneous
passages to have communion with the great Ocean. It comes from heaven, Christ
the Fountain and Center of it: and it goes back unto heaven: As a piece of
earth falls to the whole earth, so every piece of heaven will find the way to
its whole.

2. Resurgent: With my dead body they shall arise, their life shall be given
them for their advancement: wicked men shall live again, that they may dye
again, and shall rise, ut lapsu graviore ruant, that they may be thrown deeper.
Pharoahs Butler and Baker came both out of prison, the one to his office, the
other to dishonor, the one to be advanced, the other to be executed: So mortui
tui, and mortui seculi, shall both come out of their graves, the one from a
prison to a Furnace, the other from a prison to a Palace: In which respect
Believers only are called, children of the Resurrection, Luke 20. 36. It is a
Resurrection of life to the one, of condemnation to the other, Joh. 5. 29. And
therefore to distinguish them from the other, it is added:

3. Expergiscimini. They shall awake as a man refreshed with sleep, which puts
a great difference be^ween the deaths and Resurrections of the godly and the
wicked.

1. The death of the godly is but asleep: 1. In regard of the seeds of life
abiding in them. A man in sleep cease from the acts of sense, but the
faculties he retains still: So an holy man, though he lose in death the acts
of life, yet the seed and root he has not lost, he lives to God still.

2. In regard of his weariness of the world, and fullness of days: A man
wearied with labor lies down willingly to rest: Abraham d^ed full of days, he
was satiated, and desired no more, Genesis 25. 8. the Apostle had enough of the
world, when he desired to depart, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. whereas a
wicked man, how old soever, is not said to die full of years, or satisfied with
life: He may be loaded, but not replenished; he knows not whither he is going,
and therefore he would fain stay in the world still.

But it may be said, Have not wicked men brought death upon themselves, as
Achitophel, Saul, Judas, and godly men been sometimes unwilling to die, as
Hezekiah? Isai. 38. 1, 2.

True both, yet neither the one out of the love of death, nor the other out of
love of the world: wicked men are impatient of present anguish, and
inconsiderate touching future terrors, and therefore rush upon the one to
avoid the other: But godly men are weary of the body of sin, and believe the
favor of God, and glory of Christ's presence, and that makes them desire to
depart, and to be with him: Nor did Hezekiah decline death out of a servile
fear, being able to plead unto God his uprightness, but out o^ a desire to live
to complete the Reformation of the Church which he had begun, and that he might
have a Successor to derive the Line of the Royal Seed unto.

So then death to the godly is but a sleep, in regard of the rest it gives
them, Rev. 14. 13. from sins, from sorrows, from labors, from enemies, from
temptations, from fear, from evils to come; and therefore Job calls the grave
his bed, Job 17. 13. and so the Prophet, They shall lie down in their beds,
Isa. 57. 2.

2. This awaking makes a great difference between the Resurrection of the godly
and the wicked: the one rises refreshed, as sleep repaireth the decays of
Nature, so that a man rises vigorous and recruited; therefore the time of the
Resurrection is called the time of refreshing, and of restitution of all
things, Acts 3. 19, 21. The other rises affrighted, as a man awakened with a
Thunderclap, or whose house is in a flame about him; the one awakes to his
work, the other to his Judgment; it is morning and everlasting day to the one,
it is horror and darkness to the other; and therefore it is added:

4. Cantate, when they awake they shall sing: as David when he awaked, calls on
his Lute and Harp to awake with him, Psalm. 57. 8. In their graves, at Bobylon,
they hung their Harps on the Willows, no music then, Psalm. 137. 3. but they go
out of their graves, as Israel out of the Red Sea, with Victory and Triumph
over Death and Hell, and so shall sing the Song of Moses and the Lamb. Dust and
Ashes, in the Scripture phrase, are ceremonies of mourning, Job 2. 12. Mic. 1.
10. but here they who inhabit the dust, are called upon to put off their prison
garments* and to shake themselves from their dust, Isai. 52. 1, 2. to awake
unto singing and triumph; when they awake they are satisfied, Psalm 17. 15.
Thus we see the deliverance of the Church, is fully as large as their distress.
From all which we learn:

1. The true cause why Death and the calamities leading thereunto, do still
remain after Christ's Victory over them; to wit: 1 To exercise our Faith and
Hope in Gods Promises, for the righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14. 32.
2 to conform us unto Christ, as well in the way to life, as in the end, 1 Pet.
4. 13. 3 To wean us from the love of the world, which both uses us ill, and
passes away, 1 John 2. 15, 17. John 15. 19. 4 To increase our desires of
glory, that we may with good Jacob, wait for the salvation of the Lord, Genesis
49. 18. 5 To commend our love to Christ, which makes us willing to be
dissolved, that we may go to him, as a stone is contented to be broken in
moving toward its center, Phil. 1. 23. 6 To commend the power of
Righteousness, which is not afraid of the King of Terrors, nor to go to
Christ, though there be a Lion in the way, Act. 21. 13. Romans 8. 35-37. 7 To
show the sweetness and virtue of the Death of Christ, which makes a Bed of a
Grave, an Antidote of a Serpent; has brought sweetness out of the strong, and
meat out of the Eater; has bound Death with her own Grave Clothes, and set a
Guard of Angels over the bodies of the Saints; has rolled away the heavy st^ne
from the graves of his people, and made it a place of ease and refreshment;
has made our Graves like a Garden, that our bodies like herbs might spring out
again; has slain Death as Benaiah did the Lion, in its own pit, and has made
it sick of the bodies of his people, and travel in pain like a woman
with-Child, till at last it be delivered of them.

2 We should by Faith and Hope in this Doctrine comfort our selves against all
other calamities, and encourage our selves against Death it self, which is but
a depositary, and shall be an accomptant unto God for every member of his
Church, though it has swallowed them, as the Whale did Jonah, it shall cast
them up again: though to the wicked it be a Trap-door which lets them down to
Hell, and so keeps them in the midst of laughter sorrowful, in the midst of
plenty and pleasures fearful, in the midst of hope doubtful, when they remember
the days of darkness, for they be many, and the days of torment, for they be
more: Yet to Believers it is a Bed, a Rest, a Sleep a Friend, when it shuts the
door between us and the world, it opens a door between us and heaven: Pardon of
sin, and peace with God, makes us bold to play with the hole of the Asp and
with the Cocatrice den, Isai. 11. 8.

We have thus far considered the Church as dead, buried in the dust; as
quickened, raised, awakened, delighted in God: We are

III. To take a view of the causes of this deliverance, which are 1
Dispositive, in regard of the Subject. 2 Efficient, in regard of the Author.

The dispositive causes qualifying the Subject for this deliverance, are in the
two Pronowns, Tui, and Meum: thy dead men: my dead body. These mercies are not
promised generally unto all dead men, but unto the Lords dead men, whom he has
chosen and formed for himself, Psalm 4. 3. Isai. 43. 21. If he say thou art
mine, neither water, nor fire, nor East, West, North, South, Egypt, Ethiopia,
nor any other Enemy shall keep us back from him, Isai. 43. 1, 2, 6.

1. His we must be, if we will not be lost in death. 1 His by Consanguinity;
for Christ having taken upon him the Nature of Adam, and the Seed of Abraham,
and so vouchsafing to call Believers Brethren, Heb. 2. 11. by that means God is
become our Father, John 20. 17. and therefore in the deluge of desolation, he
will bring us into his Ark, as Rahab, when she was delivered her self, called
together her Kindred to share therein with her, Josh. 6. 23. 2 His by purchase;
there was a dear and precious price paid for us, we were bought with no less a
price then the Blood of God, Act. 20. 28. and therefore he will vindicate his
Claim and Title unto us; no man will lose what he has paid for, if he be able
to rescue and recover it out of the hands of unjust possessors: Christ having
bought us, Death shall not withold us from him, the Redeemed of the Lord
shall return, Isai. 51. 11. 3 His by Covenant; thy Maker is thy Husband, Isai.
54. 5. and being married to her, he will make her return, Jer. 3. 14. Any
loving Husband would fetch back his Wife from the Dead, if he were able to do
it. 4 His by Dedication, Inhabitation, Consecration, as a Temple, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
If Death destroy his Temple, he will raise it up again, John 2. 19. The Spirit
that dwells in us, will quicken our mortal bodies, Romans 8. 11.

2 His dead men we must be; we must dye to sin, because he died for it; we must
kill that which killed Christ; we must be dead unto sin, if we will live unto
God, Romans 6. 11. His dead men, his perseverantly until death, Rev. 2. 10. His
patiently, even unto death, Heb. 10. 36. Nothing must separate us from his
love. His ultimately, whether we live, we must live to the Lord, or whether we
die, we must die unto the Lord, Romans 14. 8. that he may be glorified in our
mortal bodies by life, or by death, Phil. 1. 20. And being thus His dead men:

1 We are sure Death comes not but with a Commission from him, his providence
sends it, his power restrains it, his love and wisdom guides and orders
it to our good; it is his Officer, it shall touch us no further then he gives
it authority, John 19. 11. He has muzled and chained it; he says to Death, as
to Satan concerning Job, He is in thine hand, but touch not his Soul, meddle
not with his Conscience, or with his Peace; and for his Body, thou shall but
keep it, thou shall not destroy it, thou shall be accomptable for every piece
of it again.

2. Being His dead men, he has always an eye of compassion upon us, our
sorrows and sufferings he esteems his own, Isai. 63. 9. Col. 1. 24. Act. 9. 4.
and if they be his, he will certainly save us from them, and conquer them as
well in us, as in himself, for unto him belong the issues from death, Psalm 68
20.

3 As ever therefore we look for blessedness in death, or deliverance from it,
we must labor both living and dying, to be the Lords, that he may own us when
the world has cast us out, that we may be precious in his sight, when we are
loathsome to the world; jewels to him, when dung to men, that our Graves may
not only have worms in them to consume us, but Angels to guard us. If we die in
our sins, and be Satan's dead men, we shall never rise with comfort, rottenness
will feed not on our bodies only, but on our names, we shall have worms in our
consciences, as well as in our carcasses: But when we can say, Lord, I am
thine, thou art mine, we may thence infer, we shall not dye, Hab. 1. 12. We
have a life which death cannot reach, Col. 3. 3. this therefore must be our
special care, to be Mortui tui, to dye to the Lord, to fall asleep in Christ, 1
Cor. 15. 18. that when he comes we may be found in him, and so may be ever with
him, 1 These. 4. 17. This is the first qualification of the Subject for
deliverance, to be Mortui tui, the Lords dead men.

2. The next is, that it is Cadaver meum: 1 Mine, as the words of Christ, being
my body, they shall surely rise: 2 Mine, as the words of the Church; Every
member of my dead body shall rise in the unity of the whole.

1 Then my dead body being members of an Head that lives for ever, and has the
Keys of Hell and the Grave, shall certainly rise: His life is the Foundation of
ours, Because I live, ye shall live also John 14. 19. If death had held him, it
would much more have held us: But because in him the Mercies of David are sure,
therefore his Resurrection is an assurance of ours, Act. 13. 34. Christ will
not be incomplete, and the Church is his fullness, Ephesians. 1. 23. The feet under
water are safe, when the Head is above it: Christ is said to be the first that
rose from the dead, Act. 26. 23. the first begotten, the first born from the
dead, Rev. 1. 5. Col. 1. 18. For though some were raised before him, yet not
without him, but by the Fellowship of his Resurrection: As though light rise
before the Sun, yet it does not rise but from the Sun. The Mace goes before the
Magistrate, but it does so only in attendance upon him: He the only Conqueror
of Death; and as the first fruits did sanctify the whole Mass, Romans 11. 16. so
Christ by his Resurrection did consecrate all such as dye in the Lord, to be a
kind of first fruits, and first born, Jam. 1. 18. Heb. 12. 23. and therefore it
is said, that they shall rise first, 1 These. 4. 16. His Resurrection is unto
all his members

1 Arrha, a pledge and earnest of theirs; He having paid our debt, death cannot
detain us in prison for it: His Resurrection has justified us against the
claim of death, and will glorify us against the power of death: What he did
purchase by the merit of his death, is made applicable to us by the power of
his Resurrection, Romans 8. 34.

2 Exemplar; His the pattern of ours: He taken not only from prison, but from
judgment, death had no more to do with him, Isal. 53. 8. Romans 6. 9. In like
manner we shall rise Victors over death, never any more to be subject unto it:
This the Apostle calls the Image of the Heavenly Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 49. Phil.
3. 21.

3 Primitiae: The beginning of the future Resurrection; for he rose not barely
in a personal, but in a public capacity, though it were a damnable Heresy of
Hymeneus, that the Resurrection was past, 2 Timothy 2. 18. yet it is a truth to
say, that it is begun. He first, then we at his coming, 1 Cor. 15. 23. By what
is past in the Head, we are assured of what is expected in his Members.

2 All the particular Members of the Church shall rise in the unity of one
body, as mystically joined unto one Head, and as one Family, Ephesians. 3. 15. and
all one in Christ, Gal. 3. 28. not barely the persons singly considered, but as
a Church and Body shall rise.

1 Then be careful to be found in Christ at his coming; for though all men
shall rise, yet with a great difference. The wicked potestate judicis, as
malefactors are brought out of prison to the Judge to be condemned. The godly
virtute capitis, the life of Christ shall be manifested in their bodies, 2 Cor.
4. 10.

2 A Christian must not only believe, Thy dead men shall live, but forth 1 My
dead body shall arise too. Herein is the Life of Faith in bringing down general
promises to our own particular cases, interests and comforts, 2 Cor. 4. 13, 14.
Joh. 20. 28. Gal. 2. 20.

3 Since we shall all rise as one, we should all live as one. As we have all
one Head, one Spirit, one Faith, one Hope, one Inheritance, one common
salvation, so we should have one heart, and one soul, Act. 4. 32. Love as
brethren, have the same care as fellow members one of another, weep with them
that weep, rejoice with them that rejoice, That our life of faith on earth may
in some measure express our life of vision in heaven, and since we shall agree
there, not to fall our in our way thither, Ephesians. 4 1. 6. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3. Col.
3. 12, 13. And thus much of the dispositive cause, qualifying the subject of
this deliverance.

2 The Efficient follows. The word and command of God, being like dew to the
tender herbs, to revive them when they seem dead. Whence we observe,

1 The facility of the last Resurrection in regard of God, to whom miracles are
as easy as natural operations, A Miracle being nothing but a new creation. It
is as impossible to us to cause rain as to raise a dead body. He therefore who
we see does cause the one, we may believe on his word that he will the other.
We find Rain and dew used as Arguments to prove the omnipotency and
greatness of God, Psalm. 147. 5, 8. Job 5. 9, 10. ler. 14. 22. Zach. 10. 1.

And this teaches us a very useful point, to observe the wisdom and power of
God in the Ordinances of heaven and course of nature, and from thence to argue
for the settling of our faith in such things as exceed the course of nature; for
there is no less omnipotency required to govern natural causes, then to work
those that are supernatural. He therefore that keeps his Law, and shows his
power in the one, will do so in the other too. The Lord strengthens our faith
by the consideration of natural things, the bow in the clouds, Genesis 9. 12. Isa.
54. 9. the stability of the mountains, Isa. 54. 10. the multitude of stars,
Genesis 15. 5. the highth of the heavens, Psalm. 103 11. the beauty of the Lilies,
Mat. 6. 28, 30. the Ordinances of the Moon and Stars, ler. 31. 35, 36. the
Covenant of Day and Night, ler. 33. 20, 21. Thus the Lord teaches us to make
use of the rudiments of nature to confirm our faith in him.

I go quietly to bed and am not frighted with the horror of the night. I know
the day will return, It is Gods Covenant. I put my seed into the ground in the
Winter, I know it will grow into an harvest, the Sun will return, it is Gods
Covenant. And why should I not trust him, as well in his Covenant of Grace as
of Nature? why should I not believe that that power which quickens dead corn,
can quicken dead men, and can provide as well for my salvation as for my nature?

The truth is, all unbelief does secretly question the power of God. Things
past and present all can believe, because they are seen. But things promised,
when they pose reason, and transcend the course of natural causes, and the
contrivances and projections which we can forecast, we many times stagger and
falter about. Israel confessed what God had done, and that omnipotently, He
smote the rock and the waters gushed out, and yet in the same breath they
question his power, can he furnish a Table in the wilderness? can he give
bread also and provide flesh for his people? Psalm 78. 19, 20, 22. Moses
himself staggered, when the Lord made a promise which seemed to exceed the
power of ordinary causes, Numb. 11. 21, 22. And therefore when God will confirm
the faith of his servants, he draws them off from viewing the greatness and
strangeness of the promises in themselves, to the consideration of his power.
Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Genesis 18. 14. I am the Lord, the God of all
flesh, is there any thing too hard for me? Jer. 32. 27. If it be mavelous in
the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be
mavelous in mine eyes, says the Lord of Hosts? Zach. 8. 6. And therefore in
all cases of difficulty, when sense and reason, flesh and blood, dictate
nothing but despair, we should by faith look up to the truth of God promising,
and to the power and name of God giving being to his promis^s, whose ways are
higher then our ways, and his thoughts then our thoughts, Isa. 55. 8. 9. So
did Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. so David, I Sam. 30. 6. so the Prophet, Ezekiel.
37. 3. so Abraham, Romans 4. 19, 20, 21. so Peter, Luke 5. 5. so we should all do
when we walk in darkness and have no light, still trust in the Name of the
Lord, and stay upon our God, Isa. 50. 10.

2 We hence learn the Original of the Resurrection, it is an Heavenly work, as
dew which comes from heaven to revive the grass. The Lord resolves the lineage
and genealogy of corn into Heaven, Hos. 2. 21. takes it to himself to be the
father of the dew, Job 38. 28. It comes from him whose body did shed drops of
heavenly dew in the garden, and by them did slay death, and revive he herbs of
the grave.

We must labor therefore by an heavenly conversation to have our Bodies
Temples of the holy Spirit, that this Heavenly virtue, when it has drawn us
out of our graves, may then carry us to Heaven; for as that which is earthly,
when it is out of its place, never leaves descending till it goes to Earth: so
that which is Heavenly, will never cease rising till it get to Heaven. Earthly
vapors may be drawn up, but they fall again in rain and wind. Wicked men,
though raised, will fall again. Any thing of heaven will go to heaven, any
thing of Christ will go to Christ.

Concerning this dear and worthy Lay, though my custom be to be very sparing in
Funeral Elogies, yet many things were in her so remarkable, that the mentioning
of them cannot but tend to the Edification of others.

I shall not mention her mere Exterrals. The worth, credit and dignity of her
family. The gentleness and sweetness of her disposition, and all amiable
accomplishments which rendered her lovely to those that knew her; nor set forth
the proportion between her and the present Text. I shall only name such things
as commended her to God as well as to men.

She looked after Heaven very young: would frequently bless God for the
Religious Education which she had under her parents. She was even then
assaulted with Temptations unto Atheism, and to think that there was no God.
But took the best course to repel and resist them, that the most experienced
Christian could have directed her unto. Immediately betaking her self by prayer
unto that God whom she was tempted to deny.

She was a woman mighty in the Scriptures, read them over once a year, and
searched after the sense of difficult places out of the several Annotations
before her. She was as it were a Concordance directing usually to the Book and
Chapter where any place of Scripture mentioned in discourse, was to be found.

She was constant in reading substantial Authors, of dogmatical and practical
Divinity, and by that means grew greatly acquainted with the whole Body of
wholesome doctrine.

She was unweariedly constant in the performance of private duties, in so much
that it is verily believed by him, who had best reason to know it, that for
twelve years together she never intermitted her morning and evening addresses
unto the Throne of Grace. When she was suddenly surprised with the pangs of
this last child, she ran into her closet to be first delivered of her prayer,
and to pour out her soul to God, before she was delivered of her child.

She had a singular delight in the public Ordinances, and was a most constant
frequenter of them, with very serious and devout attention, calling her memory
to an account when she came home, and if any particular slipped from her
forgotten, she would enquire of her husband in bed to recover it for her.

She left behind her in her closet a paper book, wherein with her own hand she
had collected diverse general Directions for an holy spending of the day, with
several particular means for the faithful observance of those General Rules.

She highly honored Holiness in the poorest and meanest persons, and would
frequently with some decent and modest excuse get off from unprofitable and
impertinent discourse, that she might have her fill of more edifying conference
with such, in whom she had learned of David, to place her delight.

For diverse months before her death she was wonderfully improved heavenward, as
those about her observed, not regarding the world, nor letting any vain word
drop from her; and her countenance many times after her coming out of her
closet, seemed to have strange impressions of her conversing with God shining
in it, as some conversant with her have professed to observe.

She was greatly adorned with Meekness, Modesty and Humility, which are graces
in the sight of God of great price. When one wished her joy with the Honor
lately come to her, she answered, That there was a greater Honor which she
looked after, which would bring with it more solid joy.

She always expressed much Honor and Reverence to her parents, in all comely
and dutiful comportment toward them, which much endeared them unto her.

Full of conjugal affection to her dear husband revoking with an ingenuous
Retraction any word which might fall from her, which she judged less becoming
that Honor and Reverence which she did bear to him. When he was engaged upon
public concernments, and more particularly when he crossed the seas to wait on
his Sacred Majesty, she daily put up such ardent and heavenly petitions unto
God for him, as caused those about her to conclude it impossible that the
husband of so many prayers and tears should meet with any miscarriage.
Wonderful watchful over his Bodily health; and spying out distempers in him
before he discovered them himself. Earnestly desiring what is now come to
pass, that he might survive her, that she might never know the wound of a
deceased Husband.

She had a more then ordinary care in the Education of her children, holding
them close to the reading, and committing to memory both Scripture and
Catechism, wherein by her diligence they made a very strange progress, a
pregnant instance whereof to speak nothing of her children yet living, was her
eldest son, who went to heaven in his childhood, about the age of five or six
years, of whose wonderful proficiency in the knowledge of God, an exact account
is given by a grave and godly Divine in the printed Sermon, which he preached
at his Funeral.

She was very affable and kind to her servants, specially encouraging them unto
holy duties, who have professed themselves very much benefited in their
spiritual concernments by the discourses which she has had with them.

She was very charitable and ready to do good to poor distressed persons,
specially those of the household of faith, visiting, edifying, and comforting
them, and with her liberality relieving their necessities, acknowledging Gods
free and rich mercy in allowing her a plentiful portion of outward blessings,
and that she was not in the low condition of those whom her charity relieved:

In her sickness and extremities of travel and other pains, she earnestly
pleaded Gods promises of healing, of easing, of refreshing those that were weak
and heavy laden, acknowledging her self so to be, not in body only, but in
soul too, and was full of holy and servent ejaculations.

Yea, when the disease affected her head, and disturbed her expressions, yet
even then her speeches had still a tincture of Holiness, and savored of that
spirit wherewith her heart was seasoned.

She advised those about her to set about the great and one necessary work of
their souls while they were in health, assuring them that in sickness all the
strength they had would be taken up about that.

She desired her husband to read to her in her sickness Mistress Moors
Evidences for salvation, set forth in a Sermon preached by a Reverend Divine at
her Funeral, meditating with much satisfaction upon them.

And when some cloud overcast her soul, she desired her husband to pray with
her, and seconded him with much enlargement of heart, and blessed God for the
recovery of light again.

Thus lived and died this excellent Lady, a worthy pattern for the great ones
of her sex to imitate. Such works will follow them into another world, where
none of the vanities of this, no Pleasures, no Pomp, no Luxury, no Bravery, no
Balls, no Enterludes, no Amorous or Complemental discourses, or other like
Impertinencies of the world will have any admittance. The more seriously you
walk with God, and plie the concernments of your immortal souls, living as
those that resolve to be saved, the greater will be your treasure of comfort in
your death, and of glory in another life; whereas all your other delights and
experiments for content will expire, and give up the Ghost in Solomon's vanity
and vexation of Spirit. The Lord make us all wise unto salvation.

FINIS.

