The humble PROPOSALS OF Sundry Learned and Pious DIVINES Within this Kingdom.
Concerning the ENGAGEMENT, Intended to be imposed on them for their
Subscriptions.

PSALM. 64. 5. They commune of laying snares privily.

EXODUS 23. 2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.

PET. 3. 17. For it is better if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well
doing then for evil doing.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1650.

The humble Proposals of sundry Divines within the Kingdom, Concerning the
Engagement intended to be imposed on them for their Subscriptions.
WE Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who have all of us from the
beginning Sect. 1.
faithfully served the Parliament, and have in pursuance of those great and
honorable ends of just Liberty and Reformation, suffered many and grievous
things in our Names and Estates from the common Enemy: and to this day have
adhered to our first Principles, and do still promise in our Places and
Stations to maintain the Peace of this Nation, and to pay obedience to the
Laws thereof; conceiving it our duty in such a time as this, in all ways of
meekness and humility to endeavor the Preservation of our inward Peace and
outward Safety, being straightened in Conscience upon the case of the present
Engagement, do humbly offer these ensuing particulars.

1. That although we hold our selves bound by our Sect. 2.
former Solemn Covenants and Engagements, in that sense of them wherein they
were by public Authority imposed on us, yet being convinced of the necessity
of civil Government in a Land, for the preservation of Humane Society, and
prevention of all those Evils which the outrages of wicked men unrestrained
would produce, and upon mature deliberation considering, That when the wise and
holy Providence of God (whose judgments are unsearchable, and ways past
finding out) shall at any time so shake the foundations of States and Kingdoms,
as to disable one Government from affording protection and preservation, and to
admit any other to obtain it; it is not then strange to the will of God, light
of Nature, judgment of the learned, and practice of Christians in former ages,
nor to our own principles or former Engagements, to live quietly and peaceably
in our places and callings, and to submit to such things as are imposed upon,
or required of us, by the powers which are in actual possession, being things
in themselves lawful and necessary to the preservation of our selves and
others, (for this we conceive may be done without disputing the right or title
of those that are in place of Magistracy) we do upon these premises declare
that we will accordingly behave our selves.

2. That we do humbly conceive that there is a great difference between these
things and a Subscription to this Engagement, in the words wherein it is
required, and that in diverse respects.

First, This Subscription (as to our Consciences) does imply an approbation of
the present establishment, as effected by a full and a free Authority.

Secondly, An active concurrence, and as it were a ratifying consent of the
people thereunto, it having been declared, that the original of all just power
is in the People.

Thirdly, An obligation, to act an all times, in all places and capacities; to
the promoting and strengthening of it, and not only of it (but by a parity of
Reason) of any other, which by the possible advantage of power, may at any time
hereafter, even to the prejudice and ruin of this, set up it self, and then
require of us the like subscription.

3. Being by this Engagement bound up to these particulars, as the words seem
to import, we further conceive, That we shall by this subscription, violate
those former Engagements, in Oaths, Protestations, and in the Solemn League
and Covenant, wherein we were by the former Commands of Parl. obliged, in which
last particular, if the time we entered into it be considered, viz. In the day
of our extremity, or the Religious solemnity, with hands lifted up to the most
high God; or the matter of it, which is comprehensive of things Sacred and
Civil, and particularly of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the
Liberties of the Kingdom: or the sense wherein we then took it; or the
asseveration, that we would never be drawn from it, by any Terror or
Combination whatsoever; or the durable obligation which we brought upon our
selves by it, even all the days of our lives; or the Considerations which we
had before our eyes in the taking of it, namely the Glory of God, the
advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Happiness of the
King and his Posterity. These things being duly considered, do leave such an
awful impression on our Consciences, that anlesse the consistency thereof with
this Engagement be made unquestionably clear unto us, it cannot but render our
Consciences trembling and doubtful, and so the act of Engaging, by the
Apostles rule, to us unlawful, as by a parity of Reason it would have been
undoubtedly inconsistent with our Covenant, to have subscribed an Engagement to
the King and Lords, without the Commons of England, if it should by their
Agreement and Authority, have been required of us.

4. These things being considered in the nature of the Sect. 5.
Engagement, and in the full relation to which it stands to former Engagements,
cannot in our judgments but minister matter of general scandal and offense
to multitudes of men, both good and bad, many of whom being not able to make,
or happily so much as understand subtle distinctions, whereby guilt may either
be evaded or palliated, will look upon us as breakers of our Oaths and
Covenants, as prevaricators of the most sacred and solemn things, as men of
ductile spirits, and prostituted Consciences, led by principles of fear or
interest: which prejudice (though we would grant, were more founded in the
ignorance and mistakes of these men, then many solid and just reasons) would
yet grossly wound the Gospel, expose our Ministry to scorn (the honor whereof
ought to be dearer to us then our lives) endanger the reputation, and so weaken
the power of it in the Consciences of our hearers (who though through fear or
other private ends may themselves have subscribed, yet retain low thoughts of
us, as if we acted on the like principles) as that we cannot but believe, but
Christ would be a greater looser by our subscription, then the state can any
way be a gainer by it; we desire always to keep in mind the noble resolution
of the Apostle, who would not in case of scandal use his own just power, but
chose rather to suffer all things, lest he should binder the Gospel of Christ
and concluded, it was better for him to die, then that any in that behalf
should make his glorying void. Upon these and such like grounds, purely
conscientious, and not out of any private interest or design, contrary to the
peace of this Commonwealth, we are (...) to forbear Subscription, until
either by solemn debate of the Engagement (as of the Covenant) or otherwise,
our Consciences shall be cleared of important scruples.

So we humbly crave leave further to represent* Sect. 6.
that our former Governors (not duly considering that men even in highest
authority as well as others, are by the doctrine of the Scriptures concerning
scandal, bound to avoid the laying of shares and stumbling blocks in the way
of their Brethren) (...) not only attempted (as in their late Canon^ to impose
an (...) Oath, but also enforced Subscriptions on many godly and learned
Ministers, to the utter undoing of themselves and Families, and that with such
vigor* that the beginning of K. James his Government, was with the deprivation
of 3. or (...) of them: and though we shall not take upon us to charge upon
that severity of theirs the consequences which have followed, yet we may offer
this observation; that sundry examples may be given of Gover^^^^s, who have
laid the unhappy foundation of ensuing evils to themselves and their people,
in the beginning of their Government.

And therefore we do presume that those in present Sect. 7.
power (according to their professed Principles and Resolutions, to have
respect to tender Consciences) will not (...) us to the sad Dilemma of choosing
either sin or affliction, and hope that the many years experience of our
quiet behavior and faithful service, may give them a better assurance and
security for our peaceable conversation, then the fained Subscriptions of very
many; who profess themselves not engaged by this Engagement; but use ^^s a
protection of their Estates, and a cover under which they hide and keep warm
their former malignity, and who certainly would rejoice at, and take the
advantage of that sad division which is likely to ensue amongst those who have
co-operated in the common cause of Reformation and just Liberty.

We being at present shut up under such considerations as these, do humbly
beseech those in present power, not to compel us (whose reputation is as
necessary for others, as a good conscience for ourselves) to draw reproach upon
Religion, and vilify the reputation of the Ministry, by which the service of
Jesus Christ is advanced, and cause others to think we esteem Oaths as
changeable as opinions; and so brand us with the odious mark of (...) and
prevarication, subject us to the contempt (...) (...) of all, as men of loose
and uncertain principles, lay foundations to our selves of subscribing any
thing hereafter upon the same grounds, and that unto these things we may not be
enforced by so high and heavy a penalty (...) to be outlawed of our
Birthright, which is a punishment too heavy to be inflicted for no crime, and
as we conceive, can hardly be exampled to have been inflicted on any but
persons of infamous note, with whom (we may speak without vanity) we have not
deserved to be numbered, until by wilful violation of the Laws, we deprive
our selves of their protection, forfeit the benefit of them.

FINIS.

