THE MISERY OF A DESERTED PEOPLE. Opened in a Sermon Preached at Paul's before
the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Counsel, December. 2. 1659. Being a day of
solemn Humiliation by them appointed.

By EDWARD REYNOLDS, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for George Thomason, at the Sign of the
Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

To the Right Honorable Thomas Aleyn Lord Major of the City of London, the
Court of Aldermen and Common-Counsel.
Right Honorable,
WHen I was by you called to bear a part in that seasonable and necessary
service of your late solemn Humilition, I considered the sad condition
whereunto these Nations were reduced, the many and great provocations which we
have been guilty of, the miserable commotions and earthquakes, which have not
only shaken, but even dissolved our foundations, and made them all out of
course. I seriously looked back on the dark and gloomy providence of God
amongst us, the untimely death of Princes, the dimidiating and dissolving of
Parliaments, the frequent expirations and vicissitudes of Governments, the
horrid Apostasy, Atheism, Scepticisme, Indifferency, Prodigies of phrenetick
and pernicious Opinions, whereby multitudes have played the wantons with as
glorious a light of Orthodox Religion, as any Nation under heaven enjoyed; the
defaming of Ministry, decrying of Ordinances, incroaching of many Romish
doctrines under a disguize, and other like distempers, whereby we are become an
hissing and astonishment to the Nations round about us. In a word, It seemed
unto me, That the Scene of the ten Tribes was translated into these Nations,
and that we were making have to be a Jezreel, a Lo-Ruhamah, and a Lo-Ammi, as
they once did.

And therefore, though my habitual disposition usually lead me to Arguments,
which have more of mildness and gentleness in them, as remembering the counsel
of the Apostle, to instruct in meekness those that oppose themselves: yet I
thought it a duty, little less then absolutely necessary, in such a day of
trouble and rebuke, to set the Trumpet unto my mouth, and to represent unto
you, the doleful condition of a Deserted people, and withal the sad misgiving
fears (whereunto the Symptoms of these sick and sinful Nations did lead me)
least the Lord were now departing from such a People, who after an hundred
years possession of the Gospel, did still so wantonly abuse it, and walk so
unworthy of it.

Yet if any man shall say unto me, that it shall not be so, that the Lord will
still own us, and continue his presence with us: I shall answer as once the
Prophet Jeremy did, Amen, The Lord do so, the Lord forbid that I should desire
the woeful Day, or with Jonah be displeased with the patience and goodness of
God. Far may this Sermon be from a Prophecy or prediction, let it be only an
Instruction, and a warning unto us. But certainly the maturity of our sins,
and the face of our distempers do so far threaten us, as that we ought
thereby to be awakened to cry mightily unto God, and to hold him fast, least he
be weary of repenting, and after so many despised mercies, take at last the
plumb line into his hand, and refuse again to pass by us any more.

If hereunto this weak service of mine may be any way useful either to City or
Country, to Magistrates, Ministers, or people, I shall have abundant cause to
bless the Lord, to whose gracious presence and protection, in these dangerous
times, I desire in my daily prayers to commend these three Nations, and this
great City, and so to be

Your most humble and faithful servant in the work of the Lord, EDW. REYNOLDS.
From my Study, December. 10. 1659.
Hos. 9. 12. Yea, woe also to them when I depart from them.
WE find in the Law of Moses that in several cases the Priests of the Lord
were to sound the Trumpets unto the people to summon and awaken them unto the
special duties which God called for, Numb. 10. 1 -- 10. And in like manner the
Lord commands his Prophets to lift up their voice like a Trumpet, and to set
the Trumpet unto their mouth, Isa. 58. 1. Hos. 8. 1. One end of blowing the
Trumpet was to give warning to the people of any approaching danger, that they
might timely prevent and escape it. Joel 2. 1. Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, and
sound an alarm in mine holy mountain: let all the Inhabitants of the Land
tremble: for the day of the Lord comes, for it is nigh at hand. This is one
special duty of the spiritual Watchmen, Jerem. 6. 17. I set Watchmen over you,
saying, hearken to the sound of the Trumpet. Son of man, says the Lord to
the Prophet, I have set thee a Watchman to the House of Israel, therefore thou
shall hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. See Ezekiel. 33. 2 -- 9.
as Elisha gave the King of Israel warning of the King of Syriahs counsels
against him, 2 Reg. 6. 9. This charge Jehoshaphat gave unto the Priests and
Levites, that they should warn the people not to transgress, least wrath come
upon them and their brethren, 2 Chronicles. 19. 10.

When ruin was hanging over Nineveh, Jonah is commanded to cry against it,
Jonah 1. 2. Crying sins call for crying preachers; and when He slept in that
terrible tempest which was upon the ship, the Master of the ship awakened him,
What ailest thou O sleeper? arise and call upon thy God, Jon. 1. 6. We have had
amongst us the confused noise of the battle of the Warrier, Isa. 9. 5.
and garments rolled in blood, Nahum 3. 2, 3.
the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the prancing of the horses,
and of the jumping of the Chariots, of the bright sword, and the glittering
Spear. And this should have awakened us to return, and to seek the Lord. Isa.
9. 19.
For certainly it is through the Lords wrath, that the people of a Land are as
the fuel of fire, no man sparing his brother. But his anger is not turned away,
his hand is stretched out still. And if our ears were well awakened, I fear
we should hear a more dreadful noise then that of the Warriar, the noise of
the wings of the living Creatures, Ezekiel. 1. 24. the glory of the Lord in his
Church threatening to depart from us, as he did from his people Judah, Ezekiel. 9.
3. 10. 18, 19. 11. 22, 23. I have therefore made choice of these words of this
Trumpetsounding Prophet Hosea, that we may be awakened to cry mightily unto
God, and to hold him fast, and not let him go, to repent and do our first
works, least he come quickly and remove our Candlestick out of his place, as he
threatened to do unto the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 4, 5.

In this Chapter we have an enumeration of several sins of that people, and
several judgments denounced against the same. The sins are, 1. Idolatry,
going from God, ascribing their plenty to their superstition, ver. 1. 10, 15.
2. Emertaining and believing false prophets, ver. 7, 8. 3. Profundity of
desperate wickedness, as that of Gibeah, Judge. 19. v. 9. 4. Carnal confidence
and security, v. 1, 13. 5. Wickedness of Prophets who should teach others, v.
7, 8. of Princes who should punish others, v. 15. and of the People, ver. 17.
and all these sins aggravated by Gods ancient Love unto them, v. 10.

The punishments denounced, v. 9. and now presently impending, v. 7. 1.
Scarcity of corn and wine, which they promised themselves by their Idolatry,
v. 1, 2. 2. Expulsion from the Lords Land, into the Land of Enemies and Idols,
which they loved more then the Lord, v. 3. 3. Eating polluted and interdicted
meats, as they had polluted the Land, v. 3. 4. Ceasing of Sacrifices, and
impurity of them, displeasing to God as the bread of mourners, which was not to
come into Gods house, v. 4. 5. No celebrity or solemn Festivals, v. 5. 6.
Horrid vastation, flight, death burial in Egypt etc. v. 6. as chap. 10. 8. Isa.
34. 11 -- 15. 7. Slaying of children from the conception to the birth, from the
birth to youth, Educated for murderers, v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 16. 8. Gods
departure from them, hating them loving them no more; driving them from his
house and presence, casting them away, verse 12, 15, 17.

With all which there is a double prolepsis or prevention of an objection. 1.
They were at this time joyous, and in great prosperity under Jeroboam who
flourished more then any of the Kings of Israel. This vain security he
removes by assuring them that the days of visitation and recompense were
come, ver. 1, 7. 2. They were strong like Tyrus, and their place was secured by
the Impregnablenesse of it. But this should not prevent the judgment, the
murderer should find out their children, the beloved fruit of their womb, v.
1. 3, 16.

The words of the Text contain the sorest of all these judgments. God may
love and adopt a people, own them for his, vouchsafe his presence to them, be a
Sanctuary for them, in a Wilderness, in Babylon, when he feeds them with bread
of affliction and water of affliction, Deuteronomy. 8. 15, 16. Exodus 33. 14. Ezekiel. 11.
16. Isa. 30. 20, 21. But this is the uttermost misery which a people can be
exposed unto, to have the Lord hate them, love them no more, drive and cast
them out, and depart from them; a comprehensive judgment, a doleful
Epiphonema, though they have famine and banishment, and desolation, no
sacrifices, no festivals, no children, yet the Woe never comes till God cast
them away, and depart from them, Yea, woe also to them when I depart from them;
Or when I remove my Glory or Divine Majesty from them by the which I have dwelt
amongst them, or been near unto them. So the Chaldee reads it.

The seventy and Theosion render it, my flesh is from them; which the Greek
Expositors understand as a mitigation of the woe, though their own children
should be cut off, yet he would be borne in the flesh of them; and Petrus
Galatinus charge the Jews with a false punctation of this word Besuri for
Besari, Gelatin. de (...). v.1. l.b. 1. c. 8.
out of an hatred of the great mystery of the Incarnation. But learned
Interpreters do generally reject this Version, and render it vae etiam ipsis in
recedendo me ab eis, or cum recessero ab eis; which the sense of the context
evidently requires, by comparing it with, v. 15, 17. for though the middle
letter be Shin for Samech, yet that mutation is very frequent, for Letters of
the same sound and Organ to be put one for another; as learned men have
observed.

The words then are a prediction and denunciation of Gods departure from his
people for their sins. Wherein are visible these two parts. 1. The judgment
threatened, Gods departure from them. 2. The misery consequent thereupon. Ye woe
also unto them when I depart from them. It is a miserable thing for men's
children to flee away and depart from them, or after they are brought up to be
preserved for the murderer: But if God continue his presence, all other
comforts are comprised in that. Job could bless God when all was gone, because
the Lord had not forsaken him, Job 1. 21. and the Apostle, All men forsook me,
but the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. But when
corn and wine, sacrifices and oblations, country and dwelling places,
Tabernacles and delights, Children and the beloved fruit of the womb, the Glory
of that people, are all gone, then for God to go after them, and depart too,
and to withdraw his Majesty and presence from them, to hate them, to love them
no more, to cast them out of his sight, this is a cumulated Woe, etiam vae, a
Woe that does consummate all the other woes, that leaves no room for another,
or a greater, Ye Also Woe unto them, when I depart from them.

Here then that we may rightly understand both what it is for God to depart
from a people, and how great a woe and judgment it is, It will be necessary to
enquire what it is for God to be present with a people, and how great a mercy
that is; for contraries do notably open and illustrate one another.

There is a twofold presence of God, Gods presence with his Church.
the one General by the immensity of his nature as he fills all places, Psalm.
139. 7 -- 12. The other special, gracious, comfortable as he is in his Church.
This presence of his has been various, according to the different ages and
states of the Church.

1. Typical in shadows and representations. The Ark an Emblem of Gods
presence, who is said to dwell between the Cherubims, Psalm 80. 1. there he
promised to meet with them, Exodus 29. 43, 45. It is called his dwelling place,
Psalm 76. 2. his place, his presence, 1 Chronicles. 16. 27.

2. Energetical, in powerful and mighty operations, the bush burning and not
consuming, the opening of the red sea, the thunders and lightnings on Sinai,
the mighty works between Egypt and Canaan were all evidences of Gods presence
with Israel, Psalm 68. 7, 8.

3. Bodily, manifested in the flesh by the incarnation of the Son who was the
image of the invisible God, Col. 1. 15. 1 Timothy 3. 16.

4. Spiritual, by sending forth the Holy Spirit after the Ascension of Christ,
as another Comforter upon the Church, John 14. 18, 19.

And thus he is present with his Church by spiritual Ordinances, and by
spiritual operations. 1. By spiritual Ordinances, in which God is said to be, 1
Cor. 14. 25. and Christ to preach, Ephesians. 2. 17. and to be evidently set forth,
Gal. 3. 1. to be with his Messengers to the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20.

2. By spiritual operations, which are of three sorts, viz. works of
Providence. Grace. Comfort.


1. In works of providence, Agit spiritus Dei and per bonos and malos per
scientes and nescientes quod agendum novit and statuit. Aug. Qu. Evang. l. 7.
q. 49.
by his power, authority and wisdom, ordering and reducing all the
contingencies, commotions, and events of the world to the good of his Church,
and subversion of the Kingdom of darkness, Isa. 59. 19. Zach. 4. 6.

2. In works of Grace, whereby Christ dwells in believers, illightning their
minds, bending their wills, subduing their lusts, erecting a tribunal and
judgment seat in their hearts, giving access unto, and communion with the
Father and the Son, Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians. 3. 17. for the work of the Spirit is to
bring God and Christ unto the soul as his Temple, wherein be delights to
dwell, Isa. 57. 15.

3. In works of Peace and Comfort, in which respect he is called the Comforter,
John 14. 16. 16. 7. and the Reports which he makes of God and Christ's to the
soul, are called the Comforts of the holy Ghost, Act. 9. 31.

Now the Spirit does bring the consolations of God to the soul of a believer,
as a Witness, A Seal, An Earnest, A Seed.

1. As a Witness, He testifies our Adoption, and the truth of the promises,
causing the heart to acknowledge Gods fidelity in them, Romans 8. 16. 1 John 5.
6, 8.

2. As a Seal, he ratifies our title and Gods grant to those promises so
attested, Ephesians. 4. 30. God by his Spirit seals and marketh his own children
for himself, Isa. 43. 21. Ezekiel. 9. 4. and so secureth their hearts that he is
theirs, 1. Joh. 4. 13.

3. As an Earnest and pledge of those glorious things the truth whereof he
witnesses, and the property whereunto he seals to believers, giving livery
and seizen, and in part possession per primitias gloriae unto them, Romans 8. 23.
Ephesians. 1. 14.

4. As a Seed of God, or vital root of grace and comfort, when through
corruption grace may be abated, or comfort overclouded, Psalm. 97. 11. 1. John
2. 9. In these things stands the presence of God in his Church.

The greatness of this mercy to have the Lord thus graciously present with a
people is more then the tongue of a man or Angel is The (...) thereof.
able to express. These are some few of those unspeakable benefits which
usually come along with it.

1. Manifestation of himself, and of the secrets of his love and counsel to the
Church, John 14 21. he shows unto a soul the salvation of God, Psalm. 50. 23.
comes and sups with it, Rev. 3. 20. brings it into the banqueting house, Cant.
2. 4. unto a feast of fatted things. The Ordinances make the Church an Eden, a
Paradise, no tree of life, nor means of salvation out of that garden.

2. Cohabitation and gracious converse with the souls of men, having his abode
in them, John 14. 23. It is a rich mercy, as Galeacius said, to have but one
hours communion with God; but when he dwells in his Church, as in settled place,
1 Reg. 8. 13. Psalm. 68. 16. and makes a soul or people his Temple, this is
truly the glory of such a soul or people, 1 Samuel 4. 21.

3. Protection and defense, If God be with us, who can be against us? If he be
in the midst of us we shall not be moved, Psalm. 46. 5. the Lord will cover his
people all the day long, the beloved of the Lord shall dwell by him in safety,
Deuteronomy. 33. 12.

4. Intimate delight and dearnesse; where the Lord dwells he delights. He
takes pleasure in those that fear him, his desire is toward them, Psalm. 147.
11. Prove. 11. 20. Cant. 7. 10.

5. Supplies of grace, strength, ability, and assistance unto duties; Christ
comes not to nakes walls, he beautifies the place of his abode, and makes it
glorious, Psalm 149. 4. Isa. 11. 10. and makes us strong in the power of his
might, Ephesians. 6. 10.

6. Victory, he comes to the soul as Joshua to Canaan to dispossess the ancient
Inhabitants, Zac. 14. 21. Ezekiel. 28. 24.

We have briefly considering the Glory and honor of a people, who have God
thus with them as their God, owning them, comforting, blessing, defending,
encamping about them; for it is nearness unto God, and the enjoyment of
righteous Laws and holy Ordinances, which makes a Nation great and honorable,
Deuteronomy. 4. 7, 8. Isa. 43, 4, 5.

Let us now proceed to consider what it is for God to depart from a people,
What it is for God to depart.
and how great a woe it brings along with it.

1. We must remember, that the Catholic and universal Church is indeficient,
though not in its own Nature (for by the same reason that any particular Church
may fail, all may) yet in regard of the promises which are made unto it, That
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Matthew. 16. 18. That Christ
will be with it to the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20. Of the Kingdom of Christ
there shall be no End, Luke 1. 33. Christ will always have a people on the
earth to serve him. His Throne shall be as the Sun, and as a faithful
witness in heaven, Psalm 89. 36, 37. These are promises made to the universal
Church, and to all who should throughout the world believe in Christ, Chrysostom.
in Mat. 5. 1, 2. and in Mat. 28. 20.
as Chrysostom, Austine, Prosper, and others have expounded them. Aug. Epist.
80. Prosper de vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 1


2. We say that particular Churches are defectible, They may fall from God, and
God may depart from them. He has not to any particular Church or Nation made
an absolute promise of abiding with them for ever. No Church ever did challenge
this Privilege but the Roman Church, which yet the Apostle warns to take
heed, least God spare not them, as he spared not the natural branches, but
brake them off, Romans 11. 20, 21. This Truth we find verified in the examples
of the ten Tribes, who were at last Lo-ammi, quite unchurched and cast off by
God, Hos. 1. 9. and of the Jewish Church, the natural branches, from whom the
Kingdom of God has been taken, and wrath come upon them to the uttermost,
Matthew. 21. 43. 1 These. 2. 16. according as God threatened if they forsook him,
he would forsake them, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. And in those famous Churches of Asia,
from whom the Candlestick is removed, and they swallowed up in the deluge of
Mahumetanisme.

3. For opening this sore judgment of Gods departing from a people we may
observe, That the Scripture sets forth Desertion unto us three manner of
ways. In a way of propitiation. In a way of probation; And in a way of
punishment.

1. In a way of propitiation. So God the Father forsook Christ in his Agony and
Passion, when his soul was made an offering for sin, not because he ceased
to love him, (...) Ep. 12. c. 110.
or to delight in him there was no solution of union, nor substraction of love
or favor, but a withdrawing and hiding of Vision and comfort, whereby Christ
was to make an atonement for us, by bearing for us the weight and sense of
Divine wrath, Mat. 27. 46. Isa. 53. 4, 5.

2. In a way of probation, when the Lord in some particular case departs from a
man to try him, and discover his own weakness unto him; for if God never so
little turn away his face and supportance from us, and suspend the operations
of his Spirit upon us, we quickly find by sad experience that of our selves we
have no sufficiency to think or do any thing that is good, 2 Cor. 3. 5. thus
the Lord left Hezekiah in that one particular of the Babylonian Ambassadors,
that he might have trial of his weakness, and learn to ascribe all his other
standing to the grace of God, 2 Chr. 32. 31. Psalm. 30. 7.

3. In a way of punishment. When the presence of God having been undervalued,
and his Spirit grieved, and his grace turned into wantonness, he does in anger
depart from those who put such affronts and indignities upon him, and thus God
forsakes us when we forsake him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. and when we behave our selves
ill in our doings, he will hide his face from us, Micah 3. 4. It is an hiding
wrath, Isa. 57. 17. 59. 2. 64. 7. for the Lord threatens darkness to
darkness to those that walk not in the light when they have it, John 12. 35.

This penal desertion is either personal, or public. Personal is when the Lord
having endured with much long-suffering, the provocations of evil men, and
finding his grace still abused does at last depart from them as he did from
Saul, 1 Samuel 16. 14. and because they will not be purged, does resolve that
they shall not be purged, but seals them up Under this ^oleful judgment, that
he will strive no more with them, but let them alone to be filthy still, Genesis
6. 3. Hos. 4. 17. Rev. 22. 11. so the Lord forsook Judas when he withdrew his
restraining grace from him, and left him to go quickly about his wickedness,
to do that now which he had before withheld from doing, Joh. 13. 27. And
Balaam, when he left him to run after the wages of iniquity, in wrath as it
were granting him to do, what he had forbidden him to do before, Numb. 22. 12.
20. 35. When the soul of a wretched sinner has so long outfaced the light, and
withstood the wrestlings of the Word, that at last it contracteth a brawniness
and senselessness of it, then the Lord frequently comes in with penal
induration, as the consequent of voluntary and contracted induration, and as to
any spiritual awakenings, and excitations wholly departs from such a soul.
This is the forest judgment, next to hell it self.

Public desertion, when the Lord forsakes a People, and withdraws his
presence from a whole Church or Country; as when he threatened to remove the
Candlestick from Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. to strive no more with the old world, Genesis
6. 3. when he calls the ten Tribes Lo-Ammi, and will own them for his people no
longer, Hos. 1. 9.

This is either partial, as when the Lord forsook Shilo, but did not cast off
all the people, but made that place an example to warn Jerusalem, Jer. 7. 12,
14. when he threatened to scatter his people, he said he would leave a few men,
a tenth from the sword, etc. Ezekiel. 12. 15, 16. Isa. 6. 12, 13. Or total, as he
is said to have cast off the whole seed of Ephraim, Jer. 7. 15.

Again, it is either desertion temporary, when the Lord does return with mercy
to a people, and make them as though they had not been cast off; makes her who
had been termed forsaken and desolate to be Hephzibah, and Beulah, Isa. 62. 4.
Zach. 10. 6. As in Queen Mary's days he seemed to forsake England, and in a
few years returned to us again: Or perpetual; as when he called the name of the
ten Tribes, Lo-Ruhamah, resolving to take them away utterly, and to have mercy
on them no more, Hosea 1. 6.

Now that we may understand what this penal desertion is, we must note, That it
is not every public affliction which the Lord brings upon a Nation or people.
He had not forsaken Judah when he had sent them into bondage, Ezra. 9. 9. The
Lord was a Sanctuary unto them in Babylon, Ezekiel. 11. 16. they may be in a
wilderness and have God with them, Exodus 33. 15. Paul was persecuted, but not
forsaken, 2 Cor. 4. 9.

Neither does every spiritual Judgment of ignorance or corruption in worship
amount to a divine desertion. The ten Tribes a long time after the Calves of
Dan and Bethel, had Prophets sent unto them, and were not presently called
Lo-Ammi, or forsaken by God.

But the Lord is then said to depart from a people, when he gives them a Bill
of divorce, and breaks off the conjugal Relation which he had with them, owns
them not as Members of his Family, withdraws his presence from them, his Care
of them, and thrusts them out of his house; Plaut. in Amphi^ruo. Act. 3. ^^. 2.
Martial. l. 10. Ep. 41. 51. Juvenal. Satyr. 6. Caius l. 11. sect. 1. de div^t.
and Rpu^.
It is a solemn renunciation and dimission, resolving to have nothing more to
do with them, Jer. 3. 8. Res tuas tibi habe, read meas, as Plautus expresses
the form amongst the Romans, Collige Sarcinulas dicit Libertus, and exi. Take
that which is yours, leave that which is mine, and get you gone out of my
family.

It denotes. 1. A subduction of Peace and comfort, withdrawing the evidences
of Gods favor from a people. Gods Church is precious and honorable in his
sight, Isa. 43. 4. but when he casts off a people, and gives a Bill of Divorce,
he removes from them the Covenant of his peace. A rejected woman has little
sense of comfort from her husband when he turns her out of his doors.

2. A subduction of his visible presence in his Ordinances, (...). Basil in
Isa. 16. p. 1120. D.
which are the Glory of a Nation. As when a man forbids any servant of his
family to wait upon the woman whom he repudiats. So when the Ark of Gods
presence was taken, the Glory is said to depart from Israel, 1 Samuel 4. 22. when
the Lord said to the Prophet, Thou shall not be a Reprover to them Ezekiel 3. 26.
and to the Apostle, depart I will send thee to the Gentiles, Acts 22, 21. 13
46. Acts 28. 28. when a people see not their signs, have not a Prophet left,
Psalm. 74. 9. when the Glory of the Lord is upon the wing and the wheel, in
motion, Ezekiel. 10. 18. This is a dangerous evidence that God is forsaking a
people: for his Ordinances are his presence.

3. A subduction of Gifts and graces, as God withdrew his Spirit from Saul, Job
17. 4.
1 Samuel 16. 4. 28. 15. when a Nation is darkened, the wisdom of the wise, Tunc
ctiam satis apert Cassandra futuris o^a, Dei sussu non unquam credita Teueris.
Virgil. An.
and understanding of the prudent is hid, Isa. 29. 14. Or the Lord in his
severe providence is pleased to lay wise and prudent men aside, that their
wisdom shall not be believed or made use of, this is a sore degree of Divine
desertion. When men are left to despise the very callings and persons that are
eminent for gifts, and cry down the comforts annexed unto those gifts, and the
Seminaries where they usually are acquired. These are steps of Gods departings
from a people.

4. A subduction of defense and Protection, when a Nation is smitten, and there
is no healing, but God takes away his peace from them, Jer. 14. 19. 16. 5. and
they in danger of being given into the hands of Enemies, and are as a speckled
bird, a gazing stock, and a Ludibrium, to the birds that are round about them,
Jer. 12. 7, 9.

5. A judiciary Tradition, or leaving men to the vanity of their own minds,
Vid. Aug. contra Julian. P^l. g. l. 5. c. 3. Greg. Mor. l. 25. c. 9.
and the lusts of their own hearts, to a giddiness of spirit, and delusion of
judgment. A sad step this of divine desertion, when men are given up to walk
in their own counsels, Psalm. 81. 12. and are captivated to strong delusions to
believe lies, 2 These. 2. 11. we have seen what this judgment is for God to
depart from a people. It is the unchurching of them, sending them back into
Egypt again, as our Prophet here expresses it, v. 3. 6.

Let us now consider what a fearful Woe this is for God thus to leave a people,
The greatness of this judgment.
it is of all other the most comprehensive, Eminently containing in it all
other woes, as Gods presence does all other comforts. This the most
comprehensive Promise in the Covenant of grace, I will be their God. And this
the most comprehensive threatening, I will depart, I will love them no more. The
Apostle calls it wrath to the uttermost, Romans 11. 12, 15, 7. (...) summum
pot^^at ars (...)rorem, consumpt^s viribus non ^icp^ri^ns quo digne modo patris
v^^tum po^^ et exprimere, vel^vit e^us caput, and suo cuique animo dedit
(...)dum. Quintillian. Instit. l. 2. c. 13.
1 These. 2. 16. The Prophet wants words to express it, and veiles it over with
this black and dismal intimation, Thus will I do unto thee, Amos 4. 12. when
they scornfully asked the Prophets what burden they had from the Lord to
deliver unto them the Lord gives them this as a Burden of burdens, a Curse of
curses, I will forsake you, says the Lord, Jerem. 23. 33.

1. It cuts off our relation unto God, ye are not my people, I will not be your
God, Hos. 1. 9. It is the unfranchizing of a Church, Cancelling their Charter,
Reversing and extinguishing all their privileges, making them very Gentiles, A
people without God or Covenant.

2. It consequently cuts off our Communion with God; He delights not in us, nor
we in him; for though this be the greatest judgment in the world, yet there is
this further misery in it, That wicked men choose it, and are well pleased to
be without God. They say unto God, depart from us, Job 21. 14. They are
contented that the holy one of Israel should cease from before them, Isa. 30.
11.

3. It cuts off the Glory and Renown of a People, which stands not in their
Seas and Rivers, in their Wealth, or Power, or Plenty, or Trade, or other
outw^rd Accomplishments, but in having God nigh them, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Christ is the
Riches of the world, Romans 11. 12. Gods favor the honor of a people, Isa. 43.
4. when he forsakes them, their Glory is gone.

4. It cuts off the comfort of all our enjoyments, the pure use whereof we have
from the favor of God alone, brings thorns and briars in our palaces,
makes our Table a snare, our Riches the fuel of our lusts, our Quails the
harbingers of our curses, our plenty nothing but the matter of our pride and
our perdition. Wicked men eat their meat as swine do, mingled with mire and
uncleanness, they eat in darkness and sorrow, their riches are their hurt,
Eccles. 5. 13, 17. Vanity and vexation, emptiness and affliction are the total
sum of all their worldly abundance, of all the sparks which they have
kindled, after which they shall lie down in sorrow, Isaiah 50. 11.

5. It Seals us up under wrath and Judgment, is the Talent of lead which is
cast on the Mouth of the Ephah. Zach. 5. 8. It is the last Judgment before the
last of all, the very outward Court, or portall of Hell. For when the presence
and ordinances of God are gone, men are in a Remediless Condition, Sick to
death without either physic or Physician. O, says Saul, I am sore distressed!
the Philistims war, and God is departed, 1 Samuel 28. 15. Sin wounds Satan
accuses, Law curses, Death pursues, Conscience roareth, Hell flameth, and
God is departed.

6. It shuts out our praye^^, when Gods back is turned, and his presc^^ce
removed, then his Ear is stopped; when he shutts us out, he shutts out our
prayer likewise. They who are Lo-Ammi are Certainly Lo-Ruchamah. If no people,
no Mercy; There will be a time when the worst of men who now despise it, will
cry aloud for mercy; but all in vain, God will not hear them, because they
refused to hear him, Prove. 1. 28. Jer. 11. 14. Ezekiel. 8. 18.

7. It shuts out the prayers of Holy men for us, when God casts a people out of
his sight, he will not here a Prophet for them, Jer. 7. 16. nay not an Assembly
of Prophets, such as were mighty in prayers, as Moses and Samuel, Jer. 15. 1.
such as have had experience of most glorious deliverances, as Noah, Daniel and
Job, Ezekiel 14. 14.

8. It opens an Inlet for all other Miseries and troubles, lets loose the
sluices, and as in Noah's flood, breaks up the fountains of the great deep. Many
evils and troubles shall befall them, says the Lord, and they shall say, are
not these evils come upon us, because God is not amongst us? Deuteronomy. 31. 17. When
God is with a people none can be against th^^ to hurt them. He sweetens all
the^^ Sorrows, makes their very Enemies at p^^^e, but when the Glory and the
wall ^^^^re is departed, there is a free approach for all Calamities, a people
are then ripe for destruction.

Now to clear both the Justice and Goodness of God in this fore Judgment, we
are to understand.

1. That the Lord does not in this manner forsake a Nation or Church until,
The manner of Gods departing
1 They forsake him, our mercies are from God, our Miseries from our selves.
Hos. 13. 9. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. 2. Not until all Remedies have been by them
rejected, and he wearied with Repenting, so that he can no longer bear being
pressed as a cart full of sheaves, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Jer. 15. 6. Jer. 44. 22.
Isa. 43. 24. Amos 2. 13. 3. Nor without first giveing solemn warnings both by
his Messengers, and by his more moderate chastisements, as we find, Amos 3. 7.
4. 7 -- 12. Amos 7. 1 -- 7.

2. That when he does forsake a people; He does it, 1. Unwillingly, It is his
strange work, he can scarce bring his mind to resolve upon it. How shall I
give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? etc. Hos. 11. 8. He
speaks against them, and then remembers them again, Jerem. 31. 18. 2.
Lingringly and gradually, and as it were cum animo revertendi, If his people
would hold fast and not let him go; so he did in the deportation of the ten
Tribes, first in the days of Pekah, he carried the Land of Napthali away into
Assyria, 2 Reg. 15. 29. And after in the days of Hosea upon violation of the
conditions of service and tribute to the Assyrians, he carried the rest away,
and removed them out of his sight, 2 Reg. 17. 6, 18. 3. Not till he have marked
his own select people in the forehead and have provided a Zoar, a Pella, some
hiding place and chambers of refuge for them, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Isa. 26. 20. 2 Chronicles.
30. 11. or at least fitted them for the external pressure of such a judgment,
and comforted them with the promises belonging unto the remnant according to
the Election of grace; of which we find many in this our Prophet. For either
the meek of the earth shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger, Zeph. 2. 3.
or though involved in the outward judgment, yet it shall go well with them,
Isaiah 3. 10.

Now from all this we learn. 1. To Bless God for the glorious benefit of his
Presence yet amongst us now for above an hundred years; for the possession of
his Oracles, the Ministry of his Word, the Seals of his Covenant, the Liberty
of his Ordinances, the Mysteries of the Gospel, and unsearchable Riches of
Christ set forth before us continually; which things the Angels look into,
which Kings, and Prophets, and righteous men have desired to see, and have not
seen them. This is so great a mercy, that the Scripture calls it by the name of
salvation it self, Joh. 4. 22. Act. 28. 28. Heb. 2. 3.

2. To walk worthy of this glorious mercy to adorn the doctrine of the Gospel,
by lives answerable unto it, as those that have avouched the Lord for their
God, and Christ for their King, Phil. 1. 27. Tit. 2. 10, 14. Joan. Picus
Mirandala, Ep. 1. ad Franciscum N^pot^^, up^rum, to. 2. page 342.
It was a pious and devout Meditation of Picus Mirandala, who professed himself
amazed at the studies, or rather frenzies of men, both to be wondered at the
lamented, for if it be a great madness for men not to believe the Gospel, the
truth whereof has been confirmed by the witness of Apostles, the blood of
Martyrs, the power of Miracles, the attestation of Elements, the confession of
Devils; It is then certainly a greater madness, Si de Evangelii veritate non
dubitas, vivere tamen quasi de ejus falsitate non dubitares: to profess to
believe the torments of hell, and the joys of Heaven, and yet so to live, as
if we feared nothing less then Hell, or desired nothing less then Heaven.
Certainly our plagues will be answerable to our Talents if we have not improved
them, Luke 12. 47.

3. To tremble at the judgment here threatened of Gods departing from us, and
giving us a Bill of Divorce, and casting us out of his family, and removing our
Candlestick, as a very preface to Go ye cursed. If we have ever duly thought
of the horrors of Caine, the howlings of Esau, the distress of Saul, the
despair of Judas, we may pass some judgment what it is to forfeit God, and
to have him nolonger for our God. What great reason we have to fear this
judgment, and lay this matter close to our hearts, may appear if we consider,

1. The sins which provoke Gods departing from a people; amongst others such
as these, 1. Diverse and strange doctrines which corrupt the truth of God.
Heresy in the Eastern Churches made way for Mahumitanisme. And therefore when
the Apostle makes mention of the days of Apostasy, when God was in great
measure departed from the Church, we find him still mentioning delusions,
lies, doctrines of Devils, resisting of the Truth, 2 These. 2. 11. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
2 Timothy 3. 8.

2. Incorrigiblenesse under former judgments, for the Lord will not always
strive, either by his Spirit or by his Rod, but will overcome when he judges,
Amos 4. 12. though he repent once and again, yet he will at last take the plumb
line into his hand, Amos 7. 1 -- 7.

3. Contempt and scorn of his Messengers and their message, which he has
sent, rising early and sending them, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. when the servants were
beaten and stoned, and the son slain, then quickly after the Kingdom was
taken away, Mat. 21. 33 -- 43. Mat. 24. 34, 38. Certainly since the reformation
of Religion the Ministers of the Gospel have never been under more reproach and
contempt (and that by a Generation of men that think themselves perfecter then
others) then in this Age they are; heretofore they were the song of drunkards,
now of such as own themselves for Saints.

4. Remisseness and backsliding from our first love, Rev. 2. 5 -- 7. falling
away from that high esteem which once we had of the Ordinances of Christ, of
the communion of Saints, and earnest zeal for the faith once delivered to the
Saints.

5. Neglecting the day and season of grace, and the voice of Christ in the
Gospel, playing the wantons with so great a depositum, as the Jews did, not
considering in this our day the things which belong unto our peace, Luke 19.
42, 43. when men will not receive Instruction, God threatens to depart, Jer.
6. 8.

2. If we consider the Symptoms of Gods threatening to depart from us, besides
the forementioned sins. As,

1. Loosning the joints of Government, and making continual changes in a State.
It is a sign of sickness in the body, when it knows not how to rest, but is
in perpetual agitation, from Chamber to Chamber, from Couch to Couch, from Bed
to Bed; and so it is in a State when a Parliament does not please, we try a
piece of it, then down with that once and again, and try new experiments, a
certain sign of a sick Nation. It was in the ten Tribes a forerunner of this
judgment threatened by our Prophet, when they so often pulled down one another;
and it may justly make England tremble when they compare their condition, and
that of the ten Tribes before their deportation together.

2. Divided interests, and intestine dissentions amongst the people, Manasse
Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasse, and both against Judah, this the Prophet makes an
evidence that Gods anger would not turn away from Israel, Isa. 9. 21. These
kind of doleful intestine commotions were sad forerunners of the fatal
destruction of Jerusalem, of which we read in Josephus. Joseph. de Bello (...),
lib. 2. cap. 19, 20, 21. (...) 1, 2, 9 (...) 6. cap. 1, 4, 11, 14, 15. lib. 7.
cap. 7, 8.


3. Confusions and divisions in the Church; brethren biting and devouring one
another, and thereby opening a wide door for the common enemy to enter in at;
for union strengthens the interests of those united, and divisions betray them.
Jerusalem is a City compacted; the Coat of Christ a seamlesse Coat, and
therefore the Apostle bids us, mark those that cause divisions and offenses,
and avoid them, as men that drive an interest, and do not serve Jesus Christ,
Romans 16. 17, 18.

4. Multitudes of seducing spirits, and Emissaries of Satan who go up and down
without control, sowing tares, and laying levens, shaking the minds of
credulous and simple people, who are apt to be turned about with every wind of
doctrine, and slyly insinuating under disguises and other shapes, such
doctrines as in their own proper colors would be rejected.

5. The uselesness of many men eminent for piety and prudence, by whose great
perspicacy and grave wisdom, dangers, might be discovered, breaches healed,
difficulties removed, expedients offered, paths restored to walk in. A sad
providence when the Lord makes the tongues of such men to cleave to the roof
of their mouth, and lays them in his displeasure, (not to them but to the
nation) aside as Rejected stones unfit, for the building.

Lastly, the General Senselesness of Judgments past or present, the sleep of
slumber and security which is upon most of us, as upon Jonah in the Tempest,
few awakening themselves to cry unto God or to pour out their Confessions,
Complaints, or Supplications at the throne of Grace.

The Lord open our Eyes, and persuade us in this our day to lay to heart the
things which belong unto our peace, to prepare to meet our God, to hold him
fast with strong cries, and love of his Truth, and not to let him go till he
preserve three sinful Nations and snatch them as Brands out of the burning, or
at least that we our selves may be hid in the day of the Lords Anger.

I shall Conclude with a few words of Exhortation, both unto the people in
general, and unto you who are Magistrates of this great City in particular,
unto such things as seem necessary Remedies of our great danger, and Means to
keep our glory in the midst of us still. First, to the people.

1. Repent, and do your first works, else Iniquity will be your ruin. Even
after a bill of divorce God allows an adulterous Church to return unto him.
Jer. 3. 1, 22. Hos. 2. 2, 19. In a day of darkeness and gloominess, of horses
and horsemen of fire and Earthquake, of Armies and Terrors, the Lord calls on
his people to Turn to him, with intimation of a gracious Answer, Joel. 2. 12,
13, 14, 18, 19. With a peradventure of mercy, Zeph. 2. 3. This means God
prescribes unto Ephesus to preserve their Candlestick amongst them, Rev. 2. 5.
If this be neglected, no people nearer unto Cursing then those who have enjoyed
the light and presence of God ripening only thorns and briars, Heb. 6. 8. Amos
3. 2.

2. Wrestle mightily with God, be not refused nor rejected, let the Lord know
you are Resolved to hold fast, and not to let him go without a blessing, Genesis
32. 26. Lord rather no Canaan, no milk, no honey, no houses, no vineyards, no
herds, no flocks, no Angel, then No God, Exodus 33. 14, 15, 16. Lord, whither
shall we go to mend our selves? thou only have the words of eternal life? Joh.
6. 67, 68. Will changes in Government mend us? will a Democracy, or
Aristocracy, or any other form of Polity mend us, if God be going away from
us? Ask the Prophet. Now, says he, they shall say, we have no King, because we
feared not the Lord, What then should a King do to us? Hos. 10. 3. if we fear
not the Lord, if we swear falsely in a Covenant, if we be an empty Vine, and
if our heart be divided, and we are found faulty; the best Governments can do
us but little good.

3. Resolve every man with Joshua, As for me and my House we will serve the
Lord, Joshua 24. 15. I will tread in the steps of my father Abraham, I will
command my children and my household to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19.
as David did Solomon, Prove. 4. 3, 4. If they be my children and my servants, if
they expect from me the love of a Father, or the care of a Master, My God shall
be their God, I will show the love of a Father and Governor unto them, in not
suffering their souls by any neglect of mine to be poisoned or endangered by
any perverse or Heretical doctrine. The way to keep God in a Nation is for
every man to keep God in his own heart, and in his own family first.

4. Prize highly the presence of Christ in his Ordinances, the communion of
Saints, the assembling of your selves together, Heb. 10. 24. Contend earnestly
for the faith, Jude v. 3. Buy the truth, sell it not, Prove. 23. 23. Let no
interest, no party, no policy, make you willing to part with any truth of God
for promoting any design of man. If any man speak disgracefully of the
Scriptures; if any man tempt you to forsake the Ordinances, or to beget any low
or base esteem of them in you, say unto him as Christ to Satan, get thee
behind me. Christ will not forsake those to whom he is precious. The more
value we set upon him, the more careful we will be to keep him, the more
willing he will be to continue with us.

5. Pull off the vizard, and look through the disguizes which are put upon
false doctrines, Recens vastatio vineae vulpem indicat affiusse, sed nescio qua
art fingendi ita sua confundit vestigia callidissimum animal, ut qua vel
intret vel exeat, haud sacile queat ab homine apprehendi, Cumque pateat opus,
non apparet auctor, etc. Bernard in Cant. Sermon. 65.
to render them the more plausible. Heretics will bring in their opinions
privily, and by fair words and good speeches will deceive the hearts of the
simple; they have Mystery on their forehead, Romans 16. 17. Ephesians. 4. 14. Col. 2.
8, 18. 2 These. 2. 3. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Rev. 17. 5. When Agrippina poisoned Claudius,
she mingled the poison with the meat that he loved, as men gild over bitter
pills, and as Lucretius speaks, tip the Cup wherein there is a bitter potion
with honey. Satan knows how to transform himself into an Angel of light, and
under pretentions of higher perfection, like painted Sepulchers, to veil over,
and palliate rotten and unsound opinions.

6. Judge of Ends by the Means which are used to compass and promote them;
there never wants good means to advance good Ends. We shall never need to do
evil, that good may come of it, Romans 3. 8. the wife in the Law was not to do an
undecent thing in defense of her own husband, Deuteronomy. 25. 11, 12. If you see men
revile Ministers, decry Ordinances, broach Heresies, foment Divisions,
disrespect and lay aside Wise, Religious, Sober, Serious, Grave Orthodox
Patriots, Latet anguis in herba, certainly the ends may justly be suspected,
that make use of such expedients, as these to promote them.

2. To you that are Magistrates in this great City,

1. Study your Character, your Authority, and your Duty, carry your selves like
Gods Ministers, to be a terror to evil doers; be men of courage, loving truth,
etc. Exodus 18. 21. 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4. Romans 13. 4. Beg wisdom of God as Solomon
did, that he may show you the right way, that you may have him, his house and
glory nearest to your heart. If you intend Gods house, he will preserve and
build yours, 2 Samuel 7. 11. If you appear for him, he will engage for you. If
you ask wisdom to serve him in your places, he will give honor and other good
things without your seeking.

2. Be zealous and valiant for the glory, Numb. 25. 11, 13
name, worship, interests, Truth of God; as Phineas was. Jer. 9. 3.
His zeal for God put a stop to the wrath which was gone out against Israel. A
Moses, 1 Reg. 19. 16.
a Phineas may stand in the breach and turn away wrath, when God seems a
departing, Numl. 14. 12, 17, 20. Psalm. 106. 23, 30. put forth your selves, be
willing to show your selves nursing Fathers to Gods Church; Isa. 49. 23. 60. 16.
Nurses will do all they can to keep poison from their children; do you in your
places labor to preserve the Church of Christ in this City from the leaven of
dangerous and pernicious doctrines. When you are clearly satisfied and
convinced, That this is your duty to own God and his Truth, to promote,
protect, encourage, countenance Orthodox Religion, to withstand and counterwork
the projects of seducers, resolve as Nehemiah did, that no fear shall weaken
your hands, Nehem. 6. 9, 11, 13. Show your selves Gods Vicegerents, in
publicly owning his truth and Ordinances to all the world; Isa. 25. 9.
This is our God whom we resolve to serve, this is his worship and Religion
which we own, this the truth we will live and die in, these the dangerous
doctrines we resolve in our places and stations to withstand, and by all
righteous means in Gods way to prevent the growth and progress of them.

What an honor would it be for such a famous City as this to be a President to
all these Nations, in letting the world see and know their zeal for God, and
love to his Truth in these backsliding days, when many Religions do threaten
the extirpation of All: How highly they value, how steadfastly they cleave to
the unity and purity of that Religion under which they and their Fathers
flourished in piety, in peace, in plenty, in tranquillity, in prosperity, in
honor for above fourscore years together, maugre all the power and policy, of
adversaries, till of late years we our selves by our sins have loosened the
joints of Religion and Government, and done that with our own hands, which our
enemies by all their machinations did in vain attempt. Oh that now, when the
Lord says, seck my face, we would all say, Thy face Lord we will seek; when
the Lord says, Turn ye backsliding children, and I will heal your
backsliding, we would all with one heart, with one soul, with one shoulder
answer, Behold we come unto thee for thou art the Lord our God. If prayers, if
tears, if strong cries, if reformed lives, if zealous purposes, if united
Counsels, will get a reprieve, and keep our God amongst us, we will stand in
the gap, we will hold him fast, we will give him no rest till once again he
make these Nations a praise in the earth, and this City a Jehovah Shammah, the
Lord is there.

3. Believe not those Donatistical and Pontifician spirits, who go about to
persuade you, That Magistrates have nothing to do with Religion. Nothing to do
with Religion? What then made David think of building God an house, 2 Samuel 7.
2. and to set in order the courses of the Levites? 1 Chronicles. 23. 6. and Priests,
Chap. 24. How came Solomon the Wise to build a Temple for Gods worship which he
had nothing to do with? 2 Chronicles. 6. How came Asa so bold to command Judah to
seek the Lord God, Donatus s^l to surore succenssus, in haec verba prorupit,
Quid est imperatori cum Ecclesia? Optat. lib. 3.
and that in order to the quietness of his Kingdom, and victory over enemies?
2 Chronicles. 14. 3, 4, 5, 6, 11. How came Jehoshophat so much to mistake, as to
take away high places and groves, Furorem hunc passim refutaruat viri magni.
Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 20. sect 9. Beza Opus c. 10. 1. de pun. Heret.
Brent. to. 8. page 175 -- 198. Pet. Mart. loc. co. clas. 4. c. 13 sect. 31 --
33. Gerard. lo. com. to. 6. de Magist. polit. s. ct. 16. -- Rivet in decalog.
p. 258. B. Jewel. defense. p. 557-566. Sands Ser. 2. sect. 13-20. Bilso^ of
subjection. part. 2, 124 -- 129, 145, 151, 159, 178-191, 212 249 and part 3. p.
530-545.
to provide that the people might be taught? 2 Chronicles. 17. 6 -- 9. and to
command the Priests and Levites to do their duties? 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 9. How came
Hezekiah to be so zealous to purge the Temple, to command the Priests and
Levites? 2 Chronicles. 29. 4 -- 11, 27, 30. to Proclaim a Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1
-- 6. to appoint the courses of the Priests and Levites, Chap. 31. 1, 2. to
command the people to give them their portions, and not as we endeavor in this
Age to take them away, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord,
ver. 4. How came young Josiah to take so much pains in reforming Religion? 2 Chronicles. 34. 1 -- 7. to cause all the people to stand to a Covenant, v. 32. to
command and encourage the Priests in the work of the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 35. 2.
How came Nehemiah to Seal a Covenant? (...) 14 p. 71 -- etc. 16 p. 91. Z^^ch.
in 4. praecept. l. 1. c 5. ^illet Synops. controv. 7. q 4. 2.
Nehem. 10. 1. to 8. Enter into an Oath to keep the Sabbath, and maintain
Religion? v. 29. to take care of the portions of the Levites? Chap. 13. 10. to
threaten the violaters of the Sabbath? ver. 21. to command the Levites to
cleanse themselves? ver. 22. to contend, and curse, and smite those that had
married strange wives? ver. 23. 30, 31. to say nothing of the Laws and Edicts
of Christian Emperors to restrain Heresies and Idolatry, of which we read in
Saint Austin. Was it zeal and duty in these men to take care of Religion,
Epist. 48, 50. and 166. co^tra. Crescon. Gram. l. 3. c. 51. de Civ. Dei l. 1.
c. 36.
and to purge corruption out of the Church, and is it not so now? was it a
fault in the Church of Thyatira to suffer Jezabel to teach and seduce unto
Idolatry, Rev. 2. 20. And is it holiness now to leave all men free to write,
proclaim, publish without control, doctrines wholly contrary to the interests
of Christ, and the truths of Religion? It were no hard matter to show you the
rise, and to dive to the bottom of this dangerous opinion. I shall only give
you a Marginal Note in Baronius, Baron. An. 528. sect. 7.
nulla facultas Imperatoribus de rebus Ecclesiae decernendi, Anno 681. sect. 72
(just the language of Donatus) That Emperors have no power to determine any
thing in Church Matters; and elsewhere, that nothing is valid which a King
orders in Churches, without the Bishop of Rome.

4. Reverence the Oaths and Vows of God which are upon you, Plutarch. Apog.
they are not as Lysander profanely said, to be played with as boys do with
skittle-pins. It is the Character of good men to fear an Oath, Eccles. 9. 2.
and a most severe punishment was brought upon Zedekiah for violation of an Oath
and Covenant, (...) Homer. Iliad. 4. Vid. Exemplum Philippi Macedonum Regis.
Pausan. l. 8. p. 465.
Ezekiel. 17. 13 -- 19. How observant was. Joshua of his Oath, though fraudulently
procured by the Gibeonites? Joshua 9. 19. It is not safe to distinguish our
selves out of the obligation of solemn Oaths, or after Vows to make inquiry,
Prove. 20. 25. a good man though he swear to his own hurt changes not, Psalm
15. 4. How much more when he swears to endeavor the preservation of pure
Religion, and other the great Interests and Privileges of a Nation.

Lastly, consider in this our day what are the things which belong to our
peace, Luke 19. 42. It is a great wisdom in evil days to redeem Time,
Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. It is noted of the men of Issachar that they had
understanding of the Times to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. As
Mordicai said to Ester, who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for
such a time as this? Ester 4. 14. Surely in such a time as this, a day of
trouble and rebuke, it is necessary for every man to beg of God to show him his
way, to advise with the Word of God, what wisdom, or counsel, or help he may
put in to keep God with us, and to prevent this dismal Woe of Gods removing
our Candlestick and departing from us. Must I write? must I speak? must I
counsel? must I pray? must I do Judgment and Justice? Lord we seek of thee a
right way, be thou entreated of us, Ezra 8. 21, 23. In evil and dangerous
days, as all men, so especially Moses and Phineas, Magistrates and Ministers
are by their fidelity and zeal to stand in the gap, and to obviate those
judgment which are impendent over us.

I conclude with the Prophet Zachary, Zach. 2. 5. The Lord is a Wall of fire
round about, where he is the Glory in the midst of a people. He will encamp
about his House, Zach. 9. 8. upon all his glory there shall be a defense, Isa.
4. 5. in token whereof the Cherulims were on the walls of the Temple, to note
their protection about Gods people, 2 Chronicles. 3. 7. Psalm. 34. 7. But if we do
not resolve to hold God fast, if the glory of his Truth, Worship, and presence
be once gone from us, if we once come to know the difference between the
service of God, and the Kingdoms of the Countries, 2 Chronicles. 12. 8.
we shall with horror subscribe to the truth and dreadfulnesse of this dismal
threatening, Woe also to them when I depart from them.

FINIS.

