A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, On March 22. 1667. Being
EASTER DAY.

By Edward Lord Bishop of Norwich.

Published by his Majesty's Command.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas at the
Adam and Eve in Little-Brittain. 1668.

A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, On March 22. 1667. being
Easter Day.
Hebrews 13. v. 20, 21. Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead
our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the
Everlasting Covenant,

Make you perfect in every Good Work to do his will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ.


THE efficacy of the Gospel depends not on the wisdom, industry, or
ability of Man, but on the Blessing and power of God, who only can open the
Act. 16. 14.
Heart to attend unto the Word spoken.

And therefore the Apostle does often begin and end his Epistles with Prayer,
as the best Key to open, and the best Seal to close the Doctrine taught.

Now because the sum of our Happiness here stands in two things, That God
is at peace with us, and that we live in obedience to him, and both these
founded in the Covenant of Grace, Sealed by the Blood of Christ, the great
Apostle, High Priest, and Shepherd of the Church, and ratified by the power of
his Resurrection; therefore the Apostle has so couched these things in this
Prayer, that it may be a Summary both of his Doctrine touching the person and
offices of Christ in this Epistle, and of the Exhortations unto stedfastness in
Faith and Obedience frequently inferred therefrom.

The Words contain in them Two general parts: A Prayer, and Arguments to
enforce it. In the Prayer we observe,

1. The Matter of it, perfection in every good work.

2. The Rule of our perfection in working, God's will.

3. The end of Doing his will, to please him.

4. The Principles of this Perfection, 1. God's peaceable Affection toward us
in Christ. 2. God's Gracious working in us. Working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight.

The Arguments are drawn, 1. from the Free Grace of God in an Everlasting
Covenant. 2. From the Love of Christ, the great Shepherd of his Church, in
purchasing all the mercies of that Covenant with the price of his own Blood. 3.
From the power of God bearing witness to the Efficacy and prevalency of that
Blood, in Raising Christ from the Dead. 4. From the Pastoral Office, wherein
Christ applies and dispenses the Mercies of this Covenant, as the great
Shepherd of the Sheep.

I begin with the Prayer, wherein we have a complete Character of Christian
perfection in these few particulars:

1. An Internal work of God's grace in us, working in you. Good works begin not
at the Hand, but at the Heart; we must be renewed in the spirit of our mind,
and strengthened Ephesians. 4. 23. 3. 16.
by God's Spirit in the Inner-man, as the Apostle speaks. He in the Philosopher
who could not make a Dead Body stand, gave it over with this Conclusion,
Oportet ut sit aliquid Intus. We may not judge of our selves by mere External
conformities; the Lip or Matthew. 15. 8.
Knee may be near, when the Heart is far off. We must try how our Consciences
is freed from the allowance, and our Will from the love of Sin, What life of
Grace is in our Heart, How our Soul stands in awe of God's Commandments. The
outward Act may be dissembled, but no Man can love God in Hypocrisy; Again,
the outward Act may be disabled, but nothing can hinder the Heart from
delighting in God's Law. Every Man is that in God's Eye, which he is in his
Spiritual Capacity. A Bodily service, like a Body, is Dead without a Soul to
animate and enliven it.

2. Life of Grace within will produce work without. In vain do we please our
selves in the opinion of a good Heart, if there be an Evil Conversation. Grace
in the Heart, like Leaven in the Lump, or Sap in the Root, will work its way
into the whole Man. Where God gives one heart, he gives one way, Jer. 32. 39.
The Wicked must forsake his way as well as his thoughts, and so find mercy,
Isaiah 55. 7.

3. Christian perfection disposes unto Every Good Work, causes a Man to keep
a good Conscience in All things. Sincerity Heb. 13. 18.
makes Obedience universal. He who out of the awe of God's Authority keeps one
Commandment, must needs, on the same Reason, keep all, as Saint James argues,
Cap. 2. 10. they being All alike Holy, and alike His. There is in Every good
Christian a Concatenation of all Virtues and Grace. As the Child receives from
the Parent Member for Member, So when Christ is formed in a Believer, he
receives of his fullness Grace for Grace, John 1. 16. And therefore as one
dangerous Wound may kill a Man, or one dangerous Leake sink a Vessel, So one
presumptuous Sin may destroy a Soul. We must not therefore content our selves
with Herod's progress, of whom it is said, that he did many things, Marc. 6.
20. But we must with David have respect unto all God's Commandments, and hate
every False way, Psalm. 119. 6. 128. This is our Commission, to teach Men to
observe All things whatsoever Christ has commanded. Matthew. 28. 20. And this
should be your Resolution, to say with good Cornelius, We are here present
before God to hear All things that are commanded Thee of God, Act. 10. 3.

4. Christian perfection is Constant, holds out to a consummation and full
growth, to a perfect Man, Ephesians. 4. 13. Keeps God's Statutes Always to the end,
Psalm. 119. 112. proceeds from an Heart thoroughly fitted, and composed for good
works, as the Greek word (...) imports, So the Apostle says of himself that
he followed after, reached forth, and pressed forward in the Race of
Christianity, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. as all true denominations are founded in
habitual and permanent Qualities, We call not him a Red man who is so only
with Blushing, nor him a Pale man who is so only with Passion; So sincere
Piety is not in fitts, pangs, or sudden flashes, but is sober, regular,
uniform, constantly disposing the Soul unto Every good work.

5. Christian Perfection has for its Standard and Measure the good and perfect
will of God, inquireth what God the Lord will speak, Psalm. 85. 8. teaches us
to deny our own Reason, and not dispute; to deny our own will, and not to
rebel against the will of God; to say as Christ to his Father, Not as I will,
but as thou will; or as Saint Paul Matthew. 26. 39.
in his Conversion, Lord what will thou have Act. 9. 6.
me to do? Great reason it is that the wisest Will should order, and that the
Sovereign Will should Rule Every other Will which is subordinate unto it. And
since we know that God requires nothing of us but for our own benefit, (for
our goodness extends not Deuteronomy. 10. 13. Psalm. 16. 2.
unto him) we should Even out of Self-love obey his will.

6. Christian Perfection proposes as its ultimate end to please God, and to
bring glory to his Name, is not guided by Carnal hopes or fears to please men,
but chiefly regards God's eye and his approbation. So Abraham walked before
God, so David set the Genesis 17. 1. Psalm. 16. 8. Joh. 8. 29.
Lord always before his face, so our Blessed Savior did always those things
that pleased his Father. And great Reason it is, that the first of Beings
should be the last of Ends; that we should study to please and bring glory to
him, who in so doing has promised to assist and reward us, and by not so doing
is provoked both to disappoint and to destroy us.

Lastly, Our good works cannot please God, but in and through Jesus Christ. For
1. his Spirit and Grace are necessary to enable all our performances. 2. His
Merits and mercy are necessary to pardon all our failings. Thus far the Matter
of the Prayer Perfection in Every good work to do God's will.

We are next to Consider the Principles of these good works; which are,

1. God's peaceable affection toward us, The God of Peace. Enmity began at us,
but Reconciliation begins at God, our destruction is of our selves, But from
him is our help, Hos. 13. 9. He came not only to save, but to seek and to
find that which was lost, Luke 19. 10. When we were Sinners, Romans 5. 6. 8. 10.
obnoxious to Justice; Enemies, Exposed to wrath; without Strength, Unable to
decline God's Justice, to withstand his Power, to prevent or escape his
Displeasure; for him in this Case to send after his Creatures, his Enemies,
that fled from him, that Rebelled against him, to be seech them to be
reconciled unto God, to be content to be saved, to accept of 2 Cor. 5. 20.
pardon and peace, of glory and Blessedness, this is a love which passes
knowledge, which Ephesians. 3. 9.
exceeds the expression or Comprehension of Men or Angels.

And we must thus apprehend God as a God of Peace before we can be fitted for
any good work. It is the Nature of Man, as the Historian, tells us, odisse quem
Laeserit; We having by Sin wronged God, do after hate and fly from him, till he
proclaim Pardon and Peace. Peter repented not of his Denial till Christ looked
back upon him; the Tears Luke 22. 61.
which fell from his Eyes, were put into them by the Eyes of Christ. While
Heaven in Winter is cold and tempestuous, the Earth is Barren, till the Sun
return with warmoh and healing: So the Soul is fruitless, till the Light and
favor of God shine forth upon it. We love him because he loved us first. 1 John 4. 19. We Remember our ways when he is pacified toward us, Ezekiel. 16. 63.
His pardon and goodness is the ground of our fear, There is forgiveness with
Thee, says the Psalmist, that thou may be feared. Psalm. 130. 4. They shall
fear the Lord and his Goodness, Hos. 3. 5. Godly men, says Macarius, have Joy
and Fear mingled together; the Joy which they have in God, Makes them Fear to
offend him, They dare not grieve him that comforts them, nor use his Favors to
his own dishonor.

The best way therefore to Abound in good works, to be kept in an Uniform and
constant Love of God's holy ways, is to get our Hearts possessed with a Sense
and assurance of Divine Love, that God is unto us in Christ a God of Peace; for
where God speaks Peace, he brings Healing, Isai. 57. 19. The Peace of God
wherever it is will Rule, as the Apostle teaches us, Col. 3. 15. Assurance of
Faith is an excellent means to have the Heart sprinkled from an Evil
Conscience. Heb. 10. 22.

And here since our God is a God of Peace, Our Savior a Prince of Peace, His
Gospel Isai. 9. 6. Isai. 54. 10. Psalm. 122. 3.
a Covenant of Peace, His Church a City of Peace, compacted within it self,
wherein, in the purest Age thereof, the Members were all of one Heart and one
Soul, since we have Act. 4. 32
all but one Spirit, one Faith, one Hope, one Ephesians. 4. 4, 5.
Baptism, one Common Salvation, as Saint Jude Jude 8. 3.
calls it; How should we all bewail the never enough-lamented Divisions which
still Continue and woefully increase in the midst of the most considerable
Protestant Nation in the Christian World? How should all of us besiege Heaven
with United Prayers, with Uncessant Importunities for the peace of Jerusalem?
How should All whom the God of Peace has entrusted with the care of his House,
looking strait forward, with a single Eye, and Unbiassed aim, to the Glory of
God, the Interest of Religion, and Salvation of Souls, put forth their utmost
and most Zealous Endeavors to close up these doleful Breaches which are
amongst us? Rulers, by the Prophet, are called Healers, Isa. 3. 7. and it is
recorded for the honor of Jehoash King of Judah that he took care for the
repairing of the breaches of the House of God, 2 Reg. 12. 5. The Church of
Christ in Heaven shall have no Divisions in it, and he has taught us to Pray,
that his will may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. Why should we not with
all Seriousness and Sincerity endeavor, as far as possibly may be, to Effect
that, which we hope for in Heaven, which we Pray for on Earth? We read of
Wise-hearted Men that they made several Curtains with Loops and Taches, and so
Coupled them to one another, that they became one Tabernacle, Exodus 36. The
Lord thereby teaching us, that it is a work of special wisdom from Above, so
to procure Order and Unity in his Church, that the Interest and Beauty thereof
may be strengthened and preserved, that it may become Beautiful as Tirrah,
comely as Jerusalem, Cant. 6. 4.
Terrible as an Army with Banners. For certainly next to Truth of Doctrine,
Purity of Worship, and Holiness of Life, there is nothing more necessary for
promoting God's Honor, and Men's Salvation, for preventing all Atheistical
prejudices against Religion, and departures to a common Adversary, for
strengthening the Interests of all both Governors and Governed in the Church,
than the Peace and Unity thereof is. And so long as Ephraim is against
Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah, we may Justly
fear that God's Anger is not yet turned away, but that his Hand is stretched
out still, as the Prophet speaks, Isai. 9. 21.

The next Principle of Perfection is God's Gracious Working in us, fitting,
preventing, assisting us, unto the Good Works here prayed for. This Aid of
Divine Grace is Necessary, 1. to our Habitual Aptness, 2. to our Actual
working, 3. to our Progress and Perseverance in any good. All our good Works
are begun, continued and ended only by God's Grace. Creatures which seek no
higher Perfections than are to befound within the Sphere of their own Nature,
may by the Guidance and force of Nature attain thereunto: But Man seeking a
Supernatural Happiness, must be thereunto carried by the force of Supernatural
Grace.

1. Then our Habitual Fitness is only from Grace, Our Sufficiency is of God, 2
Cor. 3. 5. of our Selves we are utterly Indisposed unto Good. This
Indisposition Saint Austin has reduced to Two Heads, Ignorantia and
Difficultas. Ignorance in the Mind, the Natural man cannot know the things of
the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Difficulty, in the Will for want of Love, in
the Heart for want of Sense and Softness, in all the other Faculties for want
of Strength.

To the Removal of these Indispositions Grace is Necessary.

1. Grace only enlightneth the Eyes by the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation,
Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. Christ only gives us an Understanding that we may know him
that he is true, 1 John 5. 20. we have received the Spirit which is of God,
says the Apostle, that we might know the things that are freely given to us
of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

2. Grace only Removes Difficulty, First from the Will, by a sweet and
effectual persuasion enclining us to love God, by a secret and ineffable
operation working in us, and veras Revelationes and Bonas Voluntates, as Saint
Austin speaks.

2. Grace only removes Difficulty from the Heart, by Softening it with such
an efficacy, according to the Judgment of that excellent Father, Quae a Nullo
Duro Cord respuitur. I will give them, says the Lord, an Heart of Flesh,
Ezekiel. 36. 26.

3. Grace only Removes Difficulty from all other Faculties enabling them to
do do all things through the strength of Christ, Phil. 4. 13. Not I, says
the Apostle, but the Grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Thus Grace
is Necessary, ut Innotescat quod Latebat, ut suave Fiat quod non Delectabat, to
make that known which was hidden from us, to make that sweet which was Irksome
to us, as the same Father Excellently speaks.

2. Grace is Necessary to put this Habitual Fitness into Exercise. It is God
that works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13.
It is God that Works all our Works in us and for us, Isaiah 26. 12. Certum est
Nos facere quum facimus, sed ille facit ut faciamus, as Saint Austin speaks. It
is true we are the Workmen when we do work, but it is he by his Grace who
enableth us to Work.

3. Grace is necessary to our perseverance in well-doing, as the presence of
the Sun is Necessary to the Continuance of Light in the House, He is able to
Keep us from falling, as Saint Jude speaks, verse 24. Non Mihi sufficit, says
Saint Hierom, quod semel Donavit, nisi semper Donaverit, Peto ut accipiam, and
cum accepero Rursus Peto: It is not enough for me that God gives me Grace
once, except he give it me always, I beg that I may receive it, and when I
have received it, I beg it still. We must thus by constancy in Faith and
Prayer Attend upon all the means of Grace, because Every Stepp of our
Sufficiency depends upon it.

We now proceed unto the Arguments used by the Apostle for enforcing the matter
of this Prayer, Drawn from the Mercy of an Everlasting Covenant, From the Blood
of Christ whereby that Mercy was purchased for us, From his Resurrection
whereby it has been ratified and secured unto us; and Lastly from his Pastoral
Office, whereby it is Administered and Dispensed for the Sanctification and
Salvation of hi Church.

1. Then our God of Peace was Pleased to enter into a Covenant of Grace with
Man, when he had violated the former Covenant; The Lord might have left us in
our Lapsed Estate, as he did the Fallen Angels, Non Expectavit Angelos, sed
praecipitavit, says Saint Bernard. But he was more Merciful to sinful Man,
who, since he fell not but by harkening to the voice of a Tempter, should not
perish without having provided for him the Blood of a Redeemer.

2. This Covenant is Founded and Established in the Blood of Christ. Sanction
is essential to Contracts, which among the Ancients was done by Killing of a
Sacrifice, of which Custom we find mention Jer. 34. 18, and it was Imitated by
the Gentiles, Stabant, and Caesa firmabant faedera porca. That then which the
Scripture calls the Blood of the Covenant was that whereby Exodus 24. 8. Zach.
9. 11. Heb. 9. 20.
the Covenant was ratified, or had its Sanction, as we read in Tacitus,
Suetonius, Plutarch and others, of Leagues sealed by Drinking of Blood; So
Servius the Gramarian will have Sanctio to come a Sanguine, and faedus a
feriendo.

Now Christ by his Blood is the Mediator Heb. 7. 11. 8. 6.
and Surety in this Covenant, as our Apostle tells us, a Mediator to
Reconcile, a Surety to Undertake, according to the several Articles whereby the
Parties in Covenant stand Engaged each to other.

1. In behalf of God there is due unto him from Man Satisfaction to his
Justice, and Obedience to his Law. Christ as our Surety has in his own Person
fully satisfied the Justice of God, and Rigor of the Law: and as our Head does
derive upon his Members the Grace of his holy Spirit, whereby they are enabled
to perform such Evangelical Obedience, as the Covenant of Grace does require,
and accept.

2. In behalf of Man there is necessary Remission Heb. 8. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Heb. 9. 15. Zach. 12. 10. Rem. 2. 7.
of Sin, Reconciliation unto God, Re estating in an Inheritance, Grace to
make him Holy, Glory to make him Blessed. These things God in this Covenant of
Grace does promise to give unto us in Christ, who by the price of his Blood
has purchased them for us. Thus Christ as our Surety has paid our Debt unto
God, and as the Purchaser and Treasurer of his Father's Mercy, does procure
and perform God's Promises unto us.

3. This Covenant is an Everlasting Covenant, so called by the Prophet Isaiah
55. 3. as by Saint John an Everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14. 6. Though the manner
of its Dispensation in several Ages of the Church has been Diverse, yet the
Substance is one and the same for ever: Varta Sacramenta, Fides eadem, as Saint
Austin speaks.

A Covenant founded in Everlasting Love, the Gifts whereof are without
Repentance, Romans 11. 29. A Covenant Ratified by the Oath of God to show the
Immutability of his Counsel therein, Heb. 6. 17. A Covenant of the Sure
Mercies of David, Isai. 55. 3. of a Kingdom which cannot be moved, Heb. 12. 28.

Lastly a Covenant, the Benefits whereof are for ever, Everlasting Salvation,
Heb. 5. 9. An Eternal Weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. An Inheritance
Incorruptible, and that Fades not away, 1 Pet. 1, 4.

Now if we consider Each of these Three Particulars, we shall find them
Weighty Arguments unto that Holiness and Perfection which the Apostle here
prays for.

1. The whole substance of the Covenant is Frequently in the Scripture
comprised and re-capitulated in these two words, I will be their God, and they
shall be my People. Jer. 24 7. 30. 22. 31. 33. 32. 38. Ezekiel, 11. 20. 36. 28.
Hos. 2. 23.


And if he be Our God we must be Holy; for it is written, Ye shall be Holy, for
I the Lord your God am Holy, Levit. 19. 2.

And if we be His People we must be Holy, for he Saves his People from their
Sins, Matthew. 1. 21. He purifies unto Himself a Peculiar People, zealous of
good works, Tit. 2. 14.

Yea Our Holiness is one Principal branch of those good things which in the
Covenant of Grace are promised unto us. I will put my Fear in their Hearts,
that they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 40. I will give them an Heart of
Flesh, that they may walk in my Statutes, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall Keep my
Judgments and do them, Ezekiel. 36. 27. The Law does but Command, but the Covenant
supplyeth Grace to do, in Sincerity, though not in Perfection, what the Law
Requires; Lex imperat, Fides impetrat, as Saint Austin speaks. The Law was
given by Moses, But Grace to perform the Duties of the Moral Law, and Truth to
accomplish the Prefigurations of the Ceremonial Law came by Jesus Christ, John
1. 17.

2. The Blood of Christ, whereby the Covenant of Grace is established, and the
Sure Mercies of David purchased for us, is an invincible Argument unto Holiness
of Life, For the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1.
7. The Blood of Christ purges our Conscience from Dead Works to serve the
Living God, Hebr. 9. 14. By the Blood of Christ we were redeemed from our vain
Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.

In Christ crucified Faith sees his Infinite Love in Giving Himself for us, and
this Love of Christ constrains us to Live unto him who died for us, 3 Cor. 5.
14, 15.

In Christ crucified Faith sees the Justice of God against Sin, who spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. and this works in the Heart
an Hatred against Sin, and an endeavor to avenge the Blood of Christ upon
it. And it works a Fear of Sin, for if Sin brought a curse upon the
Sacrifice, it will much more bring it upon the Sinner, if the Sacrifice be
despised. Where Sin is found it will be punished. Sin forsaken and repented
of has been found on the Sacrifice, and has there been punished: Sin
unforsaken and unrepented of remains yet upon the Sinner, and so long he
himself is under the Curse which is Due unto it. For Christ did not Dye to
Protect us in our Sins, but to Deliver us from them; He dyed to save the
Sinner, but withal to destroy the Sin. He therefore who resolves to Hold
fast his Sin, does Interpretative resolve to let go Salvation.

Again the Apostle teaches us thus to Argue, We are not our own, for we are
Bought with a Price, Therefore we must Glorify God in our Body and in our
Spirit which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. For Quod emitur transit in potestatem
Ementis. In the Imperial Law a Person redeemed became the Servant of him that
Redeemed him, per Modum Pignoris, till he could pay back his Ransom. Certainly
Christ did not purchase us with so Precious a Price as his Own Blood, that we
should continue the Servants of Satan and Sin still, which he came to
Destroy. Year Bought 1 Cor. 7. 23.
with a price, says the Apostle, be ye not the Servants of Men, Much less of
Sin: for to this End Christ both Dyed and Rose, and Revived, that he might be
Lord both of the Dead and Living, Romans 14. 9.

The Apostle makes mention of the Fellowship of Christ's Sufferings, and our
being made comformable to his Death, Phil. 3. 10. wherein our Old Man is
Crucified Romans 6. 6.
with him, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth We
should not serve Sin, as the same Apostle speaks. For that is to be done to
Sin in us, which was done to Christ when he was made Sin for us.

The Death of Christ was a Violent Death, Christ having no Sin in himself
could not have dyed otherwise than as a Sacrifice: So Sin in us would never
dye of it self, Omnis Peccator Peccat in Suo AEterno. It must therefore be
Judged, condemned, and destroyed, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 6. 6. Romans 8. 3.

Again, the Death of the Cross was Servile Supplicium, as Historians Usually
call it; whereunto the Apostle seems to allude, when he says that Christ
took upon him the form of a Servant, and became Obedient unto Death, Even the
Death of the Cross, Phil 2. 7, 8. Thus should we treat Sin as a Base, Vile,
and Servile thing, not suffering it to reign or have Dominion over us, as the
Apostle speaks, Rom 6. 12. 14.

Again, the Death of the Cross was In same Supplicium, Christ endured the Cross
and despised the shame, says our Apostle, Heb. 12. 2. So Sin should be put
to shame by us. A Sinner in his Baptism and Repentance does, as Gregory
Nazianzen Flegantly Expresses it, (...), put Sin to open shame, What Fruit
had Ye in those Things whereof you are now ashamed, says the Apostle, Romans
6. 21.

Lastly, the Death of the Cross is frequently called in Historians Summum
Suppluium a Cruel and a Cursed Death. We should show no Mercy to Sin. Christ
would not Drink the Vinegar and Ga^l, which some Learned Men (as I Remember)
think was a Cup of Astonishment to Dull his Senses against the Pain of Death,
Thereby teaching us, if so, to refuse any Anodynes or Stupesactives which might
take away the sense of sin from us. Thus the Blood of Christ is to cure
Sin, and not only to Cover it. One of the surest Comforts of the pardon of
Sin is its dying in us, for the Life of a Christian should be a showing forth
of the Death of Christ.

3. The Everlastingness of the Covenant of Grace is an Impregnable Argument
unto Holiness of Life. There is no Real fruit in Sin, the Promises thereof are
all false and deceitful. Gehazi promised himself Gain, but got a Leprosy.
Balaam pursued Honor, but met with a Sword. Achan found a Wedge of Gold, but
it cleaved asunder his Soul from his Body. The only fruits of Sin are, Shame
if we repent, and Death if we do not repent, Romans 6. 21.

But whatever Fruit we can promise our selves from Sin, it is all but
vanishing and Transitory, The pleasures of Sin are but for a Season, Heb. 11.
25. the World passes away, and the Lusts thereof, 1 John 2. 17. Our Sin will
Leave us nothing to keep Company with for ever, but a polluted Soul, and a
Guilty Conscience. Now what a Folly is it for Men that are themselves Immortal,
who must have a Being as long as there is power in God to preserve it, as long
as there is Truth in God to make good the promises of Eternal Life to them that
Serve him, and the threatenings of Eternal Death to them that Despise him, not
to provide an Happiness of equal duration with themselves? to prefer the false
and dying Comforts of the World, before the Pleasures which are at God's
Right Hand for evermore? O let us learn by a sincere and serious Holiness of
Life, to secure unto our selves the Mercies of an Everlasting Covenant, O let
us Remember what a God we have to do withal, and Dread to provoke him, because
his wrath is Eternal, Who amongst us can dwell with Everlasting Burnings? and
resolve to serve him with Reverence and Godly fear, Because he will render unto
them, who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality, Eternal Life, Romans 2. 7.

And let the perpetuity of his Covenant teach us constancy in our Obedience. If
he repent not of his Mercy, neither should we repent of our Duty; if he save us
to the uttermost, we should serve him to the uttermost. There will be an End of
our Labor and Pain in serving of him, there will be no End of his Love and
Grace in saving us. No comparison between a few Tears of Godly Sorrow, and a
whole River of Endless Pleasures; between our weak and momentary Duties, and a
far more exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory.

There are but Two Arguments more, which being both Peculiar to the Day, and
the Solemnity thereof, I shall very briefly conclude with.

The former is drawn from Christ's Resurrection, Who brought again from the
Dead the Lord Jesus. But why is Christ said here, as often Act. 2. 24. 32. 3.
15, 26. 4 10. 5. 30. 13-30, 33. Romans 6. 4.
elsewhere, to be raised by God the Father, when we find it done by his own
power, Destroy this Temple, and in Three days I will raise it up, John 2. 19.
I have power to Lay down my Life, and I have power to take it up again, John
10. 18. I answer two things. First the Spirit whereby Christ was Quickened, as
Saint Peter Expresses it, 1 Pet. 3. 18. was the Spirit of the Father, and of
the Son and so the Action Common to Both. Secondly, Hereby the Father, to
whose Justice the Debt was due, by letting Christ out of Prison, Acknowledged a
Satisfaction of Judgment. Christ dyed as a reputed Transgressor, He was Numbered
with the Transgressors, Isai. 53. 12. But he Rose a Justified 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Person, and declared the Son of God with power, Romans 1. 4. for owning
whereof before, as for Blasphemy, they Accused and Condemned him, John 10. 33,
36. John 19. 7. Now this Doctrine of the Resurrection is likewise a Notable
Argument to enforce the Duty here prayed for. We find deliverance out of
Captivity Largely described by a Resurrection, Ezekiel. 37. 1, 13. and Even this
figurative Resurrection is used as a special Argument to enforce the Duties of
the whole Decalogue. I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land
of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage, Thou shall have no other Gods before me,
etc. In like manner, the Resurrection of Christ being a deliliverance from a
greater Captivity, is an Excellent Argument unto Holiness of Life; for God,
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless us, in turning us away from
our Iniquity, Act. 3. 26. That like as Christ was raised from the Dead by the
Glory of the Father, so we also should walk in Newness of Life, Romans 6. 4. The
Life of Christ is diffusive and Communicative, Because I Live, Ye shall Live
also, John 14. 19. Christ rose to declare his Victory over all our Enemies, the
greatest whereof is Sin, in the Subduing whereof and Quickening us unto New
Obedience, the self-same Power is Exerted upon the Hearts of Sinners, which was
wrought in Christ when he was Raised from the Dead, as the Apostle insinuates,
Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. Col. 2. 12.

The Resurrection of Christ is a Ground of Holiness, Per modum causae
Efficientis and Exemplaris.

1. By way of Efficiency, called the Power of his Resurrection, Phil. 3. 10.
whereby we are risen with him, as the Apostle speaks, Col. 3. 1. He from his
Grave, and We from our Sin; For He being the Head, and We the Members, we
have a Communion with him in the good things of the Head. Being a Risen and a
Living Head, he will not have a Dead Body. God is not the God, nor Christ the
Head, of the Dead, but of the Matthew. 22. 32.
Living.

2. By way of Pattern, His Resurrection is an Exemplar of our Sanctification.
1. He Rose to Life, not as a Ghost or Spectrum, but as a Victor, to teach us
not to content our selves with Dead shows of Holiness, but to live the Life of
God. 2. He Rose to an Heavenly Life, to ascend unto his John 20. 17.
Father, Teaching us to have our Conversation in Heaven, and our Affections set
upon Phil. 3. 20. Col. 3. 1, 2.
things above where Christ is. 3. He Rose to an abiding Life, to dye no more,
now no more to return to corruption, Romans 6. 9. Acts 13. 34. So should we unto
such a Repentance as is not again to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10. 4. He Rose
to Life speedily, very Early in the Morning, Luke 24. 1. Teaching us, as the
Psalmist speaks, to make haste, and not delay to Keep God's Commandments, Psalm.
119. 60. Rise as Early as we will he is up to save us, before we are to serve
him. 5. He Rose to a victorious Life, He came not forth bound as Lazarus, but
he left the Grave-cloaths behind him, John 20. 6, 7. So should we rise from
Sin, never to be bound or entangled in it more. A Sealed-stone, a Watch of
Soldiers could not hinder his Resurrection; no Fears or Prejudices should
dismay us, or Keep us in the Grave of Sin, when Christ calls us out. In our
Spiritual Resurrection, there are Ever, More with us, than against us. We
should Keep these Evidences of our Communion with Christ in his Resurrection
clear and unquestionable; for we must rise with him unto Holmess, before we can
rise with him unto Glory. No Man can rationally hope to be like unto Christ in
Blessedness hereafter who does not purify himself, that he may be like unto
him in Holiness here; No Man can sincerely desire consummate Holiness, who is
an Enemy to inchoate Holiness.

The Last Argument is drawn from Christ's Pastoral Office, The Great Shepherd
of the Sheep, of whom the Angel foretold that he should be Great, Luke 1. 22.
A Great King, A Great Prophet, A Great High Priest, Matthew. 5. 25. Luke 7. 16.
Heb. 4. 14. 1 Pet. 5. 5.
The Chief Shepherd, Great in Power, and this Power Acted by Great Love, and
both Quickened by Great Interest: For Heb. 3. 6. Joh. 21. 16, 17. 10. 14, 27.
he is Lord of the House, the Sheep are His Own. All which Power, Love and
Interest he will put forth to Save to the uttermost those that come unto God by
him, for Every Office of his is by him powerfully administered, to the
Sanctification and Salvation of his People.

1. As a Shepherd He Rules and Governs his People with a Scepter of
Righteousness, Heb. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 10. 5.
bringing into Captivity their Thoughts unto his Obedience, causing them with
all Cheerfulness to submit unto his Sovereignty, and to choose much rather to
be ordered by his Will, than to be left unto their Own.

2. As a Shepherd He Leads them by his Heavenly Doctrine and most Gracious
Example into the ways of Truth and Holiness; Causing them to walk as he
walked, 1 John 2. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 21. John 10 4. 27. Exodus 23. 20.
to follow his Steps; and as the Angel of God's presence, treading forth their
way unto the Heavenly Canaan for them.

3. As a Shepherd he Heals all their Sicknesses, Psalm. 103. 3. 147. 3.
whereof Sin is the chief: This is his name the Lord that Heals us, Exodus
15. 26. For this End he was wounded, that by his Isai. 61. 1. Isai, 53. 3. John
5. 2. Zach. 13. 1. Rev. 22. 2.
Stripes We might be Healed, He a true Bethesdah, whose waters are for Healing,
A Tree of Life, whose Leaves are for Healing, A Sun of Righteousness, whose
Wings are for Healing, Mal. 4. 2.
No Sickness, no Death, is too hard for him, He has raised Dead Men from the
Bed, from the Biere, from the Grave, Mark 5. 40, 41, 42. Luke 7. 14, 15. Joh
11. 43, 44. Ezekiel. 37. 4, 10.
from Dry Bones; No Man's Doubts or Fears, No Man's Sins or Temptations
should Keep him from coming with a Lively Faith, with Godly Sorrow, with
unfeigned Repentance unto Christ for Mercy; of all Sinners they who feel most
need of him, are most welcome to him, and whosoever so come, he will in no wise
cast them out, John 6. 37.

Lastly, as a Shepherd he feeds his People Psalm. 23. 1, 5.
not only with his Holy Word, but with his own most precious Body and Blood.
In the Law, the Passover, after it had been Sacrificed unto God, was to be
Eaten in a Feast by them that offered it, Deuteronomy. 16. 2, 5, 6, 7. Conformably
whereunto, Christ having been Sacrificed for us, is in his Last Supper, as a
Perpetual Feast, fedd on by us. And as no Man might Eat of the Legal Sacrifice
in Levit. 7. 20. Number. 9. 6.
his Legal Uncleaness, No more can we be welcome unto the Lords Table, if we
come thither in Impenitency and Spiritual defilement. Christ our Passover is
Sacrificed for us, therefore we must Keep the Feast, not with the Leaven of
Malice and Wickedness, but with the Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth, 1
Cor. 5. 8. We come unto the Lords Table for Fellowship with Christ in his
Sufferings, that being made conformable unto his Death, we also may be Phil. 3.
10. Rom 6. 11.
Dead unto Sin, as the Apostle speaks. We come thither to Exercise that Faith
in Christ crucified, which the Scripture assures us does purify the heart,
and work by Love. We Acts 15. 9. Gal. 5. 6.
come, as to receive the Seals of the Sure Mercies of David unto us, So to
renew our Covenant of Obedience and Service unto him, to Dedicate and Offer up
our Selves as Living Sacrifices holy and acceptable unto Romans 12. 1.
God. Lastly, We come to the Lords Table to profess our unfeigned Love and
Thankfulness unto Christ for the unspeakable Benefits of his Passion; and this
is Love, says the Apostle, that we keep his Commandments; this 1 John 5. 3.
is Thankfulness, that we order our Conversation Psalm 50. 23. Phil. 1. 27. Tit.
2. 10, 14.
aright, as becomes the Gospel of Christ, adorning the Doctrine of God our
Savior with Lives suitable to the strict and severe Precepts of his Word, For
herein, says Christ, John 15. 8.
is my Father Glorified in that you bring forth much Fruit. That We may in this
manner bring Glory unto God, and testify our Fellowship with Christ in his
Sufferings, That we may thus evidence the Sincerity of our Love and
Thankfulness unto him for the unspeakable Benefits of his Death and Passion,
The God of Peace who brought again from the Dead the Lord Jesus, the Great
Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make us
perfect in every Good Work to do his Will, working in us that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. To whom be Glory for Ever and
Ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

