A Line of Time REVEALED.

There is a God in Heaven that Reveals Secrets, Dan. 2.28. and Psalm. 25.14.
By Henry Revit a Lover of Sion, Living at the Chequer in Bow-Lane with Mr.
Barnes.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1699:

H. R.'s Line of Time, Revealed to him by the Revealer of Secrets.
There is a God in Heaven that Reveals Secrets. Dan. 2.28. and Psa. 25.14.
1. FRom the Ejection of Adam out of Paradise, to the Birthday of Christ, 4000
Years, which ended at Daybreak, or Light, Sept. 12. old Style; The day after
the Aequinox of Autumn.

2. From thence to the beginning of the Time; Times, and the dividing of Time,
which was the duration of the Reign of the Man of Sin; 437 Years.

3. The Time of his Kingdom; Or of the Witnesses Sackcloth Prophecy: 1260 Days
Prophetical; which makes 1697 Years. Then his Limited Right to hold and
possess the Riches and Glory he had done, Ended: and All became the Ten Horns.
Reve: 17.16. Now he is doing his Mysterious and last Work

4. The Time of preparation for the New Jerusalem from thence just 30. Years,
which will make 17.27 ended at the time before named.

5. The binding of Satan; and the Time of the New Jerusalem for her great
Amplitude and Glory 1000 Years: which are Synchronall; And make 2727 Years.

6. The short space of Satan's liberty after will be 272 Years; and neither
more, nor less. And which will make 1999. Years.

7. Then at Daybreak or light, Sept: 12. old Style; will enter the Year of the
World. 7000. An: D. 3000. here the line of Time ends. And yet neither the Day,
nor Hour of Gods Judging and Burning the World is known hereby.

N. B. 1. By this Line of Time, we may understand the Vision of Dan. And the
Revelations, (in good part.)

2. By it we may understand, what the Romish Traditions are.

3. By this we may see what is the true sense of the Evening. And the Morning,
before the Sun Rise, being the fourth, or the fifth day.

Soli Deo laus and gloria.
Deus in Monte Videbitur. The Second part, or a Prophecy of what the great God
will do hereafter, in this time of preparation or 28 Years yet to come,
accounting from the Year of our Lord 1697.

1. He will bring into the Truth Such as have been Mislead and are deceived.

2. If we will now do our duty, we shall see Trading Good, Silver and Gold,
plentiful, etc. Bliss, Peace, and prosperity, for many Generations: And the
blessings of King David, and Solomon will be on the Kings of New Sion: And also
the Crown and Miter will (D. D.) be a great blessing to the whole Church of
Christ.

3. God will make Tyrants, and Tyrannical Cities, and Nations know his power,
and hand, for his Saints Witnesses, and Martyrs sake.

4. Kings must be Nursing Fathers, and Queens Nursing Mothers all the World
over.

5. The Ten Horns must, and will Take away the power, and Dominion of the Man
of Sin; and the Pseudoprophetess, and so fulfill Rev. 17.16.

6. Jews, and Gentiles will Embrace the Gospel: And the Jews must return to
their own Land.

H. R.'s Prayer for the persecuted Witnesses and Members of Christ, in France
and other places.

O Most Merciful and Omnipotent Lord God, Remember thy poor, and persecuted
Witnesses beyond the Seas: Repair the Ruins and Desolations which their Enemies
have made amongst them. Reduce such as are banished, Enlarge those that are
Imprisoned; Relieve such as are Impoverished: Strengthen with might in the
inward Man, such as are now Martyrs for Religion, as thou O Lord have thy
Martyrs of Old. Comfort all such as are Comfortless, and yet do Endure the same
for Conscience sake; Restrain the fury of their cruel Enemies; And suffer them
not to abuse thy Saints and Witnesses as they have barbarously done, for thy
Great Name Sake, and for thy promises Sake, in and through Jesus Christ our
Lord Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

