THE VANITY OF MAN, IN His best ESTATE; A SERMON PREACHED At St. MARY'S in
Nottingham, March 18. 1657. At the Funeral of the Honorable FRANCIS PIEREPONT,
Esquire third Son to the Right Honorable ROBERT late Earl of KINGSTON.

By WILLIAM REYNOLDS, M.A. Minister of the Gospel at St. Mary's in Nottingham.

The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and
all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field.

The grass withers, the flower fades: because the Spirit of the Lord blows
upon it: surely the people is grass. Isai. 40.6, 7.

LONDON, Printed for J. Rothwel, at the Fountain in Goldsmithsrow in Cheapside,
1658.

To the Honorable Alissimon Pierrepont Widow to the late Honorable Francis
Pierrepont Esquire deceased.
Madam,
IT was at your desire that these Sermons were preached, and it is through your
continued comm^nding importunity that they appear in public: our backwardness
hereunto is very well known unto you; which yet proceeded not from any want of
respect either to your self, or your deceased Husband (whose Memory we do, and
ever shall honor) but from the sense of our own weakness and unworthiness,
and an unwillingnesse to renew your grief, fearing lest every review of these
Sermons, might prove as a fresh tenting of that wound, which the loss of so
near and dear a relation has made in your heart. But our respects both to your
deceased Husband, and to your self, from both whom we have received so many
engaging favors, as also your own most earnest desire that these Sermons might
be printed, have silenced all our Objections, and prevailed with us to the
publishing of them, which we now humbly dedicate unto you, knowing none that
have a greater right unto them than your self, by reason of your most near
relation, and dear affection, unto him at whose Funer^^ they were preached.

Madam, We are very sensible both of your and our great loss. The Lord teach
and help both you and us, to find and make up that in God, which we have lost
in the Creature. The present duty which this dispensation of Providence calls
for, is the eying of God in it, a submission unto, and due improvement of it,
that you may hear the Rod, and him that appoints it.

And if any thing in these plain Sermons may further you, or any other in the
like condition, to the performance of this duty (which through Gods blessing we
hope they may) we shall rejoice and be thankful unto God.

The former acquaints you with Man's Vanity in his best Estate, which lesson God
has been many ways, and for a long time teaching of you; First, by taking
away diverse of your dear Children from you in their tender years, and now your
more dear Husband in his best Estate, according to the sense of the Psalmist.
Sure God would by these Providence knock off your Hands and take off your
Heart from the Creature. Endeavor to make this use of them, to get a more
weaned Heart from the world, and all those Creature enjoyments God has yet
left you It is true indeed you have cause to say with Job, Have pity upon me,
have pity upon me O ye my Friends, for the Hand of the Lord has touched me.
Yet withal, you have still cause to acknowledge, that in the midst of Wrath,
God has remembered Mercy: in a peaceable settling your worldly affairs, to
content and satisfaction, and yet more, in his hitherto sparing and continuing
unto you the life of your now only surviving Daughter Mrs. Winnifred
Pierrepont, a living Branch of your deceased Husband Our Prayer is, and shall
be, that God would season her young and tender Heart with Grace, and that he
would lengthen her life, that she may live to be an instrument of his glory,
and a comfort unto you and her relations. And our Humble Advice to you, in
order hereunto is, That you would take heed lest you set your Heart too much
upon her; you cannot love her too well, but you may love her too much: and
strong affections toward Creatures, do usually make way for strong
afflictions. See therefore that you place not too much of happiness in her, or
any other Creature, but make God your portion, and while you use Creatures of
which God has vouchsafed you plenty, be sure you enjoy God: and labor after
an Estate that is better than Man's best Estate, whether natural, Civil, or
Moral.

The latter Sermon, presents you with the gain and advantage of Uprightness,
and Sincerity of Heart, and may serve as a Cordial to Gods People under the
greatest present presures of trouble and affliction, which they are exercised
with, affuring them of a calm Evening after a stormy Day, and that though they
have sorrow here, yet they shall find joy and rest at last, in their Fathers
House and Saviors Bosom. We hope God has given you this Uprightness of
Heart, and pray, that he would give you that peace and comfort which he has
promised to it. Labor more and more to abound in this Grace: See that
Uprightness animate all your performances, Professions, and Practices: Let
Uprightness be your way, and Peace shall be your end. Which that it may be, is
the humble and earnest prayer of

Madam Your Honors most obliged Servants, John Whitlock. William Reynolds.

ERRATA in First Sermon.
IN p. 10. l. 10. for be read being, in p. 19. l. 15. for or read to.

In Second Sermon.
In p. 3 l. 3. for diligent, read diligently, p. 5. l. 25. add be before
virtue, p. 12. l. 26. add so before 2 Kings, p. 19. l. 7. add your before (...)
19. l. 15. for this, read his, p 21. l 2. for neither, read wither, p. 23 l.
(...). dele 8. p. 25. l. 24. for caring, r. carving, p. 25. l. 30. add called
before a true heart, etc. p. 27. l. 32. add their before hearts, p. 28. l. 6.
r. purifying, p. 28. l. 28. dele own, p. 28. l 34. add the before doors, p. 31.
l. 10. add have before had, p. 35. l. 7. for green, r. greeness, p. 35. l. 33.
for incipit, r. incipis, p. 37. l. 14. for Diabilo, r. Diabolo, p. 38 l. 14.
dele be, p. 38. l. 22. add and quae, after proavos.

In Verses.
Second Copy, p. 2. v. 11. for brighe, r. bright, ibid. v. 30. read Country, in
fourth Copy in the Latin Verses, v. 13. for religionis, r. relligionis, in the
English Copy, p. 2. v. 21. for Seplchrall, r. Sepulchrall. Ibid. v. 32. r
power, in Mr. Pickerings Copy, v. 13. r. Elegy, Mr. Grants Copy, p. 2. v.
10. for invite, r. indite S. C. Cop. v. 18. r. things, Mr. Stillingfleet Cop.
p. 2. v. 25. r. Brothers.

To the truly Honored ROBERT PIEREPONT, Esquire, the only Son and Heir; And to
Mrs. Frances Pierepont, Eldest Daughter to the Honorable FRANCIS PIEREPONT,
lately deceased.
WE are bold to present you with these two SERMONS Preached at the late Funeral
of your dear Father, whose Memory being (as deservedly it ought to be) most
Highly Honored by you, We doubt not but these Sermons devoted thereunto, will
be very acceptable unto you. The Lord bless the Reading of them to you both,
and grant that the great truths held forth in them, may be so impressed upon
your hearts, as that being convinced of the former, namely, Man's Vanity even in
his best Estate as to this world, you may above all things labor after the
later, to wit, Gospel-perfection, and uprightness of heart; by thus doing, you
will live most honorably, dye most peaceably, and to all eternity live most
happily, which is the hearty Prayer of

Your Faithful Servants in the Work of the Lord. John Whitlock. William
Reynolds.

To the READER.
THe unusualness of having two Sermons Preached at the Funeral of one Person,
occasions us to Preface somewhat to give thee an account thereof. That person
of Honor, at whose Funeral these Sermons were Preached, having had his
residence for some years, and dying in the Town of Nottingham, where he was
much respected and honored; and a great part of the persons invited to his
Funeral, being inhabitants of the said Town, many of which were unable to
attend the Hearse to the place where his body was interred, which was at some
considerable distance, and the Church there too small to receive so great a
number; It was judged inexpedient, to dismiss so great a Company, as were met
at his house at Nottingham, with a mere civil treatment, without some word of
instruction suitable to so solemn an occasion; which occasioned the Preaching
of the former Sermon. As for the later Sermon, which was only at first
intended, we shall need to give no further account than this, that it was
Preached at the place where the Corpse was interred.

We need no less to apologize for our appearing in Print in this age, wherein
the Press abounds with so many supernumerary Papers. It was with much
unwillingness that we were induced to it, but the importunity of some friends
(nearly related to the Person deceased) to whom we owe very much respect, and
our willingness to do any thing, that might contribute to the keeping up the
memory of him now dead, whom we so much honored whilst living, has at last
prevailed with us, thus to appear in public. You have the Sermons as they were
Preached, without any addition, except, that in the later Sermon, diverse
inlargements which were prepared to be delivered, but through streights of
time, were necessarily then omitted, are now added. Such as they are, we
recommend them to thy Reading, and to Gods blessing upon them: not doubting,
but if God shall teach thee those two main Lessons held forth in them, (viz.)
Mans-Vanity, and Heart-Integrity, they may much conduce to thy holy Life, and
happy Death. Which that they may, is the Prayer of

Thy Souls Servants, John Whitlock Willam Reynolds.



TEXT. Psalm. 39.5.
Surely, or verily, every Man, at his best Estate, is altogether vanity. Selah.
WE read the Prophet David, in the second and third verses of this Psalm, e're
he breaks forth into that Speech, of which our Text is a part, saying, that his
sorrow was stirred, and that his heart was hot within him. In like manner
before I speak to my Text, I must needs crave leave to tell you, that upon the
sight of this great Assembly, congregated to solemnize the Funeral Rites of
that truly Honorable Person deceased, I find my sorrow stirred, and my heart
to be greatly moved within me. He dyed the 30th. of January.
It is indeed some weeks since, that divine providence made this sad breach
amongst us: but the wound yet is very green, and the least tenting of it, makes
it to bleed afresh, how much more such a violent raking into it as at this day!
and what are a few weeks, months, nay, I may add years, to wear out those
deep impressions, which the loss of a Personage of so much honor and worth
has made upon the minds of many amongst us?

My beloved, It is very well known to the most of you, that it has neither
been mine, The seveneth year is complete the 25th. March, 1658.
nor my fellowlabourers practice, during those seven years, which now within
some very few days, we have labored in the word and doctrine among you,
either to Preface, or add any Panegyricks to the Funeral Sermons we have been
called to Preach; and one great reason of our forbearance has been the great
abuse which we have observed formerly to have been hereof; it having been too
usual, as one sadly complains, ut eorum vitae laudentur in terris, quorum
animae cruciantur in inferno; and we have also observed, that there has been
but little of edification in the best, and much of falsehood, and flattery, in
the most Funeral Commendations.

Yet though we have forborne the practice, we have not judged it unlawful to
give a due Testimony to the dead, in mentioning such commendable virtues, and
practices, as may be precedential to the Living.

The warrantableness of it, 2 Chronicles. 32.33.
might be clearly evinced, both from what we read in Scripture Acts 9.99.
, as also what we sind to be practiced amongst the Ancients: who as a Dr.
Spurstow in his Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Lady Viner.
present Divine in our Nation has observed, did ofttimes mingle the praises of
their dead friends, with their sorrowful mournings over them. It is not so much
the lawfulness, as the expediency of thus doing, which is so much scrupled. The
great miscarriage (as the same Author expresses) which has brought this way
and practice, both under suspicion, and censure, has been the Golden
commendations that some have bestowed upon worth-less Persons. But I persuade
my self, that the eminency of worth and merit, which was so resplendent in that
Honorable Person whose Funeral rites we now solemnize, will cause, that I
should rather incur your Ceusure, by my silencing the due Character that may
be given of him, than your suspicion, by an unfeigned, and impartial expression
of it.

I shall not take upon me, to give you a Narrative of his whole life; albeit I
might (having the warrant of a very good Testimony, and the witness of some
present, to whom the whole of his conversation has been very well known)
safely say this of him, in reference to that part of his life, which was
unknown to me; That his youth was no ways beleapred with those foul spots of
pride, luxury, prodigality, and disobedience to Parents, which are too too
Common: but that his humility, modesty, frugality, and dutiful obsequiousness
to his Noble Parents, was such as is rarely paralleled in a Person of his Birth
and quality. A worthy pattern for young Gentlemen's imitation.

But I shall pass these things, and diverse others I might mention, as the
speaking to that Ancient and Noble Family, of which he was a Branch, this being
better known to many amongst you, than it can be expressed by me. And I have
met with what Basil observed in the praise of Gordius the Martyr. It is the
Custom of the world (said he) when they would praise a man to speak of his
Family, to derive his Pedigree through many descents, to open unto all his
Education, parts, and learning, and such other accomplishments: sed
Ecclesiahaec tanquam supervacua dimittit; the Church looks only at such things,
which may glorify God in his Saints, and thereby do good to them that remain
alive.

The brief Character I shall give of him, (for I must be brief in all that I
have to deliver) shall be only in such things, which my personal knowledge, and
the great honor I do, and shall ever bear to his memory, does both warrant,
and provoke me to deliver.

To begin first with things relating to Religion, a due regard to which is the
most radiant, and sparkling Stone in the whole Ring of any ones virtues: There
were these several particulars highly commendable in him.

First his constant attendance upon the public Ordinances, and that not only
on the Lord's Day, both Morning and Evening, but also on the Week-dayes at both
the Lectures.

Secondly, his constant frequenting the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, in its
monthly administration amongst us. I may safely say, that for these six years
last past, wherein we of this Congregation have been privileged with the
enjoyment of this Ordinance, I do not remember, that when he was in Town, and
in perfect health, he ever omitted three Sacraments.

Thirdly, his care and cost to set up, and his constant attendance upon the
worship of God in his Family: wherein the Scripture was read, and Prayer made
Morning and Evening.

Fourthly, his not only complying with endeavors after Reformation, in the due
administration of Gospel Ordinances amongst us; but his forwardness unto, and
activity about the settling of Order in the Church of God in this place; of
which he was not only an useful, and honorable member, but was pleased also to
act as an officer, humbly condescending herein, to join himself with persons
far inferior to himself, in rank, and quality.

Fifthly, the great respect he bore to the Ministers, and Messengers of Jesus
Christ: Surely he accounted well of them, as the hearty welcome he gave them to
his own house, his friendly going to their houses, his constant attendance
upon, free, and bountiful encouraging of them in their labors, does abundantly
testify. And that this respect he showed, was not so much to the persons of
the Ministers of the Gospel, but unto the faithful, and conscientious discharge
of their work, and office, that worthy speech of his, which was often heard
uttered by him, bears witness; namely, That it much pleased him, to hear such
searching Sermons, as ripped up the heart, and discovered sin to the full.

And as I have thus glanced at some commendable practices in him relating to
Religion, so should I speak distinctly to each moral virtue that was
resplendent in him, I should exceed the limits of the time which is allotted to
this part of the Solemnity; I must remember, I am yet to begin my Sermon, and
that after it, another, at some distance hence is to be preached: to sum up
therefore all in a very few words.

This truly Honorable person whom we now commemorate, was most punctually and
exactly righteous in all his civil transactions, tenderly merciful and
compastionate toward decayed Debtors and Tenants; humble, affable, and
courteous toward all, and grievous to none.

And in the last place, I must not forget his Charity to the poor. Indeed by
Will and Testament there is little done, he being surprised with the suddenness
of his sickness and death: yet whilst he was living he did some things very
exemplary. Besides the constant relief the poor had at his Gate, and his
liberal annual pension to a poor Scholar in the University, and to some others
that had been in the relation of Servants to himself and Noble Father; he did
some years before his death settle by Deed 12. pound per Annum for ever upon
the Almeshouses founded by Mr. Hanly.

These things being so well known, have we not great cause to mourn over the
loss we have sustained in and by his death? The honorable Widow has lost a
most tender Husband, the Orphan'd Children a loving and indulgent Father, the
Servants of the Family a mild, prudent, and most righteous Master, the Tenants
a just, and compassionate Landlord, we Ministers a noble Friend and faithful
Patriot: We especially, whom God has called to this place, who came hither
upon his, together with some others of the chief of the Parish, special
invitation, set down here (after mutual knowledge obtained one of another) upon
the public declaration of his, and the whole Parishes earnest desire and call
of us so to do, and have cheerfully and comfortably, and (through grace we hope
we can say,) in some measure profitably continued our Ministerial employment,
and been succesfully carried through the many difficulties that usually attend
endeavors after Reformation in the administration of Gospel Ordinances, through
his (under God) special countenance, encouragement and active concurrence with
us: The sense and experience of which mercy from God to us, and choice Service
which this great and public good Man did the Gospel, has caused many
thanksgivings unto God, much heightened the deserved honorable esteem which we
with the whole Church of God amongst us had of him, made us highly to prize,
and earnestly to pray for his life; and now, we reflecting upon the greatness
of our loss, sadly to bewail his death: but I must proceed no farther on this
Text; to come to the other.

Surely Every man, Text
at his best estate, is altogether vanity. Selah. WE may fitly begin our
discourse upon this Text, with that gracious Apophethegm a^ rather divine
Oracle, wherewith Solomon that Kingly and royal Preacher begun his sacred
retractations, (so some have styled his book of Ecclesiastes) saying, vanity of
vanities, vanity of vanities, all is vanity. This is an Hebrew Form or Phrase
of speech, they expressing the Comparative often by a preposition, and the
superlative by doubling the same word, which notes excellency and perfection:
by the ingemination and redoubling of the same word and Phrase, the Preacher
does at once both confirm the judgment in the certainty of the fundamental
truth he lays down, and also vehemently move the assections: a good copy for
all Preachers to write after, namely, to speak such words as may be both
instructive and affective. As to the import of this concise speech of Solomon's,
in brief it is this; That all things here below are most vain, or extreme
vanity, and that no true felicity can be enjoyed in the freest and largest
possession of them. In the fourteenth verse he tells us, that they are not only
vanity, that is, as our Annotators gloss, ineffectual to confer happiness; but
which is worse, they are vexation of Spirit, apt to bring much affliction and
trouble upon the heart of him who is too earnestly conversant about them: And
this he delivers as the result of all that his search and enquiry which by
Wisdom, that is, by his very best skill, he made into the causes and effects
of all things, that have a being and are done under the Heaven: I the Preacher
was King over Israel in Jerusalem, and I gave my heart to seek, and to search
out by Wisdom, concerning all things that are done under Heaven: and I have
seen all the works that are done under the Sun, and behold all is vanity and
vexation of Spirit. Eccles. 1.12, 13, 14.

Thus you have heard what Solomon says; but they are not his words but David's
which we are now to insist upon: the difference indeed that is between them is
but little, what David says in the Text, is included in what Solomon has
delivered, as each particular is comprehended in the general, and each part and
parcel in the whole. Solomon tells us, that all the works that are wrought under
the Sun are vanity, and David singles out one of the works, but indeed the
chiefest and topmost of all the rest, and instanceth in this, when considered
and beheld by us in the compleatest outward form and natural perfection of it,
and he says that it is altogether vanity. Surely every man, in his best
estate, is altogether vanity Selah.

The Text may not be unfitly styled fallen man's Portraiture, and lively image
and representation; and this is such a curious and exact piece of workmanship
as cannot be paralleld; it far exceeds whatever art in the highest perfection,
brought any of its Scholars unto; the most exquisite Limners that ever we heard
or read of, could never give us the draught and portraiture of the Mind and
Soul of man in its inward motions and operations; some have drawn the Pictures
and representations of men's bodies to the life, but they could never so draw
any, as in their draught to represent together with the outward form and
feature of their bodies, also the inward complexion frame and full endowments
of their minds: But you may in our Text behold man represented to us perfectly,
both inside and outside, both in his soul and body: Surely every man, in his
best estate, is altogether vanity Selah.

The words are an entire proposition, The parts of Text 1. The subject.
containing the Subject and Predicate.

The Subject that is Man, (...) Adam; this though it was the proper name of the
first man, yet it is frequently used appellatively, In this subject here is
first the note of universality. [Every] every man, none excepted; secondly the
qualification of this Subject here spoken of, (viz) when he is best
constituted, when in his prime, when in his greatest beauty and bravery, Every
man in his best Estate. The word translated here (...)
best estate the Septuagint renders it, (...) vivens, living, so also the
Ethiopick, and Arabik version; and indeed natural life, is one of the choycest,
richest, and most precious Jewel, in all natures treasury and cabinet. Skin for
skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life, Job 2.4. and says
Solomon, a living dog is better than a dead Lion, Eccles. 9.4. We read of a
woman in the Gospel, how that she spent all she had on the Physicians, and what
was it for? only to have her health restored, which is a degree below life; but
though this translation of the word, does express somewhat that is very choice;
yet this of Life is employed; and all the comforts, conveniences, and
accomodations, yea, perfections of life natural, are carried in the Hebrew
word: the word properly signifies Stans, it comes from the Hebrew root which
signifies (...)
Stetit; and it is rendered by sundry constitutus, as Piscator, Tremelius, and
others: Tremelius renders the words; thus, Profecto omnimodae vanitas omnis
homo, quantumvis constitutus maxim: Surely every man is all manner of vanity,
albeit he be never so well settled, and constituted.

The second thing observable is the Predicate, The Predicate.
or that which is spoken, and affirmed of this Subject: and that is, that he is
vanity, yea, altogether vanity, and that surely; all this belongs to the
Predicate.

He is vanity. The Hebrew word here used, was the proper name of the second Son
born to Adam, (...)
whom his Brother Kain killed: and the name, or word, properly signifies as
translated here in the Text, namely vanity; which Pagnin describes, to be a most
vain, or light thing, such as is a bubble on the water, Res est quae non est
quidpia, aut qua cito desinit, ut flatus qui exit abore Pagnin.
or the breath of a man's mouth: The Syriack version, render the words thus;
quoniam omnes homines ut vapor consistunt; the consistency of all men, is no
better than that of a vapor: which Saint James says, appears for a little
while, and then vanishes away, Cap. 4.14.

He is altogether vanity, Kol Hebel Kol Adam; (...)
universae vanitas omnis homo; all men are all vanity, so it is word for word:
the Septuagint render it, (...), quoad omnia vanitas; the version of the
Arabic thus, quicquid pertinet ad hominem viventem est vanum; whatsoever
belongs unto living man, is vanity.

Bithner he expounds it thus, Every man is altogether vanity. Hoe est, omni ex
part, ita ut vanitas and miseria quae per alias creaturas frustatim spargitur,
in uno homine aggregata videatur: sicque homo evadit compendium omnium
vanitatum quae in creaturis extant, etc. Cum inanimis subjecit matationi,
corruptioni; Cum animatis, alterationi, morti; Cum sensibilibus, laetitiae,
maerori; Cum Angelis qui reliquerunt suum-domicilium, inconstantiae. Bithner in
locum.
that is, he is the sinck and center of all the vanities in the world; he is as
it were the Vniversa vanitas.
universe of vanity.

Surely every man in his best estate, is altogether vanity; (surely) it is as
if he had said, this is most true, most certain, none need to question it.

And as the word surely begins the Text, so the note (Selah) concludes it;
which if in any place it be more than a bare Musical Note, and points at some
extraordinary matter, calling for more than ordinary attention, it may be
looked upon as so used here. The matter whereunto it is affixed, being of such
unquestionable certainty, of such great importance, and there be such a natural
unaptness in every of us, to give Credit to, or take notice of it; so that we
had need to be called upon to attend heedfully to it.

Thus we have for brevity sake, given you both the parts of the Text, and sense
of the terms together, you see that every word in the Text has its weight; the
Text may be thus paraphrased.

Man, Paraphrased.
who is the glory of the Creation, Gods masterpiece; and not only this, or the
other man, but every man; and not every man, at sometime, in some conditions,
not man, when dead, or if living, yet in an afflicted estate, or the like, but
every man whilst living, yea, when he is in the height, perfection, and
accomplishment of all Creature Comforts, when standing on his tiptoes, Mr. Gase
in his Sermon 1 Corin. 1.29.
when in his best beauty, and bravery; what is he then? not (says one) only a
mixed creature, a compound of folly and wisdom, weakness and strength, light and
darkness, flesh and spirit, beauty and deformity, substance: and vanity But he
is altogether vanity, the very sink, and center of all the vanities in the
world. If man be a compound creature, it is of all the vanities under Heaven;
and to this the Holy Ghost sets a double Seal, one at the beginning of the
sentence, and another at the end.

Surely lets it in, and Selah shuts it up. It is a truth of such illimited, and
immutable certainty, that it can neither be met, nor overtaken with any
objection. Surely every man, in his best estate, is altogether vanity Selah.

I proceed now to the Doctrinal conclusions, which we may gather from the
words, and we might parcel out the Text into three or four conclusions; as
first.

1. That man is a very vain thing, yea, vanity it self. 2. Not only this, or
the other man is so, but every man. 3. Every man in his best estate is
altogether vanity. 4. How difficultly so ever any are brought to believe this,
yet it is a very great truth, and that which is above all objection.
But all these are most pithily, and concisely summed up by the Prophet in the
words of the Text, which we shall not vary from: so that the point of Doctrine
we shall insist upon, you may take it in the very words of the Psalmist.

Surely every man in his best estate is altogether vanity. Doct. Proof.


For the proof of this you may consult these Scriptures, Psalm 144.3, 4. Lord
what is man, that thou take knowledge of him, etc? and why do^^ David thus
reason? in the next words he tells us, man is like to vanity, his days are as a
shadow that passes away. Man is like to vanity, in the Hebrew it is Adam is
like to Abel, (...)
now Abel, as I told you before, signifies vanity, and it is sometimes put to
express an Idol, as Jerem. 2.5. Thus says the Lord, What iniquity have your
Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after an
(...) * 1 Corin. 8.4.
Idol? Now the Apostle tells us, that an Idol is nothing in the world; It is
the vainest thing in the world, or the greatest vanity: man is become even as
one of these; he in his best estate is but a representation of a thing which is
not so that upon the point, it is as much as if David had said, Man is nothing.

Another Scripture we have in Psalm 62.9. Surely men of low degree are vanity;
and men of high degree are a lie, to be laid in the balance they are
altogether lighter than vanity; here we read, that what ever degree men are of,
they are no better than vanity; nay, those that are of the highst degree, that
is, are highest in riches, honor, parts, or the like, these will the least
answer our expectations, and fulfill our hopes; nay, they will prove a lie to
us, they will deceive us. Hence David thus exhorts: Put not your trust in
Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom there is no help, his breath goes
forth, he returns to his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish, Prove.
19.6.29.26.
Psalm 146.3, 4. There are many as Solomon says, who seek the Princes favor,
and oh if they can but obtain it, they think they are made persons: but what
are Princes? are they any other than Sons of men? and being Sons of men, what
help is there in them? because their breath goes forth, and they turn again to
their earth, and then their thoughts perish, their thoughts, ad alios
benefaciendos, as Abon-Ezra expounds it, of doing thee and others good, these
fall to the ground. To what has been said, we may add, that God in Scripture,
does not only speak of single persons, that they are vanity, but also of
Nations; and not only of this, or the other Nation, but of all Nations: take
all mankind in a cluster, or as bundled up together; and not only is this, or
that man, this, or that Nation, but all men, and all Nations, before him, are
as nothing, and are counted to him less than nothing and vanity, says the
Prophet Isaiah, Cap. 40.17.

Having thus given you the Proof of the Doctrine, I shall briefly dispatch
these few particulars, namely, show you first, when it is that man may be said
to be in his best estate; or what this best estate of man is: Secondly, that in
this estate he is vanity, how, or in what regards he is so: Thirdly, why, or
whence he is so; and so make application.

To the first, Explication.
namely, what is meant here by man's best estate: you may take the answer to
this first Negatively, then Affirmatively.

Negatively, Negatively.
by Man's best Estate, as it is here spoken of, is not meant that estate of
Innocence, integrity, and perfection, wherein God at the first Created man;
that indeed was a right-good, and excellent estate: First, By man's best estate
here in not meant man's estate in innocence.
it was an estate of perfect holiness, he being made in Gods Image, and after
Gods likeness, Genesis 5.27. Secondly, it was an estate of perfect wisdom, and
understanding, of which Adam gave Proof, by giving names to all Cattle, to
Fowls of the Air, and to the Beasts of the Field, suitable, and apposite to
their nature, Genesis 2.20. Thirdly, it was an estate of great honor, and
dignity: David brings him in with a Crown upon his head, and that Crown is a
Crown of glory, and honor; thou have Crowned him with glory, and honor,
Psalm. 8.5. His place was little lower than the Angels, but far above all other
Creatures.

Fourthly, it was an estate of great dominion and authority, man being made the
Sovereign Lord of the whole Creation, Genesis 1.26. Psalm. 8.6, 7, 8.

I might instance in sundry other particulars, as

1. The exquisite beauty, Dr. Harris his Sermon on Eccles. 7.29.
and perfection of his outward man, it had nothing (as one observes) of
blemish, or blushing, but was clothed with all requisite beauties, and
abilities, that might render him lovely, and commend him to every eye.

2. The greatness and vastness of his possessions; we need not, says the same
Author, stand to enlarge upon one parcel of his dismeans, namely, that which
they call Paradise, since the whole both of Sea and Land, and all the Creatures
in both were his possession, his Paradise.

In brief, man's first estate, was a state of perfect, and complete happiness,
there being nothing within him, but what was desirable, nothing without him,
but what was amiable, and nothing about him, but what was serviceable, and
comfortable; When therefore it is said, that Surely every man in his best
estate is altogether vanity, by best estate in the Text, is not meant man's
estate of Innocence; had man persisted in that, he should not have known what
vanity meant; Adam in that estate, had in himself a power of perpetuating his
estate in Fee-simple, upon himself and his for ever.

Secondly, Not his estate of Regeneracy
by man's best estate, is not meant his estate of Regeneracy: this is a most
excellent estate, and far better than that which is intended in the Text. This
estate of regenerary, is a spiritual estate, consisting in spiritual graces,
and privileges. It is a free estate, freed from all forfeitures, and endowed
with choice immunities. Colos. 2.10.
It is a full estate, we are complete in Christ. It is a firm estate, all is
everlasting, unmovable, unfading, we are all Heirs, Romans 8.17.
and joint Heirs with Christ, if the estate stand good to him, it will to us.

Man in this estate, is not altogether vanity. Indeed this estate does not
exempt and privilege from manifold miseries, and afflictions, that abide us in
this life, nor does it exempt from death; Heb 9.27.
for it is appointed unto all men once to dye; the good as well the bad, the
regenerate, as well as the unregenerate: notwithstanding man in this estate, is
not altogether vanity. Indeed the regenerate man's outward comforts, such as are
his friends, estate, honor, yea, his person, as it is subject to death, may be
said to be vanity: but his spiritual estate, this you have heard, is firm,
everlasting, and that fades not away; whereas one that is no more but a man,
but a mere child of the first Adam, both he and his best estate be it
whatsoever it may be, is altogether vanity.

Thirdly, Not his estate of Glory.
by man's best estate, as is not meant his estate of Innocence, nor his estate
of Regeneracy: so much less his estate of Glory; this is the best estate of
all. This is better than the estate of Regenerary; because though in that be
the truth of grace, yet there is not in it the perfection of grace: yea better
than Adams estate of Innocence; because though in that he had perfection of
holiness, yet it was loseable, he being (as you know) endowed with freedom of
will, either to stand, or to fall; and we too too well know, that he did fall;
but as to this estate of Glory, the holiness, and happiness of it, is both
perfect and perpetual, it is sure and cannot fail, hence it is called an
inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.4.
and undefiled, and that fades not away. Man when exalted to this estate,
shall be fully freed from all manner of vanity; and we may alter the words and
say. Surely every man in this his best estate, is altogether felicity, or
altogether Glory.

Thus we have heard, Affirmatively.
what is not meant by man's best estate, as specified in the Text; Now for the
Affirmative.

By man's best estate, is chiefly, Man's best estate threefold.
and principally understood his most flourishing, and prosperous estate, as to
this world: Now this is threefold. First, there is man's natural estate.
Secondly, his moral estate. Thirdly, his civil estate.

First then every man in his best estate is altogether vauity, that is, in his
best natural estate: by this, Man's best natural estate is vanity.
I do not understand that estate of sin, wherein every man is born, thus indeed
divines frequently, and not improperly, use this phrase of man's natural estate:
but understand man simply considered, as he is natures work-man-ship, as nature
has endowed, and enriched him with her gifts, and that either in reference to
body or mind: these gifts and endowments of nature in reference to body, are
health, strength, beauty, and the like: the gifts and endowments of the mind,
are strength of memory, quickness of apprehension, good utterance, and all of
the like nature, which go under the Notion of a man's natural parts. Now man,
yea, every man in his best natural estate is altogether vanity: that is, man,
even then when he is most strong, most healthful, most beautiful, which is
usually in youth, or complete manhood, then is a person in the flowr, and Prime
of his life and days; even now is he not altogether vanity? Solomon tells us,
Eccles. 11.10.
that Childhood, and youth, are vanity; there is a double vanity in these,
both the vanity of sin, and also the vanity of nature. Job. 21.23, 29.
But more expressly to this, is that of Job; one dies in his full strength,
being wholly at ease and quiet, his Breasts are full of Milk, and his Bones are
moistened with marrow. One dies in his full strength, he dies not only
strong, but in robore perfectionis moritur robustus; So the vulgar translation
rendereth it; the strong man, dies in the strength of his perfection: when his
Breasts are full of Milk, and his bones moistened with marrow: Job here
describes the exactest state of nature, yet now man dies, death easily knocks
down this strong man: death as M. Caryll well glosseth upon the place, does not
stay to take men at an advantage, when they are weakened with age and sickness,
Genesis 34.25.
as Simeon and Levi did the Shechemites, come upon them, when they were fore,
Death can do its work easily, and as speedily in health, as it can in sickness,
in strength, as well as in weakness; when we handle the sword, as well as when
we lean upon a staff; in the Spring and Summer, as well as in the Fall and
Winter of our lives.

Secondly, Man's best moral estate is vanity.
as man is vanity in his best natural estate, so also in his best moral estate:
that is, take him when his natural parts are brought to the greatest height
that Art and diligence can bring them unto: when he is wisest, learnedest, when
his heart has had the greattest experience of Wisdom and Knowledege as
Solomon Phraseth it. Is he not then even altogether vanity? Is he not equally
obnoxious to the stroke of Death? how dies the Wise man as the Fool? Eccles.
2.16. As the strongest man cannot resist Death, so the wisest man cannot evade
Death: D(...) with one black Theta, soon refuteth all our Wi^^ome, and puts
at once a period to our reading, and to our-natural being. How good therefore
is that counsel which the Prophet Jeremiah gives. Jer. 9.23.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in
his might; Let not the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that glories
glory in this, that he understands and knows the Lord.

Thirdly, man, Man's best civil Estate is vanity. 1 The richest man is vanity
yea every man is vanity in his best Civil Estate. By this I understand man
when he has attained to great riches, to great honor, to great power and
authority in the world: First the rich, yea the richest man is altogether
vanity. How vain are riches themselves, and all which they, when enjoyed in the
greatest plenty and abundance imaginable, do furnish and accommodate us with?
you may read what Judgment Solomon after his large experience passes
hereupon. I got me Servants and Maidens, Eccles. 2.7.8.9, etc.
and had Servants born in my house; also I had great possessions of great and
small Cattle, above all that were in Jerusalem before me: I gathered me also
silver and gold, and the Peculiar treasure of Kings and of the Provinces: I
gate me men-Singers and women-Singers, etc. then I looked on all the works that
my hands had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored to do, and behold
all was vanity, etc.

And as riches themselves are vain, for Solomon elsewhere says they have wings
and sly away: So are the possessors of them: Prove. 23.5.
As the rich man cannot by the multitude of his riches by any means redeem the
life of his friend and brother from death, so as that he should still live for
ever, and not see corruption, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 49.6, 7, 9. So
cannot he keep off Death from knocking at his own Door, yea from making a
forcible entry upon him, as you may read Luke 12.20.

Secondly as the richest man, The Honorable person is vanity.
so the Honourablest person is also altogether vanity: yea indeed the higher
any person is in honor, he is but vanity in a greater degree. Men of low
degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie, to be laid in the
balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity, Psalm. 62.9. and in Psalm.
49.12. man being in honor abides not, he is like the beast that perish^th.

Thirdly man when arrived at, and invested with, the greatest power and
authority, Man when advanced to the highest power and authority is vanity. Mr.
Trap.
even in this his estate hers altogether vanity: If a Prince, his breath is but
in his nostrils, and he is equally if not more subject to Death than the
meanest Pea^ant. The mortal Sithe (says one) is Master of the roy^l Septer,
and it moweth down the Lillies of the Crown, as well as the grass of the Field.
At one end of the Liberary at Dublin was a Globe, at the other a Sk^leton: to
show (says my Author) that if a man were the Lord of the whole world, yet he
must die, his honor and greatness must be laid in the dust.

Thus we have showed you what that best estate of man is here spoken of in the
Text. It is not understood of man's estate in Innocence; not of his estate in
Regeneracy; much less of his estate in Glory: But of man's most flourishing and
prosperous estate in the World, namely of his best natural, moral, and civil
estate. Thus says the Prophet Isaiah Cap. 40.6. All flesh is grass, and all
the goodliness thereof as the flower in the field. Hebrew Chasdo, the Piety,
Excellency, and Emine^cy of it, that is, all humane and created Excellency in
its best beauty and bravery is vanishing.

These are altogether vanity: How man in his best estate is altogether vanity.
1 Comparatively. 2. In regard of inconstancy and instab lity.
first comparatively, namely, when put into the Balance with God. Behold the
Nations are a drop of the Bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the
Balance: all Nations before him are as nothing, they are counted to him less
than nothing and vanity. Isa. 40.15, 17.

Secondly man in his best estate is altogether vanity, in that he has no
permanency or stabilitie, but is continually subject to change and alteration.
That which sets the glory of God highest in opposition to the vanity of the
creature is, that with him there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning,
James 1.17. now in opposition to this point of highest perfection in God, lies
the lowest point of the creatures vanity, namely, that in them is nothing but
turning. 1 Cor. 7.31.
The fashion of this World passes away says Paul, it is ever passing, never
stands at a stay; thus is man even when in his best estate: man that is born
of a woman is of few days and full of trouble, he comes forth as a flower and
is outdown, Job 14.1, 2.
he flees also as a shadow, and continneth not: I might multiply many other
particulars, but I tak it, that these two are here principally meant and
intended by vanity, of these the Prophet had been immediately before speaking,
in the fourth and former part of the fifth verse of the Psalm.

The last thing we have to do ere we come of the Application, Whence it is that
man is such a vain creature.
is to show you whence it is that man is such a vain creature, and this I shall
dispatch in a word. The Apostle tells us that it is sin that has subjected the
creature to vanity, Romans 8.20. and says the Preacher, Lo this have I found,
that God created man upright, but they have sought many inventions, Eccles.
7.29. The nature of man at the first creation, before the lump was sowred with
the leaven of sin, was full of glory and grace: But alas man now, yea every man
being become altogether sinful, he thereby is made to be altogether vanity. We
shall close with this, Man when he was in the glory of his Innocence subjected
himself to sin and iniquity, and therefore God has now most righteously
subjected all his glory to vanity. Application.


The brief use we shall make of the Text and Doctrine follows.

Is man, Instruction.
yea every man in his best estate altogether vanity? Then in the first place
let us learn hence not to put our trust or place our considence in man, no not
in any of the children of men, be their outward estate never so flourishing and
prosperous in the world, for surely every man in his best estate is altogether
vanity. What great means do diverse in the world make to wind and insinuate
themselves into the savor of such whom we call great ones? namely, such who
are great in riches, high in honor, and eminent in power and authority? and
when they have obtained this, they think they have enough, and to compass this,
how will they fawn and flatter, complye with and conform themselves unto the
sinful ways and extravagancies of great men? But consider seriously with your
selves what David says here in the Text, and then tell me, whether the favor
of any man, be he never so great in the world, be tanti, of so great worth, as
that either to get or keep it, thou should by any wilful sin, incur Gods
displeasure? Is it any better than himself, and is not he even altogether
vanity? yea, are not men of high degree a Lie? Cease therefore from man, whose
breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2.22.
most apposite to this, is that of the Psalmist, which we have cited once
already, Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of man, Isal. 146.34.
in whom is no help, his breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in that
very day his thoughts perish.

Secondly. Reproof.
Let this serve to give a check to all covetous, or ambitious desires,
whereunto Satan may either tempt us, or our own evil hearts incline us.
Methinks this may be a notable Argument to take our hearts off from the world:
ask thy self, what is it O my soul, that thou art so eager in pursuit after? Is
it riches, or honors in the World? admit thou gainest them, what will thy
estate be bettered? thou art now but a vain man, and would thou be vainer
yet? The man of low degree is vanity, but he that is of high degree is a ^e;
this the Scripture speaks expressly, notwithstanding all that is spoken of the
vanity of all creature-enjoyments, and of man's estate, when possessed with
them, yet there is so much Sophistry, and deceivableness in the creature, that
men are apt to think, that there is no greater felicity, than to be rich,
great, and honorable in the world: hence they indulge covetous, and ambitious
desires in their hearts, but to these, let me speak in the words of David,
Psalm. 4.2. O ye Sons of men, how long will ye love vanity, and seek after
leasing? and in the words of Solomon, Prove. 23.5. will thou set thine eyes, or
as it is in the Hebrew, (...)
will thou cause thine eyes to fly upon that which is not? an Eagle will not
catch flies, much less will she make a flight at nothing, when no game is
sprung, and will thou make a flight with thy heart, (for the eye which Solomon
chiefly intends, it is the eye of the soul) when nothing springs before thee,
but that which is not?

Thirdly, let this Text and Doctrine be improved, Counsel and Exhortation.
as an Antidote against security: Let none put far from us the evil day.
First, let me speak to you that are young men, who are in your best natural
estate; in the flower of your age, and full of your strength, in the prime, and
pride of nature, your breasts are full of Milk, and your bones moystened with
marrow, Oh yet know, that even man, yea, every man in his best natural estate,
is altogether vanity; you have heard what Job says, that one dies in his full
strength, being wholly at ease and quiet. Consider also, and improve your daily
experience: many as likely to live as thou, are gone down into the grave;
Caryllon Job.
Death (as is well observed by one) does not observe the Laws of nature, but
the a^pointment of God. The Law of nature does indeed set death at the greatest
distance, from those that are young, strong, and healthful, and faith to death,
go to the wrinkled face, dry bones, dry breasts, meddle not with this young man,
touch not this fair, and beautiful woman, he or she, is now in the prime of
their time and days; go to yonder old man, go to that whithered woman, let
these alone: Oh but death will not receive these commands, death will not
observe the Laws of nature, but the appointment of him, who is the Lord of
nature: It is appointed for all men once to dye: and as God has appointed all
to dye, so he appoints the seasons of death; and the seasons he appoints are as
various as the kinds, occasions, and ways of death are, and therefore death
knocks as often at the young man's door, as at the door of the old man.

Learn therefore to prepare for death, though you have no appearance of death
upon you; in some we may see many Images, and representations of death, dim
eyes, palsy hands, trembling knees, stooping backs, in others we can see no
sign of death, nothing that looks like death, but their countenances are fresh,
their strength clear, their constitutions healthful, and the like, yet let such
remember the words of our Text, that Surely every man in his best estate is
altogether vanity.

Secondly, let me speak to you, who are rich, honorable, and great men in the
world, do you also frequently meditate upon this portion of Scripture, namely,
that man, yea, every man in his best estate, is altogether vanity. It is
requisite thus to exhort you, because in this point, the world is full of such
fools as we read of in the Gospel of Luke, Cap. 12.19. who from the greatness
of his wealth, concluded the length of his life, saying, Thou have goods laid
up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry, and says the
Psalmist, speaking of rich men, Their inward thought is that their houses shall
endure for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; nevertheless man
being in honor abides not, he is like the beast that perishes, this their
way is their folly, Psalm. 49.11, 12, 13. David himself was overtaken with this
folly, when being in prosperity, he said I shall never be moved, Psalm. 30.6.
Alas God can as easily level your Mountains, as the poor man's Molehill. How
know thou but that God may say to thee as to that rich man in the Gospel,
Luke 12.20.
Thou fool this night thy Soul shall be required of thee Albeit you are rich,
great, and honorable, yet you are but men, and know it that man, yea every man
in his best estate is altogether vanity; Dr. Reynolds.
yet (as a learned divine of our Nation has well observed) there is so much
seed of pride in the heart of man, and so much heat (as we may so speak) and
vigor in the creature to quicken it, as that men are apt to Deisie themselves,
in the reflection of their own greatness. I might give you sundry instances of
this, both out of sacred and profane History. As that of the Babylonish
Monarchs recorded Isai. 14.14. and 47.7, 8. and of the Prince of Tyrus recorded
Ezekiel. 28.2. And I have read of Alexander the great, that he persuaded himself,
that he was the Son of Jupiter Hammon; And Sapores, Rex Regum frater solis and
Lunae, particeps syderum, nec Deus est nec homo.
King of Persia wrote himself King of Kings, Brother to the Sun and Moon, and
Partner to the Stars: with sundry others of this nature.

But however you may fancy your selves, know it that were you Princes, yet you
are but Sons of men, and ye shall dye like men. Let me close this with that
excellent admonition of Scaliger to Cardan; Exerc. 148.
his words are these; I would ever have thee remember, that thou, and I, and
others are but men, and if thou know what man is, thou will easily
understand thy self to be nothing: for my own part, I am wont to say, we are
not so much as men, but Parts homin^s.
pieces of men; of all which put together something may be made, not great, but
of each of them sundred, Paene ^inus quam nihil.
almost less than nothing.

Lastly, to close all, is every man in his best estate altogether vanity? then
look out after a better estate than this which David calls man's best estate.
This is but a natural estate: look thou after a spiritual estate: this but a
worldly estate, look thou after an h^avenly estate: this but that which
recommends you to men, but look thou after that which may recommend you to God:
look out after an estate of favor with God through Faith in Christ Jesus: this
(my beloved) is not vanity, but solid substance: by thus doing, you shall have
riches, and honor, yea, durable riches, and righteousness: Prove. 8.18, 19, 20,
21.
My fruit says wisdom, is better than Gold, yea, than fine Gold; and my
revenue than choice Silver: I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of
the paths of Judgment, that I may cause those that love me to inherit
substance, and I will fill their treasures.

FINIS.

