SELF-DENIAL: Opened and Applied IN A SERMON BEFORE The Reverend Assembly OF
DIVINES: On a Day of their private HUMILIATION.

BY EDWARD REYNOLDS, D.D. Minister of the Word of God at Braunston in
Northamtonshire, and a Member of That ASSEMBLY.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by T. Maxey, for Robert Bostock, at the sign of the Kings
Head in Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

To the Reverend Assembly of DIVINES.
Brethren and Fathers,
THis Sermon was preached by your command, and in your alone audience: nor had
it gone further then those walls, had not the importunity of many Reverend
Brethren amongst your selves urged the Publication of it. The Argument of the
Sermon taught me to lay aside mine own judgment touching the expediency or
seasonablenesse of this action, seeing the judgments of so many godly and
learned Brethren concur for it. I have this advantage and benefit by the
publishing of it, that I may return some small tribute of thanks for those many
grave, judicious, and learned Debates, those many gracious and heavenly
excercises, that sweet and most delightful Society, whereof I have been made a
partaker by sitting amongst you; which truly have made my life, amidst many
great losses and greater infirmities, more cheerful to me, then even mine own
judgment in such sad and calamitous times could otherwise willingly have
allowed it to be. Yet it will be a farther accession unto this content, if you
shall be pleased to accept of this poor part of my labors, first preached in
your hearing, and now submitted to your view; from him, whose hearts desire and
prayer is, That the Lord (whose you are, and whom you serve) would prosper all
your Labors for the good of his Church, and make you happy Instruments of
healing the Breaches, reconciling the Differences, preventing the Confusions,
and advancing the Peace of his Sion.

Your most humble servant in the Lord, E.R.

SELF-DENIAL: Opened and Applied in a Sermon before the Reverend Assembly of
DIVINES.
MATTHEW. 16. 24. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
WE may observe of CHRIST, that usually when there appeared in him any
evidences of humane frailty, lest his servants should thereat be offended and
stumble, he was pleased at the same time to give some notable demonstration of
his divine Power: he was born weak and poor, as other Infants, but attended on
by Luke 2. 13, 14
a multitude of glorious Angels, proclaiming him to the Shepherds, and by a
special Matt. 2. 2.
Star, leading the wise men to worship him. He was hungry, and Tempted by
Satan as other men; but by his divine power Matt. 14. 11 Vid. Athanas.
Interpretat. parabol. qu. 22. Et Isid. pelut. lib. 1. epist. 15.
he vanquished the enemy, and was ministered unto by Angels. He was deceived in
the fig tree, which he went to for fruit, and found none, and so showed the
infirmity of an humane ignorance; but withal immediately did Mat. 21. 19
manifest his divine power in drying it up from the roots. 2 Cor. 13. 4.
He was crucified (as the Apostle tells us) in weakness; and yet withal he
did even then manifest himself The Lord of glory, by Mat. 27. 51, 54.
rending the rocks, opening the graves, darkning the Sun, converting the thief
and the Centurion, and Col. 2. 15. Vid. Parker. de descens. l. 4.. 76.
so triumphing over principalities and powers.

On the other side, we may observe when holy men in Scripture (...) Arian.
Epist. lib. 3. cap. 24.
have been in any notable manner honored by God, he has been pleased so to
order it, that some intercurrent providence or other should fall out to humble
them, lest they should be too highly exalted in their own thoughts. It was so
with 2 Samuel 11.
David: After his Kingdom settled, and great Victories over enemies obtained,
steps in a great sin, which humbled and afflicted him all his life after. So
with 2 Kin. 20.
Hezekiah, after he had been raised up by a great deliverance from a potent
enemy, and a sentence of death, he falls into a sin of pride and vainglory,
upon which the Lord revealed unto him his purpose of leading his people and
children into captivity, and giving up his Treasures into the hands of the King
of Babylon; which caused him to humble himself for the pride of his heart. So
with 2 Cor. 12. 7.
Paul, he was caught up to the third Heavens, and heard unspeakable words, and
saw visions of the Lord; but withal there was given him a thorn in the flesh,
the messenger of Satan to buffet him, left he should be exalted above measure
through the abundance of the revelations. And so it was with Peter here in this
Chapter, He made a glorious confession of Christ the Messiah, verse. 16.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; and Christ highly honored him for
it; verse. 18.
And I also say unto thee, says Christ, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I
will build my Church: Which Aug. Chrysostom. Hilarious. Vid. Dr. Reynolds
Conference with Have. cap. 2. Divis. 1.
though we are to understand principally of the Rock which he had confessed, as
the Learned expound it; yet there is something of Camero tom. 2. page 50, 60.
in quarto.
special honor therein bestowed upon Peter. We read in Scripture of a
twofold foundation of the Church; A personal foundation, which is but one;
for other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Christ Jesus,
1 Cor. 3. 11. And a Doctrinal foundation; for the Church is said to be built
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. and so we read
of Twelve foundations in the new Jerusalem, Revel. 21. 14. Now, amongst these,
as Peter had the precedence in faith, to make the first confession of Christ to
be the Messiah; so he had the honor to be the first of those twelve
Foundations, who should first of all plant the Gospel, and gather a Church unto
Christ after his Resurrection, as we find he did, Acts 2. In which respect
happily it is, that the Gospel of the Circumcision is said to have been committed
unto Peter, Gal. 2. 7, 8. because the Gospel was by Christ's appointment to be
first of all preached to the Jews, who were God's firstborn, Acts 3. 26. and
13. 46. Exodus 4. 22.

Now from this time of Peter's Confession, Christ (to take off all mistakes
touching his Kingdom) began to acquaint his Disciples with his Sufferings:
whereat Peter is presently offended, and takes upon him to advise his Master,
and rebuke him, Be it far from thee, this shall not be unto thee. Hereupon
Christ sharply reprehends him: It is not now, Thou art Peter; but, Thou art
Satan, a Tempter, * an Adversary to the work of Christ's mediation; (for, so
much the word elsewhere implies, Number. 22. 22. 2 Samuel 19. 22.) not now a stone
for building, but a stone * of offense; Thou savourest not the things of God,
but the things which are of men: that is, Thou have a carnal and corrupt
judgment of me, and of my Kingdom, conceiving of it according to the common
apprehensions and expectations of men, and not according to the counsel and
will of God.

In this Reprehension there is 1. A personal correption, ver. 22. 2. Doctrinall
Instruction; teaching his Disciples and the people, That all they who would (as
Peter had done) own him for the Messiah and King of the Church, must not
promise themselves great things under him in the world, but must resolve to
walk in the steps which he would tread out before them, viz. To deny themselves
as he did, Matthew. 26. 42. and to bear a Cross, as he also did, John 19. 17.
and so to follow him. And to take off all prejudice and scandal, he assures
them, That whatever their fears and suspicions might be of so hard a service,
yet thus to deny themselves was the only way to save themselves, verse. 25, 26.
and thus to bear a Cross the only way to a Crown and glorious reward, verse. 27.
which, lest it should seem an empty promise without evidence and assurance, he
undertakes to confirm shortly after by an ocular and sensible demonstration,
verse. 28. which we may understand either of his glorious transfiguration the
week after, Matthew. 27. 1, 2. or of his glorious Ascension in their sight, Acts
1. 9. or of his pouring forth the holy Spirit upon them in fiery Tongues, Acts
2. 2, 3. or of his more full manifestation of his Kingdom and Glory unto his
servant John by the ministry of Angels, in his glorious Revelation, Apoc. 1.
1. Unto all which (though the context seem to relate principally unto the
first) may that promise of our Savior be understood to refer.

The words then are a Character of a Disciple of Christ; He is one who must
deny himself, and that not in some more easy matters; but thoroughly, and in all
things, so far as suffering, and suffering to the uttermost, Pain, Death,
Shame, for those three things are contained in the Cross; and all this, first,
willingly; he must take up his Cross, it must be an act of election, not of
compulsion. Secondly, Obediently, to do it with this resolution, of following
Christ; both his Command and Example; as a Lord, because he requires it; as a
Leader, because he goes before us in it.

I have singled out the Argument of Self-denial, to speak of, in this reverend
and grave Audience, as being very suitable to the state, not only of Christians
always, but more particularly of these present times wherein we live, and of
those special businesses wherewith we are entrusted: wherein, having in two or
three words considered what is meant by Denying, and what by a man's self, I
shall briefly dispatch the Doctrinal part according to those premises.

For the first, the Original word (...) is emphatical, as Chrysostom notes,
and signifies not simply negare, but pernegare, or prorsus negare, totally,
utterly to deny, not at all to spare or regard, (...), as Theophylact and
Suidas: Vid. Suid. in voce (...).
it imports a perfect or universal Denial. It is rendered by Beza, Abdicet
seipsum, which is as much as to reject and cast off, as a man does a graceless
son, whom he will not own any more for his, which is the same thing in a
Family with that which the Law calls Ignominiosa missio in an Army.

For the second, Leg. 2. D. de iis qui notantur infamia*
Man is taken most ordinarily three ways in Scripture, either in respect to
his Creation, or to his Traduction, or to his Renovation; the Natural man, the
Old man, and the New man; and so consequently by a man's self I understand,
first, a man's sinful self; (to put that branch in the first place for our
method of proceeding) which the Apostle calls the Old man, Ephesians. 4. 22. The
Earthly Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 47, 48. The Body of Death, Romans 7. 24. The Carnal
mind, Romans 8. 7. Our Earthly members, Col. 3. 5. in which sense to Deny a man's
self, is in the Apostles phrase, to Deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.
12.

Secondly, A man's natural self: and that 1. in regard of Being and substance,
and so it imp^orts our life, which is the continuance and preservation of
Being: And the faculties and powers of nature, our understanding, will,
appetites, senses, fleshly members. 2. In regard of Wellbeing, or the outward
Ornaments and Comforts of life, which may all be reduced unto three heads; 1.
external Relations, as between husband and wife, parent and child, brother and
brother, friend and friend, etc. 2. Special Gifts and endowments, as Learning,
Wisdom, Power, or any other abilities of mind or body. 3. Common Ends, which
naturally men pursue and seek after, and are all by the Apostle comprised under
three Heads, of Profit, Pleasure, and Honor; the lusts of the eyes, the lusts
of the flesh, and the pride of life, 1 Ioh. 2. 16. Houses, Lands, Lordships,
great possessions: fleshly, worldly, natural, unnatural, artificial delights:
Liberty, Praise, Favor, Applause, Preferment: any thing from which a man does
draw any kind of content or satisfaction in order to himself.

Thirdly, a Man's moral, virtuous, Renewed self; for as Lusts are the members
of the Old man, so Graces are the members of the New man; and as the first Adam
begets us after his image, Genesis 5. 3. so the second Adam regenerates us after
his Image, Col. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 15. 49. Romans 8. 29. From the one we receive Lust
for Lust, and from the other Grace for Grace.

Now these things being thus premised, according unto this threefold Self,
there are three branches of this duty of Self-Denial: For some things are to be
denied simply and absolutely; some things conditionally and upon supposition;
and some things comparatively and in certain respects.

1. Absolutely and Simply, so a man is to Deny his sinful felf, and that two
ways; first, Generally, as it imports the whole Body of Corruption and
Concupiscence, which we are to mortify and subdue, to crucify and revenge the
Blood of Christ against it, Colos. 3. 5. Rom 8. 13. whereunto is required a
formal and perpetual endeavor by actual exercise of grace, because things
Natural (as Lust is) though they be never so much altered and abated for the
time, will yet ex se, return and reduce themselves to their original state and
strength again, if they be not still kept under. As a stone will fall down to
its natural place by its own inclination, as soon as the impressed force which
carried it upward is worn out; and water will reduce it self unto its natural
coldness, if fire be not constantly kept under it. Neither may we expect, that
because grace belongs unto our renewed nature, therefore it should with the
same natural facility suppress Lust, as Lust without the workings of grace
would return to its natural vigor and force again: For there is this
remarkable difference between Lust and Grace, That the workings of Lust are
totally ab intus, as to the root of them, and require not any foreign force or
activity to concur with them, or to set them on motion; and therefore though
weakened, they are still offering to return to their strength again. But the
workings of Grace, though partly ab intus, when vital principles and spiritual
habits are infused, do yet require an actual concurrence, cooperation, and
assistance of the Spirit of Christ immediately as from him; Illo operante
cooperamur.
for, it is he who works in us for to Will and to Do: As there is an aptness
in a weapon to cut, Aug. de not. and great. c. 31.
in a wheel to move; yet that cutteth not, this moves not, Non tantum u^
arbor sit bona, scd ut faciat fructus bonos, eadem gratia nacessarium est ut
adjuvetur de Great. Christi. lib. 1. cap. 19. Velle and currere meum est, sed
ipsum meum fine Dei semper auxilio non erit meum. Hieron. ^om. 2. epist. 197.
without a further vital faculty applying it to these uses. And therefore
though there be no need of labor for Lust to recover strength, (because it is
naturally apt to return thereunto of it self) yet there is need of much
diligence, and earnest waiting upon Christ by Faith and Prayer, for the
continued supplies of his Spirit, whereby the Graces which are in us may be
kept on work in the constant mortifying and subduing of our Lusts, because the
habits of Grace infused do not work alone of themselves without such supplies.
Secondly, Specially, in regard of these personal Corruptions which we in our
particulars are more notably carried unto, which David calls the keeping of
himself from his own iniquity, Psalm. 18. 23. for, though natural corruption,
wherever it is, be a Seminary of all sin, yet in particular persons it
usually puts it self forth more notably in some particular sins. As the sap
of the Earth is the fomes and matter of all kind of fruits; yet in one ground
it sorts better with Wheat, in another with Barley; in this Tree it becomes a
Grape, in another an Olive: so original sin in one man runs most into Avarice,
in another into Sensuality, in a third into Pride and Vainglory, and the like.
We read of National sins, the lying and laziness of the Cretians, Tit. 1. 12.
the curiosity and inquisitiveness of the Athenians, Acts 17. 21. the pride and
cruelty of the Babylonians, Isai. 47. the robbery of the Sabeans and Caldeans,
Job 1. 15. 17. And we read of Personal sins, the stubbornness of Pharaoh, the
gainsaying of Corah, the envy of Saul, the churlishness of Nabal, the ambition
of Absalom, the intemperance of Felix, the sorcery of Simon Magus, etc. Thus
particular persons have their more proper sins, whereby they have most of all
dishonored God, withstood his Spirit, neglected and resisted his Grace, and
defiled their own Consciences; and therefore in Conversation, though
Repentance, as an Hound, drive the whole Herd of sin before it, yet the dart of
the Word sticks most in this sin, which is thereby singled out for a more
particular detestation.

11. Conditionlly, and upon supposition of God's special Call, and in that
sense we are to Deny our natural self, which we are the rather to do; first,
because God calls no man to deny his whole self, and wholly to all purposes, at
any time or in any case. He allows us, yea, he requires us to seek the good of
our souls, to seek any thing without the which we cannot be happy, to promote
by all means our own salvation, to seek our selves out of our selves, in Christ
and in his Righteousness. Secondly, because he never calls us unto any either
morose and cruel, or superstitious Self-Denial, such as is that of the covetous
worldling, who when he wants nothing that he desires, wants power and an
heart to eat thereof, and bereaveth himself of good, though the things which
God gives, he gives them unto us to enjoy, Eccles. 4. 8. and 6. 2. 1 Timothy 6.
17. or as that of Baal's Priests, Vid. Hospinian de Orig. Monach. l. 6. c. 30.
and de festis, lib. 2. cap. 30. Clavis Reg. Sacerd. lib. 8. cap. 7.. 5.
and the Sect of the Flagellantes, who cut and whipped themselves in their
frantic devotions, as Saire the Cafuist tells us of Francis and Benedict,
two Founders of the regular Devotions or Superstition in the Church of Rome,
that they were wont to cast themselves naked into Snow, and amongst Thorns to
vex their bodies. A notable Relation of which kind of Self-denial (I know not
whether more nastie or superstitious) a learned and grave Divine of ours has
largely collected out of Climacus and Jews of Granada, Downham part. 4. lib.
1. cap. 4.. 4.
in the fourth part of his Christian Warfare.

But we are then called by God to Deny our selves, our Reason, Wisdom, Parts,
Learning, Ease, Wealth, Lands, Houses, Honor, Favor, Credit, Applause,
Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Life, whatsoever is dearest unto us, whenever
it stands in Opposition unto, or in Competition with Christ, his Glory,
Kingdom, or Command. In which sense we are to deny our selves Always, in
praeparatione animae: And Actually, whenever any thing dear unto us is
inconsistent with the Conscience of our duty to God. And thus (to instance
only in our own profession) Paul regards neither Liberty, nor Life, in
comparison of the Gospel of Grace, and of the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 20.
24. Acts 21. 13. Nor Micaiah his safety or reputation in Ahab's Court, 1 Reg.
22. 14. Nor Levi his father or mother, or brethren, or children in the zeal of
God's honor, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. Nor Ezekiel his dear wife, the delight of his eyes,
when God took her away with a stroke, and forbad him to mourn for her, Ezekiel.
24. 16, 17, 18. Nor Matthew his receipt of Custom, Luke 5. 27. Nor James and
John their Nets, their Ships, their Father, when they were called to follow
Christ, Matthew. 4. 21, 22.

In this case things are to be denied two manner of ways: First, as
Temptations and Snares, when they are either Baits to draw us into sin, or are
themselves the Fruits and wages of sin. When they are Baits unto sin; If thy
brother (says the Lord) the son of thy mother, or the son of thy daughter, or
the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, entice thee
secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou have not known,
thou, nor thy fathers, etc. Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto
him, neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall
thou conceal him: But thou shall surely kill him, thine hand shall be first
against him to put him to death, etc. Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 9. Though an Idol be made of
Silver and Gold, yet being an Idol, it must be thrown away with detestation
like a menstruous Cloth, Isai. 30. 22. If Simon Magus offered money for the
gifts of the Spirit, the Apostle does abhor so abominable a negotiation, Acts
8. 20. Even the Brazen Serpent when it becomes a snare by the abuse of men, is
no longer preserved as a Monument of mercy, but broken in pieces as Nehushtan,
a piece of brass, 2 Kings 16. 4. When they are themselves the fruits and wages
of sin: so Zaeheus denies himself in all his unjust gain, which he had gotten
by sycophancy and defraudation, and when Christ offers to come into his house,
will not suffer Mammon to shut the door against him, Luke 19. 8. Restitution,
as it is a most necessary, so it is one of the hardest parts of Self-denial,
when a covetous heart must be forced to vomit up all its sweet morsels again.
Unjust Gain is like a barbed arrow, it kills if it stay within the body, and
it tears, and pulls the flesh away with it if it be drawn out; Forte per
angustam tenuis vulpecula rimam Repserat in cumeram frumenti, etc. Hor. cpi.
li. 7.
as the Fox in the Fable, which having crept in at a narrow hole to feed on a
prey, and being filled was grown too big to make an escape at the same passage,
was constrained for saving his life to empty and starve himself again, that he
might go out by the same way as he came in.

II. As oblation and sacrifices, whenever Christ calls us to dedicate them
unto him: when Abraham was called from his country into a land of so journing,
which he knew not: when Daniel was called from a King's Court to a den of
Lions: when Moses from the honors of Egypt to the afflictions of God's people:
when the Disciples from their nets and their ships to follow Christ, and wait
upon a persecuted Ministry: when Paul from an active to a passive persecution,
immediately they consulted not with flesh and blood, but willingly left their
own comforts to obey Gods commands. In Conversion, the uses, the property of
all we have is altered; all our vessels, all our merchandise must be
superscribed with a new title, Holiness to the Lord, Isa. 23. 18. Zech. 14. 20,
21. Then men's chief care will be to honor the Lord with their substance, Prove.
3. 9. to bring their Sons, their Silver, their Gold to the name of the Lord,
the holy One of Israel, Isa. 60. 9. All we are, or have, we have it on this
condition, to use it, to leave it, to lay it out, to lay it down, unto the
honor of our Master, from whose bounty we received it.

III. Comparatively, and in some respect so we are to deny our Renewed self,
our very virtues and graces. In the nature and notion of duties, so we are
bound to seek, to pray for, to practice, to improve, to treasure up, and
exceedingly to value them: but in relation unto righteousness, in the notion of
a Covenant of life and salvation, and in comparison of Christ, so we must
esteem all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our
Lord, Qui docet in opera confidere, is negat meritum Christi sufficere. Ferus
in Act. 15. August.
Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10. It is a dangerous thing to hang the weight of a soul upon
any thing which has any mixture of weakness, imperfection, or corruption in
it, as the purest and best of all our duties have. Vae etiam laudabili vitae
hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam. It is a dangerous thing to
teach, that Faith, or any other evangelical virtue, as it is a work done by us,
does justify, or succeed in the place of legal obedience unto the purpose of
life. There is nothing to be called our righteousness, but Iehova tzidkenu,
Ier. 23. 6. Faith justifies as the window may be said to enlighten, because it
alone is apt (which no other part of the structure is) to convey and transmit
that light which arises out of, and belongs unto another body, and not unto
it; therefore it does not justify habitually, as a thing fixed in us; but
instrumentally, as that which receives and lets in the righteousness of Christ,
shining through it upon us; as the Cup feeds by the Wine which it conveys; as
the Looking-glass makes the wall to glister, by reflecting the beam of the Sun
from it self upon it.

The sum of all in one word, is this: We all profess our selves to be Disciples
of Christ, and Candidates of glory and immortality by him, and we have all
promised to follow him whithersoever he leads us. Now whosoever will be in
truth, what he is in promise and profession, must learn this fundamental duty,
to deny himself, willingly and obediently to forsake all sin, to subdue all
general concupiscence, with his own proper and personal corruptions,
absolutely, without any limitation or exception. To cast away and forsake,
always, in preparation of heart; and actually, whenever Christ calls
thereunto, whatsoever is near or dear unto him, whenever it becomes either a
snare to conscience, as a bait unto, or fruit of sin: or a sacrifice unto God,
as matter of duty: to undervalue and disesteem the best of all his graces in
respect of the righteousness of Christ, and in order to justification in the
sight of God: looking on every thing, being, well-being, outward enjoyments,
inward abilities, virtues, graces, as matters of no rate or estimation, when
Christ and the conscience of duty stands in competition with them.

I have done with the Doctrinal part of this point, and am sorry to have so
long detained a learned Auditory with things so fully known unto them before. I
now proceed to Application.

It is said when Christ preached this Doctrine, that he called the people unto
him with his Disciples, Mar. 8. 34. My Exhortation proportionably unto you and
my self shall be double. One as we are the people of Christ, the other as we
are his Disciples, and Ministers.

As the people of Christ, let us be exhorted,

I. To take heed of that sin which is formally opposite unto Self-denial, as a
sin most pernicious and obstructive to salvation, which is the sin of
Self-love, or self-estimation; a most comprehensive and seminal lust, which
lies at the root of every other sin: for, unto the formality of every sin
belongs an inordinate conversion of a creature unto it self, and therefore it
is set by the Apostle as Commander in chief in the head of a whole Regiment of
sins, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 5. It branches it self into two great sins, Self-seeking, as
an end, and Self-depending, as a means unto that end, (for, he that works for
himself, will work from himself too.)

Self-seeking, Nemo Deo displicet, nisi qui sibi, placet. Ber. de miser. Hom.
Qui esse vult sibi* non tibi, nihil esse incipit inter omnia, Idem. Ser. 20. in
Cantic.
when men neither regard the Will and Call of God, nor the need and good of
man, but are wholly taken up in serving their own wills and desires, Seeking
their own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. 21. Like the
Prophet's empty Vine, bringing fruit only to themselves, Hos. 10. 1. Obeying
their own wills against God's, Ier. 18. 12. 44. 17. giving ear to the
temptation of their own lusts, James 1. 14. making their own eyes Judges of
right and wrong, Judge, 17. 6. whence arise proud reasonings and contendings
against the Truth; falseness of heart in God's Covenant; falling off from his
Service; leaning upon our own wisdom; with many distempered and froward
passions which usually attend upon a will wedded unto it self. Now this kind of
Self-love our Savior here tells us is indeed the greatest Self-hatred that
can be. Whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his
life for my sake, shall find it, v. 25. Our love and our life should still go
together; for, all things are loved in order to life. That only may be the
terminus of our love, which is the fountain of our life. If any man have his
life from himself, that man's love may rest in himself. Now the Apostle will
tell us that Christ is our life, Col. 3. 4. Gal. 2. 20. (for, the life we have
without him, is but gradus ad mortem) and therefore he must be our love too (as
Ignatius called him.) (...). Ignat. epist. ad Romans
His end, his will, his wisdom must be ours. As all Rivers run into the Sea,
and do not stay within themselves, and so are kept from being harmfull. If the
Sun should keep its light, the Clouds their rain, the Earth its sap unto
themselves, what use were there of them, or benefit by them? God has made all
things in such a sweet subordination, that each one serving that which is above
it self, inanimate animate, and both man, and man God; all the services of all
the creatures should finally meet and run into God, who alone is worthy of all
service and obedience.

Self-depending is, when we put confidence (for Spiritual ends, which respect
righteousness and salvation) in our graces, expecting pardon of sin, favor
with God, and final happiness from our own duties; as the Jews did, Romans 10.
3. And when for other Civil and public ends we put confidence in Men,
Counsels, Horses, Treasures, in an Arm of flesh, rising and sinking, confiding
and drooping or desponding, according as second causes do ebb or flow: A sin
which in these times we are too much guilty of, and whereby God being so
greatly provoked, might justly leave us to our selves, that when we find our
selves fatherless, we might be driven more closely to find mercy in him. It
is a sin very injurious to the Love, Power, Wisdom, Mercy, Truth of God, upon
which Attributes of his our confidence should cast anchor; For all these are
immutable, always the same, ever equally near unto us, tender of us, ready to
engage themselves for us: And therefore there should not be such changes, such
risings and fallings in our dependence upon him. But we weak men are like a
Ship at anchor; though the anchor be fastened unto a sure Rock, which moves
not, yet the Ship notwithstanding is subject still to tossings and
unquietness, when winds and ways beat upon it: So, though our anchor and
confidence have a sure and steadfast ground to keep it unmovable; yet according
to the different aspect of second causes, our hearts are too apt to waver and
change; one while to say with David, I shall never be moved; and presently,
upon the turn of things, to be faint and troubled again. Therefore we should
pray and labor for a more stable and composed frame of heart: Say not one
while, The enemy is strong, now we shall be devoured: say not another time, The
enemy is weak, now we shall prevail, and have an end of trouble. But let us
learn to sanctify the Lord God of Hosts himself in our hearts, let him be our
fear, and let him be our hope: when he humbles us, let us fear, and yet still
trust in him, because if we repent and return, he will lift us up; (for, it is
all one with him to help, whether with many, or them that have no power.) And
when he exalts us, let us rejoice, and yet still tremble; because if we be
proud, and provoke him, he lifts us up in anger, that he may make our ruin
and fall the greater, as the Psalmist speaks, Thou have lifted me up, and cast
me down.

Counsel of God in our judgments. In matters of Faith, Worship, and Obedience,
let us fetch our light from him, and not lean on our own wisdom, nor be wise in
our own eyes, Prove. 23. 4. Isai. 5. 21. nor suffer natural and carnal
reasonings to elude and shift off any Divine truth, whereby lust should be
restrained, and conscience guided. 2. To exalt the authority of God in our
wills, to say as Paul did, Lord, what will thou have me to do? This is the
great point upon which all duty hangs. The principal point in difference
between God and sinners is, whose Will shall stand, Sermon. 3. de Resurrect.
his or theirs. Cesset voluntas propria, non erit infernus, said Bernard truly:
Conquer Will, and you conquer Hell. 3. To exalt the honor of God in all our
aims. Let us be willing that it go well or ill with our selves, according as
the one or the other does most make for God's glory, and for the advancing of
his Name; to say as David, If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he
will bring me again, and show me his habitation: But if he thus say, I have no
delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. To say with Job, cap. 1. 21. as well when he takes away when
he gives, Blessed be his Name. To say with Paul, Let Christ be magnified in my
body; whether it be by life or by death, Phil. 1. 20. It is fitter that he
should have his honor, then that we should have our ease. It may be our
prayer, that he would glorify himself in our deliverance; but it must be our
choice, rather not to be delivered, then that he should not be glorified. If
thou will (Lord) be glorified by our deliverance, we shall admire and magnify
thy mercy; But if thou will be glorified by our destruction, we must needs
adore thy dominion over us, and acknowledge thy righteous judgment in proceeding
against us. Lastly, To set up the love of Christ and his Church uppermost in
our hearts: this love will constrain us, and make us willing to be offered up
in the public service: to say with Jonah, Cast me into the sea, so the tempest
may be stilled: to say with Esther, I If perish, I perish: to say with Paul, I
will very gladly spend and be spent, though the more abundantly I love, the
less I be loved: and, we are glad when we are weak, and you are strong. This
public Love will cry down all private interest, and make us say to our selves
as Elisha to Gehazi, Is this a time to receive money, and to receive garments,
and olive-yards, and vine-yards, and sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
maidservants? 2 Kin. 5. 16. and as Jeremy to Baruch, The Lord is breaking
down, and plucking up; and seek thou great things for thy self? seek them
not, Ier. 45. 4, 5. Certainly, that man cannot without great repentance and
restitution expect mercy from Christ, who, so he may promote his own private
and sordid ends, quocunque modo, and make a prey and merchandise of the
calamity of his brethren, and the times; cares not how he defraud, spoil,
devour, suck from the public into his own Cisterne, regards not which way the
Church or the State fall, back or edge, sink or swim, so he may sleep in a
whole skin, and secure his own stake, and fish in troubled waters, and with the
unjust Steward, write down fifty for an hundred; and like a Fly, suck fatness
and nourishment unto himself out of the wounds and sores, out of the blood and
tears, out of the ruins and calamities of other men. Surely, if ever God's
hands were clapped at any dishonest gain; if ever the flying roll did seize
upon the houses of perjurious robbers, to consume the Timber and the Stones
thereof: if ever the curse of Gehazi did attend upon ill-gotten treasures; if
ever Salt and Brimstome were spread upon lands purchased with iniquity: if ever
fire did devour the habitations of injustice: if ever a woe did hunt those who
increase that which is not their own, and build with blood: if ever the stone
did cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber answer it: if ever the
furrows of the field did complain, and call for thistles in stead of wheat, and
cockle in stead of barley: such men as these must expect that the wrath of God
will mingle gall and bitterness with such wages of iniquity, they are sure
never to enjoy them in their lives with comfort, nor to leave them at their
deaths in peace, nor to transmit them to their posterity without a canker and
curse. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them. Pro. 21. 7.

Now then for the quickening of us to this necessary duty, there are two notable
encouragements in the text. 1. It enableth us to take up our cross, meekly,
willingly, obediently to accept, and bear whatsoever affliction God shall lay
upon us. The less we value our selves, the better able shall we be to digest
any troubles that befall us. We are not moved at the breaking of an earthen or
wodden vessel* but if a Diamond or rich Jewel be defaced, it does greatly
affect us the more vile we are in our own eyes, the more unmoved we shall be
when any bruize or breach is made upon us. Who am I, that I should fret against
God, or cavil at the ways of his providence? that I should think my self wise
enough to teach, or great enough to swell against the will of my Master? why
should the servant esteem his back too delicate to bear the burden, or his
hands too tender to do the work which his Master was pleased to bear, and to do
before him? Did Christ bear a cross to save me? and shall not I do the same to
serve him? did he bear His, the heaviest that ever lay on the shoulders of a
man? and shall not I bear mine, which he by his has made so light and easy?
Surely, if we could have spiritual apprehensions of things as they are in the
eyes of God, Angels, and good men, shame would be esteemed a matter of honor
and glorying, when it is for Christ. The Apostles went away from the presence
of the Counsel rejoicing, Act. 5. 41. (...), that they were honored with
dishonor, or had the dignity conferred upon them to suffer shame for the name
of Christ.

2. It enableth us to follow Christ in all duties of obedience. When I can say,
not my will, I shall quickly say, Thy will be done; I shall follow him as a
Lord. No so necessary a qualification to service, as self-denial: Christ
himself, though by the dignity of his person he were free, yet being in the
form of a servant, did not seek, nor do his own will, but the will of him that
sent him. Joh. 5. 30. and 6. 38. I shall follow him as an example: for what he
commands us to do, to the doing thereof he encourages us by his own example,
Ioh. 13. 15. Legal obedience is in hearing and doing; but Evangelical obedience
for the most part is in hearing and imitating, 1 Pet. 2. 21. For this end we
were predestined, unto this we were called, that we might be conformed unto
him, hear him in all things whatsoever he shall say, Act. 3. 22. and follow him
wheresoever he shall go, Rev. 14. 4. To give up our selves in all things unto
his wisdom to counsel, and unto his will to command us, and in no service of
his to confer with flesh or blood. This is the highest and noblest disposition
of a child of God, and that wherein he most resembles Christ, to exclude and
prescinde all self-respects in every thing wherein his Master is to be served
and glorified. Self-seeking ever proceeds from lowness of mind. The more truly
and spiritually noble any man is, the more publick-spirited for God's honor,
and the good of Church and State. Look among the creatures, and you will ever
find, that those who live only to and for themselves, are either base or
wild, mean, or tyrannical. Worms, caterpillars, weezles, mice, rats, live and
eat only for themselves; this is their baseness. Lions, Wolves, Leopards,
Tigers, prey and ravine only for themselves; they plow not your land, carry
not your burdens, submit not to your commands; this is their wildness. But the
noblest creatures, as Sun, Moon, Stars, have spheres of activity, wherein they
work for the public good, and the more large their sphere, the more noble
their nature. God has planted a kind of natural self-denial in all creatures.
Light things will move downward, and heavy things will move upward, to
preserve the compages of nature from a rupture. And he has planted a kind of
Moral Self-denial in very Heathen men, whereby they prefer the public
safety and interest above themselves. As Pompey answered the man who would have
dissuaded him from going upon a public, but dangerous Expedition, Necesse est
ut eam, non ut vivam. But we are never enough out of our selves, till Christ
have taken the spoils of us, and divided all that is in us unto himself and his
Church; and enabled us, when Satan calls upon Wit, to be wanton or scurrilous:
upon Reason, to be proud and heretical: upon Will, to be stubborn and froward:
upon Passion, to be disorderly and violent: upon Power, to be insolent and
injurious: upon Wisdom, to be cunning and crooked: upon Learning, to be
flatulent and aerie: upon Wealth, to be luxurious: upon Greatness of mind, to
be ambitious, or the like: to answer, I am neither Yours, nor mine own; I am
bought with a price, and his I am who so dearly bought me. He denied himself to
purchase me, I will deny my self to serve him: I will not be so unwise as to
lose my soul by being unthankful for the saving of it; or to forfeit Christ by
serving his enemy, and so ruin my self. I have done with the exhortation which
respects us as the People of Christ: And come in the last place to the other
which concerns us as his Disciples and Ministers.

It consists of two branches. 1. That we would pray for, 2. That we would
practice this excellent duty. For motives unto both which let us seriously
consider,

1. That nothing in the world is more dangerous to the public welfare of
States or Churches, then private self-seeking. One false tooth or notch in a
wheel will spoil the motion of an exquisite instrument. One string in a Lute
which has a private tune of its own, dissonant and unharmonious to all the
rest, will corrupt the whole Music: one self-seeker who would be baited with a
wedge of gold, and a Babylonish garment, had almost brought mischief upon the
camp of Israel. Private Interest will ever obstruct public duties: what shall
I do for the hundred Talents? will be a strong objection against a necessary
resolution. It was private interest made Pharaoh oppress Israel, that they
might not grow too strong and potent a people, Exo. 1. 10. It was private
interest made Jeroboam set up the Calves at Dan and Bethel, least unity of
worship should reduce the ten tribes to the house of David again* 1 Kin. 12.
26, 27, 28. It was private interest made the Jews crucify the Lord of glory,
If we let this man alone, the Romans will come and destroy our place and
Nation, Ioh. 11. 48. (for indeed there was a public fame and expectation of a
great Prince to arise out of Judea, Praecrebuerat orient toto vetus and
constans Opinio esse in fatis, ut eo tempore Iudaea profecti rerum potirentur.
Suct. in Vespasiano, cap. 4.
who was to rule over all the world, which the Romans blindly believe was made
good, when Vespasian, who had been the Praefectus of that Province, came to the
Empire.) It was private interest made Demetrius and the crafts-men cry up
Diana, and cry down the Gospel, Act. 19. 24 27. As little ditches joined to the
sides of a great River, will draw it away from its own channel; or as a Wen,
or some other unnatural excrescency will suck away unto it self nourishment
from the whole body.

2. On the other hand, That self-denial is an admirable preparation unto great
services: the more low and useless we are in our own eyes, the fitter we are to
be employed by God, who powers the oil of his grace in vasa co^trita, into
broken vessels. When God offered Mos. to destroy Israel, and make of him a great
nation, he has no heart to such preferment, his magistrate-affectio^ to the
people of God swallowed up his family-affection, and all regard to all
domestical interests, Ex. 32. 10. 11. So Joshua his successor divided the land
of Canaan amongst the Tribes, and had no portion allotted for himself till the
public was served, and that by the care of the people, Ios. 19. 48. when the
pepole of God were afflicted in Nehemiah's time, he was so far from adding
thereunto by any act of oppression or violence, that he remitted much of his own
right, and refused to eat the bread of the Governor, Neh. 5. 14. Solomon prays
not for riches, revenge, or any matter of private advantage, but for a public
grace, the spirit of wisdom for government, 1 Kin. 3. 9. He had the heart of a
Governor before, and that taught him to pray for the head of a Governor too.
How low was David in his own eyes, when God took him to feed his people? Who am
I? what is my Father's house, that thou have brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel 7.
28. How does Moses even to a sinful modesty, under-rate himself, when he is to
be employed in a great service? Who am I, that I should go to Pharaoh? I am
not eloquent, I am of a slow speech, and a slow tongue, Ex. 3. 11. and 4. 10.
It is true, there was in this declining of his, something of Self hid in his
heart, to wit, the fear of enemies, which God took notice of, when he tells him,
The men are dead which sought thy life, Chapter 4. 19. yet I doubt not, but Moses
did truly conceive of his unfitness for that service, as he spoke. So Isaiah, a
great Prophet, Woe is me, I am undone; for I am a man of unclean lips, Isa. 6.
5. So Paul, I was a blasphemer, a persecuter, injurious; and yet I obtained
mercy, the mercy of pardon, the mercy of employment; mercy to be a Saint, mercy
to be an Apostle. Greatest of siners, less then the least of Saints; and yet
that Apostle, who labored more abundantly then all the rest, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
Before we use great Timber in buildings, we lay it out in the Wind and Sun, to
draw out all its own natural moisture: before we use brick, we fetch out the
softness of the clay, which it has of it self, and harden it in a furnace,
that it may be fit for service: we cannot make lime and mortar of Stones, so
long as they retain their natural hardness, till by the heat of fire they be
made dissolvable, and so fit to temper: So the Lord humbles and draws out
selfe-thoughts, self-sap, self-indispositions, any thing which might cause
shrinking or warping, before he intrusts his fervants with great employments.
High buildings have deep foundations, tall Cedars deep roots, quantum vertice,
tantum radice; Richest Treasure is drawn out of the lowest mines: God lays
the foundation of great works in despised and selfe-despising instruments, in a
day of small things, as it were, in a grain of mustard seed, that he may have
the greater honor. What a high dignity was it to the Virgin Mary, to be the
Mother of God? She will tell us what foundation God laid in her for this
dignity: He had respect to the low estate of his handmaid, Luke 1. 48. What
graces does Christ honor to be the Keys of eternal life but self-denying
Graces? Faith and Repentance. By the one whereof we are taught to go out of our
selves, by the other to abhor our selves.

3. Consider again, That there are no conditions of life which are not
exceeding subject unto the temptation of self-seeking. Some men gain by the
public troubles; if differences should be composed, and a happy end put to
these calamities, their offices, commands, advantages, employments would
expire; they must then shrink back into their wonted lower condition again.
Quod superest, iterum, Cinname, Tonsor eris. Martial.
Others gain by the crimes of men, by their sensuality, luxury, prodigality,
excess, malice, contentions; some by one sin, Criminibus debent hortos,
praetoria, mensas, Juvenal.
others by another. If there should be a too strict Reformation, and
animadversion over the Exorbitancies of men, there would much less water drive
their Mill; and as John Baptist, so in this respect, might they say of Christ,
If he increase, we must decrease. We in our profession have our temptations
too: If so much duty be required, so much preaching* humiliation, thanksgiving,
admonition, superintendency; so frequent returns and vicissitudes of service
do attend our office, we must then shake hands for ever with all our outward
ease and quiet, and resolve never more to have the power and possession of our
selves. We might instance endlessely in things of this nature, from the Throne
to the Plow.

Now then it much behooveth us who are the Lord's remembrancers, to pray
earnestly unto him for a large spirit of self-denial upon all in public
service, both others and our selves, That God would preserve us all from this
dangerous temptation, That he would take out of us all our own sap and lusts,
whatever would make us warp, and shrink, and crack, and be unserviceable to
the State, the Church, the Community whereunto we belong. She who was to marry
an Israelite, being her self an Alien, was to be shaven and pared, and taken as
it were from her own former shape, before she became an Israelite. The Daughter
of Pharaoh is no fit wife for Solomon, till she forget her own people and her
father's house, Psalm 45. 10. Rahab, Babylon, Tire, Ethiopia, Philistia, must
renounce their natural and Gentilitian honors, and derive their genealogy
from Zion, before they can be useful unto the service and glory of God: All my
springs (says he, speaking of Sion) are in thee, Psalm 87. A man who works all
for, and out of himself, is like a standing Lake, which harbors Toads and
Vermin, of very little use, of no pure use at all; but they who deny
themselves, and work for God, and from God, are like the streams of a spring;
their sweetness, and pureness running out of the springs and fountains of Sion,
make them fit for their Master's use, and prepared unto every good work.

Let us therefore, I say, pray for all who are in public employment, That God
would give them public spirits.

For the King's Majesty, That God would fill his heart with this excellent
grace, and with the love of the common welfare above all other respects or
Interests, That he may bewail his poor people, as David did, What have these
sheep done, that in a difference of mine they should suffer such bitter things?
That God would mercifully preserve him from joining with the Enemies of pure
Religion (to the endangering thereof) for the promoting of such ends, as those
Enemies of God, even according to the principles and practices of their
Religion, are much more likely in the conclusion to betray and destroy, then
promote or preserve.

For the Parliament, That God would double upon them the Spirit of
Self-denial; that as they have denied themselves, their ease, pleasures,
estates, and have indefatigably wrastled with mountainous difficulties to
vindicate public liberty and reformation: so God would keep it always in the
imaginations and resolutions of their hearts, to seek the wealth of the people;
and as Mordecai did, to speak peace unto them, and to their seed, Ester 10. 3.
That God would cause them still to speak comfortably unto the Levites, who
teach the good knowledge of the Lord; and to command them to carry forth all
filthiness out of the holy place, as good Hezekiah did, 2 Chronicles. 29. 5. and
30. 22. That no jealousies may ever break asunder, but that piety and wisdom
may most sweetly knit together the Civil and the Ecclesiastical Dispensations
in things pertaining to God and his House.

For the Armies: That God would pour out upon them the noble spirit of
self-denial, and carry them by his power and blessing with unwearied
resolutions to the services they are entrusted withal. That nothing but the
alone desires of anhappy and well-grounded peace may put spirits and vigor into
the sword of war.

For our selves, That we may in all matters of duty and service deny our
selves. It is a singular mercy of Christ unto us, so to order the business of
his Church, as that the reverence of the persons and function of his Ministers
should be as it were complicated and linked up together with his own honor,
according as he has said, He that hears you, hears me; and he that
despises you, despises me; whosoever entertain honorable thoughts of Christ
by our Ministry, cannot but therewithal reverence us, and esteem the feet of
those beautiful, who discover such glad tidings unto them. And it is but a
counterfeit and hypocritical pretense of zeal for piety, which is accompanied
with any low thoughts, or contemptuous undervaluing of the Ministers of the
Gospel. The Galathians received Paul as an Angel of God, yea, as Christ
himself, and would have plucked out their own eyes to have given them unto him:
But though Christ has joined these things together, yet it is our duty in all
our aims and desires to abstract and prescinde our Master's interest from our
own reward; to seek Christ's honor alone, and to leave unto him the care of
ours.

I dare not think or suspect that in any of our humble advices and petitions to
the honorable Houses of Parliament, we have at all pursued any private
Interest of our own, but only that service which we are persuaded Christ has
entrusted his Ministers withal, which I am fully assured has been the only
scope we have aimed at: yet because some are jealous with a jealousy of
suspicion, that it is so; Let us our selves also be jealous with a jealousy of
fear and caution, that it may not be so: and let us pray for humble and
selfe-denying hearts, that God would enable us to pass through evil report,
and through good report; and would furnish us with such spiritual meekness
and wisdom, as that we may be able to make it manifest to the consciences of
all, even of enemies themselves, that as we preach not our selves but Christ
Jesus the Lord, so we seek not our selves or our own things, but the things of
Jesus Christ; nor affect dominion over the people of God, but would only be
helpers of their joy, and furtherers of their salvation, and servants unto them
for Jesus sake.

I have done with the first part of my exhortation, to stir us up in behalf of
our selves and others, to pray unto God to bestow this excellent grace upon all
who are entrusted in public services, unto which (had I sooner thought of it)
I would have subjoyned a-like exhortation unto every one of us in our Ministry,
to press and urge the practice of this duty upon our people, especially when
we preach before those who are called unto public trusts, and in whose hands
the managing of great and common affairs is deposited. For, certainly,
self-seekers can never serve the public with fidelity.

I now proceed unto my last part of my application, viz. An exhortation unto us
our selves to practice this heavenly duty, wherein I can but offer a sceleton,
and some naked lineaments of what might have been more fully enlarged. I shall
branch this exhortation likewise into two parts: One concerning our general
Ministry, the other concerning our particular Relation unto the service of this
Assembly.

For the former; (I shall need say nothing of the third way of self-denial;
there being none, I presume, either here or in our Ministry, who so value their
own graces as to seek righteousness from them, or to hang salvation upon
them.) Of the two former, let me crave leave to offer a word or two.

First, That we would study to deny our selves in those more peculiar and
special failings which we are subject unto as Ministers of the Gospel: many
particulars might be singled out, I shall name but two at this time, namely
Affection of New Lights in Doctrine, and of New senses and Expositions of
Scripture.

For the former, there are in this age of Liberty (for, usually such men do
Captare Tempora impacata and inquieta, as Petrus Aerodius a learned Civilian
tells us) very many itching and wanton wits, men of an Athenian temper, who
spend all their time in nothing else but to hear and to tell some New Theology,
who fly after too high notions, and abstruse, metaphysicall, unheard of
fancies; not contenting themselves with the wholesome form of sound words, and
the general harmony of Orthodox Doctrine; who direct all the studies and
navigations of their minds unto Theologia incognita, to practice new
experiments, and to make new discoveries. For mine own part, I never liked
Projectors in any kind, they usually delude others, and undo themselves: But
above all, a Projector in Learning is one of the most unhappy: and of all
Learning, none more dangerous then a Projector in Theology; the likeliest piece
of timber of any other, out of which to shape first a Sceptick, and after that
an Heretic, and at last an Atheist; such were the Ancient Heretics of old,
Valentinus, Basilides, Montanus, (...), Lib. 4. Hist. Eccles. cap. 10.
Marcus, and therest, who as Eusebius tells us, were wont to amuse the people
with strange words, and unintelligible expressions, the better to draw them
first into admiration, and by that into belief; and such were in our later age
of the Church, Faustus Socinus, and Conradus Vorstius, and diverse others, whose
corrupt and bold doctrines, have spread like a gangrene, and miserably infested
the Churches of Christ in other Countries. And many such are likely enough to
arise and multiply in these Kingdoms (heretofore famous for unity in Doctrine)
if the fancies of New Light, and Liberty of Conscience (falsely so called)
should go on and prevail: one sad example whereof we have already in the
prodigious and most execrable blasphemies of a Socinian Heretic, to say
nothing of any other distempers.

I do not doubt, but when the prophecies of Scripture, touching the affairs of
the Church which are yet future (of which I believe there are many) shall be
fulfilled, there will by that means be much more light in understanding such
predictions, then it is possible yet to have of them while they are
unfulfilled; (for, the accomplishment of prophecies are the best and surest
expositions of them.) But in things Doctrinall, and Evangelicall, in matters of
Faith, Duty, and Godliness (which, I am sure, ought to be the heads of our
preaching) to cry up New Lights, and to amuze the people with Metaphysicall
fancies, and Chimicall extractions, as if they were deep and heavenly
mysteries, and in the mean time to neglect the preaching of duty, and the
savory and saving principles of Repentance and new Obedience, is the next way
to introduce Skepticism into the Church, and a far readier means to make men
question the truth of all that they learned before, then ever to attain any
certain knowledge of the things which are newly taught them. In this therefore
let ministerial prudence and zeal for the souls of our hearers, and for the
peace of the Church, teach us to deny all pride and wantonness of wit, which
would offer to tempt and transport us into by ways, and make us busy our
selves in finding out a Northwest passage (if I may so speak) unto heaven; but
let us content our selves with the words of truth and soberness, with the
wholesome form of sound words, that we may be wormen who need not be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth; and making manifest the will of God to the
consciences of our hearers by demonstrations of the spirit and of power, that
they being convinced, and the secrets of their hearts discovered, may fall
down and worship God, and acknowledge that God is in us of a truth.

2. Let us learn to deny our selves in the affectation of new senses and
meanings of Scripture, in indulging a liberty to our own wits and fancies, to
pick exceptions at the pious and solid expositions of other learned men. We
know how affectation of Allegories and forced allusions in Origin and some
other Ancients, and affectation of Cabalismes in many Rabbinicall Doctors, Vide
Reuchlin. de art Cabalistica.
has pitifully wrested and abused the holy Text; which is no small sin in
the Apostle Peter's judgment, Aug. de unitat.
2 Pet. 3. 16. Dic ubi cubas in meridie, Eccles. cap. 16.
you know what a wild and proud sense the Donatists put upon that place to
maintain their African Schism. But as Iuvenal said of children, Naxima
debetur pueris reverencia, I may say in another sense of the holy Scriptures,
Nunquam verecundiores esse debemus quam cum de Deo agitur. Sen. Not. qu. lib.
7. ex Aristotele.
that we owe much reverence and veneration unto them, and we may not without
much modesty, and gravity, and godly fear, set our selves to the expounding of
them. I do not deny (it were injurious to the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit,
bestowed differently upon them, so to do) but that we may deliver our own
private conceptions upon any part of Scripture, though unobserved by others
before us, (that may be revealed to another which sits by, which a former
had not discovered;) But I dislike the affectation of finding something new and
strange in every thing we read, though plain, easy, and by others literally
and clearly expounded; a coming with prejudice unto the labors of our
brethren, and a willingness to find faults and defects in what they have done
before us. Whenever therefore we judge it needful to interpose any opinion
or sense of our own, let us, First, do it with humility and submission, with
reservation of Honor and Reverence unto others from whom we differ; not Non
ita pro nostra sententia dimicemus, ut eam velimus scripturarum esse quae
nostra est, etc. Aug. de Gen ad lit. l. 1. c. 18
magisterially or tribunitially, with an (...), as if we spoke rather Oracles
then opinions. Secondly, let us in this case take heed of departing vel latum
vnguem from the Id potissimum eligamus quod cum sana fide concordat. ibid. c.
21. and l. 83. qu. 64.
analogy of faith, and that knowledge which is according unto godliness, into
diverticles of fancy, or critical curiosity; but let us resolve ever to judge
those expositions best and soundest, which are most Orthodox, practical,
heavenly, and most tending unto the furtherance of duty and godliness.

Secondly, Illic expositionum adulteratio, ubi doctrinae diversitas. Tertul. de
praescrip cap. 38.
for the second branch of self-denial, let us learn in the service of Christ's
Church to deny our natural self, to spend and be spent, and like burning
Lights be contented to wear out, and be consumed in our Master's service.
(...). Clem. Alex. strom. l. 6.
There are many things will call upon us for the performance of this duty.

1. The prejudices and jealousies which men are apt to conceive against us.
Some look upon us as if we did drive a design, and affect a domination, and
fought great things for our selves. Very many likewise have an evil eye upon
the outward condition and prosperity of the Ministers; they are apt to object
unto us, and very ready to lay plots, and subscribe Petitions against us in the
matter of our maintenance. Meaner raiment, courser diet, narrower harbor,
every way magis curta supellex judged good enough, and much fitter for us. In
these and the like cases it becomes us, and it is our duty to maintain and
vindicate Iura Ministerii and decentiam Status; we cannot without unworthy
cowardice betray the rights which belong unto our places. The Apostle Paul does
magnify his office, and so in our degree and proportion must we; Romans 11. 13.
and he will plead for double honor in behalf of those who labor in the Word
and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
and so may we. Only because these are things which concern our own order, and
so we may by prejudice be mis-judged in the discharge of such duties as these,
as if we did seek and serve our selves; Let us do it with such tenderness, as
that we may stop the mouths of those who watch for occasion against us; and by
our humility, meekness, innocence, wisdom, contempt of the world, and all the
pleasures and vanities thereof, using it as if we used it not, without vanity,
without levity, without excess, by our bounty and charity, and ministering to
the necessities of the Saints, and making all our substance appear to have
written on it, Holiness to the Lord, we may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish, and the calumnies of envious men.

2. The weaknesses of diverse men, who are but babes in knowledge, men of low
and narrow capacities, will likewise call upon us to deny our selves in our
parts and learning; though we could set forth a feast of strong meats, of wine,
of fatted things; yet we must descend and provide milk, and cibum praemansum
for such as these; Mark. 4. 33.
and with the Apostle, Ioh. 16. 12.
be all things to all men, Heb. 5. 11. 14.
that by all means we may save some. 1 Cor. 9. 22.
In some Seas and winds, the maine sail may be hoised up; in others, the less
you spread the swifter you move. Paul had strong arguments when he disputed
with the Philosophers at Athens; and easy, low exhortations when he instructed
the servants and children at Ephesus.

3. The pride, frowardness, and humors of men will many times mind us of
this duty. Usually men will expect to be pleased and flattered, when indeed
they ought to be reproved by us. 1 King. 22. 13, 14.
Our relations unto them, Ier. 1. 17, 18.
our dependencies upon them, Ezekiel. 2. 6.
will tempt us to forbear unwelcome truths, Amos 7. 12, 14, 15.
lest we forfeit our reputation with them, our supplies from them. Mark. 6. 18.
In this case we must resolve to deny our relations, Acts 4. 19. 5. 29.
our dependencies, to prefer the truth of God, and the conscience of duty
before the favors of men, 2 Cor. 12. 15.
though the more we love, Gal. 4. 16.
the less we be loved. Cowardice in a Minister is baser then in a Soldier, by
how much our warfare is more honorable. A faithful reproof will get more
love and honor at the last, then a sinful and fawning dissimulation. Though
Paul reproved the dissimulation of Peter, yet Peter praises the wisdom of
Paul. Pessimum inimicorum genus, laudantes. A man can have no worse enemy in
the world then a flattering and fawning Minister, that dares not deal plainly
with his conscience. We are in much more danger to wrong the souls of men by
our oil, then by our salt; by our praises, then by our reproofs.

Lastly, the sad condition of the Church of God in these times of distraction
and distress, does mainly call upon us for this duty of Self-denial, that we
would set our selves more to seek the welfare of the whole, and the closing up
of the sad breaches that are amongst us, then how to advance our own ends, or
to advantage our selves. And in this case there are two things we should learn
to deny.

1. Our own interests in comparison of the common safety. Let it never enter
into the desires of any of us to wish, or be contented that the troubles
continue, that the breaches and differences be kept still open till parties be
balanced, till we can by time work out more probable means to advance our
own interests. Oh that such a thing as sides and parties should be ever
thought on amongst Brethren, when Churches and Kingdoms are in a flame! You
remember the story in Plutarch, of Themistocles and Aristides, (...). Plutarch.
in lib de praecept. reip. gerend.
two great Commanders, who though there were private differences between
themselves, yet being at any time joined in Commission upon public service,
either military or civil, for the good of their Country, they were wont to
leave their enmities at the gates of the City, and go on with amity and accord
upon the common affairs. It is an excellent example, and worthy the imitation
of Christians.

2. Our private judgments and opinions, so far forth as not to widen the
wounds and increase the divisions of a Bleeding Church, by an unseasonable
venting and contending for them, they being not in themselves matters of faith
and moral duty, but matters merely problematicall, and of private persuasion,
wherein godly men may be differently-minded, without breach of love, or hazard
of salvation. I have long had this opinion, that a divided Ministry in this
Kingdom, of Conformists and Non-conformists was fomented by an Episcopal
interest; that some being zealous on the one side, and others on the other,
they might never want matter for their power, having objects both for their
frowns and for their favors to work upon. Whence peradventure it was, that
when former Ceremonies grew more generally to be digested, the practice of
others, and more offensive, began to be introduced, to discriminate Ministers
still, and by that means to be the fomes of Episcopal power. As men put
vipers and flesh into vessels of wine, that by feeding on them it may be
preserved from weakening it self. But what, or whence should the cause now be,
that we must still have a divided Ministry? That they who were formerly united
in suffering, should like Petrus Alexandrinus, and Meletius, Epiphan. lib. 2.
Haeres. 68.
(as we find the story in Epiphanius) divide a sunder upon lesser differences,
and make secessions one from another? Whose interest is hereby promoted? Who
are they that are most pleased by these divisions? Are any more likely to make
advantage by the divisions of brethren, then they who are enemies unto them
both?

For the Lord's sake, let us lay it to heart, and the more we see the common
enemy gratified by it, and glorying in it, the more let us be grieved for it,
and ashamed of it, and on all hands endeavor to take off the edge of prejudice
and bitterness. When sheep push and run heads against one another, it is a
foretoken of ill weather. It were worth not only our fasting and praying, but
our studying, our sweating, our bleedng, our dying, to recover peace to the
Church, and unity amongst Brethren again. Why should not the world say of us
now, as they were wont to say of Christians heretofore, Vide ut se diligunt?
Surely, biting, devouring, censuring, counter-working, spending the edge of
prejudice, policies, and passion against one another, well it may be through
humane weakness amongst good men, but I am sure it is the thorn and prickle,
it is not the rose or flower which grows upon that tree. I shall add but one
word more unto this point, and so conclude it; and it is this, That no man
ought to prejudice a public and general Right by any private apprehensions of
his own, though they may seem to have a pretense of humility and self-denial
in them. No single person by any disclaimer of his, may undertake to extinguish
a common property. In copartnercy or fellowship, the rule of the civil Law
grounded upon clear reason is this, Leg. 65.. 5. D. pro Socio.
Non id quod privatim interest unius ex sociis servari solet, sed quod
societati expedit. No persons private interest, but the common advantage of the
society is to be attended. And again, In re communi nemo jure quicquam facit
altero invito. L. 28. D. Communi dividendo.
Therefore the Apostle, when upon great and weighty reasons he declined in his
own particular to receive maintenance from the Churches of Achata, 1 Cor. 9.
he yet withal writes a whole Chapter to vindicate and assert the just claim
of the Ministers of the Gospel unto maintenance, lest he should by a private
act of self-denial (necessary hic and nunc for him himself to exercise)
prejudice the common and perpetual interest of all the Ministers of the
Gospel. Surely, if I had a singular opinion in matters not of faith or
necessicessity to salvation, different from the opinion of all others, and had
confidence enough to value it, and wit enough to plead for it, and wisdom
enough to manage it unto plausible correspondencies, and forehead enough to
undervalue the judgment of all other godly men concerning it: I hope either
modesty or piety would constrain me to learn of the Apostle to have such a
persuasion to my self, and not by an unseasonable obtruding of it, to offend my
brethren, and to trouble the Church of God.

I have but three short words more of Exhortation unto us, with respect to our
service in this reverend Assembly, and then I shall conclude; and they are, that
with respect hereunto we would learn to Deny our selves,

First, In our own private Affairs, times, occasions; that we would not suffer
these any way to retard, or obstruct the public service. The eyes of friends
are upon us, expecting our haste: the eyes of enemies upbraiding and deriding
our slownesse: the eyes of other Churches abroad, looking on us as healers, and
repairers of breaches in these times of trouble and division, and longing to
see the fruits of our labors. Let these considerations move us not to be weary
or faint in our minds, but to do our uttermost to discover truth, and to
recover peace unto these torn and afflicted Churches,

Secondly, In our Speeches and debates: Some men have excellent abilities of
copious and fluent speaking, a felicity which I so much the more honor and
admire wherever I find it, by how much the greater mine own inability is of
sudden digesting or uttering mine own conceptions. Yet considering the
necessity of hastening the work which we have before us, I humbly conceive it
were fitter to speak Vt Menelaus (...). Iliad. (...). Tacit.
Aristotle, then Cicero; concise arguments, then copious Orations: In (...) non
est canctandi locus, quod non potest laudari nisi per actum.

Lastly, in matters of difference, if at any time such shall occur, let us
chiefly study to deny our selves. Passions are seldom friends unto serious
affairs, having much of mist and darkness in them. The more heavenly the mind
is, the more calm and serene, and the less turbid; Senec. Lucan.
Inferiora fulminant. It is (...). Iliad. (...) Summam aggressus ut in Ulysse
facundiam, magnitudinem illi junxit, cui orationem nivibus hibernis and copia
verborum atque impetu parem tribuit. Quintil. Orat. Instit. Lib. 12. cap. 10.
Homer's commendation of the Eloquence of Ulysses, that it was a shower of
snow, which falls soft, but soakes deep; whereas violent and hasty rain runs
off the ground before it can enter into it. Jonah slept, Christ slept, while
the ship was under a tempest. I love not Allegories, yet give me leave to make
this allusion from it: Our Prophetical, our Christian temper is too much
asleep when we are troubled and distempered with passion.

I conclude all in the words of the Apostle, Look not every man on his own
things, but on the things of others. Let the same mind be in you which was also
in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, and yet he humbled himself, and emptyed himself, and made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant: And being
Lord of all, became obedient; and Lord of Life, obedient unto Death; and Lord
of Glory, obedient to the death of the Cross. If our Lord and Master did so
deeply deny himself to save and redeem his Church: Let it not be grievous unto
us to deny our selves to serve and to edify the Church.

FINIS.

