A SERMON Touching the Use of Humane Learning, PREACHED In MERCERS-CHAPPEL, AT
THE FUNERAL Of that Learned Gentleman, Mr. JOHN LANGLEY, LATE Schoolmaster of
Paul's School in LONDON, on the 21 day of September, 1657.

By ED REYNOLDS, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for GEORGE THOMASON at the Rose and Crown in Paul's
Churchyard, 1658.

To the Honorable Sir Henry Yelverton, Baronet.
SIR,
THere i^ none amongst all my ^^ble Friends unto whom the Ded^cation of this
Sermon does more properly be long, then unto your Self. For ^esides that debt
of Honor which I owe to ^our Family, not only for the favors received from
your self, but from your noble Father and Grandfather, n^w with God; When I
consider the very great love, and high esteem which your Father did bear to
that good man, at whose Funeral this Sermon was preached* unto whose care ^e
in^^usted the Two ^rops of his Family, your Self, and your most hopeful Brother
(whom God took from that School to a celestial Academy*) and with all, your own
hereditary possession of the same love and esteem, as a grateful return unto
this learned man for his special care in your education; and when I further
remember the noble thoughts and singular honor which this worthy man ever had
toward your Father, your self, and all the Relations of your Family; it was
not possible for me to look further for a name to inscribe before this small
Book. I have therefore assumed the boldness to put so poor a testimony of those
honorable affections which I owe unto you, and of that great love which I bear
to the nam^ of that good man, who was so dear unto you, into your hands; as
knowing withal how much the Argument of this Sermon would be acceptable unto
you, who can experimentally subscribe to the excellency and use of that
Learning which it pleads for, and as an eye and ear witness can attest the
Character of that worthy person, to whose Obsequ^es this last office of love
was performed. My hearty prayer for you unto God is, that he will crown all
those great Blessings which he has bestowed upon you, with ^ more abundant
greatness of his heavenly Grace, tha^ you may be eminently serviceable to his
great name, and may so tread in the steps of your worthy Pr^genitors (which I
persuade my self you do) as not only to keep up the life and power of
Godliness in your own heart, and Family, but further to be a Comforter,
Countenancer, and Encourager (as they were) both of learned and godly
Ministers, and of others who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity. To his gracious
protection and blessing I commend you, and all yours, desiring to be esteemed

Your most faithful and humble Servant ED. REYNOLDS.

A SERMON Touching the use of Humane Learning.
ACTS 7.22. And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was
mighty in words and in deeds.


IN the former Chapter we read of a dispute between Stephen, and the members of
a certain Synagogue in Jerusalem, called the Synagogue of the Libertines, of
such Jews, who having been servants to the Romans, Justin, Instit. l. 1. tit.
5. Vid. Rosin. Antiq. Romans l. 1. c 20. Et Calvin^ Lexic juridic.
were manumitted and made free; for such the Romans called Libertines; of which
sort of Jews, coming out of several parts of the world that College or
Convention seems to have been made up. Or, as Grotius supposes, was built by
them at Jerusalem for their Countrymen and Proselytes, as there are at Rome and
Rhemes Colleges for English Papists.

Istae sunt haeretic^rum machinae, ut convic^i de pe^fi^ia, ad ma^edicta se
conferant Hier. Apol. 2. advers. Russianum.
The issue of this Disputation was, that being worsted at Arguments, these
Libertines do betake themselves to calumnies, and false accusations, as the
Pharisees when their reasons were spent, were wont to take up stones to throw
at Christ. They bring him from a scholastical to a judicial defense, from the
^olledge to the Council, and by false witnesses charge him with blasphemy
against Moses and God. Whereupon, being pro forma, permitted to make his
defense (for persecuters will manage their cruelties under a form of Law, that
they may appear the more specious) he does it largely with much wisdom and
courage.

The scope of the Sermon is to show (upon a fair Issue with his accusers) that
he was not guilty of the charge given in against him, that it did not follow,
because he affirmed that Christ would destroy the Temple, and change the
customs which M^ses deliv^red, that therefore he blasphemed either Moses or
God; The Argument of his justification, is by an Historical Induction. 1. If
Abraham, Isaak, Jacob* and Joseph worshipped God without a Temple, and without
such customs as Moses delivered, and Moses did without blasphemy against them,
make that alteration which God was pleased to command him to make: Then the
Worship of God is not peremptorily confined to an outward Temple, or a Mo^aical
ministration. But Abraham, Isaak, Jacob and Joseph by obeying the commands and
believing the promises of God, did acceptably worship him without a ^emple or
Mosaical Ceremonies; therefore it is no blasphemy to say that God may so be
worshipped. 2. Again, if Moses, a great, a learned, a mighty Ruler and
Deliverer, did assure the people that a Prophet God would raise who should do
as he had done, make new institutions, and set up a more excellent way of
Worship, then it was no blasphemy against Moses or God, to say, that (...)
customs by him introduced should be by that Prophet altered. But Moses himself
did teach the people thus to believe: Therefore Stephen teaching the same did
not blaspheme Moses. 3. Again, that which was not blasphemy to affirm of the
Tabernacle, though it were set up by Gods special appointment unto Moses, is
not blasphemy to affirm of the Temple. But it was not blasphemy to affirm the
use of the Tabernacle to have been temporary, and consequently alterable;
therefore to affirm the same of the Temple is not blasphemy. Especially, since
the Lord has said, that he dwells not in Temples made with hands.

Together with these strong Arguments are interwoven apologetical
Reprehensions; Stephen justifying himself against their accusations now, by the
same Argument whereby Moses was to be justified against their Fathers before.
Moses did by wonders and signs in Egypt, in the red Sea, in the Wilderness
prove himself to be a Ruler and Judge sent of God, and yet your Fathers would
not obey but thrust him from them, and made a Calf to worship. Now the Lord
has raised up the Prophet whom Mose^ foretold, who by signs and wonders did
prove himself to be of God, but you thrust him from you, and resist the Holy
Ghost as your Fathers did. And your refusing of Jesus is no more argument
against his doctrine and institutions, then their refusing of Moses, was an
Argument against his. In as much as you are not able to allege any thing why
your Fathers should have believed Moses, which we are not able to allege, why
you ought (...) to believe Christ.

Unto this strong defense of Stephen, neither the Judges nor his Accusers make
any reply by way of Argument; but though he professed himself to be at that
time an eye Witness of the truth of Jesus his being in glory, yet in a rage and
outcry they cast him out of the City and stoned him. The stronger were his
Arguments for the truth, the more excessive was their malice against him for it.

The words of the Text are a branch of the second Argument, drawn from the
testimony of Moses, and the historical narration touching him: and they contain
the fruit which followed upon the noble education, which he received from the
hand and care of Pharaohs Daughter; he so prospered under it, that he became
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was a mighty man both for
Oratory and Action. The Lord by these civil accomplishments fitting him in part
for the Government whereunto he reserved him.

In the Words we have first, his intellectual perfections. He was Learned and
instructed, together with the object of that Learning, All the wisdom of the
Egyptians.

Secondly, His civil, moral and religious perfections; a mighty man for
Elocution, a mighty man for Action. He improved and put forth his intellectual
abilities for the good and service of others, laid up all his power to do good
to his Brethren, in due time when God should call him thereunto.

Moses was learned, or instructed and instituted. It notes acquired Knowledge,
by the benefit of learned Education. In all the wisdom of the Egyptians; that
Nation was anciently famous for wisdom: From thence some think that the
Grecians derived their learning; Diod. Si^^l. l. 1.
for we read in Diodorus S^culus, and others, that Orpheus, Homer, Pythagoras,
Plato, Lycurgus, Solon, and others did travel into Egypt for institution.
Eusebius. de praep. Evang. l. 10. sect. 5. Bochart. Geograph. sacra. lib. 1. c.
19.20.
But Cadmus who first brought Letters into Greece, was a Phanitian, as
Eusebius, and after him other learned men have fully proved. Therefore from the
Egyptians the Greeks did not primitively derive their Learning. What this
wisdom of the Egyptians was, wherein Moses was learned, is by Philo in the life
of Moses, by Diodorus Siculus, lib. 1. c. 2. By Sixtus Senensis, Biblioth. lib.
2. and others described, viz. Mathematics, Astronomy, Geometry, Arithmetic,
Music, Natural Philosophy, Physic, Symbolical, and Hieroglyphical Writing,
Civil and Political Knowledge, for which that people seems to have been
famous, Isa. 19.11 -- 14.

I shall not here enquire into the most ancient rise or original of Learning,
or seat thereof, which some carry beyond the Flood, and tell us of Pillars with
Hebrew Inscriptions and Characters set up by Enoch and Seth; Nor shall I
inquire whence the Egyptians derived their Learning, which some ascribe to
Joseph and the people of the Jews living there: Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. Alex. Poly
Hist. apud Eusebius. de oraepar. Evang. l. 9 c. 17^
Others to Abraham, of whose being in Egypt we read, Genesis 12.10. It is
sufficient for us to know, that at this time there was Learning there, and that
Moses was brought up and proved excellent in it.

Now we may here observe, First, The great care of the Kings Daughter to bring
up Moses in in all kind of good Literature, that thereby he might be fit for
such great Services, as his so near relation to a Princes Court might probably
have brought him unto. And truly so great has been the care of w^se Heathens
in this particular (as we read of the Lacedaemonians, Persians, and others) as
may justly put to shame many Christians, who breed up their children many times
so loosely, so ignorantly, so sensually, to gameing, sporting and excess, as if
an inheritance did serve to no other purpose but to make the Heir of it
useless, and good for nothing. And as we see many times good ground grow moss^
and barren for want of culture; so is it with good wits, which being neglected
do usually become more vicious then those of less hope and pregnancy. The
foundations of an honorable and comfortable Age are laid in the minority of
children; if the plant be not kept strait at first, the tree will be crooked
incurably at the last. No doubt but David had special care of the education of
Solomon; for quickness of parts, without special culture would hardly have
arrived at so great a pitch of Learning, especially in a disposition, as the
event proved, by nature sensual enough, and therefore he makes mention both of
his Fathers and his Mothers teaching him, Prove. 4.1.31.1. It is as great a
folly to lay up Estates for children, and to take no care of themselves who
must enjoy them, as to be curious for an handsome Shoe, and then to put it upon
a gouty f^ot.

And the greater men are, the greater should their care be for free and
honorable, learned and religious education of their children. First, Because it
is a very incongruous mixture, greatness of estate, and meaness of
understanding; the one will be a perpetual blemish and reproach unto the other.
Secondly, Because there will be the more fuel of lust, if Learning and Piety be
not laid up to season a full estate. We see nothing grow upon a fat heap of
muck, but weeds and trash: Therefore we find what great care Theodosius had to
have a good Tutor to shape the minds and manners of his children The famous
Arsenius, Niceph. l. 12. Joseph. contr. Appion. l. 2.
and Josephus tells us that Moses had a special care of the education of
children in good Literature, and we find some evidence of it in the Scripture,
where he commands the people to teach the words of the Law diligently unto
their Children, Deuteronomy. 6.7.

And herein must our care exceed this of Pharaohs Daughter, we must so provide
to breed up our Children unto wisdom, as that we forget not the chief thing to
have them seasoned with the knowledge and fear of God, which is the only true
wisdom, Ennopius in Maxim. S^z^m. lib 5 c. 2.
Job 28.28. Julian the Apostate had great Scholars, Mardonius and Maximus to
his Tutors, but being profane Heathens and Scoffers at Christian Religion,
they laid the foundations of that desperate Apostasy, whereby he fell from
Christ to the Devil. He that begets a Fool, or by careless breeding makes one,
has been the Author of his own sorrow; a wise Son makes a glad Father. If
thine heart be wise, says Solomon. I shall rejoice, Prove. 23.15. It is very
sad for children to have wicked Parents, who wholly neglect their Education,
and of whom Cyprian tells us they will cry out at the last day, Parents
sensimus parricidas. Our Parents have been our Parricides.

Now then by this important duty we learn, 1. To set an high value upon such
wise, learned and religious Tutors as at any time we enjoy for the discarge of
this great Work. And 2. To bewail it as a more then ordinary loss, when men
whom God has every way fitted with Learning, industry, piety, and fidelity for
so excellent a work are by a sudden stroke taken away from us.

We have considered the Care of the Kings Daughter for the education of Moses;
let us in the next place consider, the blessing of God upon it, in that thereby
Moses was learned in all the Learning of the Egyptians.

Where first, It is very observable, the different end which God had in his
Providence, and she in her particular Care; She intended, no doubt, the service
of Pharaoh, God intended to qualify him the better, to be a Ruler and a
Deliverer of his people from Pharaoh; She intended the good of Egypt, God
intended the good of Israel. Many times the wise and holy providence of God,
uses the diligence of one man to bring about effects for the good of others,
which he never intended; as we see in Joseph's Brethren, and Hamans dictating
the honor which was conferred upon Mordecai at that time, when he came to beg
him for the Gallows which he had erected. God uses the counsels of men, to
effect things by them which they never thought of. The Assyrian had his work,
and God had his, Isa. 10.6, 7. Vid. Aug. in Psalm. 75. and 93. and tract. 7. in
ep. 1. Ioannis. and epist. 48. ad Vincentium.
Judas looked after money, Caiphas and the High Priests after interest and
revenge, Pilate after Caesar and his favor; but Gods end was the Salvation of
the World by the death of Christ. In re una quam fecerunt, causa non una
propter quam fecerunt. God and Christ did it in Charitate, Judas and the Jews
in proditione.

2. We may here observe, that Moses that great Prophet, whom the Lord did after
speak unto mouth to mouth, Number. 12.8. is commended for his skill in the
learning and wisdom of the Egyptians, a profane Nation. ven Humane, secul^r,
and Exotic Learning is a noble gift of God; and a very great Ornament and
Honor un^o the most excellent men. As it was mentioned for the honor of Daniel
and his three Companions, that God gave them knowledge and skill in all
learning and wisdom, Dan. 1.17. meaning, as appears ver. 4. the Learning of the
Caldeans: Not as if they were Southsayers, as the wise men of Caldea were; or
Moses, a Magician and Sorcerer, as the Wisemen of Egypt were, and as Heathen
Writers charge him to have been. For the great miracles which Moses did; Plin.
l. 30. c. 1.
and the interpretations of dreams and visions by Daniel, were from God, and
not from the Devil, by the help of any Magical Enchantments. In like manner
Bezaleel and Aholiab are commended by God for that Wisdom and Understanding,
which they had in all manner of cunning Workmanship, Exodus 31.3 -- 6. And it is
mentioned for the honor of Iabal, Iubal, and Tubal Cain, that they were the
first inventers of some particular useful Arts for the good of Humane Society,
Genesis 4.20, 21, 22. And of Solomon, that he spoke of Trees from the Cedar tree
in Lebanon, unto the Hyssop that springs out of the wall, and that he spoke
also of Beasts, and of Fowl, and of creeping things, and of Fishes, 1 Reg.
4.33. The high esteem which the Heathen had of the first Inventers of Liberal
Sciences and necessary Arts and Manufactures, is noted as one principal cause
by Diodorus Si^ulus, Lib 3. cap. 5. and i^. 5. c. 15.
and others, of the divine titles and honors which were given unto them. And
Paul mentions it amongst other his privileges, that he was brought up a
Scholar at the feet of the learned ^amaliel, Act. 22.3. Yea by that Apostle
the Lord has given so much honor unto Humane Learning, as three times to make
mention of Heathen Poets, and their sayings. Aratus, Act. 17.28. Justin. Apol.
1.
(...). Me^ander, 1 Cor* 15.33. (...). Epimenides, Tit. 1.12. (...), etc. Truth
is Gods where ever it is found, Res fisci est ubicunque natat; as a Mine of
Gold or Silver is the Kings in whose ground soever it be discovered. De doctr.
Christ. l 2. cap. 18.39, 43. Confess. l. ^. c. 15.
Christianus Domini sui esse intelligit ubicunque invenerit veritatem, says
Austin. A Christian knows that truth belongs to Christ wheresoever he finds
it. And again, Tibi serviat, says he, quicquid utile puer didici. As Israel
took of the Egyptians, jewels of Silver and jewels of Gold, as David
consecrated the Spoils of the Philistims, Moabites, Syrians, and all Nations
whom he subdued to the Lord, 2 Samuel 8.11. as the Crown of the King of Rabbah,
was set upon the head of David, 2 Samuel 12.30. so the spoils of all secular
Learning are to be dedicated unto Christ, and the use of his Church, who is
said to take from Satan all his armor, and to divide the spoil, Luke 11.22. For
so in triumphs the enemies was disarmed, ^^v. dec. 4 l. 9.
and the spoils carried in state before the Victors Chariot. Such spoils did
Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Clemens Alex. Justin, Cyril* Lactantius, Hierom,
Austin, Basil, Nazianzen, Arnobius, etc. take from the Gentile Writers and
devote them to the service of the Church of Christ. It is noted of Theodosius
the Emperor, Socrat. l. 5. c. 16
that when he destroyed the Temples of the Heathen Idols, in Alexandria, yet
all the vessels and statues of Gold and Silver he converted to the use of the
Christian Churches. Yea ^etrus Aerodius a learned Civilian out of Procopius
tells us, that the Christians did convert the very Idol Temples themselves
into Churches, Decret. l. 1. tit. 8 sect. 4.
wherein to worship Christ. For if an Idol, being nothing, did not so, defile
meat, but that as a good creature (though not in idol communion) it might be
eaten, if the conscience of no man were thereby offended, as the Apostle
teaches, 1 Cor. 8.4-7. 10.25.28. Certainly neither does it leave any such
abiding pollution to any place, but that therein God may be worshipped, 2 Timothy
2.8.

First, All good Learning and wisdom is per se, and in its own nature
desirable, as an ornament and perfection to the mind, as a part of that Truth
whereof God is the Author. There is a knowledge of God natural in and by his
works: and a knowledge supernatural by revelation out of the Word; and though
this be the principal, yet the other is not to be undervalued. For the works of
God are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein* Psalm. 111.2.
Now all secular Learning is the knowledge of Gods works, aeternae verita^is
particula; a small emanation from eternal verity. Philosophical and
Mathematical Learning, the knowledge of his works of Creation. Historical and
Political Learning, the knowledge of his works of Providence. Moral and
Oeconomical and Civil Learning, the knowledge of those remainders of his Image
and Law, which are left in the minds of men, for their direction and
conviction. Grammatical, Rhetorical and Logical Learning, the knowledge of the
use of that Reason which God gives us for imparting our minds, and evidencing
our conceptions unto one another. So then all true Learning being a knowledge
of the works of God, and of that Truth which he, who is the supreme verity,
has implanted in them, must needs be such as the works of God themselves are,
honorable and excellent, and so per se desirable.

Secondly, All true Learning is desirable, for the uses whereunto it may be
applied* We will consider these Uses.

1. In regard of evil men, many of whom are great Scholars, and eminent for
various learning.

First, It serves to beautify even them, and render them, as learned men,
great ornaments to their generation; as many harmful herbs do bear beautiful
flowers, and are upon that account special ornaments to the Gardens were they
grow. Goodly Statues of Gold or Silver, though dead, though hollow, and without
heart or vital parts, are yet of great value, and special honor to the places
where erected. Such are even profane Learned men, in regard of their Learning.

Secondly, It is useful unto them to convince them of Gods glory and greatness,
of his Sovereignty and Will; and so if it be not praeexercitamentum, as Clemens
Alexandrinus calls it, unto the more comfortable knowledge of him out of his
Word, namely, to kindle in them a desire to know more of so great a God from
thence, it will render them without excuse for abusing the knowledge which they
have, Romans 1.19, 20.

Thirdly, It is by accident useful another way, viz. by honest and assiduous
labors in the pursuit of Learning, to keep them from the Temptations of diverse
lusts, which by a loose and an idle life would be more ready to assault them.
If David had been at his study, when he was on his house top, he had not been
tempted unto Adultery.

Fourthly, It makes them thus adorned serviceable to humane Society. Singular
use have all Ages had of the learned labors of profane Historians,
Philosophers, Poets, Orators, Mathematicians, Physicians, Artists in diverse
kinds. And^ it is a comfort to any man to live to some good purpose, and to be
serviceable to his own and future generations.

Fifthly, They are hereby useful to the Church of God: That God who can make
use of the sins of men to do his people good by them, as of Joseph's Brethren,
to make way, by s^^^ng him, unto the safety of Israel and his Family; can make
use of the gifts and tallents he bestows on wicked men for the service of good
men. The hands of those that did themselves perish in the Flood, were employed
in building the Ark for Noah and his Family. It is true, very often wicked men
do use their learning against God, as they do all other his good blessings.
Learned wickedness is Arm^ta^ nequitia, (...). Arist. ^het, Tertul. ont.
Hermog. c. 8. Apol. c 47,
such learning degenerates into Pride, Arrogance, Scorn, Atheism, Heresy,
contempt of godliness, (as Philosophers are called by the Fathers, Haereticorum
patriarchae, but all this is accidental, and the fruit of lust.) Yet, as a
malignant Planet, when in conjunction with a good one may have a benign
influence; so it does often fall out that they who are by sin enemies, may by
learning be useful to the Church. The Jews are bitter enemies to Christ, Vid.
Aug. de civ. Dei l. 18. c. 46. and in Psalm. 58.
yet God has by their care preserved the old Scriptures from danger of
corruption.

2. In regard of Holy men.

First, Though Learning be much inferior to Holiness; There are learned Devils,
there cannot be holy Devils (for Holiness is the character of celestial not of
infernal Angels, Deuteronomy. 33.2.) yet in Holy men Learning is a rare Ornament and
accession, as the golden Ring to the Gem which is in it. Like the marriage of
an holy David to a beautiful Abigail.

Secondly, It enableth them to do the more service unto the Church of God, and
the Truths of Religion. Every good gift sanctified is in such a way useful to
the Church, as the proper nature and excellency of the gift does admit.
Sanctified Wit beautifies Religion, sanctified Reason defends it, sanctified
power protects it, sanctified Elocution persuades others to the love of it. As
different gifts of the people, did with a different value serve the Tabernacle,
the stones of the Ephod, more precious then the Badgers skins; so though every
good man is ready to offer willingly to the service of the Church, yet great
difference between the learning of a Paul, or the elequence of an Apollo, or
the power of a Constantine, or the acuteness of an Austin, or the courage of an
Athanasius, and the ordinary qualifications of inferior good men.

Thirdly, It enableth them to procure more favor and to bring more reputation
unto Religion* by the greatness of parts wherein they may be otherwise
serviceable unto them, with whom it concerns Religion to have the honor
thereof preserved. God is pleased in his holy providence to make other
interests, sometimes a preservative unto Religion, where it self is not
immediately and per se regarded. Ahasuerus was amorous and uxorious, and that
induced him to favor the Jews, whose worship he cared not for. Thus it is
useful in regard of holy men.

3. In regard of the Church and truth of Religion; It is useful as an Handmaid,
in a way of attendance thereupon, and subserviency thereunto several ways.

First, Hereby the ancient Fathers of the Church were furnished to confute the
Pagan and Idolatrous worship of the Heathens out of their own Writers, Legimus
non ut teneamus sed ut repudiemus, Ambros. proaem. in luc.
as Paul did the Idolatry of Athens by the inscription of their own Altar, Act.
17, 23. As David killed Goliath with his own Sword, as a tree is cut down by an
Axe, the helve whereof was made out of a bough of the same tree; this course
Origin, Clem. Alex. Justin, Eusebius, Tertullian, Minutius Felix, Terul. de
testim Animae cap. 1.
and many others of the Ancients have taken, as likewise to show that many
doctrines of the Scripture have been owned even by profane Writers; One God by
Plato, one first Cause by Aristotle, Divine Providence by Cicero, the last
conflagration by the Stoics, etc.

Secondly, Hereby we shame Christians, 1 Cor. 11.14.
when out of profane Writers we let them understand of the continency,
justice, temperance, meekness, clemency, and other amiable moral Virtues of
Heathen men, which they having abundantly more means, come so exceeding short
of; and that Fabritius, Aristides, Antoninus, Epictetus, and many other
virtuous Heathens shall rise up in judgment against them.

Thirdly, Scriptures have much of Poetry, Philosophy, Mathematics, Law^,
Antiquities and customs of other Countries in them; in the understanding of
which by secular Learning we may be much assisted. Physics in Genesis, Vid.
Alting. probl. 2.
Ethics in Proverbs, Logic in the disputations of the Prophets, of Christ and
his Apostles, Allusions to the natures of Beasts, Sheep, Goats, Wolves, Lions,
Doves, etc. Many allusions in the Books of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther, to the
customs of the Persians, many passages in the Prophets illustrable out of the
Histories of the times and places to which they refer, many expressions in the
New Testament best explicable out of the Roman Laws and Antiquities. Many
passages exquisitely paralleled in humane Authors, and receiving much light
from them, Cinnus lib. 2. cap. 13.
as that learned and good man Mr. Gataker has observed.

Fourthly, The Histories of the Scriptures, and the Miracles of Moses, Hier. in
Dan. 1.
of Christ and his Apostles may even out of Heathen Writers be confirmed (and a
testimony from Adversaries is of great validity) this has been largely and
learnedly proved by Mornay and Grotius in their Books de veritate Christianae
Religionis. Mornay. cap. 26
Grot. lib. 1. sect. 16 and lib. 2 sect. 5.


Fifthly, The knowledge of Times by the Olympiads, the fasti Consulares, and
other standing ways of computation are exceeding necessary to the the exact
distinguishing and digesting of sacred Chronology, and of the occurrences of
Scripture to their proper times, De doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 28.
as Austin has noted.

Sixthly, Many Ecclesiastical Writers, who either write against the Gentiles,
or Apologetical Discourses for Christian Religion, cannot be clearly understood
without the reading of Secular Authors; those kind of Writings, as Origin
against Celsus, Tertullians Apology, Theodoret de curandis Graec^rum
Affectibus, Cyprian de Idolorum vanitate, Austin de Civitate Dei, Minutius
Felix his Octavius, and other the like, being brimful of such kind of Learning,
and allusions thereunto.

To say nothing of the necessity of Grammar and Tongues to understand the words
of Scripture; of Logic to understand the contexture, 1* Th ^ 5.21
method, argumentation, and Analysis of Scripture; of Rhetoric to understand
the eleganc^es of Scripture.

When I consider all these things I cannot but believe that the more learned
men are (having gracious hearts as well as learned heads) the more sensible
they are of their insufficiency, for so tremendous an employment as the sound,
solid, and judicious preaching of the word of God; and are more dismayed at the
sense of their own wants for so weighty and arduous a service, then they do
wonder at the boldness of illiterate men, who therefore venture with more
confidence upon it, because they know not that variety of learning, as well as
of spiritual wisdom and grace, which is requisite unto such an able discharge
of it, as whereby a man may appear to be a workman who needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth.

We have considered some of the many uses of Sec^lar Learning, H^xam. Hom 5
and that within the sphere of one only profession, that it is as a dead hedge
wherewith men use to fence a quick one, or as Basils similitude is, as those
fulcimenta upon which men do raise and bear up their Vines; or as ground
colors upon which gold is to be over-laid. I shall conclude with a few
inferences from this point for our use.

First, Though there be excellent use to be made of Humane Learning, yet it is
to be used with much caution, as Physicians use Opium, or other dangerous
things with their due correctives.

1. Use it, not unnecessarily where the nature of the matter does not
rationally call for it. Some learned men have upon this account blamed some of
the Ancients, Alting. The^l. pr^bl p^rt. 1. problem 2. Melanct. Epist. page 890.
Raynold* confer. with Heart. p. 72. vid. ora^ 2. Anti^Weigel. su^vissimi
^oc^issimique viri D. I an. A^rowsmith. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuit. in prae^. et
Hist. Sacram. p 401. Cic. de not. Deorum lib. 1. de Prota. Abderit. Plutarch.
in Nicia and in Pericle, de Anax. Socrat. l. 2 c 28 Sozom. l. 2. c. 4.
Origin, Justin, Clemens Alexandrinus and others, for mixing Philosophy with
Theology, out of an opinion thereby the easier to gain the Gentil^s unto the
Christian faith. But none have been more blameworthy in this case then the old
Schoolmen, of whom Melancthon says, that their doctrine is chiefly made up of
two things, Philosophy and Superstition; and therefore it is well observed by a
learned man that Schoolmen and Canonists have been the fountains of that
corruption which has infected the Church of Christ; the Schoolmen in
doctrine, by opinions of Popery; and the Canonists in Discipline by the state
of the Papacy, of which the main cause has been the admitting of Aristotle and
his Philosophy, In ipsa adyta and penetralia Ecclesiarum, as H^spinian
speaks. We find even amongst the Heathens, men were punished for presuming
to dispute of heavenly things, in the same manner as they did of natural
causes; and for the like reason Aetius the Heretic being given to an er^stical
and contentious way of arguing in divine things, as one much addicted to
Aristotelical learning, thereby purchased unto himself the Title of Atheist, as
Socrates and Sozomen tell us.

2. Use it not vain-gloriously, and unto oftentation. It is a puffing, a windy,
a flatulent thing; knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1. Tertullian calls
Philosophers, Gloriae Animalia. And I believe that this vanity does scarce in
any thing mote put forth it self then in pride of Wit or Memory in this way of
learning. We may learn the danger of it by the example of Herod, Act. 12. who
was smitten with Worms because he gave not God the glory.

3 Use it not proudly with contempt and disdain of the Word of God, like that
profane Wit who said, he did not dare to read the Scripture for fear of
spoiling his style. I have heard of some wretches even amongst us in our days,
who presume to magnify Socrates above Moses or Paul.

4. Use it not heretically in defense of error, as Erasmus says of the
Arrians, hoc ipso fuere pestilentiores quod Aristotelicis argutiis essent
instructi; and as Hierom complains that they rose e Platonis and Aristophanis
sinu in Episcopatum. H^er. advers. Luciferan. Vid. Tert, Apol. c 46. de pres^r.
c. 7. de anim. c. 1, 2, 3. Vid. Daven. in Col. 2.8. Alting. Theol. problem. p.
1^. N^s a prophetis and Christ^, n^n a philosophis and Epicuro erudimur.
Te^tul. conn. Marc l. 2. c. 16 Vid. Danaeam in Aug Euchirid. c. 4. sect. 9.10.
We must take heed of making our Reason judge of Articles of Faith, or setting
Humane Learning in the Tribunal against Divine Truth. For this it was that
Tertullian calls Philosophers the Patriarchs of Heretics, and that the
Apostle exhorts us to take heed no man spoil us through philosophy and vain
deceit, Col. 2.8. He means not solid philosophy, the genuine issue of Right
Reason; But the arrogance of Humane Reason to sit as a judge of those things
that are supernatural and of divine Revelation, as Articles of Faith and forms
of Worship, when it will acknowledge no Religion but what is deducible out of
the princples of corrupted Reason, nor admit any conclusions which are not
consonant to those principles.

5. Use it not profanely, to inflame lust, as some elegant Writers do more
corrupt by their lasciviousness* then benefit by their politeness, as Ma^tial,
Petronius Arbiter, Prohibe^ur Christianis figmenta legere po^tarum, quia p^r
oblectame^ta inanium fa^^l^rum mentem excitan^ ad incentiva libidinum, I^id lib
3. Sent. de summo b^no^ cap. 13. Vid. Tertul. de Idol^lat. cap 10. and Isidor.
Pelut. lib. 1* Epist 63.
etc. Cyprian said of the Adulteries of the Heathen gods, that by their
examples fiunt miseris delicta religiosa. In such a use we may justly fear the
rebuke which Ad Eustochium de custodia virginitatis, Aug. Epist. 119. Basil. de
leg. lib. Gentil. Hieron ad Pammachium de obitu Paulinae. and epist. ad Magnum
orat. number. 31.23.24*
Ierom says he had, Ciceronianus es, non Christianus.

But use it with Humility, Moderation, Sobriety, as an Handmaid to Christ; as
Painters lay a worser color, when they mean to superinduce another. Pare the
Na^ls, cut the Hair, lop the luxuriances, carry it through the fire, as the
spoils were appointed to be, that it may be purged for the use of the Temple.

Secondly, This justly reproves all the Enemies of Learning; who because the
Apostle forbids deceitful Philosophy, and tells us how vain the professors
thereof became in their imaginations, do thence condemn all the sober and just
use of true Learning. Hoorubec. Commantar. de ^eige^. Baldw. Casus. Conscien.
lib. 4 c. 2 cas 9. Greg. Tholos. de Re^ub. lib. 17. cap. 12. sect. 5. Plati^.
in fi^e vitae Pauli* 1, 2
Such the Weigel^ans, who tell us that there is no knowledge of Christ in any
Universities; that all Schools and Academies are enemies unto Christ, and all
their Learning merae corruptelae; who shut all Learning out of the Church, and
all learned men out of Heaven. Such was it seems Friar Francis the Popish
Saint, who cursed a learned Minister of Bononia for going about to set up there
a School of Learning without his leave. Yea, such it seems was Pope Paul the
second, of whom Platina tells us, that he did so hate Humane Learning, that
he esteemed the lovers thereof Heretics, and exhorted the Romans not to breed
up their children thereunto. This hatred of Learning must needs proceed either
from ignorance, for scientia neminem habet inimicum nisi ignorantem: Or from
Malice, Aug. de civ. Dei l 18. c 52. Confess l 8. c. 5. Greg Naz. orat. 1.
and a desire to have Religion betrayed; (and therefore it is reckoned amongst
the persecutions of the Church, that Julian prohibited the children of
Christians to be trained up in the Schools of Learning:) Or from Avarice, and
out of a sacrilegious desire to devour those Revenues wherewith the bounty of
Benefactors has from time to time endowed the Schools of Learning. I shall not
spend time to confute so ignorant an absurdity. Aret. Problem. loc. 151.
Ar^tius a learned Protestant has fully done it to my hand. But I cannot but
take notice of it, as doubtless a calumny cast upon Carolostadius and
Melanchton, Sarius Comment. rerum in ^be gesta^um* Ann^ 1522. p. 116.
as if they taught the Youth at Wittenberg to cast off all Philosophy and
Humane Learning, having been themselves so taught by Luther, and that they
turned to Mechanic employments, one to Husbandry, the other to the Art of
Baking, and that thereupon many young men did burn their Books of Liberal Arts,
and betook themselves to Manufactures. But how honorably both Luther and
Melanchton thought of Humane Learning in it self (though they might inveigh
against the abuse of it in Popish Academies) is by learned men so abundantly
cleared out of their own practice and Writings, Baldw. Cas. consc. l 4. c. 2
cas 9. D. Arrow. orat. 3 An^i ^e^g.
that I shall not need add any more in their vindication.

Thirdly, We must get our Learning seasoned with Holiness, else it will not
serve us to repress any temptation. Great Learning will consist with monstrous
Wickedness. Who more learned then the Scribes and Pharisees, and who more
graceless, Joh. 7.48.
and more bitter enemies to the doctrine of Salvation? Who more learned then
the Athenian Philosophers, and who greater deriders of the Apostles Preaching?
Act. 17 32.
Never had Christian Religion more bitter Enemies then Celsus, Porphyrie,
Julian, Libanius, and the like great Professors of Humane Learning. None do the
Devil more service in his opposition to the Church of God, then men of great
parts, that are enemies to Godliness. A proud Heart, and a learned Brain, are
Satan's Warehouses, and Armories, the Forge where he shapeth all his Cyclopical
Weapons against divine Truth. The Egyptians here are noted for wise men, and
yet they were of all others the most sottish Idolaters; insomuch that other
Idolaters derided them for theirs, as we find in Iuvenal; Oppida t^ta canem
venerantur, nemo Dianam. Iuvenal. Satyr. lib. 5.

O sanctas gentes quibus hac nascuntur in hortis Numina!


Though therefore we must covet the best gifts, yet we must still remember
there is a more excellent way; and consider if the knowledge of the wisdom of
Egppt be so honorable, how glorious is the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ, in comparison whereof all other knowledge is loss and dung? Si
tanti-vitrum, quanti veram margaritam? If a glass jewel be so valuable, how
excellent is an inestimable Pearl?

Themistocles though he was ignorant of Music, Aug. ep. 36. Quid mihi pro
derat ingenium per illas doctrinas agile, cum def^rmiter and sa^rilega turpi
tudine in doctrina pietatis errarem! Aug confess. l. 4. c. 16. lib. 1* c. 8.
yet knew how to govern a State; and a Believer, though he be ignorant of all
other learning, yet by the Knowledge of Christ will be a blessed man, whereas
all the learning in the World, without this, will leave a man miserable. To
know the whole Creation, and to be ignorant of the Creator; to know all
Histories and Antiquities, and to be unacquainted with our own hearts; to be
good Logicians to other purposes, and in the mean time to be cheated by Satan
with Paralogisms in the business of our own Salvation; To be powerful Orators
with Men, and never to prevail with God; To know the constellations, motions,
and influences of heavenly Bodies, and have still unheavenly Souls; To know
exactly the Laws of men, and be ignorant and rebellious against the Laws of
God; To abound with worldly Wisdom, and be destitute of the fear of God, which
makes wise to salvation, is all but a better kind of refined misery; the
Devils have much more then all this comes to, and yet are damned. We must
therefore study to improve our Learning unto the use and furtherance of
holiness, to better our minds, to order our affections, to civilize our
manners, to reform our lives, to adorn and render our profession the more
amiable, to consecrate all our other endowments as spoils unto Christ, to lay
our Crowns at his feet, and make all our other abilities and acquirements
Handmaids unto his glory. When Learning is thus a servant unto godliness,
godliness will be an honor unto Learning.

Fourthly, Since Learning is so excellent an Endowment, The Teachers of it
ought to be had in great Honor. Quis enim ^irtutem amplectitur ipsam. Praemia
si tollas? Iuven. Sat. 10.
And I scarce know a greater defect in this Nation, then the want of such
encouragement and maintenance as might render the Calling of a Schoolmaster so
honorable, as men of great Learning might be invited unto that Service. Errors
in the first concoction, are not mended in the second, what is lost in the
School, is hardly ever fully recovered in the University. And by how much the
fewer men of great worth and parts are employed in that service, by so much the
more should the loss of rare and worthy men in that way be bewailed by us. And
certainly were they while we enjoy them so honored as they should be, they
would be as much lamented when we are deprived of them. We read of the
honorable Interment which Augustus gave unto his Master. Dion. lib. 48. p. 376.
Iul. Capital. Auson. in G^at. Act. Homer. Iliad. 9.
Of an honorable Statue with M. Antoninus Philosophus erected unto his.
Gratianus the Emperor made Ansonius his Master Consul: and Achilles made his a
fellow-sharer with him in his own honor. Cod. l. 10. tit. 15
And we read in the Imperial Law, that Learned Grammarians, after they had
taught diligently for Twenty years, had special honor conferred upon them, and
were numbered amongst those who were Vica^iae dignitatis.

What necessity there is to have the minds and manners of Children formed and
seasoned, Vid. Qui^til. l. ^ cap. 1, 2.
while they are pliant and ductile, before license break out into pride and
luxury, before lust grows headstrong and intractable, while they are a Rasa
tabula, tender trees, and capable of shaping, we need not to be told. Philo de
praeir. and paen.
Omnium hominum gravida est anima, said Philo, and want Masters, as Midwives to
shape and fashion the Offspring of them: And even Heathen men have complained
of the carelessness and neglect of Parents in this particular. Aelian. var^
hist. l^ 12. Diog. Laert. l. 6.
Diogenes was wont to say that a man were better be some men's Sheep then their
Son; the care of their Cattle being greater then of their Children. If then you
set a value upon your Children, you ought accordingly to prize religious and
learned Instructors of them, and to take care to put them under such. For if
Grammar Schools had everywhere holy and learned men set over them, not only
the Brains but the Souls of Children might be there enriched, and the work both
of Learning and of Conversion and grace be timely wrought in them.

Great was the happiness of this City in this particular, while it enjoyed this
Worthy man, and great the loss in being deprived of him; For though through
Gods goodness there be many excellent men remaining, out of whom some
reparation may be made of so great a damage; yet still I look on the departure
of this man, as if the middle and most precious Stone in a rich Jewel should
drop out, which though many others remain in, cannot but be greatly missed, and
bewailed.

Moses was unto the people of Israel, Poedagogus ad Christum, as the Apostle
speaks of the Law, Gal. 3.25. and of other Teachers, 1 Cor. 4.15. And although
he were so great a man, as no other Prophet (much less ordinary person) could
parallel, Numb. 12.6, 7, 8. yet there may be resemblance where there is not
equality.

Give me leave to make the comparison in several particulars; Three of which we
have in the Text, Moses was Learned and Mighty in word and deed, in which
Three, consists the excellency of a Teacher, and therefore the same is noted
of Christ the great Prophet of the Church, Luke 24.19. Act. 1.1. Learning
qualifieth the Teacher; Word and Work, Doctrine and Life, Institution and
Example leads and directs the Scholar. And so Homer describes Phaenix the
Master and Instructor of Achilles, Homer. Iliad. 9.
(...).

First, Our dear Brother was a Learned man, Learned in the whole Body of
Learning; not only an excellent Linguist and Grammarian, Historian,
Cosmographer, Artist, but a most judicious Divine, and a great Antiquary in the
most memorable things of this Nation. Into whatsoever parts of the Land he
traveled, he was able to refresh and to instruct his Fellow-travellers in the
most remarkable particulars of every Country. Pausanias was not more accurate
in the description of Greece, then he of England. And I have heard, that he had
it sometimes in his thoughts to have published some thing in this kind. He was
a man of a solid Judgment; he always spoke e sulco pectoris, and I have, not
without very great satisfaction, heard him give his Notions upon difficult
places of Scripture, and Arguments of Divinity in ordinary discourse, as if he
had elaborately studied them.

Secondly, He was mighty in Word, able out of a full Treasury, and Storehouse
of Learning, to bring forth both new and old. I never knew any learned subject
spoken of in his company, wherein he was not able most dexterously to deliver
his opinion. He was a man of a copious Discourse, but withal so solid and
judicious as did ever delight his auditors, never weary them. As Livie said of
Cato, Natum ad id diceres quodcunque ageret, we may say of him, Doctum in hoc
uno crederes, quodcunque diceret.

Thirdly, He was as Moses, a Worker as well as a Speaker, he was not a barren
Fig Tree, that had leaves without fruit; nor a tinckling Cimbale, noise without
love; he taught by his Life as well as by his Learning. Verbis tantum
philosophari non est doctoris sed histrionis, as he said; and dicta factis
deficientibus erubescunt, Tertul. de patientia c. 1.
says Tertullian. And indeed he was a man of fixed and resolved honesty, and
wondered in his sickness what men did learn Christianity for, if it were not in
every condition to practice it, and adorn the profession of it. Time was, when
fearing whether his conscience and his Employment would consist together, he
put himself to much pain and trouble to resign the place, which he then held in
the City of Gloucester. For the times were then such, that many durst not take
his resignation, till at last he met with a worthy Gentleman, who feared no
man's displeasure in doing that which he knew was his duty.

Fourthly, He was as Moses, a patient man; patient in his Business, Moses was
patient in his Judicature from morning to evening, Exodus 18.13. and he patient
in his School in like manner. Patient in his sufferings, willingly with Moses
bearing the reproach of Christ, and not fearing the wrath of any man in
comparison of the reverence he did bear to his own Conscience. Patient in
sickness, composing himself with as an unshaken confidence to dye, as in time
of health he would have gone about any other business.

Fifthly, He was as Moses, a faithful man, Heb. 3.5. most exactly answerable to
the Trust of his place: Opprimi potius onere officii maluit, quam illud
deponere, as once Tully spoke. It was hardly possible for any friend by any
importunity to draw him from a most punctual observation of timely attendance
upon the duties of his place. And so tenderly fearful was he of miscarriage
herein, and so sensible of any the least defect, that in a former sickness he
desired, if he should then have died, to have been buried at the School door,
in regard he had in his ministration there come short of the duties which he
owed unto the School. And this we shall ever find true, the more active, able,
conscientions, faithful, any are in discharge of duty, the more humble, the
more jealous, the more fearful they are of their coming short of it. The
fullest and best ears of corn hang lowest toward the ground; and so those men
that are fullest of worth, are most humble, and apprehensive of their own
failings.

Sixthly* He was as Moses, a constant, resolved, steady man. Moses would not
bate Pharaoh an Hoof, kept close to every tittle of his Commission, Exodus* 10.9,
26. So was he punctual and unmovable from honest principles. Vir Rigidae
innocentiae, as Livy said of Cato. He was of Polemo his judgment in this point,
Debere, inesse quand^m mo^ibus contumaciam, Diog. Laeril. 4.
that men having proved all things should hold fast the best, and be
pertinacious in goodness.

Seventhly, He was as Moses, a wise man; Moses was often put to the use of his
wisdom to compose the distempers of a froward people; and a masculine Prudence
is requisite to tame and calm the wild and unswaied humors of young children.
It is noted as a special piece of Socrates his wisdom, that he did by his
institution fix and reduce the wandering and vicious inclinations of
Alcib^ades. Vid. Greg. Tholos. de Repub. l. 15. c 1.
I might go on in this parallel, and instance in the Authority, Gravity,
Meekness and Zeal for the truth, which were observeable in this our dear
friend, as they were eminent in Moses. But I shall add only this one thing
more, The great care which he had of the School at his last, that there might
be an able Successor chosen. Of Moses his care in this particular we read,
Numb. 27.15, 16, 17. And this good man the evening before he died with great
earnestness commended it to the Company, by a member thereof, who came to visit
him, that they should use their uttermost wisdom and care to choose an able,
learned, religious, and orthodox man into the place, naming one of whose
fitness, both he, and the Company, and School had had before great experience.
And so much were they pleased to honor the judgment and integrity of this
worthy man, that presently after his death they pitched upon an excellent
learned man whom he had so providently commended unto them.

I might add one parallel more, in the death of this good man to Moses. The
Lord bid Moses go up to the Mount and dye, Deuteronomy. 32.49, 50. and he did so,
Deuteronomy. 34.1.5. This worthy Friend of mine, the Friday and Saturday before his
own Fit, was pleased to visit me, lying at that time under a sore fit of the
Stone. It pleased the Lord the Monday following to bring a like Fit upon him,
and sending to enquire of his condition, he sent me word how it was with him,
and that he looked on this Fit as a Messenger of death from God unto him. And
accordingly though in obedience to Gods appointment, he made use of means, yet
he still insisted upon it, that his time of dissolution was now come, and
accordingly, with great composedness and resolvedness of spirit, waited for
death as a man does for a loving friend whom he is willing to embrace. I assure
my self that he had with Moses a sight of Canaan, which made him so undauntedly
look death in the face.

I shall conclude with that Exhortation, Let us go up to the Mount, and by
faith look into our heavenly Country; let us have our eyes fastened upon Christ
our Salvation, and then we may with old Simeon sing our Nunc Dimittis; with the
Apostle be willing to depart and to be with Christ, which is best of all; and
with Moses die not only patiently but obediently, as knowing that we have a
City which has foundations made without hands, eternal in the Heavens, whose
Builder and Maker is God.

FINIS.

