A DISCOURSE OF THE VANITY OF THE CREATURE

By a Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock for Richard Royston, Bookseller to the Kings
Most Excellent Majesty, 1673.

To speak of nothing, is no good motive to attention; yet, to offer you a
Discourse of less than nothing, may invite your ears, whilst Curiosity may
raise an expectation; and that may make you tarry to hear. What this may be,
you will find it in my Text.
Ecclesiastes 1. Verse. 2. Vanity of Vanities, (says the Preacher) Vanity of
Vanities, all is Vanity.


THE Text is a description of all worldy things; there is not any thing which
falls not under this: the Hebrew has it, most vain vanity; all the crested
Plumes of Honor, all the Treasures of the Universe, with all the delights and
pleasures of it, extended and summed up by a most able and most experienced
Accomptant, amount unto no more than Vanity of vanities (says the Preacher,)
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

Observable in the words are, first an Assertion, Vanity of vanities.

Secondly, The Assertor (says the Preacher.)

Thirdly, The duplication of the Assertion, Vanity of Vanities.

Fourthly, The Universality of the Assertion, All is Vanity.

But is not Man, at leastwise, the great Men of the Earth, excepted? Are not
Kings and Rulers of the Earth, whose pompous Trains and numerous Attendance,
striking awe and terror in the Beholders, serious things? And if single
persons be not, are not Armies with Banners terrible? Are not the Nations of
the Earth, when united, great and considerable? And if all these things were
not so, is not the flux of Mankind the propagation of Ages to come?
Immortality, which is denied to persons, yet granted to the kind, a noble and
magnificent thing? Some one might think thus: Did not a King inspired with a
divine Oracle say, That every man in his best estate is altogether vanity? not
only some men, but every man; not only every man in a low condition, but in his
best estate; not only in respect of mutable dependencies, which make bright
Fortunes britler, but altogether vanity. As for the heaps of Mankind, they
serve but for their own oppression, and are like those in throngs, where every
one strives to be foremost, although they know the most must come behind; and
what is this Combination of men but a great bubble? All the Inhabitants of the
Dan. 4. 35.
Earth are reputed as nothing: all Nations Esa. 40. 17.
before God are as nothing, and they are accounted to him less than nothing and
vanity; they are altogether lighter than vanity; and then what is it but to be
less than nothing, and that is vanity. Negation of a Being is in silent
darkness, but vanity is a cheat, a counterfeit of a Being which is not: Why
will thou set thy heart upon that Psalm. 62. 7.
which is not? And as to the immortality annexed to the kind, what is it but
the production of mortality, since the generation of one must be the corruption
of another, and so no otherwise can pretend to a notion of immortality but by
perpetuating death? And if the Maxim be true, The whole Nature of the Species
is preserved in the Individual of the kind; the Species or kind may be said to
dye when the Individual does, and so properly would, were there not others to
support that notion: and this is all that Chimerical Immortality. When Xerxes
mustered his numerous Army of five hundred thousand men, (if we believe
Herodotus) it is said he wept upon the consideration of their approaching
Funerals, which was to be dispatched, as to every member thereof, within one
Century, though it fell out much sooner: whereby it appeared, that there was no
force comparable to that of death, which swept them all away.

We shall now descend to examine the words more particularly in respect of the
Honors, Treasures, and Pleasures of this life, and search if either of these
can evade from this severe censure of Solomon. Vanity is an appearance of
something which is not; Honor has the Trappings of this World, it commands
the caps and knees of men, it has the attendances and dependencies of Suitors
and Followers; it has the breath and applause of multitudes; when Herod
speaks, It is the voice of God and not of man, cries the people. The Descents
and Genealogies of some have been boasted, and endeavored to be propagated
even beyond Mankind. Julius Caesar said that by his Fathers side he was derived
from Kings, by his Mother from the Gods; and how many besides Hercules and
Achilles have pretended to such Lineage? The Emperors of Constantinople, as to
their Extraction, were held so Noble, that it was said of them, they were all
engendered of Purple, forgetting the seat we have in the womb, inter sterous and
urinam. Of which Pliny says, Fo^dius sterquilinium nusquam videtur; yet must
all this be forgotten, and by the vain, so well as foolish pride of man, claim
must be laid to Divinity it self. So Alexander the Great feigned himself
greater by an extraction from Jupiter, and through the flattery of the Priests
of Jupiter Hammon must be owned as his Off spring. A sorry Clear^us of Pontus
would be no less than Jupiter; Latian Ulysses, to encounter the Argument of
Ajax, who pretended a descent on the one side from the Gods, asserts himself on
both sides to be so descended, Deus est in utroque parente.

Volumes may be made in summing the Pretenders to this kind of Poetical
Heraldry; I shall only refer these extravagant Pretenders to what all of them
have now felt, being a better record of the descent of men; I have said to
corruption Job 17. 14.
thou art my father, and to the worm thou art my mother. And as there is a
vanity in these impossible pretenses above mentioned, so is there in the
Pageantry of the Genealogies among men. The ancient Britains must have no less
Founder of their Race than Brutus the Trojan, if Geffrey of Monmouth may be
believed, and single persons would strive to be of kin to some famous person or
house by the most evident conclusions of truth and reason, not remembering the
Poet herein to be a Prophet; to wit, Majorum primus quisquis fuit ille tuarum,
aut pastor fuit, aut alius quem dicere nolo; and this is vanity in Mood without
a Figure, but when we shall see this improved to a challenge and belief of
Immortality, he, as Ptolomy Philadelphos said, that he had found the way to
live always upon earth. We may then think Solomon's multiplication very proper,
as to these things; Vanity of vanities.

Now as some men boast of their descent, though our bodies are made but of a
mud wall, and all Nations are made of one blood, and all persons descended from
one man, so others pretend to honor with their actions by conquering Kingdoms,
destroying Armies, making many wretched, multiplying the number of the dead;
burning Cities, destroying houses, using cruelties, changing Governments,
trampling down Laws, thinking they have much honor when they have much power,
and are then truly great when they have made such little; but what is this more
than to be Butchers of men? Is it brave to exercise ferine cruelty on our
fellow Creatures? Is it a blessed condition to make others wretched? to use the
natural force, common with beasts, and leave the moral, proper to man? Can it
be thought brave to be a great Thief (as the Pirate told Alexander) and
infamous to be a little one? Is not the Sword bloody enough, unless it kill
whole Nations? and must glory be acquired by the destruction of States? How
much better were it said of Pericles the Athenian, surnamed Olympius, which
title, some say, was given him for his supereminent eloquence. Other Writers,
for this, that being long a powerful man in Athens, he never abused his power
so far, as to cause any Citizen to wear a black Gown; where then is the honor
of these Executioners of the World, these general Hangmen and Butchers of
Mankind? Is not that office held ignominious among men; albeit these are
usually the Ministers of Justice, they of injustice? Does the Crown endure to
all generations? Are they not often made the Footstools of Power, who had
domineered in the Throne over others? Is not History full of the variety and
calamity of Princes? How often they that have reigned over others, have been
made subject to the vilest death by others? How often Families have been thrown
out as well as Princes from their Thrones? and how the forms of Governments
themselves have changed, and yet must the Map of their Magnificence be drawn
out with the purple gore and blood of Mankind? Is it bravery to make the whole
Earth a Golgotha, and to pave the Highways with dead men's Skulls? to turn
fenced Cities into ruinous heaps, and to endeavor, as far as they can, to
destroy the Works of God, by erecting those of the Devil, whilst they seek to
enravle this beauteous Frame, and to introduce the old Chaos? If these crested
Plumes, swollen up with Cruelty and Carnage, have any pretense to Honor, and
if those Arms, so destructive to Mankind, must be enrolled in the Heraldry of
Fame, and painted out in Shields, I hope no sober mind can deny but this ought
to be the Motto, Vanity of vanities.

And as in the empty bubbles of Honor, the puff-pastes of the pride of men,
nothing is found but vanity, humane honor not being in the honored, but in
the honoring, and so the great Potentates borrow their splendor from the
meanest Peasants and Vassals of them; so is vanity inscribed on all the
Treasures of the Earth; for what is gold and silver but white and red Clay,
made estimable only by the folly and covetousness of men? What is there in the
Pearls and precious Stones of the World more than in Beads and the Shells of
Fishes, which some Indians are willing to purchase with expense of any the
former, amongst us accounted valuable? What is the difference between a Jewel
and its counterfeit, but our uneven estimation? and what good is in all these,
but from the vain conceits and common follies of mankind? It Is reported of the
Emperor Tiberius, that he hanged an Artist who had made Glass to endure the
stroke of the Hammer, ne aurum prae vitra vilesceret, lest gold should lose its
estimation; so careful was this Prince of the reputation of that metal, I need
not say cruel or vain, both which the execution manifests.

There was a Spanish Merchant, who, observing what some Jewellers had gained by
selling of Jewels, sold all the Land and Goods he had to buy some; on the
evening following, when he went to bed, he was disturbed with this anxious
thought (which kept him that night sleepless) what if men should return to
their wits, and value these Pebbles at their true worth (which is nothing) I
were then undone. This tormented him till he had sold away what he so greedily
had purchased; and did men consider the vanity of Apparel, stripped off from the
backs of Birds, and Beasts, and creeping Worms, who can but think every Plume
of Feathers and every gaudy Dress to be all over Vanity, whilst we, wrapped up
in the Skins of Beasts, think our selves more than men, and having stripped all
Animals and Vegetables for Clothing, we prick up our selves and look big, as
if thus apparelled, we triumphed over the whole Creation; forgetting our
Wardrobes are filled with Moths, the devourer of all this Bravery, and not
remembering the rust which is the Canker of our valued Metals, and all these
laid up in places where thieves may break through and steal, and so deprive us
of all those Treasures, which are hardly acquired with great difficulty,
preserved in solicitude of mind, and lost with anguish and trouble of spirit,
riches make themselves wings and fly away; they are styled uncertain riches,
riches Job 20. 15.
often swallowed down and vomited up again; often heaping up riches, and knows
not who shall gather them, riches are not Prove. 27. 24.
for ever, and yet for all this man's vain eye is not satisfied with riches,
they are uncertain riches, therefore we are advised not to trust in them, and
they are such things as are corrupt, and garments moth-eaten; what then are
these things summed up, but truly nothing or something worse than that; that
have an appearance of Treasure, and are not so; that have an appearance of
Bravery, as the triangular Glass has of colors, yet indeed have none, that
serve only to deceive, to abuse, and to undo us; wherefore we may safely say of
these, as the Poet did of Parentage, -- Vix ea nostra voco.
and may label the whole Inventory of these things with the Proposition in the
Text, Vanity of vanities.

But what if riches be vain, must pleasures be so, those brisk entertainments
of Nature, the choice delights of the Sons of men? Were not the Cinque Ports of
the Senses made to entertain this, and is the satisfaction of them to no
purpose? Did not the Epicureans hold the chief good to be in pleasure? and
could such Learned men mistake nothing for a superlative Being? Who will show
us any good, is the voice of Nature, and if pleasure be not so, what is? Does
not our Preacher say in this Book; Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant
thing it is for the Eccl. 11. 7.
eyes to behold the Sun. Was it not pleasant to behold Solomon in his Royalty,
and is it not so to see the Lillies in the field better clothed than he, when
the Spring has made the Earth like the Garden of Eden, decked with all things
sightly and comely, except the Tree of Life, and is the partaking of this rich
Carpet, spread by the Divinity for our admiration and content, a vanity? Is not
beauty a real good? the heart of man loves nothing better; it is that which
triumphed over the strength of Sampson, the holiness of David, the wisdom of
Solomon, that which is stronger than Wine, or a King, is that Vanity? What are
harmonious Sounds, the choice Compositions in Music, those ravishing Airs,
which not only put Humanes in a rapture, but have a power to charm evil
Spirits, and to promote the effusion of the good; are not these valuable, who
could withstand the voices of these Sirens, who had ears, whose sweet chanting
drew more effectually the hearers to them, than the Loadstone Iron? these
running upon the nimble wings of their will, that dull in moving without these,
and is the touch and taste less considerable? Philoxenus wished his throat to
have the length of a Cranes, that so the pleasure of a taste might be produced,
and what the blandishment of the first stroke of these pleasures did not
effect, the lengthening of them might increase. Are those Perfumes made by
Nature, raised by Art empty things, which sill the nostrils with delight and
pleasure? And if these be not great things, sure the conversation of the witty
are? Who would not hear the Eloquent longer than they could speak, and to
converse with the wise? Wisdom makes a man's face to shine, and the hardness of
his face shall be changed. Are not those Verses valuable, which have been
esteemed more worth than a Crown? Are not their handsome addresses and
expressions of such a tincture, as seem to threaten Time to do its worst, and
yet subsist, when rust has eaten out the Brass Statues, Water and Air consumed
Marble masses, yet these seem too hard for Time to chew, and seem to have a
duration beyond the measure of it; if this be not great, what is? May not mirth
be called a real good, and those Festivities in discourse, which make men
forget sorrow valuable? A Feast is made for laughter, says the Preacher
himself; but, Alas! are Eccles. 7. 19.
not our senses subject to mistakes? are not their pleasures quickly transient?
The pleasures of them are but points, the displeasures of them Maps and Cards;
we have pleasure by grains, but pain by pounds; the pleasure of them are
bounded by saticty, the pains of them infinite: The eye is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear with hearing, and if the light be pleasant to the eyes; If
a man live many Eccles. 11. 8.
years, and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the days of darkness, for
they shall be many. All that comes is vanity: and as for the Lillies of the
field, they are made the examples of our frailty. All flesh is grass, and all
the glory thereof as the flowers of the field, in the morning it is fresh and
growing, in the evening cut down and withers. Does not Winter, as a rough
attendant, take off the flourishing Carpet spread there by Summer, and give
deaths stroke to all the flourishing verdure of the field, and make the glory
thereof vanish? And what was Solomon's bravery, which could not equal one simple
Flower, nor apparel himself like it? How do these Vegetables vanish and expire,
not only in our hands, but on the stalks that bear them. Miraber celerem
fugitiva aetate ruinam,
Et dum nascuntur consenuisse rosas.


And for Solomon's bravery, when at the Psalm. 39. 6.
best, he walked but as every man does, in a vain show; and as for beauty, the
Preacher in my Text, who had experience of a thousand of them, pronounces that
vain. What if the heart of man loves much, The Lord knows the thoughts Prove.
31. 30. 1 Cor. 3. 20.
of the wise to be vain. And if the thoughts of the wise be so, we need not
appeal to those fools. What is that glittering earth, that thin appearance
being but skindeep, which men do so much dote on? how sudden do diseases, and
how certainly does time make it to appear vain; nay, did men inquire, they
might often receive more mortifications from the very objects they admire. And
by how much it is less reasonable it should, by so much it will trouble
discerning men to see that which is so little to have an influence so great,
which yet proceeds not from the worth in it self in the examples instance, but
by the weakness contracted by the sin of Adam, whereby mankind is apt to
mistake the least appearance of good for the greatest; and, as Swine, delight
to wallow even in the dirt and mire, as most suitable to sinful inclinations,
and then it is not the Woman that reigns but the sin; it is not the Fly on the
Coach-wheel that raises all this dust, but these trotting Lusts, which draw
men to perdition; and as the eye is not satisfied with seeing, so the ear is
not with hearing, unless Eccles. 1. 8.
it be with things that displease us. Sweet Sounds dye as soon as brought
forth, and as the Swan warble out their own Elegies: and if a place be so
favorable as to yield an Echo to them, it is all, and by a long winged
expression seem to make the Epitaph to the dying sound; and though David's
Music seemed sometimes to relieve Saul, yet was the Devil too hard for the
Harp, which had been too weak a Buckler to have saved David from Saul's Javelin,
had not an overruling hand directed Saul to miss his mark. 1 Samuel 18. 11.
And for Elisha's prophesying, excited by a Minstrel, it is probable it was none
of the best Instruments, which may be conceived by the Prophets indifferency in
calling for any, not making choice of consorts or persons.

And for the Syrene voices, they are beholden to the Poets for improving them,
who were willing to support the defects of Nature by their Romantic
supplements. As to the pleasures of the touch or taste, how short are they to
the opposites of them? pleasures are feeble, pain forcible, the one momentary,
the other fixed. And for Philoxenus his wish, it reaches no farther than to
make a Glurton; when could he have perpetual appetite and constant food to
entertain it? 'twould be so far from the felicity, that it might parallel the
Poetical Fiction of Tantalus his torment in Hell, who was to have desirable
Fruits hang near his lips, but was not able to touch them. For what is the
difference between not feeding and not silling. And as for Perfume, besides the
unhealthiness of many of them, what serve they for but to make ill smells more
odious. And as for witty Conversation, what is it but a froth which makes much
show, but has little substance. And for the wise, how often are they taken Job
11. 12.
in their own craft? Vain man would be Job 5. 13.
wise, though he be born as a wild Asses Colt. God respects not any that are
wise in heart, who turns the wise man backward. Every man is brutish by his
Jer. 51. 17. Job 37. 24.
own knowledge. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom.

How rightly did old Socrates pronounce nullity of wisdom upon all Mankind,
when being declared by the Oracle to be the wisest man of Greece, professed
Isa. 44. 25.
that he did only know this, which other brainsick and conceited men did not,
That he knew nothing; and now where is the wisdom of the wise, where is the
Scribe, 1 Cor. 3. 20.
where is the disputer of this world? The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise,
that they are vain. Even in those Verses, which the folly of some men have put
too great a price on, what is their matter but words, Gibberish by common
consent made intelligible? and if their duration add to their commendation,
sin, cruelty and many enormous crimes can pretend to a lasting, even beyond
these. What is there in that Ode of Horace, Donec gratus eram tibi, which
Scaliger prefers before the Crown of Persia, but a recantation of the swerving
of its affection? And when we have extracted by the greatest curiosity with our
most earnest industry, all that can be gathered from the wandering wits of men,
we may say with the Poet,

-- Vox and praeterea nihil. And as to mirth, ye have an answer of the
Preacher; I have said of laughter it is madness, and of mirth, what do thou?
as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is laughter of a fool, this also is
vanity. So as the pain we take to obtain pleasure is abundantly out-weighed by
the pains we suffer afterward for it; man wearieth himself for that which does
not profit him: and as the Satyrist said of the Patricians in his time, whom
years had made gray and not grave; Et nostrum istic vivere triste vidimus,
Et nucibus facimus quaecunque relictis.
So as when we have labored and spent our substance to grasp that which we
think good; these humane things, like Air and Apparitions, slip from us, and so
we embrace a Cloud instead of Juno, and inherit only the wind, and in our
embraces the East wind, which blows away all these things, leaving only behind
the account of them, which is, Vanity of vanities; which leads me to the next
particular, the Assertor, says the Preacher.

It was said long since, that the World was happy when Kings were Philosophers,
or Philosophers Kings; and should we not think the World would be holy, when
Preachers were Kings, or Kings Preachers? Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness
to a World hard of hearing, and here we have in the Text a King that is a
Preacher, I the Preacher was Isa. 1. 12.
King over Israel in Jerusalem. Kings are not usually Prophets nor Declamours
against those things which Courts do nurse; yet there we have a King preaching,
a King wiser than other sons of men, Solomon whose Wisdom the Queen of Sheba
came so far to hear. Who would not hear such a Preacher? who would not give an
attentive ear and an obedient heart to what King Solomon said, Yet behold a
greater than Solomon is here. For the same divine Spirit, which of old inspired
the Prophets, and afterward the Apostles, and which preached to the old World
in the Patriarch Noah, this divine 1 Per. 18, 19, 20.
Spirit by Solomon speaking; who is so hard of hearing, that will not hear
this? For, if the words spoken by Angels were steadfast, how should this spoken
by the Spirit of Christ be looked on? so as we may truly say, not only said the
Preacher, but thus says the Lord, Vanity of vanities, Vanity of vanities;
which brings me to the next Particular, the Duplication of the Assertion.

When Pharoahs dream was doubled, Joseph told him, it was because the thing was
established; divine Echoes are always significant, and as always they show the
certainty, so usually the importance by a repetition. Pythagoras offered a
Hecatom for the duplication of the Cube; of how much greater value is this
doubling of the Preacher, not terminated in a superficial measuring of the
outsides of bodies, but giving a true account of the intrinsic Nature, not
only of humane bodies, but of worldly actions also? Vehement asseverations are
made by duplications, Verily, verily, I say unto you. Christ foretold Peter
before the Cock should crow twice, he should deny him thrice; and the
duplication of the Cocks voice was a seasonable Monitor of the Apostles fault,
and to his repentance also. A single expression seems not enough to proclaim
the vanity of worldly things, it must be ingeminated, God speaks once yea
twice, and man perceives it not; in a Dream, in a Vision of the night, when
deep sleep falls upon men; but here he speaks to men awake, and doubleth
what he says, Vanity of vanities, Vanity of vanities: and so I descend to the
last Particular, the Universality of the Assertion, All is vanity.

That some things of the World are vain and illusory, scarce any will deny;
Children are cozened with Toys, men with Oaths Lisander said of old; Heraclitus
wept, Democritus laughed at the vain courses held by men, and therefore were
thought mad, by those that indeed were little better; as sober persons will be
looked upon in Bedlam amongst the distracted. Mechanical Arts would not take it
well to be counted vain; the Silver-Smiths at Ephesus held their crafts
valuable, and rather than they should be in danger, would put all in an uproar;
and canonize the Fable of Diana's Image as fallen from Jupiter, with a Great is
the Diana of the Ephesians. Liberal Arts triumph as serious things; yet what is
the Grammar but canting by Rule? What is Rhetoric but a Cadens of words
chiming handsomely in the ear? What is Logic but a delfick Sword, which may be
bent this way or that, and arm men by mistaking Sophistry for Truth? How
defective is Astronomy, which cannot teach us certainly, whether the Sun move
or stand? How imperfect is Geometry, that cannot measure the distance between
us and the Celestial bodies, nor give the exact proportion between a right Line
and a crooked? And how little is Arithmetic, that cannot find a number to the
defects of Nature? That which is wanting Eccles. 1. 15.
cannot be numbered. And what is Music but a medly of Concords and Discords
thrown on heaps, the judgment of which is as various as the Auditors? Hence
Midas preferred Pans Whistle to Apollo's Viol; for what if Arts be vain, is not
Physic divine, that can restore that which is near to death to health again?
Alas! what are all Medicines, when rightly placed and prosperously succeed, but
small differings of approaching death? Meat for the belly, and the belly for
meat, God shall destroy both it and them. The Physician must die as well as his
Patient, the caviling Lawyer as well as the cozened Client, the Line is drawn
over all worldly things by the unerring Pencil, nothing is excepted; Vanity of
vanities, (says the Preacher) all is vanity.

This Position may be improved to cast into the Scale of the Sanctuary all
worldly things, and that will inform us how light, how empty these are. A
single vanity is not sufficient to express it, you have a Gradation, Vanity of
vanities.

Secondly, It points what estimation we should have of these things: no other
than of Vanities, and that by Gradation, Vanity of vanities. The Assertor gives
us the certainty of the Assertion; it is not the saying of an ignorant man; nor
is it said probably or problematically, but positively, says the Preacher,
said he who had Wisdom above all Mortals. But this is not all, says he, who is
the Wisdom of God, by the Pen of Solomon, who made all Mortals, so as this
truth is not to be doubted, being uttered by the God of Truth, Vanity of
vanities, Vanity of vanities (says the Preacher.)

From the Duplication we may draw the importance of the truth as well as the
certainty thereof; and therefore we should be doubly diligent to awaken our
hearts, to quell the inordinate love of earthly things, to see the emptiness
and nothingness of them lively expressed in the twice vanity thereof; to
remember to abstain from those fleshly vanities which fight against the soul;
to double the files of our thoughts, and fortify our imaginations against
being carried away with the trifles and dotages of this World, with the empty
Pomps and petty Pageantry of Wax and Parchment, of the fading breaths and false
acclamations of men, or with fleeting things, which sometimes attend a wasting
life, the necessary Ushers to a certain death; to know we are here as strangers
and pilgrims, travelers, not dwellers, such as death will draw from our
houses, or adversity them from us; to wind up our bottom upon stable things,
to see the difference between counterfeit Ware and true Riches, between worldly
Pelf and everlasting Righteousness, between the deceit of appearances and
reality of good, between walking in a vain show, and waiting for a new Heaven
and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.

From the Universality of the Assertion we may learn, that it is not one or two
particular things which are Vanity; the whole System of worldly things, the
Creature it self is subject to vanity, and groaneth under the bondage of
corruption: So that it is not this or that, but all is vanity; and not singly
so, but in gradation, Vanity of vanities. Whatsoever good appears is momentany
and unsatisfactory; whence it is, that humane desires hunt after varieties,
inidentities, and please themselves with somewhat new, though there be nothing
so but what number makes. Pliny speaks of some Inhabitants in Asia, who not
wearied with adversity, but surfeited with prosperities of this life, tired
with the repetition of earthly things, cast themselves into the Sea to avoid an
irksom life, which doing the same things so many thousand times over and over,
make that to them intolerable, which most of Mankind do esteem desirable. Where
then should we place our thoughts, seeing nothing is to be found here but
Vanity of vanities; but on that City which has foundation, whose builder and
maker is God. That leaving the pursuit of these earthly trifles, we may be
mortified, not only toward all evil, but toward all earthly things, that so
ascending in our thoughts, and aspiring by our endeavors to surmount this
World, and to get the ascendant as to our appetites toward these transitory
things, we may arrive at that blessed Region, where there is no Time but
Eternity, no Accurant but Felicity, no Change but Perpetuity, and where there
is no Vanity but a blessed Stability, where an infinite good shall
everlastingly entertain such as have wisely judged, and righteously walked in
this World, with those Joys that are at his right hand for evermore, which
neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart of man has conceived. So
as they that have walked as they should in this Valley of Tears, shall be there
transfigured and transplanted into eternal Glory. Which God of his infinite
mercy grant us all for his Son Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be all Glory and Honor.

Amen.
FINIS.

