Great Britains JUBILEE; OR A Rural Present; to his Royal Majesty, my Gracious,
renowned, and Admired SOVEREIGN, Charles the IJd. OF Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, King. Defender of the Faith, etc. In diverse Panegyricks, and Poems, on
several Objects, Persons, and Occasions: relating to his sacred Person, and
Progress.

Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos,

Romans 8.31. By LANCELOT REYNOLDS, Gent.

LONDON: Printed by Roger Vaughan, for the Author, 1662.

THE ROYAL OAK REVIVED: SOME Branches thereof Illustrated, AND SOVEREIGN
MAJESTY PROTECTED.

THat Royal Oak that kept my Gracious King, Continue green, in Summer, Winter,
Spring:

TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY Charles the II.
By the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, DEFENDER OF
THE FAITH, etc.
Most Dread and Admired Sovereign;
THe whole world cannot parallel such a Miracle of Mercy, as the Lord has
vouchsafed in your gracious and miraculous Preservation, and Restoration,
beyond many men's expectation of your Sacred Majesty, unto us your obedient
Subjects, and to be invested in your dear and Royal Fathers Throne, without
effusion of blood. For which unspeakable mercy and blessing, let us magnify
the grand mercy of our good God, for his mercy endures for ever, and render
our thankfulness from the ground and bottom of our hearts. As Artaxerxes the
Persian King, did kindly accept of a handful of fair water from his poor
Subject Sinates: And another great Monarch, of a handful of roots from his poor
Subject: So my hope is, that your Royal Majesty will be pleased, graciously to
accept this Paper-present, proceeding from the heart, hand, and pen, of your
most Loyal Subject, who does truly reverence and honor your Sacred Person.
Part of these poor unpolisht lines were intended against your Majesty's coming
to the Right Honorable John Lord Poulet of Henton Saint George, within the
County of Sommerset; and to the Honorable Colonel Francis Windham at Trent. I
am truly sensible of mine inabilities to answer expectation, and therefore do
humbly sue for your gracious pardon: I beseech the ancient of days, to add many
years unto your precious life. The Lord make your Sacred Majesty a special
choice instrument of his glory, that you may reign gloriously here, and have a
Crown of Immortal Glory hereafter; for the obtaining whereof, your Majesty
shall have the most fervent and hearty prayers of

Your Majesty's most humble, loyal, and faithful Subject. Lancelot Reynolds.

The Royal, famous Oak, no^ revived;
His Majesty's Court obs^ur'd for a ^ime:
Some constant, faithful Courtiers, described;
Both now praised be God most bright do shine.
FOr to begin, with Wor'sters bloody Fight
It would almost amaze the World to write:
Where they did kill and slay without measure;
And cared not for their lives, but their Treasure.
The Fight was hot, and bloody was that day:
It was indeed, a deadly mortal Fray.
Oh may we to our God most thankful be
Who did preserve our King, our all in Thee.
It Is beyound Man's thoughts, and admiration,
His Escape, and blessed Preservation!
Of my Sovereigns Person and Dear Life,
Which comforts does conveigh, to Man and Wife,
And Children likewise, does thereof partake,
Oh let us love him, for his own Names sake
He is our Sovereign Lord that does protect,
Friends, and En^mies, that do not him reject;
His Lawful power, and his Command;
That does Gods word obey, and firmly stand.
At Worster, at that great and cruel fight,
Our royal Sovereign then was forced to flight:
He knew not where to go, to ride, or run,
To keep himself from being quite undone.
Our blessed Savior did an Oak provide:
His sacred Person, for a time to hide:
Until Brave Lord Wilmot, did him remove:
Whereby he showed his Zeal, and faithful love.
Oh blessed Oak, that shel red my dear Lord:
Who always trusted in Gods holy Word:
From sight of wicked, and ungodly men:
Not fit for Earth, but for a Lions Den.
If that they meant my Sovereign to destroy,
They would thereby, three Kingdoms much annoy.
When our gracious Lord was in distress,
God did support him in his heaviness.
To his dear Lord, then he did make his moan,
Who did him comfort, though he were alone.
Gods Angel guided him still in his way;
In a most safe, and hollow tree to stay.
Oh, When, dear Lord, shall my weak eyes be blessed,
To see that woman, gave my King sweet rest:
When his sad heart with sorrow did abound,
So rare escape, on Earth, can scarce be found.
The hollow woods, the Trees did comforts bring,
Unto our gracious, and admired King.
Did ever God for any King so work?
In time of horrid danger; for to lurk,
In so obscure, and solitary place;
Where Gods Vicegerent King, by Gods high grace;
When griefs, fear, horror, did his soul affright,
My royal Sovereign in the dark some night:
Where one blessed man, by hap, did him attend;
And proved to be his true, and faithful friend.
God bless him still, in body and in soul,
That he may never but for his sins condole.
The shady woods, and trees, comforts afford
Unto our sovereign King, and gracious Lord.
From woods and trees, a Lane God did provide:
A Lane adorned with virtue, and with grace;
Over whelmed with joy, to see her Sov'raigns face:
To free him from his fears, and dangers deep;
Secure his person, and his life to keep,
In blessed safety, free from mortal harms;
From bloody men, clasped in his Saviors arms.
The Almighty did, his precious soul, protect;
And will always, his faithful, blessed elect.
1623.
When that royal P. Charles went into Spain
Resolving, then, a Princess for to gain:
For safety of his life, he changed his name:
And traveled with great Duke of Buckingham.
There names they thought fit for to chang;
That they might see far Countries strange:
Will, and Tom Smith, were then their names,
Which might seem strange unto King James,
That gracious, wise, and royal King,
Who to fa^ Nations peace did bring,
Read Wilmot forward, backward, and then find;
(...) and Tom ready, perfect in your mind.
W^^n Subjects changed their love, king Charles his name;
Royal C^aries is after called William.
A name of Conqueror it did foretell;
A happy Omen, that he should do well:
To live to conquer, overcome at last;
Pardon Offenses, forgive what is past.
To live to reign, to be a glorious King;
Much joy, and happiness, to three kingdoms bring:
In a fourth also he has a good share;
And likewise does a Sovereign title bare;
My Sovereign conquered not by sword, but love;
God did his words and actions well approve.
On our gracious KING his feigned Name
When he rode disguised with Mistrisse Lane.
William, Conqueror of this Nation;
Jesus, the worker of our salvation.
Last^l did labor to preserve our king;
Lane ventured life, him for to safety bring:
In Jesus Christ our Lord, puts all his trust;
Abounding in mercy, able for to save:
Majesty dejected, from untimely grave.
Wise men, and great, have changes in this life;
In youth, and age, avoid all mortal strife:
Lift up your heart unto your Creator;
Lose no time, of Heaven to be Pertaker:
In time of life, think on that night of death;
All that are born, are surely born to die;
Man lives below, may your soul mount on high.
Wealth, nor honor, can keep us from grim death,
Jewels, nor gold can much prolong our breath;
Lord, we must all drink of Deaths bitter cup,
Low brought by sin, yet Christ can raise us up,
In glory bright, above the starry sky,
Amidst the glorious Saints your foul w^^l fly.
Among holy Martyrs to the Trinity.
Whiles I did live in heart of Oak,
I feared not death, nor yet his stroke.
Laid low by sad event of War,
Lifting my heart to God above,
In Jesus Christ my Saviors love,
Advanced by his King, his God;
Made to escape his Enemies ^od.
While I did live in sorrow for my king;
It joy'd my heart, when brave Monck ^^d him bring
Lare, better then never, for him to reign:
Long live king Charles, in glory to remain,
In health, and happiness, unto the end
And never ^^and in need of earthly friend;
Among Saints and Angels after this life spend.
On his Sacred Majesty CHARLES STUART, King of ENGLAND, etc.
Christ now has brought you, to your fathers throne:
Heaven has his soul, to you we make our moan:
A^rs, and arms, with him are gone to grave;
Royalty remains yours, his Crown to have:
Lord, after this life, bring your soul to bliss;
Eternal Joy, and endless Happiness;
Saints robes put on, of Christ his righteousness.
Soaring aloft by Meditation,
Truth to maintain, and Reformation:
Up ready, to uphold Gods word,
A gracious King, and Sovereign Lord;
Right just, and good, in word, and deed;
Tyrants power, by your hand is freed.
Calamities are past, and gone;
Heavens power has fixed you on your Throne:
Arts now embrace, let Wars depart,
Rejoice in God, with all your heart:
Let Heavens King guide you, in your ways,
Eternally, your good God to praise;
Sanctity, you will practice, all your days.
Sweet influence, dear Lord, does flow from thee,
Truth, Peace, Love, heroic Clemency:
Unanimous Providence, Gods Decree;
Again to raise your sacred Majesty;
Raising You up, above your Family,
To do service, for your grand King, on high.
Cares, and great Troubles do attend a Crown:
Heavens King protect You, put your Enemies down:
A happy chang we have now lived to see,
Royal king Charles in perfect Majesty:
Let us lift up our hearts to God on high,
Ever to bless, praise, and perform his will,
Serve our dread Sovereign, be obedient still.
Sanity from your blessed hand does proceed;
The gentle touch of your fair hand does breed;
Unto the sick Patient quick cure, and ease;
A happy Cordial for so sad Disease:
Royal Kings have such virtue in their touch;
The like, no other man, can do so much.
When our happy Parliament did ordain,
To fetch our blessed Sovereign home again;
And valiant Montague pointed to bring,
The Person of our royal gracious King,
The royal Fleet, committed to his hands,
To wait him home, who rules diverse Lands:
Grief did then vanish, and soon pass away;
Then did begin our happy Halcion Day.
On that Mirror of loyalty, and admired Gentlewoman, Mistress Jane Lane.
His MAJESTY'S most faithful, humble, and obedient Subject.
Jane, gracious your Name does signify,
A good Name does the Owner dignifie.
Nature and rich Grace did contend in thee,
Ever to comfort royal Majesty.
Loyalty, and faithful love thee did invite,
A gracious Lane a comfort for to be;
Nature and Grace did in you take delight,
Even to live, or dye, for's Majesty.
Jngenious Lane, you did your wits awake,
Add greatest vigor for your Sov'raigns sake;
No wit, nor p^licy you did omit,
Endeavors, of your own, proper, and fit.
Lanes numberless are, in Great Britains Land,
Amongst them all none did more firmly stand;
None in fair England, better could accord:
Enter a way to please her sacred Lord
Judicious Jane, thy ways were firm, and good,
An honourer still of the Royal blood;
Nights may seem pleasant, for to tell of thee,
End, and begin, of's Blessed Majesty.
Led on by Angels, for to guide thy way,
Above most Names, may Lane bare the sway;
No Night approach, but be a Halcion Day,
E're for your carrying, your Dear Lord away.
Jn sorrow, and in joy, I Will bear my part,
And love my Sovereign with my soul, and heart;
No worldly thing shall part my loyal love,
E're to maintain, and still to him approve.
Laud still that Name, that holy Name of God,
Abide in Virtue, shun his 'venging rod;
None, None but Christ, did that brave Martyr say;
Eternity crown you, on your last day.
Jnspire your heart, with knowledge, and with grace,
Attend at last to see thy Sovereigns face;
New shall your Name and actions then be found,
E're for to praise, and make his Praise resound.
Lament you did, for your good Lord and King;
Adventured your life, him safe to bring;
Nere to the sea his Person to convey,
Expecting him to rule another day.
Jane was that blessed name, gave me my life,
And being in the World, to enjoy a Wife
Nature, and Grace caused her my life to save,
Ere comforted me, and kept me from grave.
Least in my infancy I should perish,
A Nurse did provide, me for to cherish;
Nature being weak, made choice of a Nurce,
Even me to luckle, though to me the worse.
A blessed Jane did our dear Father feed;
In a sad time, when 'twas of greatest need;
The happy Father of my Native Land,
Who firm in his faith, did for ever stand:
As he was firm, and constant to the Lord,
And careful to obey his sacred Word;
So did the Lord in his due time provide,
A faithful, valiant Champion, him to guide;
And to conduct unto His Fathers throne;
Where all sad hearts are heard, who make their moan.
Our wise Solomon does hear Cause just;
Do righteous things, before he turn to dust.
God grant him Nestors years, yea long to live
And many Godly Acts, and Laws to give.
God make my Sovereign happy in a Wife,
Virtuous, firtile, grand comfort to his life:
Give him a royal, and most faithful Queen,
As ever was in fair great Britain seen.
Master JOHN DANVERD, for your precious lines,
Valued in part equal to golden Mines:
I will in praise and honor of you write,
Which of our Sovereign did such things indite:
Thou do recount his dangers that are past;
Of your royal Master, and King at last:
Which does now give the Nation great content;
That d^d, in th'acting, make him to lament:
To see, at that time, his disastrous fate:
Brought low, by fatal war, his Princely ^^tate.
But God, in mercy, did at last him bring,
To be our Sovereign Lord, and Gracious King.
John, Gracious your name does import,
On things divine thy thoughts resort;
Heavens glory thy soul mounts to see,
Night of Death past in joys to be,
Dan, one of Jacobs blessed Sons;
An Angel will thy soul convey;
Nature subdued, Grace bears the sway.
Verd waxing green, in virtue bright,
Eternal Day, when past thy night.
Raise up thy soul above the sky,
Dauverds heart loves true Majesty.
Upon the happy and joyful News of his sacred Majesty, King Charles the IId.
his returning into England; And proclaiming of him, King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland.
REturn, return brave Prince, from fertile France;
Fair England long has lain in a sad trance.
From rich Holland our King will soon arrive:
Make joyful hearts, and many will revive;
Pass over the Sea, and come to Dover Town:
To Enjoy his Crown with Glory, and Renown.
Our Noble Phoenix, he will come at last;
And put a period to our griefs, are past.
When he shall land, in faithful, fruitful Kent;
Many brave Nobles will be thither sent:
For to conduct our Royal, Gracious Prince;
His Enemies actions will them then convince.
Your just, and blessed Parliament will act,
What they think fit, about that horrid fact,
Of putting your Royal Father to death:
And taking from him, his most precious breath.
They did so soon sever's immortal Soul;
That most o'th kingdom did with grief condole:
Oh may sad, horrid War now pass away;
And when you come, appear a haleion day,
May mirth, and gladness, be in place of grief,
And yield the most remotest soul relief.
Your Fathers spirit soared unto the sky;
His Meditations were profound, and high:
His active Genius it did soar aloft;
Who trusted in's Savior, whose soul he bought.
Welcome Royal Charles, unto your Fathers Throne;
His Friends do live, though he be dead and gone.
They do revive, though in Vault he lies dead:
And will support you; What more can be sed:
With Life, and Fortunes, as long's they draw breath:
And will continue constant, till their death.
Christ will conduct you to your Fathers Court;
Where Great, and Small, will thither then resort.
Times various are, in turning of Man's state:
Most happy those, that are Regenerate.
After many sorrows, joy does come at last;
And seems greater, when dangers are overpast.
The King will come, to joy sad hearts of Men:
That joy I cannot full express by pen.
When that, with Triumph, he shall be landed here;
Many brave, wise, Noble Men will appear;
And wait upon his Person, and it guard;
Our heavenly King give them their reward,
Our Royal Sun will shine in Albions Isle;
And make things clear, whom envy does defile.
Obscure, and darken, with their envious breath:
Which nothing will work of, but time and death.
Whiles Britains Isle does flourish, and wax green:
Your famous Actions, ever shall be seen;
Renown your Name, unto after Ages:
In well writ Books, admired and learned Pages:
Regain the Honor of our brave Nation;
And bring it into some better Fashion.
News is now come, king Charles proclaimed shall be:
God give him happiness, and prosperity:
Long Life, and Peace, that He may safely reign;
And prove to be a second Charlema^gn.
May great Jehovah bless your Majesty:
Your royal Person, and Posterity.
Pardon, great Prince; my failings, and accept:
A Mite instead of Pounds, for my great Debt.
The faithful CHAMPION, and admired SUBJECT.
On his Excellency General MONCK,
And those brave Valiant, and Religious Men,
Who was a mean^ to bring king CHARLES again,
To rule and reign in fair Great BRITAINS Isle:
Let us praise God, that he does on us smile.
THe time is come, that joys men for to see
A Supreme Power of high Soveraignity:
Our Famous English Nation strive to bring,
Fair, and rich Presents to their royal King.
Joy does abound, and stir up their brave mind:
For to express their Love, and Nature kind.
They do bethink the time of his absence:
And post unto him, with golden Presents;
There Is nothing that they have they think too dear;
The worthy Gentleman, and noble Peer;
The Sun does shine, and yield a pleasant light:
This new great chang, does give men's hearts delight.
Behold how God does work in his due time;
To bless, and comfort the good True Divine;
Yea, and all other men, we hope beside;
That in his sacred truth does firm abide.
It is the hand of God, has this thing wrought:
It was his Son, our Souls most dearly bought.
Monck mounted high, to bring his Sovereign home;
That Power, was derived, from God alone.
Gods Spirit moved him to do such a thing;
Well pleasing to Gods People, and the King.
It was not in the simple power of Man;
For to obtain, nor in their power to skan:
The Finger of the Lord did it direct,
And brought the same, at last, to good effect.
No Gold, or Silver, could the same obtain:
So rare, so Rich, and unexspected gain.
A King, to rule a Religious Nation;
In Godly order, is a stately Fashion.
Those happy Men that studied this Great work,
God still preserve from Pagan, and from Turk:
I mean, from all sorts of vile, wicked Men:
Too long for to recount, with my weak Pen.
We want a Homer, to set forth thy Fame:
Your Noble Actions, and thy Mighty Name.
The high, and gracious Work, thou did archive,
Will make thy Fame, even after death, to live.
No Julius Coesar, can his fame advance,
So high as thine, in England, or in France.
Stout Hannibal could not do such a Thing:
To bring from Foreign Parts, his Sovereign King:
In such a manner, and you sh^d no blood:
Perform an Act on, could not be withstood.
Rich Croesus could not purchase, with all his wealth,
So rare a cordial, for Englands perfect health:
Their Treasure was exhausted, and grown low:
In great Distress, and knew not where to go.
Many people did want, and cry for bread:
And knew not, by their Labor, to be fed:
Most Trades were barren, and grown very poor:
And knew not how for to increase their store.
These blessed Men have used a strain above:
That will, most justly, merit faithful Love.
In all things then, let us humbly submit,
Unto his hand, that knows what is most fit
Our Maker made us, and he knows our mould:
Christ paid our ransom: we are bought and sold.
In brief, let us love God, honor our King:
Give them the praise, that did him safely bring,
From Foreign Parts, into our Native Land.
And, in true Faith, see that you firmly stand.
Let English Men, then due praises render,
To God that has restored their Faiths Defender.
Oh that I could immortalize thy Name:
And build a stately Structure to thy fame.
I would crect a stately Monument:
To continue, till time on Earth be spent:
In mind, it should exceed Romes Capitol:
For him that was so wise, Majesticall:
As high, and famous Capitol of Rome,
Which might continue, till the Day of Dome.
Or famous Colossus, that did Ships guide;
His Lamp did light them, not to sail aside
Or ancient, famous, Mausoles Tomb:
Beyond that sumptuous Capitol of Rome:
Or rare, brave Pyramids of Egypts Land;
Or what might be framed by a Mortal hand.
Could erect a Pile, of that great Store:
For to continue while time were no more.
All these, I wish, I could perform by pen;
Brave Monck, and his Friends still might live amongst Men
God will advance, continue your rare Name:
Let Angels sound the Trump of thy great Fame.
Soladine, after all his brave Conquests past,
Carried but a Shirt unto his Grave at last.
God bless the King,'s High Court of Parliament,
That they may love, and act with joint consent.
When that your Gracious Soul away shall fly,
The Glorious Angels guide it to the sky.
When that your body shall be laid to sleep,
In Mother Earth, your dust, most safe, shall keep.
When Crowns and honors shall turn to an Urn,
May Glory, after Death, be your Return.
On that Worthy, Accomplished Gentleman, Mr. Thomas Mayhew.
TRanscendent Mayhew, for your royal Lines,
Writ with a quill, plucked from an Angels wing;
Shall flour^sh and wax green, in future times:
For writing the welcome, of our dearest King.
Who is the Fountain of our Bliss, our All:
His Royal Person, high Imperial.
Of brave Mayhews Writing let us take a veiw;
So rich, so rare, and of so fair a hew.
Mount up, rare Mayhew, get Promothean Fire:
To warm thy wings, and mount high by desire.
Thou do bestir, thy golden, nimble Pen:
To exhilerate the sad hearts of men.
Thy hew is glorious, in the Month of May:
The Flowers, then are fair, fresh, look full gay:
Flowers then are sweet, pleasant, rare, and new.
Nones fairer have expressed, then Mayhew.
His dainty Fancy, and his golden Pen,
Does eq^^l, if not exceed, most of Men,
Thy Noble Spirit, it does soar alost;
Christ's precious blood, thy pure soul, dearly bought,
Thy Genius is sublime, and mounteth high:
Thy blessed Savior will thee dignifie.
Thy Muse does soar up high, and elevate:
Thy thoughts are profound, and do contemplate,
On things sacred, sumpt'ous, rare, and divine;
which shall continue, as long's Mortal time.
Maynew^ is brave, sublime, and royal Pen,
Does ^eetly please, delight the hearts of Men.
His Th^am is high, and lofty is his Spirit;
Which, one Day will, the spacious Heaven inherit.
Long may you live, to write on diverse things:
On high Jehovah, and the state of Kings.
High Matters, do well become, thy brave Pen:
To solace rich Saints, and the best of Men
Mayhew does fill he mind, with wonders great:
In writing in such manner, brave, complete.
The more thou do extol, and praise my King:
The more I will thee praise, thy goodness sing.
My weak Pen cannot, express, thy rare worth:
A Homer, or Lucan, must it set forth,
In perfect Colors, and thy Noble hew:
Who can express, and write like brave Mayhew.
The very luster, of thy famous Name,
Shall still preserve, thy rare, and Noble Fame.
Let Angels sound the Trump of thy high praise:
For to continue beyond length of Days.
Let Time be weary, for to measure times:
So long, or longer, dure thy Famous Lines.
Let Angels sing, the praises, of your Verse;
Which I, weak man, not able to Rehearse.
I wish and pray, that long, long, thou may live:
More Royal Verses, to my Sovereign give.
Upon the Sight of King Charles the II. his Picture, at the Honorable Colonel,
Sr. JOHN DRAKE, Knight, and Baronet, his House at Trill, in Devon.
IF that the Shadow does the mind content:
Much more the Substance, pure, excellent.
If that the Shadow, does such Reverence move:
What will the Substance, with dear, faithful Love!
If that the Shadow do but represent:
How does the Substance give most sweet content!
Though's hair be black, yet his Soul's white within:
God keep his Body safe, his Soul from sin.
Christ our Savior, and Immortal King,
CHARLES REX, to the highest honors bring.
May he be happy, 'bove all Kings on Earth:
Eternally happy after his death.
I want Apelles Pencil, for to limb:
And Homers famous Pen to paint out him.
His royal Head, the Watchtower of the Senses
His sweet Clemency pardons great Offenses.
His Eyes, though black, yet do most purely shine:
His Knowledge high, like a Rare Divine.
His Eye of Providence, did long foresee,
The Effects of Times, and how they would be.
His precious Ears, do ever love, to hear,
Gods sacred Word, which he does hold most dear.
His Smelling, sweet things, does revive his senses:
God, and our gracious King pardons offenses:
Yet to a Lover, nothing smells more sweet;
Than M^striss brea^h, when lip^ and hearts do meet.
His Taste is pure, sweet with Delectation;
By Faith he feeds on Christ, for his Salvation.
His Feeling's quick, and all his Senses good;
His greatest Treasure, is Christ's precious blood.
His rubie Lips, though shadows, I could kiss;
His Soul, and Body, God for ever bless:
His Lilly white hand, I have kissed before;
And hope hereafter, to kiss it once more.
His golden Crown, does by his sweet side lie:
After this life, may his Soul mount on high;
Above the Spears, and bright star spangled Sky:
To live with his Savior Christ eternally.
I Will pray, that he may long, and happy reign:
And after death, in Heaven e're remain.
On's sacred MAJESTY'S CORONATION: The blessed Precursor of Reformation.
THis Day, my Gracious Sovereign crowned shall be;
And will show forth his Royal Majesty.
God bless that reverend hand, that crown's our King
Let us praise God, that he did safely bring
Him hither, for to sit, on's Fathers Throne;
It was the handy work of God alone.
Famous Albemarle was the Instrument,
Of our royal Comforts, and high Content;
Cncurring with the blessed Parliament.
God give him a happy, and a blessed Boon;
Comfort his blessed Soul, Morning, Night, and Noon.
Rejoice this Day, Great Britains KING is crowned:
Long may he live, and ever be renowned.
Oh let his Life, and Glory so transcend;
That Every Nation may become his Friend.
Defend Him Lord, who is Faiths Defender;
Strengthen Brethren, and confirm the Tender.
Protect him, Lord, who art the Worlds Protector.
From's Enemies, and every ill Projector,
Famous King Charles, let his Name ever Ring;
Royal, brave Anthems to his praises sing.
The Nobles, and the Gentry flock to see,
This famous, far renowned Solemnity.
Oh what a Royal, Stately, and brave sight:
To see the King, with his Nobles, shine most bright:
In Radicant manner, with that luster shine,
With Royal Glory, and with Lords Divine:
Royal attended with a Princely Train:
Not inferior to brave, Great Charlemain.
To that Famous Abbey Our Sovereign came:
Bravely attended with his Men of Fame.
The Noble Lords all came in their order,
In their Rich Robes, and most stately border:
Collar of Esses, their George, and brave things:
Fit, well becoming the high state of Kings.
The Bells did ring: Conduits run wine: all rejoice:
Expressing it, both with hand, heart, and voice:
When he had heard a Sermon preached there:
He was conducted to an ancient Chair:
Where many Kings have been crowned in this land
God still preserve tha^ blessed, happy hand.
But first, his brave grand Champion claimed the Crown
For our true Sovereign, of so great renown.
They did acknowledge him to be true Heir:
And did conduct him to that Royal Chair:
Being the next great Prince of Royal Blood:
Who will undoub^ed do this Nation good.
The Nobles then did perform their Duty:
And ^omage to their Gracious Sovereign Lord.
They put their hands unto the Royal Crown.
And venture Life, and state for his Renown.
The Reverend Bishops preach to him Gods Word:
Which he most ready is for to obey.
God keep his Person safe, both Night and Day.
They present themselves at his Royal Feet.
His Sacred Person did them kindly greet.
And most lovingly did kiss their Right Cheek:
In gallant manner, and ^n order meek.
A Ring's put on, as wedded to a Wife.
Great God of Heaven preserve him all his life.
Our King's anointed with most precious Oil.
May he his Enemies overcome, and quail.
Then was the Crown put on his sacred head.
Let Angels guide him, till his soul be fled.
And afterward convey his Soul to bliss;
To Glory, and Eternal happiness.
Great Acclamations made, God save the King.
The Trumpets sounded, and with Echoes ring.
Let Bonfires blaze, and Bells out loud now ring:
To show our Love unto our Graciou^ King.
The Great, and Glorious God assist my Pen;
To write of my Sovereign, the best of Men;
That Rules, and Raigns in Fair Great Britans Isle.
Let Us praise the Lord, that he does on us smile.
The King of Kings give Power for to write,
On him, in home he takes great delight.
No Angel will forbid quills from his wing;
To write in praise, of my renowned Ring.
Some blessed, holy, precious Angel bright;
Give me a Quill from his rare Wing, to write;
What I do for my Dear Sovereigns sake.
My drow sie Muse, O Lord do thou awake.
My mind will be content, my heart at ease;
If some fow Lines may my Dear Sovereign please.
This royal Solemnity being past;
They did return in order, all at last.
It was a stately Sight, there for to see,
The Nobles pass in Rank, in their Degree.
But b'ing 115 miles
far distant, cannot now relate,
The manner how they rode, or walked in state.
It was my happiness, for to see
King Charles the first, crowned for to be.
In the same manner I do apprehend,
Thu was performed; and so do draw to'n end.
Wishing, praying, my Sovereign long may live
More worthy Laws, unto his Subjects give.
Lord give my Sovereign, a Virtuous Queen,
As ever was in fair Great Britain seen.
Grant him a happy Issue, prosperous Reign;
Long here on Earth, with Saints for to remain.
After this Mortal Crown shall pass away,
Give an immortal Crown, never to decay.
In the highe^t heavens, where the Saints excel;
In that blessed Place may his Soul ever dwell.
On His most Excellent MAJESTY, King Charles the Second, His exspected coming
to the Honorable Colonel FRANCIS WINDHAM, his House at Trent.
WElcome Dear Sovereign, welcome to Trent.
May it yield your Highness, all sweet content;
Even to Admiration, Astonishment.
At difference of the times, You live to see,
How sad you were, now joyful may you be.
Let all true Subjects yield to God the praise;
That did prolong Your Life, with happy Days.
Behold the Place once you were in sorrow;
Some time, to rest your felf, you did borrow
Your sacred Majesty made choice then to rest,
With one of your faithful Subjects, loved you best
Mr. Francis Windham, of a happy Name;
May he e're live in honor, and in Fame;
His heart, and house, rea^y to entertain,
So Gracious a Guest, with him to remain.
A Guest above all others, did excel;
Who wished, with you for ever for to dwell.
The times then were wild, dangerous, and wood:
Windham adveutu'rd's Life, to do you good;
Francis, Free his Name does signify;
Receiving you, his Name did dignifie.
Behold the Place, that sheltred my Dear Lord:
(Who always trusted in Gods holy Word)
Which his Faithful Servant did him afford,
In time of need, and horrid Danger deep;
When many for your Person then did weep;
Your Grace kept waking, whiles that they did sleep.
Let Us praise God, who did your Soul deliver,
From cruel Men, and bloody Oliver.
Your Gracious heart was sad when you passed by:
And saw an Object of Englands Tragedy:
Brave, Noble, Learned Digby's Famous Seat:
A Place of strength, and beauty, most complete.
I should but Eclipse his great noble worth;
Weakly, and lame, to express it, and set forth.
There is a Famous River, called Trent;
Where thirty Rivers are into it sent.
These several Rivers fall into her Flood:
And thirty sorts of Fish, to do men good.
More various are the Favors of my King:
Innumerable Comforts they do bring,
From the greatest Subject, unto the least:
Happy is he that has so Rare a Guest.
No thing is wanting, that may set forth
Some part of Luster, of the Owners worth.
A Windham brave, vert'ous, wise, did you cherish:
This Windham kept you, that you might not perish.
The King of heaven highly him reward;
That of my Sovereign had such due regard.
I never was in the House of this brave Wight;
And therefore know not fully how to write.
Pardon (dear Prince) my weakness, and accept
A Mite, instead of Pounds, for my great Debt.
During my Life, I will, Sir, daily pray;
God preserve my Sovereign both Night and Day.
When Crowns and honors shall be laid in Dust,
May Your Soul live, in Happiness, amongst the Just.
When Death shall put a Period to your Days:
God crown your soul, with wreaths of heavenly baies.
On his most excellent Majesty, King CHARLESH. his exp^^ted coming to the Right
honorable JOHN (...), his House, at Henton S. George.
WElcome dread Sovereign, welcome to this Place:
Unto a Noble Lord, who loves your Grace.
Your Royal Father here took great Delight:
Pleasing his S^nces, and his Eye most bright.
Naught is here wanting, that may give content:
Even to admiration, Ravishment:
For wholesome Dwelling, and sweet healthy Air;
Few Places, in the County can compare:
A neat compacted House, in brave order;
Rich Pictures, Hangings, and stately Border;
Land skips, and Maps, for to delight the sense:
With many other things, of Excellence,
Rich Curtains, and sumptuous Tapestry:
Rare and soft Beds of Down, whereon to lie.
Walks, Water works, Gardens, Parks, Oh brave Seat!
Where Is nothing wanting to make it complete:
With other, sumptuous, stately, costly things;
Fit, well-becomeing the high state of Kings.
Nothing is wanting here, that may set forth,
Some part of luster, of the Owners worth.
Welcome Emperial Monarch, I do say;
Where You do come, you will make a Halcyon Day.
Shine forth bright Sol, unto my Sovereign dear;
And show thy self, now that he does appear,
Within this pleasant kind of Paradise.
God bless your Counselors, that give advice.
Part of that Noble Order, that attend;
The dew of heaven, still on them descend;
And all the rest, that do my King follow;
Let time, and death, all your Enemies swallow;
Let glorious Planets all then now rejoice:
And we your Subjects, for to hear your voice;
And see your sacred Person, at this time;
Extend your Virtues, 'bove a Grand Divine.
And eke, blessed Physician, for to cure,
The Kings Evil, which many do endure.
Your Majesty is willing to do good:
What rare Ver ues flow from Kings Royal Blood!
Heavenly Motions do their minds incline;
To move to heavenly Raptures, most sublime.
Before, or after your rich, stately cheer;
Your Majesty may hunt, the fat, brave Deer;
Walk in sweet Gardens, for to take delight;
View Objects rare, for to content your sight.
Recreate with bowling, or other sport,
To see your Person, many will resort.
Your Gracious Person does Men's minds content;
To see with joy Gods blessed Vicege^ent,
Mercury does point before or behind:
To show the various changes of the wind:
And on each side, he does not then omit,
To point to the place, that is proper, and fit,
For to direct, where Boreas blasts do blow.
And to inform the Standers by, to know,
Nothing in this frail Life is firm and sure:
God grant us his Grace, for e're to endure.
This Place your Royal Court, is fit to feast;
So divine, rich, rare, sumptuous a Guest.
Shine forth, and show your Rays of Majesty;
God bless your Person, and Posterity;
That shall hereafter, I do hope succeed:
From royal, gracious, King Charles loins proceed.
The Birds do now sweetly melodious sing:
To welcome hither our most gracious King.
Henton St. George is a mark of honor:
That brave Progenitors cast upon her.
St. George is a high, noble mark of Fame:
Kings, and Nobles will preserve that great Name.
The highest Order of our brave Nation:
Which other famous Kings keep in fashion,
The Heavens do smile, and the fields look gay:
For here is now kept high St. George's Day.
As much as tongue can speak, and pen express;
I Will wish, pray for, my Sovereigns happiness.
I will express my love with heart and hand;
And be, for ever, at your blessed command.
I will set forth my love with tongue, and pen;
God save my King; let all Men say Amen.
After your Progresses on Earth are past;
God give you heaven, to reign in at last.
There to be crowned an Eternal King;
For to praise God, and heavenly Anthems sing.
Accrosticks Upon the Royal, and most Illustrious DUKE, JAMES STVART, His
Majesty's only Brother.
JAMES, only Brother to our Gracious KING:
Abundant comforts, by your service bring.
Majectick Actions do your Name advance:
England of late was in a dismal Trance:
Sweet Blessings has, by our Sov'raigns good chance.
Strength of Gods arm, his Power you defend:
The Life of Grace here live, unto the end.
Up at last blessed Soul mount, to Heavens Glory:
A HOMER's Pen shall write your blessed Story.
Relig^on, Virtue, Valor, and true Fame:
These do, in part proclaim your Royal Name.
In time of Sorrow you did bare your part:
Again regained your Honor, by Desert.
Majesty does smile on your grand Merit:
Ended this Life, Glory then inherit;
Sing praises to God, by his sacred Spirit.
Soar up aloft to heaven, by Raptures high:
Truth still maintain, and its pure Dignity.
Up, above the Clouds your Soul soar's aloft:
Advancing toward Christ, your Soul he bought.
Renown your name, brave Duke, by your rare deeds:
It Is from your Virtuous Actions it proceeds.
James, that learned, wise, and Religious King;
Admired amongst all Nations, peace did bring.
Magnificent Prince, that late ruled this Land;
Eternal Blessings wrought by his fair hand;
Still let us admire him, for his grand Command.
Sir, you're a Royal Branch of that learned Sire;
Truth did maintain, with Zeal as hot as fire.
Unity, Peace, and Love he did maintain;
Amongst his greatest Enemies peace did gain.
Rare, famous Duke, may you his Acts embrace;
Truths Friends cherish, Enemies deface.
On the most Illustrious, and Religious Elisabeth; DUCHESS of YORK.
Elizabeth, Blessed Peace of the Lord:
Loving ever to obey Gods pure Word.
In Life, and Death, God guide you by his Grace,
Zealous of his glory: you shall see his Face.
Angels at last convey your Soul to bless.
Bright radiant Glory, heavens happiness:
Even as Glass does run, and sand pass away;
The greatest Beauty, one day turns to clay.
Heavens happy Harbor will receive your Soul.
Satiate with Gods presence, never condole.
There Is nothing that shall trouble you above:
Up raised 'bove the World, by perfect love.
A mind you have, to do those things are good:
Rich by your Faith, in Christ his precious blood.
There is no fear, where this is understood.
Dukes, Kings, and Princes; one Day all must die:
Unto their God ascend, and mount on high.
Treasure immortal the good shall enjoy:
Christ will tree them from this vain worlds annoy.
Heaven is the happy Place where Saints do dwell:
Each being content, not striving to Excel.
Sufficient Glory every Saint has there;
Singing praises to their Savior dear.
Of heavens glory each Saint has his part;
Far transcending the thoughts of humane heart.
Your blessed Savior did your Soul Redeem;
Ordained you happy, and of high Esteem.
Reign rare Duchess, a Queen in that fair Land;
Kings are joyful there to bear least command,
E're guided by the wile, Almighties hand.
On his Excellency George Monck, Duke of Albemarle.
Great Duke, God give you length of days on earth:
E're make you happy both in Life and death.
Our Gracious King you happ'ly dia restore:
Riches immortal may you have therefore.
God grant, hereafter you may see Gods face;
Enthroned by Christ unto a heavenly Place.
Majesty does on you most sweetly shine,
Oh, may Gods Providence you safely keep,
Noon, Day, and Night, whether you wake, or sleep.
Christ, and King Charles your Soul and Body love;
King, and Subject your faithful Love approve.
George is the Name of fair brave Englands Saint:
England made happy, by your noble hand.
Our Gracious Sovereign will hear our complaint;
Religiously rule, and govern this Land.
Great God of Heaven and Earth you ever bless;
Even here on earth, with heavenly happiness.
Maj'stick Monck, Mirror of this Nation:
Oh what brave order, and stately Fashion;
Now that our Gracious King does rule and reign:
Christ grant him Nestor's years, here to remain.
Kings to exceed, yea great King Charlemain.
God gave you Life; and in his full due time,
Exalted you, unto a Place sublime;
Oh may Gods Blessing still on you descend:
Remaining to our King, a faithful Friend.
God has rewarded you, for your great pains;
Eternal Mansions be your blessed Souls gains.
Geometry cannot measure your great worth;
Emanent Logicks Science not set forth;
Or Arithmat^cks useful Art number.
Rhetoric cannot more divinely move;
Gracious Moncks heart, his Sovereign for to love;
Exceeding the kind, faithful Tuttle Dove.
Music, for sweetness d'ont exceed your voice,
Of making so good, praise worthy a choice
Not Nature, but three Nations for it rejoice.
Christ bless you, and the sacred Trinity^
King Charles to bring, to's Royal Dignity.
Grand famous Warrier, may thou still win fa^^
Eternize your great virtues, and your Name
Oh let all Kingdoms, of our joys partake;
Rouse other Nations, and their Valor wake.
Great God of heav^n, and Earth, our Champion bless
Even with all joy, Eternal happiness.
Great Riches, and Honors shall pass away
Ended this life, enjoy a glorious Day,
Oh that my Dull Muse could fully express,
Rich, rare, transcendent, future happiness.
God has in heav^n, I hope, laid up for thee,
E're blessed Mansion to Eternity.
Mount up alost you shall to Saints above.
On Angels wings your blessed Soul shall fly,
Near to our Savior, mounting up on high,
Conveyed by Angels to a place sublime:
Kings, Saints, and Martyrs: there may your soul shine.
On the most Reverend FATHER in GOD; William Juxon, Arch- bishop of Ganterbury,
His Grace.
Willing ever to serve your Sovereign Lord;
Industrious to advance Gods sacred Word.
Laud still the Lord, that did our Sovereign bring,
In his due time unto his Fathers Throne:
Advance the Name of Jah, of God alone.
May you shine bright, like a Transcendent one.
Jesus the grand true Bishop of your Soul,
Up has raised you, by your Sovereign dear,
Xalted on high, in our Hemisphear.
On your Royal Master you did fix your love:
None higher then your self did he approve.
When he was to suffer that fatal stroke
It made your heart to bleed yea heart of Oak:
Lamenting sore, for your Sovereigns death,
Like to have cost you your dear vital breath.
In Jesus Christ, you did put all your trust:
Angels still guide you, till you turn to dust:
Among Saints and Angels shine among the Just.
Jn Troublous Times, at last you lived to see
Unto your joy, his sacred Majesty;
Xonerated from his pain and grief:
Our gracious God did send him his relief.
Next to Gods Name, let us extol him chief.
Waiting long, at last our Sunn did arise:
In radiant manner, clearing our dim eyes;
Lamenting him, whose Death they did deplore.
It was a Blessed Time, when brave Monck did bring,
Again our gracious Sovereign, Lord, and King;
May we due praises of our Sovereign sing.
It pleased our good God, after many years;
Unto your joy, being almost drowned in tears;
Xalt your grieved heart, and sorrowful mind,
On your Dread Sovereign Lord, who was so kind,
Now double joy does spring: your King to find.
When that sable Day, and sad Night of Death,
Judicious Juxon, stop thy Sovereigns breath:
Lord, what a time was then to your sad Soul:
Lamenting his departure, did condole:
In grief, and tears, you were almost drowned then.
A better, happy time, God has you sent:
May heavens King crown you, with most sweet content.
Jn heavenly things you do spend your Days;
Unto your grand King, and Creators praise.
Xhorting Christians purely for to live;
Oh blessed Soul, such fair Instructions give;
None, none but Christ, can our foul sins forgive.
Wisdom advances Men of good desert;
It crown's that Man, who has a perfect heart.
Lord inflame your heart with holy fire;
Let your Affection be of like desire.
In place, as your Grace is advanced high;
Angels after Death, with your soul then fly;
Mount up aloft to highest Majesty.
Jnstall'd a Bishop in a blessed time;
Uprai's'd to honor, to a place sublime;
Xalted may you be to place of Bless;
Of heavenly Glory, and Happiness,
N^re Jesus Christ, in Robes of Righteousness.
On the most Reverend FATHER in GOD Edward, LORD BISHOP of NORWICH.
My ever Honored Priend and Kinsman.
Christ called you unto his Dean of Christ Church in Oxen.
Church again
Enabling you in's service to take pain.
But long you did not then continue there
But in a higher Place did soon appear.
You reaped a happy Guerdon for your love;
Both King and Kingdom did your ways approve.
God guided you by his sacred Spirit:
After this Life, Eternal joys inherit.
You preached before the Commons, and our King:
Praising the Lord, that did our Sovereign bring,
At last, with joy, unto his Fathers Throne:
It was the glorious work of God alone.
Your loyalty unto our Gracious Lord,
Does now unto you great comforts afford.
Your healing precious Balm was well applied:
The king the happy Bridegroom to our Bride.
The bride, this Kingdom was married at last:
Your Griefs, and Sorrows then were everpast.
Oh let us, to our God, most handful be.
That did preserve his Royal Majesty.
Oh how I did rejoice to read you Sermons before the King and Parliament.
Books
And therein see your gracious heart and looks
It did m^ drooping spirits then revive,
God guard ^^y Sovereign, keep him long alive
And tha^ his Enemies he may overcome:
Preserve his Offspring till the Day of D^me.
Let REYNOLDS then ever renowned be:
For's healing Balm, for Royal Sov'raignty.
He did prepare the Physic, for to cure,
The Malady which long we did endure.
God bless all the happy Physicians skill.
That did obey Gods word, and it fulfill.
The happy Patriots of our Country dear,
Which does our Gracious Sovereign love and fear.
Unite their hearts in Bonds of faithful Love;
Loving's Majesty, and his Acts approve.
And being made happy with all sweet content,
By a brave, blessed, healing Parliament.
On my Ever Honored Friend and Kinsman Doctor John Castle Esquire, one of the
Clerks of his Majesty's Privy Seal.
John Gracious your name does signify:
Oh! how good Names, the owners Dignify
Hereditus was for brave History,
Nathan a Prophet, in Divine Mystery.
Casting Your Care on God, has set You (...).
Advanced you to former Dignity.
Still by your Virtues, get to honors seat,
The grand King of Kings make you still Complete,
Laid low by War, yet Christ has raised you up.
Even to Dine, and at last with him to Sup.
Jesus of Nazareth, g^i^ you in your Ways:
O^ Christ (...) full (...) his praise
H (...) high of Bless,
No (...) Can you Wish.
Constant e're, in serving your Lord, and God:
And always diligent, to hear his word.
Serving your Lord, and Master faithfully,
The King, of Heaven, and Earth you dignifie
Laud God above: who has Preserved your life:
E're made you happy, for a ver^uous wife.
In all your troubles, you were not dismayed:
On God, you put your tru^: were not afraid.
Hosanna then at last, may you: soul sing:
None could you draw, from your dear Sovereign (King)
Christ gave your mind rest, after so much pain;
Advanced you to Honor, and place Ag^^n.
Still did you w^^te, upon the ^and of God:
The Tyrants pow'r's removd, his cruel Rod.
Lord thou have brought my friend; for to sit down,
Even under the Rays, of a blessed Crown.
Judicious Sir, I love your learned Arts:
On virtue grounded, and Renowned parts.
Heavenly fire, does inflame your mind;
Naught can remain of Dro^s, b'ing thus refind.
Christ make you happy: both in Life, and Death,
Advance his glory, with your vital breath;
Standing still firm, and constant in your faith:
Truth to maintain, and what our Savior says.
L^uding the Lord, in the most sadest time,
Even then your soul, did mount to place sublime.
In contemplation, and divinest things:
On things Celestial, and the King of Kings;
High Heavenly Raptures, for to place your mind:
None so sweet, and good on Earth, as Christ to find.
Clouds of calamity, being past away,
Advanced you now to see, a Halcyon day.
Salvator Mundi, does you comfort give,
The Lord grant your blessed soul, long life to live.
Lord when thy servants work, is done and past:
Eternal joys, give his blessed soul, at last
This have I poorly drawn, from your good Name
Let Blessed Angels, blow your Trump of Fame.
You have been like a Father unto me,
God bless your soul, to all Eternity.
On the right worshipful, and noble minded Gentleman, Henry Ford, Esquire; one
of his Majesty's JUSTICES of the Peace, in the County of Devon, and Lieutenant
Colonel to the Honorable Sir JOHNDRAKE, Knight, and Barronet, etc.
High, he^v'nly knowledge does enrich thy mind;
Eternal happiness may your Soul find:
Not Nature, but Grace, does thy Savior please:
Restored by Christ, cured of sins disease;
Y^n brightness of his Glory may thou shine:
Far more Transcendent than a brave Divine.
Ore Topps and Mountains thy Wit does aspire:
Raised up to Heaven By a heavenly fire;
Death shall not quench the flame of thy desire.
High do thou mount by thy rich Fantasy:
Ear^h cannot turn it into an Ecstasy.
None none but Christ, did that brave Martyr say:
Raise up thy though^ and live with Christ for aye,
Yet, happy to have all things here on Earth:
Far more happy to have a blessed death.
On things (...), thy blessed Soul does not feed;
(...) Divine; (...) of immortal seed;
Death wh^^ (...) come, thou fear not, oh beav'nly breed.
Wisdom and Learning does adorn a man,
I m^kes him flourish, and things duly scan:
Learning adorns a worthy noble mind:
Learning invites men to beloving, ^ind:
It does enrich the mind with knowledge store:
Adds luster to its wit, and makes it more:
Magnify Gods great Name; praise him therefore.
Could I your worthy noble parts rehearse:
And write the same in high immortal verse:
I should then to your Country; then declare;
Your Virtues and your Learning rich and rare.
A mirror to the World thou do appear,
Thy Learning and thy Judgment shines clear:
Go on blessed Saint in thy brave way to bliss,
And at the last enjoy Heavens happiness.
Lieutenant Ford,
One of those famous Worthies of my King:
God in his due time to happiness bring:
Eternal happiness after thy death:
To Gods glory, er'e spend your vital breath.
On the Worshipful, Francis Poulet, Esquire; One of his Majesty's JUSTICES of
the Peace, for the County of SOMERSET.
Fair may your Name be writ in book of Life:
Raised is your Soul'bove Earth, and mortal strife.
Angels attend you both in life and death:
Nature b^ing spent, yield up your vital breath.
Christ will call home your Soul in his due time,
Into his Manssion; where it bright shall shine;
Sweet Savior, grant it so, in place sublime.
Pondering and musing on Divine things:
On blessed Angels, and the King of Kings.
Up may your Soul rise 'bove Earthly Story,
Lord mount it up to Eternal Glory.
Ended this life, may your Soul mount on high,
There to reem^in to all Eternity.
Famous, and Renow'd; were your blessed Ancestors
Records of 'time, show forth your Progenitors.
A famous Author does preserve their Name:
Not to be mentioned, but with Trump of Fame.
Christ has obtained, by his precious merit,
In Heaven a place, your Soul to inherit;
Solace with Saints, and the Holy Spirit.
Prudent in your actions, and circumspect;
Oh may Gods mercy on you still reflect.
Up may you rise unto a Heavenly Throne;
Lauding your blessed Savior, God alo^e:
Ever may you on Earth; and heaven happy be;
Transcendent live to's Sacred Majesty.
FRANCIS, Free, your Name does signify.
Right good Name does the Owner dignisie:
And may the holy Spirit you comfort give;
Nurtured on Earth, in Heaven for to live.
Casting your care on God, and him to serve.
In health and sickness, till grim Death shall come.
Sweetly resting in hope, till Day of Dome.
Pleasures immortal may you e're enjoy.
On earth, and heaven, past this vain Worlds annoy.
Up may your soul mount, to eternal bless;
Lord give you true, and perfect happiness.
E^re may you shine, like starr, celestial bright;
To Enjoy the comforts of transcendent Light.
On Coming to the Right Worshipful Sir COVRTNEY POLE, Knight and Barronet, his
Court Holden at Brodwinsor in the County of Dors^t the Fourth day of April
1661. to take the Oath of Alegiance.
VVElcome to Brave Sir Courtney Pole his Court:
Where many Loyal Subjects do resort.
Come Swear With joy to be true to your King:
It was the hand of God that did him bring,
Into his Native Land to Rule and Reign:
Rejoice now Loving Friends, with might and maine,
That the ^ing does sway the septer of this Land:
Oh! be true and Faithful, to his Command.
Do you what good, true Subjects does befit:
That you may hereafter down in Heaven sit;
With Faithful Abraham, and his blessed train:
With Saints and Angles there for to remain.
The Clouds of blackness, Now are past away
Our Sovereign Lord: has brought a Glorious Day.
Let then your Loyal hearts: with true Love burn:
After you're sworn you may again return:
V^^o your Houses: or Places Where you Dwell,
Wishing and praying, none More may rebel.
Living in peace and L^ving Each other:
Doing good, not hurt to your Dear brother.
Let Writh and Anger cease, that God may bless:
And send you Everlasting Happiness.
May'th the King, and's People live and so accord,
Truly to love and serve our gracious Lord.
May the King and's People live and agree,
In true Love, Peace, and perfect Amity
On hearing of his honored, and reverend Kinsman, Edward Reynolds, Doctor in
Divinity, consecrated Lord BISHOP of NORWICH.
As God has called you to a Bishops Seat,
Long may you live, and preach Gods Word complete.
May your holy life give such example;
That your Charge over Sin and Vice may trample:
May your holy life such example give,
That may proclaim, that Christ in you do live;
And by his power does foul Sin destroy:
And so at last enter your Masters Joy.
Welcome dear Kinsman, to Norwich City,
A place rare, ancient, famous, and pretty,
By your heavenly Doctrine you mount aloft;
And show how Christ man's sinful soul has bought.
The preciousness of Faith you do descrie:
And mount the Soul up to Eternity:
To see the face of Christ through holy Faith;
To behold his Word, what our Savior says.
Repentance also you declare to men:
God bless your heavenly Tongue, and golden Pen
And all your parts of Body, Soul, beside;
That you may over a heavenly Flock still guide:
To Heavenly Cannan, that Celestial Hill,
Comfort the Saints with heavenly Manna still.
God long continue your most happy days;
To tune your Tongue, to your Creators praise:
Inspire your heart with a heavenly flame;
As long as life continue praise his name.
Accept my language from a faultring Pen,
Who will reverence you amongst worthi'st men.
Oh happy then, when holy Saints does greet;
May we at lest our blessed Savior meet,
And go with him into eternal bliss,
To have a Mansion with those Saints of his.
When your work is ended, and parted hence,
God give your Soul a happy recompense.
When that your days, on Earth are past and done,
God make you happy to behold his Son.
When that your days on Earth shall pass away,
God grant your soul a Divine Halcion day.
For those famous learned books you do indite,
May God your Name in's book of Life down write.
When Death shall shut, and close up your blessed eyes
May your Soul with Angels mount 'bove the Skies.
Where Saints, Holy Martyrs, all that are Blessed:
There may your Blessed Soul, for ever rest.
ON Reading of some part of the Church HISTORY Of BRITAIN: Written By the
learned Pen of that Famous Historian. THOMAS FVLLERD. D.
FRom time of Pagan Britains, last of Kings,
That ruled, and Reigned, in this Famous Isle;
Thou do in ample manner, so place things:
By thy melifuous, and most learned style.
From birth of Jesus Christ, our most dear Lord:
Thou do begin thy sacred History,
Concluding Truth, out of his Holy word,
And do unfold, many hiden mystery.
The Church of Britain, thou do so set forth,
Advance its Glory, and make it shine bright;
That After-Ages may behold thy worth,
And see its splender, in the Darksome night.
How many learned Books, have thou turned over?
Extract the quintisence, of Ancient times:
And taught the world; what they knew not before,
Enriching their minds, with thy Precious lines.
Grand Mirror of this Nation to Advance,
Your worth and Fame, there wants a Homers Pen:
For to set forth, things Parallel to men,
Of Highest learning, and of greatest Fame,
For to Preserve Thy Rich: and famous Name.
Whiles Britain's Isle does flourish, and wax green,
Thy Famous works with wonder shall be seen,
And be Renowned unto After-Ages:
In your well writ, Admired, and learned Pages.
The Ancient British Church thou do revive:
Advance, Coroberate: and keep alive.
Old Father-Time, Thou do confer with all:
Materials for thy Building; great, and small,
Out of many Studies, in this land:
Thou have made search, with thy learned hand.
The Famous British Isle, Thou 'ast surrounded:
Both Truth and falsehood, You'ave deeply sounded:
Whiles that Great Britain, bears that famous Name:
Your learned works shall still preserve thy Fame:
Let others write, in whatsoever style:
Thy writings shall be Mirror, in this Isle;
Spread far, and travel into other lands:
Be Admired, that come from your courteous hands.
Your famous Books, shall preserve your Name:
And Angels high resound your Trump of Fame.
The Famous Worthies of After Ages:
Shall admire your Golden learned Pages.
As long as God by time shall leave a man;
All sorts of men your Books shall love to scan.
When life's ended; and Death shall close your eyes:
Your Body Imortal to Glory, shall Arise.
ACCROSTICKS ON The HONORABLE and truly NOBLE SIR WILL. MORICE KNIGHT. One of the
SECRETARIES OF STATE Unto His most EXCELLENT MAJESTY, K. CHARLES II.
WHiles that you ponder on the Kings Affairs,
Judicious Sir, for to advance the State;
Laboring diligently, early and late:
Lord guide your faithful heart to serve our King,
In Gods due time let Angels your soul bring;
Ascending up, and then with Angels fly:
Mount up aloft unto the Hea'vns high.
Majestic Morice, with your Golden Pen,
Of your great Actions, and Affairs of Men,
Rich, rarer Pen then mine, I want to write,
Royal great things, not mean ones to indite.
In Jesus Christ, you do put all your Trust:
Christ crown your soul with Kings amongst the just,
E're you attain it, you must turn to dust.
Wisdom and Learning does advance a man,
It makes him prudent; and things duly skan,
Learning adorns a worthy noble mind:
Learning invites men to be courteous kind;
It does enrich the mind with knowledge store.
Adds luster to his parts, and makes them more,
Magnify Gods great Name, praise him therefore.
More care and pains no Creature can fulfill;
Oh! you do help both King and Subject still,
Raising your heart up to that sacred hill.
Jesus still make you happy all your days:
Changes and chances does not trouble thee,
E're in your mind b'ing noble, loyal free.
Wit, wealth and learning cannot keep from death,
In dying posture we yield up our breath.
Labor of mind and body being past,
Laid low in grave, we must be all at last.
In and by Jesus Christ, our Savior dear,
Arise you shall out of your grave of dust,
Mounting aloft to live among the just.
Melifuouse in your words and actions still:
Oh! how I love, and honor pens man's skill,
Resplendent raptures high does enrich your mind,
Just royal King Charles does you great business find.
Christ still direct you, and be e're your guard,
Eternal Blessings be your blessed Reward.
Whiles that ingenious fancies stir the brain,
It makes some things appear, but light and vain:
Lord so advance your Wit, your Wealth, and State,
Living and dying make you fortunate
In Jesus Christ, your blessed Savior dear.
Awake, though dead before him, shall appear.
Mount up on high, and Heavenly Anthems hear.
Mercy and Truth adorn your gracious sp'rit,
On sublime things to think on, and to write.
Robes of Christ's righteousness may you put on,
In and by him, that is that holy one:
Changed one day you shall be, yet need not fear;
Enthroned at last by Christ your Savior dear.
BE pleased to relish well what I impart,
I love my Sovereign with my Soul and Heart.
It is in your power to make me live.
Oh! could I to you Fairer Present give,
Then mean bare words of a Country Hue,
Not Court-like, Sublime, which are fit for you.
Judicious Morice, you do move in Sphere,
Near and about my Grand Sovereign dear;
Your word to Him may make me happy then:
You shall command my Body, Heart and Pen.
The Operation of my head b'ing old:
My Wit is dull, my brain of temper cold.
If it were hot and strong, should be for you,
The highest fruit of brain is but your due.
I fear with tedious lines for to offend,
I will therefore conclude, and make an end.
I will, I say, end my earthly story,
Praying God may crown you with immortal glory.
ON THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, VALIANT, AND TRULY NOBLE MINDED GENT. SIR JOH.
CLOBERY Knight.
JUstice and Goodness does your heart affect;
On sacred works you do no time neglect:
Heavenly thoughts your mind does pitch upon,
None, none but Christ, I there let it fix on.
Christ has advanced you by his word and sword,
Laud and praise still your blessed heavenly Lord.
Oh! may your actions ever happy be,
Blessed for ever to Eternity
Everlasting Lord your soul ever bless.
Raise up your heart and mind to happiness
In and by Jesus Christ his righteousness.
Ingenuous Sir, I love your valiant Arts,
On Virtue grounded, and renowned parts.
Heavenly fire does inflame your brave mind:
Naught can remain of dust, b'ing thus refined.
Cares and great troubles does attend the Saints;
Lord hear my honored friend, his just complaints,
Open the gates of Heaven, and entrance make
By fervent prayer, for thy Saviors sake.
E're thou were born, thou were ordained to dye:
Raise up your heart to 's heavenly Majesty;
Y In height of bless, up with bright Angels fly.
Joy after sorrow, you enjoy at last:
Oh render thanks, now griefs are over past.
Heaven made you happy by a gracious King,
N New praises to your Maker daily sing.
Christ at last give your soul eternal gain,
Labor being past, and all Earthly pain.
Oh Lord make you happy in life and death.
Be careful in spending your vital breath.
Ever in praise and honor of Gods name,
Raised by Christ to place of happiness,
Ynvested be in's Robes of Righ eousness.
ON THE HONORABLE COLONEL, AND MY EVER HONORED FRIEND SIR JOHN DRAKE Knight
and Baronet, etc.
RIght noble Knight I do admire your wit,
In acting of high matters, proper, fit.
Your Love was ever constant to the Crown,
Which has purchased you great and high renown.
Your Name shall ever flourish and wax green,
And amongst the Worthies of this age be seen.
Your Wisdom solid is, moves in due place,
It advances your name, and noble race. Of Knights and Baronets.

Who can in England exceed Drakes great Name?
His worthy Ancestors of noble Fame.
Thou did outstrip the Kings Enemies: Please him still,
And to his Laws obedient and to his will.
His presence did revive your loyal heart,
His absence did increase your greater smart.
The Crommelites from him could get no Bays,
It was to the King he did owe his praise.
He would not yield to any Tyrant great;
In his actions he walked upright, complete.
Oh what a high and lofty brain he had!
Not to buckle, with Ruler was so bad.
Who durst to sit in's Royal Soverains Throne,
Which did belong to our King Charles alone.
He could not therefore love him in his heart,
For shooting at King Charles his mortal dart.
He was the man, King Charles his blood did shed;
He was accursed both alive and dead,
For ^ntting off King Charles's sacred head.
Oh, how he did suck that most precious blood,
Who to three Nations would have done much good.
Drake's fit to be Counselor to a King:
He ever ready was comforts to bring.
His Wit's profound, his Genius mounts up high.
He serves his royal Master faithfully.
I must conclude, Gods Spirit did you guide,
That in your acting did not walk aside.
AN ELEGY ON THE Death of that most Excellent, Religious and unparralel'd
Queen of BOHEMIA, Only Daughter to JAMES KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, SISTER TO
CHARLES THE FIRST, AND WIFE to the most Illustrious ELECTOR, FREDERICK KING OF
BOHEMIA.
A Brave stately Cedar's fallen in this land;
There Is no withstanding of the Almighties hand.
Ah cruel death, why did thou now appear?
To rob us of a Jewel rich and rare.
The Mirror of this Isse is now deceast,
Her death has many Mourners now increast.
My gracious King and Nobles they do mourn,
And faithful servants over her sacred Urn
They mourn in heart, with black Cloaks to the ground,
For such a Queen on earth's scarce to be found.
This virtuous Queen of fair Bohemian land,
who in the true faith did most firmly stand
Of all the famous Nations far and near,
Her like and parralel does not appear.
She was extracted from a Royal stock;
Death came too soon, and at her door did knock.
James that great King of Peace, and learned skill,
Death would not spare for all his learned quill:
Nor yet his virtuous daughter shining bright,
But must away with him in sable night.
Great Queen of Sheba not more virtuous rare,
Then this great Queen within our Hemisphear.
When death does summon, we must all away,
From Princely furniture, to beds of clay.
Before Queen Anne, that famous Queen she died,
There was before a glorious star espied.
'Twas of wonder and admiration:
It Is sad to yield account of its station.
Many sad things it did portend i'th'end,
Which God Almighty then did quickly send:
Great Wars and Bloodshed then did after come,
Which ranged over many parts of Christendom:
But Germany did feel the stroke most great,
A heavy Famine little for to eat.
King James that learned and renowned King,
Which to this Kingdom did great Blessings bring
Of Peace and Happiness to this Nation,
Both Penty, Riches, and stately fashion.
God has Crowned our Nation with great content,
A gracious King, and blessed Parliament.
King James did write of that strange blazing star;
Seen before Queens Anns death, that Princess rare
'Twas to invite this Guest God sent this star,
Whose friends and nearest kin good Princess are:
Who though they run the race of men, and dye,
Death serves but to refine their Majesty.
So did my Queen from hence her Court remove,
And put on death, to be enthroned above:
Then she is not dead, but sleeps, no good Prince dies,
But like the Days-Sun, only sets to rise.
Since her sad death, a bright star did appear:
I hope our Royal Queen will soon land here,
And will arrive at this famous City,
With noble Lords, sweet Ladies, and pretty.
Cleopatria not equal to thee,
Though filled with riches, perfect Majesty,
Attended with a sumptuous stately Train,
Yet was at last by poisonous Asp there slain.
This blessed Queen was by death summoned hence,
Raised up to Heaven to receive recompense.
The blessed Angels did her soul convay,
Freed from all Troubles, and the worlds annoy.
At last to enter her grand Masters joy,
Her many choice virtues for to recount,
Would up into afair Great volumn mount,
I want a Homer or a Mayhews pen,
Her worth and virtues to declare to men.
Her faith and patience was of that brave fame,
Which shall preserve her great and famous name:
Some famous Poet shall adorn your Hearse,
And make you live by his immortal verse.
Du Bartus, heavenly Poets fit to write
Of your rare Virtues which did shine most bright.
Beams of Eternal light lighten your soul,
Rich, rare, transcendent without man's control.
I wish your soul high perfect happiness
Amongst blessed Saints with everlasting bless.
Transcendant hrppiness I hope you find,
None but Jesus Christ filled your heart and mind.
None but Anne and Elizabeth like to thee,
In radiant virtues, and high Majesty.
Most blessed Queen you did prepare for death,
Advanced toward heaven, part with vital breath.
Nature most kind, and grace you did set forth,
Ever to show your vertu^s and great worth.
Bright shining virtues did your soul adorn,
Robes of Christ's righteousness you have put on,
In and by Jesus Christ most happy be,
Ascend with Angels to the Trinity.
No earthly thing does satiate the heart.
The holy Spirit does all grace impart.
Gr^nd virtuous Queen your ways were firm and good,
Advanced by Christ, your Saviors precious blood.
Night of death came, thou did go to be's bride,
Ere to sit down by Christ your Saviors side.
Bounty and Gods free love to you blessed Saint
Raised you up, God heard your just complaint.
In full ripe years you were now called away;
Advanced by Christ, with your blessed Bridegroom stay.
Christ called you hence unto his Fold;
Our Savior calls both Young and Old:
No Riches, Honor, Youth can stay,
Strong sturdy Death takes all away.
The Baly of our blessed Lord,
Away must go, obey his word.
No longer time he will neglect,
Christ's calls away his blessed elect
Brought now at last unto your home.
Riches to have, not of earth's lome.
Indeed that Portion will endure,
Gods mercies are for ever sure:
Away she went, when Christ did call,
No dallying death will take all.
The greatest, richest, and the small:
Brought low by death unto her grave,
Robes of Christ's righteousness to have.
In Jesus Christ the put her trust,
And is now gone unto the just.
Nothing so dear that she did love,
Treasures immortal did approve.
Changed is your body, and refined shall be;
Called to the presence of the Trinity.
Night of death come, with Angels she did fly
Saints to live with to all Eternity.
Christ has removed you to a greater joy,
Earths comforts, unto heavens, but a toy.
In earthly things there is but lintle pleasure,
Above the sky is immortal treasure.
Christ ransomed your soul with his precious blood,
Only that Balm can do our souls most good,
Near Jesus Christ, I hope your soul does rest,
Saved by your Savior, lives amongst the blessed.
The soul is wearied by its travels here,
Away shes gone unto her Savior dear,
Her glass being run, her soul is fled away
With her Redeemer ever for to stay.
What can I think, speak, or write more then?
She does deserve! shall have a better Pen.
To write of her high Virtues, glorious Name,
Which learned Authors shall recount her Fame.
Christ is your blessed Spouse, your Birdegroom, All,
Your God, your Savior, King Emperial.
He has advanced you to eternal bliss,
Let Us be as careful not to do amiss.
She was a mother unto Princess store,
God bless them here on earth, and evermore.
Their severel names I cannot recount;
Some are on earth, others to heaven did mount.
Prince Robert is a stout courageous wight,
And has put many enemies to flight:
God bless his Highness long here on the earth,
And make him truly happy at his death.
Grieve not immoderately, brave Prince, her son,
For your dear mother that is dead and gone
From earth to heav, n, that blessed place of rest,
To live with glorious Saints for ever blessed.
Wherefore then should I say, that she is dead;
Whenas she is gone, where life it self is bred.
Then mourn no more but set your heart at rest,
You shall be like her carcass in the chest:
As number, as wan, as pale and cold as she,
Pray God your lives and deaths no worse may be.
Grieve then no more, put not your mind to pain,
For her pure soul in heaven does remain.
He that writes more, more time of grief must borrow,
Let him then bring his wit, I Will bring my sorrow.
ACCROSTICKS On her most sacred MAJESTY.
Elizabeth blessed peace of the Lord,
Loving his Saints, and his sacred word.
In Jesus Christ you did put all your trust,
Zealous for Religion, lives amongst the just.
A blessed change you lived for to see,
Blessed be God, his sacred Majesty:
Enthroned complete in his dear Fathers Throne;
The praises chiefly belongs to God alone;
Hosanna let us sing to that holy One.
Queen 'bove all Queens in glory bright,
Up mounted high unto that heavenly light.
Eternal Joys now to be partaker,
Ever to praise with Saints your Creator;
Now singing Anthemes to your blessed Maker.
Of all the blessings of a righteous soul,
Freedom from sin, and this vile worlds control.
By death of Christ you have obtained life,
Overcome the world, and all mortal strief.
Hallalujahs sing in his height of bless,
Ever partaking of heavens happiness.
Made now a member of that heavenly host;
In praising Father, Son, and holy Ghost.
Angels conveyed your soul, that heavenly Post.
Away she is gone unto that place of bless,
Immortal Saints enjoy full happiness:
Adieu blessed Queen, we mortals will prove just,
Always esteeming your most precious dust,
The grave has your body, world your fame,
Heaven your soul, your son preserves your Name.
Though you be gone, your fame is left behind.
I hope your son will prove as gracious kind.
My muse is dull, my Taper gives dim light,
Yet may invite some better Pens to write.
I Will put an end to this my mortal story,
Hoping God bath crowned her with immortal glory.
On Hearing of the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, JOHN MERREFIELD Esquire Made one of the KINGS
SERGEANTS AT LAW, Andin Election tobe a Judge.
WHen our renowed King Charles came to his Court,
Many Lords and noble persons did resort,
Who came to see'm, and kiss his royal haud,
B'ing come from far into his native land.
All sorts of men of our brave English Nation,
Were glad in heart for their Kings restoration.
It was a time then freely for to give,
To see their gracious King then for to live
In royal Honor, and in noble Fame,
God long increase, and propagate his Name,
It was a time to confer honors store,
The cause did well require long before.
Brave Monck and Patriots did love our King,
Who used their best means speedily to bring
Him to sit and act with them in's Parliament,
To make good Laws with one and joint consent.
As Guerdon of's love did the King impart
Rewards of honor for their good desert.
Of those brave Nobles and deserving men,
I Am far unworthy to recount by Pen:
Yet may I not my honored friend forget,
Whose former favors make me much in debt.
Let Merrefields name advance to his height,
May Kings and Princes in him take delight.
From worthy Squire, surmount an noble Knight.
I heard that King Charles will make him a Judge:
His domeanor is such, no man will grudge,
To hear of his good and high preferment,
Which long continue till his interment.
Loyal learned Merrefields worth do shine
In equal splendour to some rare Divine.
I did long since conceive within my breast,
When that my Royal Soverain came to rest,
And to sit down on his dear Fathers throne,
For to enjoy three kingdoms of his own:
That then his Majesty would him advance,
When being come from Holland, fertile France,
Mere love and favor would my Sovraign move
On honest Merrefield to fix his love.
For Learning, Law, Loyalty, and the rest.
He does deserve among Lawyers counted best.
When he shall come to sit in justice place,
Lewd vicious men he will then disgrace.
Advance the virtuous, and the godly man,
And of men's various actions duly scan.
When he shall mount up to grand Justice seat,
His parts with luster, then will seem complete.
Immitate honest Crew, Hutton, Denham,
Doddrige Walters, Jenkins, Crook and Popham:
Both these and many learned Lawyers more:
Their worth he will practice, and yet keep in store.
My Pen is weak and lame for to set forth,
His profound wisdom, and his noble worth,
Full fraught with favors of his Sovereign Lord,
Still careful to preserve Gods sacred word.
E're may you have your Kings love here on earth,
King of Kings make you happy in your death.
May Gods Spirit joy you e're above all,
Be ready when God for your soul shall call.
As there are several degrees amongst men,
So in Heaven, Saints, Angels and Syraphen.
As the King has honored my dear friend,
So to his Family let it extend.
According to his worth let us praises yield
Unto that well deserving Merrefield.
After all honor when it shall please your Maker,
Of heavens joys may you be made partaker.
Enough you will have when Angels shall you bring
To glory your blessed soul to Christ your King.
ON HEARING OF THE DEATH Of my dear and admired SOVEREIGN LORD, KING CHARLES
the First.
GRief does afflict, and pierce my tender heart,
That death has slain my Soverain with his dart,
Cannibals they were, did act the devils part,
Make brave royal Branches, and whole Kingdoms smart.
Was there no mean to qualify your ire?
But that your wrath must burn with hellish fire.
Oh cursed Monsters to do such athing,
To murder our Sovereign Lord and King.
What shall I say, 'twas sin that did provoke
God for to strike us with so sharp a stroke,
For to deprive him of his precious breath,
And snatched his life away by untimely death,
Ah cursed Miscr'ant to lay thy hand on him,
For to commit so horrid bloody sin.
Did not thy heart with sorrow then relent,
And cause thy wicked heart for to repent?
For so great mischief, bloody, crying sin,
That will eternal vengeance after bring.
Where were thy eyes within thy cursed head!
To strike the fonntain of Life, our Soverain dead:
I wept, and bathed mine eyes in morning tears,
For death of my dear Sovereign Lord and King:
It was to qualify my grief and fears:
For that sad Act, Repentance it will bring.
Had I not been in my dear brothers house,
I might been cut by Soldiers smals a mouse: Cap. P^^l. bu^ge^ Cap in K. C^^^l.
th. First his Army, lived and d^'d ^t Waym^uth.

They would soon have holpt me from my weeping,
And brought me to an untimely sleeping.
God will revenge him on that cursed wretch.
Who did his murdering hand out-boldy stretch
For to cut off our gracious Sov'raigns head:
The grief thereof did strike me almost dead,
That Monster that did cut off that sacred head,
Did strike the Nobles, and the kingdom dead.
Dead in Repute, in Misery, and in fame,
Stain to our noble Nation, English name.
The wicked Vipers hastened him away,
Gods holy Angels did his soul conveigh
To heavenly Canaan, there to be crowned King,
With glorious Saints and Angels Anthemes sing.
On sight of supposed ANGELS, In shape of DUCKS, Hovering over King Charles the
first, when he was beheaded,
WHy do you talk of Ducks? they Angels were!
Soldiers could not discern them, their eyes
The bright Angels waited for to conveigh [b'ing blear,
King Charle's soul, though's life were made a prey.
His blood did drown their Consciences full deep,
Whiles many for our Sovereign Lord did weep.
The blessed Angels hover d'ore his head,
And waited on him after he was dead:
Who did conveigh his blessed soul to bliss,
To a heavenly Mansion, endless happiness,
ON Sight of the Death of that HONORABLE and LEARNED Knight. SIR. HEN. HYDE On the
fourth of March 1650.
RIch, rare, transcendent Hyde when thou did die,
My heart did grieve my eyes did weep; the sky
Was overcast with sable blackness sad,
For to behold an action was so bad.
Loyal brave Hyde when thou did loose thy head,
My heart with grief and inward sorrow bled.
The fourth of March was that fatal day,
That brave Sir Henry Hyde was snatched away
by cruel, sudden and untimely death:
Who in high language spent his vital breath.
He faithfully served his royal Master,
His enemies made him of death a Taster.
It grieved me for to see his head fall down;
He fell so low, for love unto the Crown.
I hope brave Hyde did not the Merchants wrong,
But that it was a lash of a false tongue.
I could scarce write these lines without weeping eye.
My eyes did weep when that brave soul did die.
Though's body dead, his soul shall e're remain
With his Lord Christ for ever to reign.
Henry, Rich Lord, it does import,
E're loved the word, to it resort.
No man more loyal to his King,
Rebellious men did his soul sting,
Yet's Prayers did in Gods ears ring.
Hyde laid down his life for serving his King
In loyal manner, b'ing a blessed thing.
Death did not sad him, nor his heart dismay,
Expecting to live with his Lord Christ always.
His soul is gone to eternal rest,
Ended now is his mortal sorrow,
No piercing cares can him molest,
Everlasting joys did him follow.
Repine not therefore at his bliss;
If thou live well, thy joy shall be like his.
Hope does assure me, Hyde's soul's gone to heaven:
In this life, though of's life he were bereav'n.
Death did deprive him here of a few days:
Enemies sent him to heaven his God to praise.
On Sight and Hearing of my HONORED FRIEND, GEORGE FVLFFORD, Esquire One of His
Majesty's Justices of the PEACE For the County of DORSCET, at Prayers with his
Family, the tenth of August, 1661.
BY fervent Prayer thou do so discry,
And raise the soul up to Eternity.
Mount up rich soul with your heart and voice,
And cause those hear you, in their hearts rejoice.
God long continue your most happy days,
To tune your tongue to your Creators praise.
Inspire your heart with a heavenly flame,
As long as life continue, praise his name.
Assist you in your Prayers by his spirit,
After may your soul heaven inherit.
Accept my language from a faultring pen,
Who will reverence you'mongst worthy men.
May your prayers ascend and pierce the sky,
And your soul mount up, and with Angels fly.
After you have done your service, parted hence,
God give your soul in heaven a recompense.
When that your days on earth are past away,
God give your soul a divine alchion day.
Christ's precious blood's your balm, that balms your bless.
God bring your soul to endless happiness.
By Christ's his merits so rewarded be,
Make you happy to all Eternity.
ON MY HONORED FRIEND, GEORGE FVLFFORD, Esquire at Prayers with his Family, etc.
BY zealous Prayer thou do soar aloft,
Fly up by Faith to Christ our souls who bought.
Dear 'twas indeed, it cost him his heart blood,
To save our precious souls, and do men good.
Oh what a various change of divine things,
Flows from your blessed mouth to the King of Kings,
Your heavenly tongue does inchant the ear
With ravishing comforts of our Savior dear.
What heavenly language does from you flow,
Nectar proceeds from you, though here below.
A constant servant to our Sovereign true,
With honor you are graced, it is your due.
Your Graces are divine and eminent.
Translucent shine, rich, rare and transcendent.
Oh my dear friend you do my mind content,
To admiration, divine ravishment.
Most rare you do pray for our gracious King:
The King of Kings your soul to glory bring
In his due season to a glorious state,
To live and reign with the regenerate.
O what sweet Raptures does proceed from thee,
Ravish the mind with divine Ecstasy,
Until my soul shall up to Heaven ascend,
God make me happy with so good a friend.
Who can conduct my soul to heavenly bliss,
To full fruition of heavens happiness.
Ah blessed soul what more then can I say,
Night of death come, may you see a glorious day.
ON SIR. ROB. BRET Wearing a LEEK IN HIS HAT ON S. David's Day, And in playing
Gleek with two Noble Ladies.
FRom Royal Tuders stock Eliza came,
That famous and renowned Queen, whose fame
Shall ever live in fair great Britains Isle,
Her gracious Actions still does on us smile:
Her name does fragrant smell amongst the Saints,
Our gracious King will hear our just complaints.
This day being David's Saint does me invite,
To show forth a beam of its radiant light,
A King and Prophet that did bravely reign
Beyond the State of that great Charlamayn.
A man very rare after Gods own heart,
Oh may we in Gods service bear a part.
Eliza that Majestic Royal Queen,
Her Leek on David's Day was to be seen,
Which she did wear in honor of that day
In silk and silver beautiful and gay,
Though first of March seemed in the month of May.
The valiant old Britains strong and stout,
Foild their enemies, and gave them the rout.
The Leek did wear and for a sign display,
Vanquished their enemies, made them run away.
It is a joy to see the old green Leek
Worn in friends Hats, and see them now at Gleek.
These noble Ladies does become the place,
Heroick-like, plays with a comely grace.
Friends, long may you wear Leeks, and at Gleek play,
And when you marry Sir, be an Alchion Day.
ON DR. T. FULLERS Putting down the NORMAN RACE, in his History of the Church
of Britain.
SEt up again that Royal Norman Race,
Which you of late turned down with such disgrace.
But you are wise to run the race of men,
To change your mind as you can change your Pen.
Is this your noble zeal to Royal Stock,
To turn them down, as of it make a mock!
Turn't up again, and do no longer stay,
Lest being spide, it carries gain away,
For writing of that goodly stately book,
If that our Soveraiu Lord should on it look;
Peruse that irksome passage, and it find,
It would no doubt be much against his mind:
You did it then against your mind and reason:
To set it up, 't would be connted treason.
But that time is past, now a better's come.
Arnend that Act lest you receive your dome.
Now that the learned Doctors life's ended,
Some friend of his may get it to be mended.
ACCROSTICKS, ON THO. FULLER Doctor of Divinity, and late Prebend of New SARUM.
THy Name is botomless, so is your Art:
High skilled in History: for to Impart.
Open your Treasury, and let men view:
Mines most profound of Riches, old, and new,
Ascend Rare Sir, unto that Radiant sky:
Soar up aloft unto the Heavens high.
Fair Charecters of Grace may your heart hold,
Virtues sacred, pure, and more worth then Gold.
Lifting up your heart, to your Savior Dear:
Low be in self, high in your Hemisphear.
E're may you be Blessed, by Gods Heavenly Grace:
Raised up at last; to see His glorious Face.
Thrones mighty high, shall be subdued at last:
Heaven continues, when Earthly things are past.
Oh! then Remember Sir, your later end:
Mercy, and Peace obtain to be your friend.
As all things pass, on this vain Globe below,
Soar up aloft, where better fruits does grow.
Fervent in your Prayers, and in Preaching,
Unto Heaven, you do direct your Teaching.
Lay hold on Christ, let him be your sure Guide:
Lay hold on Him, and you shall never slide.
E're that the World was made, he did Elect,
Ransomed his Servants, and will them Protect.
Transcendent, in your Calling, manifold,
High Raptures to Declare, out of Gods word.
Open your mouth wide, and set forth his Praise:
Among blessed Saints, may you spend all your Days.
After this mortal life, is gone and past:
Soar up to Heaven, and live with Christ at last.
Fair, sacred Beams, that does your Soul Inspire:
Up raise your Heart, and so Inflame desire.
Like to a Conduit-pipe, thou do convay,
Laborious sweetness, and Christ's Rich Array.
E'rlasting Joys, prepared for you in store:
Remain for your Blessed Soul, for evermore.
Translucent Fuller, with thy Golden Pen,
High Mysteries utter, and declare to Men.
Old and young, both sexes, give Dainty food:
Meat seasonable, choice: new, old, and good.
As Fountain-like: flow out with streams of Grace:
Saciate enough the Saints, in every Place.
Full to the Brim, let thy sweet Nectar flow:
Up to the Highest Heavens, let your thoughts go.
Laid low in self, most high, thy Soul will mount:
Lord let his Rich Soul, be of High account.
Eternal God, Crown him, in his last Days;
Record his Name, for Ever Thee to Praise.
ON The hearing of the general Muster of the Honorable COLONEL, SIR. John
Drake. Knight, and Baronet, one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the County of
Devon, and one of his Majesty's JUSTICES of the Peace of the said County, his
Regiment, on Otery-hill, the 20th of June. 1661.
LOok, do you see on yonder Hill,
The brave bred Soldiers show their skill:
A royal gallant Company appear,
To the Noble Colonel counted dear.
They did their brave rich Colors there display:
Their stately Gallantry on a soul Day:
But, at the last, the he'vens began to smile:
And all did bless, and none did them revile.
The several Captains did march in state:
And did their Colonel congratulate.
They did there then march in brave manner,
And did mount up their rich stately Banner.
They did I say, their stately Colors show:
For others as well as themselves to know:
Their Feathers wag and their rich Rapiers shine,
A Sermon preached by a sound rare Divine.
Solid learned Ashford was that brave man,
Oh, may they his profound points duly skan.
He did both duty teach of God and King,
And to their joyful hearts much comfort bring.
Look up brave Sonldiers see your Caesar's come,
Advance your pikes shoulder musket and make rome.
Suppose you saw Alexander the Great,
A Warrier brave, a Soldier most complete.
Methinks I saw Hanibal Scipio there,
Brutus, Tigranes, Tamberlain appear:
Dion, Phocion, stout Marius, and the rest,
Themistocles, Fabius, of Soldiers best.
Methinks those famous men I did then see
A sumptuous stately, gallant Company.
To these brave famous men I would advance,
Look on by standers, see their Palfraies prance.
In fit season advance their Warlike Pikes,
And see management of War like Rites.
Great famous Caesar he will come and see, K. Charles.

You brave Gentlemen march in Your degree.
Oh, had I Homers Pen to advance; Ye
And write according to your Company:
Of your desert and high deserved merit,
The honor of the day which you inherit.
At another time I do hope to see,
You exercise your Noble Chivalry.
Mean while kind Gentlemen I do you wish,
Health and Happiness and Eternal bliss.
ON MY WORTHY FRIEND, Will. Brag Esquire ONE Of the Captains belonging to the
Honorable Colonel, SIR JOHN DRAKE Knight and Baronet, his Regiment.
WHiles that you lived, in Accademick Schools,
It taught you to discern wisemen from fools;
Learning taught you deep knowledge in the Arts,
Learning advanced you, unto Noble parts.
In learnings mine, you labored to dig deep,
Advanced your Studyes, took the lesser sleep;
May God Almighty, you sleeping wakeing keep.
Brave Education does good wits Advance,
Raise to Honor before Death leads his Dance:
Ah gracious Soul hereafter Inherit,
Goulden treasures obtain by Christ's merit:
Grand Magazin of Wealth beyond compare,
Eternal treasures in the Heavens there.
Wits nimble fancy you can soon pierce,
Ingenious men you do most dearly love:
Learnings brave Litrature you do approve,
Lightness of mind though young you 'av laid asside.
In learnings sweetness you do firm abide,
Aiming at last to satiate your will:
May God in's own due time your Aim fulfill.
Beams of Eternal light lighten your Soul,
Raise you above where you may never condole:
An Angel guide you in Divinest things,
God give you favor of the King of Kings.
Give you the knowledge that is high Sublime,
Eternal knowledge, that is pure Divine.
ON Consideration of our own WANTS, And my Blessed SAVIORS Allsufficiency.
I Am in straights dear Lord and now do find,
A remedy fit to content my mind:
My precious Lord Christ does supply all things,
In riches far surpassing Courts of Kings.
He is the grand Lord full of bright Majesty,
He Is the learned Dr. of Divinity.
Divines does teach to bring us unto him,
He is my head, O make of me a limb.
The Saints account it to be a member,
Lord make me grow in grace and Glorious splender.
What can I wish that thou will then withhold,
The choicest Jewels passing purest gold.
Thou art my best Treasure, my gold my all,
In thee I live I move and ever shall:
Thou art my life, Oh whither can I go,
Out of the way from thee is but to woe.
If life I wish, death surely I shall find,
Death hell and sin against me does combind:
Open the gate that leads unto bliss,
On let him bless me that Immortal is.
He is that light ye that bright glorious Sun,
Who will make an end as he has begun:
He is that precious vine that bore that grape,
Who quenched the hea^ of sin and lustful rape.
He is the light of truth that glorious Sun,
Oh without him the world had been undone:
He is the way that leads unto life,
Out of that way it leads to all strife.
The wide broad way that leads unto hell,
Where damned souls and devils there does dwell:
If ever thou do mean happy to be,
Take care to serve the sacred Trinity:
The Father Son blessed sprite the Holy Ghost,
Will keep all Blessed souls from being lost.
Christ is that Shepherd that does keep his sheep,
He is a watchman when his soundly sleep:
He is our Physician when we are sick,
He comforts us against sins mortal prick.
He is that God that wonders great has wrought,
He is our dearest friend our souls has bought:
He is the word that teaches us to live,
He is the Lord that does all comforts give.
He is that fair polished and corner stone,
He is our God to whom we make our moan:
He is our Savior and salvation,
Who saved our poor souls from D^mnation,
He is that Bread of life man to preserve,
Give me thy merits not what I deserve:
He is the Lion of fair Judahs tribe,
He sent his spirit with us to abide:
He is that safe and precious way of Life,
That comforts all persons both Man and Wife.
I look unto the way that leads to Bliss,
I look unto the truth, fair truth it is.
I look unto the life, that life does give,
I look to dye, and in him for to live.
He is that bright and Heavenly day Star,
That guided the wise learned men from far.
He is the subject of our sacred story,
He is the Door that enters unto glory.
If then so many comforts he does bring,
Let us be thankful to our Heavenly King.
I will now then conclude my mortal Story,
Praying my Sovereign, may be a Star of Glory.
ACCROSTICKS, ON That Rare, and Exquisite Artist, GEORGE WHARTON, Esquire
GRand famous Wharton thou do write sublime,
End and begin of matters most Divine.
On nature of the Stars thou mountest high,
Rules perfect in that Art, thou can discry.
God ad a Blessing to thy Heavenly Art,
E're happy be for what thou do impart.
Wisdom and Art thou do reveal to men,
High heavenly Mist'ries by thy learned pen:
Arts hidden and Occult thou do set forth,
Rarly expressing your most Noble worth.
Things pleasant and delightful thou do write,
On various things which does men's minds delight;
Not fit to lie hidden but see the light.
Golden Artist thy Art and learned skill,
E're will I love, and thy stately quil,
Of Planets high and lofty thou caust tell:
Range the Heavens and know where they do dwell,
God give you knowledge 'bove all earthly things,
E're for to live with that great King ^f Kings.
Whiles learned Wharton does Communicate,
Heavens stately fabric and Comensurate:
Astronomies learned Art to unfold,
Rich and rare truths unto the world has told.
Treasures transcendent may thou discover,
On famous Arts of Arts you are a lover:
Now learned Wharton, the best rules recover.
Glory after Death may your Soul obtain,
Eternal happiness be your best gain:
Oh may thou after death ascend on high,
Raised up unto that Heavenly Majesty.
God grant hereafter thou may see his face,
Enthroned by Christ into a Heavenly place.
Where Is nothing wanting for the souls content,
Heaven fills it up with divine ravishment:
After all travels past ascend at last,
Raptures to feed on divine rare repast.
Things that transcend man's eye and mortal ear,
On Sion hill the like does not appear;
None can Thee satiate but thy Savior dear.
ON My Worthy and Learned friend Mr. ROBERT GOMERSALL, Bachelor in DIVINITY,
Late Deceased.
THy Learning Language, and Rare Noble parts,
Thy truth, Piety, and deserving Arts.
What is in Man, thy Brain could comprehend,
Ever Real, and faithful to thy friend.
Renowned Gomersall, Thy name shall e're live,
I will due praises to your Memory give.
Thou Build'st a Monument, to dure as long,
As brave great Brytaine, shall not want a Tongue:
For to express thy worth, and Noble Fame,
Still to Preserve thy worthy Learned Name.
Thy Rich Doctrine was High, and did transcend,
Taught Mortal man, how God might be his friend:
Raised high the heart and mind did Elevate,
On Divine things for to contemplate.
Glory of the Age thou did live in,
Brought Presents Rare from our Heavenly King:
These few lines are thy Brave fame to Revive,
Thy Books will keep the Memory alive.
What shall I say: As long as sand will Run,
Thy Hour Glass of Fame, shall never be Done.
The AUTHORS Conclusion.
Dear Countrymen.
EXcuse my Lines, though they are written plain,
Cast not on them your Envy or disdain:
If that my Sovereign Lord you do love well,
You Will like my Lines for's sake who does excel.
He Is a gracious King in mercy does abound,
The like I know not where is to be found.
He Is humble, patient, Gentle to command,
And best deserves to r^le this famous Land.
He does abound in meekness and in grace,
God make me happy to see's blessed face.
In Thirty Eight I kissed his Royal Hand,
By means of's Servant Monsieur le Grand:
In Month of June his blessed Hand I did kiss,
All Health and Happiness I do him wish;
And pray that he may long and happy reign,
And after Death in Heaven er'e remain.
Let Angels then conveigh his Soul to bless,
From Earth to Heaven's Eternal Happiness.
FINIS.

