CONSIDERATIONS Concerning MARRIAGE, The HONOR, DUTIES, BENEFITS, TROUBLES of
it.

Whereto are added, 1. Directions in two Particulars. 1. How they that have
wives may be as if they had none. 2 How to prepare for parting with a dear
yoke fellow by death, or otherwise.
2. Resolution of this Case of Conscience. Whether a man may lawfully marry his
Wives Sister?



By EDWARD REYNER, Minister of the Gospel in Lincoln.

London, Printed by J. T. for Thomas Newbery, and are to be sold at the three
Golden Lions in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. MDCLVII.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THou may wonder that I should bring this poor Embryo to the birth, in the
Press, the place of bringing forth. When I first penned these concise
considerations concerning marriage, I had not the least thought that they
should have seen more light, then came in at my Study-window; or that any more
eyes then mine own, should have seen them, while I lived. But thus it came to
pass; These being the heads of what I delivered in private at the Marriage of
some Friends not long ago; and I being requested soon after to communicate my
Notes thereof, reveiwed them, but found them very short and imperfect, and that
what I had written could not give an account, of what God helped me then to
speak. Hereupon I resolved to transcribe and enlarge them a little, only that
I might get some Copies written out, to gratify some Friends that desired
them. But when I had almost finished them, I had several Hints upon my Heart
from Providentiall occurences to expose them to public view: Whereto I was
also encouraged by some godly and judicious friends, who had the perusal of
them. Thus I am drawn to hope, that through Gods blessing (which can make
little Pamphlets instrumental for the good of others, as well as great volumes)
this little, poor, plain ^iece, may be of use to many, because,

1. The Subject of this Discourse, to wit, Marriage, is of general extent, and
of special consequences, for it is the first Relation and foundation of humane
Society; and it is the Rule and Measure of the Wel-ordering of all other
Relations, and has a Regulating Influence upon them all.

2. The Principal Concernments of Marriage (as I humbly conceive) are plainly
declared, briefly comprised and usefully applied herein.

3. This Tract, being so small, may be bought cheap, and read soon; and be
ready to direct either Poor or Rich, who desire to walk by Rule in their
Matrimonial State.

The Lord command his Blessing upon it, that it may be effectual, and prosper
in the things vvhereto I intend it, and Gods Providence sends it now unto
thee; even to accomplish the good pleasure of God toward thee, in making thy
Relations religious in the manner and order of them, and sweet and comfortable
to thee in the end and use thereof.

Reader, I pray thee live this book thoroughly in thy family, I hope it may draw
down a blessing upon thy whole house; when thou reapest profit by this, or any
other Tract, give God the praise, and let the Author have thy prayers to God to
strengthen him and bless him in his labors. Which is the request,

Sept. 19. 1657. Of thy Friend in the Lord, Edw. Reyner.

TO THE READER.
THe worthy Author of this ensuing Treatise, was pleased, not only to favor
me, with the perusal of it, but also to put so much honor upon me, as to crave
my Judgment concerning it, before he purposed to make it public. Doubtless
such condescentions of his spirit, unto a friend, every way inferior to
himself, do speak his great humility, which adds much luster unto the rich
abilities, with which the Lord has crowned him: His former practical pieces,
have found so good acceptance amongst gracious savorie spirited Christians,
that the prefixing of his Name, will be sufficient commendation of this book.
Whosoever have heretofore drunk of his rich spiritul Wines, will say, There is
no need to hang forth an Ivy-bush to call in Customers, when his vessels are
broached. I do ingeniously profess, that I have received edification, by
reading over this discourse, and thence I take encouragement to commend it to
thy serious perusal.

Long since, when I read Reverend Mr. Greenhams Treatise of a Contract, before
Marriage, and observed his serious instructing of the persons contracted, in
the Articles of faith, and the ten commandments, I then thus concluded in mine
own thoughts; Surely this man of God, judged that this condition of life, does
need more than ordinary helps, that it might be Christianly managed. And
questionless upon this account (not excluding others) Ministers most eminently
godly, have in their times persuaded a matrimonial contract, before the
consummation of Marriage, that the persons intending that change, might by
peculiar advice and prayer, be prepared for it. I well remember, that my good
Friend Mr. John Ball, (whose memory is precious) during the time of his last
sickness, did often speak to this purpose; If God should be pleased to restore
me to the exercise of my Ministry, I will more preach and press Relative
duties, then I have formerly done. The power of godliness, appears in
relations, and what relation is so influential as this, betwixt husband and
wife. This is the first and fundamental human Relation, and according to the
disposition and conversation of husband and wife in their domestical state and
capacity, will the behavior of children, servants, and others in the family, be
usually ordered, both amongst themselves in their mutual subordinations, and
toward others occasionally. I know that many of Gods Worthies, both in former
and latter times, have in their Discourses concerning domestical duties,
mentioned many things here particularized, yet as the concurrence of Brethren
adds strength to their counsel, so that which is additional, may be found
profitable. In mine apprehension, there is a vein of Scripture strength, and
evidence together with the savoriness and judiciousness of the Authors Spirit
running through the whole book from beginning to end: in these regards I was
moved to request him, to make it public, hoping that it will (through Gods
blessing) be instrumental, in promoting the power of godliness, amongst
professors of Religion. That case of conscience which is added unto the
practical discourse concerning Marriage, is upon dispute, determined with so
much strength and authority, both Divine and Humane, that I am persuaded, much
sin in that kind, will hereby, for the future be prevented. There were three
sheets more prepared for the Press, concerning the mutual spiritual communion,
betwixt Christ, and the soul, which is espoused to him, whereof there are some
short hints, in page 42. and 43. and 44. and 60. of the following Treatise; and
doubtless this piece would have been acceptable, and profitable unto
Christ-improving Christians; This was wrapped up in a paper, directed unto me,
and sent by a special friend, who lost it out of his pocket, in his journey
from Lincoln to London, in May last. This loss is the more to be lamented,
because the Author has no copy of it. There have been hitherto, some
expectations that this loss might have been recovered, that this spiritual
Tract might have been added unto the former, but now through long
disappointments, our hopes grow more faint. If hereafter Gods good hand of
providence, should bring this Manuscript, either unto the Author at Lincoln, or
to my self at London, the Restorer thereof, should be well recompensed, and it
should be forthwith published for common profit. Christian Reader, as the
Author deserves, so he beggeth, thy Prayers, who is,

Octo. 15. 1657. Thy Friend and Servant in Christ, Simeon Ash.

Let the Reader be desired to amend these faults with his pen before he peruse
the B^ok.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 4. for efficiency read efficient: p 2. l. 6. f justification r.
institution p. 5 l. 13 f Love r. Lover: p. 6. l. 9. r. to act in to his Church:
p. 6. l. 32. f. justification r. institution: p. 8 l. 9 f. Lincy r L^n^ey.
Margent, r. 1 Kings 11 ^, 3, ^. p. 14 in marg. Col. 18. 3. r Col. 3 18. p. 15.
l. ult. l is, r. in the sal^: p 18. l. 17. f follows r. flons, p. 23 l. 25 f
Proprietors, r. Proprietaries: p. 25 l 3. f spiritual r special p. 25 l. 5 f.
walking, r. wel-being: p. 26. l. 19 f. ad^ance r. clean, marg. r. 1 Kings 11.
2. p. 26. l. 34. f. communion r communication: p. 27. l. ^5. f. parties. r.
party, and l. 26. f. it is, r. and is aptest. and l 32. f heaven 1 healers: p
30. l. ^. f. allunder, r asunder and l. 2. f contention, r. contentation. and
l. 16. f. wrest, r wres^le, and l. 19. put out is: p 31. marg. r 1 Timothy 5 14.
f. Tim. 2. 14. p. 33. l. 26. f. covenant, r. government, and l. 30 f.
exercises. r. exercise: p. 44. l. 1. ^ ^ r. to thrist: p. 53. l. 13 f.
fore-arned, r. fore-armed: p. 59. l. 3. f. our r. or, and l. 28. f. ours, r.
our: p. 60 l 3. f. learn r leave: p. 64. l. 29. f. word, r. world. p. 70. l. 3.
f. fitted, r. filled.

THE HONOR OF MARRIAGE. There be four things considerable in it.
The Honor Duties Benefits Troubles
of it.

I. The Honor of Marriage.
Heb. 12.4. (...)
Marriage is honorable, in all (says Paul) of high esteem and great account
among all sorts of Persons, high and low; rich and poor. and the bed
(considered in it self) is undefiled. Adam and Eve might have used it in their
Innocence. This is common to all mankind.

Reas. 1. from the Author.
Reas. 1. From the efficiency or Author of it, that is God, 5 ways.

1 By justification. Marriage is Gods ordidinance; he first invented it and
appointed it. What is of God is excellent and honorable.

2 By administration, he married Adam and Eve. When he had builded the rib he
took out of the man's side into a woman, Genesis 2.22.
he brought her to the man, that is, joined her in marriage with him, and God is
said, now to join man and wife together, Math. 19.6. that is, by his ordinance,
and by his providence.

3 By Qualification of the Persons for a Matrimonial Relation; Genesis 2.18.
making the woman to be a help meet for the man; and the Man to be a fit head
and guide, for the woman. This is Gods work, A prudent wife is from the Lord.
Prove. 19.14. So is a loving Husband. God makes them so.

4 By Benediction, God blesses them together to make them partakers of all the
Ends and comforts of marriage. As he did Adam and Eve, when he had made them and
married them, Genesis 1.28. Genesis 33 5.
he pronounced a large blessing upon them, saying, Be fruitful and multiply and
replenish the earth. Children, and famlies. Psalm. 107.41. are Gods gifts.

5 By Mission of his Angels, which God sends forth to be ministering spirits to
his servants for assistance in this business; as to Abraham's Servant, when his
Master sent him to Mesopotamia, to take a wife unto his son Isaac, and to
Joseph, Mary's Espoused husband, Genesis 24.7.21.40. Math. 1.20.
Math. 1.20. and 2.13. The Ministry of Angels about marriage (by Direction and
protection) implies it to be weighty and worthy in it self, though unto many it
seems Worldly and base.

Reas. 2. from the subject and circumstances.
Reas. 2. From the Subject and Circumstances of marriage at the first. Who were
the first couple whom God married? Adam and Eve, who were the common Parents of
all Mankind; of all the Kings, Queens, Princes and Nobles in the world; yea of
Jesus Christ according to the flesh. Even he was The Son of Adam, Luke 3.38.

Where was marriage first Celebrated? In paradise, where God manifested his
presence to our first Parents; which made the place a Heaven upon Earth.

When was marriage first instituted and ministered? In the time of man's
Innocence, before his fall. Before sin entered into the world. Therefore there
is no sin in Marriage; but marriage is now a Remedy against sin.

The persons, place and Time of the first marriage, or of marriage at the first,
do put Honor upon it.

Reas. 3 From Jesus Christ.
Reas. 3. From Jesus Christ who highly honored marriage, not only by choosing
to be conceived and born of a woman Espoused to a man; and by his presence at
that marriage in Cana of Galilee, where he wrought his first miracle, John. 2.1,
2, 10.11.
and manifested forth his Glory by turning water into wine; and by comparing
the kingdom of Heaven to a weddin* Mat. 22.
feast. But especially by choosing a Conjugal Relation to stand in to his Church
(as husband to wife) and therein 1. To manifest and Communicate himself to her.
2. To solace and delight himself with her. 3. To gloryfie himself in her; and
her with himself for ever in Heaven.


This marriage is begun between Christ and his Church and every true believer in
Espousal upon Earth, Hosea 2.19. 2 Cor. 11.2. and it is consummated in Heaven,
Revel. 19.7, 8, 9.

Blessed are they which are called to the Mariage-supper of the Lamb; that is
as some expound it, the Time of Celestial Joys.

Hence the Civil marriage between man and wife is made by Paul, a figure or
representation of the Mystical Marriage between Christ and his Church, and every
child of God; in respect of the union, or near conjunction of them. ( This is
now bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh, said Adam of his wife, Genesis 2 23. we
are members of his (that is Christ's) body, of his flesh, and of his bones,
says Paul of Saints and Beleivers, Ephesians. 5.30. and of Conjugal Communion
between them. Therefore Paul concludes verse 32. This is a great Mystery, but I
speak concerning Christ and the Church: as if he had said, All I have written
concerning husband and Wife, sets forth the Matrimonial Relation and fellowship
between Christ and his Church, his expressions of love to her; and
interchangeably her duties to him.

Let me add, Is it not an honor to Marriage that a most sweet choice Piece of
Scripture was indicted by the Holy Ghost, as an Epithalamium or Mariage-song,
called The Song of Songs, that is, Cant. 1.1.
of all songs the most excellent, because it celebrateth the Mystical Marriage
between Christ and the Church; and pours forth a Torrent of Spiritual love
that is between them. The forty and fi^th Psalm is of the same subject, A Psalm
of Love, or Mariage-Hymn, setting forth Christ the bridegroom in his Glory; and
the Church his spouse in her beauty.

Reas. 4. (...) General consent.
Reas. 4. From General Consent and Opinion, which (as some observe) has settled
marriage in Dignity and Honor: Regers of Matrimonial Honor.
and graced it with Privileges, and granted Immunities to it far above single
life, both in war and peace.

Use 1. Slight not Marriage.
Use 1. Think not slightly of Marriage as a low contemptible thing; but highly,
as a Solemn Ordinance of God, of great consequence and Importance to you;
wherein the future Comfort of your Lives is bound up. Therefore enter not
rashly into it, but advisedly with due consideration for the choice of a fi^
yoke fellow. Prove. 20.^.
Every purpose (says Solomon) is established by Counsel, and with good advice
make war. I may add, with good advice ma^y: because Marriage is not upon liking
( God hates putting away, Mala. 2.16) but for life. It is the tying of such a
knot as nothing but death can loose: it is a business of lasting importance.
An Error therein may prove dangerous. Shall we account that Relation or
condition mean or inconsiderable, whereof God himself was the Institutor and
Minister? Adam and Eve the first couple? and Paradise the place where, and
Innocence the state or Time when Marriage was celebrated at first? which Christ
has chosen to act into his Church unto Eternity?

Use 2. Preserve the Honor of it.
Use 2. Then Husbands and Wives should preserve the Honor of Marriage in their
Carriage; and not blemish or stain the Glory of it, Either

1. By being light, vain, loose, frolic in their spirits or demeanor, for
that is a dishonor to the Gravity of Marriage.

2. Or by being froward, peevish, proud, sullen, discontented, impatient,
disdainful in their spirits or carriage; for that is a dishonor to the Amity,
Suavity and Society of Marriage.

3. Or by unfaithfulness and bodily uncleanness, embracing the bosoms of
strangers; for that is a dishonor to the Unity, Purity, Chastity of Marriage.
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Hebr. 13.4.
if Magistrates do not.

4 Or by loving any other man or woman in a conjugal way, better then his own
wife, or her own Husband. This is a dishonor to Gods Justification of marriage
and to the mariage-bond and covenant; which tieth Husband and wife, to forsake
all others, in this way; and to cleave in love one to another, inseparably,
till death.

Use. 3. Honor God in marriage.
Use. 3 Then, take Care and endeavor to honor God, in your Marriage, by
marying in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39. and 11.11.

Qu. What is it to marry in the Lord?

Ans. To make God the beginning and end of our Marriage.

1 The beginning of it, Make God the beginning of Marriage.
by seeking earnestly to God for council and direction therein: for guidance of
our Affection to a right object; for the choice of a fit yoak-fellow: for
making the Woman a Comfortable help, and the man a suitable Head; expecting to
receive one another, as a special gist and token of favor from the hand of
God. For who finds a wise, finds a good thing and obtains favor of the
Lord, says Solomon, Prove. 18.22. Prove. 19.14.
And, House and riches are the Inheritance of fathers (a man may have a woman
and a portion from her father) but a prudent wife (or the Qualifications of a
woman to make her a wife) is from the Lord: the same may be said of the man.
Also, by looking chiefly at or for the grace of God, one in another, as the
lodestone of our love, and the inkindler of our affections each to other. Look
more at inward goodness then at outward goods or beauty: especially at
sutableness in Religion, Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers,
says Paul 2 Cor. 6.14. Do not mary with Idolaters or Infidels, this is (...),
as when beasts of diverse kinds draw together; an ox and an ass might not be
coupled together in the law. Deu^. 22.10.
We should be afraid to yoke our selves with any untamed heifers or bullocks,
that will not bear Christ's yoke. We should let Religion have a Negative voice
in our choice, that is not to mary any who are not really, or hopefully
religious. When persons match themselves to those that are either profane and
of no reglion, or of false and contrary Religions; then their wedding garment
(as one says) is made of Lincy wolsey, Deuteronomy. 22.11.
and the wedding Ground is plowed with an Ox and an Ass. Such mongrel marriages
brought destruction upon the old world, Genesis 6.2, 3. God forbids such ungodly
matches, Deuteronomy. Genesis 26.35. chap. 27.46.
7.3, 4. Esaus marying the daughter of the Canaanites was a great grief of
mind to his father and mother, and made Rebekah weary of her life. If Moses
mary an Ethiopian he cannot change her color or her Qualities: she will be a
vexation to him. Woe to Sampson, if he mary a Philistine though he was the
strongest man. If Solomon mary Idolatrous wives they will turn away his heart
after other Gods, though he was the wisest man upon earth. Kings. 11.1.3, 4:


To marry unequally, as a wise man to a foolish woman; or a virtuous woman to a
profane wicked man, Charron.
is, as one says, to bind the living to the dead; which was the cruellest
Death invented by Tyrants, to make the living languish and die by the company
of the dead.

2 To make God the end of our Marriage, Make God the end of marriage


1 by propounding Gods glory as the principal end of all our Mariage-comforts
and enjoyments.

2 By ordering our whole Carriage in that Matrimonial state, according to the
rule of Gods word.

3 By depending on God for his presence therein, and blessing thereon.

4 By improving marriage, to promote our serving of God, and the saving of our
own souls:

But more of these in the next thing to be confidered in Marriage.

II. The Duties of Marriage.
WHich are.

1 Special, of the one Party to the other.

2 Or common to both, and to be performed by both, jointly and mutually.

1 1 Special duties of husband to wise 6.1. Love.
The special Duties of husband to wife are these. 6.

1 A love to her, which should be, pure, chaste, sincere, entire, constant. The
Husband should love his wife.

1 As Christ loved his Church, Ephesians. 5.25. 2 As the man loves his own body,
ver. 28. 3 As he loves himself, his whole self, ver. 33.
As Isaac loved Rebekah, Genesis 24, 67.

This duty of Love, comprehends all the rest: because all, whatsoever the
Husband says or does to his wife, should spring from Love, and taste of love.
She should be dear to him as himself, and lie as a Lamb in his bosom. 2 Samuel 12.
Jacob was content to serve a double apprentiship under a Churlish Master, for
Rachel to be his wife, Genesis 29.32.
because he loved her more then Leah.

2 2. Tenderness.
Duty of the Husband is Tenderness and kindness, to nourish and cherish her,
as the more tender part of himself, as a man does his own flesh; yea as Christ
does the Church: Ephesians. 5 29.
to supply her with Necessaries and Conveniences; and suffer her to want
nothing that is fit for her, and to cover her weaknesses. Then Husbands must
not be bitter to their wives nor injurious, nor vexations, not make drudges of
them. Col. 3.19.
Their Authority should savor more of loving respect to them then of rigorous
power. Husbands should exercise so sweet and amiable a Government over their
wives, so as not only their bodies, but also their wills and hearts may be
subject unto them. When Husbands cause their wives to go to God with tears, to
complain of their unkindness and harshness to them, God will regard and receive
their offerings no more. Mal. 2.13. ver. 14.
To this end the Husband should consider, his wife is his companion and the
wife of his Covenant, made of a rib taken out of his side, not of a bone taken
out of his foot, therefore he must not trample upon her; and she is to be in a
state but of Collateral subjection to him. She is his yokefellow, that stands
on even ground with him, and draws on the left side. He should make her yoke as
easy as may be; and not suffer the heavier end to lie on her Neck, because she
is the weaker vessel.

3 3 Honor 1 Pet. 3.7.
Duty, is due Respect and Honor to her, Peter gives 3 reasons for it.

1. The wife is the weaker vessel therefore she must be carefully and gently
handled, as a crystal glass.

2. The wife is coheir with her Husband of the grace of life, that is of the
life of Grace and glory.

For (as one observes) souls have no Sexes; and as they are in Christ they are
both equal, male and female are in him all one.

3. That their prayers be not hindered. A Husbands disrespect to his wife breeds
discontent between them, distractions in the family, and interruptions in
duties, and a contempt of them both. To which I may add that of Solomon, Pron.
12.4.
A virtuous woman is a crown to her Husband. and if she give him a crown, he
may afford to give her honor. A Husband by debasing and disgracing his wife,
dishonors himself.

4. 4. Instruction
Duty of the Husband to the wife, is Instruction, Direction, and consolation,
to teach her, counsel her, lead and comfort her, as her head ( Ephesians. 5.23.) and
Guide, Prove. 2.17. This is to dwell with her according to knowledge, 1 Pet. 3 7.
Hence the wife should learn of her Husbands 1. Cor. 14.34, 35. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.
A Husband may put honor upon his wife by hearkening to her Counsel, and not
despising the same: which is his Duty when she advises and persuades him to
good; or disswades him from Evil. This may be a great advantage to him. For God
sometimes gifteth and graceth the wife equally or above the Husband, as he did
Abigail above Nabal, for he was a fool. In all that Sarah has said unto thee
hearken unto her voice, said God to Abraham, Genesis 21.12. So did Elkanah to
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1 22, 23. and David hearkened to Abigails Advice, before she was
his wife; how thankful was he both to God and to her for it, 1 Samuel 25.32. to
35. Manoah did the like to his wife, Judge. 13.22, 23.

5. 5. Adhesion.
Duty is cleaving to her, forsaking father and mother, and his dearest friends
for her, and to be glued to her, and to become one with her, Ephesians. 5.31. One
flesh, to dwell with her, not only one house, but one bed should hold them.
And to rejoice in her, Eccles. 9.9. and Prove. 5.18.19. or live joyfully with
her, make her his Chepthzibah: and be ravished always with her love.

The wife should be as dear to the Husband as the Hind is to the Heart, as the
Do to the Roe-buck, This will make him drink waters out of his own Cisterne
only. Not the having of a wife, but to delight in her and lovingly to comport
with her, will keep a man chaste from embracing the bosom of a stranger, Prove.
5.19, 20. A man should count all others strange women in comparison of a wife.

6. 6. Protection
Duty is protection of his wife from wrongs and dangers, to rescue her, if in
jeopardy (as David did his wises, 1 Samuel 30.18.) and to right her, if injured.
Abraham was to Sarah for a Covering of the Eyes, that is, Genesis 20.16.
her Husband to defend her from injury. Booz was to take Ruth into his
protection as the hen her chickens under her wings, signified by spreading his
skirt over her, Ruth. 3.9. and 2.12. that she might be safe under the wings of
her husband. A man gives Coverture; no action is brought against the wife, the
man is to answer, she goes Covert baron, as is observed. Therefore woman was
made of a bone from under the Man's Arm, that he might be a protection and
defense to her. The Husband must be as a house side for his wife, as the
fruitful vine to spread her self on, to support and strengthen her, Ps. 128.3.
and a rest to give her a safe and settled abode, Ruth 1.9.

2. 2. Duties of wife to husband. 6.
The Duties of the Wife to the Husband are these six.

1 Submision.
First, Submission to his Authority, and to his just and aequal commands, 1
Peter 3.1.

1. As unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5.22. as having to deal with God, whose Ordinance
this is, that the wife should live in subjection to her own Husband, and that
for conscience sake: Col. 18.^3
This is fit in the Lord.

2. As the Church is subject unto Christ, Ephesians. 5.24. that is freely, willingly,
reverently, constantly and universally in all things.

The Apostle gives four Reasons of the woman's subjection to the man, or
subordination to him, and dependence on him.

1. Because she was made out of man, scil. of a rib taken out of his side, 1
Cor. 11.8. The man (says Paul) is not of the woman (he was made at first of
the earth) but the woman was made of man.

2. The woman was made for the man at first, not the man for the woman, 1 Cor.
11.9. I will make him (says God) a help meet for him, Genesis 2.18. to serve and
obey him as her Superior. Hence it is said, that the woman is Vir Occasionatus:
a man occasionate, a man's Occasion, or the Occasion of a man to serve as an aid
and as a Second to man.

3. The woman was made after the man; for Adam was first formed, then Eve, 1 Timothy 2.13.

4. 1 Timothy 2.14.
The woman was first in the Transgression. She was first deceived by the
Serpent, then she drew her Husband into the same deception; hereby she was the
cause and beginning of sin, and ruin to all mankind: and though she was given
to be a help to man, yet she proved at first to be a great hurt and hindrance
to him. From this priority and causality of the woman in sin, the Apostle
infers and presses subjection and silence upon her to the man, and not to
usurp Authority over the man, 1 Timothy 2.11, 12, 14. upon this account she was
more straightly subjected to her Husband. For this was inflicted as a
chastisement for sin upon the woman, Genesis 3.16.
that her desire should be subject to her Husband, and he should ruleover her:
which implies, as some observe, a further Rule then man had over her by
Creation; and with more trouble and grief unto woman-kinde: So that the yoke is
now become to her more hard and heavy to be borne.

Women may Object,

Object. That was Eves fault to be deceived by the Serpent, and to be first in
the Transgression, not ours.

Answ. Eves punishment is yours, therefore her fault is yours. Her peculiar sin
is the fall (distinct from Adams) is justly imputed to you, or else her
particular punishment, (distinct from Adams) is unjustly inflicted upon you.
Eves fault is as much yours, as Adams sin is ours.

This subjection of the wife to the husband was the ground of the woman's
wearing a vail or covering, as a sign she is under the power and Authority of
her Husband, 1 Cor. 11.9, 10. and subject to him. Rebekah took a vail and
covered her self when she saw Isaac, Genesis 24.65.

Therefore she was made out of the side, not of the head, that she might be
under him, not above him in place and power, Sarah obeyed Abraham, whose
daughters all obedient wives are, 1 Pet. 3.6. And the holy women in old Time
who trusted in God, were in subjection to their own Husbands, to v. 5. and
those wives that are not obedient to their Husbands, are not good, Tit. 2.5. In
this sense (as some conceive) the woman is said to be The Glory of the man, 1
Cor. 11.7. scil^by her subjection, when she obeyes her Husband, as man is the
glory of God when he obeyes God. This is the first Duty of the wife,
Submission, a Comely Lesson for her to learn. Disobedience in a wife is a fault
even in a Queen, much greater in a meaner woman, even among Heathens, much more
among Christians that are better taught, as in Queen Vashti, Esther, 1.12.20.

2. 2. Reverence. Ephesians. 5.33.
Duty of the wife is Reverence to her husbands person, all due respect to him,
as her head, in word and deed, in gesture and deportment. Even as Sarah obeyed
Abraham and called him Lord. 1 Pet. 3.6. she is (as one says) crowned and
chronicl'd for it. Michal mocked her Husband David, 2 Samuel 6.21, 23.
and God smote her with barrenness for it, she was childless to her death. The
wises reverential respect to her husband is an honor to him, and an Ornament
to her self.

3. 3. Helpfulnes.
Duty is Helpfulness to her Husband in every thing, in his body to cherish
that, in his soul to tender that, in his family to order that; in his Estate to
get, at least to save and to dispose that aright. not to spend or waste the
same; in his calling and affairs to promote them; in his Name and Credit to
preserve that: in his secrets to lock them up in her bosom. She ought to be a
Help to him in every thing, a hinderance in nothing. Else she is a woman, but
not a wife, and he that finds her does not find a good thing, Prove. 18.22. The
wife should cherish her husband as the better part of her self. For this very
end God made her for man, and married her to man, to be a help meet for him,
Genesis 2.18. If she be not a meet help for the man, she will not please,
satisfy and give content. A wife is like a garment though the cloth its made
of be very good, yet if it do not fit us, it will not please us, it will be
uneasy or uncomely we take no delight to wear it: Convenience causes
contentation. If the wife be no meet help shaped and cut out as it were of
purpose for the man to fit and suit him every way in his disposition
conversation, and occasions she will not sit close to the man, as a garment
does to the body that fits it, but hang loose, or be ready to fall off and
rather hinder then further him: and not be an Ornament to him. I commend Prove.
31. from 10. to the end, as a Glass for all that would be good wives to look
and dress themselves in, or as a pattern to imitate, or Rule to walk by every
day. A virtuous woman will do her husband good and not evil all the days of her
life, etc. approve her self faithful to him in every thing, that his heart may
trust safely in her. Pro. 31.11, 12.
For Marriage is Conjugium, the fellowship of a yoke, wherein the wife must bear
one end, and draw equally with her husband.

4. 4. Chastity Tit. 2.5.
Duty is Chastity of Conversation (which follows from chastity of affection
and disposition in the heart) wives must abstain, not only from all acts, but
from all Appearances of lightness, wantonness, dalliance or unfaithfulness;
that their husbands who cast off ordinances and holy duties, may, by the holy
and chaste conversation of their wives, be gained to the Lord; to have a liking
and good opinion of the Gospel and the ways of Christ in which they walk, 1
Pet. 3.1, 2. This should be the wises design upon her husband.

5. 5. Fear.
Duty is Conjugal fear of offending or displeasing her husband. She that is
married (Says Paul) cares for the things of the world, how she may please her
husband, 1 Cor. 7.34. Wives should couple chastity with fear in their carriage
to their husbands, not to cross, or vex, or greive them.

6. 6 Modesty.
Duty of a wife is modesty, of Apparel and of behavior. 1 Of Apparel, 1 of
Apparel.
not to affect costly, gaudy attire, new fangled fashions, or to go above her
rank, or to give way to pride, vanity, excess therein: or to account outward
adorning, as plaiting of the hair, or wearing of Gold, etc. or decking of the
body, her chief Ornament, but,

1. A meek and quiet spirit (the frame of the hidden man of the heart) which is
incorruptible, which is of great price in the sight of God, 1. Pet. 3.3, 4. and
a great Ornament in the sight of men. For after this manner in the Old Time the
holy women who trusted in God and were in subjection to their own Husbands
adorned themselves, verse. 5.

2. 1 Timothy 2.8, 9, 10.
And good works. I will, says Paul, that women adorn themselves in modest
apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, not with broidered hair, or gold,
pearls or costly array; But which become women professing Godliness, with good
works. Both Paul and Peter are to be understood in a Comparative sense, that
women's adorning should be, not so much in outward attire, as in inward virtues,
or rather in the latter then in the former. Even Godly women may wear Gold, and
jewels, and precious things, and good attire, as Rebekah did the earring and
bracelets which Abraham's servant put upon her, Genesis 24.30, 47.
with these limitations.

1. That these be suitable to their rank, place and state, and not costly above
their ability, and as the most wise, godly, grave women are habited.

2 That they be without wantonness, wastfulness or curious nicer^^s, or new
fangledness for fashion. God visi^eth for strange apparel, Zeph. 1.8.

3 Without pride, Vanity or Excess, or thinking better of themselves for them.

4 So that they place their chiefest fineness in their inward adornings rather
then outward, more in their Graces and good works then in their Garments; and
endeavor by the outward ornament of their bodies to set forth the inward
beauty of their souls.

2 2 Of behavior. Tit: 2, 3.
Also modesty of behavior, to express the inward holiness of their hearts in
sober deportment, in countenance, gesture and speech; to open their mouths with
discretion, Prove. 31.26. Prove. 7.11, 12 and 9.13.
and bridle their tongues, and not be as the harlot babbling and clamorous, who
is as extravagant in her Tongue as in her feet. Good wives should account
meekness of spirit their chief ornament, and take heed they be not either

1 Proud, or imperious in their spirits, speeches, looks, Carriage:

2 Or unquiet, turbulent, impatient, always brawling or chiding. Such wives are
neither credit nor comfort to their husbands, but a continual vexation: Thorns
in their sides, and pricks in their eyes. The contentions of a wife are a
continual dropping, 19. Prove. 13. and 27.15. Like rain that falls into all the
rooms of a house, which is very tedious and irksome. Prove. 21.9.25.21.
It is better to Aw^^^ in the Corner of a housetop, then with a ^rawling woman
in a wide house.

Thus much concerning the particular duties of Husband to wife, and of the wife
to her Husband.

2. Duties common to both. 7.
2. Now follow the Duties Common to both husband and wife; and to be performed
by both, or Exercised to, or with, or for both, which are equally reciprocal
and of like Obligation. These are seven.

1 Prayer.
1. Prayer to God, frequent and fervent, both jointly and severally, for all
marriage Graces and marriage Comforts. Especially,

1. For sutablenesse of Disposition; that God would fashion your hearts alike.

2. For wisdom to carry with most beauty, amiableness and sw^^tness, for the
benefit, and advantage, comfort and encouragement one of another.

3 For Gods presence with you in it, and for Gods blessing upon it, and that
God would build you a house, ( Psalm. 127.) by giving you hopeful children,
faithful servants, blessed goods. Let Husband and wife interest God much in
their Marriage by prayer.

Reas. 1 Because a Conjugal condition can be no more comfortable or
satisfactory to us, then God makes it. It will be an empty thing if God do not
fill it, and bitter if God do not sweeten it. It is not the having of a Husband
or a Wife, but of God in them or with them, that gives content, comfort and
satisfaction. We ought in all our ways to acknowledge God, especially in
Marriage, which is one of the chief of our ways, and a great Turn of our lives
which concerns the future Comfort thereof.

2 Because mercies got with prayer, are got with a blessing, and prove the
sweetest mercies of all. Prayer sanctifies Marriage, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4. and makes the
acts of it holy in manner, and happy in end.

2. 2 Love, Tit. 2.4.
Common duty is Conjugal love which is not proper to the Husband alone, but
should be mutual and reciprocal between them both; To this end husband and wife
ought to love one another.

1 Chiefly for the grace of God the one sees in the other: that being
unchangeable, their love will be constant. When Religion tieth the knot of
affection between them, it holds fast till death. But when they love one
another chiefly for other respects, as beauty, wealth, or fulfilling the
desires of the flesh, etc. when these are satisfied or fail, love will cool.

2. Really at their hearts, or in sincerity. For to dissemble affections, and
Counterfeit love and kindness, will deprive them of the comfort and sweetness
of marriage, and make it in Time a burden and bitterness to them. Sincere love
knits their hearts as m^n joins their hands together; Else they will not
cleave, but sit loose; and be ready to leave one another.

4. Grounds of mutual love.
But there be four special Grounds of mutual love and deareness between Husband
and wife, scil. Donation, Propriety, Union and Necessity.

1. Donation They are special gifts bestowed by God, the one upon the other, 1
Donation, Prove. 18.22. and 19.14.
which should be a precious Endearment of one to other, Thus they should look
at themselves. This is the woman God has given to me to be a meet help for me,
above all the women in the world. So this is that man God has fited for me and
given to me for a head and Guide above all other men in the world.

2. 2 Propriety
Propriety, or the Mutual Interest they have by matrimony, one in another. They
are one another Own, properly and peculiarly; so as they are no bodies else;
and so as no person or thing in the world is their own; for they are married,
One to another; so are they to no body, to nothing besides. The Apostle asserts
this matrimonial interest in the 1. of Cor. 7.2. Let every man have his own
wife; and every woman have her own husband. The wise has not power of her own
body but her husband nor the Husband has power of his own body but the wife,
so as not to account their own bodies to be at their own disposal, The wife is
the Husband, only one, and he is hers.

They should be mutual darlings one to another, because they are mutual
Proprietors one of another: by self resignation of each to other they give
themselves mutual power one over another. Now every one loves his own best,
non quia pulchrum, sed quia Suum, his own Children, his own goods, his own
house etc. for propriety more then for beauty; beause they are his own. Shall a
man love any thing that is his own but his wife? or better then his wife? or
shall a wife love any thing that is her own but her husband? or better then her
husband? or shall a man love other men's wives, or a woman love other women's
husbands better then their own? Peculiarity of Interest is a Ground of
Speciality of love.

3. 3 Union.
Ground of special love between them is union. The Conjunction Husband and wise
have one with another. They two are in many respects as one person: and so one
together, as they are not (or should not be) with any one besides in all the
world, to wit one flesh, Genesis 2.24. as it were incarnated one to another: Adam
acknowledged this, when God had made the woman for him and brought (or married)
her to him, he said, This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, to
show his Thankfulness to God and love to his wife, Genesis 2.23.
as wondering at Gods goodness to him therein. Marriage is a moral conjunction
of two persons, so as Man and wife are in Law one flesh by Gods Ordinance. It
is the strictest bond of any relation, and therefore a fellowship of the dearest
amity, nearer then that between Parents and Children. Though children have
their flesh and bone from their Parents, yet they are not one flesh with their
Parents. Therefore shall a man leave his father, and mother and shall cleave
unto his wise, This, Genesis 2.24.
was the sanction of marriage. All Society must be left, that this between man
and wife may be kept. This is Paul's rule: Let not the wise depart from her
husband, 1 Cor. 7.0.11. ^^^ach. 2, 16.
and Let not the Husband put away his wife, for God hates putting away. The
wife must be an individual companion of life. The saying of the Philosopher,
that perfect friendship is only between two, is most true, in this case,
between man and wife, because they two are by marriage made one.

4 Necessity.
The 4 Ground of spiritual love between them is, Necessity of the one for the
other, even for their being, as well as for their walking. In both these
respects we may understand that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.11.
Neither is the man without the woman; neither, is the woman without the man in
the Lord. The man is not without the woman (nor can be) because man now is
conceived and born of a woman. The woman is not without the man; Job. 14.1.
because she is now begotten of man, so that they are mutual Causes the one of
the other. The woman has her Generation from the man, the man has his
conception and birth from the woman. They cannot be, much less be well, the one
without the other. The Husband should look at his wife, as Causa sine qua non,
a help he cannot well be without, for God said, It is not good that man should
be alone; and the woman should look at her husband, under the same notion. It
is not good for the woman to be alone. Therefore the husband should not insult
over his wife, because o^ his superiority over her, nor the wife be discouraged
because of her inferiority or subjection to him; because they have need the one
of the other; as fellows to bear and draw in one yoke together. Now mutual
Necessity should breed mutual love between them. What is so dear unto the wife
as the child of her Womb? Isa. 49 15. yet the husband should be dearer to her,
as E^kanah said to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8.
Am not I better to thee then ten sons?

3 3 Common du^^ is Communion.
Common duties between Husband and wife is communion (which flows from the
union of their Persons by marriage, for union is the ground of Communion) or
communication, of their bodies, souls, goods and respects.

1. 1 Of bodies.
Of their bodies, by mutual benevolence performed by the one to the other, 1.
Gor. 7.3.4.

2 By cohabitation (1 Pet. 3.7) or dwelling together, unless it be for a time,
and upon necessary Occasions: 3. by conjugal fidelity, reserving themselves
entirely and peculiarly proper, the one for the other, as Christ and his Church
does, Hosea. 3.3.

2 2 Of souls.
Of their souls, for the spiritual good of both. The heart, as well as the body
should be common between Husband and wife. One says, that both the body and
the soul are united together in Marriage. Conjugal love will make hearts advance
together as well as bodies; as amical love does friends. The Soul of Jonathan
was knit with the Soul of David, and Jonathan loved him, as his own soul, 1 Samuel 18.1. as lustful love makes the souls of unclean persons to cleave
together, as well as their bodies, as Shechems soul clave to Dinah Jacobs
daughter, whom he defiled, Genesis 34.3. 1 Kings 11.3.
and Solomon clave unto many strange women in love. But I shall speak more of
this Soul communion between married persons in the fourth common duty.

3 3. Of Gods.
Of their Goods and Estates, labors and endeavors; a joint fruition thereof
for mutual benefit and Comfort.

4 4. Of respects to their kindred.
Also there should be a communion of due respect and loving kindness, to the
kindred and friends that pertain to either party. The Husband and Wife lie as
cornerstones in the wall, to join several alliances and kindreds together; and
ought to carry very respectfully to their Affinity contracted by Marriage.
Esau's wives offended greatly in grieving the hearts of their Husbands parents,
Genesis 26.35.

4. 4. Furtherance of the salvation one of another.
Common duty is to further the salvation, and soul good one of another, as
given of God, to that end. Husband and Wife should labor to gain one another
to Christ and help one another to Heaven What know thou, O wife, says Paul,
but thou may be a means to save thy Husband, and wh^t know thou, O man,
but thou may save thy wife. However this ought to be the Serious endeavors
of both. If thou know not whether thou shall, yet try whether thou can.

To this end Extend your desires and labors in three particulars.

1 To heal infirmities the one sees in the other, as pride, passion,
discontent, folly, vanity, excess, or the like. Take the fittest Time, when the
parties may best be wrought upon, it is aptest to take Impressions; or is in a
tractable ductile frame: and choose the best manner, to do it in a taking
efficacious way. Beg wisdom of God for it, rightly to observe what is amiss
in a yoke fellow, to heal it, or to cover it. Happy is that couple, whom God
makes Heaven, of Spiritual Infirmities (or Spiritual Physicians) one to
another. The wife should be a second Conscience to her Husband, a bosom
Monitor, to tell him privately of his faults, to amend them.

2 To increase Graces mutually, and to encourage one another to the Exercise of
them, as, of faith, love, patience, of prudence, piety, charity, sobriety and
the like.

3 To Excite and Encourage unto duties, and to provoke one another unto good
works, and to quicken and sharpen, or edge themselves thereunto, to take off
dullness and aversness the one from the other. Yoke fellows should draw on one
another, to God and good, and toward Heaven, to public ordinances, and
private exercises, and to the Communion of Saints. They should be goads and
spurs each to other, and worship God together as Companions in his service; and
fellow travelers walking hand in hand together to the kingdom of glory. That
they may be like Zacharias and Elizabeth, both righteous, walking in all the
Commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luc. 1.6. like Abraham and
Sara both believers: like Elkanah and Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.
both true worshipers of God, like Aquila and Priscilla, both helpers in the
work of Christ, Romans 16.3, 4. Now, if either father or mother believe the
children are holy federally, 1 Cor. 7.14. and many promises are made to them,
especially if both the Parents be saints and believers, God blesses such with
pious and prosperous children, which are double blessings, as he did Abraham
and Sarah with an Isaac; Elkanah and Hannah with a Samuel, Zacharias and
Elizabeth with a John; Manoah and his wife with a Sampson. Such Godly compeers
make maria^e it self honorable; and they will live and die with Glory.

5 Patience.
The fifth Common duty is Patience, Husband and Wife should not only labor to
heal (of which before) but (if they cannot) yet to bear with infirmities, one
in another. Remember this Rule, never to be angry both at once, but the one
should bear with the others frowardness and Passion; and for a time give way to
it. This is the way, to overcome and quench passion in a yoke fellow, and to
make them afterward love one another better, when the one by yielding a little
has conquered the other; whereas to be both angry at once, is to add fuel to
the fire, and to make the slame of Contention between them very great, this
will dissolve the glue of affecton that made them cleave together, and separate
them, and make of one, two. Patience is necessary to prevent breaches and
preserve Conjugal Amity and familiarity between married Couples; and to possess
themselves and one another. It was the speech of a godly man, I count it a
necessary Qualification in one whom I may match my self unto, to have no
predominant humor in her, which I cannot bear; but to be able to bear any
Infirmity of mine. Another Reverend man (as is reported) seeing a very
choleric couple live very lovingly and quietly together as Husband and wife;
asked them how they could so sweetly agree and consort together: to whom the
man answered, when my wifes fit is upon her, I yield to her, as Abraham did to
Sarah; and when my fit is upon me she yields to me, and so we never strive
together, but assunder. This mutual forbearance each of other will beget
contention with their Coujugal Condition; and further their endeavors to suit
their mind to their Choice, and to be well pleased one in another after
Marriage, Mal. 15.
though before marriage they might have fitted their Choice to their mind. That
Marriage has a great blessing in it, wherein the greatest Contention between
Man and Wife, is who should love each other most, and please one another best.

6. Procreatio^ of Children.
6. The sixth Common duty, Procreation of children, I will, says Paul that the
younger women mary and bear children. 1 Timothy 5.14. especially to seek a godly
seed. To this end Husband and wife should wrest by prayer with God, not only
to bless them with the fruit of the womb, but with such a seed as shall be
blessed, is not only to give them children, but children of promise as well as
of providence; such as he will make his children by grace, as well as their
children by nature, heirs of God and coheirs with Christ.

God at the first made only one woman for one man, though he being the God of
the spirit of all flesh, had power to have made more: but he did Conjoyn one
woman only to that one man (and still continues his ordinance, of the same
single Copulation) that he might seek a seed of God: that is, a religious and
holy posterity, such as might worship him, the only true God, and propagate
his Church. This is a proper and principal end of Marriage, to wit the
procreation of children, ^or the propagation of Gods worship and of his Church
(of which I shall speak again afterward) yea this was the end of it, Even in
man's Innocence; when he was without sin. Hence amongst Gods people virginity
was a grief, as in the Case of Jephtahs daughter, Judge 11.37, 40. and
barrenness was accounted a shame and reproach, 1 Samuel 5.6, 7.
as Elizabeth's speech implies, Luc. 1.25. Hannah had experience hereof, upon
this Account, because they could not increase the Church of God. For which end,
Paul bids the younger women mary.

Tim. 2 14.
Whereas an ungodly seed serves to increase the Synagogue of Satan, Idolatry
and profaneness: and cause exceeding grief and troubles to their godly Parents.

And as it should be their earnest desire to bring forth a godly seed; so
should it be their care to bring them up for God, in the Discipline and nurture
of the Lord, Ephesians 6.7.
in the fear and knowledge of God, and in his worship, loving their souls
better then their bodies. Augustine praised his mother, that she traveled in
greater pain for his Soul, then she did in bringing forth his body. Solomon's
Mother taught him a Prophecy, that is, lessons of chastity, and temperance,
and the properties of a good wife, Prove. 31. His father David composed a Psalm
for his instruction, Psalm. 72. Timotheus mother taught him the scriptures from
his Infancy, 2 Timothy 1.5 3.15.

7 to build a godly family
7. Common duty is to build a godly family; not only by the procreation and
religious Education of children (which is a pillar of the house) but by a wise
and godly Government and ordering of the house, in which the wife ought to act
her part. I will, says Paul, that the younger women mary, and bear children,
and guide the house (that is domestic affairs). (...)1 Timothy 5.14. domi-portae.
To this end they ought to be discreet, that is prudent and circumspect, and
keepers at home, Titus 2.5. housewives, to carry their houses (as it were) on
their backs, as snails do. The Harlot does not so. Prove. 7.11.12.
Her feet abide not in her house, now she is without, now in the street. But
Abraham, when he was asked, where is Sarah thy wife? he said, Genesis 18, 9.
behold she is in the Tent. To this end Husband and wife should put forth joint
endeavors in five particulars.

1. 5 Things are requisite hereto.

1 Family duties.

Jer. 10.25.


To perform holy duties in their houses constantly, of reading the Scriptures
and of prayer, Evening and Morning. For without prayer, they and their Family
lies open to Gods wrath and judgments. Let them pray with their family in the
morning, because some of them may fall sick, and die before night; and pray in
the Evening also, to commit themselves and their house to Gods safe keeping
from all peril and danger, for they know not what a Night may bring forth, or
day either, and if evils befall them, their hearts will smite them for neglect
of this necessary duty of prayer in their families. Also to Catechize repeat
sermons, and teach all in their house their duties, and to seek the souls good
of their servants as well as of their children, and as well as to expect the
service of their bodies, and to charge them all to walk in Gods ways, as
Abraham did his children and househould, after him. Gen 18.19. Prove. 4.1. to 5.
1. Chron. 28.9.
and as David charged his son Solomon in his life, and at his death 1 Kin.
2.1.2. This is the mothers duty also, to teach and command her children their
duties. My son, says Solomen, Prove. 1.8. and 6.20.
keep thy fathers Commandment, and forsake not the Law of thy mother.

Josh. 24.15.
The master of the house should resolve with Joshua, I and my house will serve
the Lord, every day together (what ever other familes do) we will pray and read
Gods word, that is, perform holy duties together, for the Glory of God and the
good of all our souls, as well as eat, drink talk and sleep together; and with
David, Ps. 101.2.
I will walk in the midest of my house with a perfect heart.

Esther 4.16.
The wife also should be a help to her Husband in family duties, and no
hinderance therein. Queen Esther and her Maids will fast and pray: For if the
wife should draw back from holy duties and be a discouragement to him therein,
the soul of her husband (if he be godly) can take no pleasure in her. She is in
a posture tending to perdition, Hebr. 10.38.39.

Mr. Abbot.
I have read a sad story reported by a Reverend Minister upon his own knewledge,
of an honest Christian that had a wife, world ly and distrustful: and he being
much in Godly Exercise, Morning and Evening in his family, She would disturb
him, and go about rattling her keys, or making some other noise, to hinder
him, pretending that his Time spent that way, might be employed, in getting of
money for his family. This woman was given over by God to the Devils Temptations
so far, that she thrust a knife into the pit of her stomach, and killed her
self, yet before she died, she confessed thus much to that Minister, and craved
Gods pardon as well as she could. Had it not been better, that she had borne
her husband company in holy duties, and so gone hand in hand to heaven together?

Further set up Gods word to be the Law of your house, to order your family and
all the affairs of it according to the Rule of it. For Gods word moulds and
shapes every person in it for his Employment, and directs and keeps them in
their several ranks, Places, and duties. This is the way to have a Church in
your house, Romans 16.5.
as Aquila and Priscilla had.

2. 2 Choose good servants.
To choose good servants: such as know and fear God, or as appear tractable and
hopeful to be instructed, and wrought upon. Set David before you as a pattern
herein, Psalm. 101.6, 7. Suffer no disordered swearing ranting persons to come
into your house or to tarry in your sight, such as will bring sin and a curse
along with them. Covet earnestly to have a choice picked family, Acts 10.2
such as Cornelius had, who feared God and all his house.

3. 3 Exclude sin.
To shut sin out of doors, as excessive drinking, gaming, swearing, lying,
pride, contentions, Job 11.14. chapter 22.23.
vanities.

Follow the Council which Jobs friends gave him, as Zophar, Let not wickedness
dwell in your Tabernacle, and Eliphaz, Put iniquity far from your Tabernacle,
then you shall know that your Tabernacle shall be in peace. Chap. ^.24.
God will keep house for you, when you are from home, as Bildad, Job. 8.6.
If you be pure and upright God will make the Habitation of your righteousness
prosperous. Let it be your care to make it righteous; and God will make it
prosperous.

4 Look well to the ways of your household, 4 Oversee the family.
to prevent or supress sin and to stop the beginnings thereof, to cherish and
encourage good in all that live with you, to reduce those that go astray in
opinion or in conversation. This is the duty of the wife as well as of the
Husband. Prove. 31.27. 1 Samuel 3.13, 14.
The virtuous woman looks well to the ways of her household; Because Elies
sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not, God judged his house
for ever.

5. 5. To Sanctify the sabbath.
To keep holy the Sabbath day, not only you, but all within your house? the
charge whereof lies mainly on the master of the house, and next upon the
mistress, Exodus 20.9, 10.

This Godly Covenant of your household will draw down Gods protection, and
blessing upon your habitation, relations, and upon all your affairs.

The use hereof is to exhort all Marying and married persons.

1 To learn these marriage duties, both special and Common. Use 1. Learn these
marriage duties.
For any to mary before they know their duty, or how to carry therein, is like
setting up, before one has learnt the trade: or like answering a Matter,
before one hears it, which is folly and shame unto him, Prove. 18.13.

2 Use. 2. perform them.
To perform these duties of marriage car^full, and constantly, I commend unto
you four Motives or inducements hereunto. 4 Motives.


1. 1 Duties of Marriage a^e matters of Religion.
Though Marriage in it self be but a civil matter, yet the duties of Marriage are
Matters of Religion, o^ conscience and obedience to the gos^el, ^^ing fully
prescribed and enjoined (...) And Christ will one day come in slaming ^ire to
ta^^ ^vengeance on them that ob^^ not the Gospel, in the precepts of it. 2 These
1.8.

2 2 To do the duty. This to get the Comfort thereof.
In the diligent and Conscionable performance of the duty of marriage, you may
expect the comforts, benefits and blessings of marriage. A wife may draw forth
the love and kindeness of a husband, and a Husband may extract the helpfulness
and comfort of a wife, by the religious doing of their duties the one to the
other. For man or woman to expect the Comfort of a Relation, and to neglect the
duty thereof, is to tempt God; Math. 25.24.
and to act the part of a hard man, who looks to reap where he has not sown,
and to gather where he has not strowed.

3. 3 The marriage covenant.
Motive. The solemn league and covenant you enter into mutually at Marriage
(whereof God himself is a witness, Malac. 2.14. both of your making it, and
your breaking it or keeping it; Hence it is called the Covenant of God; this
ingageeth and obliges you strongely to all Matrimonial duties. Prove. 2.17.
Covenant breakers (even in wedlock) God will judge.

4. 4 This will be a good example.
The good Carriage of Husband and wife each to other, according to the Gospel,
will be a good example or pattern to all other Relations in the family, to set
them a copy; or teach them how to carry therein, and to put them in order.
Without this all would be out of frame; the children unruly, and disobedient,
and the servants unfaithful and disorderly.

So much of the Duties of Marriage.

Now follows the third thing considerable in marriage.

III. The Benefits of Marriage.
WHich may be referred to five heads. They are 1. Personal 2. Domestical 3.
Political 4. Ecclesiastical 5. Universal.

1. 1 Personal Benefits.
The Personal Benefits of Marriage appertaining to the parties themselves are 4.
to wit,

1. Society 2. Sanctity 3. Copartnership 4. furtherance of the mystical Marriage
between Christ and the soul.

1. 1 Society.
Society. God made man a sociable Creature, in respect both of the Constitution
of his body, and disposition of his mind: and said, Genesis 2.18.19.20.
It is not good for man to be alone. Though God made Adam lord over all the
Creatures, and brought them to him, to give names to them all, as a sign of his
sovereignty and authority over them; yet for all this man was alone; for among
all the creatures there was not found a help meet for him or like to him in
Nature: a fit and suitable Companion, that should be alter ego, a second self to
him. God set all the creatures before him, ere he gave him a wife; that (as
some think) he seeing their sexes, might desire to have a help in his kind and
nature also. God saw it was not good for the irrational living creatures to be
alone, Genesis 7.2. (...)
therefore he created them male and female, in Heb. called the man and his wife,
for the increase of their kind (to this end God bid Noah take into the Arc two
of every sort of living things to keep them alive, they shall be male and
female, Genesis 6.19, 20. and God created them male and female together, but he
did not so in mankind for Adam was first formed, then Eve. Though it be said in
Genesis 1.27. that God created them that is Adam and Eve) male and female, yet not
together. This is an anticipation. The 27, 28. verses of Genesis 1. chap. are to
be made up with the 17, 18, 19. verses of the 2. chapter together into one
Relation. This was the Cause of the Creation of the woman, because Adam was
alone (God saw Adam Solitary and defective till he had a wife. I will make him,
says God, a help commodious for him. God created the woman by deliberate
Council, as before he had done the man, Genesis 1.26, 27. Let us make man in our
Image. The creation of the woman was the work of the Trinity as well as of the
man. When Adam saw no other fit help for him, among all the Creatures, it might
make him the more prize a wife: and count it better to lose a rib then to lack
a wife; to want part of himself, then not to have a second self. A wise was the
Complement of all to Adam: and a Recovery of his lost Rib. If Adam in
Innocence, when he was perfect in body and soul, and when the whole world was
his own, stood in need of a wife even for society, to be his Companion, and it
was not good for him that was so happy to be alone, much less for poor sinful,
sickly miserable man since the fall, what need has he of a wife, even for
Society?

Eccles. 4.9, 10.
Two are better then one, says the Preacher, that is fully verified in
conjugal Society, though this only is not meant here, but that society in all
sorts of affairs is better than Solitariness.

2. Sanctity. 2
The Second Benefit of marriage is sanctity, to prevent sin, and keep us pure
from Pollutions of flesh and spirit.

1. 1 Cor. 7.2.
From outward acts of uncleanness. To avoid fornication let every man have his
own wife (says Paul) and every woman her own husband.

2 From inward Lusts, Ver. 9.
It is better to mary then to burn. Marriage is a means to prevent burning in
lust.

Marriage is a preservation of chastity, and prvention of heart adultery which
our Savior makes to be to look on a woman and lust after her. Math. 5.28.
Though marriage was instituted before there was sin, and Adam needed it not as
a Remedy against Incontinency but upon another account. But since the fall it
is of necessary and sovereign use, to prevent sin, and to procure or promote
our sanctincation, that we may possess our vessels in holiness and Honor, not
in the lost of conpiscence: These. 4.3.4, 5.
This is the will of God.

3. 3 Copartnership.
Benefit is Copartnership in all conditions better and worse: As yoke fellows
to take part and share equally together therein.

1. To be a solace and comfort one to other in adversity, as in sickness,
poverty, disgrace. What a great comfort is a loving tender husband to his dear
wife in her sickness? and she the like to him in his. Prove. 17.17,
As a brother is born for adversity: so many couples find cause to say, that
they were married together for a time of adversity: and that God brought them
together to be mutual helps, and comforts at such a time as this; Judge. 13.22,
23.
as he did Esther to the kingdom, Esther. 4.14. how did Mancahs wife comfort
him, when he was plunged deep into fear of death?

2. To be companions in joy; the delight one of another in prosperity; the
desire of the eyes, as Ez^kiels wife was, Ezech. 24.16. Eccles. 9.9.
and the joy of the heart; to live joyfully and comfortably together, as
Abraham and Sarah, Genesis 26.8.
Isaac and Rebekah did. Ab^melech looking out through a window, saw Isaac,
sporting (or laughing and rejoicing) with his wife. Which implies some pleasing
familiarity, or sign of love and delight between them: Husband and wife are
glasses to look one another face in: and echoes of delight, refreshments and
reflections or repercussions of pleasure and joy the one to the other; and
mutual chearings each of other.

4 4 Furtherance of the Mystical Marriage.
Benefit of Marriage is, the Furtherance of the Mystical Marriage between Christ
and the Soul. Both Husband and wife should improve their conjugal Relation and
fellowship together to promote the Communion of their souls with Christ, as the
Spiritual huband thereof. To this end we should do three things.

1. 1. To look at Christ as our Husband. Hoseah. 2.19 20.
To look at Jesus Christ our Maker and Redeemer as our Husband ( Isa. 54.5) as
married to us, Jer. 3.14. and at our selves as betrothed to him, in
righteousness and loving kindness, mercy and faithfulness.

2 2 To expect the love of a Husband from him.
To expect all that love, kindness, tenderness, Comfort, nourishings and
cherishings from Christ spiritually ( Ephesians. 5.29.) which the wife looks to
receive from her Husband corporally. As the spouse does in the Canticles: the
kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.2. the Embraces of his arms, cap. 2.6. the
refreshments of his presence, to sit under his shadow with great delights.
Cant. 2, 3.
Cordials and Refocillations to support and comfort the Soul in his absence:
this is to be staid with flagons, and comforted with apples, verse 5. Also the
discovery of Christ to the soul, for he has promised, I will manifest my self
to you, John 14.21. Will not the husband let his wife behold his face? and the
sense of his love shed abroad in the heart, Romans 5.5. Oh that is better then
wine, Cant. 1.2. The Communication of the seed of Grace, this is the
benevolence which Christ as a Husband renders to our souls, 1 Cor. 7.3.
to make them fruitful in good works. We are married unto Jesus Christ (says
Paul) that we should bring forth fruit unto God; Hence the spouse says, Romans
7.4. Cant. 1.16. Col. 1.10.
Our bed is green. This denotes the fruitfulness and flourishing of the soul in
every good work, by the spiritual Communion or heavenly Conjunction of Christ
with the soul.

3. 3. To perform our duty to him.
To express and perform all that duty spiritually to Christ, which the wife
does corporally to her husband, as subjection, obedience love, loyalty,
chastity, serviceableness. To reserve our hearts wholly, solely, entirely for
him (as his bed to lie in, his Throne to rule in; now the husbands bed and the
Kings throne admit no Corrivals) to be for him and not for another ( Hosea,
3.3.) to tarry many days for his gracious Return and manifestation of himself
to our souls, after his departures and Occultations of himself (in our
apprehensions) from us: to embrace and imbosom Christ, and lay him between our
breasts, Micah. 7 19, Cant. 1 13.
as a bundle of mirrhe, or perfumed bags. To subject our desires to him, and
submit our wills to his, that his will may be ours, and there may be but one
will between Christ and our souls: to refer our selves wholly to be at his
command and dispose. To open our hearts unto him, inviting and entreating him
earnestly to come in, and not only to sup and lodge in them, but to make his
abode in and with our souls. I opened to my beloved, says the spouse, Cant.
5.5. To be sick of love for Christ, as the spouse was, Cant. 5.8. sick with
grief for his absence, and with desires of his presence, and to seek him up and
down, as the spouse did, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. by night on our bed (in private
inquiries, breathings and restless desires and pursuits after him) and in the
streets and broad ways of the ordinances and communion of saints, and not to
give over till we find him, and having found him to hold him fast and not let
him go to join ou^selves, 1. Christ, by faith and love to be one spirit with
him ( he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, says Paul, 1 Cor. 6, 17, as
Husband and wife are one flesh.

To leave father and mother, yea wife and children, house, goods, land, all we
have, whatsoever is near or dear to us for Christ's sake, to follow Christ, and
to go to Christ, which is best of all for us. Phil. 1.23.


This is the Law of the Churches marriage with Christ, Psalm. 45.10.
Hearken O daughter, forget thine own people and thy fathers house. He that
loves father or mother, son, or daughter etc. more then me, says Christ, is
not worthy of me, Math, 10.37. to have me to be the Husband of his soul. Luke
14.26.
Christ requires we should leave all to cleave to him.

The Ap^stle in Ephesians. 5. describes the Union and amity of Christ and the
spouse by the sameness of flesh, which Marriage causes between Husband and
wife: and reaches married persons their duties, by the communion of Christ and
the Church: and the souls duty to Christ by the wives duty to her Husband. This
is to spiritualize marriage; and to improve it to a high, holy and heavenly use,
the benefit whereof w^^l extend to the days of Eternity.

What Expression of Conjugal, love is there between man and wife, which carries
not a resemblance of some spiritual intercourse between Christ and the soul?

2. Benefit of marriage is Domestical, the building of families and kindreds, 2
Domestical Benefits of Marriage. Ruth, 4.11.
and the multiplication of them. Women are Builders hereof as well as men;
Rachel and Leah did build the house of Israel. Indeed marriage is the fountain
of all humane societies.

3. Benefit is Political. 3 Political.
Marriage lays the foundation of cities, countries, nations: of Laws and civil
government: of Commonwealths and Kingdoms: all these are superstructures upon
Marriage. also it furnishes the same, with useful and serviceable instruments.
That Marriage upholds the fabric of the republic; the continuation and
succession thereof. Hence it is called the Seminary of the Common wealth.

4. 4 Ecclesiastical.
Benefit of Marriage is Ecclesiastical: the Propagation of the Church of God,
and of the tr^e religion, to replenish it with members, as it furnished Christ
the head of it and Savior of the world with a body on earth, (for he was
conceived and born of a woman, that was begotten in wedlock.)

Marriage afforded flesh unto the Messiah, and provides materials for Gods
Church, both stones and pillars, and helps to fill heaven with heirs, therefore
Marriage is called the Seed plot and Nursery of the church.

5. Benefit of Marriage is universal, 5 Universal.
the preservation and increase of mankind, this was the end of Adam and ^ves
creation and Marriage before the fall; and this was Gods benediction upon them.
Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth, Genesis 1.28.
Were it not for marriage; the world would come to an end. Hence marriage is
called, the pillar of the world under God; the right hand of providence.

Use. 1 Thankfulness to God
Use. 1. This should teach us thankfulness to God.

1. For providing so comfortable, useful and beneficial a Relation or condition
for us, as marriage is. It is a great bundle of Benefits; How many both private
and public are bound up together in it as in one volume?

2. For all the benefit, help and comfort God has given us particularly in our
Marriage, in and by our yoke fellows. What shall I render to the Lord, may the
Husband say, for giving me such a meet and suitable help, as I think there is
None such for me: may the wife say, for giving me so great a blessing in a
wise, loving, tender Husband; may both Husband and wife say, for blessing us
with the fruit of the womb, and giving us hopeful tractable children.

Use 2. Improve marage.
Use. 2. This should teach us to improve Marriage for all those ends, for which
God appointed it, as

1. For Gods glory as well as for our Comfort.

2. For our selves; the good of our souls as of our bodies; in spirituals as
well as in temporals: and for Heaven as well as for earth.

3. For others, not only to build families, but godly families, such as may
know, fear and serve God: and may breed and send forth useful persons (children
or servants) such as may do service in Church or common wealth, or up religious
families abroad. This is an honor and comfort to a married couple, that out of
their house as a stock or root, many godly families have sprung and grown, as
swarms out of a hive, when it is full: that their children being disposed of in
theworld, have built some; and their servants, being married from them have
built other families; and all fearing and worshipping God.

Use. 3. reprovs them that mary for low ends.
Use. 3. Reproves them that mary for poor low ends, as only or chiefly,

1. For Carnal ends to satisfy the lusts and desires of the flesh.

2. Or for worldly ends, to get wealth or preferment, to heighten, greaten, or
raise themselves some way in the world thereby. Such mary the portion or
Estate, rather then the Person (whether it be man or woman) and may come to
have sorrow enough therewith; and to buy gold too dear. By Gods just judgment
such persons enjoy few of the benefits of Marriage.

1. Little society together; when they have obtained their ends, and satisfied
their lusts, they care little, one for another; and are ready to part bed, if
not houses.

2. Less sanctity thereby. For their eyes are as full of adultery, and their
hearts of unclean affections or lustings after others men or women, as if they
were not married.

3. No advantage at all do they got to their Souls by their marriage, or
spiritual befit, no help heavenward, but rather a hindrance.

4. They desire children, but do not think or care whether they be Godly or no;
and they prove many times accordingly.

5. They build up families, but without a dram of religion or piety in them,
scarce Civility or common honesty.

6. They seek great things in the world for their children, but do not
endeavor, intend or desire, they should be useful Instruments in Church or
Comonwealth and they often spend prodigally, what their parents got painfully.

7. They take little or no delight one in another, and have little comfort
togethes: it may be much grief: being thorns in the sides and pricks in the
eyes, and provocations, the one to the other.

8. As for the mystical marriage between Christ and Soul, they know not what it
means: it is a paradox to them, as Regeneration was to Nicodemus.

How many Husbands and wives have no more benefit by marriage, then the Pagans
that knew not God, yea then the beasts have, to satisfy their lusts, which God
created male and female as well as them.

Now I come to the fourth thing considerable in marriage.

IV. The Troubles of Marriage.
4 The troubles of Marriage.
Marriage has it is crosses as well as comforts: and sorrows as well as joys.
It is not all honey, but has some gall and wormwood intermingled. Marriage is
but a Bitter-sweet.

Many are the cares, fears, sorrows, troubles that attend marriage, even the
comforts of it, as,

1. The having of children. Many sorrows accompany the wife conception,
breeding, bearing and feeding of them; and many cares and troubles arise both
to Husband and wite in the education and disposal of them: and if their
children prove not well, what a heart break is that to them? besides, the death
of children causes great grief unto parents.

2. The building of a family; the ordering and governing of it, and making
provision for the whole house. 1 Timothy 5 8.
He is worse then an infidel that does not so, says Paul. Many encumbrances
accompany household affairs. Martha had experience thereof. Luk 10.40, 41

3. (...)
The care incumbent upon both, how to please one another, 1 Cor. 7.33, 34. The
word signifies a care joined with anxiety of mind, the word implies a dividing
of the mind (as one says) into diverse thoughts, casting this way, and that
way, and every way, how to give best content.

4. There may be several events and Emergencies, that prove occasions of
Trouble and grief to them both, as, Losses and Crosses in their Callings,
estates and affairs; sicknesses upon both or either of them; and death at last.

5. Especially when they are unequally yoked, in Religion or otherwise, and
they draw diverse or adverse ways; the one forward and the other backward: or
the one upward the other downward. Or when they are unsutably disposed, and
their spirits are cross-grained, each to other; the one high the other low.

How many discontents and differences arise from hence?

The reason of it.
The reason why Marriage has its crosses and troubles, is, because it is a thing
under the sun, therefore it is subject to vanity and vexation of Spirit, as all
other things. The Preacher affirms the same from his own experience. Besides,
Marriage is but for this present time. When we get above the sun, and come to be
happy in Heaven, we shall stand in no need of marriage, or of any of the
benefits or comforts of it, which we enjoy here below, Math. 22.30.
but we shall be as the Angels of God in Heaven.

Use. 1 Expect not too much from it.
Use. 1. Then do not greaten your expectations too much, nor look for more from
it then is in it, or can be had from it; as if it was all joy and no sorrow;
all sweetness and no bitterness in it, all honey, and no sting of trouble. To
look for more comfort and delight in it, then you can find; and to find (or
meet with) more trouble and sorrow in it then you did look for or imagine, will
greatly disappoint your expectation; and that will beget, not only
dissatisfaction; and discontent, but vexation of spirit in you.

Use. 2 prepare for troubles.
Use. 2. I counsel and exhort all married persons, to expect and prepare for
Troubles, and Trials, yea for now ones, and it may be greater then ever ye
experienced before.

Marriage crosses are new things, to those that have lived single and solitary
lives; you stand in need to beg of God wisdom and patience, to bear them and
improve them. Paul was a true Prophet herein. Such as mary, shall have trouble
in the flesh 1 Cor. 7.28.

Husband and wife have cause to expect variety and vicissitude of turns and
changes (from better to worse, from joy to sorrow, from pleasure to pain) in
wedlock as well as in any other condition under the sun: and the time, or
several seasons thereof are determined by the appointment and limitation of
Gods purpose and providence. This is conceived to be the Preachers sense and
Scope, in Eccles. 3.1. to 9. Ecclesiansj. 1 to 9.
wherein he declares the Universal uncertainty of future events, as having
their total dependence upon Gods predetermining purpose and overruling
providence which man cannot by all his solicitude, anxious care or thoughts,
possibly prevent or escape. Job had large experience hereof He enjoyed the
comforts of Substance and health, of wife and of many children (seven sons and
three daughters which were accounted as his greatest mercies or blessings next
to his graces, as his uprightness and fear of God, and eschewing of evil: Job1,
2.
though some reckon their children but as Troubles, (...) 1, 2.
and bills of charges) and that many days, but afterward his estate was all
snatched from him by violent hands, his children were all taken away by a sudden
blow or blast, as you may read Job. 1.19, 20. and his body was smitten with
sore boils from head to fo^t chap. 2.7. Then his wife said unto him Do thou
still retain thine integrity? Curse God and die She that should have been a help
and comfort to him, ver 9.
proved a great cross and trial to him in his affliction, as appears by his
sharp reproof of her. verse. 1^.
Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks. What? shall we receive
good at the hand of God and shall we not receive evil? Even those that are
married must expect (in their conjugal condition) to receive ev^l at the hand of
God as well as good; loss of children as well as of goods, and diseases of
body, and crosses in yoak-fellows, and in friends also, which were an addition
to Jobs afflictions, Job. 16 2 They proved miserable comforters to him,
Physicians of no value, cha. 13.4 Some think that Satan by his commission mi^ht
have taken away his wife as well as his children, Job 1.12. but he kept her
alive to be a vexation unto Job.

Marriage at first is a soft gentle pleasant thing but, it proves to many
afterward hard, heavy, and uneasy (through concomitant Troubles) more bone
then flesh, especially if they want patience, which makes hard things soft, and
heavy thing; light. Husband and wife that live comfortably and joyfully
together for sometime, may afterward m^et with new afflictions and Additions
to their afflictions, such as they never looked for, nor imagined. Now that ye
are forewarned of them, be ye forewarned against them, not to bear them out by
the head and shoulders (as we say) in a self hardening, Stoical stupid way; but
as becomes Christians, by the exercise of faith and patience, meekness and
holiness in them, and of wisdom to make a spiritual use and improvement
thereof, that ye may gloryfie God in the fire of Wedlock afflictions; and that
when God has tried you therein you may come forth as Gold ( J^b 23.10.)
leaving the dross both of your personal Co^uptions and Conjugal miscarriages
behind you therein. Socrates once said to some that hit him in the teeth with
his wives frowardness, that he did thereby learn even within his own doors to
be constant and patient every where etc.

Use. 3. (...) wean (...) from it.
Use 3. The Consideration of marriage troubles may wean you from it, even at
your entrance into it, and prevent your surseition Marriage comforts and
delights afterward. Does not Paul prescribe and press this upon you? Let them
that have wives be as if they had none 1 Cor. 9.27. and let them that have
husbands be as if they had none; for this Rule is a direction to them both.

Quest. How may those that have wives be as if they had none? or those that are
married be as if they were not married?

Ans. Five ways.

1. 1. Let not Marriage be a hinderance to serving God or saving our souls.
First by not suffering out marriage to be an Impediment or Discouragment to us
either, 1. In serving of God. 2. Or in working out the Salvation of our souls.


When we will wait upon God in his public Ordinances and seek God in private
duties, both in our families and closets, and meet God in the communion of
Saints;

1. Though our wives will not join with us therein, or others in our family,
refuse Communion with us,

2. Yea though they should reproach us for the same, as Michal mocked David for
dancing before the Arc; 2 Samuel 6.20, 21, 22.
or though any of our Carnal kindred should do the like, we should answer them
resolutely, as David did Michal; If going to hear Sermons, or performing holy
duties in and with my family (as prayer, reading the scripture, repeating
Sermons etc.) or in my closet alone, If these things make me vile, I will yet
be more vile then thus. I will bind the reproaches I suffer for piety, purity,
strictness in duties, from my husband or wife, or from any of our friends to my
forehead, and wear them as my crown; and they shall rather edge and spur me on
thereto, then be any pull back or hindrance there from. Then a Husband has a
wife, as if he had none; and a wife has a Husband as if she had none.

When we endeavor to serve God freely and entirely, and as much as we can,
without distraction, as if we were single persons, unrelated to any man or
woman by Marriage; as if we had none but God to take care to serve, and please
and approve our selves to: or as if we had none (related to us) to dissuade or
discourage us from the same. Or if we have relations and they should attempt
it, we are resolved, that our God and our souls being dearer to us then they
all, we will (by his grace) serve and please him, and tender the salvation of
our souls, above them all, whether our husbands, or our wives, or kindred be
pleased or displeased at it. Then we carry as if we did not mary.

When we look at these two, to wit, the worshipping of our dear Lord God; and
the saving of our precious immortal Souls, as the main and supreme business we
have to do; and at Marriage but as subordinate and subservient thereunto: and
but a secondary means of our good, when the desire and purpose of our hearts is
fixed upon three things.

1. That Marriage Crosses, and family cares and troubles, Luke 10.42.
shall not take us off from seeking the kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof, John 6.27.
in the first place; the one thing needful; from choosing the good part, that
shall never be taken from us: 2 not to our coming to Christ.
from laboring more for the meat that endures, then for perishing meat.

2. That our relation shall not hinder us from coming unto Jesus Christ in his
ordinances (as Word, Sacraments etc.) when he invites us (and an opportunity is
an Invitation thereunto) It was the excuse of one, bidden to the great supper,
in Luc. 14 20. I have married a wife, therefore I cannot come. Such an one has
a wife, so, as if he had none but a wife; neither a God to serve, nor a soul to
save; as if a wife was summum benum, the chief good. But he that has a wife,
as if he had none, will say, though I have married a wife, that shall be no
impediment to me, but I will come to Jesus Christ in his Ordinances, and
endeavor to bring my wife with me to Christ. However I will come, though she
hang back and will not come with me.

3. 3 That we will go to heaven alone heavenward.
That if our Marriage do not help us Godward and Christ-ward, it shall not
hinder us; and that we will go to Heaven alone (if our yoak-fellowes will not
go along with us) rather then to Hell with company.

When these (and the like) are our resolves and endeavors, then we have
Husbands or wives as if we had none.

2. We that have wives may be as if we had none, by not suffering our Marriage
to be a means of sin unto us, either Immediately or Mediately


1. Inmediately in our selves, by breeding in our hearts 1 Either distrust by
reason, of the greatness of our charge, and smalness of our means. 2 Or
discontent because of the mani old troubles we meet with therein.
When we endeavor to overcome distrust, and suppress discontent; and to ^rust
God for our families (to provide for them) as well, as for our single selves,
if we were alone: and to be as patient in bearing our marriage Crosses as our
own personal trials; when we are content to take the better with the worse,
together, therein, and both as from the hand of God, as Job answered his wife,
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? then we
that have wives are as if we had none.

2 Let not Marriage be a means of sin to us.
2. When we suffer not our marriage to be a means of sin to us, Mediately by our
yoak-fellowes being Instruments of Tentations to us unto sin, to draw us from
God and good.

1. To idolatry, superstition or will, 1 Of Idolatry 1 Kings 11.4. Deuteronomy. 13 6,
8, 9.
worship, as Solomon's wives turned away his heart after other Gods. Under the
law an Enticer to Idolatry, though she were the wise of their bosom, was to be
put to death.

2. Apostasy Job 2.9.
2 To Apostasy from God, or blasphemy against God, to fall from integrity or
sted fastness and, to think or speak ill of God. Jobes wife tempted him
thereunto, do thou still retain thy integrity? curse God and die.

Such like are the designs some wives have upon their Hutbands, to draw them
from the Truths, ways and ordinances of God into errors, heresies, by-ways
etc, or licentiousness.

Or to discourage their hearts from pious duties and courses, as Michal sought
by her mocking to do unto David, from dancing before the ark.

3. 3 Injury
To Injury, to do our neighbor wrong in taking (by unjust ways) their house,
land or goods from them, as Jezebel did Naboths vineyard from him, for her
Husband Ahab; to cheer him up when he was sick with grief and indignation, upon
Naboths denial of his vineyard to him. Ahab desired it, upon a valuable
consideration, but Jezebel his wife took the vineyard violently from Naboth, 4
Any breach of Gods command.
by taking away his life.

4. Or to a breach of any (even the least) of Gods commandments. Eve tempted
her husband Adam to eat forbidden fruit (which was the transgressing of a law
of Trial) hereby she brought sin and death upon herself, and her Husband, and
upon all their posterity.

Let this (by the way) be a caution to women to beware Satan do not abuse them
in making them his instruments or Agents, to entice or tempt their Husbands to
any sin, as pride, malice, revenge, vanity, covetousness, or the like. Now,
when we are always watchful and careful, lest Satan should surprise us by coming
to tempt us unto sin, in or by a conjugal Companion, Math. 16.22.23.
one so dear and near to us (lying in our bosoms) as he thinks we will suspect
no evil from, nor serpent in: (as Satan came to tempt Christ, in Peter)
therefore we ponder well what counsel, entreaties, our proposals are made to us
by our yoak-fellowes, as well as by strangers, which both Ahab and Solomon
neglected to do. Or when they do persuade or entice us to any evil whatsoever,
either of Omission or Commission, against God or man; we strive, strenuously to
resist all their suggestions, tentations, and solicitations; and set our selves
as a wall of brass to repel them all, that they cannot prevail, no nor enter or
pierce us. As Job not only rejected his wifes persuasion, but gave her a sharp
reprehension for it. Thou speak as one of the foolish women, as David
resolutely replied his wife Michals discouraging scoff.

Then we that have wives are as if we had none, and ye that have husbands are
as if ye had none.

3. 3 Honor christ for your Husband.
We that have wives, or Husbands may be, as if we had none, by having Christ
for the Husband of our souls, and by having holy fellowship with him, and by
delighting our selves in him, in the embraces and solaces of his love; and in
the cherishing comsorts of his presence. When Christ is dear to ours souls
above all our relations (yea above all the world) and we are willing to leave
father and mother, wife and children, house and lands, and all for Christ, that
is,

1. To follow Christ in the Regeneration, as his disciples: to follow the Lamb
whither-soever he goes, Revelat. 14.4.

2. To be willing to suffer the loss of all for Christ, as Paul did.

3. Phil. 3.8.
To learn them all, to go to Christ, as best of all for us; then we have wives
as if we had none. This Christ requires of all that would be his Disciples; or
be accounted worthy of him, Luc. 14.26.
even to hate father and mother, wife and children, that is to love them less
then him, and to be willing to leave them all for him. Hereto Christ makes a
large promise of a hundred fold now in this time, and in the world to come
eternal life, Mark, 10.29.30. Galeatius Caracciolus that Noble Marquess of
Italy or rather the most Excelent Theophilus) did forsake parents and wife and
children and all his friends and renounnced all his wealth and Dignity because
(as he said) he could not enjoy both Christ and them. He was a rare example of
leaving all (a very great all, of Relations, Possessions, Honors and
pleasures) for Christ, rather then to enjoy all without Christ. Notwithstanding
the strongest workings and wrestlings of natural affections within him; and the
powerfullest and most heart breaking Solicitations of his friends by prayer,
Tears and Arguments to the Contrary; and the deep and sore Agonies and
Conflicts he had in himself about it; yet through the Grace of Christ, he
overcame them all for Christ.

A man may be said to have a thing etc. (as an old house o^ Garment) as if he
had it not; when he has something of the same kind that is much better, as a
new house to go unto or new clothes to put on, when he pleases. Now the
souls Marriage with Christ is the most Excellent of all Relations, Conjunctions
and Consociations: it is the first and chiefest marriage in excellency, and
thereof a Rule and pattern to humane marriage, to direct the due Carriage of the
Parties each to other. To this purpose Paul proposes it in the fifth of the
Ephesians. As a greater Light obscures a less, so a greater delight weans us
from a less. If our souls be married unto Christ, and take pleasure in communion
with Christ, this will wean us from our Temporal Marriage, and the delights of
it, as poor low things of an inferior nature, respecting the body most which
is the Earthly part of man. Sensual delights (wherein we partake with the
beasts) which cannot reach the sublime part of man, the soul, to afford it
divine refreshments, which only Christ the Husband of it can do. This
fellowship with Christ will abundantly compensate or supply, the loss or want
o^ the comfort of all other Relations; and take us off them, wean us from them,
and raise up our hearts above them. Even whilst we have them. As it is in
other things, when we make Grace our chief goods, then we have Gold and silver
as it we had it not; or Gods favor our chei^ honor; then we have the favor
and honor of Men, as if we had it not. We have thing appretiatively and hold
them tenaciously, when we have nothing better then they, or so good: as the
covetous man has his gold; the Ambitious man his Honor, the Voluptuous M^n his
pleasure, and the Uxorious man his wife on whom he dotes: These know or have
nothing that is better. A man cannot have an useful, delightful Creature, as
if he had it not, unless he have something as good or better to injoye in the
room thereof. When a man has God to his portion, he may say, It is enough,
though he has nothing else. God without all, is a greater portion, then All
without God. When Christ becomes all in all to us; then all the comforts we
have are as nothing to us, Scil. in comparison of Christ; then Marriage is
nothing, wealth nothing, preferment nothing. When we have a better Husband for
our souls (that is, Christ) then any Husband or wife is or can be for the body,
4 Be sober in all the concernment, of Marriage. 1 Cor. 7.29.30.31.
should not we upon this Account, who have wives or Husbands be as if we had
none?

4. We that are married may be as if we were not married, by being very fober and
moderate in all the effects, concomitants and concernments of Marriage, which
the Apostle particularizeth in and connecteth with Marriage in the text, and in
the thing; as sorrow, joy, possessions and wordly affairs and businesses
attending or circumstantiating that condition.

To be sober and moderate in all these, and to be weaned or sit loose from them
in our hearts (both which are included in the Apostles (...) i. e, 1 in Marriage
comfort.
as if not) is the way to have wives as if we had none.

As 1. To be sober and moderate in the use of all marriage comforts and
delights; and in the fruits thereof, as the birth of children, or the like, and
in our joy therein. This is to rejoice as if we rejoiced not; not to overjoy
our Marriage joys.

Not to be excessive or immoderate in any Marriage enjoyment (or in our joy or
delight therein) for that is to have a wife or a Husband, as if we had nothing
besides. As a man may be excess be a drunkard with his own drink, and a Glutton
with his own meat, so likewise one may be unclean in the immoderate use of the
Marriage bed. Mr. Dod on 7. com: 2 In Marriage grief.
What we are very moderate in, we use as if we used it not.

2. To be moderate in our grief for the troubles that accompany marriage, as for
the loss of wife or children. The Jews conceive that Abraham wept but a little
for Sarahs death, or that his mourning for her was at least not excessive but
with Moderation, Ainsworth. Pareus.
because in Genesis 23.2. where its said Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to
weep for her, the word weep in the Hebrew has one little letter extraordinary.

David fasted and wept while his child was yet alive; but when it died, why
should I weep any more says David? when God took all Jobes children away at
once with a stroke, he blessed the name of the Lord, Job. 1.21. This is to weep
as if we wept not, not to overgrieve our marriage griefs:

3. To be moderate in, 3 in worldly Matters.
and weaned from worldly Matters, which concerns marriage as,

1. In Buying as if we possessed not; minding earthly things as if we minded
them not. As a Traveller that goes on in his way, as in buying.
and a labourer in his work, but both of them are in a deep study; and their
minds are intent upon other matters then either the journey of the one, or the
work of the other. So should our Minds be Employed about heavenly things (as
much as may be) while we are going about wordly business. Things above should
have Our hearts, while our hands and feet are busied about things below. We
should so deal in the world, as those that are wholly taken off from the world.
1 Cor. 7.30.
This is to buy as if we possessed not (...) as not to hold what we have bought
or gotten too hard or close to our selves or ours, as if we would keep all to
our selves and part with nothing; for God has many ways to pluck our
purchases and possessions from us. Prove 23.5.
Riches make themselves wings and can flee away from us, and our family and
posterity, as an Eagle. There is great uncertainty in them; this should wean us
from them. 2. In using he world


2 Using the world and the things of it as if we used it not, as food raiment,
habitation and outward accomodations, (all which are appurtenances to marriage)
to be very Temperate sober and moderate in them, and weaned from them; not
setting our hearts upon them, nor being any way excessive or inordinate in the
use of them, is to use the word as if we used it not. 1 Cor 7.3.


A wise moderation in, and a holy Alienation from the matters of the world, may
either procure or preserve and promote in us a Weanedness or fitting loose from
Temporal Relations; that we that have wives may (...) as though we had none.

5. And lastly, 5. Enjoy relations with submission to God.
we that have wives or husbands may be as if we had none, by Enjoying our
Relations with Submission to the will of God, for time and measure, how far and
how long God pleases to Continue them to us: and by laboring to get our
spirits into such a frame or posture of preparation and readiness, as freely
and submissively to part with Husband, wife, children, and to resign them up
to God, when he takes them from us, or us from them; Acts. 21.14.
and to say obedientially, The will of the Lord be done. We have any thing as
if we had it not, which we are willing to part with to God or for God: or else
we oppose our wills to Gods will, as if we will have or keep persons or things
whether God will or no.

Objection. Parting with a dear yoke fellow is a great and sad Trial, how may
we be prepared for it?

7 Preparatives for the death of a yoak-fellow.
Ans. By serious and frequent Preconsideration of these seven particulars; for
when the the stroke is sudden, it falls heavy; but when it is foreseen, and we
are forearmed and prepared, it may be more easily born. 1. God has a propriety
in our Relations.


1. Let us consider that God has a special propriety in our Relations; my
husband or my wife, and children are the Lords, by absolute right, whilst they
are mine; yea more the Lords, then mine: God made and qualified them for me,
and gave them to me, or rather lent them for a Time, reserving to himself his
Interest in them. As he does in all other Mercies, as he did in Isreal's Corn,
wool, wine and flax. If God take husband, Hos. 2.8.9.
or wife, or children away by death, he does us no wrong, Math. 20.15.
for he requires no more but his own, Is it not lawful for God to do what he
will with his own? Job. 1.21.
Did not Job bless God upon this account when he took from him, what he gave to
him? God has given us so much Comfort and benefit in our Relations, and
continued them so many years unto us; we should rather be thankful to God, that
we have enjoyed them so long, then murmr or mourn too much, because we must
have them no longer.

2. 2 Hope of their happiness
Consider we our hope of their happiness dying in the Lord, that they are
released wholly from all their pain sorrow and misery; and are gone home to
their fathers house to inherit a kingdom prepared for them, and are now
actually possessed of fullness of joy, and rivers of pleasures, which shall
endure for evermore. Therefore as Christ said to his disciples, John 14.28.
If ye loved me ye would rejoice, because I go to the father. So if we love
husband, wife or children, we will rather rejoice for their Gain by death, then
mourn for our loss of them; because the one is far greater then the other. Paul
would not have Christians to sorrow for their deceased friends (to wit
imoderately) even as others which have no hope, 1 These. 4.13.
to wit of their friends resurrection and salvation.

3. 3 Hope of our going to them.
Consider we, our hope of going to our dear Husbands, wives or children, who
have got the start of us, and are gone to Heaven before us: and of our
fellowship with them there in that place of perfect joy, glory and felicity,
where they and we shall meet one day, and never part more. This was David's
Comfort when his Child died, 2 Samuel 12.23.
I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. This was Jacobs comfort at
his death, Genesis 49.29.
I am to be gathered unto my people, that is to my holy fathers and friends, or
Saints, who are gone hence to their everlasting rest and joy.

4. Let us consider that the time is short. 4 Shortness of Time. (...) 1 Cor.
7.29.
It is a Metaphor from sails, which are wrapped up and contracted, when the ship
draws near harbors.

1. 1 Of life.
The time of life is short and uncertain, neither Husband nor wife knows, how
long, or rather how little a while they shall yet live together, or enjoy one
another; or how soon death may step between them and part them. The
consideration hereof

1. Should quicken us, both to diligence and expedition in all duties of our
Vocation, general and particular, and of our Relations, because we have much
work to do, and but a little time to do it in; and a loss of time may bring
great grief and misery upon us. Some that have lain a dying would have given a
world for time to repent, believe and serve God in. I have heard (says a
reverend man) some crying day and night, call time again; but time past is
irrevocable and irrecoverable.

This should also quicken Husband and wife to preparation for parting one from
another.

2. This consideration may also comfort us, that if the one party be taken away
by death, the other may follow soon after, or not stay long behind, and so both
may meet in Heaven, they know, not how soon.

2. 2. Of Peace.
The time of Peace may be short. Troublesome times may come (tribulations and
persecutions) all outward Comforts may be clouded in a day; and they may be
violently pulled one from other. Will it not be a mercy either to husband or
wife to be taken away from the evils to come? and may not the Surviver of them,
when single, perhaps shift better for him or her self. This was Paul's
resolution of the Corithians Question about marriage, In 1 Cor. 7.
that for those that were not married, it were good and expedient to keep them
so, considering The present distress, ver. 26. that is the persecution of
Christians at that time; for they were compelled by the Roman Tyrants and
Pagans to fly with their wives and children for preservation of their lives;
and to fly from place to place, as Aquila and Priscilla did, to seek safety
where they could find it. As for those that were already married, he gives them
this counsel, Let them that have wives be as if they had none etc. Times of
persecution or of public calamity may make a separation between husband and
wife. It Is their wisdom to prepare before hand for parting the one with the
other. For this is one part of their preparation against evil Times.

5. 5. Mixture of grosses.
Let us consider the Mixture of Crosses, Troubles and sorrows with comforts
and refreshments in our matrimonial state; and many times the former weighs
down the latter. God lays the same as wormwood upon the breasts of marriage, to
wean us from it; and make us more willing (then otherwise we would be) to part
with our yokefellow; as also to endear unto us, both our fellowship with
Christ, which is altogether sweet, and no bitterness in it; and Heaven, where
there is all joy without any Sorrow at all.

6. 6. The inefficacy of sorrow.
Let us Consider the inefficacy of immoderate sorrow for the death of husband,
wife, or children, for we can contribute nothing by our Tears to their
felicity, if they die in the Lord; or if not, we cannot mitigate their pain or
misery thereby. All our Mourning for them, cannot revive or recover them. Upon
this ground David ceased mourning when his child died. Why should I weep any
more? as if he had said, It is to no purpose, Can I bring him back again? 2 Samuel 12.23.
We may say of Immoderate grief in this Case what Solomon said of Mirth, what
does it? It can do our deceased friends no good: It may do us much hurt; by
weakening our bodies and sadning our spirits so much, as to deprive us of
Comfort in our lives and livelyhoods, and disable or indispose us for duties.

It is best for us to do in this as in other cases, when God does things cross
or contrary to our desires or expectations, even to resolve our wills into Gods
will, and submit to it patiently and acquiess in it.

7. God can supply the loss.
The seventh and last particular Considerable to prepare us for parting with a
dear vokefellow is this, God can supply our loss (by death) of a loving
Husband, or of a helpful wi^e, or of hopeful children, either

1. 1 Mediately.
Mediately, by giving us another husband or wife, fitted for us, and fitted
with like gifts and graces, to equal if not exceed the former, or by rai^ing up
some friends or others to be very helpful and comfortable to us in our Solitary
condition, when God by death has taken away our dearest companion from us, and
we are left alone.

2. 2. Or Immediately.
Or Immediately by himself; He is the fountain of all goodness; and has all
that Love, kindness, delight, comfort, help in him self; that is or can be in a
husband or wife, or in any other Relation, yea and infinitely more; more then
is in all the husbands, and wives in the world; more then they can possibly
contain, because God is Infinite, as in his essence so in all goodness; and
they are finite and shallow vessels, but of a small quantity, and hold but
little. When God takes away my wife or my husband or my child from me, I may
boldly seek to him, trust in him, and expect from him, not only inward
support, but the Comfort and help of my yoke fellow or child that is dead. The
Lord can, and I hope will, be better to me then ten Husbands or wifes; or then
a hundred children The Lord is able out of his wisdom and goodness, and by the
comforts of his presence, to make an abundant supply and reparation of the loss
we sustain by the death of our dear yoke-fell was or any friend, with this
Addition, that the Lord lives, and shall do for ever, though Husband or wife
or friends dye. What are our Relations but pitchers or Conduit-pipes to convey
comfort and help from God unto us: when the Pitcher is broken we should go to
the fountain. Dulcius Ex ipso font. Waters drink sweetest there. God gave us
all the comfort of our Relations at first, and if he take them from us, he is
able abundantly to make a supply, either by other creatures or out of himself.
Nihil dat quod non habet, When a Husband dies and leaves his poor wife and
children to the wide world, and has nothing in the world to leave them, then
God says to him, Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them alive,
and Let thy widow trust in me: q. d. I will take the charge and care of them. I
will provide for them. I will be a Husband to the widow, and a father to the
fatherless. God has given many precepts and made many promises concerning
widows and, orphans, provisional, protectional and consolational.

Let me add this by way of caution, we should take heed our affections be not
inordinately set upon any of our Relations, be it a wife or a husband or a
child, that we do not love them too well, or delight in them too much, or dote
on them, or make Idols of them, for this may justly provoke God to take them
from us, or to try us sadly in them. Whereas the way to keep them, is to be
willing to part with them, out of submission to God, who gave them to us, and
whose they still are, and who is worthy to be served with his own. Because
Abraham was willing to part with his only Son Isaac, in obedience to a
difficult command of God, therefore he enjoyed him with a special blessing,
Genesis 22.16, 17. Mr. Burroughes in his exposition on Hosea 2.9. relates a
remarkable story from his own knowledge, that a Godly man desiring his
friends to meet to bless God for his blessings in a plentiful harvest; after
dinner was done, a little Child comes in, who was indeed very lovely, oh,
says the father, I am afraid I shall make a God of this Child: by and by the
Child was missing, and presently they went to look him, and he was found
sprawling drowned in a Pond. Consider this ye Parents (says Mr. Burroughes)
who have your hearts inordinately set on your children.

QUAERE. Whether is it lawful for a man to mary his wives own sister?
Answer IT is Unlawful, which I prove by six Arguments,

First Argument.
A man may not marry one that is near of kin to him. A man's wives sister is
near of kin to him. Ergo, A man may not mrary his wives sister.
First A man may not marry one that is near of kin to him: for that is Gods
precept or Rule for Marriage, Levit. 18.6. None of you shall approach to wit in
a Conjugal way) unto any that is near of kin to him. or to any kindred of his
flesh, or to any of his flesh, or to any flesh of his flesh: as (...) Hebrew
word may be rendered, (...).
for it signifies both flesh and kindred.

This law commands that a just and due Distance be observed and preserved (in
respect of blood and alliance) by persons that would contract Matrimony; that
neither of them do come near the kindred of their flesh.

N^w kindred (as appears by the Catalogue of Particulars instanced, Levit. 18.
from the 7. verse to 19.) is not only Consanguinity, whereby Persons are of a
blood, but Affinity also, whereby they that are not of blood, are allied by
Marriage each to other.

Household government cap. 5.
Yet Affinity or Alliance grows (as Mr. Perkins says) by Mixtion or
Participation of blood in the coupling of man and wife together in lawful
marriage.

2. But a man's wives Sister is near of kin to him, because

1. Brother and Sister (whether by Consanguinitie or Affinity) are next of kin
in a Collateral Line; therefore Marriages bettween them are unlawful, and
incestuous.

2. She relates to him in the first degree of Affinity. Doctor Halls cases.
Out of our Civilians and Canonists a Learned Author that writes of this
subject gathers

2 Kinds or degrees of Affinity Primary and Secondary.

1. Primary, is that Affinity between the Husband and Couzins of blood to his
wife, or eConverso: which indeed is justly held no less for a bar of Marriage
then his own natural Consanguinity: for that is an Affinity contracted upon
interest of blood, by virtue of that entire union between man and wife whereby
they two become one flesh. Upon this Account a man's wives Sister comes to be
the kindred of his flesh: and therefore Gods Law prohibits him to marry her.

The Second degree of Affinity is wherein there is another person added to that
first kind now mentioned. Here the Affinity arises only from the interest of
an Affinity formerly contracted; not upon interest of blood, as the former kind
does.

Marriage within this Second Degree is questioned; as whether it be Lawful for a
man to marry his wives Brothers widow; by some that are the most favorable, it
is held unmeet and inconvenient, (though lawful) as coming over near to the
Verge of a sinful Conjunction.

Ergo, for persons to marry within the first degree of Affinity (as for a man
to marry his wives Sister) cannot but be unquestionably unlawful.

2. Argument.
A man may not marry any of his wives kindred nearer in blood, then he may of
his own. But a man may not marry his own Sister, Ergo, a man may not marry his
wives own Sister.

A man may not marry any of his wives kindred, nearer in blood then he may of
his own: nor the woman of her husbands kindred, nearer in blood then of her own.

These are the very Terms in the Contession of Faith, set forth by the
Assembly of Divines, Proximity of alliance is no less a bar to Marriage, then
proximity of blood. For this I will give two Reasons.

1. Reas. 1.
Because of what degree any one is of Consanguinity to the wife, in the same
degree of affinity is that person to the wives husband. De spensalibus. Of
houshol^ government p. 677.
This Rule is laid down by Zanchius and by Mr. Perkins also, who adds further
(to recite his own words)

Couzias by Marriage within the degrees both of the right and Collateral Line,
do come near to the kindred of their flesh, in the same manner that Couzins by
blood do in the same Line; and the like degrees in both are forbidden. From
hence it may be gathered (says he) that it is in no sort lawful for a man
when his wife is dead to marry her Sister.

Hence it is laid down as a certain Rule among Divines, Cujus non licet inire
Nuptias ejus nec conjugis licet. Because a wife cannot marry her own Brother,
nor a husband his own Sister; no more can a man marry his wives own Sister,
because her near consanguine who was one flesh with him.

This Rule holds undeniably true within the first rank of assinity, which is a
perpetual Impediment to marriage: as though the wise be dead, yet her kindred
is of affinity still with her husband remaning alive. The Rights and T^^ of
affinity between the Husband and the Consanguines of the wife are not loosed,
the wise being dead, although they had no children together; but they hold firm
still, being founded in the union made between them by Marriage, not in Issue,
though that may strengthen the same. See for this Willets Synopsis Papismi page
790. Junij Append. and Explic. Levit. Thes^^.

2 Reas. 2. De spensalibas These. 5. p. 788.
Because by the very same Rules, says Zanchius, is a husband forbiden to marry
with the Consanguines of his wife (or with those that are of her blood) that
consanguines or those of a blood are forbidden to marry among themselves. But a
man may not marry his own Sister, Levit. 18.9 therefore nor his wives Sister.

The Result is this. A man may as lawfully marry his own mother as his wives
mother, and his own Aunt (by father or mother) as his Uncles wife, for that is
said to be an uncovering of the nakedness of his fathers Brother, Levit. 18.14.
and his own Sister as his brothers wife, for this is called an uncovering of
his brothers Nakedness, Levit. 18 16. or as his wives Sister. From both which
being compared together I may frame the

3. Argument.
A man may not marry his Brothers wife, Ergo he may not marry his Wives Sister.

A man may not marry his Brothers wife because this is Expressly forbidden in
Levit. 18.16. and 20.21. Therefore nor his wives Sister because a man's wives
Sister is full as near of kin to him as his B^others wife is and where there is
the some Reason of propirquity, Ames^ (...) l. 5. c. 3. App^^^ (...)
there is the same Reason and force of prohil it on. It is Dr. Anes his Rule,
In those degre^s (prohibited to marriage.) persons not expressed in the law
should be accounted, if they have the same nearness, with those which are by
Name forbidden. As the same law that, forbids the Nephew to marry the Aunt,
forbids the Uncle to marry the Niece, Levit 18.14. and cap. 20.20 An Uncles
wife and an Aunts husband are equally near of kin, Vide Annot. in Lev. 18.14,
Zanch de spons. These. 4.
but for a man to marry his Uncles wife is under an Express prohibition; so is
it for a woman to marry her Aunts husband. It is truly said by Dr. Hall in his
Cases of Conse. Diverse no less unlawful Copulations are omitted in this black
roll of uncleanness then those which are expressly mentioned; the rest being
i^ tended to come in by way of Analog^ only; for it is easy to observe that
all the severalties of the degrees prohibited run still upon the male, under
which, if the Exorbitancies of the other sex were not meant to be comprehended,
females should be lawless and the law imperfect.

Therefore though a man's marrying his wives Sister be not forbidden in Express
T^rms, yet it is effectually prohibited by necessary Analogy and clear
Implication of sense.

4. Argument.
A woman may not marry two Brothers. Ergo, a man may not marry two Sisters.


Because there is the same Reason of propinquity (or nearness of kin) in both:
and reason requires this (says Beza.) De Repudiis and Divortiis.
ut de similibus similiter statuatur, that the like should be determined of the
like* It was a Canon in the Neocaesarien Council, that it a woman married two
Brothers, abjiciatur usque ad mortem, she should be cast off even to death.

Here I will answer the chief objections which I conceive may be made.

1. Object. This prohibition of degrees from marriage mentioned in Levit. 18.
was but some Mosaical law given to the Jews only, and not binding to us
Gentiles.

Ans. No, the laws there expressed against incestuous Marriages from ver. 6 to 19.
(as well as against adultery, Sodomy, Buggery in the verses following) are
moral, universal and perpetual, binding to all Nations, by which the law of
Nature is Explained. So says Willet in his Synops. Papis. page 790. Vrsins
Catech. qu. 109. Pet. Mart. Loc. Com. Ames. Cas. Conse. l. 5. c. 35. Zanchius,
Perkins and diverse others. See the Confession of Faith by the Assembly of
Divines chap. 24.

That these prohibitions are moral and Natural may be proved by five Reasons.

abominations, Levit. 1826. and abominable Customs, ver. 30. which defile the
land, verse. 25.

Egyptians and Canaanites (that is, ^ll the Nations that dwelt in the land of
Canaan) as their abominable practices, Levit. 18.3.24.27, 30. ver. In all these
are the Nations defiled, and they were severely punished for the same. For
these sins (even of incestuous Marriages among the rest) the land of Canaan did
spue out her Inhabitants though Gentiles ( v. 25.) who were not tied to observe
the laws peculiar to the Hebrews: yea who had not the law written in Tables of
stone. Therefore these sins of the Gentiles were sins against the law of
Nature. Willet in Lev. 18. qu. 30.
It is said of the Cana^nites that they were guilty of many other sins; but
most of all they were defiled by these Pollutions of the flesh and Uncovering
of Nakedness, which they learned of their fathers Cham and Canaan, who
consented together to leave uncovered their fathers Nakedness.



1. As being the Manners of the Heathen among whom they had lived and conversed
in Egypt; and were to live and converse with in Canaan, or as being the sins of
the Gentiles, Levit. 18.3. After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye
dwelt, and after the doing, of the land of Canaan whither I bring you, shall ye
not d^e. These were their doings.

2. And that under the very same penalty God inflicted on the Canaanites for
these sins, ver. 28, 29. that the land spue not you also, when you defile it
(to wit, by an^ of these abominations) as (...) spued out the Nations that were
before you. God concludes with this charge to Israel ver. 30. Therefore shall
ye keep mine Ordinance, that ye commit not any of these abomin^ble customs,
which were committed before you, and that ye defile not your selves therein. I
am the Lord your God. God denounces many and heavy judgments upon the breach
of these laws, Levit. 20.11.12.14.16, 20. Deuteronomy, 27 20.

Ezekiel. 22.10.11. Amos 2.7. not only prescribed in the old Testament, but
pressed in the new; as, that it is not lawful to have a Fathers wise (or mother
in law) 1 Cor. 5.1. Yea, or a Brothers wife, Mark 6.18.

Mr. Perkins) not only the laws of the Roman Emperors (which according to
Peter Martyr, Loc. Com. class. 2. c. 10. Number. 43.
were accounted inter egregias and honestissimas (ab honestate naturae
desumptas, Zanchi.) amongst the most honest and famous laws) but also the
civil Canons and constitutious of men (very skilful in that kind) have in all
ages been made expressly against such persons as have offended in those
Societies (or Conjunctions) forbidden by the Law of Moses.

Now whatsoever Law is natural being written in the hearts of Heathens, must
needs be moral and perpetual, as it is written in Gods Book at large in a full
and fair copy.

Obj 2. God commanded Deuteronomy. 25, 5. that the Brother in case his Brother died
without issue should take his wife and raise up seed to him, Ergo, its lawful
to mary a Brothers wife, and why not then a wives sister?

Ans. That Prohibition in Lev. 18.16. of marying the Brothers wife, is the law
of nature common to all Nations. This in Deuteronomy. 25.5. is but a special exception
of a general Law; a peculiar privilege granted by God (the Law maker) to the
Israelites, who was pleased then (as he might) to make this particular
exception from it among the Jews, and that in a special case, viz. to preserve
families and inheritances in that land, which God would have distinct among
them for the Messiah's sake, that it might be known clearly of what tribe he
came. And to conserve the Family in the name of the first born. This being but
an indulgence (granted to the Israelites in a special case and by a special
warrant; or if a law, yet but judicial appropriated to their state, and
relating to the land of Canaan and expectation of the Messiah) is not now
lawful to be preached by us Gentiles, whom the case does not at all concern;
but we are under the general prohibition in Levit. 18.16. which is fully
confirmed in the Gospel, Mark. 6.18. John said unto Herod, It is not lawful for
thee to have thy Brothers wife.

Obj. 3. Jacob married two Sisters Rachel and Leah, Therefore a man may marry
his wives Sister.

Ans. The examples of the Patriarchs (or others) who transgress the Rule, may
not be imita^ed, nor be made a Rule. Wherein soever they turn aside we must
leave them to follow a better guide, that is the law of God, the Rule of Gods
word. As many as walk according to this Rule (and not according to Examples
swerving from it) peace and mercy shall be upon them. Gal 6.16. Cain, Factum
est compellente necessitate. August.
Eno^h and Seth married their own Sisters; necessity made it then not unlawful.
It is a just Rule of Law Those things may not be drawn into precedent which
have been yielded upon mere necessity. Doctor Halls ca^ses.
As we use to say, necessity has no Law, so it can make none. After wards as
mankind grew, nature it self taught men to keep further aloof from their own
flesh: and still remeteness of distance enlarged it self with time.

Obj. 4. The marying of a wives Sister is not directly forbidden in the law;
and what is not prohibited is permitted.

Ans. The marying of a man's own daughter is not expressly forbidden in Levit.
18. (but of his sons daughter or daughters daughter ver. 10. or of his daughter
in law, ver. 15.) is it therefore lawful?

There are incestuous Marriages not specified, which are as really forbidden as
those which are expressed. If we hold our selves close to the letter of this
Rule, that what is not prohibited is permitted it will lead us into Sodom. But
this Objection received its answer before in the third Argument.

Fifth Argument.
Ames case Cons. lib. 5.
For a man to mary his wives Sister, hinders one end of Mariag^, which is the
dilatation of kindred and affection; Junii Appendex ad explan. Levit.
that humane Society might be extended and confirmed by a Matrimonial
conjunction, between families that were remote and dis-joyned: That is a good
note and to purpose, which our Divines have in their Annotations on Levit.
18.14.

What in this Law ( viz. against Incestuous Marriages) is forbidden to the Jews,
is much more forbidden to Christians; who having more latitude and liberty of
choice then they had (who were to marry not only within their own Nation, but
within their own Tribe, and sometimes (as has been said) two Brothers must
successively be Husbands to one wife) are less capable of excuse, if in carnal
concupiscence they transgress these prohibitions. And in the general (since
the Gospel is the Law of love and charity, not to one Nation only, but all the
world over) as far as consanguinity or affinity will work in affection without
a new tie of Matrimony, so far reaches matrimonial prohibition; and should
there first begin where the Relations are so remote, that they have little or
no operations of love: that so charity might be more diffusive; and not so
contracted to ones kindred, as it was among the Jews.

The Sixth Argument
May be drawn from humane Testimonies, (which challenge a place after Scripture
and Reason) that pass their condemnatory sontence upon this Marriage, viz. of a
man with his wives sister: as

1. Laws made against it. Zanchy, These. 5. circa incepta conjugia inter Affines.
in his book de Sponsalibus says, This is Moses his sense, and therefore the
Law of Nature, that it is as filthy and dishonest a thing for one man to mary
two sisters one after another: as for one woman to marry 2. brothers one after
another. And this, says he, is confirmed by those Laws of the Romans (which
are by all judged to be taken from the honesty of Nature) and bypious and
Christian Emperors; who do as well condemn the Incest that a man should mary
his wives sister, as that he should marry his brothers wife. And though some of
the Romans did marry so, as Lucius Tarquinius Superbus did his Brothers wife,
and Honorius the Emperor did two sisters. Yet Dion^sius calls the former
marriage (...) an impious marriage; a thing abominable among the Graecians and
Barbarians: And the latter was condemned: and the unhappy end of both the
sisters (as he relates) declared that those Mari^ges ( vis. of two sisters)
were not allowed of God.

That Table of forbidden degrees in the Church of England, set forth by
Authority, names this expressly, the wives sister. And the laws of the Land
prohibit this marriage. See Sr. Edward Cooks second part of the Institutes of
the Laws of England, page 683. See the Statute of the twenty and fifth year of
Henry the eighth, chap. 22. and of his twenty and eighth year, c. 9. and of his
thirty and second year, c. 38.

2. As for the ancient Fathers, Patres omnes hasce nuptias damnarunt, says
Zanchius; All the fathers condemned these marriages.

3. So do our modern Divines generally make the Sister of a man's wife to be an
affinity hindering marriage as Junius in his notes and table of degrees upon
Levit. 18. and the Geneva Divines in their notes and table upon the same
chapter. Beza de Repud^is et Divortiis is full and express against it, Vol. 2.
p. 63. Polanus in his Syntagma l. 10. c. 53. Butanus de Conjugio Loc. 12.
Willets Comment on Levit. 18. Quaest. 17.

Yea learned Zanchie affirms that Nostri feculi doctissimus quisque ejusdem
est sententiae, lsc. cit.
all the most learned of his time were of the same opinion; and that his
position ( viz. For a man to marry his wives Sister is in cest) is confirmed by
the consent of all Graeciaus and Barbarians and Nations.

I will conclude with the grave advice some Divines have given about the
marriage of Cousen Germans; which holds more strongely in the case proposed.

One says Let single persons who have the world before them look further of,
and fasten their affections at a more unquestionable distance.

Another says, It is safe to forbear what is doubtful, and to keep aloof from
what is unlawful; especially the choice of lawful marlages being large enough,
without the hazard of so great a sin as Incest.

It was wont to be Mr. Perkins his expression to this purpose,

Let those who must walk close to the brim of a steep precipice look well to
their feet, and tread sure; but if a man be to choose his way, let him so cast
it, as that he may not approach near the brink of danger.

The Lord give us understanding in all things, and guide our feet in his ways.
FINIS.

