VITVLI LABIORVM. OR, A THANKSGIVING SERMON, IN Commemoration of our Great
Deliverance From the HORRID Powder Plot, 1605. And also of Gods Merciful
Discovery of a Bloody Conspiracy against His Majesty's Person, and the
Protestant Religion, 1678. Both intended by the Papists. Preached at St. Peter'
s, Exon, Nov. 5. 1678. In Prosecution whereof the Churches Persecutions,
Foreign and Domestic, by the hands of Popish Votaries, ever since the
Reformation, are briefly recapitulated. Their charge of Novelty on our Church
and Religion is retorted. The absurdity of many of their Doctrines and
Principles, and how destructive unto Civil Government, is detected.

By JOHN REYNOLDS, M. A.

London, Printed for Tho. Cockeril at the Three Legs in the Poultry: And
Walter Dight Bookseller in Exceter, 1678.

To the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS CAREW, Knight, Judge of the Sessions for the
County of Devon, and Recorder of the City of Exceter.
Honored Sir,
NO sooner could I make my thoughts to comply with the motion of publishing
this Sermon, (which I presume for its seasonableness unto the present juncture
of affairs, more than from any intrinsic worth therein, some that heard it
were pleased favorably to estimate) but it presently became the matter of a
deliberation with my self, what could discourage me from hoping but that your
worthy Name might prove auspicious unto it, by lending it something of a credit
to pass out into the world? I foresaw nothing that could check my pleasing aims
herein, but might arise either from the subject treated of in this Discourse;
or from the person whose it was, and does now present it unto your candid
acceptance; or from the defectiveness of the management and handling of it.

As to the first of these, I did the more easily persuade my self, that it
could not offend you to see and read in this Sermon the deformities of a false
Religion in any degree exposed, who have your self zealously espoused, and are
so good a friend unto the true and best Religion in the world. A Religion never
sufficiently to be praised and commended for the certainty of its Rule, which
are those Books of Canonical Scripture, of whose authority there was never any
doubt in the Church: for the compactedness of her Fundamentals, determined and
summed up in the Apostles Creed, explained in those others which are called the
Nicene and Athanasian: for the simplicity of her Sacraments, and all her
Administrations managed, in a language, and performed with that decent
plainness as may be understood by all that are concerned in them: for the
gravity and soundness of her Ordination and Ministry; for the peaceableness of
her Tenets, in obedience to the Magistrate; for her conformity to the
Apostolic and Primitive pattern in all things, so far as the looseness of this
Age will bear: for the undoubted assurance of finding Salvation by its Rules
and Precepts, if we continue in them and do them. These and the like are the
lineaments of our and your Religion, which cannot be displeasing unto you to
assert, and therefore neither to oppugn the contrary.

But neither, in the second place, could I suppose any disrespect unto the
person, submitting those Papers unto your candor, that should be able to create
unto you any ill resentment of the Sermon it self. In that what never had been,
I could easily hope, must have a greater occasion than this to beget it. For
indeed it is a pleasure to me to let the world to know, that under Him who is
the giver of every good and perfect gift, Jam. 1. 17.
next unto the memory of my exeellent and worthy Patron deceased, I owe most
unto your care and providence, for the comfort and been esse of my being and
Ministry in the place where I am: whereby you have buoyed me up above the
necessity of depending upon the precarious benevolence of a people; which I
wish no good or honest Minister were ever put to trust to. A good part of my
Books deservedly bear your honored name upon them for their Donor: The first
and the most seasonable News-years gift I could possibly have received for the
encouragement and assistance of my first studies in this your own
Dwelling-parish. You never yet denied me any request (which notwithstanding
have been very many) that in consistency with your Honor and Power I durst
move unto you: nor ever spared to take any pains (which yet have been very
great) whereof the success in prospect has promised fairly on my behalf. So
sure has been my happy interest in your ever valued respects, that I never
found it hitherto checked with the least change of countenance or carriage. So
noble and generous, that whereas another kindnesses would have necessitated a
man to the study of an Answerable Gratification; you have always taken my
Relation to you as your Minister for so sufficient a Supersedeas to such
designs, that I have never apprehended any adventure more hazardous of yours,
than only to attempt it. I cannot really admit any diminutive account of your
goodness to my self, otherwise than by considering you in that larger sphere
which God has placed you in, as a (...), a common good to your Country; of
which for me to say any thing, would be altogether unnecessary, forasmuch as
there are every day so many mouths open to acknowledge it. There being therefore
no room for the scruple of a personal prejudice: It remains in the third place,
that only the defectiveness and blemishes of my speaking unto this subject, can
render it unworthy of your acceptance: and as to this, I confess the charge;
and rely upon your known and experienced candor to excuse and lay your finger
on the naevi of this Discourse. Indeed it is a small and a slight thing in it
self, to have your Name prefixed unto; but yet it is not unusual for Maps in
single sheets to carry their Dedication on their forehead. And as for the
failances in the manner of handling it; forasmuch as it is a time for every one
of us to show his zeal for his Religion, the fear of smaller miscarriages that
are frequently incident to zealous actings, will no more dispense with their
total neglect, than it can warrantably prescind or supercede any other Moral or
Religious duty, in that we cannot acquit our selves therein with an absolute
perfection. Hoping therefore that upon the removal of those bars first
supposed, my way of access unto your favorable reception of these few Pages is
plain and open, I shall in gratitude for (what I presume of) your pleasing
countenance reflecting on them, and all other signal pledges of your kindness,
think my self now and ever obliged to pray, That the father of mercies would
still make good the multiplied effects of his infinite love and goodness, for
your temporal and eternal welfare. That the generation rising may by an
hundredfold recompense unto the hopeful branches of your Family, all the good
that your self have been the instrument of unto the generation shining; and
that he who is now your humble Orator at the Throne of Grace, may never want
the opportunity or power of approving himself to the last day of his life.

St. Thomas November. 13. 16^8. Sir, Your most faithful and affectionate Servant
JOHN REYNOLDS.

A Thanksgiving Sermon in Commemoration of our Deliverance from the
Powder Plot, and of the discovery of the late Bloody Conspiracy of the Papists.
Psalm. CXXIX. 1, 2. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may
Israel now say.

2. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, yet they have not
prevailed against me.


BAronius the great Annalist for the Church of Rome, Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. Ann.
34. Art. 275. Ann. 57. Art. 39.
has indeed made a very proud and lofty claim on the Popes behalf, viz. That
Christ after his Resurrection translated upon the Popes both Priesthood and
Kingdom. But by what a thin and faint argument does he grasp at so large a
Jurisdiction? namely, That this was signified, Act. 5. 15.
by that shadow of St. Peter, whereby the sick were healed; that the Popes
should always have the same power, which Christ himself had, though never so
far different from him in good life and manners; because they should ever at
least retain the shadow. But I pray what consequence is there from the shadow
of St. Peter, unto the shadow, and from thence unto the power of Christ? and
that power likewise that should not serve to heal the sick as did St. Peter's
shadow, but to destroy Kings and Kingdoms? for what other miraculous power have
they made proof of this thousand years? A cruel instance thereof we had in the
Conspiracy plotted against us this day Seventy-three years ago, wherein the
Pope and his Agents taking counsel with the Prince of Darkness, were agreed and
sworn together, yea and approached within a few hours of accomplishing their
Hellish design, To blow up the King and Royal Family, the Clergy, Nobles,
Knights and Burgesses in Parliament; the very confluence of all the Glory,
Piety, Learning, Prudence and Authority in the Land, with one sulphurous blast.

But because age and length of time generally brings with it the oblivion and
forgetfulness of the most notable occurrences; and that we experimentally find
our irreligious age to be grown so remiss and negligent in the recognition and
celebration of this once renowned Deliverance: God is pleased from time to time
to awaken and rub us up by suffering this bloody brood of the Papacy to engage
upon such like attempts afresh; though (to his only praise be it ascribed)
hitherto without accomplishing their wicked aims and purposes. Such was the
traitorous design wherewith we have been alarmed this last month; the
consequents whereof, had it taken effect, I dread to think! In respect of both
which, and manifold other repeated occasions, our merciful God having so often
preserved and shielded our Princes and their Kingdoms, our Church and Religion,
from their implacable rage and fury; good reason have we to make our hearts and
spirits thankfully to accord with this Psalm of praise, part of which you have
heard read in the words of our Text. Many a time have they afflicted me from my
youth, may Israel now say; many a time have they afflicted me from my youth,
yet they have not prevailed against me.

This is one of the fifteen Psalms that is entitled a Song of Degrees, a Song
of Ascensions or of Heights, either to note the excellency of the Song; and
without doubt much more sweet and captivating would these Psalms appear unto
us, if the nature and reason of the Hebrew Music and Poesy were better known
unto us than it is: Or a Song of degrees, with respect unto the stairs or steps
which by degrees went up into the House of the Lord, whereon the Singers should
stand; or in reference to the several Stages of their coming from Babylon.

The design of the Psalm is to recount the Churches past troubles and
deliverances, occasioned by some good success of Affairs, in evading the hands
of their enemies, then fresh in memory, Many a time have they afflicted me from
my youth, may Israel now say.

From my youth] from the time of my being in Egypt, from whence I came forth,
when I grew up to be a Church, or from my first Constitution.

The words do afford us three principal heads of Discourse.

First, Here are the Persecuting attempts of the Enemies of Religion against
the Israel of God, or against Gods Church, which we have twice delivered,
either by way of Poetical elegancy, or out of a zealous affection to the praise
and glory of God in reciting it, or the better to express the malignity and
spite of the Enemies themselves: Many a time have they afflicted me from my
youth, etc.

Secondly, Here is the frustration of those mischievous attempts against the
Church: Yet they have not prevailed against me.

Thirdly, Here is the Churches bounden and thankful reflection on her
afflictions, and the happy issue of them, suggested by the Psalmist: May Israel
now say; which stands in the middle between the Churches Persecutions and
Deliverances as respecting both; the misery and the malice of the one
excellently serving to enhanse the mercy and the value of the other.

I. In the first of these Generals we have again three Branches.

1. Here is the Churches Affliction or Persecution by the hands of her Enemies:
They have afflicted me.

2. Here is the frequency of the Enemies inflicting trouble and persecution on
the Church: Many a time have they afflicted me.

3. Here is the earliness of the Enemies spite and malice against the Church
of God, attempting to blast it in the bud: Many a time have they afflicted me
from my youth.

1. The first branch of this Division shows us the ordinary case and state of
the Church of God, to be a state of affliction; being to grapple with enemies,
and that at first seeming with very great odds and disparity; for thus you find
the enemies of the Church to be expressed in the Plural Number, they; whereas
the Church it self is simply spoken of in the singular Number, they have
afflicted ME. The Jews while they inhabited Canaan, the land of Promise, how
vastly were they out-numbred by their enemies that surrounded and compassed
them on every side? On the East they had the Moabites, Ammonites, Assyrians,
and Chaldeans; on the West the Philistines; on the North the Syrians; on the
South the Arabians and Egyptians; and these were all alike maliciously bent
against them. Compare but the Popish and the Protestant interest in the world,
how few are the Protestant Kingdoms and Territories in comparison of those
large Dominions which do strike sail to the Sea of Rome? and even amongst those
who sculk under the name of Protestants, how few are there who would adventure
any thing in a critical time upon that Profession, which in a calmer state of
things they are ready to protest unto? now from these their numerous enemies
what can the Church of God expect but affliction and trouble? Either,

1. By open force; as Cain did furiously imbrue his hands in his brothers
blood, and so Christened the Church with her first Martydom. Or as Pagans and
Infidels in the Primitives times of Christianity, when they could not tell
where else to lay the charge of their public calamities; that which was
presently uppermost with them, was Christianos ad Leones, away with the
Christians, let them be thrown to the Lions. And it is hard to say in those
first Ten Persecutions, which had less remorse or more barbarity with them,
either the beasts themselves unto which the Christians were frequently
condemned; or their unjust Persecutors, who did sentence them unto such kind of
violent torments. 1 Cor. 15. 32.
It Is most probable that St. Paul's fighting with beasts at Ephesus is to be
understood de hominibus ferinis, concerning those who had the nature of savage
beasts in the shape of men. And we frequently find up and down the Scripture,
Psalm. 22. 12.
such kind of unrelenting blood-thirty persons metaphorically called strong
Bulls of Bashan, Dan. 7. 6.
Leopards, Rev. 13. 2.
Leviathans, Isa. 27. 1.
and what not? Psalm. 74. 14.
The Papists in their intended Powder Plot had conspired to act such a part,
that would have convicted them to have been more unnatural than the very wild
beasts of the desert. For to make this work of darkness sure, they were content
to have blown up some of their own Friends, which they must have done to bring
it to pass. Baron. out of Philo.
Like cursed Herod, who is said to have murdered his own Son among the Infants
of Bethlehem, because he would be sure not to miss of the newborn King of the
Jews.

2. But if the Enemies of Gods Church cannot bring to pass their spightful
purposes against it by open force, then they fall to work by subtle close
undermining practices; sometimes by their sophistical insinuations perverting
the Church in point of sound Doctrine, or soiling the Churches purity; and
surely this is enmity destructive enough. Thus the first Council of Nice had an
Arrius to find work for then; (...), etc. Clem. Alex. (...).
the first Council of Constantinople had a Macedonius, if possible, to instill
poison into them. The Council of Calcedon had an Eutiches to go about to
deprave them. Chrysostom had the Manichees, and St. Augustine had a Pelagius
his Dempsterus ex Walfilda refert eodem die quo ille in Anglia natus, tenebras
errorum toti mundo effudit, summum Ecclesiae lumen Augustinum in Africa
emicuisse.
Cotemporary to deal with them.

Sometimes the Enemies of Gods Church subtly compact the loose pieces of some
pernicious enterprise against her, by matching great relations and interests
with those that are of principal note and renown in the Church; Facile is
exambit filiam qui matrem habet propitiam. Thus our Ecclesiastical History
tells us of Valens the Emperor, when he, first took upon him the Empire he
was an Orthodox professor, a man well-furnished and accomplished with the
Principles of Apostolical Doctrine; but being once married to an Arrian Lady,
she soon acted the part toward him, that Eve did unto Adam, insnaring and
captivating him to the same heresy; insomuch that he afterward became a most
bloody Persecuter of the Orthodox Church of Christ. But besides this of making
affinity with some of the Churches worthy Patriots, Theodor. Hist. Eccles. lib.
4. cap. 12.
they can otherwise slily pretend themselves her friends for a time; hanging
out false colors till they see their own opportunity to change the Scene.
After this manner came many of the Scribes and Pharisees, and Lawyers to our
Savior, like so many Devils in Samuel's mantle, silvering their viperous
tongues with fair language; but in the mean time the odious device of their
hearts was how to entrap him in his words. Such there were who crept into the
Church under the benign aspect of Constantine the Great, Luke 20. 20. (...),
Eus^o. de vita Constantini, lib. 4. cap. 54.
hypocritically putting on the Christian name, though they were nothing such.
Another such race of these two-faced men we have Ezra 4. who delighted in the
ruins of the Temple, and fretted with indignation of heart against Zerubabels
endeavors to rebuild it; and to the end that they might effectually hinder the
work, Ezra 4. 2. Hoc consilio ut illis intermixti personas inter se
committerent, and ita opus interverterent.
they subdolously offer their service to promote it, Let us build with you, for
we seek your God as ye do. Thus as in the building of Solomon's Temple, all
things were before hand so framed and fitted in Mount Lebanon, that not so much
as the sound of an Axe or Hammer was heard in Jerusalem, Iun. in loc.
when it came to be erected: So on the other hand, Nehem. 4. 11.
those desperate destroyers of the Temples of the living God, have their hidden
ways of executing their purposes, without being obstreperous to an open
discovery till the blow be given. They work in the fire with Erostratus, but it
is a fire like that of Hell, that yields no light before it blow up and
consume. Neither is it to be wondered that our Popish Incendiaries are so
expert this way, forasmuch as they dare wholly mancipate and sell themselves to
the Devil, Prideaux his Introduct. to Hist. in the fifth rank of Egyptian
Magicians.
for the compassing of their horrid ends. Even of the Popes themselves some
have reckoned up a Catalogue of twenty four, others more, who have been
practitioners or Masters rather of the Black Art; as if they had resolved upon
this for their principle, ^lectere si nequeo superos, etc.
that if God will not help, the Devil shall. How much of the Devil was in the
Conspiracy of this Fifth of November! as if from the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, this Master of the damned crew had opened a running spring
of fire and brimstone in the hearts of those Traitors. And as for the
Jesuitical Conspiracy which is the matter of our present heart-aking, and which
deservedly checks our rejoycings with trembling, what the just depth and extent
thereof was, and might have proved, must be the business of many Months further
search and discovery, if as yet through the great mercy of our God, it may be
happily frustrated.

The ground of all those troubles and afflictions under which the Church of God
labors by the hands of her Enemies is the contrariety of temper and spirit
between them, Genesis 3. 15.
the antipathy sown in the natures of the seed of the Woman, and of the seed of
the Serpent toward each other; in respect of which they can no more be
reconciled than light and darkness. And this is very much fomented and stirred
up on the one hand by the Devil, in order to the enlargement of his Kingdom:
and yet on the other hand does God see fit to permit it as most congruously
suiting with the Militant state of his Church here on Earth; unalterably
forewarning us to expect that through much tribulation we must enter into the
Kingdom of God, Act. 14. 22.
Act. 14. 22. This has been the common lot of the Church Militant from time to
time, Elijah-like to be always ascending to God in its own flames; taking up
her Cross to follow Christ, and to become conformable to her head; hereby also
approving her integrity unto God and the world: for the real Saint would not be
distinguishable from the false and rotten Hypocrite, at least unto the eye of
the world, did not a tempest of Persecution sometimes arise and blow off the
Hypocrites Mask. Besides, the Church of God never gains more assured proofs of
Gods Power and Providence over her, than when the exigency and necessity of her
condition drives her to lay hold on him. As the Stars shine brightest in the
night, so in the blackest night of the Churches troubles and adversities kind
Heaven opens so many the more eyes to watch over her and guard her.

In respect of those Spiritual and blessed ends and advantage of the griefs and
troubles of the Church we may well say with St. Augustine, Infaelix Ecclesiae
faelicitas, the outward felicity and prosperity of the Church would be one of
her greatest infelicities, as that which would rob her of much of her best
interest.

And yet this will not in the least excuse or extenuate the crying guilt of
those who are the Instruments of the Churches Persecution and bloodshed. No,
let them look to it, if the fire of Persecution be permitted to try the Gold,
surely the fire of Hell it self shall burn up the dross. If the green tree that
has both his sap and fruit may sometimes be roughly shaken with a violent
storm, Luke 23. 31.
what shall be done in the dry? If the Saints must drink of the bitter cup of
affliction, Psalm. 75. 8.
surely the unjust tormenters of the Saints may expect a cup of the Wine of
astonishment, 1 Pet. 4. 17.
and that they should have the dregs thereof wrung out unto them: yea that this
Cup should be compounded with so many the more bitter Ingredients of wrath, by
how much the oftener they have afflicted Gods Israel. Which brings us to the
second Branch.

2. And that is the frequency of the Enemies inflicting trouble and persecution
on the Church: Many a time have they afflicted me. We are to look for
afflictions and troubles as familiarly as for our bread: for as we are taught
to pray for our daily bread, so we are taught to buckle to our daily Cross too,
Luke 9. 23.
Luke 9. 23. Had our Reformed Church of England no other Enemies in Hell, or
upon Earth besides the Papacy, their incessant rage, like a fiery Aetna
continually belching out new flames, and smothering exhalations out of its
bowels against us, were enough to warrant our ingeminated moans and complaints
unto God and man with a MANY, MANY a time have they afflicted me. Did they ever
forbear to strike when they had their opportunity? Not to trace their bloody
footsteps in foreign Countries, in their Butcheries committed upon the poor
Waldenses, whom they so hotly pursued for many years together with Fire and
Sword, and all kinds of Hostility, Mat. 8. 20.
as that they reduced them to their Master's own forelorn case, not to have any
corner or hole in the whole world granted them where to lay their heads. Not to
mention how many thousands have been swallowed up in that gulf of cruelty, that
Hell upon Earth, the INQUISITION. To say nothing of the outrageous Inhumanity
of the Duke of Alva in the Netherlands. Nor with what prodigious Massacres the
Protestants have been surprised in Germany, Paris, Lions, Piedmont, and many
other places; what criticisms of Cruelty have been invented and exercised, and
all upon the quarrel of the Reformed Religion. I say, not to lead you any
farther by the way of this Red Sea; let us a little consider what Tragedies
have been acted, and what Desolations threatened and endeavored by the same
sort of men nearer home in our own Israel.

No sooner had King Henry the Eighth allowed the Bible to be read in English,
and enjoined the Lords Prayer, the Decalogue, and the Articles of the Christian
Faith to be Translated into English, and taught the People; but as if those
things had had the force and power of a Conjuration to raise evil spirits by,
presently hereupon the Monks in Lincolnshire blow the Trumpet to Rebellion.
Insurrections are made in diverse other parts of the Nation, to the number of
Twenty thousand, and Forty thousand in bodies; no less than six or seven such
swelling waves of the multitude fell in, one upon the neck of another, enough
to have utterly ingulphed and swallowed up the little Ark of Gods Church
amongst us, had not the Heavenly Pylot lent it his Steerage.

In the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, the Religious Josiah of our Israel,
besides the Rebellion that brake out in several other Counties, instigated by
Popish Priests and Friars, for the setting up of their fond Idol of the Mass
again; This very City has a Reckoning with the Papists not yet fully satisfied
for, Sir Rich. Baker in K. Edward 6.
for the long distress of Siege and Famine by Arundel and his Confederates,
wherein besides the eating of Horseflesh, the Inhabitants were forced to make
bread of coarse Bran molded in rags or clothes, because it would not otherwise
knead together, as our Chronicles report.

The Reign of Queen Mary was such a continued Bonefire, not of dead men's bones
as were the Bonefires of old, but of living Saints and Protestants, that one
would think the memory of her flames should still enkindle and heat our spirits
with indignation against the name of Popery. For in her short reign (the
shortest of any since William the Conqueror, K. Rich. 3.
except that of Richard the Tyrant) no less than two hundred seventy-seven,
suffered Martyrdom upon the cause of Religion.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth Pope Pius the Fifth Excommunicated the Queen,
absolved her Subjects from their Allegiance, and Oath of Fidelity, and gave
away her Kingdoms unto the Spaniard. In pursuance of which Highway title, that
which they called the Invincible Armada was set out with the Popes Benediction
to invade this poor Nation. At which time they boasted that they would carry
away our Land in Turfs; an arrogant flaunt! Much like that of Benhadad, and
followed with much alike success and event, 1 King. 20. 10.
who swore (1 King. 20. 10.) that the dust of Samaria should not suffice for
handfuls for all the people that were to follow him. Almost innumerable other
were the Plots attempted against her state and person by Popish Votaries and
Adherents.

In King James his Reign the Conspiracy of the Gunpowder Villainy will be
enough to brand the damned principles of this kind of men with everlasting
odium and infamy, in the account of all true Gospellers. If Religion can
produce or hallow such hideous projects, one may certainly expect Religion
among Devils.

In the Reign of King Charles the First, who but this miscreant brood contrived
and acted the Massacre in Ireland, wherein about Three hundred thousand were
starved, pined, and murdered. And without doubt although men of other
Professions too shamefully imbrued their hands in the execrable murder of King
Charles the First, yet the Jesuits and other Papists also needed more than a
sprinkling to clear them from being partakers in that crying guilt. Neither do
I question but that the unhappy Toleration was an Egg of their laying; and that
these Furies spit forth the sparks that fired the famous City of London; and
turned it into a kind of dismal Colepit. Although but one French Papist were at
that time executed upon that tremendous occasion, yet perhaps more of them may
be raked out of their dark Cells by the search that is and will be made after
the Complotters of this new grand Treason and Massacre; which is yet but in the
dawn of a perfect and full discovery. And here we have matter of horror and
astonishment unto every soul amongst us! Who can tell what an universal
sweeping calamity the forcing open of one principal Sluice would have let in
upon us? What, more murdering of Kings yet! In Poem styled Church-Musick.
Nay then pray we with pious Mr. Herbert, GOD HELP POOR KINGS. We this day find
new Argument to excite us to pray for the life of the King, as the Primitive
Christians were wont in their ordinary Liturgy to pray pro mora finis; Tertul.
lib. Apolog. advers. Gentes. cap. 32.
namely, that it would please God to defer the end or fall of the Roman Empire,
thereby to put off the lamentable times of Antichrist from their days, very
well apprehending the Apostles meaning in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2 These. 2. 6, 7.
That that wicked one could not be revealed until the (...), that which
withholdeth or lets were taken out of the way: and what that was which
let, the Apostle durst not speak out, for fear of incurring the rage of the
Romans on their new planted Churches; but the thing that let was the Roman
Empire, the decay of which the Apostle foresaw, and that Antichrist would build
up himself upon the ruins of it. Accordingly, when the Empire came to be broken
into various Kingdoms, by the coming down of the Northern Nations, and by other
intestine occasions; then did the Pope with all his Creatures invade the vacant
seat of the Empire. Now whether or no we have not a like parity of reason,
earnestly to pray pro vita Regis, that they had to stir them up to pray pro
mora finis, I leave to your selves to judge.

And thus having showed you the frequency of Babylon's troubling or afflicting
Zion; I am sensible that I have herein somewhat anticipated my self in the
third Branch.

3. Branch of this part of my Text, and that is the earliness of the Enemies
spite and malice against the Church or Israel of God: Many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth. Yea, this is their sagacity and wicked policy to
take the first advantages, and if it were possible, not to suffer the Church to
grow up to strength and stature, but to oppress and crush it betimes, while it
is tender and least able to resist. This was the merciless policy of Pharaoh
and the Egyptians to drown the Hebrew Children as soon as the tender Midwifes
hand had received them into the world: To doom them to die in Water as soon as
they began to breath in Air. This was the bloody subtilty of Herod, to cut off
him that was born King of the Jews (if he could) as soon as the very name of
him began to be noised. And this was the vigilant policy of the grand Professor
of all such destructive arts, Revel. 12. 4. The Dragon stood before the Woman
which was ready to be delivered, Rev. 12. 4.
for to devour her child as soon as it was born. Oh, how implacable is the
malice of the Churches enemies! that although the Church could not be supposed
to do any thing to exasperate and provoke them in its early minority and youth,
yet unprovoked they have afflicted me from my youth. What, could nothing of her
youthful prettinesses and beauties charm their pitiless Adamantine hearts to
spare the Church in this her so pleasant age? no, not infancy or tenderness,
not innocence or causelesness; nor all her insinuating excellencies besides are
able to make an Oratory persuasive enough unto the Enemies of the Church for
one drop of compassion, but notwithstanding all this, have they many times
afflicted me from my youth. What meekness so great that can forbear at least to
chide with this kind of Ruffian Adversaries? Psalm. 137. 9.
O Daughter of Babylon, happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have
served us. Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against
the stones, Psalm. 137. 8, 9.

Object. But what, shall we yield our Popish Enemies so great an advantage to
acknowledge that our Church is so young and so late a thing? that our Protestant
Religion is but of yesterday? our supposed Novelty is that which they do
incessantly charge us with: Sarcastically demanding of us, Where was your
Religion before Luther.

Sol. No, no, with respect to our Adversaries of Rome, we say, Many a time have
they afflicted us from our youth; not meaning the youth of our Church, but only
from the youth of our Reformation. And in answer to the Question, Where our
Religion was before Luther? we boldly affirm, wherever the Christian Religion
was embraced, and the holy Scriptures were received, there was our Religion.
And as it bears the Denomination of the Reformed Religion, although Luther were
a very happy Instrument in the Reformation (the meanness of the Person so much
the more commending the power of God that accompanied the work) yet there were
clouds of Witnesses in all ages of the lapsed state of Rome that bare Testimony
against that spreading canker of her corruptions, Vid. Philip. Mornayi
mysterium iniquitatis, in oppositionibus per totum lib.
before Luther was in being. Our own King Edward the first, four hundred years
ago in Session of Parliament, under the subscription of the Peers, utterly
renounced the Popes supreme Authority. No less man than Lewis the Twelfth of
France, in defiance of the Pope, coined money with this Inscription, Perdam
Babylonem, I will destroy Babylon; several years before Luther began to stir.
But suppose we date the beginning of the Reformation from the rise of Luther's
name in the Christian World, which was in 1517, may we not retort their
question, Where was your Religion before Luther, with another more significant?
Where was your Popish Religion before the Council of Trent? which commenced not
till at least six or seven and twenty years after Luther entered upon the
Reformation: until which Council there was never such a body of Popish
Doctrines or Heresies entirely and professedly owned and received in the world,
as now there is. For that Council of Trent decreeing many things to be Points
of Faith which were not so accounted before, has made no small distraction
among the Papists themselves. Before this time we can calculate unto them out
of the best Historians, when and how their several Heretical Innovations and
Idolatrous abuses crept in.

The Popes Usurped Supremacy took place in Boniface the third, Spondani Epit.
Baron. An. 606. Art. III.
which was above Six hundred years after Christ, though Gregory the next
immediate Pope save one before him, earnestly declared against John of
Constantinople, that whosoever should claim to himself the title of Universal
Bishop was the immediate forerunner of Antichrist: Ego fidenter dico, quisquis
se universalem sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua
Antichristum praecurrit, quia superbiendo caeteris se preponit. Greg. I. 6.
Epist. 30. So Constantine saluted Miltiades Bishop of Rome, as also Chrestus
Bishop of Syracuse. Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5.
and urges this good argument against it, If there be one called Universal
Bishop, then must the Universal Church go to the ground, if he which is
Universal happen to fall. Before these times, instead of the Blasphemous titles
of your Holiness in the abstract; The most great and excellent God on earth;
The invincible Monarch of the Christian Commonwealth, etc. The Popes were then
content with the sober style of (...), Your Gravity.

The setting up of unwritten Traditions in equality with the Sacred Oracles, as
it were the bringing of another Trojan Horse into the place of our Palladium,
the Word of God, came to be ratified in the Seventh Age.

The use of Images in Churches grew up into an occasion of Idolatry about the
same time; De Progressu hujusce (...), vid. Morney. p. 292, 293. lat. Edit.
although the first suggestion thereunto was only by a pictured table of some
of the chief of the Fathers that assisted in the sixth General Council, hung up
in the Porch of St. Sophia in Constantinople.

Both the name and Doctrine of Transubstantiation was no earlier broached than
in that Laterane Council that convened in the year 1215. Carranzae summa
Council. in Council. primo Later. cap. 1.
And how well (think you) did Bernard the Dominican believe this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation (and the Popes Legate that instigated him thereunto) who
about the year 1309 poisoned the Emperor Henry the seventh with the
consecrated Host? or the Subdeacon that poisoned Victor the third in the
Chalice? or Hildebrand, alias Gregory the seventh, that threw the Consecrated
Host into the fire, because it answered not his demands (as the Heathen gods
did) concerning his success against the Emperor? I could further open this
pack, and show you much more of the same stuff: but these are instances enough
without an induction of more particulars, to warrant our inference from thence,
that the Popish charge of Novelty on us is justly to be recriminated upon
themselves. And as for the Antiquity of our Religion, (...), we appeal unto the
holy Gospel, Nicaenum, Constantinopolitanum, Ephesinum, Chalcedonense.
and the four first General Councils. But so much for the prejudice and the
spite of Isreal's enemies against her, even from her youth. I must forthwith
betake my self unto the second principal part of the Division of my Text: And
that is,

II. The frustration of the Churches Enemies in their mischievous attempts
against her: yet they have not prevailed against me. Whatsoever probability of
success may appear for a while on the Adversaries part, there shall be no final
or total prevailing against the Church. Haman for a while seemed to be in a
fair way to have prevailed against all the Jews, Esih. 7. 9, 10.
when he had the Letters of Execution sealed with the Broad-seal, and Posts
sent forth; whereas in the mean time he was but twining a Rope for his own
neck. The Enemies confidences and insultings may grow high, but such kind of
heights can serve for no other purpose, than like the silver and golden
Precipices, which the Emperor Heliogabalus devised and would have prepared for
himself, to make his ruin to be the more observed and taken notice of.
Sennacherib may boast that with the sole of his feet he would dry up the rivers
of the besieged places; 2 King. 19. 24.
but God was able to make the hearts of his Soldiers as water to fill up the
Channels. God disappointed the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise. He takes the wise in their own craftiness,
Job 5. 12, 13.
and infatuates their counsels when they are carried headlong in a bad cause:
he makes them to lose themselves in the Labyrinths of their own wily brains;
and their crafty policies so intricately woven, serve oftentimes but as a key
of many Wards to open the Chambers of Death unto themselves: as is famous in
his rendering this days Conspiracy fatal unto its own Authors. On the other
hand, on the behalf of those whom God undertakes to protect and shield; he has
infinitely more ways and methods in the course of his wise Providence to secure
and preserve them, than their most deadly lurking enemies can find how to hurt
and injure them. Heb. 2. 10.
Gods Israel have the Captain of Salvation on their side, the Lord Jesus Christ
who so leads on the army of Saints against their enemies, as that you may be
sure he will bring them honorably off again. We have in him not only the
virtue of his Death and Resurrection, but also the benefit of his Intercession,
supplying us with invincible strength to overcome our enemies; we have with him
also legions of powerful Angels to fence and guard us, one of whom in one night
smote in the Camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand. So
that whatsoever enemies think effectually to prevail against the Israel or
Church of God, must first make account to cancel all the Promises that are
given for Isreal's security; he must first overcome God himself, his Power, his
Wisdom, and all his other Attributes concerned for his People; he must subdue
the Captain of our Salvation, storm Heaven, and put all the glorious Host of
those Guardians of the Saints there to the rout, before he can perfectly and
fully prevail against Gods Israel. Bravely therefore does the Prophet in an
Ironical Apostrophe upbraid the enemies of Jerusalem upon this very
consideration, Isa. 8. 9, 10. Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall
be broken in pieces; Isa. 8. 9. 10.
and give car all ye of far Countries, gird your selves and ye shall be broken
in pieces. Gird your selves and you shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel
together and it shall come to naught; speak the word, and it shall not stand,
for God is with us.

Yet here I must caution you, That you do not imagine by what has been said,
that you have any absolute security given unto any particular Churches but that
they may be prevailed against. This attestation of Gods Providence for Isreal's
safety in the Text, and that other promise of our Savior in Mat. 16. 18. Mat.
6. 18. Grot. in loc. See also Dr. Hammond.
Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it; are to be understood to speak of the Church universim, and not
partitim, any farther than particular Churches do still stand firm upon the
rock of sound Faith, and a good Christian life, on which Christ has founded
the whole. We know particular Churches have been broken off, as that of
Jerusalem, Corinth, the Seven Churches of Asia, etc. and yet Christ has still
his Church in the World, and will have till time shall have an end. As for the
Church of Rome it self, it was long since forewarned (though she take but
little notice of it) that she should not be highminded but fear, lest she her
self were cut off after the severe Example of the Jews before her, Romans 11. 20,
21, 22. Romans 11. 20, 21, 22.
Nay, the words sound like a clap of Thunder, Otherwise thou also shall be cut
off. Undoubtedly God might have cut off this Church of England with the cursed
Powder Plot, or with the dreadful stroke which was intended us in this new
forged Conspiracy, and yet have been justified in so doing: especially
considering how highly we have provoked him thereunto, by the profane and
customary neglect of most of the duties of Religion, and Divine Worship among
the general sort of men; by the uncharitable factions and divisions of others,
by the loose Drunkenness and the loud Swearing; Jer. 5. 7, 8, 9.
by the gross Whoredoms and Uncleanness; Rev. 3. 16.
by the universal lukewarmness that is amongst us. But perhaps God foresaw that
our ruin had been a mortal wound to the Protestant Religion throughout
Christendom, or might have set the whole true Church of God in the world
a-bleeding, in such an hopeless manner, as would not have been easily stanched
again: and so considering his Church amongst us as so main a part of the true
Catholic body, perhaps God has spared and delivered us who were a part in
faithfulness to the whole.

III. And now let me obtain a little of your Patience for the third thing
remarked in my Text, and that is the Churches thankful Reflection on her
afflictions and the happy issue of them, suggested by the Psalmist, Let Israel
NOW say. Just the same triumphing Epenthesis in the midst of a sense, that we
find Psalm. 124. 1, 2. Psalm. 124. 1, 2.
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say: If it had
not been the Lord, who was on our side, when men rose up against us: Then they
had swallowed us up quick, etc. Let Israel NOW especially say and glory hereof,
in that the Lord has been pleased to warm our hearts anew, with the fresh
sense of a discovery, perhaps of little less moment than that which this day
commemorates unto us. Let Israel now say, yea and as our Psalmist descants upon
it, Let us say it over again and again, MANY, MANY a time have they afflicted
me, yet they have not prevailed against me. You come home to the very heart of
God by a grateful acknowledgment of his mercies; you set him up a new Pearl in
his Crown; for thus we sometimes find God himself, as it were, decking his name
with new Titles, taken from the Mercies and Deliverances which he has wrought
for his People, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, Exodus 20. 2.
out of the house of bondage; Psalm. 81. 10.
and the Lord which brought up, Jerem. 23. 8.
and which led the seed of the house of Israel, out of the North-country, and
the like. In Psalm. 22. 3. Psalm. 22. 3.
he is elegantly said to be (...) inhabiting the praises of Israel, that is
either dwelling in and among the Tribes of Israel who celebrated his praises,
or inhabiting the place, the Tabernacle, the Ark, whither they brought and
rendered his praises to him. But why inhabiting the Praises of Israel? Were
there not many other sorts of offerings which the Devotion of Israel prescribed
him besides Praises? yes, but praises carry the garland from them all, because
he should not so soon be dislodged out of them, but should longer inhabit
Praises than any legal services whatsoever: Buxtorf. Lexicon Rabbin, in voce
(...).
according to that saying amongst their Jewish Writers, that every Corban or
Sacrifice should cease, but that the Sacrifice of Praise.

Therefore with all the most signal Praises, let Israel now say, and say aloud
too, that, if possible, the echo of our rejoycings might carry terror and
trouble over all their Papal Monarchy, that although they have many times
afflicted us, yet they have not prevailed against us. Can you do less in zeal
for your Religion, than celebrate the praises of God for the preservation of
it? especially when the safety of your persons, your lives, and all that is
near and dear unto you is concerned equally with your Religion? But unto you
that are in Authority above others, An Advertisement to Magistrates.
I humbly remonstrate, Does not the blood of that Worthy Knight, and Justice of
the Peace, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, unto whose Title we may now superadd the
Martyr (a thousand times more deservedly than the Romish Party do Canonize for
Martyrs, Garnet, Winter, Digby, and other instruments of the Powder Plot), I
say, Does not his blood cry loud enough, to rouse and awaken all your Zeal,
Care, and Courage against those Catholic Murderers? Are not his wounds so many
mouths to bespeak you plain enough, that he has but acted that part which you
all must do, if you ever come to lie at their mercy? Rev. 9. 3.
I do believe indeed that this County of* Devon is as clean and free of this
sort of Locusts, as any one shire in England; yet had this late Conspiracy
taken effect, you would have found by this time such numberless swarms of them
filling the City, and the whole Country about, as if the Marian Generation had
risen out of the Earth again. And had this come to pass, then instead of an
opportunity to celebrate our Deliverance from the Treason of this fifth of
November, it would have been accounted on the other hand, a new fifth of
November's Treason, only to dare call it such. We could not have adventured
here to meet together, for the offering up our sacrifice of praise to God,
without the danger of the Galileans fate to have our blood mingled with our
sacrifices; Luke 13. 1.
and for you in special that wear the badg of Magistracy on you, to have your
scarlet-Gowns dipped afresh in your own gore. Now therefore to excite you to
vigilance, against the seeding of any of those evil tares amongst us, I shall
only present you with two Considerations:

1. The Absurdity of their Doctrines (I mean their Doctrines distinctive and
characteristick of Papists, as such) even to common sense and reason, and much
more to become matters of Faith. For example, as to their Doctrine of
Indulgences, which gave the first offense unto our Reformers, what more
ridiculous than to believe what the Preachers of Pope Leo the Tenth, published
out of their Pulpits; that at the sound of the money, as it was cast into the
Basin, those souls whom they intended to buy out of Purgatory, skipped and
leaped for joy amidst the flames, and presently mounted out of Purgatory?

What greater violence to Reason than to believe their Doctrine of
Infallibility? Place it where you will, either in their Popes or in their
Councils; of both which, there have been manifold instances of their
contradicting and nullifying the acts of each other, and yet both must be held
infallible.

Can you reconcile it unto any honest mind and understanding, that the common
people should be able to serve God acceptably in a public worship sealed up in
an unknown tongue?

That Doctrine of Transubstantiation, what is it but an opium that stupefies
all the senses of a man? For a man must belie not only his own, but the senses
of all the world besides, whereby we know bread to be bread, and wine to be
wine, because we see it, and taste it, and feel it, before we can receive this
gross Tenet.

What an unreasonable thing is it to have their not-written Traditions imposed
upon us for a rule of faith equally with the holy Scriptures, and yet none of
them in the mean time vouchsafe to inform us how many these Traditions be? or
to be continually forging new Articles of Faith as indispensably necessary to
Salvation, and yet never tell us when there will be an end of coining any more?

Who that has but well learnt his Primer, or can turn to the second
Commandment there, can brook their worshipping of Images? The public scandal
of which is more than any one thing besides, to prejudice both Jews and Turks
against their embracing of the Christian Religion; New Survey of the Turkish
Empire: Tit. of their Oratories.
neither of whom can endure the use of Images in their Oratories or places of
Worship.

As for the various measures of the Taxes of the Apostolical Chancery, as they
call them, where you may have dispensations and absolutions of all kinds, and
which are no less commonly used amongst the Popes brokers, then the books of
Customs and Entries among Merchants. What strange traffic is that by which the
absolution of Impoysonings, Sacriledg, Simony, Fornication, Adultery, Incest,
nay Sodomy, Brutality, and other the most horrible and enormous crimes are
rated at a less price, than the least Dispensation of eating of flesh on days
forbidden by the Pope. Now if a man can utterly abdicate natural Reason, let
him give himself up to believe such strange incongruous lies.

2. My second Consideration is the dangerousness of their Principles unto Civil
Government, and unto the peace of States and Kingdoms; such as are their
dispensation with Oaths, their allowance of breaking faith with those whom they
are pleased falsely and abusively to call Heretics; their Excommunication of
Kings and Princes, and then despoiling them of their Kingdoms, and murdering
their persons by any that can first come at them, if they refuse to own fealty
to the Pope, or are not obsequious to all his placita. Tell them of giving unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, In lib. Scripto per quendam Ioh. de
Therano, sed jussu Urbani Pap. 6.
Pope Vrbane the sixth has an excellent Evasion for that, viz. that those
words of Christ, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, took place only
till his Ascension, but after his Ascension they were of no moment, seeing that
Christ himself says, Joh. 12. 32.
Ioh. 12. 32. If I be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me;
that is, all Kings and Kingdoms under the Empire of the Pope: whom he therefore
concludes to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: thus abusing the Sacred Word
of God, as if it were no better than a mere Pasquil or Burlesque.

But may it be ever hoped that this proud Apocalyptical Beast will yield
himself to be cicurated and tamed? Alas, his lofty claim of Infallibility
renders him too stubborn and untractable for that. Yea, it has long since been
believed by many; that so great is the pestilent infection of this Chair of
Rome, that with the contagion thereof it instantly infected him, whosoever sat
in it As it did Pius 2d, and Paul the 4th. who before they were made Popes were
zealous Reformers, but afterward all was forgotten. Fuller in his life.
.

I conclude therefore unto you as Luther, when in a great sickness he made his
Will, bequeathing his detestation of Popery to his Friends and Pastors. Or as
the Reverend Dr. Holland for twenty years together Regius Professor of Divinity
in Oxford, when he went any Journey, he is said to depart with this Valediction
unto the Fellow of the College (which is all I have to say) Commendo vos
Dilectioni Dei and odio Popatus and superstitionis: I commend you to the love
of God, and to the hatred of Popery and Superstition.

FINIS.

