THE BRAND Plucked out of the FIRE. A Sermon Preached before the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Companies of London, On November. 5. at Paul's.

By EDWARD REYNOLDS, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for George Thomason, at the Rose and Crown
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

Amplissimis, Praestantissimis, Consultissimis Viris D. THO. ALEYN
Honoratissimo Domino Praefecto, MAGISTRATIBUS UNIVERSIS, TOTIQUE SENATUI
Celeberrimae Florentissimaeque Civitatis LONDINENSIS, Concionem hanc coram
ipsis habitam Ipsorumque jussu publici Juris factam, In Honoris and debitae
observantiae. TESTIMONIUM, D. D.

E. R.

Zach. 3. 1, 2. And he showed me Joshua the high Priest, standing before the
Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him.

And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee. Is not this a brand plucked out of the
fire?


THis Chapter is a Collection of comforts for the Church; comforts present in
the type, Joshua the Brand; comforts promised in the substance, Jesus the
Branch. Comforts to Joshua, the comfort of protection against adversaries, ver.
1, 2. The comfort of Honoring and adorning him for his Ministry and Office,
ver. 4, 5. The comfort of Remuneration for his fidelity, ver. 6, 7.

The words of the Text are a promise of protection, revealed by the Angel,
published by the Prophet, two excellent witnesses to a promise. And indeed we
seldom find the Church in affliction, but we find an Angel with them. With
Israel, when Pharaoh and his Host pursued them, when they were Exodus 14. 19.
Judge. 6. 11.
in the hands of the Midianites; when they were in the hand of the Philistines;
when Judge. 33. 3.
they were in Babylon in the bottom amongst Zach. 1. 8, 11.
the myrtle trees, with the three children in the furnace; with Daniel in the
Lions Dan. 3. 28. Dan. 6. 22. Acts 27. 13. 2 Reg. 6. 17. Genesis 19. 1.
den; with Paul in the shipwreck; with Elisha when beset with an Army at
Dothan; with Lot in the midst of Sodom; the Angel of the Lord is round about
those that fear him to deliver them, Psalm. 34. 7.

He showed me Ioshua] Israel returned but from two Captivities, from Egypt and
from Babylon, and in both we find a Joshua employed, one to possess them of
Canaan, another to re-edifie the Temple. It was not without a great mystery, to
note unto us that there is no deliverance without a Jesus: no Name but that
under heaven by which we can be saved, Act. 4. 12. He alone delivered us from
the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10.

Joshua the High-Priest] He is seldom mentioned alone without Zerubbabel, as
Ezra 3. 2, 8. 4. 3. 5. 2. Nehem. 12. 1. Hag. 1. 1, 12, 14. Hag. 2. 2, 4. As in
their return out of Egypt they were led by Moses and Aaron, Psalm. 77. 20. so
in their return out of Babylon they were led by Zerubbabel and Joshua, and
being returned, these two were to engage themselves in the work of building the
Temple, Ezra 5. 2. And indeed Temple-work does never go prosperously on, but
when the Ministry of the Priest is backed and encouraged with the authority of
the Magistrate. As it was by Nehemiah, Hezekiah, and other good Princes.

And therefore they are enemies to the building of Gods house, who go about to
persuade the Magistrate that he has nothing to do with matters of Religion,
that it belongs not either to his power or duty, to take care that purity of
truth and worship be preserved within his territores: of whom notwithstanding
it is prophesied, that they should be nursing Fathers to the Church, Isa. 49.
23. and truly they are none of the best Nurses, that suffer their children to
have poison as freely offered them, as milk or wholesome meat.

There is something in it, that we find Joshua here alone. Satan would do
mischief to any one whom God honors and imploys. But his notable malice is
against Religion, and the building of the Temple. If there be any more special
instrument of that then other, him in special manner he opposes; the more
spiritual the service, the more resisted by the Devil. The true Jesus, whereof
our Joshuah was a type, was no sooner called by God to build his house (for so
it was said of him that he should do, Zach. 6. 13.) but we find him assaulted
by the Tempter, Mat. 4. 1. Of all works this is the work which Satan most
desires to oppose, as the Apostle intimates, 1 These. 2. 18.

Standing] Both Tanquam Servus, and Tanquam Reus. 1. As a servant to Minister
unto the Angel. So much the word standing frequently imports attending upon a
Ministry, Deuteronomy. 10. 8. 17. 12. 1 King. 17. 1. Heb. 10. 11. whereby is noted, 1.
Reverence to the Lord whom he served. 2. Readiness to receive his commands. 2.
As a Defendant, who being accused stands up to answer for himself; the Judge
fate, and the people stood, Exodus 18. 13. Actor and Reus were wont to stand
together before the Judge. Who will contend with me? Let us stand together,
Isa. 50. 8. to intimate possibly in either the confidence of a just cause;
therefore it is said of the ungodly, that they shall not stand in judgment,
Psalm. 1. 5.

Joshua was in filthy garments, yet God employed him, and Satan accused him.
How low soever our condition be, God thinks not scorn to use us in his
service; Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings he has ordained praise: He
will be served as well in rags as in robes. And how low soever our condition
be, Satan would have us lower, from robes to rags, from rags to nakedness. His
malice is like hell, without any bottom. The truth is, it is not robes or rags
that trouble him, but that whether in the one or the other, we do any way stand
before the Lord, and minister unto him.

Before the Angel of the Lord] namely, the Angel of Gods presence, Isa. 63. 9.
the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. He is the Lord of the House, and Joshua
his servant, Heb. 3. 6. Mat. 24. 45. He is the Judge over the House, Acts 10.
42. and Joshua his Subject. And in both capacities he stands before him, to
execute the commands of his Lord, to answer the accusations of his adversary.

And Satan standing at his right hand] the right hand seems to have been the
place of the Accuser, Psalm. 109. 6, 7. And it is the Hand of Action. A wise
man's heart is at his right hand, Eccles. 10. 2. he does what he does heartily
as to the Lord. Satan hopes, if he speed not at accusing, he shall at
resisting, that he shall prevail either as an Adversary or a Tempter. But here
is Joshua's comfort, though Satan be at his right hand to tempt, God also is at
his right hand to support him, Psalm. 16. 8. He an Accuser at our right hand,
and Christ an Advocate at Gods right hand, 1 John 2* 1, 2.

To Resist him] or to accuse him. To Resist him in his Ministry, to accuse him
for his failings. What these failings were we may guess by the story. 1. He
ministered not in the Priests robes, but in filthy garments, v. 3. 2. He delayed
the building of the Temple, till pressed thereunto by the Prophets, Ezra 5. 1.
3. His sons were, some of them, defiled with strange wives, Ezra 10. 18.

What a white devil have we here? Satan transforming himself into an Angel of
Light, zealous for Gods worship, which is the thing that he chiefly maligneth.
Even the haters of Religion will pretend zeal for it, so they may do it
mischief, and when they rejoice at the failings of good men, will yet seem
greatly offended for them. They did so here; they would feign have had an hand
in building the Temple, the building whereof they most earnestly maligned, Ezra
4. 1, 2. Dalila will take Sampson on her knee to cut off his hair. Judas will
kiss his Master that he may betray him. Christ's enemies will court him that
they may entrap him, Mat. 22. 16. and Paul's enemies will preach Christ to add
affliction unto him, Phil. 1. 16. we find Satan one while tempting Christ,
another while confessing him, denying him in the Pharisee, John 7. 52.
acknowledging him in the man possessed, Mark 1. 24. (but with a mischievous
purpose in both, as if it were Learning to deny him, as if it were madness to
confess him,) one while leading him to the Temple* another while showing the
World. He has Temple temptations, and secular temptations, it is all one to
him, the Serpents skill or Samuels mantle, so he may either way be doing
mischief.

And the Lord said unto Satan] The Lord Christ, the Angel before whom Joshua
stood, the Mediator and Intercessor for his servant.

The Lord rebuke thee O Satan] Restrain thy pride; silence and muzzle up thy
mouth, cast out thy Bill of complaint, throw thee over the Bar, that thou
may not rise against his servant any more. And if thou be still clamouring,
then once again.

The Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee] Must Gods holy Tribunal be
still troubled with the obstreperous malice of a common Barrater? can thou
hinder the Adoption, or alter the immurable Election of God? we see hereby the
Rage of Satan, he never gives over accusing till God silence him. And we see
the Love of God, be Satan never so clamorous, God never gratifies him with an
hearing, but answers all his accusations with his own free love, and gratuitous
Election. The Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee.

Is not this a Brand plucked out of the Fire?] Has he not suffered enough
already, except he be quite burnt up? have I begun to deliver him, and shall I
not perfect it? did I bring him out of the furnace of Babylon sore against thy
will, that I might gratify thy malice in destroying him here? Can I be weary
in showing mercy, when thou art unwearied in doing mischief? I have delivered
him to build my Temple, and to set up my worship, and the mercy begun, I will
finish maugre all thy malice.

The words contain a Vision of a special mercy to Joshua, set forth in the
manner of a juridical process. Wherein we have

1. Joshua his Ministry and defense. He stood tanquam Servus. Reus.
2. The adversary, Satan and his work against Joshua to Resist. Accuse.
3. The Advocate. The Lord. 4. The victory over Satan, The Lord rebuke thee. 5.
The foundation thereof, Gods Election of Jerusalem, and his compassion to
Joshua.
He showed me Ioshua] That which the Prophet The Vision.
saw was only in a Vision and Representation, not really and in effect: for
where was the Priest to minister but in the Temple and at the Altar? and these
things were yet but in consultation, nothing finished; yet in a Vision the
Prophet sees it all done.

With God, promises and threatenings give a kind of being unto things before
they are produced. 1. They exist in decreto Dei; in Gods decree, and so are
known only to himself, Acts 15. 18. 2. They exist in verbo, in the word; and so
are known only to faith, which is (...), the very present subsistence of things
which to hope are but future* Heb. 11. 1. 3. They exist really in opere and
effectu* in the work done, visible to the sense of all beholders* and so wicked
men know the works of God in execution which they knew not in denunciation, as
our Savior tells us, Matthew. 24. 38, 39. though Noah had threatened the deluge,
yet they knew not until the stood came and took them all away: When there was
no Temple the Prophet sees Joshua ministering: When Ahab was not yet gone to
Ramoth Gilead, the Prophet saw all Israel scattered, 1 Kings 22. 17. when there
was no natural strength. Abraham saw Sarah conceiving, Romans 4. 19, 20, 21.
Whatever the faith of a Prophet can fee in a vision, the faith of a believer
can see in a promise.

When therefore we have Gods promise, how cross soever it may appear to sense
or reason, we should with David encourage our selves in the Lord our God, 1 Samuel 30. 6. and rest upon his name, I AM, who calls the things which are not,
as if they were. He that gave Being to the world out of nothing to make good
his decree of Creation, can give unto any man comfort out of nothing, to make
good a promise of mercy and deliverance. He can command his loving kindness,
Psalm. 42. 8. He can create peace, Isa. 57. 19. when all second causes, Vines,
Olives, Fig Trees, Fields, Herds, Stalls, do wholly miscarry, we may rejoice in
God, and glory in his salvation, Habak. 3. 17, 18. when our flesh and our heart
fails, we have him for our strength and for our portion still, Psalm 73. 26.

We live in failing times, we have found men of low degree Vanity, and men of
Job 8. 15.
high degree a lie; we have leaned on our 2 Reg. 18. 21.
house, but it did not stand; we have leaned Ezekiel. 29. 6.
on our staff, and it has gone into our hand. We trusted too much in
Parliaments and they have been broken; in Princes, and they have given up the
ghost, net vitia nec remedia far possumus, we have been afflicted both with
our diseases and with our remedies, fear, and the pit, and the snare Isa. 24.
17.
have been upon us, we have been changed Jer. 4^. 11.
from vessel to vessel, and we break every vessel we are put into; our ships
have been broken, our trade broken, our estates broken, our Government broken,
our Hopes broken, our Church broken, nothing but our hearts and our finnes
unbroken. A sad Hos. 14. 3.
thing, that a people will be quite fatherless, before they will think of
going to God; that they will have their way hedged up with Hos. 2. 6, 7.
Thorns, before they will resolve to return to their first husband; that they
will be Luke 15. 16, 17, 18.
brought to husks, before they will come to themselves, and go to their father;
that they will be brought to such extremities, as not 2 Chronicles. 20. 12
to know what to do, before they will have their eyes upon the Lord. Well, it
has been our sin and our folly, to trust in broken reeds, in dying and
perishing comforts; Isa. 36. 6.
let it at last, before the Epha be sealed, before Zach. 5. 8.
the decree bring forth, be our wisdom, and our faith to trust in the living
God. Zeph. 2. 2.
And by repentance and humiliation to remove our sins from between God and
us, and then no other impossibilities can obstruct the passage of mercy unto
us; nothing can any more hinder the fulfilling of an evangelical promise, then
of a prophetical Vision.

Well, whether in a vision or really, he saw Joshua standing. And he stood,
Joshua standing as a servant


1. Tanquam servus, to minister before the Lord. Whereby we learn, 1. That as
the Ministers of the Lord have their mission from him, Romans 10. 15. Heb. 5. 4.
so they ought to receive Instructions from him, to do all in his Temple
according to the pattern he gives them, 1 Cor. 28. 11. Heb. 8. 5. to speak
nothing but according to his prescript and direction, His Words, Ezekiel. 2. 7.
His Counsel, Act. 20. 27. what they have received in command from him, 1 Cor.
11. 23. A servant is (...), A living Instrument, and Aristot. politic. lib. 1.
cap. 4.
Instruments must be led by the guidance of the principal cause. Semper agat ne
rogat, nec nisi jussus agit. Woe be unto us, if we Depositum Custodi, quod tibi
creditum est, no^ quod a te inven^um, quod accepisti non quod excogitasti, rem
non ingenii sed doctrinae. Vincent. Lyrinensis. Acts 4. 20.
speak any thing in Gods Name, which he has not commanded us, Deuter. 18. 20.

2. Having received Instructions, they ought with all Reverence and readiness
to obey them. We cannot but speak the things which we have heard and seen, no
dignity, no excellency is a supersedeas to duty. Joshua, and other Priests;
Paul, and other Elders; Angels, and other Ministers are all fellow laborers in
the service of Christ; Zachary 3. 8. Colos. 4. 11. Revelations 19. 10.

3. That they are always in the eye of God, to Counsel them in their duties,
to search them in their performances, to hear them in their Petitions, to
tender them in their sufferings, to protect them in their fears and dangers.
The anointed ones do ever stand before the Lord, Zach. 4. 14. And since they do
so,

1. They must learn to walk fearfully and humbly, to discharge their Ministry
heartily as to the Lord, to consider the weight of their Pastoral Office, as
men that must give an account, Heb. 13. 17.

2. The people must learn to pray for them. Their duties are many, their
Temptations many, their Enemies many, their Infirmities many, their
Discouragements many, the Infamies, Contempts, Reproaches poured out upon them,
the devilish Machinations and contrivances against them, many, more then many:
and therefore they have the more right unto, the greater need of the peoples
prayers. When enemies threatened, then the Church prayed, Lord behold their
threatenings, and grant unto thy servants that with all boldness they may speak
thy word, Acts 4. 29. When the Apostle knew he should meet with enemies at
Judea, then he earnestly besought the Church to pray for him, Romans 15. 30, 31.
when he was an Ambassador in bonds then he moves the Church to pray that he
might open his mouth boldly, Ephesians. 6. 19, 20. Thus he stood in a posture of
service.

II. Tanquam Re^s. As one accused, to As a defendant.
answer for himself and others. The sins of the age then were general, 1.
Neglect of building the Temple, Hag. 1. 2. 2. Marrying strange wives, Ezra 9.
1, 2. Ezra 10. 13. yet Satan brings his accusation against the Priest only,
who was to warn the people, Ezekiel. 33. 8. his plot was against Israel, but his
practice was upon David, to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. If he can
overthrow public persons, cast down a Joshua, blow up a Parliament, make
contemptible, and insignificant the great Officers in Church or State, the rest
he hopes to have presently in his power, (...). Cut the Tree up by the roots,
and you may easily lop off all the Branches. Thus we find him sifting of
Peter, and hindering of Paul, Luke 22. 31. 1 These. 2. 18. Therefore in the Law
as great a sacrifice was required for the Priest, as for all the people, Lev.
4. 3, 13, 14. Their sin is of a diffusive nature, from them profaneness goes
into all the Land, Jer. 23. 15. They are the snare of a fowler, by which others
are entrapped, Hos. 9. 8. the sin of him that has knowledge emboldeneth
others, 1 Cor. 8. 10. the Priests sin brought contempt upon the very offerings
of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17.

And therefore all public persons, Magistrates and Ministers, should be so
much the more vigilant over themselves, by how much the more Satan is busy
both to tempt and to accuse them. Plutarch has written a Book of profiting by
Enemies. Certainly next unto this, that they stand before the Lord, and have
his eye over them, there can hardly be a more profitable consideration for men
in office, then to remember that Satan is at their right hand, to tempt, to
accuse, to observe and to resist them. They say those Roses are sweetest which
have stinking weeds grow near them; the nearer we know that Satan is to us, the
more holy and pure should our lives be.

We have seen Joshua standing; Let us Satan standing.
now see Satan standing, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him, to
accuse him* If we do our duty, Satan is at our right hand to hinder us: If we
do not our duty* Satan is at our right hand to implead us. Whether we be
conscionable, or whether we be careless, he will have some design upon us,
something to do against us.

1. He withstands us as a Tempter* No As a Tempter.
sooner was Christ called out to his Office and Ministry, but Satan presently
sets upon him to tempt him, Mat. 4. 1. and usually the more work the more
temptation. He stands at the working hand. And the more public the work, the
more sharp and eager the temptation. None more exposed to Satan's opposition
then a Zerubbabel and a Joshua, a conscionable Magistrate and a zealous
Minister. When Magistrary and Ministry are most opposed, we may conclude Satan
is most busy. Their office is most against his Kingdom* and therefore his
malice is most against their function.

2. He opposes us as an Accuser, Rev. As an Accuser.
12. 10. As the young man said unto Joab, If I should have done as thou say,
thou thy self would have set thy self against me, 2 Samuel 18. 13. Is most true
of Satan, Impii diabolum habent primo suggestorem, dei^ tortorem, Cyprian de
Iejunio and Tentat.
if he can by any means tempt us into sin, he will be the first to accuse us
of it.

But how did Satan resist Joshua? no other way that we know of but by stirring
up the Samaritans to hinder the building of the Temple, by hiring Counselors,
writing accusations, and procuring an Edict against them, which they hastily
put in execution, Ezra 4. 5, 6, 23. Satan as the general and chief captain
uses wicked men as his drudges and instruments in all his oppositions against
the Church. All the world are under two Heads, in their peaceable capacity, Una
civitas and una Civitas, Babylonia una, Jerusalem una; illa R^ge diabolo, ista
Rege Christo, etc. Ang ii Psalm. 61.
under two Princes, holy men, under Christ the King of Saints, and wicked men
under Satan the Prince of this world, that works effectually in the children
of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. and in their military capacity, holy men under
Christ the Captain of our salvation, Heb. 2. 10. and wicked Rev. 15. 3, 17* 14,
19, 16. Joh. 12. 31. ^oh. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 10. Rev. 12. 7.
men under Satan, the great Dragon, who are taken by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.
26. And therefore,

1. Believers must accordingly arm themselves with the whole Armor of God,
Subsicuturis testationibus munimenta praestruimus, Tert. de Baptismo, c. 20.
vid. Aug. Epist. 148.
when they give their name to Christ, and provide for sharp troubles from
principalities and powers, especially the Ministers of Christ in the service of
his Church: No life more comfortable, more honorable but a warfare belongs
unto in. The weapons of our warfare, says the Apostle, are mighty through God,
2 Cor. 10. 5. and endure hardness, says he to Timothy* as a good soldier of
Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 3. Every good Sermon storms some or other strong hold
of Satan, and mortifies, at least aims at mortifying some one or other lust
that is subservient unto his Kingdom. There will be continual Temptations, we
must labor and pray for Grace to overcome them. And there will be continual
Accusations, we must labor and pray for Faith to answer them.

2. Wicked men may see in opposing Joshua* in building the Temple, in
withstanding the Ministers, and work of Christ in his Church, what Master they
serve, and whose interest they: promote. They are but vassals of Satan, acted
by the some principles of enmity and malignity which are in him. He that
commits sin, is of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. And whereas men may be of the
Devil two manner of ways, 1. Per modum servitutis, as obeying his commands.
12. Pen modum imaginis, as resembling his disposition: opposing of the work of
Christ in his Church, is of this last and worst kind, wherein men show
themselves not his Servants only but his Children. As when Elymas the Sorcerer
withstood Paul, and would have turned the Deputy from the faith, the Apostle
thereupon called him the child of the Devil, Acts 13. 10. Whoever sow tares in
the Lords field, do the work of him who is the Lords enemy, Matthew. 13. 25. O
how many workmen has Satan amongst us at this time! when the Lords husbandmen
are so decried, and mischievous doctrines so boldly and with open face
published* The Lord grant that we may not be so long smitten with blindness,
till we be led even into Samaria.

But here is the Churches comfort, That The Advocate for Joshua, and his
victory over Satan.
there is a Lord our Advocate with the Lord. As the Lord said to the Lord, sit
at thy right hand, Psalm 110. 1. So here the Lord says to the Lord, Lord
rebuke Satan. The Lord sent Christ the Lord to conquer Satan, and Christ the
Lord prays unto the Lord to rebuke Satan.

1. When Satan is the Churches Accuser, Christ is the Churches Advocate, we
have an Advocate with the Father; Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 John 2. 1, 2.
When Satan is an Adversary to resist, Christ is a Captain to defend, Heb. 2.
10. He was for this purpose manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil, 1 John 3. 8. And he has destroyed Satan three manner of ways, 1. Per
viam sapientiae, he has outwitted Satan, and made his own devices to return
upon his own head. By malice Satan brought Christ to his Cross, and on that
Cross Christ spoiled principalities and powers, and triumphed over Satan, Col.
2. 15. He swallowed the bait of his humanity, and was caught by the hook of his
Divinity* 2. Per viam potentiae, in a way of war and combat, being stronger
then the strong man, he overcomes him, takes from him his armor, divides the
spoils, Luke 11. 21, 22. makes his people set their feet upon the neck of
(...). -- Homer Iliad.
Satan, as Joshua did call the Captains of Israel to tread on the necks of the
Kings of Canaan, John 10. 24. He vanquished him in a single combat of
temptation himself, so that Satan was feign to leave the field, Matthew. 4. 11.
and he vanquished him in his war against the Church, so that he and his
Angels are cast out, Rev. 12. 9. 3. Per viam judicii, in a way of juridicall
process, He brings Satan to his Tribunal, as Prince of Peace, as Judge of the
world, makes him accomptable for all his Temptations, for all his persecutions,
for all his Usurpations and Tyrannies over the souls of men, pronounces
Judgment upon him, and casts him out, and casts out all his accusations
against the Brethren, John 12. 31. 16. 11. Rev. 12. 10.

This is a ground of great Comfort, though Christ suffer Satan to tempt and to
oppugn his Church, to put out his venom, and power, and policy against it, yet
he will still be a wall of fire round about it. If Satan go to and fro to
devour, Job 1. 7. Christ has his Angels going to and fro to protect, Zach. 1.
11. If Satan have four Horns to scatter the Church, Christ has as many
Carpenters to fray them away, Zach. 1. 18, 21. What ever Poison there is in
Satan, there is an Antidote in Christ against it. He a Destroyer, Christ a
Savior; He a Tempter, Christ a Comforter; He an Enemy, Christ a Captain; He an
Accuser, Christ an Advocate; He a Prince and God of this world, Christ a King
of Saints and Lord of Glory. Three names Satan has given him from his three
most active Principles, A Serpent for his Cunning, Genesis 3. 1. A Lion for his
Strength, 1 Pet. 5. 8. And a Dragon for his Malice, Rev. 20. 2. And Christ has
a name which meets with every one of these, A Counselor, no subtilty of the
Serpent can deceive him: A mighty God, no strength of Isa. 9. 6.
the Lion can overcome him: An everlasting Father, no malice of the Dragon can
outact him, and he is wonderful in All these, ordering and improving his
Wisdom, his Power and his Love unto the peace* of his people against whom
Satan warreth.

II. And further we may here note, That when Satan accuses, Joshua does not
stand upon his defense, nor plead his own cause, but he answers by his Counsel,
his Advocate pleads for him. When we are tempted and assaulted by Satan, we
must put off our Adversary to Christ. If we go against him in our own strength,
he will certainly be too hard for us. Paul was buffeted by a Messenger of
Satan; he does not buffet Satan again, but cries to the Lord to help him, 2
Cor. 12. 7, 8. No name to oppose to the Accusations and fiery Darts of Satan,
but the name of Christ. We know not what to do against Principalities and
Powers, but our eyes are upon him. Satan brings in his Charge to condemn;
What Is the Romans 8. 33.
Answer? Christ died, Christ is risen, Christ is at the right hand of God,
Christ is our 1 John 2. 1.
Advocate with the Father, Christ has a plenitude and sufficiency of Grace,
Christ 2 Cor. 12. 9.
can save to the utter most those that come unto Heb. 7. 25. Luke 11. 21.
God by him, Christ is stronger then the strong man, Christ has exceeding
abundant 1 Timothy 1. 14.
grace to save the chief of sinners, Christ Psalm. 68. 18.
ascended up on high and gave gifts unto men, even unto the rebellious: If God
will not hear the blood of his Son, if Christ will not hear the cry of his
servant, if Satan can out-bawl the Intercession of Christ, if Satan can pluck
Christ from the right hand of his Father, or can pluck away the compassions of
Christ out of his bowels, then, never till then, shall penitent sinners that
trust him with their souls and salvation, be cast in their suit, and be put to
shame. We see by what weapons Satan is to be overcome; not by humane counsel or
power, but by the Increpation of God, and by the Intercession of Christ; He
only is able to succor those that are tempted, Heb. 2. 18. In his name alone
we must go out against this Goliath. Though Satan be trod down under our feet,
yet it is the Lord alone that does tread him down, Romans, 16. 20. Stand before
him, Appeal to him, Implore his Rebuke, and you are safe.

One thing more the Apostle Jude teaches us from this Increpet, Not to despise
Dominion, not to speak evil of Dignities, since Michael the Archangel
contending with the devil, durst not bring against him a railing Accusation,
but said, The Lord rebuke thee, Jude v* 8, 9. This as it is severely forbidden
by God, Thou shall not revile the gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people,
Exodus 22. 28. So is it noted by the Apostle as an evidence of walking after the
flesh, of Uncleanness, Presumption* Self-willedness, to despise Government, and
not to be afraid to speak evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 2. 10, 11. How careful
were the Apostles in their days to caution Christians against this sin, Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers, they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation; ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but but
also for Conscience Sake, Romans 13. 1, 2, 5. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, Tit. 3. 1. Inculcate it upon
them, they are apt enough through Pride and Arrogance to forget it. Submit your
sel^es to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, to Kings, to Governors;
use not your Liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God,
1 Pet. 2. 13, 16. And yet the Princes in whose time they wrote, were Monsters
of men for wickedness. Christian Religion does ratify and bear up, it does
not despise or destroy Magistracy, but owneth it to be of God, as his Ordinance
and Institution, By whom Kings reign who puts his name, and an impress of
sacred Authority upon them, Prove. 8* 5. Psalm. 82.6. and sets them as his
Ministers to be eyes to the blind, and feet Job 29. 15.
to the lame, and Fathers to the poor, and Sanctuaries to the afflicted. Great
therefore the wickedness of those that despise them, horrid and execrable the
enterprises of those which would blow them up, and destroy them. If Corah, or
Sheba, or Absalom, or Zim^i had peace, such as these may look for it too, but
Solomon assures us of these men, That their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and
who knows the ruin of them, Proverbs, 24* 22,

Lastly, From the double Increpation we may draw, 1. Matter of Caution, not to
think our selves secure at any time against the Assaults of Satan, He is like
the flies, of which he has his name, Impudent, and Importunate: When he is
beaten off once, he will come on again, when he has been foiled and rebuked
once, he will venture a second Increpation: there is no truce to be held with
him: when he was infinitely overmatched, yet he departed from Christ but for a
season, Luke 4. 13.

2. Matter of Comfort, That we should not despond under the Assaults of Satan.
When he multiplies Temptations, Christ will multiply Increpations; he will
deliver a second time, Isa. 11. 11. In six and in seven troubles, Job 5. 19.
From the Terror by night, and the arrow by day, Psalm 91. 5. Christ is never
less active and vigilant to help, then Satan is to hurt the Church. If where
sin abounds, Grace does superabound, and God does multiply to pardon, Romans 5.
20. Isa. 55. 7. Much more when the rage of Satan abounds* succor shall
superabound, and God will multiply to rebuke.

Repetitions and Ingeminations in Scripture, note 1 Certainty, as the dream of
Pharaoh was doubled, because of Gods fixed purpose concerning it, Genesis 41. 32.
Satan in all his oppositions against the building of Gods house shall certainly
be disappointed. 2. Constancy, Thou shall follow Justice, Justice, Deuteronomy. 16.
20. thou shall never give over following it. The Lord will constantly and
perpetually rebuke Satan in all his assaults against Joshua and his fellows.
3. Vehemence and Ardency of affection; it intends the sense, and makes it
superlative, O Earth, Earth, Earth, a pathetical excitation! Jer. 22. 29. Holy,
Holy, Holy; an ardent expression of the infinite Holiness of God. Isa. 6. 3.
The Lord will vehemently, and with much zeal and earnestness rebuke Satan in
his Hostility against the Church. 4. Consummation and completing of what is
gone about, I will overturn, overturn, overturn, Ezekiel. 21. 27. When I begin, I
will make an end. God will never give over rebuking and oppossing Satan, till
he have wholly subdued him, and brought him under Christ and his peoples feet.

And since Christ does thus certainly, constantly, earnestly, completely rebuke
him, Let us keep our ground, oppose him with treble and unwearied prayers, 2
Cor. 12. 8. Resist him with stedfastness in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5^* 9. With
patient continuance in well doing, Romans 2. 7. Let us stand, and stand, and
stand, pray with All prayer, pray with All perseverance in prayer in this
spiritual Combat, Ephe. 6. 11, 13, 14, 18. Christ rebukes and rebukes again,
Let us resist and resist again.

There remains only the double foundation The foundation of the Victory 1. Gods
gracious Election of Jerusalem.
of this Victory; 1. Gods gracious Election, The Lord which has chosen
Jerusalem, rebuke thee. The Doctrine of Adoption by free Grace is the strongest
weapon that we can wield against the malice of Satan: Thou art my God from my
mothers belly, and therefore since Bulls, and Dogs, and Lions do compass and
beset, and gape, and roar upon me, Do thou deliver and save me, Be not thou far
from me, Psalm 22. 10, 13. 20. 21. God will admit no Charge against his Elect,
Romans 8. 33. 35. If I were to be saved by Merits of my own, want of merit would
condemn me: But where all is of Grace, and free gift, no guilt can condemn him,
who has the Righteousness of another freely bestowed upon him. It is five
times together called the Gift, the free Gift, the Gift of Righteousness, Romans
5. 15, 16, 17. O thanks be unto God, Thanks for ever be unto God, for his
unspeakable gift, the gift of the Righteousness of Christ bestowed upon us.

The next foundation of this Victory, is Joshua's past deliverance, Is not this
a brand 2. His deliverance of Joshua.
plucked out of the fire? Whence we learn,

1. That Past-Mercies are pledges of more. The work of God is perfect,
especially his work of Mercy, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. If he snatch out of the fire, he
will bring unto his Temple: If he lay a foundation, he will bring forth the
Head stone, Zach. 4. 9. He will perfect that which he has wrought: If he begin
a good work, he will finish it, Psalm. 138. 8. Phil. 1. 6. He who will not have
us be weary of well-doing, will not be weary of well-doing himself. His mercy is
from everlasting to everlasting upon those that that fear him, Psalm 103. 17.
Satan can no more hinder the continuance of it unto Eternity, then he can cause
it not to have been from Eternity.

2. No condition is so sad or desperate out of which the Lord cannot rescue his
people. He carries them through the fire, Zach. 13. 9. he preserves them in the
fire, Dan. 3. 25, 27. He brings them through fire and water into a wealthy
place, Psalm 66. 12. And this he does suddenly, in the very nick of danger. In
the Mount will the Lord be seen, Genesis 22. 14. and hastily, laying merciful hold
on us while we linger, Genesis 19. 16. He repents concerning his servants, when
he sees that their power is gone, Deuteronomy. 32. 36. and when they are as very
outcasts, whom no man looks after, Jerem. 30. 17. In our greatest
perplexities and fears, if we could glorify God by believing, and stand still
without sinful doubts, disquiet murmurings, and diverting unto sinister and
perverse means, carnal Sanctuaries, and a refuge of lies, we might comfortably
expect to see the salvation of God.

3. This Brand God will not only save, but Honor, turn it into timber to build
his house withal. When the Lord rescueth a Great and a Good man, out of great
troubles and temptations which were ready to consume him, usually he makes him
an Instrument of great and special service. Moses drawn out of the water,
Joseph out of prison, Daniel out of the Lions den, David from a world of
persecutions and dangers, Mordecai out of the pit of Hamans malice, and here
Joshua out of the furnace of Babylon: and all afterward eminent Instruments of
great and honorable services for the Church of God.

This is a worthy fruit of afflictions, when they season and prepare us to be
beams in Gods House. As the greatest Timber has the most seasoning. Luther
was wont to say, That Prayer, Meditation and Temptation are excellent
preparations for the Ministry.

4. God can use weak, improbable, despised Instruments unto great and excellent
works. He that could make one Loaf of bread enough to feed thousands, can make
one Brand Timber enough to build Temples. He that drew the Prophet out of a pit
with rotten rags, can erect a glorious Temple out of the dust with burnt
firebrarnds. He blew down the Walls of Jerico with Rams horns, discomfited an
huge Host of Midianites with a few broken pitchers* converted the world with
twelve fishermen, and chooses the weak, and base, and foolish things, things
which are not to bring to naught things that are, 1 Corinthians. 1. 27, 29. He has
more regard to the lowliness of those that are weak, then to the abilities of
those that are proud. To teach us not to despise Truth, or Comfort, or any
mercy by what hand soever brought unto us, no more then the Prophet did his
meat, when God sent it unto him by Ravens, 1 Reg. 17. 5. God has purposely put
rich treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of his power might the
more shine forth in the infirmity of his Instruments, That no flesh might glory
in his sight.

And now as on this day has this Scripture been exactly paralleled in this
Nation in the glorious deliverance we now celebrate.

Joshua his work was to build a Temple, Satan's to hinder and oppose it. He is
an Enemy to all such Building, but that which Tertullian calls, Edificatio ad
ruinam, He is all for pulling down Work.

And are not Religion and Laws the best part of a structure, the foundation?
Are not Princes, Peers, Nobles, Fathers of their* Country choice Stones in a
building? Demosthenes tells us, (...). That men were Towers and Cities, and not
Walls; does not the Apostle say of the Church, ye are Gods Building? 1 Cor. 3.
9. Of this Temple it was that these wicked men said, Raze it, Raze it to the
very ground; down with it, down with it into ashes; up with it, up with it into
fire. They would have turned things up-side down, Isa. 29. 16. down with Laws,
u^ with Confusion: down with Jerusalem, up with Babylon: down with the Arc, up
with (...): down with Religion, up with Superstition: make Princes, and Peers,
and Gentry, and Ministry, the flower of a Nation, who were wont to be, like
polished Saphires, very firebrarnds, blacker then a coal, Lam. 4. 7, 8. Tell
me whether any but heads and hearts filled with the Devil, could ever have
invented or executed so bloody a design.

King and Parliament, Peers and People were standing before the Lord; for God
stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he judges among the Gods, Psalm
82. 1. And Satan will be thrusting in to withstand them. No place so sacred
whether he will not intrude. He crawles into Paradise; we find him standing
before the Lord amongst all the Host of Heaven, in the midst of an Angelical
consessus, 1 Reg. 22. 19, 21.

But he can do no good at the hand to hinder that from working, he cannot
introduce superstition and ignorance at that door. He tries therefore what he
can do under the feet. He croucheth, he digges through a wall, he springs a
mine, and gets a den, finds out an hell from whence to murder the innocent,
Psalm 10. 8, 9, 10.

And this not to resist or accuse only, but utterly to destroy; to turn head,
and hand, and feet, and the whole body into very firebrarnds.

And he has been at this work once and again. This was not the first time he
had been resisting or rebuked. He tried by water in that invincible Armado in
88. And now by fire more terrible then that of Babylon, which would not have
left so much as a Brand remaining, which in the twinkling of an eye would have
done more mischief, then threescore and ten years captivity in Babylon.

But God be blessed we were not as a Brand in this fire, but as Moses his Bush
not consumed, as the three children, not so much as singed by it. That out of
this fire, not a few Brands, but many goodly Cedars, and the Vine, the weakest
of trees, the poor Church of Christ amongst us, were not plucked, but
preserved from it; Gods mercy preventing Satan's malice, and making their own
tongue to fall upon themselves, and by that little mercy which was in one of
these bloody men, to snatch one brand out of this fire, quenching the flame
which would have devoured all the rest; so inconsistent was this villainy with a
dram of mercy.

And all this not for our worthiness, but for his own free grace, because he
loved England, and chose it for a place to set his Name in. And blessed be his
Name, that notwithstanding all Romish attempts, and machinations, we have had
his presence, and the true reformed* Religion in the midst of this Nation, for
now a full hundred years; for so long it is from November. 17. 1658. since Queen
Mary died, and that glorious Princes Elizabeth, succeeded in her Throne. In
this month were her fires quenched, and in this month was this fire quenched,
the eyes of the Lord running through the earth, to show himself strong in
behalf of this poor Nation.

And now what remains, but being thus delivered, and yet through Gods mercy in
the possession of the reformed Religion (the Lord knows how long that yet may
last) we should betake our selves to the duties here mentioned by the Prophet.

1. To stand before the Lord* to have our eye still upon him, to attend his
Will, to listen to his Commands, to wait on his Worship, to aim at his Glory,
to have our mouths and hearts filled with the praises of his Name; who has
made us not as firebrarnds plucked out of the burning, Amos 4. 11. but preserved
from it.

2. To put off our filthy garments, to bewail the woeful provocations of all
orders of men amongst us, to make have and be zealous to purge the house of God
of those sad corruptions which have defaced it, and of that woeful leaven of
heresy, which threatens to sour the whole lump.

3. To get change of raiment, to be clothed with the garments of praise, with
the long white Robe of Christ's righteousness, that our nakedness be not
discovered, to worship the Lord in the beauties of Holiness.

4. To walk in Gods ways, and to keep his Charge, to be zealous and
conscionable in all our peculiar duties, to hold fast those wholesome truths
which the Lord has so long continued unto us. We know how busy foreign
Emissaries are, who are said to swarm among us, under a disguize, and in a
mysterious way to infuse their doctrines into the minds of credulous and
seduced people. We see what hideous errors are every where broached; what
contempt is poured out upon a learned and faithful Ministry. What dishonor is
cast upon Magistrates, as if it belonged not either to their power or duty to
take care either of the truth or worship of God in their Territories: What
immense and boundless license men take to write, print, publish the most horrid
opinions without check or control: what sad effects this infinite liberty has
produced, in some Atheism, in others Scepticisme, in others Apostasy, in
others sad divisions, jealousies, animositites, scarce any face left of that
Christian love, and holy communion which heretofore shined in the Assemblies of
Professors. What woeful Symptoms we have of Gods threatening to remove our
Candlestick and his Glory from us. Calling home to himself many eminent
Ambassadors in the Church, laying aside many worthy and religious Patriots in
the State; exercising his Ministers that remain with the reproaches and
defamings of many: our leaving our first love, and former zeal for the truths
of God: The doleful confusions and changes in the State; Governments changing
as it were with the Moon, up one month and down another. Certainly it is
through the wrath of the Lord of Isa. 9. 19.
Hosts that a Land is darkened; It is for the Prove. 28. 2.
Transgression of a Land that many are the Princes thereof: It was a forerunner
of a final wrath amongst the ten Tribes, when God left them to pull down one
another.

Oh what need have we to be awakened, to lay these things to heart, to prepare
to meet Amos 4. 12. Rev. 2. 5.
the Lord, to do our first Works, to revive the ancient communion of Saints, to
awaken the Spirit of prayer, and to cry mightily unto God, to spare his people,
and not to give his Joel. 2. 17.
Heritage unto reproach:* To receive the truth in love, and to contend
earnestly for the Faith 2 These. 1. 10.
once delivered unto the Saints: To use all holy endeavors in our places and
stations Jude v. 3.
to keep the glorious presence of the Lord still amongst us. To prove all
things, and 1 These. 5. 21.
hold fast that which is good: to try the spirits 1 Joe. 4. 1. Heb. 10. 24.
Mal. 3. 16. Joel 2. 14.
whether they be of God: To provoke one another, to speak often to one another,
not to forsake the assembling of our selves together. It may be the Lord will
return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him.

That so we whom the malice of Satan and wicked men would gladly make Brands,
may by Gods blessing be Trees of Righteousness, Isa. 61. 3. Isa. 5. 7. Ezekiel.
47. 12. Cant. 4. 16.
the planting of the Lord, that the spirit blowing upon our garden, the Spices
thereof may flow out, and our beloved may delight in us, and eat his pleasant
fruit. So shall the enemies of the Church always find, that he whose name is
the Branch, Zach. 3. 8. Deuteronomy. 4. 20.
will still be too hard for the furnace of Egypt, for the staff of the
oppressor. That he Isa. 9. 4. 14. 5. Zach. 3. 9. Zach. 12. 3. Isa. 8. 8.
who is a Stone with Eyes, will make his Church a burdensome stone, to all that
set themselves against it. That he will so watch over this Land, while it
continues Immanuels Land, that we shall still, as the Prophet Isaiah speaks,
chap. 24. 15. Glorify the Lord in the fires, Even the Name of the Lord God of
Israel in the Isles of the Sea.

FINIS.

