THE Rich Man's Charge. Delivered in a SERMON AT THE SPITTLE Upon Monday in
Easter Week, 12 April. 1658. BEFORE The Lord Major, etc.

By EDW. REYNOLDS, D D.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for George Thomason, at the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

To the Right Honorable Sir RICHARD CHIVERTON Lord Major of the City of London,
and the Honorable Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
IT is truly resolved by Learned men, Aquin. part. 1. qu. 1. art. 4. and
Scholastici in Prolog. Sentent.
That Theology is not a bare Speculative Science, which ultimately terminateth
and stops in the understanding, but that it is a Doctrine ordered and
directed unto Practice, prescribing not only the John 17. 3. Ephesians. 4. 13.
knowledge of Spiritual Truth, but the Marth. 7. 21. Jam. 1. 22. John 13. 17.
doing and loving of Spiritual Good. The Apostle calls it the Tit. 1. 1. Ephesians.
4. 20, 21.
acknowledgment of the Truth which is after Godliness; The Learning of Christ,
and of the Truth as it is in Jesus. As light and heat, luster, motion, and
influence, are united in the Sun, the one working with and by the other; so
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are joined with fullness of Grace and
Holiness, in the Sun of Righteousness, whose Wings have healing in them. The
Doctrine of Religion is like the Ezekiel. 1. 8, 13, 16, 18.
Prophets Vision of Cherubims, where he saw Wheels full of Eyes; the one for
Vision, the other for Motion; and Hands under Wings; these to soar in
contemplation, those to be employed in Action; and Lamps, and Burning Coals of
Fire; the one for light, the other for heat. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 19. c. 25. De
Nupt. and Concupisc. l. 1. c. 3. Contr. 2. ep. Pelag. l. 3. cap. 5. Contr.
Julian. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 3.
As an Heathens and Heretics Moral actions do not benefit him without Faith in
Christ; so a Christians Aug. Tom. 4. lib. de Fide and oper. cap. 14. ad
Simplician. quaest. 2.
speculative knowledge, and mere Doctrinal Faith will not save him without good
works, and the fruits of new obedience. Aug. de Trin. l. 15. c. 18. Qualis est
illa confessio quae sic Deo credit, ut pro nihilo ejus ducat imperium? aut
quomodo ex animo ac vere dicimus, Domine, Domine, si ejus quem Dominum
confitemur, praecepta contemnimus? -- Inter Christianum and Gentilem non fides
tantum debet, fed etiam vita distinguere, Hier. Epist. ad Gelantiam de ratione
Pie vivendi.
Fides esse sine charitate potest, prodesse non potest Though therefore we dare
not ascribe unto good works, any meritorious dignity, or proper causality,
whereby they procure or produce Salvation for us, yet such a Heb. 12. 14. and
10. 36. Vide Davenant. de Justitia Actuali, cap. 30. 31.
necessity of them we ever acknowledge, as that without walking in the way of
holiness, we shall not arrive at the Kingdom of Glory; without doing the will
of God, we can never expect to receive the promises. And as it is a dangerous
temptation of Satan on the one hand, to persuade men to deifie their own good
works, by putting confidence in them; so it is no less dangerous on the other
hand by mere notional, aerie and Platonical speculations to eat out all care of
good works, and those moral duties of Piety, Temperance, righteousness, and
Charity, in which the life and proper virtue Gal. 5. 6. 1 These. 1. ^3. 1 Timothy
1. 5. Tit. 3. 8.
of true saving faith does exert it self.

These considerations moved me, when I was invited to Preach before you at that
solemn time when many proper objects of good works use to be presented to your
eyes, to single out that argument to treat upon. And that so much the rather,
because we live in times wherein there is a concurrence of many of those
symptoms and distempers, upon which our Savior has concluded, That the love
of Matthew. 24. 6, 12.
many should wax cold: Wars, and rumors of wars, Nation against Nation, Kingdom
against Kingdom; many offended, many hating one another, many false Teachers,
many seduced people, and, above all, an abundance of iniquity. And indeed, it
may be justly feared, that where there are so many divisions, prejudices,
animosities, differences both of judgment and interest, to say nothing of the
luxury, delicacy, vanity and excess in private expenses, there cannot but
consequently be a very great obstruction in the current of good works.

My hearty desire and prayer is, That as this Sermon received favorable
audience from you, and is now by your own direction exposed to a more general
view, so some signal blessing may follow the publication thereof, that thereby
the hearts of many rich men may be enlarged to honor the Lord with their
substance, and to let their Merchandise, and their Prove. 3. 9.
Treasures have inscribed upon them, Holiness to the Lord. Isai. 23. 18.


Your Honors most humble Servant in Christ, EDWARD REYNOLDS.

THE Rich Man's Charge.
1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this World, that they be
not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy;

That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate;

Laying up in store for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal life.


THe Wiseman tells us, that a word fitly spoken, is like Apples of Gold in
Pictures of Silver, Prove. 25. 11. And our Lord in the Prophet tells us, that
he had the Tongue of the Learned, to speak a word in season, Isai. 50. 4. Paul
at Athens disproved the superstition of that Learned City, out of the
inscription of their own Altar, and the testimony of their own Poet, Acts 17.
23, 28. And before Cuncta malefacta sibi impune ratus, Tacit. Annal. 1. 12.

Per omnem saevitiam and libidinem jus Regium servili ingenio exercuit. Hist.
lib. 5.

Sueton in Claudio, cap. 28.


Felix, a corrupt and intemperate Judge, he Preached of Righteousness and
Temperance, Acts 24. 25. In solemn and public meetings, the most needful
Doctrines to be pressed, are those which are most suitable to the Auditory.
When Timothy is to Preach before rich men, the Apostle here furnishes him with
the materials of his Sermon, to warn them against the sins incident to that
condition, and of the duties incumbent upon it; and because hard duties are
both to be urged with cogent Arguments, and sweetened with special Comforts,
here are Motives of both kinds used, that by the necessity and the utility,
they may be persuaded unto the duty; so that my Text is a very fit present for
an Assembly of Rich Citizens, a present of Gold and Silver, Apples of Gold in
Tables of Silver, a present of Treasures, Stable and abiding Treasures, a good
foundation, an eternal life, and all to be had not (...), in this present now,
but (...), in that living God, who is yesterday and to day the same, and for
ever, and who never fails or forsakes those that trust in him.

The Apostle having before showed the great mischief of covetousness, that
godly contentment is true gain; that resolutions to be rich, do cast men upon
desperate and frequent temptations; that worldly love is a seminary of
unbelief, apostasy, and all mischief; and having warned. Timothy in his own
conversation, to avoid such dangerous Lusts, does further direct him in his
Ministerial Function, to lay the same charge upon worldly Rich men, in the
words which I have read unto you.

Wherein we have, First, Timothies Duty, (...), To charge. Secondly, The
subject of that charge, Rich Men. Thirdly, The limitation of that subject,
(...), Rich men in this World. Fourthly, The particulars and materials of the
charge, set down Negatively and Affirmatively, and both twofold.

The Negative, Not to be High-minded, not to Trust or Hope in Riches; with a
Reason which reaches unto both, because of the uncertainty of them.

The Affirmative, 1. To trust in God, with a double Reason of that; His life,
he is the living God: His bounty, he gives, gives richly, gives all things, and
with the things gives an heart to enjoy them.

2. To imitate God in this Divine Work of Bounty and Liberality, expressed

First, By the matter of it (...), To do good.

Secondly, By the manner of doing it, viz. 1. To do it copiously, to be rich in
good works, (...). 2. To do it cheerfully, readily, easily, with an aptitude
and propension thereunto, (...). 3. To do it diffusively, extensively unto
Community, or to do it modestly, humanely, lovingly, gently, without morosity
or exprobration; to be (...) as Lucians expression is, That others may be
partakers of our good things with us.

And this Duty is pressed by a very elegant reason, in a way of (...), and as a
prolepsis or prevention of what might be objected. If I be so diffusive and
communicative to others, I shall leave nothing for my self, or those of mine
own household; this the Apostle preventeth, telling us,

First, That thus to lay out, is to lay up, and that as in a treasure, (...).
It is like scattering of Seed, in order to an increase and harvest. Prove. 11.
24.


Secondly, That thus to lay out upon others, is to lay up for themselves, (...).

Thirdly, That hereby the uncertainty and instability of Riches, is corrected
and fixed, (...) turned into (...).

Fourthly, Whereas worldly riches are only (...), for the present time, they
will not descend after a man when he dies; being put into Psalm. 49. 17.
good works, they are (...) returnable into another Country, a Man's works
Revel. 14. 13. Eccles. 11. 1.
will follow him, he shall find them again after many days. And whereas they
being of a muddy and. slimy original, are slippery and cannot be held; either
we shall go from them, or they from us, they have Wings, and will fly away;
that which Prove. 23. 5.
is thus laid up, by them may be held, (...) that they may lay hold.

Fifthly, Whereas a Man's riches cannot lengthen his life one night beyond the
period Luke 12. 20.
which God has fixed. Being thus laid out, and laid up, to comfort the lives
of others, they are graciously by God rewarded with eternal life. An house thus
founded, shall continue for ever.

1. Timothies duty, Charge those that are rich. He does not say, flatter them,
nor please them, nor humor them, nor fawn upon them, or crouch to them; nay, he
does not say what sometimes he uses to do himself, Beseech them, entreat them,
persuade them; but he gives Timothy the same power toward them, as he used
toward him. Verse. 13. (...). As 1 Timothy 4. 11. (...), These things command and
teach. It is true, The Ministers of Christ, are the servants of his Church. The
Levites and Priests were so, They served the Lord, and his people Israel, 2 Chronicles. 35. 3. The Apostles themselves were so, Our selves your servants for
Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4. 5. Yea, the Lord of all, whom the Angels worship, took
upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 7. Came not to be ministered Servili
pretio venditus, Matthew. 26 15. Exodus 21. 32. Zach. 11. 12, 13.

Cod. lib. 7. Tit. 7. Vide Casaub. exercit. in Baron. Anno. 34. numb. 15.
Servili supplicio affectus, Lips. de Cruce, lib. 1. c. 12.


unto, but to minister, Matthew. 20. 28. And he who was the Apostle, the High
Priest, (...), the great, the chief Shepherd, is pleased to be called by one of
the lowest appellations (...), a Deacon, a Minister of the Circumcision, Romans
13. 8.

Servants then we are, and accordingly must in humility, in meekness, in
condescension, stoop to men of the lowest degree; the very Angels of Heaven do
so, they are (...), Ministering spirits, Heb. 1. 14.

But you must consider we are Servants to your Sculs, not to your Wills, much
less to your Lusts: So Servants to you, as that we must give account of our
service to a greater Lord, who gives us Authority and Power, as well as
Ministry and Service, Tit. 2. 15. And therefore in the delivery of his
Message, we may not so be the Servants of Men, as to captivate the truth of
God, and make his Spirit bend and comply with their Lusts, I Cor. 7. 23. Gal.
1. 10.

There is a Majesty and Power in the Word of Christ, when set on with his
Spirit, who spoke (...), as one having Authority, Matthew. 7. 29. and regarded
not the persons of men; which no power, wealth, or greatness, can be a
fortification against. It is as a Two-edged sword, Heb. 4. 12. Psalm. 45. 5.
Isai 49. 2. Psalm. 29. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. 1 King. 21. 27. Acts 24. 25. Mark
6. 20. Isai. 53. 1.
sharp in the hearts of Christ's enemies, able to break Rocks, to tear Cedars,
to pull down strong holds, to smite the heart, to stop the mouth, to humble an
Ahab, to shake a Felix, to aw an Herod: It is the arm of the Lord, which can
sling a stone into the Conscience of the stoutest sinner, and make it sink like
Goliath to the ground: It can so shake a man with conviction of guilt and
prepossession of wrath, that he shall go in Sackcloth and Ashes, weeping and
mourning, roaring and rending of himself, till his Soul draw nigh to the grave,
and his life to the destroyers.

And there is an Authority in the Office, which 2. Cor. 5. 20. Acts 2. 29. and
4. 13. Ephesians. 6. 19. Tit. 2. 15.
dispenceth this power of God; being the Ambassadors of Christ, there is a
(...), a liberty and boldness belonging to our charge; so that albeit we must
manage the same decently and prudently with due respect to men's stations and
degrees, showing all meekness to all men; yet we must do it, first, Impartially
without respect of persons; secondly, Zealously against the daring presumptions
of the greatest sinners. Say to the King and to the Queen, Humble your selves,
Jere. 13. 18. I have made thee a defenced City, and an Iron Pillar, and Brazen
Walls against the whole Land, against the Kings of Judah, against the Princes
thereof, against the Priests thereof, and against the people of the Land, Jere.
1. 18. A Minister of Christ, though Vide Aug. epist, 54.
he must be meek and lowly, gentle, and patient, of a Dovelike Innocence, and
of a winning compliance; yet he must not be a low-spirited man, to fear the
faces or the frowns of men; he must magnify his Office, as Paul did, and dare
to be as Romans 11. 13.
bold for Christ, as the proudest sinners can be against him. The File is as
impartial to Silver and Gold, as it is to Brass and Iron: The Honey though it
be sweet, yet it cleanses; Oil though soft and smooth, yet fetches out the
poison which lies in the stomach. Ministers must be bold to speak the Gospel
(...) with much contention, 1 These. 2. 2. To cause the truth of Christ to enter
into a combat with the lusts of men, to deliver it in the Spirit and Power of
Elias, to sever the precious from the vile: Not to please men, except Luke 1.
17. Jere. 15. 19.
in case when they may be edified and profited (then we may please them, 1 Cor.
10. ult.) not to please them by strengthening their hands in wickedness, but to
please God that tries the heart. They must speak nothing but as the Word 1
These. 2. 4.
and Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. And when they do so, the richest and
greatest amongst men ow as much reverence, fear, trembling, and obedience to
the Word, as the meanest: Nay, many times as a Canon Bullet makes more battery
upon a stately Pile of Building, then upon a Wall of Mud, and a Tempest does
more easily break an Oak or Cedar, then a low Shrub; so the Majesty of the Word
delights to show it self more in taming the pride of an Ahab, or a Pharaoh,
or a Doeg, then of other mean and inferior persons.

Besides, great men stand so much the more in need of plain-dealing from
Ministers, by how much the less they meet with it from other men. Some flatter
them, others fear them, some are bewitched with their favors, and others are
affrighted by their frowns; but the Word of the Lord is not bound, the Spirit
of the Lord is not straightened; his 2 Timothy 2. 9. Mic. 2. 7.
Ministers are or should be full of judgment, power and might, to declare their
transgressions to the heads of the house of Jacob, and to the Princes of the
house of Israel, Mic. 3. 8, 9.

Besides, they are in more danger; the richest Land is more subject to be
overgrown with Weeds and Thistles; great men are apt to be hardened, ensnared,
tempted unto more pride and stubbornness. And as they are under greater danger,
so they are under a greater trust, and are responsible to their Lord for more
Talents; their conversion is of a more general influence and concernment, then
that of mean and private persons; their meekness and professed subjection to
the Gospel of Christ, does give much glory and abundant thanksgivings unto God;
and therefore no where is the charge more seasonable, Charge those that are
rich in this World. They say the crowing of a Cock will cause the trembling of
a Lion: What is a Be to a Bear, or a Mouse to an Elephant? Yet if a Be get
his sting into the Nose of a Bear, or a Mouse creep into the Trunk of an
Elephant; how do so little Creatures upon that advantage, torment the greatest?
Now the richest men have a tender part, into which a sting will enter. The
Conscience is as sensible in a Prince, as in a Beggar; and therefore the one as
well as the other equally exposed to the charge of God. And therefore the
Apostle as he does in humility beseech and exhort, so he does in authority give
commandments by the Lord Jesus unto the Church, 1 These. 4. 1, 2, 11. And four
times in one Chapter, speaks in that language of Authority, 2 These. 3. 4, 6,
10, 12. A Physician sometimes gives a Cordial to a poor man, and a Vomit to a
Prince; tempers his Physic not to the dignity of the person, but to the
quality of the disease: And so must the Ministers of the Gospel. Eadem omnibus
debetur charitas, non eadem omnibus adhibenda medicina; August. de
Catechisandis Rudibus. cap. 15.
aliis blanda est, aliis severa, nulli inimica.

Let us now consider the subject of this charge, Charge those that are rich in
this World. He does Vossii Hist. Pelag. lib. 5. These. 2.
not forbid men to be rich, as if Christian perfection consisted in voluntary
poverty, as some would persuade us. When Christ pronounces a woe unto those
that are rich, he shows us whom he means, Even such as receive all their
consolation in this World, and are wholly forgetful of another, Luke 6. 24.
When he said to the young man, If thou will be perfect, sell that thou have and
give to the poor, Matthew. 19. 21. he speaks not of Evangelical Counsels, or a
State of Perfection and Supererogation beyond the fulfilling of the Law; but he
speaks (...) by way of trial, and to convince him of that worldly love which
obstructed his salvation; of his self-deceit in conceiving he had done all that
the Law required; of his unsoundness and insincerity of heart, which could not
forgo all when Christ required it, to be his Disciple, Luke 14. 26. which could
not suffer the loss of all things, and count all dung for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3. 8. which could not with Abraham, Leave his
Country, and Kindred, and Fathers house, to follow the command of God, Genesis 12.
1, 4. and with Peter and the other Disciples, Leave Nets and Boats, and
Fathers, and all to follow Christ, Matthew. 19. 27. And with Barnabas, Sell all,
and lay down all at his feet, Acts 4. 36, 37. (...), etc. Clem. Alex. Strom. 1.
3. p. 327. E. 328 A. Edit. Heinsianae.

-- Volens arguere Divitem illum Dominus noster quasi non vera dicentem --
Dixit ad eum, Si vis perfectus esse, vade, vende omnia quae possides, and da
pauperibus. Sic enim apparebis dicere verum, si dilexsti aut diligis proximum
tuum sicut teipsum. Orig. Tract. 8. in Matthew. (...). Theoph. Hunc ex lege
insolentem, solicitum de salute remittit ad legem, ut inea ipsa in qua
gloriaretur intelligeret, nihil exinde recti operis fecisse, etc. Hilar. in
Matthew. Can. 19. Vide Otat. Basilii in ditescentes, Tom. 1. p. 403, 407. Puto
quod arrogantius quam verius servasse se mandata responderat, Aug. Ep. 89.
Adolescens dives and superbus -- mentitur dicendo Omina haec servavi. Hieron.
Vide Mede Diatrib. 4. page 142, 143. Davenant, de Justit. Actuali, cap. 44.


And so Clem. Alexandrinus, Origin, Hilary, Austin, and others, understand that
answer of Christ.

He does not then forbid to be rich: Riches are the good gifts of God, Prove.
10. 22. The Lord had in his Church, as well a rich Abraham, Job, David,
Solomon, as a poor Lazarus. Yea, in those times of danger and persecution, the
Spirit of the Lord which blowcth where it lists, did find out a Joseph of
Arimathea, a Sergius Paulus, a Pudens, (who was a man of a Senatorian order, as
Baronius tells us, married unto Claudia, a Lady of this Island, of which
marriage we read in Martials Epigrams.) Yea, we read of Saints in the Martial.
lib. 4. ep. 13.
Family of Narcissus, who was that vast rich man, worth Ten Millions of pounds
in the days of Claudius the Emperor; for of him do Calvin, P. Martyr, Paraeus,
Grotius, and other Learned men understand that place, Romans 16. 11. though
Baron. An. 58. Sect. 56.
Baronius think that he was dead when that Epistle was written. We find
mention likewise of Saints that were of Caesar's Household, Phil. 4. 22. If any
place in the World were like Hell, certainly Nero's Court was the place, yet
even there we meet with some that belonged unto Heaven. Rich then he forbids
them not to be.

Neither does he forbid the use of such lawful means, by which, through Gods
blessing thereupon they may be rich. We must maintain honest trades for
necessary uses, Tit. 3. 14. We must be industrious in them, that we have lack
of nothing, 1 These. 4. 11, 12. It is true, in every estate, as well of want as
plenty, we must be content, Phil. 4. 11. (for there is a rich discontent as
well as a poor) We may not will, resolve, conclude upon it, that whatever come
of it, by any means by which it may be effected, we will be rich, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
We may say so of grace and glory, whatever pains or danger it cost me, I will
venture all for grace; but not so for riches; they are not absolutely and per
se good; and therefore not simply to be desired. We may not seek great things
to our selves; they who have most need of them, may not greatly multiply them
to themselves, Deuteronomy. 17. 17. Cyrus Xenophon. Cyropaed. 1. 8. Vide Greg. Tholof.
de Rep. 1. 3. c. 9.
esteemed himself more rich in the hearts and love of his people, then in his
Exchequer, as he told Croesus. We may be more rich in a narrow estate, with
Gods Blessing, then many wicked men are in the midst of their abundance, Psa.
37. 16. As a man may be rich in bonds, who has but little money in hand; so
may a good man be rich in promises, who is but narrow in possessions. He
forbids Treasures of unrighteousness, Micah 6. 10. Hab. 2. 6, 9. Jere. 22. 13.
He forbids misplacing of Treasures, making our hearts the repositories of them,
Psalm. 62. 12. But when God is pleased without the concurrence of our sinful
actions and affections to give in abundance, we may with a good Conscience
enjoy it, so long as it does not draw away our delight from God, but enlarge
our hearts to honor him therewith, and humble them the more to listen to his
charge, and to be inquisi^ive after his counsel.

I shall not stand to inquire what measure of wealth it is which makes a man a
rich man: We read of the vast riches of Croesus, Pallas, Narcissus, Lentulus,
Seneca, Vide Budaeum de Ass. 1. 2. fol. 50. lib. 3. fol. 83. 1. 4. fol. 98,
99, 100. Lipsi. de Magnitud. Romans 1. 2. c. 15. Brierwood de Nummis, cap. 19.
Athenaeus, l. 12.
and others, and of the monstrous and portentous expenses almost beyond
Arithmetical computation in the Luxury of Games, Feasts, Apparel and Buildings
amongst the Romans, and others. Cleopatra dissolved and drank in one draught of
Wine, a Pearl of above Seventy eight thousand pounds in value. The Ornaments of
Lollia Pautina amounted to above Three hundred thousand pounds; and P. Clodius
dwelt in an house which cost him above One hundred and fourteen thousand
pounds. There is no standing quantity which makes the denomination of a rich
man. In the Apostles account, he certainly is a rich man who has plenty
sufficient for his calling, his occasions, his train, family, posterity, for
necessary, decent, and liberal expenses: In one word, Whose estate is amply
proportionable both to his condition and to his mind; for copiosum viaticum
(...), and penury does not consist (...), but (...), not in narrowness of
wealth, but in vastness of desire. So that which is suitable to a man's mind,
and to his train or estate, makes him a rich man.

But yet still all this wealth is but (...), it inricheth a man but between
this and his grave. His glory will not descend after him; in all points Psalm.
49. 17. Eccles. 5. 16. Job 1. 21. 1 Timothy 6. 7. Eccles. 1. 4. Job 7. 10. (...).
Ninus apud Athenaeum, lib. 12. cap. 7.
as he came into the World, so he must go out, naked in and naked out; he
brought nothing in, he can carry nothing out; he passes, but the Earth abides,
and his house will know him no more. And this shows the baseness of worldly
wealth, First, That it is communicable to the men of this World, who have their
portion only here; their Bellies may Psalm. 17. 14. and 73. 7. Job 21. 13. Isai
5. 8. Hab. 2. 5, 6. Eccles. 9. 1.
be filled with these Treasures; they may have more then heart could wish, they
may be mighty in power, and spend their days in wealth, they may join house to
house, and lay field to field: No man can know love or hatred by these things;
a Nabal, and a Doeg may have them as well as an Abraham, or a David. Jacobs
Ladder which conveyeth to Heaven, may have its foot in a smoking Cottage, and
there may be a Trap-door in a stately Palace which may let down to Hell.
Secondly, That it is of but a very narrow use, like a Candle, needful in the
night, but absurd in the day; like Brass Tokens, fit to buy some small trifles
with, but not to purchase an Inheritance. All the difference which riches make
amongst men, are but (...), in this little isthmus of Mortality. As in casting
accounts, one Counter stands for a thousand pounds, another for a penny; as in
setting Letters, the same Letter may one while be put into the name of a
Prince, and the next time into the name of a Beggar; but when the Counters are
put into the Bag, and the Letters into their Boxes, they are there all alike;
no difference between the dust of Dives and Lazarus. Come to Ahab and Jezabel
when the Dogs have done with them, and their Vineyard and their Paint is
vanished unto all eternity. A living Dog is better then a dead Lion, a dead
Lion no Eccles. 9. 4.
better then a dead Dog.

Our wisdom therefore it is to labor for that which Solomon calls Durable
Riches; which is current in another World, which will follow a man when he
dies; his wealth will not, his works will, Revel. 14. 13. To make the fear of
the Lord our Treasure, Isai. 33. 6. To be rich toward God, Luke 12. 21. To lay
up treasure in Heaven, Luke 18. 22. To buy of Christ Gold tried in the fire,
that we may be rich, Revel. 3. 18. As Abraham sent Jewels of Silver and Gold
and Rayments unto Rebecca, the Wife of Isaac, the Son of Promise, Genesis 24. 53.
So does the Lord give rich and precious Ornaments unto the Church his Spouse,
Ezekiel. 16. 10, 13. The graces of the Spirit are compared unto Chains and Borders
of Gold, and Studs of Silver, Cant. 1. 10, 11. These riches are returnable into
Heaven; to be rich in faith, in knowledge, in wisdom, will stand us in stead,
when the World has left us. Things which come from Heaven to us, while we are
on the Earth, will go to Heaven with us, when we leave the Earth. Graces are
like the Wagons which Joseph sent to carry Jacob his Father, Genesis 45. 21. They
are the Vehicula, like Eliah's Chariot of Fire, to transport the Souls of
Believers unto Christ. Men naturally desire durable things, strong Houses,
clear Titles, lasting Garments, Jewels, and precious Stones that will go every
where. No riches are indeed durable, but those that are heavenly; no Rust, no
Moth, no Theif can reach them: What the Philosopher affirms of Heavenly
Bodies, is certainly true of Heavenly Graces, they are Incorruptible.

There is a strange contradiction between men's Professions and their Practice.
Ask a man which in his conscience he thinks the best, Riches or Grace, and he
will answer very truly, There is no comparison, no more then berween God and
Mammon: Riches not to be named the same day with Grace. But observe it, and you
will find no man sit still, and drowsily look when riches will drop into his
mouth; but he rises early, and goes late to bed, his worldly heart shakes and
awakeneth him, Surge, inquit Avaritia, ejah surge, negas? Instat, surge inquit,
non queo, surge. He sweats, he toils, he spends his time, his studies, he
ventures far and near, Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes.

But for durable riches of Grace and Glory, which our Savior says, Must be
labored for; which Solomon John 6. 27.
tells us, Must be searched and dug for as for hidden treasures, Prove. 2. 4.
How few are there who evidence the truth of their profession by the measure of
their diligence? who are not far more supine in their pursuance of holiness
then of wealth? Surely even in this sense is that of Saint James true, Your
Silver and your Gold shall rise up in judgment Jam. 5. 3.
against you, and plead as Cyprian tells us, Satan will plead against wicked
men by way of exprobation, I never died for them, I never made promises of
eternal life unto them: So will your money say, I was never able to cleanse
their Consciences, to remove their guilt or fears, to pacify their hearts, to
secure their salvations, to present them without spot or wrinkle to God; yet me
they woed, and worshipped, and hunted after, and left Grace and Mercy,
Righteousness and Peace, Christ and Salvation, unsaluted, undesired. O learn we
to build our House upon a Rock, to get a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, to have
a City which has Foundations; Crowns may fall, Thrones Jere. 13. 18. Dan. 2.
21. and 7. 9. Isai 2. 13, 16. Zech. 11. 2. Isai. 45. 3. Obad v. 6. Psalm. 112.
6, 7. Prove. 18. 10.
may miscarry: Such may the storms be, as may subvert the Cedars of Lebanon,
and the Oaks of Bashan, as may overturn Towers and Palaces. Treasures of
darkness, hidden riches of secret places may be searched out and taken away;
but the righteous shall not be moved, he shall not be afraid of evil tidings.
The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, in the which he shall be kept in
perfect peace, because in the Lord Jehovah is Everlasting Isai. 26. 3, 4.
strength.

Let us now proceed to the matter of the Charge, which is first Negative, and
that double. First, That they be not high minded. This notes that there is a
secret malignity which riches meeting with corruption, have in them, to lift up
men's minds above their due Region. Tyrus deified her self, because of her
wealth. Thine heart is lifted up, because of thy riches; and thou have set
thine heart as the heart of God, Ezekiel. 28. 5, 6. According to their pastures so
were they filled, they were filled and their heart was exalted; therefore have
they forgotten me, Hos. 13. 5, 6. Whence that Caution which Moses gives unto
Israel, Beware, least when thou have eaten and art full, and have built goodly
houses, and dwelt therein: And when thine Herds and thy Flocks multiply, and
thy Silver and thy Gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is multiplied;
then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, etc. Deuteronomy. 8.
12, 13, 14. Men are like Larks, very silent and modest when they are low and on
the ground; but in a warm and glorious Sunshine they soar up, and are very
clamorous. And though they be never a dram the holier, the nearer to Heaven,
the safer from Hell by all their wealth; yet they think highly of themselves,
walk with more state, look with more disdain, breathe more skorn, keep more
distance, that you would not think such an one a richer only, but another man.
Put money into a Bag, and the Bag remains Leather or Canvas still; but if it
once get into the heart of a man, he is presently changed, his thoughts of
himself greater, and of others meaner then they were before.

This the Apostle says should not be so, for after all this, It is but man
still, Eccles. 6. 10. and the Word is as much above him, as before. A Hill is
proud and overtops the Valley; but in comparison of the Sun, they are equally
distant, and that happily scorcheth the one when it reviveth the other; as the
same Word it may be, comfort a poor Believer, and scourges a rich Sinner. A
rich man then should not be highminded: For

1. Riches are not noble enough to raise the Mind, or to put any solid value
upon a man more then he had before. Righteousness indeed, Prove. 14. 34.
because it comes from Heaven, can exalt and lift up thitherward: But things of
a mere Earthly extraction, do rather depress then heighten the Soul, they bear
no proportion unto it. The Heart is as improper a place for riches, as a man's
Purse or Barn is for Grace. The Mind is the seat of wisdom, of knowledge, of
divine impressions; whereas Earthly things can per se, and in their own nature
operate only unto earthly effects. They may indeed be used by sensual lusts,
as the Foams and Instruments of Pride and Luxury, and by special wisdom, as the
vehicula of Charity and Mercy; but of themselves they add nothing of real
value to a man. A poor man may be richer by one promise of the Gospel, by
laying up but one line of the Scripture in his heart, then a Doeg or a Nabal,
by the Cattle on a thousand Mountains.

2. Rich men are at best but Stewards; For the Earth is the Lords, we are but
Tenants, Depositaries, Treasurers unto him. Now a Steward or Princes Treasurer
is the self same man, no change of State, no ebb or flux of greatness, when he
has the custody of Thousands or of Tens: And surely God gives us our riches to
honor him, and not our selves withal.

3. Rich men walk amongst more snares and temptations; for riches are the
materials which provoke, excite, foment lust, call forth sinful pleasures,
worldly love, self-confidence, contempt of the Word, endanger our Apostasy in
times of persecution, and our security in times of peace. And this is certain,
That a full Estate, is like a full Diet; as this requires more strength of
nature, so that more wisdom and grace to order and to digest it. Therefore a
rich man ought to look downward the oftener, to take care of his feet, and the
higher the wind is to hoise up the fewer Sails, because there are Rocks and
Shelves round about him.

4. In making men rich, and setting them in great places, God has exalted them
enough already, and they ought the rather to be more low in their own eyes. The
highest boughs in a Tree are the slenderest, the more nature has raised them,
the smaller they are in themselves, and by that means the less endangered by
the tempests which they so easily yield unto. And so it should be with us, the
more we are exalted by God, the less we should be in our own esteem; and the
less we are in our own esteem, the safer we shall be against any temptations.
Humility is not only an ornament, but a protection. We see the fruit grows
upon the twigs and smaller branches of a Tree, not upon a Stock: Humility makes
way to fruitfulness, and fruitfulness back again to humility. The more weighty
the Ears of Corn, the more they hang downward toward the ground. The richer
things are, the more humble they are. Ambition was the sin of the Bramble; the
Vine, Olive, Fig Tree, were contented with their former dignity. Clouds, the
fuller they are, are the more heavy; the Earth is the richest, and yet the
lowest Element. Christ had in him the Treasures of Wisdom and Grace, and yet in
nothing more proposed himself unto us as an example, then in meekness and
humility, Matthew. 11. 29. John 13. 13, 14. Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7. And what comparison
is there between Christ the Heir of all things, and the richest man on Earth.
When the Lord of glory, who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, humbled
and emptied himself, and made himself of no reputation; What is there in sinful
dust and ashes, that he should be proud? We see in the Body one member has
more magnitude, nutriment, dignity, employment then another; but none has more
humility then another. The Head will be as ready to study for the Hand, as the
Hand to work for the Head; the Tongue as forward to speak for the Foot, as the
Foot to move for the Tongue. And all Christians profess to be Members of the
same Body, and therefore none should be proud or disdainful toward another.

5. Why should a man's work and service make him proud? Commonly pride and
idleness go the other, Ezekiel. 16. 49. Now the more riches God gives a man, the more
work he sets him about. If we see a man's shop full of Wares, of Instruments, of
Servants, Commodities continually imported, we conclude such a man is full of
business: When the Lord does multiply men's estates, he does multiply their
employments. And we see Tradesmen, though upon Festival times they will put on
rich Apparel; yet upon working days they go in a more plain and careless
fashion. Now of all other work, a Christians work will not let him be proud.

Lastly, Why should I for a little difference in this one particular of worldly
wealth, despise or disdainfully over look my poor Brother? Does a Lawyer
despise a Physician, because he has not read the Code or the Pan^ect? Does a
Physician despise a Lawyer, because he has not read Galen or Hippocrates? Does
the Eye despise the Ear, because it cannot see; or the Tongue the Hand, because
it cannot speak? Have we not all one Lord, one Faith, one Hope, one Spirit, one
Gospel, one Common Salvation? When so many and great things unite us, shall our
wealth only disunite us? One Sun shines on both, one Air refreshes both; one
Blood bought both, one Heaven shall receive both: Only he has not so much of
the Earth as I, and possibly much more of Christ. And why should I disdain him
on Earth, whom happily the Lord will advance above me in Heaven? Why should I
brow-beat, and proudly overlook him, whom Christ has adorned with his grace,
and honored with his presence?

We see a rich man has no reason to be highminded; but he that is so, will not
stop there. He that makes an idol of his riches, will worship and trust in it,
when he has done; and therefore Timothy must give rich men a second charge.

That they trust not in uncertain Riches] By which, first, he gives us a plain
intimation, That rich men are naturally apt and prone to trust in their riches;
as it is said of Doeg, that he did not make God his strength, but trusted in
the multitude of his riches, Psalm. 52. 7. And Solomon tells us, That the rich
man's wealth is his strong Tower, and an high Wall in his own conceit, Prove. 18.
11. As Thrasylaus by a melancholy fancy judged all the Athenaens, l. 12. c.
ult.
ships in the Harbor at Athens to be his; so a rich man judges all the safety
and security, that the World can afford to be his own, because he has that
unum magnum which will help in the sorest extremities. Every man is conscious
to himself, both of his wants and of his dangers; what good he is defective in,
what evil he is exposed to: And therefore does what he can for assistance to
procure the good he wants, and to repel the evil he fears; and of all
assistances, he looks upon this as the surest, because money answers unto
all. The Fool in the Gospel promised himself, Ease, long life, many years, to
eat, to drink, to be merry, and all in the confidence of his riches, Luke 12.
19. How many men trust their wealth to uphold their wickedness, and lean upon
them while they fall from God? How many take a liberty of violence, rapine,
cruelty, oppression, luxury, profaneness, because they think their wealth will
be an advocate and a varnish unto all? How many, if Christ and Mammon should
come into competition, would say as Amaziah did, What shall I do for the
hundred Talents? Arduares haec est opibus non tradere mores. So hard a thing is
it not to give up our souls into captivity to our wealth. But

Secondly, This ought not to be neither. For first, The object must be
commensurate and suitable to the affection, or else it is altogether unnatural
and improper: But there is no suteableness between hope and riches: For hope
and trust is ever de futuro possibili, whereas riches are only present, Aquin
1a. 2ae. qu. 40. art. 1.
(...). No man can know the vicissitudes of worldly things, What a day may
bring forth: Bellisarius a great Commander one day, and a poor Beggar another.
There must be permanency, stability and fixedness in that which a man casts his
Anchor upon, but riches take to them wings and fly away.

Secondly, The true Object of hope and trust, is Bonum arduum. I trust in that
which can help me in such arduous and grand matters, wherein I cannot help my
self, in that which is adequate to all mine extremities; which has more good
in it, then any of mine evils can embitter, and more strength in it then the
weight of any of my extremities can over-bear. But now riches are not at all
suitable to a man's greatest extremities: When my Lungs are wasted, my Liver
dried up, Stones in my Kidneys too big for the passages: If all the Stones in
mine house were Diamonds, and I would give them all for the removal of these
distempers, it could not be done. When Death comes, what Crowns or Empires can
ransom out of the hands of the King of Terror? When my Conscience stings me,
and the Arrows of God stick fast in me, and I am summoned to his Tribunal Vide
Gatak. Cinnum. lib. 1. c. 8.
to be there doomed: In such cases, Neither treasures, nor multitude of riches
can deliver in the day of wrath, Prove. 10. 2. 11. 4. Riches are but like the
leaves of a Tree, beautiful for a season; but when Winter and storms arise,
they fall off and are blown away.

3. The Apostles reason in the Text, They are (...). Eurip. Electra.
uncertain riches.

Uncertain, 1. In their abode, subject to a Moth, a Rust, a Theif. Some things
precious, but so thin, that a Moth can eat them up. If more massy and solid,
as Gold and Silver, Rust and Canker, some slow and lingering lust, can
insensibly eat them out; but both the one and the other subject to a Theif, to
some outward accident and miscarriage, which may spoil us of them.

2. In their Promises and Pretenses; the fool promised himself long life, but
was answered with an hac nocte. Many men's riches are like Isreal's Quails,
promise meat, but bring a curse; like Ezekiels Book, Chap. 2. 10. 3. 3. Tastes
like Honey, but is written with woes. Like John's Role, Sweet Josh. 7. 21. 2
Kings 5. 23. 1 King 21. 15. Jere. 22. 14.
in the Mouth, but bitter in the Belly; like Belshazzers Feast, Wine on the
Table, and an Handwriting on the Wall. Achans Wedg of Gold, Gehazies Talents,
Ahabs Vineyard, Jehoiakims wide House, and large Chambers, were all but like
the Queens Feast unto Haman, as poisoned dainties, sweet to the taste, but
attended with Death. Beds of Ivory, Lambs of the Flock, Calves of the Stall,
Instruments of Music, Wine in Bowls, Precious Ointments, all Comical
Harbingers of a Tragical Catastrophe, They shall go captive with the first that
go captive, Amos 6. 4, 7. Little reason to put trust in such false and
uncertain things, which do not only lie and disappoint, but like a broken reed
run into the arm of those that lean upon them, Kept to the hurt of the owners
of them, as the Wise man speaks, Eccles. 5. 13.

But great reason for rich and poor to trust in God, who is a Good able to
replenish the Soul, to help it in greatest extremities, true and faithful in
all his promises; and truth is the ground of trust. No attribute of God, which
the Soul may not rest upon. His eternity, he will never fail me, in him there
is everlasting strength: His immensity, I have him ever with me: His
omniscience, I want nothing but he knows it: His omnipotence, I suffer nothing
but he can rebuke it: His wisdom, he can order every condition to my Good. If I
do my duty in the use of means, I may comfortably venture on his blessing for
an happy issue. He is a living God, he ever abides; is a Fountain of Life Psalm.
35. 9.
to his poor servants; all that is desirable is comprised in this one word
Life: What ever we delight in as good, is in order to the support, or to the
comfort of life. Now riches can neither give life, nor preserve it, nor restore
it: A man's life stands not in his abundance, then there would be no poor man
alive. It is not our Bread, but Gods Word of Blessing which feeds us, and that
Blessing Luke 12. 15. Match. 4. 4. Dan. 1. 15. Psalm. 78. 27, 31.
he can give to Pulse, and withdraw from Quails. Riches perish, but God lives;
Riches sometimes make us to perish, but God makes us live. A theif can take
away my Gold, but who can take away my God? what has a rich man if he have not
God? and what wants a poor man, if he have God? An Acre of Land, and a
Shepherds Cottage in the South, with the warmth and benignity of the Sun, is
better then Twenty thousand Acres, and a stately Palace under the North Pole.
Better be in a Wilderness with God, then in a Canaan without him. If thy
presence go not with us said Moses, carry us not up hence, Exodus 33. 15.

He is a Bountiful God; he is Good, and he does good; he is Life, and he gives
life, to him alone it belongs to supply all necessaries, all comforts of life
unto us; we place riches in his throne, we transfer his work and office upon
them, when we make them the objects of our trust.

He gives, so do not riches; they buy, they do not give. I must part with so
much of them, as I will proportionably have of other things: But when I have
God, I need not exchange him away for other things; he brings them eminently in
himself, he gives them bountifully with himself. The Earth is his, the Silver
and the Gold his, the power, the strength, the wisdom, whereby we get Psalm.
115. 16. Hag. 2. 8. Deuteronomy. 8. 16. Prove. 10. 22. Eccles. 9. 11. 1 Cor. 4. 7. 1
Chro. 29. 14.
riches, his; the blessing upon that strength and wisdom, his; we are not the
getters, but he is the giver of them. And if we boast of them, and trust in
them; he that gives, can take them away; they that receive, must not glory as
if they had not received. And if he give first, he may well charge us to give
too, since he requires of us but his own.

He gives All things: All the wealth in the World could not buy a mouthful of
Air, or a drop of Light, if God subduct it. Rich men give nothing for Sun, and
Moon, and Stars, and breath, and health, and strength: God is the free Giver of
all. The Earth he gives to the children of men. All things that pertain to life
and godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3. (two things which all the riches in the World
cannot reach.) All things in the promises, All are yours, 1 Cor. 3. 23. I have
all, I abound, I am full, Phil. 4. 18. as having nothing, and yet possessing
all things, 2 Cor. 6. 10. All things in measure, in proportion to our capacity,
to our ability, to our exigences, to our occasions. All things necessary, all
things suitable; withholds no good thing, nothing but that which would be a
snare and a temptation unto us; we are not straightned in him, but in the
Bowels of one another; our covetousness may defraud our Brethren, Gods bounty
does not.

All things richly: There is not the poorest man living who is able to number
up all the mercies which he does enjoy. The light which he sees is mercy; the
air he breathes, mercy; the ground he walk on, mercy; the bread he eats, the
water he drinks, the rags he wears, mercy; the bowels of those that pity him,
mercy; the bounty of those that relieve him, mercy; if dogs lick his sores,
mercy; if a potsherd to scrape him, mercy; rotten rags to Jeremy in a Dungeon,
mercy; a basket to Paul in a Garrison, mercy: But for the poor in this World to
be rich in Faith, heirs of a Kingdom, to have the same common christ the same
Hope, and Spirit, and Salvation; for a poor Lazarus to have the bosom of a
rich Abraham to rest in at the last: How can the poorest Saint in the World,
deny unto God the praise of being rich in mercy? It is not barely want, but
ignorance of our deservings, ignorance of our enjoyments, unthankfulness to
God, envy against others, our murmuring, discontent, idleness, imprudence,
improvidence which makes men poor: Were their hearts and mouths more enlarged
toward God in praises, other men's bowels would be more enlarged to them in
bounty and releif.

Lastly, He gives all things richly to enjoy; and that is more then all the
world can do. If it give the possession, it cannot give the fruition, it cannot
give an healthy body, it cannot give a cheerful and contented mind, it cannot
free a man from disquieting thoughts, from anxious fears, from discruciating
cares, from wearisome labors, from continual solicitude; it cannot give either
a free, or a cheerful, or a pure use of the things which a man has. As it is
God that gives the power to get riches, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. so it is he who gives
knowledge, skill, wisdom, an heart seasoned with his fear, and cheared with his
favor, whereby we may with quiet contentment, and sweet tranquillity, make use
of those blessings which are reached unto us by the hand, and sanctified by the
Word, and sweetened by the sense and comfort of the love of God. It is Gods
blessing alone which makes rich without sorrow, Prove. 10. 22. Which by his
fear, takes away the trouble of great treasures, Prove. 15. 16. Which makes us
enjoy the fruit of our labors, Psalm. 128. 2. Which makes us eat and drink
before him with cheerfulness; eat the fat, and drink the sweet, because the joy
of the Lord is our strength, 1 Chro. 29. 22. Nehe. 8. 10, 11, 12. This is the
frequent Doctrine of Solomon, Eccles. 2. 24, 26. and 3. 13. and 5. 18, 19. and
6. 2. So much for the first Affirmative duty, To trust in God, who alone is the
Fountain of our life, the Author of our comforts.

We proceed now unto the second, which is to imitate God in these his works of
bounty, (...), To do good, to be rich in good works; for God has not given
them to us only to enjoy, but to do good with them too. He has not given them
for the fuel of our pride and luxury; but for the good of our Souls, and the
comfort of our poor Brethren. We have our Waters not only to drink our selves,
but also to disperse abroad, Prove. 5. 15, 16.

Good works are taken either in a more large sense for all such actions of
regenerate men, as they do by the help of the holy Spirit, in conformity to the
Law of God. As he that does good, (...), is said to be of God, 3 John v. 11.
and Governors are said to be for the praise of those that do well, 1 Pet. 2.
14. or else more strictly for works of Bounty, Charity, and Beneficence; as
Tabitha is said to have been full of good works and alms deeds; where the
latter clause is exegetical of the former, Acts 9. 36. As elsewhere, Do good and
lend, hoping for nothing again, Luke 6. 35.

Now it being here restrained to such good works as it is proper for rich men,
as rich men, to exercise; and being after explained by the words (...), and
(...), I shall take it here in the more contracted sense for a Direction
touching the right use of riches, which is, to make them the materials of good
works, that we may be profitable unto men. As God has made us not only for
our selves, but to glorify him, and to serve our generation; so when he
supplieth us with provisions, wherewith we may act toward those public ends,
he requires that his gifts should be used, not only for our own domestical
interests, but for his honor, and the good of others. Rich men have their
wealth as the Sun has light, or the Fire heat, to communicate unto others. And
of all things, riches should be so employed, because their whole use is in
motion. Some things put forth their virtue most when they rest and stand still.
The Earth keeps its place, and yet is fruitful. Motion debilitates the virtue
of some agents, and hinders the fixing of their impressions: But the whole
good that money does, all the efficacy that it has, is while it is in motion,
and passing from hand to hand. It is as insignificant in a Worldlings Chest, as
when it lies in the Bowels of the Earth. We call it current money, to note that
the use of it is while it is in cursu.

The duty then it is of rich men to make their wealth the materials of good
works: Money uses to have an Image and Superscription upon it, Matthew. 22. 20.
And the Prophet has given us an Inscription for ours, Isai. 23. 18. Her
merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord, and so Zech. 14. 20,
21. Hereby we stamp the Image of God upon them. Homo homini Deus, By doing good
a man is as it were a God to his Brother. Be ye merciful, as your Father is
merciful, Luke 6. 36.

The Lord could have enriched all men, but he has said, That we shall have the
poor always with us; that so the rich may have matter to imitate God, and the
poor to praise him; that the poor may have Christ for an example of patience,
and therich for an example of goodness; that the rich man's supplying the poor
man's wants, may be a pledge and an assurance of Gods supplying his wants. For
rich and poor are relations amongst men; but as we stand in relation to God,
every man is poor, and must be always in a begging posture, Luke 18: 1. And as
Christ has taught us to pray, Lord, I forgive others, do thou forgive me; in
like manner, we may pray, Lord, my heart and hand is open to others, let thine
be so to me. 1 that am evil, am enabled by thee to give good things to others,
and thou have given me assurance that thou will much more give good things to
those that ask them.

The matter out of which these good works are to be done, must be

1. Bona propria, (...). Our own things, Luke 11. 41. and 12. 33. 2 Cor. 8. 11.
We must not enable our selves to do good by doing evil first, God hates
robbery for Burntoffering: We must warm the poor with the fleece of our own
sheep, Job 31. 20. Ill gotten goods are matter of restitution, rather then of
distribution.

2. Bona superflua, We are to give out of our over plus and abundance, That
your abundance may be a supply for their want, 2 Cor. 8. 14. (...), that which
remains and is to spare after other necessary uses, as Mark 8. 8. Luke 15. 17.
(though ardent charity will sometimes go beyond its power, Mark 12. 44. 2 Cor.
8. 3.) To know what these remains and overplus are, we must consider what
things are necessary. Things are necessary upon a double ground.

1. Necessaria simpliciter, without which a man cannot maintain himself and his
charge at all.

2. Necessaria ad decentiam status. Necessary to the decency and quality of a
man's condition; that which is abundant for a Tradesman, may be too little for a
Nobleman.

Now in case of extreme necessity of our Brother, we ought to relieve out of
that which is necessary to our own decent condition. He that has two Coats to
give to him that has none, rather then to see him perish, Luke 3. 11. In cases
of ordinary necessity we are to give out of our overplus and abundance,
providing for the decency of our own condition, which is to give as we are
able, Ezra 2. 69. Acts 11. 29.
according to the blessing of God upon honest labors; so much the word (...)
imports, 1 cor 16. 2. which does not hinder our endeavors to lay up and
provide for our Families and Posterity, which the Apostle requires, 1 Timothy 5.
8. 2 Cor. 12. 14.

The Object or Matter Circa quam of our Good works, are

First, The worship of God, and things subservient and conducent thereunto; as
maintaining Poor Scholars in the Nurseries of the Ministry, and Schools of the
Prophets; comforting and encouraging the able and faithful Ministers of the
Gospel: For which, Hezekiah and Nehemiah are by God honored in the Records of
Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. and 31. 4, 11. Nehe. 13. 10, 14. Let him that is
taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good things, Gal.
6. 6. Honor the Lord with thy substance, Prove. 3. 9. They who fow unto you
spiritual things, it is equal that you minister unto them carnal things, 1 Cor.
9. 11. David would not, when he might, offer unto the Lord of that which should
cost him nothing, 2 Samuel 24. 24. Ministers that are faithful; dare not offer
unto you that which costs them nothing: It costs them their time, their
Studies, their strength, their Prayers, possibly their tears and sorrows, to
see their work fall as fast as they set it up (as Chrysostom sometimes
complained) Nay, if you will have a Learned Ministry, it must cost their purses
too; the Utensils of a Minister are chargeable things. And therefore it is a
worthy, honorable, and most beneficial work, to contribute unto public
Libraries for the service of the Ministry in Universities, Cities, and public
places.

Secondly, The necessities of men; and here

1. Kindred, friends, acquaintance, those of our own house, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Acts
10. 24.

2. Those of the household of Faith, who dwell before the Lord, Gal. 6. 10.
Isai. 23. 18. Pour your ointment above all, upon the feet of Christ.

3. Strangers, 1 Timothy 5. 10.

4. Enemies themselves, If thine enemy hunger, feed him, Romans 12. 20, 21.

In one word, All that are in misery and distress amongst them: First, The most
helpless, widows, fatherless, sick, maimed, aged, exiles, captives. Secondly,
The most hopeful, useful, and painful; as pregnant wits for learned education,
or other necessary employments.

For the manner how, the Apostle directs us. First, To do good works richly:
They who are Divites opibus, must be Divites operibus too; their fruit must be
plentiful, as well as their estate. There may be a narrow Heart, a starved
Charity, where there is a large estate, as in Nabal: And there may be a large
and bountiful heart, where there is but a poor and narrow estate, as in the
poor widow, who as our Savior tells us, Cast in more then all others into the
Treasury; more in proportion, quia nemo sibi minus reliqui^; more in affection,
she cast in her bowels, she cast in her prayers with her two Mites, Mark 12.
43. So the Apostle testifies of the Macedonians, That their poverty was deep,
and yet their liberality was rich and abundant, 2 Cor. 8. 2. Though they could
not draw much out of their Purse, yet they drew out their very Soul to their
Brethren, Isai. 58. 10. As the Apostle says, That he imparted his own Soul to
the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2. 1. But you that are rich in estate, may be rich
in good works, as well as in good affections, may be exercised to all
bountifulness, 2 Cor. 9. 11. As there is a decentia status for a man's expenses
on himself; so is there for his bounty to the poor. The Widows two Mites had
been a mock and not an alms, if a rich man had cast them in.

Secondly, To do them readily, (...). To be easy, prompt, prone unto good
works, not out of necessity, importunity, constraint, but willingly. This is a
great mercy, when men are able to offer these Sacrifices willingly, 1 Chronicles.
29. 14. And hereunto are necessary such habits and principles as do facilitate
good works, as

1. Piety to God, a desire to honor him with his own gifts, and to give him
back again of his own, and thereby as to testify our professed subjection to
the Gospel, so to procure abundant thanksgiving unto God, 2 Cor. 9. 11, 12, 13.

2. Love to Christ, whose doctrine hereby we obey, Luke 11. 41. whose example
herein we imitate, John 13. 29. whose members hereby we refresh, and so in his
account do it unto himself, Matthew. 25. 40. and become his creditors. For he
that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, Prove. 19. 17.

3. Love to our Neighbor, which works tender heartedness toward him in his
affliction, and large heartedness for his relief, Prove. 31. 20. God requires
the doing of judgment, which in some cases may be done with sorrow, as in the
punishment of malefactors; but he requires The loving of mercy: We must never
go unwillingly about that, Mic. 6. 8. Our bounty must be in our eye, and so
affect our heart, Prove. 22. 9.

4. Wisdom and skill with prudent consideration to do a good work to the best
advantage. A man is never ready and dextrous in a business, which he is
unskilful in; therefore the Psalmist says, Blessed is he that considers the
poor, Psalm. 41. 1. We read as I take it in Seneca or Plutarch, of one who
knowing the poverty and modesty of his friend, was fain to steal a gift under
his Pillow for him, who otherwise might have refused it.

5. Cheerfulness and speed, to do a good work without grudging or delay. Say
not to thy Brother, Go and come to morrow, Prove. 3. 28. Job did not withhold
the poor from their desire, Job 31. 16. He that shows mercy, must do it with
cheerfulness, Romans 12. 8. For the Lord loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7. In
many cases delays are denials; a duty done in season, is twice done.

Thirdly, To do them diffusively, (...). We are not only to do good, to do it
copiously, to do it readily and cheerfully, but to do it to many, to community;
so to have the property in our selves, as that the comfort may be diffusive,
and redound to many others. And as here (...) and (...) are put together, so
elsewhere, Heb. 13. 16. (...) and (...), doing good and communicating, are put
together, and so it is used, Phil. 4. 15.

The word seems to import, first, To do good so, as that many may be the
better for it, that it may be a common and a public good: Such are the works
of God; his Sun-shines, his Rain falls on good and bad; on the barren Rocks, as
well as the fruitful Valleys. Such public works are building and endowing of
Schools, of Churches, of Lecturers, of Workhouses, of Hospitals, of
Manufactures, furnishing of Libraries, maintaining of public Professors,
Legacies to the poor, repairing Ways and Bridges, Loans to set up poor
Tradesmen, and other the like Benefactions which have a common and public
influence.

Secondly, To do it as in communion, as Members one of another, communion
Natural upon principles of humanity, and communion Spiritual upon principles of
Christianity. To remember them that are in Bonds, as bound with them, and them
which suffer adversity, as being our selves in the body, Heb. 13. 3.

Thirdly, To do it sociably, modestly, humanely, to be not only bountiful, but
to adorn both our wealth, and our good works with suavity of conversation, with
meekness, placideness, and facility of manners, with an amiable and
communicative deportment toward all men. For a Man's very charity may be so
morose and austere, that tender stomachs may nauseate it; as Physic that is
wholesome, but bitter.

Give me leave to press this duty upon you, which the Apostle does by so many
and emphatical expressions, with such considerations as these.

1. From the example of God himself, who requires us to imitate him in works
of mercy, Luke 6. 36. His mercy is in the Heavens, Psalm. 36. 5. The Earth is
full of his goodness, Psalm. 35. 5. His bounty is over all his works, Psalm. 145.
9. He punishes unwillingly, Lam. 3. 33. He watches to be gracious, Isai. 38.
18. He chose mercy and grace as the choicest things, to make his name known
unto his people by, Exodus 34. 6, 7.

He gives his Son, his Spirit, his Love, his Grace, his Glory, Himself unto
us; and yet his mercy is free, he is not by any Law bound thereunto. He shows
mercy to whom he will show mercy, Romans 9. 18. Whereas we are but his Stewards,
and have riches as the Sun has light to disperse to others. We have the
custody, but the comfort belongs unto others; it is called another man's, and
not our own, Luke 16. 12. If a Man were master of the light of the Sun, we
should esteem him extremely barbarous and inhumane; if he should let it shine
only into his own house: Our Money, our Bread, our Clothing, is as necessary
for our poor Brother, as the light of the Sun; and therefore the inhumanity as
great to withhold the one, as it would be to monopolize the other.

Secondly, From the example of Christ. He was his Fathers Almoner, Mercy was
his Office: It belonged unto him as the Son of David, to show mercy, Matthew. 9.
27. Mercy was his practice, He went about doing good, Acts 10. 38. All his
miracles were in works of mercy, feeding, healing, raising, comforting; and
though he be now in glory, yet he reckons the bounty showed to his members,
as done to himself, Matthew. 25. 35, 40. A Sacrifice was offered to God, though
eaten by the Priest and the people; and our Alms are called Sacrifices, Heb.
13. 16. Phil. 4. 18. The poor only are benefited, but God is honored by them.
And there is a connection between his mercy and ours; we forfeit his when
werestrain our own, Math. 5. 7. Jam. 2. 13. And the Argument is strong from his
to ours; his was to enemies, ours to Brethren; his to debtors, ours to
fellow servants. His freegrace to me, mine just debt to my Brother, Romans 13. 8.
His for ever to me, mine but for a moment to my Brother; his in Talents to me,
mine but in Pence to my Brother; his in Blood to me, mine but in Bread to my
Brother; his mercy inricheth me, mine leaves my Brother poor still. If then I
live by the mercy which I do enjoy, and must be saved by the mercy which I do
expect, shall so much mercy shine on me, and none reflect from me upon my poor
Brother? shall all the Waters of life run from Christ unto me, as those of
Jordan, into a Dead Sea, to be lost and buried there? Wherefore does the Sun
shine, and the Rain fall on the Earth, but that it may be fruitful? The mercies
of God should be as Dew and hear, as manure and culture to the Souls of Men,
that being thereby enriched, they may empty themselves, and draw out themselves
into the Bowels of others. Christ is the Fountain; Rich men the conduit, and
Poor men the Vessels which are there and thence supplied.

Thirdly, From respect to our selves. 1. Community of nature, we also are in
the flesh: We they want mercy from others, as others do now from us. Who would
have thought that David should have stood in need of the Bread of a Churl! Good
offices between men and men, are not duties only, but trade and merchandise. I
show them to him now, and another time he may show them to me; it is the
Apostles argument, 2 Cor. 8. 14. 2. A special honor, when God makes us
instruments of doing good; for it is a more blessed thing to give, then to
receive, Acts 20. 35. Mercy is the seed of honor, Psalm. 112. 9. Prove. 21. 21.

Fourthly, From respect to our Neighbor, to whom we ow this debt of love: For
there is a debt of Charity as well as a debt of Justice: A debt whereby I ow
him that which is truly his, and a debt whereby I ow him something of that
which is mine own. And this I do both unto Gods Image in him; for every one
that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten, 1 John 5. 1. and
unto mine own Image; for his flesh is as mine own flesh, Nehe. 5. 5. He that
made me in the Womb, made him, faith Job, Cap. 31. 15. And when I hide my self
from him, I hide from mine own flesh, Isai. 58. 7. Homo sum, humanum a me nihil
alienum puto.

Fifthly, For the credit of our Reformed Religion, that the mouths of
adversaries may be stopped, who falsely charge us with preaching, and you with
professing a naked, empty, fruitless Faith. We preach St. Paul's Faith, a Faith
which works by love; remembering your work of Faith. We preach Gal. 5. 6. 1
These. 1. 3. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 7.
St. Peter's Faith, a Faith which has virtue, and knowledge, and temperance,
and patience, and godliness, and brotherly kindness, and charity added unto it.
And we tell you with him, That if these things be lacking, you are blind; and
your knowledge is worth nothing, so long as it is barren and unfruitful. We
preach St. James his Faith, a Faith which has works, which may be showed,
which Jam. 2. 2, 14, 18, 21, 25.
visits the Fatherless and Widows in their afflictions: Abraham's Faith that
has a bosom for poor Lazarus, Rahabs Faith which had an Harbor for endangered
Strangers. We preach St. Judes Jude v. 3. 12, 20.
Faith, a most holy Faith, a Faith delivered to the Saints; such a Faith, as he
who indeed has it, is not a Cloud without Water, nor a Tree without Fruit. We
preach St. John's Faith, to believe on ^. John 3. 17, 18, 23.
the Name of Christ, and to love one another; and to show this love by opening
our Bowels of Compassion to our needy Brother, and loving him not in Word
only, but in Deed and Truth. We tell Psalm. 37. 3. Job 31. 16, 23.
you, if you trust in the Lord, you must do good: If you believe either the
truth, or the terrors, or the promises of God, you must not withhold the poor
from their desire, nor cause the eye of the Widow to fail. This is the Faith we
preach, this the Charge we give: We tell you, without this, your Faith is
Hypocrital, your Religion vain, your Hope delusion, and all your Expectation
but as a Spiders Web.

Sixthly, Let me press upon London, the example of London, an easy Argument,
One would think, to desire you to be like your selves. I might make a large
recital of great and public Works of Piety done by this famous City: I might
mention multitudes of ample Munificencies and Benefactions, by very many worthy
Members thereof, since the Reformation, whereby they have refuted the calumnies
cast upon our Religion by Papists, as if it made us careless of Good works. A
large Catalogue has been made of them to mine hand by a Learned Writer, Dr.
Andrew Willet, to the Synopfis Papismi. Edit. 5. P. 1223-1232
honor of God, and credit of our Religion. I shall content my self to give you
a report of the general sum, which upon computation, he tells us, does amount
in the space of Sixty years, unto above Six hundred thousand pounds. So that by
an equal distribution, through the whole time, this famous City did allow Ten
thousand pounds per annum, for Threescore years together unto Works of Piety
and Charity (besides all which was done in a private and unobserved way.) An
example, I believe, hardly to be paralleled in any City under the Roman
Jurisdiction. More then Forty Hospitals built, above Twenty Free Schools,
besides Granaries, Conduits, Waterworks, Loans to poor Workmen, Exhibitions to
poor Scholars, Churches, Munificent gifts to the Universities and Colleges
there; so that I may say unto you, as Paul to the Thessalonians, touching
Brotherly love, You need not that I speak unto you, for you have been taught of
God; only I beseech you, That you abound more and more, 1 These. 4. 9, 10. That
you may receive the same honorable Testimony and Memorial from Christ, which
the Church of Thyatira has received, I know thy works, and charity, and
service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works, (they are twice mentioned)
and the last to be more then the first, Revel. 2. 19. Be not weary of weldoing,
in due time you shall reap, if you faint not, Gal. 6. 9. Lose not the things
which ye have wrought, but that ye receive a full reward, 2 John v. 8. And this
leads me to the last consideration, viz.

Seventhly, The Reward which is set before you. It is a sowing of Seed, 2 Cor.
9. 6. A scattering which tends to increase, Prove. 11. 24. There is no duty
which has more copious promises of reward, then this of mercy and good works.
Rewarded with plenty, Thy Soul shall be as a watered Garden, I sai. 58. 11. For
this thing, the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
Rewarded with honor, He has dispersed and given to the poor, his horn shall be
exalted with honor, Psalm. 112. 9. Rewarded with the blessings of the poor. The
blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon me, Job 29. 11, 13.
Rewarded with the grace of God, God is able to make all grace abound toward
you, 2 Cor. 9. 8. Rewarded with a pure and comfortable use of what we enjoy our
selves. Give alms of such things as you have, and behold all things are clean
unto you, Luke 11. 41. Rewarded with a lengthning of our present tranquillity,
Dan. 4. 27. Rewarded with Gods acceptance, Heb. 13. 16. with the mercy of God,
Matthew. 5. 7. with the mansions of God, Luke 16. 9. Good works are Bills of
Exchange, which return our estates into another Country.

This laying out is laying up; Mercatura est amittere ut Lucreris. It is like
putting a Basin of Water into a Pump which draws out a great Vessel full: It is
a Sacrifice, and Sacrifices were offered for the benefit, not for the damage of
the offerers. A man scatters his Seed in the Furrow, but he lays up his Crop in
the Barn; it is a scattering which ends in a laying up. The Backs of the poor,
the Bellies of the hungry, are the Bank of Heaven.

And it is a laying up for our selves. Men lay up usually for others; their
Children, their Heirs and Executors meet with it at the last; but works of
mercy are all expended upon a man's self, he has the comfort here, and the
reward hereafter. It is money lent to God, and he will repay it to our selves.
In Law, he which sows must roap; and so says the Apostle, He that sows
bountifully, shall reap bountifully. Quas dederis solas semper habebisopes.

And it is laying up a Foundation, a way to make our uncertain riches Si amicus
tuus intraret in domum tuam, and inveniret te in loco humido frumenta posuisse,
-- daret tibi hujusmodi consilium, dicens, Frater perdis, quod cum magno labor
Collegisti; in loco humido posuisti, paucis diebus ista putrescent. Et quid
facio, frater? Leva in Superiora. Audi^es amicum suggerentem ut frumenta
Levares de inferioribus ad superiora, and non audis Christum monentem ut the
saurum tuum Leves de terra ad Caelum? Aug. in Psalm. 148.
sure and stable, that whereas other riches take unto them wings and fly away,
those which are thus laid out, are laid up, as safe, as unmovable as the
Stones of a Foundation, as the bottom of a Rock. A Foundation not by way of
merit toward God, but by way of evidence in regard of our selves, as
Testimonies of our reconciliation and peace with God. A Learned Writer Sam.
Petiti. Var. Lect. l. 1. c. 11.
makes (...) to answer to the Hebrew (...), which is the Bond or Instrument,
securing to a Creditor the money which he has lent. (...) is Bona nomina
facere; God becomes surety for the poor to repay us there, where neither rust,
nor moth, nor theif can enter.

And it is a Foundation (...) for the time to come, for the life to come, when
none of our glory will follow us. Wealth has wings, it is here to day, it is
gone to morrow; but goods are a Bank in Heaven, when all other men's wealth
does stay behind them, and betake themselves to other Masters; A good Man's
being turned into good works, does follow him, and enrich him in a life to come.

And this life to come, a life which may be held, a life which can never be
lost, when the last general conflagration shall have consumed and melted all
the Treasures of the World, our good works will abide that trial; the
inheritance unto which they follow us, is incorruptible and undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in the Heavens for us.

And now Right Honorable and Beloved, to give you all in one view, You have
heard the Charge of the God of Heaven, to the Rich men of the Earth: It is my
Petition, it is his Command. I beseech you, he injoyns you, Not to be high
minded; not to let that which comes from the deep places of the Earth, exalt
you, and make you forget that you are Earth; not to let the thick Clay make the
thin Dust proud. It cannot add a cubit to your stature, let it not add so
great a sin to your Souls: It is gift, it is not property; Gods, not yours; you
are the fiduciaries, the depositaries only; why should you glory as if you had
not received it?

Let me add this one word more, Let not your riches make you low-minded
neither, to glue your hearts, to bend your affections to things below: Let them
make you heavenly-minded, and then they will make you humbly-minded; the more
of Heaven in any mind, the more of Humility.

Not to trust in riches, not to let his gifts be used to his own degrading: Who
would trust in an unstable thing, which he cannot keep! Riches are uncertain;
in a false thing which he cannot credit? Riches are deceitful; in a nothing,
which Prove. 23. 5. 1 Cor. 8. 4.
is not? He that trusts in riches, makes them an Idol, and an Idol is nothing
in this world. Who would trust in a Dead Idol, that has a Living God to trust
in? who would trust in an useless nothing, who has a Bountiful God, who gives
all things to trust in?

You have another charge, To do good, to be rich in good works, to do them
cheerfully, to do them diffusively: And though God might stop at the charge,
his sovereignty and dominion would bear him out, to command you only; yet
being full of love and mercy, he is pleased to encourage as well as command
you. He encourages you antecedenter, by that which goes before your duty, his
own example; he encourages you consequenter, by that which follows after your
duty, his great reward, his example you have; he gives, you do but lend; he
gives, you do but render back to him of his own. He gives to you all things;
the Earth empties into your Coffers her Silver and her Gold; the Pastures send
you in Cattle, the Fields Corn, the Sea Fish, the Air Fowl; one Country sends
you in Wine, and another Spices; one Silks, and another Furrs; one Delicates,
another Ornaments: He gives you the light of the Sun, the influences of the
Stars, the protection of Angels, the Righteousness of his Son, the Graces of
his Spirit, the Hope of his Glory: He gives you Himself, and his own
Alsufficiency for your portion. And now if Heaven and Earth be all, if Grace
and Glory be all, if God and Christ be all; he has given you all things richly
to enjoy; for many of these gifts bring their joy and fruition with them. So
the Example far exceeds the Imitation; you lend, you do not give; you lend some
thing; you do not give all things; you lend to the necessities of your Brother;
you do not give to his delights and replenishment; you cloth him, you do not
adorn him; you feed him, you do not fill, much less pamper him. This is one
encouragement, A great Example.

You have another encouragement, A full Reward, good measure shaken together,
pressed down, running over into your bosoms. You give money, God gives life;
you things uncertain, which you could not keep but by giving; God gives a
Foundation, Mansions, a City which has Foundations, The sure mercies of David.
You lay out to your Brother, God lays up for you; you give perishing things to
your Brother, God an abiding, an abounding life to you; you a Cottage, or a
Coat to your Brother, God a Kingdom and a Crown to you; you such things to your
Brother, which neither you nor he can keep; God such things to you, which when
once laid hold on, you cannot lose.

So this double encouragement sets on the duty by a threefold love. If you love
God, imitate his example, be merciful as he is merciful: If you love your
Brother, refresh his Bowels, make his Back and Belly your repositories. He can
repay you with Prayers, and Prayers are as good as Gold. If you love your
selves, do what the most covetous man would do, lay up, lay up for your selves,
not only for your heirs, your children; it may be for strangers, for enemies:
Lay up surely, that which you may lay hold on, that which will stay by you, a
Foundation: Lay up for the future, that which Time, which Death, which Rust,
Moth, Theif, cannot take away; for life which is more worth then wealth, for
eternal life which is more durable then wealth. If you do not thus by your
wealth, lay up a Foundation unto Eternal life, your thick Clay will load you
with many sorrows, and drown you in destruction and perdition. You have your
wealth for this end, you have your life and salvation with this homage, and
quit-rent upon it. If you do not give, you shall not live; if you do not do
good, you shall not receive good; if you do not lay out, you shall not lay up.
Here is your option, keep your money, and perish with it; return it unto
Heaven, and be gainers by it. If you love God, or your Neighbor, or your
selves, or your very riches themselves; do good, be rich in good works, you do
not only comfort your Brother, but you keep your God; you save your selves,
you lengthen your lives, you preserve your estates unto all eternity.

FINIS.

