

Meditations ON THE FALL AND RISING OF St PETER.

By Edward Reynolds, late Lord Bishop of Norwich.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel, and at the Bible on London-Bridg, 1677.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE Reader.
Courteous Reader,
AS I cannot expect thy Thanks, so I need not fear thy Censure for the
Publication of these Meditations. For by the forwardness of the Bookseller to
promote thine (I hope) as well as his own profit, they passed the Press
altogether without my knowledge; and before I received the least Intimation of
any such Design, they were by him presented to me entirely Printed, desiring my
attestation of their Legitimacy. To prevent therefore thy doubt and suspicion
touching their true Author, I do from good and manifold Evidence assure thee,
they are the genuine, though early offspring of that Reverend Person whose
name is prefixed to them. In his Lordships lifetime I have often heard him
mention, not only in general this Tractate, as one of his First Theological
Essays; But likewise in particular, his Presenting thereof to a Pious and
Charitable Mrs. Nixon of Oxon.
Gentlewoman, who by an holy emulation of her namesake Joanna in the
Evangelist, did minister unto Christ of her Substance, by liberal Gifts to his
Preachers and Poor. From this Copy fairly written with the Authors own hand,
and prefaced with a short paper of Verses to that his Friend, were they Printed
by the Stationer. And since the Decease of my Father, and his only Brother Mr.
John Reynolds Rector of Blaby.
(both within the compass of two Months), two Copies of the same came into my
Possession; amongst each of their Papers, one: Both the fruit as of the Heart
and Head, so of the Hand too of the Author, exactly agreeing together, as I
found upon perusal of them; and (as far as my Memory can assist me, absent from
my Study in comparing them) fully according with this Third, now made public.

The first Lisping salutes of young Children, and the last Gasping Farewells of
dying friends, of all words, are wont to make most deep and lasting impressions
upon us. That these short Meditations, some of the first Juvenile Breathings in
Divinity of that devout Soul now with God, may obtain like effect, is the
prayer of

Thy faithful Servant EDW. REYNOLDS.
London, March 13, 1676/7.
TO THE READER.
THis Reverend Author, of great renown for Piety and Learning, needs no Letters
of Commendation: For as it was said of righteous Abel, That he being dead, yet
speaks, Heb. 11. 5. so this profound and pious Divine yet lives, and speaks
in his excellent Works; wherein he has studied (as the Apostle gave in charge
to Timothy) to approve himself a workman that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Yet because many eminent
Writers not only after they were dead, but even whilst they were alive, have
been much abused and injured by surreptitious, or supposititious, at least by
imperfect Copies of their Works; therefore I thought my self obliged (as being
an ancient and intimate acquaintance of the worthy Author) to give this
Testimony to the Truth, viz. That these ensuing Meditations concerning Saint
Peter's Fall and Rising, are the genuine issue of the Head-labours, and
Heart-labours of the Author, whose name they bear, and whose style they
resemble as face in water answers face, -- Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora
ferebat.
Neither do they only resemble his style (which is much of an evidence to be
his) but they are printed according to his own Original Manuscript. These
Meditations were penned and sent (as a New Years Gift) to one of his ancient
Friends in Oxford, much about that time, when he wrote those two Learned
Treatises, One of the Passions and Faculties of the Soul of Man. The other, of
Meditations of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

When he was Fellow of Merton-Colledg, Oxon, his pregnant Gifts and Graces
shined forth even in his younger years. How well he has improved his time not
only in his elder years, but in his younger also, his Learned Labors declare,
published for the great benefit of the Church of God. This consideration
deserves such a special remark of Honor to be fixed upon him, as to perpetuate
his blessed memory to posterity, and to remain for the living as a signal
pattern worthy of imitation.

It Is observable, that in his preaching and writing (as the Wiseman charge)
Whatsoever his hands found to do, he did it with all his might, Eccles. 9. 10.
He was such a Preacher as the same Wiseman mentions, The Preacher sought to
find out acceptable words, and that which was written was upright, even words
of truth, Verba desiderii, Verba rectitudinis, Verba veritatis.
Eccles. 12. 10. David said to Araunah, when he would have given him freely
Oxen for Burnt-Sacrifice, I will surely buy it of thee at a price, neither will
I offer Burnt-offerings unto the Lord my God which does cost me nothing, 2 Samuel
24. 24. It Is abundantly evident, that this eminent Preacher and Writer bestowed
much pains and studies in whatever he Preached or Printed. His Works smell of
the Lamp, and of indefatigable industry. I shall add no more concerning the
Author, because I cannot say enough of his deserts: And the sayings are vulgar,
Nemo vituperat Herculem. Expede Herculem.

The Subject of these Meditations is Peter's Fall and Rising. One thing is
added in Saint Mark, which is not mentioned in the other three Evangelists: For
it is said, And when he thought thereon, he wept. If we peruse the Original
word, we shall find that he cast something over his head (as Mourners and
Delinquents used to do when they were ashamed to be seen), Mark 14. 72. (...).
Theouph.
and so Theophylact interprets the place. Peter denied shamefully, and
therefore he wept bitterly. Great Sins will cost even God's dearest Children
great and bitter sorrows. We might add more Instances of David, Mary Magdalen,
Paul, etc. But this instance of Peter is a sufficient evidence.

It Is a saying of Justin Martyr, That it is best of all not to sin: and next, to
amend upon the punishment. But who of any understanding would therefore break
his head, because he hopes to have a good Medicine to cure it? The Uses which
we ought to make of this Instance of Peter, are mentioned by Saint Paul, Thou
stand by Faith, be not high minded, but fear, Rom 10. 20. Wherefore let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. What St.
Austine said of David, may be well applied particularly unto our selves, Let
such (says he) who have not fallen, Audiant qui non ceciderunt ne cadant, qui
ceciderunt ut surgant. Non cadendi exemplum proponitur, sed si cecideris,
resurgendi, August. in Psalm 51.
hear, and take heed of falling: such as have fallen, let them hear and rise
again. Here is not propounded an example of falling, but an example of rising
again after falling.

This Treatise (though short) is pithy and solid, and contains the quintessence
of good invention, and sound judgment, (which are the two parts of Logic.) It
may be compared to an Illiad in a Nutshell, or to a Map describing in a little
compass of paper, a large Country, which is contained in a few significant
words; and the Motto may be -- Pondere non numero.


The same Renowned Author has preached many Excellent and Elaborate Sermons
upon that Mysterious Prophecy of Zachariah. And likewise he has preached many
profound Sermons upon several Cases of Conscience: Both which he has unfolded
with great dexterity of judgment; many whereof I my self (with others far
better able to judge) have heard him preach (about twenty and six years since)
in Oxford, both to admiration and satisfaction.

It Is much to be desired and hoped that it may be obtained for the public
good, that the Reverend and Learned Doctor his only surviving Son, who does
Patrissare, (to whom may be applied that of the Poet, -- Vno avulso, non
deficit alter Aureus, and simili frondescit Virga metallo.
Virg.)

Would be prevailed withal to print those Elaborate Sermons, which
(questionless) will much conduce to the public good of the Church of God.

In the mean time let us be thankful unto God who has given such Gifts and
Graces unto men, and let us make the best improvement of them whilst we have
them; and let us (according to our Saviors example) Work the works of him that
sent us, while it is day: the night comes when no man can work, Joh. 9. 4.

I shall not detain thee (Reader) any longer in a preliminary discourse from
reading these choice Meditations. Thy profiting by them is as well desired for
thee, as for him, who desires thy Prayers, and remains thy servant for Christ's
sake,

H. W.
March 20. 1676/7
TO My Good Friend Mrs. NIXSON.
THe Season is of Joy, the Gift of Tears:
This seems a discord unto common ears.
But he that makes the ficrcest wolf to sleep,
And feed in friendship with the weakest sheep,
Unites remotest passions, and can bring
Waters of comfort from griefs bitter spring:
The Jolliest Baltaser on earth may borrow
True Joy of him who seems overwhelmed in sorrow.
Begin the Year, and pass it in these Tears,
They Will yield you joy against your greatest fears.
And kindly entertain your poor friends thrift.
A Renewed Peter, for a New-years-gift.
Your true Friend, E. R.

IMPRIMATUR Hic liber, cui titulus (Meditations on the Fall, etc.)

G. Jane R. P. D. Hen. Epis. Land, a Sacris Domest.

MEDITATIONS ON THE Fall and Rising OF PETER.
MEDITAT. I.
PRide and Presumption have been ever, as well in the godly as in the wicked,
the forerunners of a Fall. The first man, Adam, the first Apostle, Peter, both
fell by these. Had Adam given less ear to the proud persuasion of a weak Sex,
and Peter to the presumptions of a weak Confidence, the one had not plunged his
posterity into a depth of wretchedness; nor both, themselves into a depth of
sorrow. High conceits and resolutions built on shallow ground, can promise
nothing but ruin on the head of him that raised them.

MED. II.
WHat can we expect from Peter but a triple denial of his Masters person
amongst his enemies, who dares even to his own face make a double denial of his
Truth? He that will adventure to deny the truth of Christ's Word, will quickly
upon temptation deny the profession of his Truth. You all (says Christ) shall
be offended because of me this night. Nay, Lord, answers Peter, though all, yet
never I. Yes, Peter, thou more than any: for this very night thou shall thrice
deny me. O no Lord, I know mine own strength, I am so confident of my love unto
thee, that neither life nor death can separate me from it. I have a sword in my
hand, and I have a sword in my mouth; my Blade and my Profession shall both
follow thee unto death. Peter has not yet learned, not to contradict his
Master, though once he got nothing but a Satan for it. It is not one either
rebuke or disgrace, can root up the untowardness of a corrupt disposition. Weak
man! see thou not how thou have already begun to deny thy Lord? and even then
have entered upon a revolt, when thou seem most fortified and constant in
thy resolution? That man denies him, who denies his Word, he being no longer
Christ than he is true. Why then should thou either distrust thy Masters
word, which told thee, that all should be offended? or else have any such
confident presumption of thine own strength, or uncharitable conceit of thy
fellows weakness, as to believe his prediction touching their falling, and yet
think he was deceived in thee, who art peremptory and confident of thine own
standing? That God which out of true weakness has ordained strength, does here
out of presumed strength foretell weakness; and as he can make the mouths of
babes and sucklings to confess him, so can he suffer the mouth of an Apostle, a
Peter, to deny him. Showing in both the dependence as well of strong as of weak
on his Goodness: The strongest Apostle being not able without his
sustaining-grace to confess him; and with it, the weakest infant in the street
being enabled to cry Hosanna unto him.

MED. III.
I Cannot be so uncharitable as not to believe, That it was Peter's Faith and
Love which made unto Christ this promise of perseverance in his profession:
such fruit and sweetness had he found in those words of eternal life, such
power in that Son of the living God, that he could not but think it blessedness
to follow and enjoy his society even unto death, who was able to sweeten and
sanctify death it self. But behold, in the same soul, nay in the same action,
a mixture, I had almost said a predominancy, of faith and flesh! The desire and
the purpose come from faith, the confidence and resolution came from flesh.
Self-dependance, pride, or any other carnal affection which is more deeply
rooted in the particular nature of any man, do often intermix themselves in his
most holy actions. It was faith that made Peter go down upon the Water, but it
was flesh that made him begin to sink: Faith made him zealous in Christ's Cause,
but flesh drew hls sword at Malchus his ear: Faith made him follow Christ, but
flesh made him follow afar off: Faith made him accompany Christ to the garden,
but flesh made him sleep when he should have sorrowed: Faith made him promise
perseverance, but flesh made him peremptory in that promise: in a word, Faith
made him resolute to confess, but flesh to contradict his Master. Vows and
Promises unconditionally addressed, cannot but prove dangerous to the strongest
Faith. God must first give us perseverance, before we can promise it; It is not
in our power, though it be our duty to perform it. Though Peter may in the
virtue of Christ's promise be sure not to fall into Hell, he cannot in the
virtue of his own promise be sure not to fall into temptation; though he can be
secure that Faith shall have the last victory; yet he cannot that it shall have
every victory: though it cannot die and be finally dried up, yet it may ebb,
and languish; and though even now it can look undauntedly on the nails of a
Cross, yet presently it may be affrighted at the voice of a Maid. He only that
has given faith unto us, can give life and action unto our faith. Christ is
both the quickner, and the object of our Faith, by whose power it works, and
on whose merits it relyeth. When He therefore is pleased to remove and withdraw
himself, Faith must needs be there unoperative, where both its Object and its
Mover is absent. As we cannot see the Sun but by the light of the Sun, so
neither can we believe in Christ but by the Grace of Christ. Who can wonder
that the outward parts of the body should be benumbed and stupid, when the
spirits and animal virtues which should enliven them, have retired themselves?
Lord! let me never barely promise, but let me withal pray unto thee; and let
ever my purpose to die for thee, be seconded with a supplication that I may not
deny thee; when ever I have an arm of confidence to lift up in defense of thy
Truth, let me have a knee of humility to bow down before thy Throne: Lord, give
me what I may promise, and I will promise what thou requirest.

MED. IV.
WEre not the other Disciples taught from the same holy mouth? did they not
with the same holy faith receive what they had been taught? Why then should
Peter give credit to the word of Christ so far as concerned their weakness, and
yet distrust it in the presumption of his own strength? What though he be the
chief in following his Master, may he not as well be the chief in falling from
him? I never knew a priority of Order priviledg'd with a precedence of Grace.
Yet such is the nature of Greatness, that it conceits it self secure from
danger, and apprehends spiritual immunity in temporal honor. How erroneous is
the frailty of man's nature! How ready to trust upon an arm of flesh,
confidence, free will, supremacy, even against divine predictions of danger,
and thinks it self sufficiently armed with that, than which there is no greater
cause of its weakness and ruin!

MED. V.
ONE would have thought that Peter upon the noise of a denial, should have
begun to tremble, and not to boast; to arm, and not to presume; to suspect his
strength, and not promise it: But that a double warning should find a double
presumption, would make a man confident to expect an invincible resolution; and
believe that even naked and empty nature, being so deeply engaged, would have,
if not courage, yet shame enough to persist in such a purpose, which being
broken, could not but infer the discredit not only of a weak, but of an
inconstant spirit; more faithless in the execution of a promise, more impotent
in its contempt of death, than could well stand with the honestly or courage of
a Peter. But it is the justice of God to give over nature to faintings and
falls, when it relyes upon it self; and to make him fear the least assault, who
has not armed himself with that which should defend him against the greatest.
One tear or sigh, though emblems of weakness, could more have prevailed to
strengthen Peter's Faith, than so many fruitless boasts, the gildings and
flourishings of a rotten confidence. A little Peblestone will overturn and sink
down a Goliath, when all the Armor of Saul will rather cumber than profit in
such a conflict.

MED. VI.
GReat Promises require great cares; and he who has deeply engaged himself in
any service, must needs be either very vigilant, or very faithless. How is it
then that after so many promises I find Peter sleeping even then when his
Master is sweating? and that that Garden should be the bed of so secure a rest,
which was the Theater of so exquisite and unimitable an anguish? Can he follow
Christ a whole night to his Judgment, that cannot watch one hour for his
comfort? can he command his life to be laid down for Christ's Truth, that cannot
command his eyes to be the witnesses of his sorrow? so long as we are out of
the view of danger, we can make large promises of our strength to bear it; but
when once it draws near, and creeps upon us, we begin to look with another
color both on it and our selves, and become either desperately fearful, or
supinely stupid. Like untoward and forgetful children, which never fear the Rod
till they feel it.

MED. VII.
I Cannot wonder that Peter should fall off, being tempted, who is already,
though unquestioned, so far behind; that he should tremble at the terror of
Death, who cannot endure the trouble of a Watch. He must learn more to deny
himself, before he can take up his Cross. The nights of a resolved Martyr, must
be spent in the studies of patience, not in security and ease; he must first be
a persecutor of himself, and exercise a holy cruelty on his own flesh, by
cruncifying the lusts thereof, before he can be able to overcome the wit, and
most exquisite inventions of his tormentors, in a holy and undaunted patience.
The Soul must be first raised unto Heaven, before the body can be willing to go
down into the earth. Had Peter watched and accompanied his Master, he might
have received further encouragement in his resolution to die for him, and
learned from the extremity of his anguish, if not to hate life, which could
make a man subject to such expressless sorrow; yet at least willingly to
embrace the present opportunity of glorifying God by a constant death; even for
this respect, that thereby he might be freed from the capacity and danger of
those afflictions, which he should there have seen flesh and blood liable unto.
Of how many precious occasions of good does the too great love of our flesh and
ease deprive us? Every man would love God more, if he could be more out of love
with himself.

MED. VIII.
I Cannot expect other, but that he should follow Christ afar off, who goes
sleepily after him; nor can I hope for courage from his tongue, whose feet
begin so soon to play the Cowards. It is not likely that he will come near
Christ in Golgotha, that follows him afar off in the Judgment-hall: if he be
unwilling to seem his, he will be quickly ready to deny him. Behold the
beginnings of Peter's backsliding in his very following of Christ! To follow
him indeed is a work of Faith; but to follow afar off, is nothing else but by
little and little to go back from him. See how the preparations unto Peter's
fall second each other. After sleeping, he follows afar off; and from that, he
comes to sitting still; and that not in private to pray or repent, but in
public to warm himself at that fire, where his Conscience, though not seared,
was yet made more hard. He which prefers the heat of a fire, compassed in with
the blasphemies of wicked men (the nearest pattern that can be of Hell) to the
sweet society of his Savior, with the discommodity of a cold air, and an
ensuing Judgment, cannot be far from denying of him. That man whom the enjoying
of any temporal benefit, or the opportunity of any sensual and worldly delight,
can induce to forsake the company of Christ, (who is ever present in his
Ordinances) is at the next door (if occasion were given) to Apostasy and
backsliding.

MED. IX.
THE Devil has a kind of method and color of modesty in his Temptations. He
knew that it would not sort with the Holiness of Peter, to shoot at the first a
fiery dart toward him, and tempt him in the very beginning of his onset, unto
a perjured and blasphemous denial of his Master. Peter would have at the first
trembled at so fearful a suggestion. And therefore, like a cunning Captain, he
so ranks and musters up his forces, as that the first Temptation shall like
weaker Soldiers make way for the latter, which are the old experienced and
sturdy fighters; the former serve only to weaken Peter, the latter to overthrow
him. At the first the Devil tempts us to small sins, to remit something of our
wonted vigor, to indulge a little unto our corrupt desires, to unbend our
thoughts, and to slacken our pace in prosecution of good courses, that by
cooling our selves we may be able to hold out the better; but when he has
drawn us thus far, he has gotten the advantage of us; and having a door open,
lets in his more ugly and horrid Temptations. Sin has its several ages and
growths; first, it is but conceived and shaped in the womb of Concupiscence;
then it is nourished and given suck by the embraces and delights of the Will,
as of a Nurse; then lastly, it grows into a strong man, and does of it self run
up and down our little World, invade all the faculties of Soul and Body, which
are at last made the instruments of Satan to act and fulfill it. Satan at the
first leads us downward toward Hell, as it were, by steps and stairs, which
though they go lower and lower, yet we seem still to have firm footing, and to
be able to go back at pleasure. But at last we find, as the way more and more
slippery, so the enemy ready at hand to push us down into a dungeon of
unrecoverable misery, did not Gods mercy pluck us as a brand out of the fire.
Peter first sleeps only, that seemed the exigence of his nature; then he
followed afar off, that happily was pretended to be only the drowsiness of his
sleeping; then he sits down at the sire, and that was but the coldness of the
air: But then comes denying, swearing, cursing; and had not Christ in time
looked back upon him, the next step and regress, would have reached unto the
jaws of Hell. But it was the great Wisdom and Mercy of Christ to honor the
estate of his ignominy and reproach, his death and judgment, with two of his
greatest Miracles, The assuming of a repentant Thief, and the re-assuming of a
revolted Disciple.

MED. X.
IT is no wonder if Peter be tempted to forsake his Master, when he is far off
from him. How can he choose but stumble and fall, who hides himself from the
Sun of Righteousness, who is absent from the Light of the World, who wanders
out of the way of Life, who is beyond the voice of that word of Truth which
only succoreth, directs, leads, instructs in Holiness and Security? He
which testifies his Faith by following, and yet lays open his flesh and
weakness by following afar off, shall be sure to meet with such an enemy as
hates our Faith, and therefore takes advantage by our weakness to oppose it.
Our Faith provokes him to enmity, for he is adversary to none so much as those
that are out of his power; and our weakness invites him to an assault, for he
trembles and flies from opposition. Had Peter abode in the company of his Lord,
Satan would not have dared to tempt him unto a Tripledenial in the presence of
such a power, whence he had formerly received such a Triple-overthrow, having
been himself broken with those stones, and hurled down from that Pinnacle and
Mountain, in which he thought to have battered and broken in pieces the
Salvation of the World by the overthrow of its Savior. Or if perhaps he would
have been so impudent, or so venturous, as to thrust into the presence of his
Maker, and before him to issue forth his Temptations; yet this advantage should
Peter have had, that he should have been directed with more light, and assisted
with greater strength to resist so impudent an assault; his Faith happily should
bave been confirmed, though his adversaries malice had not been abated. And we
know the Devil never overcomes any, that is not first overcome of himself. What
danger is there in fighting, where, there is no danger of falling? or what
difference is there between an unoppos'd security, and an assaulted strength,
save that this is more glorious, the other no whit the more safe? He is not far
from Satan's temptations, who belonging to Christ, is yet far off from his
presence and assistance. None nearer the fury of a strong and bloody malice,
than a weak and straggling enemy.

MED. XI.
I Never read of more dangerous falls in the Saints, than were Adams, Lots,
Sampsons, David's, Solomon's and Peter's; and behold in all these, either the
first Inticers, or the first Occasioners are Women. A weak Creature may be a
strong Tempter; nothing too impotent or useless for the Devils service. We know
it is the pride of Satan to imitate God; As God magnifies his power in bringing
strength out of weakness, so does the Devil labor to gain the glory of a
strong enemy, by the ruinating of a great Saint with the Temptation of a weak
Sex. Nor is he herein more apish than cunning: for the end of the Devils
conflicts is the despair of his enemy. He gets Judas to betray his Master, that
he may after get him to hang himself. And he has the same end in Peter's
Denial, which he had in Judas his Treason. Now what is there that can more draw
a man to Despair, than an apprehension of greatness in his sin? and what fall
greater, than to be foiled by a Question by a Maid? What could more aggravate
Peter's sin, than that the voice of a Maid should be stronger to overcome him,
than the Faith in a Jesus to sustain him? The Devil tempts us, that he may draw
us unto sin; but he tempts us by weak Instruments, that he may draw us unto
despair.

MED. XII.
WOman was the first Sinner; and behold in the two greatest falls, and most
immediate denials of God, Adam's, and Peter's, Woman is made the first Tempter.
So much as any one is the Devils slave to serve him, so much is he his
Instrument to assist sin. A Sinner will be presently a Tempter.

MED. XIII.
PEter has no sooner denied his Master, but he goes out farther from him. See
what a concord there is between our Members in sinning! how the action of the
Foot bears witness to the apostasy of the Tongue! But why should Peter get him
out for fear of an Attachment, and farther Examination, having already by his
denial cleared himself, and (for ought he sees) satisfied his adversay? Surely
there is no security to be expected from the denial of our Lord. He which
thinks to gain ease by sinning, misseth of his end, and shall be more afraid
after he has cleared himself by Apostasy, than he was before. It Is not the way
to avoid the storms of danger, by making shipwreck of a good Conscience; and to
free our selves from the hands of men, by running upon the wrath of God. He
which hides himself in the hedge of wickedness from danger, shall meet with a
Serpent instead of safety; and shall be so much the more suspicious of other
men's fury and persecution, by how much the more he is sensible that he has
deserved it. Peter sat boldly amongst them while he was in danger; he has no
sooner made his Apology, but he is gone straight. The same that befell Peter
here in denying his dependence on his Savior, did once befall Adam in denying
the Truth of his Maker; the next news which you hear of them, is their flight,
their fear. Sin is ever deceitful, and pays nothing less than what it
promises. The first thing that ever painted it self, was Sin.

MED. XIV.
IS the nature of Woman more inquisitive, or more malignant, that amongst so
many other servants, a Woman should begin the second accusation? The Devil will
double a weak Temptation, if it have proved prosperous; and looks rather to the
issue, than to the Instruments of his assaults. The first Maid tempted Peter by
questioning him; this second by accusing him to the other Servants: from which
latter we may infer, That those who are aptest to Tempt, are aptest to Accuse.
These two are the Devils grand Instruments to work the ruin of Mankind. He
first tempts a man to sin, and then he accuses him to God. And therefore he
has both names in an equal propriety, a Tempter, and an Accuser, and these on
all sides. He first tempted man to forsake his Maker, and accused his Maker of
deceiving man; next he tempts God to Judgment upon man, by accusing man of
wickedness toward God: and lastly, after he has tempted any man unto sin, he
begins to accuse him to his brethren without, and his own Conscience within.
Ever when thou feel an assault, begin to fear an accusation; and learn to
prevent the Devils Malice, by resisting his Temptation.

MED. XV.
WE may here see the method of Satan. His first Temptation is by one only Maid,
his second by many Servants that stood by. The more weak and naked he finds us,
with the greater force he makes upon us; using his first assault to try, but
his second to wound us: As in the battery or breaking open of a City, one man
may serve for a spy to watch the Gates, to take notice of the Defenses, and to
make relation of the weaknesses or force of either; but when they are by his
report found unable for resistance, there then follows the irruption of a whole
army, bringing nothing but the threats of blood and slaughter: So is it with
Satan toward our Souls; after he has sent one smaller Temptation as a spy to
observe our Fortifications, and upon the success and report of it, finds how
weak we are to withstand his forces, he then rushes in upon us with a multitude
of his armed and more able servants; who certainly would take possession of us,
and hold us in peace as their own, did not a stronger than he come upon him,
and overcome him, and divide the spoils.

MED. XVI.
THE form and manner of Peter's second Denial, is (not without special reason
as I conceive) diversely related. In one Evangelist the words are, I know not
the man; in another, I am not of them. One would think these were two Denials.
May not a man know him, unless he follow him? No. Behold a mystery of Faith in
the fall of Peter. No man knows Christ unless he be one of them that follow
him, and to whom he has united himself. If it had been true, I am not one of
them, it had been true also, I know not the man. All knowledge consists in
mixture and union, whereby the understanding receives into it the image and
similitude of the thing which it knows; which made the Philosopher say, That
the Soul in understanding a thing is made the very thing which it understands;
namely, in that sense as we call the Image of the Face in a Glass, the Face it
self; or the Impression in Wax, the Seal it self. Now then there is no union
between Christ and us, no dwelling of him in us, no ingrafture, or
incorporation of us into him, without that Faith whereby we follow him, which
makes us to be so nearly one with him, that (in the judgment of the learned)
the name of Christ is sometimes in the holy Scriptures taken for the Church of
Christ. And therefore to those that believe, to them only he has given to
know. Christ is not truly apprehended either by the fancy or the understanding.
He is at once known and possessed. It is an Experimental, and not a Speculative
knowledge that concieves him: He understands him, that feels him. We see him in
his Grace and Truth, in his Word and Promises, not in any carnal or gross
presence. Pilate knew him in that manner, and Judas, as well as Peter. A true
Believer can see and know him better in Heaven at the right hand of his Father,
by a Sacramental, than a Papist can on the Altar, in the Jewish and
Pilate-hands of a Mass-Priest, by a Transubstantiated bread. Let their Faith
have the assistance of teeth and jaws; ours, though toothless, eats him with
less injury, and with more nourishment.

MED. XVII.
THE increase of the Enemies Temptation, accumulates unto the Apostles sin.
When Peter is pressed a second time, and with more strong opposition, he
conceives a naked and empty denial, to be an implicit confession; and
therefore that he may make them more credulous, he makes himself more impious;
and to gain Faith with men, he not only denies, but forswears his Faith with
God, making Christ himself the Witness and Patron not only of a Lie, but also
of a Revolt. With how deep a die of sin, with how many degrees of corruption,
will the habit of Faith consist! That failed not Peter, though the exercise
thereof were a while smuther'd and suspended. Christ's prayer was stronger to
preserve it, than his denial to root it out. That very action, which if it had
proceeded from a heart qualified with other dispositions of stubborness,
malice, and obduration, would have been the irremediable sin against the Holy
Ghost; was in Peter, proceeding from fear and weakness, the sin of a believing
and faithful heart. How may the Godly in this one Example both learn to despair
of their own strength, which cannot without Christ's assistance uphold them
from so deep a fall; and not to despair of his mercy, which can keep Faith in a
corner of that very heart, which lies drenched and weltering in its own blood;
and can raise up unto Martyrdom a man that had so deeply plunged himself into
Apostasy! He that suffered Judas to be the horrid subject of his Judgment,
raised Peter from a sin (I verily think) in it self as great, to be the
Preacher and Witness of his Mercy.

MED. XVIII.
HOW leprous and spreading is sin? how weak and impotent is nature? how
unsatisfiabl and importunate is the Devil and his Instruments? A double
temptation is not enough on Satan's part, after a double denial; nor is a double
denial on Peter's part enough confirmed by a single perjury. The Devil goes
farther in Tempting, the poor Disciple goes farther in Denying: The truth
whereof, that he may the more easily enforce it, he confirms, according to the
Law, by two, but those wicked Witnesses; and to a second Oath is there joined
an Execration. An Execration strong and deep enough to make Peter no liar,
though an Apostate; I mean to verify the truth of his denial, and to make him
indeed none of those who alone knew their Savior For it was (if the word
retain here the same force which it does in St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans) a
curse greater than any curse, even an Anathema, a wish of eternal separation
from the presence of God. It is no wonder if he dare deny Christ in earth, and
in dishonor, who can adventure to wish an eternal absence from him in Heaven
in his Glory. I never remember any Anathema that proceeded not from Love and
Fear; That of Moses and Paul from love of the safety, and fear of the
destruction of their Brethren; that of Peter, from a love of himself, and a
fear of death. How strong and violent are Passions, whether holy or natural,
when once truly apprehensive of their object? How secure and negligent can they
make Peter of his eternal estate, to avoid perhaps but the displeasure of a
mortal man? It is the misery and error of corrupt nature, to shelter it self
against danger under sin, and to think it self sufficiently safe, when it is
violently wicked.

MED. XIX.
HE has not only deserved a Curse, but provoked it, that has prayed for it;
who could but expect the Execution after the Petition? But behold the mercy of
a provoked God! Though Peter have asked a stone, a cornerstone to fall upon
him, and grind him to powder, yet he gives him instead thereof, the bread of
Eternal Life, the wine of repentant tears: Though he craye a Serpent, a fiery
Serpent to sting him for ever unto death, yet he like a compassionate Savior
gives him the voice of a Cock, the sight of a brazen Serpent to recover his
wounds. Peter has provided a whole load of sins for Christ to carry to his
approaching Cross; and Christ has thrown on him such a burden of Mercies, as
shall sink him deeper in the waters of Repentance and admiration, than he was
before in danger.

MED. XX.
ONE would think, that such a great recovery should be effected by the hand of
some glorious Ministry, by the voice of an Angel or a Prophet. But see a
Miracle in weakness! A Cock is made, as it were, a John Baptist, to forerun the
look of Christ, and to preach Repentance. That God which can in power work
without means, does in wisdom make use of the befest, and can open the mouth of
a beast for the conversion of a man. How careful ought we to be in the use of
Means, when God seldom works without them? How humble in the use of Prayer,
when the Means work not without God? The ordinary courses of nature, the most
accidental occurrences in the World, are sanctified unto the good of the Elect,
and are the Instruments of God for their Salvation.

MED. XXI.
BUT why should our Savior in this great work choose the service of a Cock for
the ministry of Repentance? There is ever some mystery in Christ's Instruments.
If he will give sight to a blind man by impotent and unlikely means, they shall
be a mixture of something out of his own mouth, with something out of the
Earth, to show that the virtue of Christ's mouth in the earthy and clayie
Vessels of mortal men, is of force to open the eyes of the ignorant and
impenitent. Christ in this Crow of the Cock has given Peter as well an Example
to follow, as an Occasion to repent; as well taught him in the execution of his
Apostleship, as converted him from the estate of a backslider. A true Minister
that loves Christ and his Sheep, must have the Wings of a Cock to rouse up
first himself from security; and then being converted, powerfully to awaken and
strengthen others: and the Watchfulness of a Cock, to be ever ready to discover
and forewarn danger; and the Voice of a Cock, to cry aloud, and tell Israel of
their sins, and terrify the roaring Lion that seeks to devour them: and
lastly, the Hours of a Cock, to preach in season, and out of season, the glad
tidings of Salvation.

MED. XXII.
WHO would think that a weak Cock should be able to do more with Peter, than
Prophets and Apostles with other men? That the noise of a Cock's Crow should be
heard so deep as the confines of Hell? Surely no man, if these weak means were
not quickened and seconded with the look of Christ. He first turns and looks
back in mercy upon Peter, before Peter can return in sorrow and repentance unto
him. By him live, and move, and have their being, as well Christians as
Creatures. The very Faithful themselves would lie still in that depth of sin
whereinto they have been plunged, if that Power which in wisdom suffers them to
fall in, should not in grace and pity raise them up. Peter cannot remember the
word of his Master, till Christ remember the misery of his Disciple.

MED. XXIII.
SEE here the greatness of Christ's Grace! one would think that he should have
been wholly taken up with the dishonor of his present condition, with the
sense of his Father's Desertion, with the foresight of his approaching
sufferings. And yet behold, when he is wholly possessed of weakness, he is yet
at leisure for a work of power. The righteous Justice of his God, and the
unjust cruelty of his enemies, were not able to drive him from the remembrance
or exercise of his mercy. He that came to suffer all these things for man, does
in the midst of his sufferings remember man, honoring the scorns and buffets
of his Judgment, with the Conversion of a fallen Apostle; and the Nails and
Ignominies of his Cross, with the Conversion of a reviling Thief.

MED. XXIV.
AND now methinks I see in the face of Christ, a throng and a conflict of
Affections. One while I see an angry and upbraiding face against Peter's
revolt; another while a pitiful face, commiserating his frailty; then a
merciful face, converting him; and next a gracious and favorable face,
inviting him. If it were a face of Anger, see then the nature of Faith in Peter
and all the Godly, which through the clouds of his displeasure can discover the
comfortable light and beams of a Savior, as well as through his vail of flesh
and dishonor, discern the Power and Majesty of God, like the Woman in the
Gospel, whose Faith could interpret the very odious name of Dog, uttered from
the mouth of Christ, to be a trial of her, and not a rejection; rather a hiding
than a denying of mercy. If it were a face of Grace and Invitation, see the
nature of sin, which is to make a man afraid even of an appeased God; and of
Repentance, which when the Soul is invited to the rivers of joy which make glad
Gods City, can be at leisure to drink of those bitter tears, which make heavy
the hearts of sinners. If it were a pitiful and commiserating face, see how it
works alike Qualities in Peter, who then only can begin to lament himself, when
he is first lamented by his Savior. Lord! never let thy saving face be turned
back from me, but be thou always pleased to look upon me, whether in tender
displeasure, or in a pitiful mercy; that so I may be driven by sorrow out of my
self, and by faith unto thee.

MED. XXV.
THE first beginning of Peter's Repentance, is a Remembrance of the words of
Christ, an applicative and feeling recordation of them. How powerful is
Temptation to banish out of man's mind all conceit of Gods Truth, or his own
danger! He that is too mindful of his safety, will be too unmindful of his
Faith. A sanctified Memory, whether in retaining of Divine Truth, or in
presenting our own sins, is an excellent preparative to Repentance; and like a
steady wind, does collect and draw together those clouds, whence shall after
issue forth those happy tears.

MED. XXVI.
BUT what was it that Peter remembered? It is not said, Peter now considered how
he stood naked and open to the flames of Hell, or how he had exposed himself to
the scourges of an inward Tormentor, to the scorchings of a bosom-hell, his
Conscience, or to the fearful judgment and revenge of him whom he had injured
by denying; and therefore he went out and wept: It was fear that made him fall,
it made him not repent: But it was only the merciful prediction of Christ which
he remembered; what slight esteem he had made of that gracious caution which
should have armed him against Temptations: and this made him go out and weep.
The abuse of Gods mercy, the grieving of Gods Spirit, the undervaluing of Gods
Truth, more wounds the Soul of a repentant sinner, than all the gripes of
Conscience, or flames of Hell.

MED. XXVII.
BUT what makes thee (O blessed Convert) thus to start and turn upon the Look
of thy Lord, and the remembrance of thy sin, as if the repentance for the
denial of thy Tongue, had made thy Foot again to deny thy Master? Whither
runnest thou, Peter, from such a fountain of Mercy? Have thou either mistaken
the Look of thy Savior, which was to draw and reunite thee unto him, not to
drive or banish thee from him? or has thy sorrow drowned thy Faith, and made
thee forget that glorious profession which thou once did make out of a happy
knowledge of experience and belief that Christ had the words of Eternal Life?
and whither then go thou? Have thou forgotten that he had balm to cure thy
grief, and blood to blot out thy sin? that he could at once both comfort and
restore thee, and render unto thee thy former joy and grace? Why did thou not
run into his embraces, and in token of thy repentance and belief, in thy body
lay hold upon him, and wash him with thy tears against his Burial? But behold
the mystery of Peter's recovered Faith! see how he acknowledges his Savior
when he turns from him; and is reinvested with the honor of a Disciple,
though he seem still rather to forsake, than to follow his Lord. His Repentance
does in action confirm, what his Faith once did in words confess, That Christ
was the Son of the Living God. Behold in the departure of Peter, an Article of
thy Faith, even the Divinity of thy Savior. Had not Christ been as well
without, where Peter wept, as within the Hall where the Jews blasphemed, Peter
had again denied, and not returned unto his Lord: and that which is now a
mystery, would have been a revolt. It is nothing but Faith that from without
could still through the Walls look into the House, and there through the
infirmity of a buffetted and contemned body, descry the glory of a merciful and
reconciled God. It is nothing but Faith that can from Earth look into the
highest Heaven; and when it is absent from Christ, not only groan after him,
but grasp and lay hold upon him. The Ubiquity of Christ gives unto that
Believer who has interest in him, a kind of Ubiquity also: And as he is in
Earth by his Power, though in Heaven by his Presence: So a Believer, though in
his Body on the Earth, yet is in Heaven by his Faith. It is the nature of Faith
to give, as subsistence and being unto things yet to come, so a kind of
presence also unto things most remote and distant; and can even converse, and
lay hold on Christ, though he be in Heaven.

MED. XXVIII.
BUT what, Peter! though thou can find thy Savior without the Hall, is there
no comfort to be taken in his sensible Presence? does the possession of Faith
make vain and fruitless the fruition of sight? Is it not some joy to see him,
because it is so much Blessedness to believe in him? Was there health in his
Garment, and is there no pleasure in his Presence? Was the Womb blessed that
held him, and is there not some blessedness in the eyes that see, and the hands
that embrace him? Was it from Temptation, which had before foiled thee, that
thou did fly as a burnt Child from the fire? Was the voice of a Virgin able
to drive thee from the Son of a Virgin; or the Challenge of a Servant, from the
presence of a Lord? Was not that Look able to confirm thee, which was able to
convert thee? Or could thou fear to fall from the Rock, thy Savior, because
thou had before fallen from the Sand, thy Presumption? Or was it out of a
loathing of that place of blasphemy where thy Master and thy God did suffer the
base reproaches of wicked men? could the air of that place be infectious, where
was so precious, so innocent, so saving a breath to sweeten it? Was the
blasphemy of a Jew more pestilent to pollute, than the Grace of thy Jesus to
sanctify the Highpriests Hall? The presence of Christ could make that place a
Heaven to Peter, which the blasphemies of a Jew had made his Hell. It was
neither the vileness of the place, nor the question of a Servant which could
have done thee any violence. They might tempt, they could not wound thee. A
Mountain stands unmoved though the Winds be impetuous, when a smaller breath
not only shakes but breaks down a reed. If thy Lord have given thee strength,
thy Adversary cannot give thee a fall: If he beckon on thee to turn, thou art
by his finger sufficiently armed against a Torment, a Devil, much more against
a Temptation, a Maid. But such is the recovery of Faith, as of Health, it
proceeds by degrees, from weakness unto strength, from fear unto confidence,
and dares not trust in Christ without some trembling. Peter is assured of his
Master's love, and yet he is ashamed of his own sin. Shame is ever sins
companion. He durst not to look that Master in the face, whom so lately he had
denied: He could with the Publican knock his breast, he could not look up to
Heaven, to the face of his Master; he could pray unto Christ, he could not
accompany him. And as the modesty of nature makes a man able to deliver more of
his mind in absence than in presence: so the shame of sin makes Peter more
confident without, than within the Hall.

MED. XXIX.
WE find not that Peter after this, saw Christ till his Resurrection: And then
none so particularly invited unto his sight, none so forward and hasty to have
recourse unto the Garden. Was it grief at his Master's misery, or at his own
sin (with the lamentation of both which, he could best in private glut
himself)? or was it fear of the Majesty in his Master's face, or of weakness in
his own breast, which drove him out of the Hall to weep? surely perhaps all. He
departed from the face of his Lord, from the company of his Tempters, provoked
thereunto by the shame of his Fall, by the experience of his frailty: He
departed from the committing of more sin, from the sight of more misery,
because he knew not whether he should find more mercy, or be able to bear more
sorrow. But when once Christ through the power of his Resurrection, had clothed
himself with Glory, and Peter by the Angels message was unclothed of fear, none
more hasty to enjoy the benefit of his real Presence. He ran, and went down
into the Sepulcher, not hoping to see there a weak and captive body, but (as he
did) a conquered and deceived grave; only the relics of weakness, and the
witnesses of power. What haste, think we, made he to rise up unto his Savior's
Kingdom, that was so ready to go down into his grave? when Nature is raised up
from her ruins and decays, when the Conscience is cleans'd from the guilt of
sin, or burden of sorrow, when a lapsed Saint has regained his measure of
Grace and Tranquillity, he is so much the more speedy in Heavenly pursuits, by
how much his former fall had been a disadvantage to his progress: and those
sharp sins which, being acted, did wound him, do now, being remembered, only
spur him forward in his way. The very sins of the Godly, contrary to the
barrenness of their own nature (which brings forth nothing but death), are by
the Mercy and Wisdom of God, made fruitful and of use unto them. The Devil in
wounding them, wounds himself; and though his fiery darts may perhaps at first
find entrance; yet when they come to the bottom of a faithful heart, they meet
there with a Rock of Salvation, from whence they are driven back into the face
of him that threw them. When the Devil batters any one Virtue in a Saint, he
does in the issue nothing else but pluck out the stones of his own building.
Though he breaks David's bones, though he sift and winnow Peter's Faith; yet
both, when they are restored, will be like a broken bone, stronger; and like
Wheat sifted, finer; and will also by instructing and confirming of others;
draw more men from him, than he before had done Graces from them.

MED. XXX.
PEter had expected great security in the Denial of his Savior; and behold the
issue and upshot of all, He wept birterly. Now are his eyes turned, as it were,
into a Valley of Megiddo, his head into a fountain of water, and his soul is
even drenched in whole floods of sorrow^ Sin is not only deceitful in depriving
us of those hoped Immunities which we seek for in it, but fruitful likewise in
an ample increase of evil. It not only depriveth us of comfort, but heapeth
unto our misery. Like a great thick cloud, which not only interposeth between
the Sun of Righteousness and us, hiding the light of his Countenance from us,
but withal also showers down on our deceived Souls whole storms of woe and
shame. There is ever a Weeping follows Sin. Either such a desperate weeping as
has that dreadful Concomitant added unto it, Gnashing of teeth, or such a
Repentant weeping as is sealed up from the mouth of Christ himself with a
Blessing until the day of Redemption. And blessed indeed are the tears of a
converted revolter; and happy is this very misery of a mourning offender; for
as water boiling and running over, puts out that fire which first raised it up;
So the Tears of true Repentance serve to extinguish those flames and terrors of
Conscience, and to blot out those burning sins (the issues of Satan's fiery
Temptations) which first caused them, by the means of Christ's Grace, to run
over. Lord! give us in the first place thy sustaining Grace, which may preserve
us from the danger of great and scandalous offenses: But if thy Wisdom find it
otherwise requisite, to punish our presumptions with a temporary desertion, and
by withdrawing thy power to let us be foiled with the assault of carnal
Temptations; yet never deny us that Restoring Grace, which may re-establish us
in the favor. Give us, if not the Grace of Standing, yet the Grace of Weeping;
that though we cannot be Innocent, we may be Repentant.

FINIS.

