THE AUTHOR and SUBJECT OF HEALING IN THE CHURCH Set forth in a SERMON Preached
before the Right Honorable The PARLIAMENT of England, at St. Margarets Church
in Westminster, on Wednesday April 25. 1660. Being the day of their Assembly.

By Edward Reynolds D. D. and Dean of Christ-Church, Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Newcomb for George Thomason, at the Rose and Crown in
St. Pauls-Church-yard. 1660.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
WHen I was commanded by the Council of State to Preach before you on the day
of the Parliaments Assembling, I could not but reflect on the woeful and
never-enough to be lamented confusions, under which these Nations were ready to
sink and perish, till the Lord was pleased, as it were (...), to raise up an
Honorable Instrument, by his Wisdom and Valor to put a stop to the progress,
and to open a way, that you by your Counsel and Authority, might put a period
to the Being of them. In order whereunto, I thought it my duty, as a Minister
of the Gospel of Peace, and a Servant to our Great Lord, whose work it was to
heal and recover, Luke 4. 18. Humbly to set before you the Author and the
Object; and on the Monday following, before the Right Honorable House of Peers,
the means and method of Gods healing a Sick Nation: And thereupon to be seech
you, so to imitate the example of Christ, who is the Lord that heals us, so
to promote the fear of his Name, and the great works of Humiliation,
Supplication, and Reformation amongst us, as that you might comfortably plead
his promise, to hear, forgive, and heal the Land: For the Lord will be with you
while you are with him; and if you seek him, he will be found of you.

And for this work of setting up the fear of God, and real conversion unto him,
though godliness have as many enemies, as there be Devils in Hell, or wicked
men in the World; yet profaneness is in it self so shameful, and holiness so
amiable, that endeavors in this most weighty work, will, I am confident, meet
with no prevalent opposition or obstruction among you. All sober men of every
persuasion, how soever otherwise divided, acknowledging the necessity, and
professing their desires, that the Name of the Lord may in purity of Doctrine,
and in holiness of life, be magnified amongst us.

You have made an happy entrance unto this healing work, (for certainly the
great sufferings of our Princes, have had a strong causality upon our
distractions, it can never be well with the Body, while it is ill with the
Head,) and you have hereby blasted the projects and attempts of any, whose
ambition might animate them, to awaken old, or to kindle new flames amongst us.

If together with this noble act of Justice and Loyalty, you proceed to secure
the Interest of Jesus Christ, by establishing the True Reformed Religion, an
Orthodox, learned and painful Ministry, pure Worship, and the Power of
godliness, suppressing and putting to shame all profane practices, whereby the
wrath of the Lord may be again kindled against us, you shall thereby greatly
blast the desires of licentious and evil men; and comfort the hearts, and give
evidence of the answer of God to the prayers of good men. Which that you may be
enabled and assisted to do by the power of Divine grace, is the most earnest
prayer of

May 5. 1660. Your Honors most humbly devoted in the Lord ED. REYNOLDS.

THE AUTHOR and SUBJECT Of Healing in the Church. Set forth in a SERMON
Preached before the Right Honorable the PARLIAMENT of England, at St. Margarets
Church in Westminster, on Wednesday April 25. 1660. Being the day of their
Assembly.
Mal. 4: 2, 3. But unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of Righteousness
arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves
of the stall.

3. And ye shall tread down the Wicked.


OUr Prophet was the last of all the Prophets of the Old Testament, after which
they were not to look for any other, till Elias the forerunner of the Angel of
the Covenant (who was the great Prophet of all) should come unto them. The
Church appears in his time to have been woefully corrupted, by those sharp
reprehensions of Priests and people, for corruption of worship, for violation
of Covenant, for cont^macy against God, for reproaching his ways, and passing
an hard and false charge against his services as if they were vain and
fruitless. In the midst of this Hypocritical people, the Lord had an Holy
remnant who feared his name, and spoke often to one another. Both these seemed
to call for the coming of Christ, and to delight in the promise of the Angel of
the Covenant. chap. 2: 17. 3: 1. And accordingly here is a promise of his
coming speedily. But though desired by both, he should come with great
difference to the one and the other; to the one after a terrible manner, with
refineing fire and fullers soap, with fan, and sword, with a spirit of
Judgment and burning to consume the stubble, to gather the body of that wicked
people into Math. 3: 12. Math. 10: 34. Isai, 4: 4.
Jerusalem as into an Oven and furnace, and there with a final and absolute
(...) to dissolve the judaical polity, and leave them neither root nor branch,
no visible hope of restitution again, chap. 4: 1. which was done by the army of
the Romans under Titus. To the other with a promise of Comfort and Reviving.
chap. 3: 17. They shall be mine, in that day when I make up my Jewels, and I
will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him. And that so
remarkable, that the reproach cast by the wicked Hypocrites upon the ways of
God, ver. 14, 15. Ye have said it is vain to serve God: What profit is it that
we have kept his Ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord
of Hosts? And now we call the proud happy etc. should be clearly confuted, by
the conspicuous difference which the Lord would make between the righteous and
the wicked, ver. 18. the one jewels and sons to be preserved and spared, the
other stubble to be burnt and dissolved; the one to be healed and restored, the
other to be trodden down and despised. Concluding all with an awakening precept,
that since they were not to expect any other Prophet, till Eliah and Christ
should come, they should therefore remember the Law of Moses, and thereby fit
themselves for the entertainment of their Messiah.

The words contain a gracious and discriminating mercy unto an holy remnant
that feared Gods name, for their supportance and comfort against the terror of
the foregoing threatening, that unto them the Sun of Righteousness, the promised
Messiah, should arise in his Incarnation with healing in his wings; and when
gross darkness did cover the people, Isai. 60. 2. Isai. 9: 2.
and they did sit even in the shadow of death, not only veiled over with the
Shadows and (...) of the Law, (...) (...) misled by the (...) glosses of S^ibes
and Pharisees, sold and devoured by their own shepherds, woefully oppressed
under Alexander, Zach. 11: 5.
Janneus, Hircanus, Aristobulus, sub^ued by Pompey into the form of a Roman
Province, and then sorely afflicted under the Tyranny of Antipater and Herod;
that after such a night of darkness and distress, the promised Messiah should
come to break the yoke and rod of their oppressor, and assert his people Isah
9. 4 10: 27.
into Light and Liberty again. That he should come as the warm and welcome beams
of the Sun, after a dead winter, or a gloomy and tempestuous night, to heal and
remove all the sins and sorrows of his people.

In the words we have these particulars considerable. 1. The discriminating
grace of God between a Remnant that feared his name, and the body of a co^upt
and profane people. 2. The supposition of a State of sickness and soreness, of
sin and sorrow, under which even this Holy Remnant did lie; with a gracious
promise of healing unto them. 3. The Author of this healing, expressed
metaphorically by the name of the Sun of Righteousness, as before by the name
of the Angel or Messenger of the Covenant. 4. The means of deriving this
healing from this Sun of Righteousness. 1. His rising. 2. His wings or beams,
which are the Vehicula of all the light and virtue which flow eth forth from
him 5. The proper and peculiar Subject of this Healing, singled out by way of
gracious compellation, unto you that fear my name. 6. The effects and fruits of
this Healing, and they are three, 1. Going forth, as recovered men use to do
out of their bed or chamber when the Sun shines in a warm and beautiful day,
to take the air and refresh themselves. 2. Grewing up, in stature, in
strength, speedily, as fatted C^lves, luxuriating in a full and pleas^nt
pasture. 3. Treading down and crushing the wicked as Grapes in the Press, as
ashes under their Feet, in a full and triumphant victory.

I shall handle the words thus distributed after a double manner. 1. In the
spiritual, proper, and theological sense of them as they are a promise of
Christ, and H^aling by him to an afflicted remnant of men that fear Go^s name.
2. In an Applicatory and particular sense, as they are suitable to the present
solemnity and occasion.

1. The Church of God was at this time in a most defaced and corrupted
condition, Gods worship profaned, his name blasphemed, his treasuries robbed,
his Judgments que stioned, his reproofs despised: yet in the midst of all this
rubbish there is a Remnant according to the Election of Grace. Though the
Church be not always visibly Glorious, yet in the most collapsed state
thereof, in the worst times, it is ^ever without visible professors who have
stood up to bear witness unto persecuted Truth. The Lord had Seven thousand in
Israel that had not bowed the 1. Reg. 19. 18.
knee to Baal. When our adversaries challenge us to show where our Church was
besore Luther, we answer, That in the midst of the greatest darkness and
superstition, there were such fundamental truths of faith and repentance, and
holy Life r^tained, as the Lord no doubt did sanctify to the Salvation of
many, who lived in the body of the Roman Church, and were by their very
Ignorance preserved from the dangerous superstructions which the Doctors of
that Church built upon that foundation, as the Renowned Bishop Sermon of the
unity of the Church.
Usher has observed. 2. There were in no age wanting Holy and zealous men who
did boldly appear against the prevailing Erro^ of the times, as our learned
men have largely proved in their Historico-polemical writings, and large
volumes have been written of the Catalogues of such witnesses in every age of
the Church, who have declared against many Corruptions of the times wherein
they lived. But that there has always been a visible conspicuous Glory in the
maine Body of the Church, is evidently disproved by the persecutions which
prevailed from time to time against it. How did the Arian Heres^e overspread
the world, when such glorious lights is Athanasius and Hilary were persecuted
for professing the truth? ^ngemuit totus orbis says Hieron: adverse
Luciferianos.
Hierom, and Arianum se esse miratus est. It is not less easy for us to find
out our Religion and the professors thereof in the corrupt ages of the Church,
then for them to find out theirs in the pure and primitive.

Sure we are in the worst times the Lord has ever had a people that feared his
name, whose hearts he has by select promises and Comforts supported, against
the terror of those curses which he has denounced against the corrupt body of
the people. Say to the Righteous, it shall be well with them, Isai. 3. 10.
^inde the Testimony, seal the Law among my Disciples, Isai. 8. 16. There is a
remnant according to the election of grace, when the rest are blinded, Romans 11.
5. 7.

Hence that usual intermixture of Threats and Promises in the Prophets, as a
president unto Preachers of the truth in all ages, who ought with such prudence
and tenderness to manage this part of their Ministry, as neither to harden the
wicked in their sins by undue application of mercy, nor to make sad the hearts
of those whom the Lord has not ^ade sad, by a promis^uous denunciation of
wrath, but righ^ly to divide the word of truth, and to give to every one their
own portion.

2. Nor must we here pass by unobserved that discriminating Grace of God,
whereby the Jewels and the Stubble, the Godly for healing, and the wicked for
burning, are distinguished the one from the other. The Lord indeed does most
righteously dispense both healing to those that fear him, according to the
Grace of his covenant; and burning to those that hate him, according to the
Justice of his Law. And it is true, the wicked make thems^lvs fit for the
burning, for their destruction is of themselves, Hos. 13. 9. Their way and
their doings have procured it, Jer^. 4. 18. it is a choice of their own
making, Isai. 66. 3. But they that are healed, are not the Authors or original
procurers either of the grace whereby they fear God, or of the merc^ whereby God
heales them; God alone by his free Grace makes the difference between those
that serve him and those that serve him not. He reveals to babes, what he
hides from the wise and prudent, and that because it seems good to him. Math.
11. 25. 26. To you it is given, to them it is not given. Math, 13. 11. I^ is n^
of him that wills, ^nor of him that runeth, but of God that shows mercy,
Romans 9, 16 If I be one of that Remnant that fear Gods name, I have no reason
to glory in my self, it is God that gives me an heart and away to fear him,
Ier. 32. 39. It is by his grace that I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15. 10. It is he
that works in me to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. It is
he that makes me to differ, 1 Cor. 4. 7. ut Totum Deo detur, qui Hominis
voluntatem bonam et praeparat adjuvandam, Aug. ^nchirid: c. 32.
et adjuvat praeparatam, as the incomparable Champion of the Grace of God St.
Austin speaks; That the whole work may be ascribed unto God, who both
prepares the good will of man that it may be helped, and helps it being
prepared.

And again Certum est nos velle cumvolumus Aug. de Great. and lib. Arb. c 16.
contra dua^ Epist ^elag. lib. 4. c 6. and de d^ perseve^at. cap. 13. de
praedestinat: Sanct. c. 10
sed ille facit ut velimus. It is certain, that we will when we do will, but it
is he that makes us to will. And again, nos volumus, sed Deus in nobis
operatur and velle, nos operam^r, sed Deus in nobis operatur and operari; we
will, but God works ^n us to will; we work, but God works in us to wo^k
also. And again, Ille facit ut nos faciamus quae praecepit, nos non facimus ut
ille faciat quae promisit; He makes us to do the things which he commands,
we make not him to do the things which he promises. O that the wanton and
proud wits of men would leave the Lord to do with his own what it pleases
him, (as he will certainly do notwithstanding all their passionate
altercations, Mat. 20. 15.) and would let the difference between him that
fears the Lord, and him that fears him not, be ascribed only unto the gift
of grace, without the which, no man would fear him; which rich grace, a nullo
duro Cord respuitur, ideo enim datur ut cordis duritia Aug de praedest. Sanct.
c. 8.
primitus auferatur, as the same Father speaks, is not refused by any hard
heart, for it is therefore given that hardness of heart may be taken away.
Though man be free to resist grace, yet he is not free to conquer it; Gods
mercy is victorious as well as his justice, That which comes into your mind,
shall not be at all, that ye say, we will be as the Heathen, as the Families of
the Countries, to serve wood and stone, as I live says the Lord God, surely
with a mighty hand, and with a stretehed out arm, and with fury poured out,
will I rule over you; Ezekiel. 20. 32, 33. Where the Lord threatens to conquer
them with his mercy, he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, Si Deus
miseretur etiam volumus, ad eandem quippe misericordiam pertinet ut velimus. I^
Ad Simply. lib. I. qu. 2.
men would be but contented that God should use his free will in giving his
grace, as well as they contend for their own free will to accept it; if the
time which is spent in disputing for free will, were spent in begging it: or if
when we beg free will of God, that we may accept grace and not refuse it, we
would but allow it consonant to Gods power and goodness, to grant us our
petition, and to cause us not to refuse it, (and certainly lex supplicandi
legem statuit Credendi, as Celestinus speaks, we may believe that God will
g^ant, what we pray for according to his will) the world would not be so
continually troubled with the hot and passionate disputes in these arguments as
we find it is, certainly every humble and holy man will not only think it his
duty to praise God for that he gave him a power to convert, but that he gave
him Conversion it self, and the very work of willing and turning unto God.

3. We may here observe the double most different effect of the Gospel of
Christ upon proud and penitent sinners, a savor of death to one, of life to
the other, 2 Cor. 2. 15. 16. fire to the one, balsome to the other; as the same
perfume kills the vulture, which revives the Dove; the same Red Sea a passage to
Israel, a grave to Egypt; the same pillar light to one, and darkness to the
other; the same sun makes the Garden smell sweet, and the Dunghill stink.

Great therefore must our care be what affections we bring to hearing the word.
It is given for life, but we may find it unto death, according to the
disposition of heart we bring with us thereunto, an honest and good Heart, a
meek and quiet Spirit, a melted ^oul ready to be cast into the mould of the
word, is the best preparation to meetwith Christ in his Gospel.

II. We see here Healing promised to those that fear Gods name, and thence we
may certainly conclude, that the Holiest men do want healing. 1. As we are like
unto Christ, per primitias Spiritus, by the first fruits of the spirit, Aug.
depeccat Me^it and Remiss. c. 8 E^ 7. 20. Jam. 3: 2.
so we are unlike unto him per reliquias vetustatis, by the remainders of
corruption; There is not a just man that lives and sins not. Though the
guilt of sin be removed in our justification, and the power subdued in our
sanctification, yet the sickness and remainders of it are not abolished till
our dissolution. Ista vitia gratia dei medicante curantur, prius Aug. contra
Julian. Pelag. lib 5. c. 7.
^t reat^ non teneant, deinde ut constict^ non vincant, postremo ut omni ex
part Sanata, nulla omnino remaneant, as St. Austin speaks. These Evils are
cured by the Grace of God, first that they may not hold us by their guilt, next
that they may not conquer us in the conflict, and lastly that being thoroughly
healed, none of them may remain. And these remainders of corruption the Lord
here leaves in us to be matter of daily ^onslict, of deep humbling, of earnest
Prayer, ^t sit quod pet^ntibus largiter adjiciat quod confitentibus Aug. de
spir. and (...). cap u't.
clementer ignoscat, that he may bountisully give the things for which we pray,
and graciously pardon the sins which we confess. 2. Besides our sins, we are
surrounded with Enemies, and beset on every side with Temptations, and though
we have a promise of victory over them, and sufficiency of grace against them,
yet we have no promise of absolute immunity, that we shall be invulnerable by
them. The experience of our own Lapses, and of the Holiest and greatest Saints
sufficiently evidence unto us what poor and frail Creatures we are when the
Lord leaves us, to t^y us, as he did Hezekiah, 2 Cron. 32. 31. 3. Sorrow is the
natural Offspring of sin and temptation, a sick and a wounded man cannot but
feel the pain of that which weakneth him. There are not any men, more men of
sorrow and acquainted with grief, then they whose eyes are most open to see,
whose hearts most tender to feel the weight of sin, the terrors of God, and
the Assaults of temptation. Being therefore subject to sins, to wounds, to
sorrows, no wonder if they stand in need of healing.

And indeed none call out so importunately for healing, either for themselves
or for the Ch^ch of God, as they that fear ^is name. Jer. 8. 22. Psalm. 51. 8.
18. Psalm. 38. 3^9. He that shall read the doleful complaints of Job, of Heman,
of Hezekiah, and others mourning under the weight of sin and wrath; of Je remy,
Daniel and Nehemiah bewailing the breaches and desolations of Sion, will find
it one principal evidence of a Godly man, to pour out his complaint before
the Lord when he is overwhelmed. Psalm. 102. 1. no desires so strong in t^m as
to have their eyes opened, their hearts purged, their sin removed, their peace
enlarged, the truth of God vindicated, his worship restored, his ordinances
preserved, his presence continued in the midst of his people. Promises of
healing in God, do awaken prayers for healing in them. Isai. 19. 22. Jer. 31.
8, 9, 10. 33. 6. Hos. 6. 1. Isai. 57. 15.

III. The Au^hor of this healing is here Luke 4. 18. Act. 4. 30. Isai. 30. 26.
the Sun of Righteousness, who came purposely, to bind up the broken hearted,
to appoint to them that mourn, beauty for ashes etc. Isai. 61: 1, 2, 3.
Concerning him let us consider 1. The reason of his Appellation, 2. The manner
of his healing. For the Appellation, he was called by Balaam, a Star, one that
was to have dominion, Number. 24, 17, 19. A great Light. Isai. 9. 2. (...), the
day Spring or Sun rising, Luke 1. 78. A Bright Star of the morning, Rev. 22.
16. an everlasting light that never goes down, Jsai. 60: 20. That takes away
all night, Rev. 22. 5.

The Apostle tells us, that by Christ the Worlds were made, H^b. 1. 2. The old
visible world, wherein is the natural Sun; and a New heaven and earth wherein
dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. unto which belongs this Son of
Righteousness. And therefore the time of the Go^el, is called a day of Grace
and Salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Romans 13: 12, 13. And Believers children of the
light and of the day, 1 These. 5: 5. W^erein darkness of Error and Ignorance is
dispelled, and glorious things, which had been hidden from ages and generations
manifested unto the World.

Christ is the Light of the World to come (as the Evangelical Church seems to
be called, Heb. 2: 5.) That Light, John 1. 8. 3: 19. An heavenly Light, so
Evangelical Doctrines are called (...), Heavenly things, John 3: 12, 31. Heb.
9: 23.

A full Light, John 1: 14. In him did all fullness dwell, Col. 1: 19. An
Indeficient light which endures for ever, as a faithful Witness in Heaven,
Psalm. 89: 36. Isai. 60: 19. A primitive Independent Light, which deriveth not
his righteousness from any other fountain, he sanctified himself by his own
spirit, John 17, 19. A diffusive light which sheddeth it self on every other
Vessel of Light of his ^ess we all receive. He silleth all in all, John 1: 16.
Ephesians. 1: 23. A moveing Light, which goes through all the Earth, to the ends of
the world, Psalm. 19: 3. 6. He came and preached peace to those afar off, and to
them that were nigh Ephesians. 2: 17. An Operative, influential, and be^gne Light,
which comes with Life, as well as with Luster, and therefore it is called the
womb of the morning, Psalm. 110: 3. 3. reviving, restoring, ripening the fiuits
of the Earth. Psalm. 36: 9.

The means and manner of his Healing is by his Arising unto us. There is a Sun
extant at midnight, as well as at noon, but he comforts not us but by his
rising. Now this rising not^th,

1. His Incarnation, the word which is translated (...), Oriens, the dayspring
or sunrising, Luke 1: 78. is in the original (...) a Branch, Zach 3. 8: And as
here a Sun of righteousness; so elsewhere a Branch of Righteousness, Jer. 23.
5. 33: 15. A Sun of Righteousness, so he is the Lord from Heaven, the Lord of
David: a Branch of Righteousness, so he is the son and the Offspring of David.
This is our comfort, that he is as well Germen, springing out of the Earth, as
Oriens looking down from Heaven, Psalm. 85: 11.

2. His manifestation in spirit and power, by the Gospel to the consciences of
his people, by the beauties of his Grace and Holiness, illightning the mind,
inclining the will, healing the affections, converting the cons^ience,
discovering to the Soul the deep things of God, which is called the rising of
the Day Star in the heart. 2 Pet. 1. 19.

3. His rouzing men out of ignorance and security, unto the businesses of an
holy life, for the sun rises that men may go forth to their labors, Psalm.
104. 22, 23. The light says, awake thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5. 14. Romans 13. 11.

4. His Heavenly conduct and direction, showing us the way wherein we should
walk, Psalm. 143: 8. Psalm. 5. 8. Isai. 30: 21.
and leading us therein, discovering Enemies and temptations behind us,
precipices, gulfs, snares, and pits before us, Luke 1. 79. whereas he who
walkethin darkness, knows not whither he goes, Joh. 12. 35.

The Sun of Righteousness thus rising does heal us by his light, and by his
influence. John 16. 8. 11.
1. By the light of his Heavenly Doctrine whereby he convinces of sin, and so
discovers our disease: and then of Righ^snes in him to pardon our sin, and of
Judgment to rescue us out of the dominion and power of Satan 2 By the Infuence
of his ^lessed Spirit efficaciously enforcing the word, an ^educing that virtue
out of it, by which it restores health and beauty to the Soul, This is called
the revealing of the arm of the Lord, Isa, 53. 1. and the hand of the Lord
being with the word. Act. 11. 23.

4. But Christ is in Heaven, and we in Earth, how shall we bring these
together, that the Medicine may be applied to the disease. O^ne agens agit per
Contactum, and this must be either Immediatione suppositi or Immediatione
virtutis, as Philosophers speak. And we have both here, his person being Divine
is Immense and omnipresent. He fills All in All. Ephesians. 1. 23.
His virtue is further conveyed unto us by his Wings, the Beams of this sun of
Righteousness, most swiftly and suddenly flying with Psalm. 139. 9.
his truth and grace into the Soul. And these Wings are;

1. His word and ordinances in which Christ is present with his Church, Math.
18. 20. and presented to it. Gal. 3. 1. The holy Doctrines of the Gospel, and
duties of worship, (are if I may so speak) the Drugs and Materials, the Balm
of Gilead, whereby spiritual diseases, sin and sorrow are cured. As we find
usually in the Gospel, he did but speak the word and diseases were gone. H^
cures were Commands. His ordinances ar^ the Leaves of the Tree of Life, which
are for Matthew. 8. 8, 9.
healing of Nations. Rev. 22. 2.

2. Any Illustrious providence sent down (...) it were from Heaven, when he
does terr^ Isai. 64. 3.
things which we looked not for. Thus he healed the fears of Israel by opening
a way in the Red Sea, and their murmurings in the wilderness by giving them
Waters out of the Rock. Thus he strengthened the faith of Constantine newly
converted by the sign of the name of Christ Eusebius d^ (...) Constantin^ lib 1.
c. 22, 25. Raynolds Conference with Heart. cap 8 divis 4. page 503.
in Heaven, with this inscription, in hoc vinces. Wonderful providence which
bring any healing to discomposed and dilacerated Nations, are as so many beams
of the Sun of righteousness, who as Lord of all Creatures orders them all for
his Churches good. The Wheels in Ezekiels Vision of living. Creatures, whereby
I understand the various and perplexed revolutions of all affairs in the World,
were full of Eyes, noteing the guidance Ezekiel. 1. 16, 1^
of Divine wisdom ordering them all to the welfare of his Church and People.

3. Any special servants and officers of his whom he commissionateth and
sends forth for the good of his people, whether the Angels of Heaven, as we
read of an healing Angel, Joh. 5. 4. Or the Angels of the Church to whom
belongs the dispensation of wholesome and healing Doctrines, 1 Timothy 6. 3. Tit.
2. 1. To open the eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, Act. 26. 18.
Or any other renowned instruments and messengers of help and comfort to an
afflicted people. These are, if I may pursue the Metaphor, the Apothecaries, to
weigh out, mix and temper and prepare the drugs according to the direction of
Christ, which the Apostle expresses by the word (...), Rightly to divide the
word, 2 Timothy 2: 15. And our Savior by (...). To give the due portion of meat,
Luke 12. 42. which some S^ckins de con^iv. l. 1. cap. 23.
would have to allude unto the custom of measuring out daily or monthly unto
Servants their allowances of diet.

4. His own holy Spirit, who in Tertullians expression is vicarius Christi, as
the beam is Tertul: de praescriptionibus. John 16: 15. Romans 5: 5. Cant. 4: 16.
of the Sun, who takes from Christ, and shows unto us; making report to the
Souls of believers of the favor of Christ unto them, sheading abroad his love
into their hearts, blowing upon his Garden, that the spices thereof may flow
forth, as a Witness, a Seal, an Earnest, a Seed, bringing Christ and all his
healing graces and comforts unto the Souls of his Servants, in their sins and
sorrows to revive them.

5. Here is the Subject of this healing; where observe. 1. The gracious and
special compellation, the Lord speaks by name to his sick and sorrowful
servants, with a peculiar favor as to his own sheep, John 10: 3. keeps a
matricula and public Register wherein t heir names are enroled, Mal. 3: 16.
Psalm. 87: 4-6. They are engraven on the breast of our High Priest, Ex^d. 28: 9.
He takes exact notice of their wants, their complaints, their tears, their
desires, and shines in with particular comfort and healing upon them; so to
Mary, John 20: 16. So to the Woman of Syrophaenicia, O woman great is thy
Faith, be it unto thee as thou will, Mar. 15: 28. So to Peter, go tell his
Disciples and Peter, poor mourning Peter, comfort him by name, Mark 16: 7.

2. The immediate preparation and proper disposition unto healing, to fear Gods
name. There is a double virtue of Christ toward men.

1. A Quickening virtue, and the Subjects of this virtue are those who are dead
in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2. 1, 5.

2. An healing virtue toward those who though they be alive, are yet in a
weak, wounded, languishing condition, looking out after help and recovery. No
such way for a sick and wounded nation to be healed as to fear Gods name, see
Solomon's Prayer to this parpose, 1 Reg. 8. 33-39. and the Lords gracious answer
unto that payer, 2 Chronicles 7. 13, 14. If my people that are called by my name
shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked
ways; then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal
their Land. They are his people, his Sons, his Jewels, they call upon him,
mourn toward him, turn to him, seek his face, they sink under the burden of
corruptions, they cry out under the buffets of Satan, under the ravishments of
temptation, Romans 7. 23. 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8.
they pine away under the Judgments of God, they know not what to do but to
look 2 Chro. 20. 12.
up unto him: How can the bowels of an heavenly Father but yearne over a sick,
a mourning, a weeping, a praying, a returning child. See Ephraim bemoaning
himself, turning, repenting, smiteing upon his Thigh, and the Lord presently
relenting over him, and resolving to have mercy upon him, Ier. 31. 18, 19, 20.
Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him,
I do carnestly remember him still; My bowels are troubled for him, I will
surely have mercy upon him says the Lord. It is not murmuring and repineing in
our afflictions, bit^ing the stone which has hurt us, breaking out into
complaints and revengeful animosities against one another, fretting our selves,
cursing our King and our God, as the Prophet speaks, Isai. 8. 21. Gnawing our
Tongues, and refuseing to repent, Rev. 16: 9-11. that is the way to healing. To
be humbled, to accept of the punishment of our sins, to bear the indignation
Levit. 26, ^1. Micah 7. 9.
of the Lord, to seek his sace, to fear his name, to convert unto him, this
only is the way to healing, Isai. 6: 10.

6. We should here proceed to consider the effects and consequences of this
healing, which I must only name, and no more.

1. Going forth, Leaping, Exulting, prepared with joy and vigor, with courage
and enlargement of Heart, unto duty and service, as John, Christ's forerunner is
said to make ready apeople prepared for the Lord, Luke 1: 17. It notes that
Spiritual Joy and Peace, which is the strength of Gods Servants in duty, when
he shines with Light and Healing upon them. Healing and Holiness is a
foundation of Joy, Psalm. 33: 1. 2 Cor. 1: 12. and Joy back again a principle
and preparation unto Holiness, The joy of the Lord is our strength, Nehem. 8:
13. The Servants of the Lord, the trees of righteousness, are ever so much the
fuller of fruit, as they are of comfort, the more the Sun of Righteousness with
his Light and influence does shine upon them, the more they abound in duty and
service.

2. Growing up, in light, in st^ture, in strength, in knowledge, in grace, to
more and more perfection, the most healthy are the most thriving christians. As
many times when persons are recovered out of a fit of sickness they visibly
shoot up, and grow more in a few months then in some years before. So is it
with Gods servants, when they have been delivered from any sore Temptation,
like Antaens they gain by their falls, when they are no more Children, when
they cease to be weak, then they grow. Ephesians. 4. 14. 15.

3. Victory and security against their proudest Enemies, whom the God of peace
will tread down under the feet of his servants, as Joshua made his Captains to
tread on the necks of the Kings of Canaan, Luke 10. 19. Romans 16. 20. Jos. 10.
24. Even for the bruized Reed, and for the Smoking Flax will the Lord bring
forth judgment unto victory. Matthew. 12. 20.

Now from these many Metaphors seting forth Christ unto us, by whose light our
blindness is cured, by whose righteousness our guilt is covered, by whose wings
our corruptions are healed, and we enabled to go forth with Joy, to grow up in
duty, to tread down our Enemies, we learn,

1. The freeness of his grace, nothing on Earth can deserve the shining of the
Sun, nothing in us can deserve the grace of Christ, it shines most freely,
without preceding merit, without consequent re^ibution, who bath first given to
him, and it shall be recompensed to him again, Romans 11. 35.

2. The fullness of his Grace, he is a Sun. If we want wisdom there are
Treasures in him, Col. 2. 3. If Spirit, it is without measure in him, Joh. 3.
34. If any spiritual Grace or Gift, there is unsearchable riches, an
inexhausted Fountain in him, Ephesians. 3. 8. Col. 1. 19. Zach. 13. 1. And he has
it all as a Magazin and Officer for the supply of his servants.

3. The communion and dependence of the Church upon this his fullness: our
light, our righteousness, our grace, our comfort, come from the influence, and
depend upon the presence of Christ with us. The House does not receive a stock
of light to stay in it, though the Sun were gone, but has it by immediate
dependence on the light of the Sun: So every measure of Grace in us depends
in esse and operari upon the influence, concurse, and presence of Christ by his
Spirit with us. Every good work of ours has its beginning, continuance, and
consummation Hierom. ad Ctesiphontem adversus Pelagianos.
in him. Non mihi sufficit quod semel donavit, nisi semper donaverit, says
Jerome. He that begins, perfects, Phil. 1. 6. gives will and work, Phil. 2. 13.
Heart and way, Jere. 32. 39. is the Author and the Finisher, Heb. 12. 2.
Without him we can do nothing, in all things we must grow up in him, Joh. 15.
5. Ephesians. 4. 15. From him is all our fruit found, Hos. 14. 8. We must pray with
David, Take not away thine holy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51. 11. We must take heed
least by our quenching or grieving of him, we provoke him to withdraw himself.

4. The conjunction between the Righteousness of Christ and his healing; where
he receives into grace, he takes away iniquity, and heals backsliding, Hos.
14. 2, 4. He came not only to pardon sin, but to destroy it, 1. John 3. 8. His
Mercy is never without his Grace, his Offices go together, his Sacrifice and
his Scepter cannot be divided. This is one of the greatest comforts that a
believer has, that at length his lusts shall be consumed. Even Heaven it self
would not be a place of glory, if a man were to carry his sin along with him
thither.

I have thus done with the General and Theological Tractation of the words: I
now proceed very briefly unto such an Application of them, as may come closer,
and be more seasonable and suitable to this Honorable Solemnity.

That this great Council and College of Physicians has a dangerously sick
Patient to look after, Three Nations, and the Church of God in them, like the
man between Jerusalem and Jericho, wounded and hal^ dead, Luke 10. 30.
we have had these many years the best, o^ rather worst assurance that may be,
by feeling the sickness; so that there need be n^ further proof of it. We have
seen and fel^ with sorrow and amazement, the honor o^ the Parliaments of
England shamefully assaulted, Princes bleeding out their Souls, sojourning in
Mesech, and in the Tents of Kedar; Peers and Patriots secluded from Psalm. 120.
5.
their Honorable and Rightful Trust; the great Council of the Nation
sesquidimiated; a learned and faithful Ministry reproached, ready to be
sacrificed, brought to the brow of the precipice; Ordinances decried, Errors,
and Heresies cumulated, the Public worship of God interrupted, the Assemblies
of his people on his own day, profanely affronted by Mechanics, working their
ordinary works in our Churches and Pulpits: We have seen and felt our Laws and
our Foundations threatened, our Ships broken, our Trade obstructed, our
Treasures exhausted, our Merchants discouraged, our Religion crumbled, our
Church-Congregations shamed and defiled with the impure and obscene intrusion
of naked persons, clothed with nothing but dung and impudence. We have heard
of families raised upon the ruins of others, and of families ruined by
perjurious crimina^ons. Indeed, we have seen and heard of more evils and
confusions, then the hour of a Sermon, or the length of an History can well
enumerate. If sins, if sorrows, if shame, if fear, if dangers, if frenzies, if
quakings, if convulsions, if breach upon breach, if change upon change, if
divided minds, if dis-joynted hearts, if inconsistent interests, if incoherent
designs, if vicissitudes of Government as mutable as the courses of the Moon,
if Altar against Altar, Doctrine against Doctrine, Worship against Worship,
Post by post, threshold by threshold, be symptoms of a sick body; certainly
this great College of Physicians has a very sick patient to look Ezekiel. 43. 8.
after.

Nay, which is much to be bewailed, even they who fear the name of the Lord
onevery hand, of every persuasion, if they will impartially review their own
ways, will find that by their mutual jealousies, breaches, disaffections,
distances, animosities, affectations of pre-eminence and domination, pursuance
of interests, preserving of stations and new raised estates; and many other the
like miscarriages have contributed a great share to the sicknesses and sorrows
of the common body, and caused the name of God, and the honor of Religion to be
evil spoken of.

Your proper work, Right Honorable Patriots, is to be Healers (so Rulers are
call^, Isai. 3. 7.) Healers to these three Nations. We have looked long for
peace, and there came no good; and for the time of healing, and behold Jer. 14.
19.
trouble. If the Lord have reserved you for such a time, for such a work as
this, to be eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, Fathers to the poor, as one
that comfort the Mourners, Job. 29. 15, 16. 25
as Job speaks, the ear that hears you shall bless you, the eye that sees you,
shall bear witness to you. It shall be written for the generation to come, and
the people which shall be created, Psalm. 102. 18.
shall praise the Lord for you. The Lord shall make you the head, and not the
tail, you shall be above only, and not beneath, Deuteronomy. 2^. 13. It is a weighty
enterprise; the cure difficult, the disease complicate, great skill and wisdom,
great Love and Caution, great Patience and tenderness is required unto it.
There may be danger of miscarriage by clashing of Councils, by partiality of
Interests, by mis-judging of Cases, by the acrimonie of Purgatiyes, by the
height of Cordials, by inequality and disproportionate Applications, by
minding the parts asunder, as divided from the whole.

O come with none but healing Resolutions, with none but closing and uniting
affections; let one Heart, one Soul, one End, one Spirit, animate your whole
Body. If this precious ointment of unity and peace be first upon you i^ will
fall down to the skirts of the Nation. The Patients will not fall out, if the
Physicians be agreed.

Think with your selves, that you hear the life and being, the ancient honor
and renown of these Nations, call aloud unto you for Healing. England sometimes
a terror to her proudest enemies, a balance to all the Interests of
Christendom, now a supplicant to her own Children to keep her alive.

Think that you hear the concurrent cry of the Protestant Churches, which are
greatly concerned in our Weal, or woe, (the Protestant Religion, being the
Interest of England, as the Duke of Rhoan has gravely observed) calling upon
you to heal us, that they may be whole.

Think that you hear the importunities of all the people of the Land, and all
orders therein call unto you for Healing. Princes and Peers long dethroned and
eclipsed in their honor and splendour. Citizens long decayed in their trade and
commerce. Contrymen long exhausted with heavy expenses upon narrow estates.
Ministers long discouraged by swarms of dangerous and corrupt opinions, by that
abundance of Atheism, Skepticism, Neutralitie, Indifferency, Profaneness,
Contempt of Ordinances, which the looseness of these times, like an opened
sluice, or a breach in (...) bank, has let in as a deluge upon the Church of
God amongst us.

Think that you hear your own families, your wives, your children, Et natos
natorum, and qu^nascuntur ab illis, the generations yet unborn, calling unto
you to lay up Healing for them, and like the man of Macedonia to the Apostle,
saying, Come and help us. Acts 16. 9.


And if you will give me leave to tell you where you must begin; you must begin
at this Sun of Righteousness; you must be wings, beams, Angels, Emanations from
him, if you will bring help and healing to his people. From him all your Wisdom
and Counsil, all your Love and Zeal, all your Fidelity and Sufficiency is
derived. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves; but our sufficiency is of God, who alone makes able Counselors in the
State, as well as Ministers in the Church.

And as he is the Father of all your Light and Counsel; so by his blessing
alone, they operate. Without him you can do nothing: As man lives not by Bread
alone, so he recovereth not by Physic alone, but by every word which
proceeds out of the mouth of God. He is the Lord that heals us, Exodus 15.
26. He that gave his Disciples power to cure diseases, Luke 9. 1. must do the
same for you, if you be our healers: And therefore you must begin at him, and
say as the Prophet did, Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I
shall be saved, for thou art my praise, Jer. 17. 14.

And as you have his sufficiency to enable you, and his blessing to give
success unto you, so you have him as a great Exemplar to lead and teach you,
whom you may imitate in this great work; for he went about teaching and
healing, Matthew. 4. 23. And he healed,

1. Freely, and so he commanded his Disciples to heal, Matthew. 10. 8. He did not
enrich himself by any of his cures and miracles; by how much the less of
reward, by so much the more of honor, for a free cure: Not but that it is
worthy the bounty of a Parliament to acknowledge great and noble services,
with proportionable returns of favor; but the less internal and domestical
those returns are, they will appear the more noble. Tu civem patremque geras tu
consule cunct is: No^ tibi, nec tua te moveant, sed publica damna Claudian.

2. Bountifully, he was at cost and charges to heal others, his blood was our
balsome; he was content to be smitten, that we might be healed, Isai. 53. 5. He
looked not on his own things, but on the things of others, Phil. 2. 4, 5. He
gave his life for his sheep, John 10. 11, A good man is willing to spend and to
be spent, for the good of those unto whose service he is devoted, 2 Cor. 12.
15. Nec sibi, sed toti genitum, se credere mundo. It is recorded for the honor
of Nehemiah, that though former Governors had been chargable to the people, yet
he and his brethren did not eat the bread of the Governor, Nehem. 5. 14, 15.
and of He^er that she would venture perishing for the service of her people.
Esther 4: 16.

3. Universally, without expectation, he healed all that came to him for
healing, Matthew. 12. 25. Luke 4. 40. and 6. 19. He is an ill Physician that will
cure his patient of a sore Finger, and use no means against his Fever or
Consumption, for an akeing heart, or a bruised head. We may say of England, is
the Prophet of his people, Isai. 1. 5, 6. That our sickness is from head to
foot; some parts sick with sorrow and sufferings, others sick with sin and
wickedness: Let your endeavors of cure be impartial. Any one part unhealed will
create pain and danger to the whole: And as you may not neglect any integral,
so let your principal care be for the Vital and Architectonical parts, to
reduce them unto health and safety. But let your providence extend to all; the
least and lowest Member has a right in the common Soul, in the good of the
whole. Render to all their ^es, tribute, custom, fear, honor, are due to Romans
13. 7.
some; love, liberty, property, safety, protection, peace, are due to
others. Balance all interests with so equal and righteous a ^ize, that Rulers
may govern a free people, and the people obey Illustrious and Noble Governors;
that the people may be comforted by the Jusstice and Clemency of their Princes,
and Princes honored by the loyalty and obedience of their people: That Love
may be the Soul of the Body Politic, the Bond, the Joint, Col. 3. 15. Ephesians. 4
15, 16.
the Sinew that holds together all the Members in the Unity, and for the good
of the whole.

4. Meekly, humbly, compassionately, there is a fained meekness as that of
Absalom and Otho, omnia serviliter pro Imperio, but Christ was meek and lowly
in heart, Math. 11. 29. Tacit. Hist.
We read of the gentleness of Christ, 2 Cor. 10: 1. So Christ taught men, as
they were able to hear, Mark 4. 33. So he healed them, took the Lambs into his
bosom, and gently lead the rest, Isai. 40. 11. Considers our mould, Psalm. 103.
14. Will not break (...) bruised reed, Math. 12. 20. Stays with a poo^ blind
beggar in the way, Mark 10. 49. 5^. And thus he requires us to heal and
resto^ disjointed Members with a spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. 1. Phil. 4 5. Show
all possible tenderness and indulgence toward the infi^mities, especially the
consciences of men (...) humble and sober, of quiet and peaceab^ Spirits, the
strong are taught to bear the ^firmities of the weak, Romans 15. 1. Be care^ to
secure and settle the Fundamentals, the (...) tals and Essentials of Doctrine,
Worsh^ and Duty, that you may be sure of sound and Orthodox Ministers, to go
in and cut before the flock; and if in smaller and more problematical things,
men cannot be all of one mind, (as we never shall have perfection of Judgment
till we come to Heaven) Let not the strong despise the weak, nor the weak judge
the strong: Whom God receives into his favor, let not us shut out of ours, Romans
14. 3.

5. Perfectly, As many as touched him in order unto healing, were perfectly
cured, Matthew. 14. 36. Endeavor as much as is possible, such a total oblivion
and obliteration of our sad divisions, and the distempers arisen therefrom,
that no dregs of the disease, no sears of the wound may remain; but that all
the Members may coalesce into a perfect unity and frat^rnitie again.

And as this must be your first care to begin at the Sun of Righteousness, and
to imitate him; so you must be careful of the Two wings which are the Vehicula
of Healing, be sure that the Wings of the Sun of Righteousness do carry him
into all places of the Land.

1. The Wing of Light, sound Doctrine, pure Ordinances. The more the people
agree in divine truths, the more they will be disposed for moral and for civil
unity. Religion is a cementing thing, Lactantius and Jerome Lactant Instit.
lib. 4. cap. 28. Hieron. in Amos 9.
derive it a Religando, Quod ea quasi in fascem vincti sumus. Discourage and
discountenance, dangerous and false doctrines, bear up, speak comfortably to an
able, Orthodox, Faithful and Learned Ministry; procure brotherly
reconciliation amongst men of sober minds, but different judgments: The
breaches I hope are not so wide, but that if animosities and prejudices were
removed, they might by amicable and fraternal debates be closed up again.

2. The Wing of Righteousness, able, faithful, Religious Judges and
Magistrates, wholesome, healing, and Righteous Laws, are the Vehicula of
Justice, by the sanctity and prudence of these, your healing will shed it self
abroad into all parts of the Land.

In one word, Go forth, have your eyes i^ in every place, (...): Xenophon
Byrop^d.
Let the Wheels of your Providence have eyes on them. Grow up into splendour and
perfection, and restore the collapsed honor of this august Council in all the
parts of it: Tread down wickedness, make stronger Laws then ever against
impiety and profaneness, against iniquity and unrighteousness. Keep Christ and
his presence; keep godliness and the fear of his Name in the mi^st of the Land:
Endeavor not a mere formal and superficial, but a substantial and spiritual
Reformation, and then assuredly the Lord will honor you, and make you his
Instruments of performing this gracious promise, Unto you that fear my Name,
shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his Wings; and these wings
shall carry your names and memories with splendour and renown unto all
succeeding ages. For they that honor him, the Lord will honor. 1 Samuel 2. 30.


FINIS.

