THE STAVES OF Beauty and Bands. Opened in a SERMON Preached at YARMOVTH,
August 23. 1663.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, EDWARD Lord Bishop of NORWICH.

Augustine. de Tempore, Ser. 169. Meritum Christianae virtutis vilescit in
Cunctis, si unitatem non habet pacis; nec pervenit ad vocabulum Filii, nisi per
nomen Pacifici.

Id. de Civit. Dei. l. 15. c. 22. Vera and brevis Definitio Virtutis est Ordo
Amoris.

LONDON, Printed by T. Ratcliffe for George Thomason at the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1663.

To the Right Worshipful the Magistrates, and to the Reverend Ministers, and
other Members of the Corporation of Yarmouth in Norffolk.
Dearly Beloved,
THIS Sermon was Preached before you in order to the Peace and Unity of the
Church of God amongst you: and I presume in order to the same good end I was by
You pressed to the publishing of it. Which motion I have the more readily
entertained, that the Arguments unto so necessary a duty, which I found
prevalent with you then, might he always at your hand, to revive in you the
same affections. And truly those many men in all parts of this Nation, who,
upon whatsoever plausible and specious pretenses, have given entertainment unto
novel opinions, (never before these loose times heard of in the Church of God)
and thereupon do forsake the Assemblies, and disturb the peace of an Orthodox
and Reformed Church, little consider the advantage they give the Common
Adversary: who no doubt rejoices to see us break one another with our own
hands, whom they with theirs hither to have not been able to harm; As Vespasian
is observed by Josephus to have done in the siege of Jerusalem, not choosing to
storm the Jews by any hostile assault, while they were destroying one another
by their Intestine confusions. Certainly what ever prejudices weak and
credulous men may have their eyes dazzled withal, Divisions and Contentions in
the Church have always fleshly lusts at the bottom of them, as the Apostle
assures us, 1 Cor. 3. 3. Nor are they only fruits of sin in men, but
evidences of wrath in God, and sad symptoms of his further displeasure. When
Manasse is against Ephraim, Isai 9. 21.
and Ephraim against Manasse, and both against Judah, it is a sign that Gods
anger is not turned away, but that his hand is stretched out still. Shismes in
a Church being like Leaks in a ship, or breaches in a Sea bank, which threaten
speedy and extremest danger. And therefore all who wish well to Sion should
listen unto Healing and Uniting Counsels, not suffering in so important a
business, as the Peace and prosperity of the Church, any secular designs,
single, or divided Interests, carnal animosities, or perverse disputes, to
embitter their spirits or alienate their affections from other their brethren,
heirs of the same common salvation: or to draw them away from the Communion of
that Church, from whose breasts they have often sucked the sincere milk of the
word, and in whose fellowship they may still undoubtedly partake of all the
means of Salvation. The Lord grant that all of us in all places of the Land,
both Pastors and People may be unanimously zealous for the Peace of the Church.
That Ministers by sound and wholesome doctrine, which cannot be disproved by
holy, humble, prudent, and peaceable Lives, and by unwearied diligence and
fidelity in their Callings, may stop the mouths, and win upon the affections
of their Gainsayers: and that the People may not lean on their own wisdom,
nor be carried away blindfold with uncharitable prejudices, or with every
wind of doctrine, but may yield themselves to the guidance of their faithful
Pastors, and be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath; for Contention is
usually the mother of disobedience. Jam. 1. 19. Romans 2. 18.
Now the Lord of Peace himself give you peace always by all means; the Lord be
with you all.

Yours in all Christian affection to serve you, Ed. Norvic.

THE Staves of BEAUTY and BANDS Opened in a SERMON preached at Yarmonth, August
23. 1663.
Zechar. 11. 7. I took unto me Two Staves; the one I called Beauty, and the
other I called Bands, and I fed the Flock.
THERE was no Office which Christ undertook, no Ministry which he instituted
in his Church, which was not by him directed and intended unto such excellent
Ends, as whereby the Honor and Welfare thereof might be advanced. When in this
place he assumed his Pastoral Office to Govern and guide his Flock, he does by
the names of these two Staves acquaint us with two noble Ends of that Service;
The Restoring of Beauty to his Church corrupted, and of Unity to his Church
divided; Of both which we shall, by Gods Assistance, take a brief View.

First, He Feeds and Rules his poor Flock with his Staff called Beauty, his
Word, Ordinances, and Government, being, as glorious things in themselves, so
the special Beauty and Honor of the Church that enjoy them. Thus among the
people of the Jews, the 1 Samuel 4. 21 Isa. 4. 5.
Ark and the Tabernacle are called their Glory; in which respect the Romans 9. 4.
Apostle says, That unto Israel did pertain the Adoption, and the Glory,
because the Covenants, the Law, the Service of God, and the Promises were
theirs: As to external Pomp and Splendour, the great Deuteronomy. 7. 7.
Monarchies of the world went far beyond them, (for they were the ^ewest of all
People:) but herein was their Pre-eminence, and Primogeniture, (as the Lord
says, Israel is my Exodus 4 22. Jer. 2. 3.
first horn) herein was their Deu. 21 17.
double portion above all other Nations, that they had the Oracles of God
committed unto them, that they were entrusted with the Romans 3. 2. Joh. 8. 17.
Psa. 147. 19, 20
Custody of that Isa. 42^. 41.
honorable Law, which as the Apostle sairh, was Romans 7. 12.
holy, just, and good. And in like manner in the Christian Church, the Gospel,
which is the Gal. 6. 1.
Law of Christ, is called by the Apostle a 1 Timothy 1. 11.
glorious Gospel, because it is the Romans 11. 11, 12.
Riches and the Salvation of those that enjoy it; insomuch that the very feet
of those that bring glad Tidings thereof, are said to be Beautiful, Romans 10.
15. and therefore as we Exodus 34. 89, 30.
read of Moses, that his Face shined when he came down from the Mount; to
signify the 2 Cor. 3. 7.
Glory and Luster of the Legal Ministry, as the Apostle teaches us: so
likewise do we read of Christ, that his Mat. 17. 2. Rev. 7. 16.
face shined as the Sun, in his Transfiguration on the Mount, to signify the 2
Cor. 3. 8^.
far more excellent Glory of the Evangelical Ministry of Life and
Righteousness; in which respect he is called the Luke 2. 32. Zach. 2. 5.
Glory of his people, and a Isa. 28. 5. Prove. 4. 8, 9
Diadem of Beauty unto the residue of them; for where Christ walks in the
midst of the golden Candlesticks, having his Ordinances in their vigonr and
Efficacy duly administered, he thereby rendereth his Church beautiful in these
four Respects.

1. By the Verity of his heavenly Doctrine; When a people are taught of the
Lord, then their Stones are laid with fair Colors, and their Foundations with
Saphires, their Windows of Agates, their Gates of Carbuncles, and their Borders
of precious Stones, Isa. 54, 11, 12, 13. When the earth is full of the
knowledge of the Lord, then is his rest, or the place of his abode glorious,
Isa. 11, 9, 10. and therefore when Christ was Ephesians. 4. 10, 13.
ascended up on high, far above all heavens, that he might fill all things, he
gave unto his Church, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, in
order to the perfecting and edifying of his body, and carrying it on unto the
measure of the stature of his fullness, wherein alone the Beauty thereof
consists.

2. By the Purity of Spiritual Worship; When Sacrifices are offered with
acceptance upon Gods Altar, (and none are so bnt 1 Pet. 2. 5.
spiritual Sacrifices) then does he glorify the house of his Glory, and
beautify the place of his Sanctuary, and make it an eternal Excellency; then
does he give gold for brass, and silver for iron; then does he call the Walls
of the Church Saivation, and her Gates Praise, Isa. 60. 7, 13. 15, 17, 18.
Therefore the second Temple, though far inferior in outward Splendour to the
former, is said to exced that in Glory, because unto it the desire of all
Nations should come, and set up the^ein his Spiritual Worship, Hag. 2. 3, 7, 8,
9. For as the soul, which is the breath of Life, puts Beauty into the Body, so
the Spirit of Christ poured out upon his Church, does enliven and beautify
that, and turn the Isa. 32. 15.
wilderness into a fruitful field.

3. By Sanctity of Life, renewing them after the image of Christ; for when the
Church is sanctified, and cleansed with the washing of Water by the Word, then
it is fit to be presented unto Christ as a glorious Church, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.
Holinefs is called by the Apostle the Tit. 3. 5.
Renewing of the Holy Ghost, the Gal. 4. 19.
forming of Christ in us, the Ephesians. 2. 5, 10.
quickening and creating us in him unto good Works. Look what Beauty the
renewing of a ruinous and decayed Building brings upon that, what Beauty the
Reunion of a living Soul unto a ghastly body does restore unto that, what
Beauty the Creation brought upon the void and indigested Chaos, when it was
wrought unto that goodly Frame and Sructure which we now behold; the same, and
much more, does the forming of Christ, and the Spirit of Holiness bring upon
our deformed and defiled nature by the Efficacy of the Ordinances.

4. By Decency of Order, rendering the Church Can. 6. 4.
beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an Army with Banners;
Thus the Church of Israel marched in the Wilderness in the manner of a formed
Camp, with exquisite beauty and order, whereof we have an ample description,
Numb. 2. In like manner the new Jerusalem, which descended out of Heaven,
beautified with the Glory of God, whose street was pure gold as transparent
glass, whose foundation was garnished with all manner of precious stones, is
said to be apiece, having an accurate proportion and symmetry in all the
parts thereof, Rev. 21. 16. And thus the Apostle directed all things to be done
in the Church of Christ with Decency and Order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. and rejoiced to
see the Order which was in the Church of the Colossians, Col. 2. 5. When every
Member keeps his own Rank, and every Officer does his proper Duty, according
to the 1 Chro. 28. 11, 12.
Pattern and Exodus 40. 16, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27, 29, 32.
Commission given him by Christ, then is the Pastoral Office administered with
the Staff of Beauty.

In one word, the Ordinances are thus the Beauty of a Church, because in and by
them Christ is spiritually present therein, and the Treasures of his Grace are
unfolded unto it. He who is the Can. 5. 10, 16.
chiefest among ten thousand, and altogether lovely, who was the Hag. 2. 7.
desire of all Nations, and the Col. 1. 27
hope of Glory to his people, in comparison of whose Phil. 3. 8.
Excellencies all other things are but loss and dung, whose very Heb. 11. 25,
26.
Afflictions and Reproaches are preferred before the Pleasure and Riches of the
world, in whose very Col. 1. 24. James 1. 2.
Sufferings there is joy, he is in his Ordinances Gal. 3. 1.
evidently set forth before our eyes; his Romans 13. 14. Isa. 61. 10. Rev. 6. 11.
Righteousness the Robe wherewith his Church is clothed, his Ezeck 16. 14.
Comeliness the Beauty wherewith she is adorned, and made Deuteronomy. 26. 19.
high above all the people in Praise, and in Name, and in Honor, by her
interest in him, and relation unto him, she has a new name given her, Isa. 62.
4, 5.
Hephzibah the Lords delight, who deligheth over her as the Bridegroom over the
Bride, esteeming her Psalm. 132. 14.
his rest, his dwelling place, his desire, so that Psalm. 87. 3.
glorious things are spoken of her.

These Beauties of Christ in his Ordinances, and in his Church by means of
them, were typified and prefigured by the Exodus 28. ^, -- 39.
glorious Garments of the Priests, with allusion whereunto we are said in
Baptism Gal. 3. 17. Romans 13. 14.
to put on Christ, whose Righteousness is unto his Church a Isa. 61. 3.
Garment of Praise. By the splendour of the Tabernacle, and of Solomon's Temple,
and all the Vessels and Utensils belonging unto the Worship of God therein, all
which were exceeding glorious and magnificent; for the building and providing
whereof, David prepared as immense a 1 Chro. 22, 14. Vid. Brierwood de nummis.
^. 16 Budaeum. de Ass fol. 112. Sr. W. Raleigh. Hist. l. 2. c. 17. sect 9.
Treasure as we shall likely read of in any History; in which respect that holy
house is called the Throne of Gods Glory, Jer. 14. 21. By the City Jerusalem,
Psalm. 48. 2.
the mountain of the Lords holiness, and the Joy of the whole earth; by the
Exo. 30. 23. Psalm 45. 8. 2 Cor. 14, 15. 1 John 2. 27.
holy oil, wherewith the Tabernacle, the Ark, the holy Vessels and Priests were
anointed, compounded of the principal spices after the Art of the Apothecary;
by the beautiful order which was in 1 Reg. 10. 5
Solomon's Family; by the dressing and preparing of a Isa. 61. 10. Psalm. 45. 13,
14.
Bride for the Bridegroom, as we read of the long and costly purification of
the Virgins to go into King Ahasuerus, Est. 2. 12. So here, in the Ordinances,
the Spouse of Christ is Rev* 19. 7, 8.
attired and made ready, being arraied in fine linen, clean and white, and
thereby Rom 9. 23. 2 T^m 2. 21.
prepared unto Glory, and unto every good work. Lastly, By a Psalm. 5. 8. Heb.
12. 13. Prove. 4. 2^. 3. 17. Isa 40. 3, 4.
strait, smooth, even and pleasant path, wherein is no Crookedness, from whence
all sla 62. 10. 57. 14.
stumbling blocks and offenses are removed.

The Author and Efficient of all this Beauty is the Lord, all whose Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
works are perfect, who has made every thing Eccles. 3. 11.
beautiful in his time. The sum and total of all Gods works are, the World
and the Church; the world is called (...), for the Beauty and Comeliness of of
it; in the which every thing was Genesis 1. 31.
very good when the Lord took a view of it. But the Lord has chosen his Church
upon which to bestow more abundant Glory. It is called a Land of Ornament, Dan.
11. 16. A land of Desire, Jer. 3. 19. in the building whereof the Lord is said
to appear in his Glory, Psa. 102. 16. The World is beautified with the power
and wisdom of God; the Church besides that, with his Love and Grace: in the
World we have the foot-prints of his Greatness, but in the Church we have the
Image of his Holiness: The World was made by him, the Church like him; the
World to show forth his Glory, the Church to enjoy it; the World a Tenement for
his Creatures to dwell in, the Church a Palace for himself to dwell in; he has
Psalm. 132. 13, 14. Psalm. 76 2. Exodus 25. 8.
desired it for his Habitation, it is his Rest for ever. Above all Excellencies,
Holiness is the Beauty of a Creature; and therefore the Angels, who excel in
all created perfection, are above all other Appellations honored with the name
of Saints Deuteronomy. 33. 2. they differ not in nature from Devils, in Holiness they
do. Derived Holiness consists in conformity to primitive holiness. The Lord
is most holy in himself, and our holiness stands in his Image and Likeness,
so far forth as he has by an holy Law made his Holiness a pattern for ours.
And when we threw away that Image of God, wherein our created Holiness
consisted, and the Lord was pleased in any of us to renew it again; he did it
by the pattern of his beloved Son, who is the Col. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 3.
Image of the invisible God, and the Character of his person, full of Grace and
Truth. Now then according to the Excellency of the pattern, we are to measure,
and take an estimate of that Beauty, wherein we are conformable unto that
pattern; and what pattern more glorious then the blessed God, and the Holy Son
of God, the chiefest of ten thousand? unto whom therefore the conformity of a
Creature must be its chief and principal Beauty.

There are several Attributes or Properties whereby the Excellency of this
Beauty may be further discovered.

1. Light and Luster; for as a great part of the Corporal Beauty is in the life
and vigor of the eye, so of spiritual Beauty in the clarity and brightness of
the mind; when the Lord, 2 Cor. 4 6
who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, shines in our Hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ; as the Sun is the greatest Beauty of the visible world, so Christ, as a
Mat. 4. 2.
Sun of Righteousness, by the Phil. 3. 8.
Excellency of his knowledge, is the glory and beauty of the invisible.

2. Rectitude and Straitness; the wise man thus expresses our primitive
Beauty, that Eccles. 7. 29.
God made man perfect; and we do then recover this Beauty, when we are without
Psalm. 32. 2.
guil, and perverseness of Spirit; when we make Heb. 12. 13.
strait paths for our feet to walk in, and Gal. 2. 14.
do (...), go evenly according to the Truth of the Gospel.

3. Integrity and Col. 2. 10.
Compleatness; when all the parts and members of the new man are formed in us,
and we do partake of the Joh. 1. 16.
fullness of Christ, Grace for Grace, as the Child of his parent, member for
member. The Lord in the Law would not accept of a maimed Offering, Levit. 22
21, 22. And when we offer up our selves a Romans 12. 1, 2.
living Sacrifice holy and acceptable unto God, we must be 1 These. 5. 23.
sanctified throughout, and our whole Spirit, Soul, and Body must be preserved
blameless: for wherever Christ is formed, though it be but in measure as to the
degrees of Grace, yet that measure must be the Ephesians. 4. 13, 16.
measure of every part, so that there is at once both (...) and (...), as the
Apostle speaks, a measure in regard of the Imperfection of every Grace, and yet
a fullness in regard of the perfection of every part, or member of the new man.

4. Symmetry and an exact proportion of parts, and equal temperament of humors
one with another, which in regard of Spiritual Beauty is called by Ephesians. 5. 15.
the Apostle (...), an exactness of Obedience; when there is such a due temper
of Piety to God, Sobriety to our selves, and Righteousness to others, that none
of these do obstruct the other, but that there is an equal Psalm. 119. 6.
respect to all Gods Commandments, and such a supply and accurate distribution
of vital influence, unto every member of the new man, that no part does either
swell or wither, that Zeal is not blind, nor Knowledge unfruitful, nor Faith
without Love, nor the Duties of one Table without those of another; but that we
g^ow up unto Ephesians. 4. 15.
Christ in all things, and have an effectual working in the measure of every
part.

5. Growth and Progress in these proportions; for while we are in this world,
we are still in our Minority, and therefore must still be contending toward
perfection. To be a man in years, and a child in stature, is an unbeautiful
thing. Christ has no Dwarfs in his body; though one man attain greater degrees
of perfection then another, yet all are in a growing condition: the life of
Christ in us being a Joh. 10. 10.
life that abounds; and his Grace like the Ezekiel. 47 3, 4, 5.
waters of the Sanctuary rising up higher and higher.

Lastly, Indeficiency, wherein spiritual Beauty surpasses all other; for Prove.
31. 30.
bodily favor is deceitful, and Beauty vain, it runs all at last into
wrinkles and deformity; but as Christ himself Act. 2. 31. 13. 35.
never saw Corruption, no more does the Beauty that he brings to the Soul with
him. They Psalm. 92. 13, 14.
who are planted in the Lords house, do flourish in his Courts, and are fat and
fruitful in their old age. As we may truly say of sin in a wicked man,
Concupiscenti^ non senescit, though nature wax old and infirm, yet Lust does
not: so we may say of Grace in a good man, Charitas non senescit, it is not
apta nata of it self to decay, but proceeds from strength to strength.

The ends of the Ordinances do likewise further evidence this Beauty of theirs
unto us: For they are by Christ intended for such purposes as these.

1. To Quicken us, and to fashion him in us. By nature we are Ephesians. 2. 1, 4, 5
dead in trespasses and sins, and death ever induces deformity; but by the
holy Spirit of Christ working in and by his Ordinances, we are restored unto
his Gal. 2. 20. 4. 19.
life and likeness, and Romans 8. 29.
conformed unto the Image of him who is altogether lovely.

2. To cleanse and purify us from all Defilements; for the Psalm. 19. 8, 9 Ezekiel.
36. 25.
fear of the Lord is clean, and his Commandment pure both in it self, and in
its operations; his precious 2 Cor. 7. 1.
promises by our Act. 15. 9.
faith in them, and by our hope and expectation of them, 1 John 3. 3.
do cleanse us from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, and cause us to purify
our Selves even as he is pure, that we may Mal. 3. 2, 3, 4.
offer unto the Lord an Offering in Righteousness, that our Offerings may be
pleasant unto him.

3. To heal us of all our spiritual distempers, whereby the Beauty of the Soul
is dimmed or impaired. As many of Christ's Mat. 4. 23.
Miracles were showed in making the blind see, the deaf hear, the lame leap,
and in curing of all manner of sickness and disease; so the spiritual virtue of
his holy Ordinances is seen in spiritual Operations consonant unto those, in
which respect he is called a Mat. 9. 12. Isa. 30. 26. 61. 1.
Physician to bind up the broken hearted, and to heal the stroke of the wound
of his people; He is the Rev. 22. 2.
tree of life, whose leaves are for the healing of the Nations.

4. To comfort us, to wipe away all tears from our eyes, all sorrow from our
hearts, and thereby to make our faces shine; for as Exodus 34. 29, 30
Moses, by extraordinary Converse with God on the Mount, had a luster on his
face, so in some proportion, all Communion with him does, by the spiritual
comfort, bring a Eccles. 8. 1. Romans 15. 13. Phil. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Beaury upon holy men, filling them with the peace of God which passes
understanding, and with Joy which is unspeakable and glorious.

5. To fit and prepare us for the Lord himself to delight in, that his Image in
us may Cau. 4. 9.
attract the eye and heart, the love and delight of the Lord of Glory unto us;
the Lord has Psalm. 4. 3.
set apart the man that is godly for himself, has Psalm. 135. 4
chosen Israel for his peculiar Treasure, has Isa. 43. 21.
formed them for himself to show forth his praise, and Tit. 2. 14.
purified them unto himself for a peculiar people; and because the Church is in
this special manner Ezekiel. 16. 8. 14.
Gods own, therefore he will in special manner put his Comeliness upon her, and
will Isa. 60. 13.
beautify the place of his Sanctuary; as he is called the Luke ^. 32.
Glory of his people Israel, so he has hononred his people Israel with this
high dignity, to be called Isa. 46. 13.
His Glory

Lastly, The manner of Christ's Governing his Church by his Ordinances is full
of Beauty and Sweetness; with a 1 Reg. 19. 12.
still voice, with the Hos 11. 4.
cords of a man, and with the bands of Love, Isa. 40. 11. 46. 3.
he gathers the Lambs in his arm, and carries them in his Bosom; as Isa.
66. 12, 13.
one whom his Mother comfort, so does he comfort them; he does not Mat. 12.
20,
break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax; he deals with
persuasions and entreaties, by his Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20 Ezekiel 33. 11.
beseeching us to be reconciled unto God: he Psalm. 23. 2.
leads his Flock by still waters, and into green pastures, through Prove. 3. 17.
ways of pleasantness, and paths of peace; he Lam. 3. 32, 33.
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men; In the Hab. 3. 2.
midst of wrath he remembers Mercy; when he causes grief, he shows
compassion; and when Jer. 31. 20.
he speaks against Ephraim, he earnestly remembers him still; he has set up a
sweet order in his Church both in Doctrine and Policy, managing both with 2
Cor. 10 1.
meekness and gentleness, Ephesians. 2. 17.
preaching peace, Isa. 61. 1.
proclaiming Liberty, erecting over his people a Cant. ^. 4.
Banner of Love; and though he have an Psalm. 2. 9.
iron Rod for his enemies, yet he holds forth a golden Scepter to his people,
ruling in their hearts by a spirit of Adoption, and by a Law of Love. Thus he
feeds his Church by his Staff called Beauty; Great therefore is the Indignity
which they offer unto Christ, who despise the sweetness of this his Government,
the Isa 8 6.
waters of Shiloah which go softly, refusing to submit to his Mat. 11. 30.
easy yoke, being Luke 19. 21
offended at the severity and Sanctity of his Doctrine, saying in their hearts
like those in the Gospel, Luke 19. 14. We will not have this man to rule over
us, disdainfully undervaluing that Heb. 2 3.
great salvation, which he by his precious blood purchased for them, and by the
word of his Grace does continually tender unto them; Spretae injuria formae is
no small dishonor done to him who is the Lord of Glory.

Great the Thankfulness we owe unto him, for the fruit of this his Beautiful
and amiable Government, that we who were Col. 1. 21.
enemies unto him by wicked works, and were well pleased with that our misery,
should, by the power of his Spirit, Col. 1. 13.
be translated from the Tyranny of Satan, into the kingdom of Grace, and be
made a Psalm. 110. 3.
willing people, beautified with his Salvation.

Great the value we ought to set upon the Ordinances of the Gospel, the Staff
of Psalm. 149. 4.
Beauty by which he governs his Flock, the Ezekiel. 16. 10, 13.
Ornaments and Bracelets, the Chain and Jewels which he sends unto his Spouse
to adorn her withal; No man comes unto Christ, till he sees Beauty in him;
and vain men, Prove. 8. 36.
who love their Lusts better then their life, are naturally prejudiced against
his holy ways: He is to the 1 Pet. 2. 8.
Disobedient a stone of stumbling, a rock of Offense, Luke 2. 34.
a sign to be spoken against. Now by the Light and Majesty of the Ordinances,
this prejudice is removed, and 2 Cor. 3. 18.
we all, with open face beholding, as in a glass, the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord.

Great the Duty which we owe to the Gospel, to bear witness unto the Beauty
thereof by our holy Conversation: To Phil 4. 8.
think on those things which are venerable, just, pure, lovely, and of a good
report, which Tit. 2. 10.
adorn, and Phil. 1. 27.
become the Gospel, and are Ephesians. 4. 1.
worthy of that high Calling wherewith we are called; to remember that we are 2 Timothy 2. 21.
vessels of Honor, to be purged and sanctified, that we may be meet for our
Masters use; that we are 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. 2 Cor. 6, 16.
Temples of the Holy Ghost, separated unto his special service and presence;
And if any man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy; That we are a
Tit. 2. 141 1 Pet. 2. 9.
redeemed and a peculiar people, whom Christ has purified Psalm. 4. 3. 135. 4*
148 14. Isa. 43. 21. Lev. 20. 26.
unto himself; That Prove. 15. 8. Mal. 2. 3.
without Holiness our prayers and Sacrifices are but an abomination; For as
Heb. 12. 14.
without Holiness no man can see God, so without Holiness no man can serve him;
Jer. 11. 15.
What has my Beloved to do in my house, says the Lord, seeing she has
wrought lewdness? The Lord will be sanctified in all that draw nigh unto him.

We should thereforeall in our several places, especially those unto whom the
Pastoral Dignity and Trust does appertain, use our utmost care to preserve the
Church of God amongst us in that honor and beauty which belongs thereunto; not
corrupting the Doctrine thereof, or obtruding any mere problematical, much less
false and unsound positions of our own, upon the faith of our Hearers; not
corrupting the Worship thereof either with superstition, or irreverence, not
suffering either the mere Form of Godliness to swallow up the power, or the
pretense of power to shut out the Form, but to give the Lord both that inward
and outward Honor, which is due to his holy name in all our solemn Attendances
upon him; not corrupting the sanctity thereof either with Hypocrisy or
Profaneness, with mere specious Pretenses of Holiness on the one hand, or with
open and downright Contempt thereof on the other. Lastly, Not corrupting the
Decency and Order thereof; either by burthening Gods Service with an excessive
number of needless Observances; or on the other side censuring and deserting
the Communion of a Sound and Orthodox Church, because the Order thereof does
not in every particular please us. Thus is the Church to be fed and Ruled with
the former of our Prophets Staves, The Staff Beauty.

Secondly, Christ, as the chief Shepherd, by his Spirit and Power, and his
Underofficers, by their Ministry and Service, do feed and rule his Church by
his Staff called Bands, procuring and advancing the Unity thereof, and
gathering together into one all the members belonging thereunto, that the whole
body may be fitly joined together and compacted without Schisms and Divisions,
which is a singular and eminent Blessing of God thereunto. God made man at the
first after his own Image, so that as the Lord is wholly one and undivided in
himself, no dissonancy between any of his Attributes, Decrees, or Counsels; so
in man as he came out of Gods hands, there was an exact harmony and agreement;
his Affections consonant unto his Will, his Will to his Reason, and his Reason
to God. And being thus perfectly One with himself, he could not but be one
likewise with others, who were perfectly like himself, as finding nothing more
in them, from the which to differ, then in himself. But when sin came into the
world, it brake the bond of Union between God and man, making us Col. 1. 21.
Romans 5. 10.
enemies unto him by wicked works, and so Isa. 59. 2.
separating between him and us, and hiding hie face from us. It brake the bond
of Union between a man and himself, the Will rebelling against the Mind, the
Sensitive part against the rational, one Jam. 4. 1.
lust warring against another, and all against the Soul. It brake the bond of
Union between man and man, between one wicked man and another, upon the ground
of different Interests, Tit. 3. 3.
hateful and hating of one another; between wicked men and good men, upon the
ground of contrary seeds, the the Lord having Genesis 3. 15.
put enmity between the Seed of the woman, and the Seed of the Serpent; Because
God has chosen his Church out of the world, therefore the Joh. 15. 19 1 John
3. 1. D^on c. 36.
world hates them; When he had his Church only in one single people, the Jews,
who dwelt alone, and were Number. 23. 9. Philostrat l. 5.
not reckoned among the Nations, we find not only in the Nehem. 4. 2, 3, 4.
Ester 3. 8, 9. Psalm. 44. 13, 14. 79. 1, 4. 137. 3. Lam. 1. 7. 2. 15, 16. Isa.
43. 28. 47. 6. Jer. 24. 9. 1 Reg. 9. 7.
Scriptures, but also in Cicero Orat. L. Flacco. Plin. l. 13. cap. 4. Tacit.
Hist. lib. 5. Plutarch. Symposiac. 1. Pal. 5. Justin. l. 36. Sueton. August.
cap. 76. H. Tiber. cap. 36. Horat. lib. 1. Satyr. 9. Juvenal. Sat. 3. 6 14.
Martial Petron. Epigram. Apion apud Josephum and Eusebium, Hist. l. 2. cap. 5.
Vid. P. Cunaei Antiquit. Heb. l. 2. c. 24. and l. 3. c. 5.
profane Writers how great scorn and contempt was cast upon chem by those of
other Nations. And when Christian Religion began to obtain in the world, the
like horrible Reproaches were cast upon Christians, as we read of Thyestaea
convivia, and Oedipi incestus, in Tertul. Apolog. c. 1, 2, 3, 7.
Tertullian, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 7. and l. 5. cap. 1.
Eusebius, and ^ Justin. Martyr, Apolog. 2. and Dial. cum Tryph. Athenag.
Legatio pro Christianis. p. 4. 37, 38 Minut. Felix in Octav.
others. So true is that of Solomon, He that is upright in the way, is an
abomination unto the wicked.

This Enmity Christ came to heal, and to remove, by preaching, and by giving
peace unto men, working the hearts of his people to be at unity and peace one
with another; in which respect Christ says of his Church, My Dove, my
undefiled is but one, Cant, 6. 9. Now a thing may be said to be one two manner
of ways; there is unum per unitatem, when a thing is so one, as that it does
not any way consist of many, as God is one by the absolute simplicity of his
Nature, without any diversity of part and part, power and act, matter and form,
subject and accident, being and not being: There is likewise unum per unionem,
when one thing is constituted, and made up of many things united and joined
together, and thus the Church is One. 1 Cor. 10. 17. 12. 12.
We being many, says the Apostle, are one bread, and one body. And again, as
the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that one body,
being many, are one body, so also is Christ. In this respect it is compared
sometimes to an Can. 6. 10.
Army, made up of many Soldiers, ordered into Companies and Regiments, under
the Command of one General, called the Josh. 5. 14.
Captain of the Host of the Lord, and the Heb. 2. 10.
Captain of our Salvation. Sometimes to Psalm. 132. 3 Rev. 21. 10. -- 21.
a City compacted together, and accurately proportioned in all the parts and
measures thereof: Sometimes to the Tabernacle of the Congregation, wherein
Exodus 26. 6.
diverse Curtains were coupled and joined together, by loops and taches, into
one Sanctuary: Sometimes to the Temple, 1 Reg. 5. 17.
wherein many goodly stones were framed and fitted into a Magnificent
Structure, in which respect the Church is 1 Timothy 3. 15 Heb. 3. 6.
called the House of God, the Household of Faith, the Ephesians. 3. 15.
whole Family of Heaven and Earth, a Ephesians. 2. 21.
building fitly framed together, and growing unto a holy Temple in the Lord:
Sometimes to a Joh. 15. 5.
Vine, consisting of one root and many branches; and to a Romans 12. 4. 5. Ephesians.
1. 22, 23.
body, wherein many members are conjoined under one Head, and animated by one
Soul. Thus the Church is One. And albeit we frequently read in the plural 2
Cor. 81. Gal. 1. 2. Act. 15. 41. Rev. 1. 4.
of the Churches of the Saints, the Churches of Asia, of Macedonia, of Galatia,
of Syria and Cilicia, yet all these are members of one and the same Catholic
Church, as many Cities of one Kingdom, and many houses of one City. For all
the persons, all the Assemblies and Associations in the world, who acknowledge
and worship one true God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Lord Jesus,
walking by one and the same rule of Faith and Love in the Gospel, do all make
up but one Catholic Church.

And the former Resemblances and Similitudes whereby it is expressed, lead us
to the consideration of a threefold Unity in the Church. 1. An Unity by way of
Disposition and Order, as in an Army or Building. 2. An Unity by way of
Composition, or integral Completion, as between the parts of the body unto the
perfection of the whole. 3. An Unity by way of Constitution, or Essential
Concurrence of Soul and Body unto one man or of the Subject, and vital
principles whereby it is animated.

There is then in the Church 1. An Unity of Order, as the Apostle rejoiced when
he beheld the Col. 2. 5.
Order of the Church at Colosse. And this consists, 1. In Variety of Offices,
and in the due and regular Subordination of those one unto another, and of the
body unto them all, as the 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
Apostle tells us, that God has set in the Church first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. And that Christ when he ascended
up on high, gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; and these the 1 These. 5.
12 Heb. 13. 17.
Apostle requires the rest of the Body to Esteem very highly in love, to obey
them, and submit themselves, unto them, because they watch for their Souls* 2.
In Variety of Ordinances in the which Gal. 4. 1.
Christ is set forth before the eyes of his people; Such are Reading the
Scripture, for as in that Church of the Jews, Act. 13. 27. 15. 21.
Moses and the Prophets were read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day; So the
Col. 4. 16. 1 These. 5. 27.
Apostle directs the Reading of his Epistl^s in the Christian Church.
Preaching of the Word, Romans 10. 14, 15. Mark. 16. 15.
how shall they hear, says the Apostle, without a Preacher? and how shall they
preach except they be sent? Prayer, as the Temple is called Isa. 56. 7. Act. 3.
1.
an house of Prayer for all people, and Peter and John went up to the Temple at
the hour of Prayer: Baptism, Mat. 28. 19
Go and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The Supper of the Lord; 1 Cor. 10. 16. 11. 23.
The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? 3. In variety of Gifts, which the Lord does 1 Cor. 12. 4, 11.
severally divide as it pleases him, for the profit and good of the whole
body. In the Administration of which Ordinances, Offices, and Gifts, such
Decency and Order is to be observed, as that it may appear, that in all the
Churches of the Saints, God is a 1 Cor. 14. 33, 40.
God of Peace, and not of Confusion, ordaining in all of them, that 1 Cor. 7.
17, 24.
as God has distributed to every man, and called every man, so he should abide
with God within the Precincts of his own Calling, Jer. 23. 21, 32. 2 Chro. 26.
18. Romans 10. 15. Heb. 5. 4.
not running before he be sent, but serving the Lord in that rank and station
wherein he has set him.

2. An Integral Unity, as between all the parts of an entire body, joined in
due order together, unto the completing of the whole; and this Unity
presupposes a double Union; the one of the body to the head, the other of the
members to one another; of both which the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.

1. There is a bond of Union between Christ and his body the Church; 1 Cor. 6.
17. 1 John 3. 24. 4. 13.
He that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit; and this Bond is on Christ's
part his Spirit, whereby he joyneth himself unto his Body, Ephesians. 2. 22.
we are an habitation of God through the Spirit; and on a Believers part his
Fatth, whereby he joyneth himself to Christ, and Hos. 1. 11. Ephesians. 3. 17.
appoints him for his Head, by which means Christ dwells in the hearts of
his people; Both which the Apostle puts together, calling it the 2 Cor. 4.
13.
Spirit of Faith.

2 There is a Bond of Union between the members of the body amongst themselves,
viz. The mutual Love of Believers unto one another, called the Col. 3. 14. 2. 2.
Band of perfectness, whereby they are knit together; for this Grace is that
Cement which joyneth the Stones of this spiritual building into one Temple,
being shed abroad into their hearts by the holy Spirit, and is therefore called
the Love of the Spirit, Romans 15. 30. as Ephesians. 4. 3, 4. Phil. 1. 19. 2. 1.
elsewhere the Unity, the Supply, and the Fellowship of the Spirit; For where
this Unity of Spirit and Love is, every member does make a Ephesians. 4. 16.
Supply according to the measure which it self has, for the increasing and
edifying of the body, Act 9. 31.
walking together in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost.

3. An Essential Unity, or as Hilar. de Trim. t. Lib. 8.
St. Hilary calls it, Naturalis Vnitas; as the body and the soul being joined
together makes one man; and thus Christ is said Ephesians. 2 15.
to make in himself of twain one new man, by the participation of that Ephesians. 4.
4*
one Spirit which was Joh. 3. 34.
without measure poured out upon Christ the Head, and Joh. 1. 16. 7. 38. 1 Cor.
12 11.
from his Fullness shed abroad in such proportion upon his Members as he is
variously pleased to dispense unto them; by which means Gal. 4. 19. 2. 20. Romans
8. 10. Joh 6. 63. 1 Cor. 15. 45. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 18.
Christ is formed in us; lives in us, and is a quickening Spirit unto us; for
the Spirit of Christ is that divine 1 John 3. 9.
seed, whereby we are regenerated unto his life and likeness, and as St. Peter
expresses it, are 2 Pet. 1. 4.
partakers of the Divine Nature.

4. Consequent upon this Essential Unity, whereby all the mystical members of
Christ are animated and enlivened by one and the same quickening Spirit, does
follow a Moral unity of hearts and minds between all of them; as it is said of
the Primitive Christians, Act. 4. 32.
that the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one soul.
And this Moral unity is fourfold.

1. An Unity of Faith, in the great and necessary Doctrines of Salvation, or in
the Ephesians. 4. 13. Joh. 17. 3.
knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ, called by the Apostle the 1 Cor. 3. 10,
11.
Foundation, the Heb. 6. 1.
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, the 2 Timothy 1. 13 Rom 6. 17.
form of sound words, the proportion or Romans 12. 6.
Analogy of Faith, the 1 Cor. 2. 2.
knowledge of Jesus Christ and him Crucified, the 1 Timothy 6. 3. Tit. 1. 1.
doctrine and truth which is after godliness, chil. 1 27.
the Faith of the Gospel, the Rev. 14 12
Faith of Jesus, the 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Mystery of Godliness, the Phil. 3. 16. R^g^la parvis maga^sque commu^^. Aug.
Ep. 17.
Rule by which we should walk, called by the Ancients, the Seed of Doctrine,
the Character of the Church, the Rule which is common to small and great; in
one word, whatever Doctrine there is, the Joh. 17. 3. Act. 4. 12. Joh. 8. 24.
knowledge whereof, and assent where-unto, is simply necessary unto Salvation;
in this all who shall be saved, do first or last most unanimously agree.
Differences there may be, and usually are, in less necessary points, which are
matters quaestionum, non fidei, as S. Austin speaks, for we 1 Cor. 13* 9 Ephesians.
4. 13.
know but in part, and are not yet come to be perfect men; and till the members
have attained unto their full stature, there cannot be expected an universal
consent, and harmony of judgments in all points, even among the best and most
learned men; in which case notwithstanding we should Romans 14. 1. 3.
receive one another in love and Brotherly Communion, because God himself
receives even those who thus differ into his favor; but the Spirit of God
does never fail to lead all that shall be saved into all necessary truths, and
to preserve them from any damnable and pernicious doctrines.

2. Unity in obedience, wherein all holy men do agree, albeit some may much
exceed others in their progress and degrees of holiness (as we may see by
comparing the 1 Reg. 15. 11. 14. 2 Reg. 23. 25.
Testimony given unto Asa, and unto Josiah) such are Luke 13. 3. 5.
Repentance from dead works, without which we cannot be saved. Act. 16. 30, 31.
Reliance upon Christ alone by a sincere and unfeigned faith for Life and
Salvation. 1 Cor. 16. 22. 1 John 3. 14.
A true love of the Lord Jesus, and of all that are his. Psalm. 66. 18* 119.
128. Rom 6. 1, 2. 8. 1. 13.
A sincere regard unto all Gods Commandments, and an hatred of every false way.
Nehe. 1. 11 Isai. 26. 8. Psalm 17. 3. 119. 57. Act. 13. 23. Number 14* 24.
A desire to fear Gods Name, and a purpose of heart to cleave unto him, and
follow him fully. Lastly, Mat. 6. 24.
Self-denial, submitting our Will, and Reason, in all things to the Word and
Will of God. There may be great differences in the spiritual growth and degrees
of holiness between one Christian and another, Romans 15. 1. Heb. 5. 13, 14. 1 John 2. 12, 13. Mat. 12. 20.
some sick, others healthy, some strong, others weak, some little children,
others young men, some bruised reeds and smoking flax, others bold as a Lion.
But this is obedientia parvis magnisque communis.

3. Unity in Worship: For though different Churches may have different
observances in the External forms and modes of Divine Service, yet in the
Substantials of Worship they all agree, viz. Joh. 4. 24. Ph. l. 3. 3.
that God is to be worshipped in spirit, and in truth, and to be Levit. 10. 3
Job 11. 13, 14. Psa. 26. 6. 66. 18 Pro. 15. 8. Isa. 1. 15. 18.
sanctified in all those that draw nigh unto him. That we are to call upon God
only Joh. 16. 23, 24.
in the Name of Christ, as our 1 Timothy 2. 5 1 John 2. 1.
alone Advocate and Mediator, Col. 3. 17.
giving thanks unto God the Father by him. That we are Col. 2. 18, 19.
not to worship Creatures, who cannot know our hearts, nor answer our prayers,
nor supply our wants, in whom we are not required to believe, but are to hold
the head and 1 Cor. 10. 14. 1 John 5. 21.
to keep our selves from Idols.

4. Unity in Ends and Designs; for being Brethren in the Ephesians. 3. 15. 2. 19. 4.
4. 5. 6.
same Family, fellow- Citizens with one another, and of the household of Faith,
having one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all;
the same Enemies to oppose, the same interests and common Salvation to look
after, they consequently prosecute the same Ends, and do not only walk by the
same Rule, but in so doing, do mind the same things, Phil 3. 16. It is true,
being in part carnal, they do too much seek and serve themselves; but so far
forth as they have the same spirit, they are of the same mind with the Apostle,
Act. 20. 24. Phil. 1. 20.
to prefer the honor of Christ, and the service of his Church, above their own
dearest interest, according to what our Savior has taught us, Luke 14 26
If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be
my Disciple. The Glory of God, the progress of the Gospel, the advancement of
Christ's Kingdom, the subversion of the Kingdom of Satan, the comforts and
concernments of the Church of Christ, are in their hearts and endeavors still
to promote; as 1 Cor 12. 26.
the members of the Natural, so they of the Spiritual Body, have all a care one
of another; the end of the parts is the safety of the whole; they are all
partakers of one spiritual Nature, and all heirs of one common Inheritance; and
therefore as one principal fruit of the Communion of Saints, they aim at the
same ends, and prosecute the same designs, joining together in all Christian
Services of Love against their common enemies, the World, the Flesh and the
Devil.

These are those several Unities which Christ by his Staff called Bands does
preserve in his Church, thereby greatly beautifying and strengthening the same.
Of this Peace he is both the Ephesians. 2. 13, 16. Col. 1. 20.
purchaser by the price of his blood, and the Jer. 32. 39.
Author by the Efficacy of his Grace, giving unto his people one heart and one
way; And lastly, The Bond by the Communion of his Spirit; for Ephesians 4. 16.
from him it is that the body is joined and compacted together, as Ephesians. 2. 20.
1 Pet. 2 6.
the corner stone of a building fasteneth all the parts thereof unto one
another; and therefore the Apostle exhorts us to be like minded, by Arguments
drawn from Christ and his Spirit; If there be any Consolation in Christ, if any
Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies,
fulfill ye my Joy, that ye he like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind, Phil. 2. 1, 2.

But it may be here objected against all this, that our Savior himself tells
us, That he came not to send Peace but a sword, to set a man at variance
against his father, and the daughter against her mother, Mat. 10. 34, 34. which
words Buxtorf-Lexicon. Chald. p. 1648.
Buxtorf has observed in the Talmund to be affirmed of the days of the
Messiah; and we see it plain by much experience; many times, Aug. in. Psa. 44.
says St. Austin, a young man pleases God, and so doing displeases a wicked
father, who is angry that God is preferred before him; Fortior est gladius
spiritualis separans quam copulans natura carnalis. Baron. ^ p. 300. Sect. 3.
Baronius tells us of Anastasia a Roman Lady, whom because she was a
Christian, her own husband did cast in to prison, and miserably afflict, and so
the Gal. 4. 29.
Apostle assures us, that as Isaac was persecuted by his own brother Ishmael,
so it is still, They that are born after the flesh, do persecute them that are
born after the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. Where ever the Gospel is preached, they that
embrace and obey it, are hated and virulently opposed by them that disobey it.

In answer hereunto we say, That all this is accidental to the Gospel; it is no
fault in the Sun, if shining on a dunghill a stinking vapor be exhaled; nor is
it the fault of the Gospel, if by occasion thereof, the proud lusts of men be
exasperated and enraged. When the Asyrians spoiled the Nations, and Isa. 10. 14.
none durst open the mouth, or peep, his Tyranny was not at all commended by
such a doleful quietness. In like manner neither is the Gospel at all
prejudiced by any such commotions, as through the lusts of wicked men, are
merely per accidens and occasionally stirred up by the preaching of it. When
Christ went into Jerusalem to offer himself to them as their King, it is said,
That the whole City was moved, Mat. 21. 10. And elsewhere, that there Joh. 7.
43.
was a division among the people because of him; in like manner where ever he
comes as a King to reign, there will be motions in the minds of the people;
there will be some who will say, Luke 19. 14.
Nolimus hunc, we will not have this man to reign over us: and when their own
pride and obstinacy are the causes of these motions, they yet charge all upon
the Gospel and the Preachers thereof, as Amos 7. 10.
if the land were not able to bear their words; as Tertullus accused Paul, Act.
24. 5. We have found this man a Pestilent Fellow, and a Mover of Sedition among
all the Jews throughout the world. As if the Chafe should complain of the Fan,
that all was quiet in the Barn till that came; or the dross of the Furnace,
that the m^ttal and that lay quietly together, till the fire severed them.
Christ comes with a Mat. 3. 12.
Fan to purge his Floor, and with Mat 3. 2, 3.
refiners fire, to purify the sons of Levi, and to gather his Church out of
the world; by which means he did occasion Joh. 15. 15
the hatred of the world against it; which would not have been, if all had
obeyed the Gospel; Act. 17. 32.
but some receive it with scorn, and others with obedience, and hence it is
that Offenses come.

But the Gospel per se in its own Nature, and in its proper and primarie
Intention, is a word of Peace, and does closely unite all that obey it unto
Christ their head, and unto one another, by the firm bonds of Faith and Love,
subduing the hearts of Wolves, Leopards and Lions, Isa* 11. 6. giving gifts
even to the Rebellious, Psalm 68. 18. casting down every high thing that
exaleth it self against the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10. 5.

And besides, it is thus far a Staff of Bands unto the Church farther, that
though it does thus exasperate the hearts, yet it does usually muzzle and
restrain the rage and power of wicked men, that Psalm 21. 11
they are not able to perform the evils which they intend: so that by the
Majesty and Authority thereof Psalm. 110. 2.
Christ rules in the midst of enemies, Prove. 16. 7.
makes them to be at peace with his people, Exodus 3. 21, 22.
makes Egyptians to enrich them, 1 Samuel ^2. 3, 4. Isa. 16. 4. 1 Samuel 27. 1. 5.
Moabites and Philistines shelter them, 2 Sa^. 8 ^.
Syrians bring gifts unto them, and the Isa. 60. 14. Psalm. 66. 3. 68, 29, 30.
enemies that afflicted them, bend, and profese to serve them.

Now for the Application of this Doctrine, it teaches us:
1. THat Christian Policy and Order, prudent, meek, religious Government, is a
very great blessing to the Church of God, and greatly to be desired, because
thereby Unity and Concord are preserved among the Sheep of Christ, and as by a
ferce or hedge they are thereby secured from the irruption of Wolves who would
devour and make a prey of them; and all leaven and chaste which would sour the
Lump, and corrupt the coin, is purged out, and fanned away. Tit. 3. 9. 1 These.
5. 14. 2 These. 3. 14.
When the unruly are admonished, and the weak strengthened, and the
Feeble-minded comforted, and Heretics rejected, and disorderly Walkers made
ashamed, this greatly tends both to the honor, and to the health and safety
of the Church of God.

2. It teaches us to take heed of those Romans 16. 17, 18.
who cause divisions and breaches contrary to the Doctrine of Christ which we
have received, who rend his Seamless Coat, and make their tongues and their
pens bellows to blow up the flames of contention among Christians, biting,
tearing, and devouring one another, of whom the Apostle says, That they serve
not the Lord Jesus but their own belly. It is noted by Epiphan. Haer^s. 4 2.
Epiphanius as a wicked speech of Marcion the Heretic, Ego findam Ecclesiam
vestram, and mi^tam fiffuram in ipsam in aeternum: And the Apostle makes the
ground of contentions and divisions in the Church to be fleshly Lusts, 1 Cor.
3. 3. Gal. 5. 20. It is a great sin to make an undue separation from the true
Church of Christ. A sin against the Communion of Saints from which the
Separation is made. A sin against the Unity and Peace of the Church, which we
all ought with our utmost endeavors to preserve. A sin against the Spirit of
Christ, which is thereby grieved, as the soul is pained by the wounds which are
made upon the body. A sin against the honor of Christ, whose name is thereby
exposed to contempt and reproach. A sin against a man's own edification, who
thereby cutteth himself off from the means of Grace, and exposes himself to
the danger of Heresy and Contagion. And therefore those holy Fathers St.
Cyprian Ep^st. 65. Sect 2 Ep. 76. Sect. 5. de unitat. Eccles. Sect. 16.
Cyprian, Aug. ep. 162. and lib. 2. de Baptismo. c. 6.
Augustine, and Optatus contra Parmen. lib. 1.
Optatus, use to set forth the Atrocity and danger of this sin, by the
greatness and strangeness of the Judgment, wherewith God punished it in Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, and those who adhered unto them, whom the earth opened her
mouth to swallow up; and by the sore Judgment upon the ten Tribes, in their
total rejection, for separating from the house of David, and the true Worship
of God in Jerusalem. We should therefore take special heed of departing from
the true Church of Christ, where his Word is truly taught, and where Christ the
foundation is held, for every infirmity or blemish which we may conceive to be
upon it; for though the Apostle reproved many Corruptions and Abuses in the
Church of Corinth, yet he blames the Contentions, Emulations, Breaches and
Divisions which were therein, 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12, 13. Of this sort were the
Novatians, Luciferians, Donatists, Audians in the ancient Church, who for
laxness of Discipline, or other Corruptions which they apprehended to be
therein, did withdraw and keep themselves apart from their Communion: To such
as these it was a good speech of Contra Parmen. l. 3.
Optatus, We have one Faith, one Baptism, one Conversation: We read the same
divine Testaments, we are of the same Sheep^fold, we have been washed and
wrought together, we are parts of the same garment, but ripped one from
another, Sar^ura necessaria est, there wants nothing but that we be sewed up
and reunited again.

I shall not here enter upon any Polemical discourse to vindicate our own, or
other Reformed Churches from that heavy Charge of Schism wherewith Pontificians
implead us, for having forsaken the Communion of the Roman Church. Our Learned
Writers have thus stated the Case.

1. That it is the B. Jewels Defense. part 5. P. 505, 506, 507 Mo^nay of the
Church. c. 10. p. 358. D. Crakenthorp against Spalat. c. 79. se. 3. c. 82.
sect. 7. c. 85. sect. 1. B. White against Fisher. p. 107. B. Lawd Confer. sect.
21. p. 133, 142, 143 D. Chillingworth. c. ^. sect. 30, 35, 38, 5^, 59, 74.
Cause, and not the Separation, that makes the Schismatic; they who give the
Cause, for which it is necessary to separate, are the Authors of the Schism;
for where there is a necessary Cause to separate, we are commanded by God so to
do, 2 Cor, 6. 17. Rev. 18. 4. As we find when Jeroboam had corrupted the
Worship of God, the Priests and Levites, and out of all the Tribes; such as set
their hearts to seek the Lord, departed from his Idolatry, 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 16
30. 11. For certainly one particular Church may reform it self, though another
will not.

2. That they gave the Cause of this Breach and Separation, and that upon
several accounts. 1. By B. Morton Prot. Appeal. l. 4. c. 2. sect. 9. sect. 37,
38. B. Ushers Sermon. on Ephesians. 4. 13. p. 7. B. White against Fisher. p. 106. B.
Lawd Confer. sect. 21. p. 135. and sect. 25. p. 192. B. Bramhal Church of
England defended. p. 13, 14, 66, 181, 367, 390. Chillingworth c. 5. s. 25, 31.
33 35, 40, 50, 51, 59, 62, 64, 65, 68, 69. 78, 106
many and great Corruptions in Doctrine and Worship, whereby they themselves
departed from the primitive Purity, which Errors and Corruptions they obtruded
and imposed upon us as Conditions of their Communion. 2. By B. Bramhals Defense
passim. F. Mason de Minister. Angl. l. 2. c. 10. B. Lawd. sect. 25. Number. 10, 11.
great encroachments and usurpations upon the just power of Princes, and
Liberties of Churches. 3. By B. White against Fisher. p. 106, 107.
Chillingworth. c. 5. 61. 96.
Tyranny in Excommunications, Persecutions and fiery Inquisitions, frighting
and thrusting us from their Communion 4. By B. White. p. 106. B. Lawd sect. 24.
p. 156. and sect. 35. p. 297. Chilling. sect. 53.
refusing to be reclaimed, or healed of these distempers, in that they
challenge a peculiar Infallibility, and a power to hold all other Churches
under their Laws and Dominations.

3. That this was not a Secession from the Jewels Defense p. 499. Mornay of the
Church c. 10. Crakenth. c. 79 sect. 4. Morton. Appeal l. 4 c. 2. sect. 10.
sect. 43. Gerard. Loc. de Eccles. sect. 180 B. Lawd. sect. 25 n. 18. p. 192.
Chillingworth. sect. 32, 45, 47, 94.
Catholic Church, nor from the Primitive Church, (unto whose judgment we are
willing to appeal) but only from the Corruptions, Faction and Tyranny of a
particular Church, with whom notwithstanding we retain an Unity still, in all
points of Doctrine and Worship, which they hold consonant to the Will of God in
his Word revealed, disowning nothing but those Errors and Additions which they
have superinduced upon the Institutions of Christ.

Lastly, That this is Gerard ubi supra. sect. 179. B. Ushers Ser. p. 27, 31.
Mornay of the Chapter c. 9. p. 324. c. 10 p 358. Crakenth. c 85. sect 2. Field of
the Church. l. 3. c. 8, 12. and Appendix p 3. sect. 2. B Lawd Epist Dedicat. to
the King. p. 16. Chilling. sect. 91. Carleton Consens. loc. de Scriptura. e. 1.
page 9. 14. D. Jo. Whiteway, sect. 50.
not to set up a new Church which was never in the world before; for the Church
is the same now as formerly, only sick and overgrown with Corruptions then;
healed, weeded, purged and reformed now; nor were there wanting in former ages,
after those Corruptions prevailed in the Church, many Witnesses who appeared
for the Truths then suppressed, greatly complained of the contrary abuses, and
earnestly desired a reformation, as under the defection of the ten Tribes the
Lord had seven thousand who had not bowed the knee to Baal, 1 Reg. 19. 18. and
a Remnant according to the Election of Grace under the Apostasy of the Jews,
Romans 11. 1, 5.

3. We should be exhorted to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace;
not to judge, despise, or condemn one another, but mutually to edify where we
agree, and to endeavor Reconciliation wherein we differ; to be perfectly
joined together, if it be possible, in the same Judgment, to think, and to
speak the same things; however to mind the same End, to intend the same Common
Salvation, to hold fast the same head, to pursue the same Interest, and however
we go in several paths of the same Rode, yet still to have our faces toward
the same City.

Arguments to persuade unto this holy unity, to obey the Government of Christ
under his Staff Bands, are many and weighty.
1. A Contrario. Consider the Unity and Confederacy of Satan, and all his
Instruments against Christ and his Church; for our Savior tells us, that
Satan is not divided against himself, Mat. 12. 26. We read of the Mat. 16. 18.
Gates of hell, whereby we understand the united Powers and Counsels of the
kingdom of Darkness against the Kingdom of Christ; and as Devils, so the wicked
of the world join hand in hand against the Church; they Psalm. 2. ^2. Psalm. 83.
3, 8. Act. 4. 27.
consult together with one consent, and are confederate against it; they will
lay down their own private enmities to combine against Christ, as Luke 23. 12.
Isa. 9. 21.
Pilate and Herod did; Fas est and ab host doceri; if enemies unite to destroy
the Church, should not we unite to preserve it? especially considering what a
Hist. of the Council of Trent. p. 49. Hoc consilio Julianus inter Christianos
dissidia fovebat ut minore negotio debell arentur, si prius bello inter se
coaflictati fuissent. Baron. Ann. 392. sect. 285.
grave Historian notes, That in the cause of Religion, every Subdivision is a
strong Weapon in the hand of the contrary party. Our intestine Mutinies and
Distempers, do the Enemies work for him. He may stand still, and please
himself, to see us bite and devour one another. Again, Consider the Turpitude,
Deformity and Danger of Schisms and Divisions, which are the same in a
Political or Ecclesiastical body, as in the natural, wherein whatsoever
mangleth and separateth part from part, does greatly weaken and deform the
whole. They gratify the common enemy; Hoc Ithacus velit. They grieve the holy
Spirit, as wounds in the body natural put the soul to pain. They dishonor the
holy. Gospel which is a Gospel of Peace. They loosen and weaken the Interest of
Religion; for when Gal. 5. 15.
we bite and devour one another, we are in danger to be consumed one of
another. They minister occasion to profane Spirits to turn Atheists, and cast
off all Religion, as a thing of uncertainty, wherein the Professors thereof
themselves know not how to agree. They have their foundation in carnal and
sensual Interests, as Pride, Revenge, Discontent, Coveteousness, and other
inordinate Lusts, and therefore are reckoned by the Apostle amongst the Gal. 5.
20. 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. Romans 16. 17, 18 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5
Fruits of the flesh. If we examine the Vid. Danaei prolegomena in Lib. Aug. de
Haeresibus, cap. 6, 7.
Rise and Original of many of the ancient Heresies, whereby the Peace of the
Church has been torn and mangled, we shall find that some carnal End or other,
as Ambition, Animosity, Discontent, or other the like sins, have been the Basis
on which they were reared. It was the speech of a graceless son to his mother,
Aug Ep. 168
Transferam me in partem Donati, and bibam sanguinem tuum; as St. De genesis
contra Manichaeos, lib. 2. c. 8
Austin says, Matter omnium Haereticorum superbia. It is a very true speech of
Baron. Ann. 474. sect. 6.
Baronius, ex Officina Sardanapali prodire consueverunt Haeresium sectatores.

2. A Necessa^^^ from the the necessity of this excellent Duty; and this is a
twofold necessity, Necessitas praecepti, because it is commanded, Have peace
one with another, Mark 9. 50. Necessitas Medii, because Peace and Unity amongst
brethren in the Church, is an excellent means to Romans 15. 5, 6, 7
glorify God, when with one mind and mouth we call upon him, and serve him
with one consent; and to further the Gospel, and gain it honor and credit even
in the hearts of strangers: the Heathen themselves took notice of the love of
Christians, as Minutius Felix tells us, Vide, say they, ut se diligunt
Christiani.

3. A possibili; our endavours in this kind are not after things which are
unattainable; for Ephesians. 2. 13. 16
Christ has by the blood of his Cross procured the Churches peace, and by his
powerful Intercession Joh. 17. 21, 23.
prays for it; since therefore Christ Isa. 53. 11.
dyed not in vain, but did Gal. 2. ^1.
see of the travel of his soul, and was Joh. 11. 42.
heard in every prayer which he made; It is certain that the Lord will in due
time pour out upon his people a spirit of Unity, and Amos 9. 11.
close up the breaches of his Tabernacle: as it is our Duty to seek Peace, so is
it his Psalm. 29. 11. Isa. 54. 13. Jer. 32. 39.
promise to work it; he is not the author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all
the Churches of the Saints,

4. A Facili, It is not only possible, but easy for Believers to be at peace
one with another; those things which are natural are ever wrought without
difficulty, it is not hard for the Sun to shine, or the fire to burn, nothing
more easy then for the members in one body to agree with one another: And
Believers are members of the same body, and have one common spirit to actuate
and animate them, and therefore should suffer and rejoice together, and be
kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly love, as the Apostle
argues, Romans 12. 4, 10. 1 Cor. 1^. 12, 13. 25. 26.

5. Ab Vtili* from the great good and advantage which hereby comes unto the
Church; it is as the dew of Hermon which brings a blessing with it; it
strengthens against all adverse power, and makes the Church terrible as an
Army with Banners; it opens the passages for Communion of Saints, that they
may derive good from one another by the supply that every joint makes, as
diverse members in the body have diverse uses, the eye to see, the ear to hear,
the tongue to speak, the hand to work; and these Uses mutually serviceable to
the good of each other, and Union a necessary bond of this Service, so in the
Church or body of Christ, every member has his measure of gifts and graces, by
which he may be profitable to the whole; 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9.
one the Spirit of Wisdom, another of Knowledge; one able to counsel, another
to comfort; one to exhort, another to rebuke, what is wanting in one, is
supplied by another; and this Ephesians. 4. 16.
supply is made by those joints whereby these diverse members are united
together. Love is the Vehiculum of all that help and service which one
Christian man deriveth upon another; hereby we Gal 5. 13.
serve one another, and Romans 14. 19 Jud. v. 20, 21.
edify one another; we bear with the infirmities, sustain the burdens, and
rejoice in the comforts, mourn in the sorrows, distribute to the necessities,
pray for the souls of one another; By this means the graces of the Church are
more bright and resplendent, as the flame which arises out of united fuel, is
much greater then that which each stick alone by it self does render; and hence
it is that the servants of God do Psalm. 26. 8. 27. 4. 42, 1, a.
love the habitation of his house, and the place where his honor dwells, Act.
2. 1, 46, 47. 3. 1.
assembling themselves there together with one accord, because he has promised
Exodus 20. 24
that in every place where he records his name, he will come unto them, and
bless them: and by this means there were added to the Church daily such as
should be saved.

6. A Jucundo and honesto. It is not only good, but pleasant for brethren to
dwell together in Unity, not only as the dew of Hermon for profit, but as the
Psalm. 133.
ointment on the head of Aaron for comfort and Delight. In the united ^sal. 27.
6.
Assemblies of the Saints we behold the beauty of the Lord; when the members
are disjoynted, the body is deformed: Shave away the eyebrows only from the
face, Quantillum decedit de corpore, quantum de pulchritudine, says St.
Austin, you much lessen the beauty, by so little lessening the body; Now a
Schism in the Church, is the same deformity as a mutilation in the body.

7. Ab Exemplo, from the great Examples which we have of Peace in the word. God
known by the name of Heb. 13. 20. Jo^. 22. 21.
a God of Peace, with whom his people having Acquaintance and Communion are at
peace. Christ by the name of a Isa. 9. 6.
Prince of Peace, who as he is 1 Cor. 1. 13.
not divided in himself, so neither should he be divided in his Members. Our
Phil 2. 1, 2.
Consolation in him should make us be of one accord, and of one mind; the
Primitive Church a mirror of Unity and Peace; the Act. 4. 32,
multitude of believers were of one heart, and of one soul, and primum in
unoquoque; genere est Regula caeterorum.

8. Ab Evangelio, from the nature of the Gospel, which is called by the
Apostle, a Romans 10. 15.
Gospel of Peace, whereby we are Col. 3. 15.
called unto peace; by the power whereof the Isa. 11. 6.
rage of Lions and Bears is calmed and subdued; much more should the Sheep of
Christ be preserved from biting and devouring one another; it is a presage of
rain and storms, when Sheep run heads together, and certainly it bodeth no good
unto the Church when the Sheep of Christ are at discord one with another.

Lastly, A Sacramentis, which are sigilla and vincula pacis: from the
Sacraments which are the Seals and Bands of Christian Peace; In Baptism we were
1 Cor. 12, 1^.
baptized into one body; in the Lords Supper we being many, are 1 Cor. 10. 17.
one Bread, and one body, for we are partakers of that one Bread; as the Wine
is made of many grapes pressed into one Liquor, and the Bread of Sicut multa
gra^^ un^^ p^n^m consiciuat, and ex multis ra^emis unum vinum extrabitur, sic
ex multis hominibus Christi corpus efficitur. Sermon. 28. ad fatres in eremo apud
Aug.
many grains molded into one Lump, so the Church of many believers compacted
together by one Spirit of Faith and Love into one mystical body.

I shall conclude this Exhortation with two or three solemn and emphatical
passages of the Romans 14. 19. ^ Cor. 1. 10. 2 Cor. 13. 11. Phil. 2. 1, 2. 2 These
3. 16. Romi 15. 5.
Apostle, pressing Christians unto this duty; Let us, says he, follow after
the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another;
And again, I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
all speak the same thing, that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same Judgment, And
again, Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in Peace, and the
God of Love and Peace shall be with you. And again, if there be therefore any
Consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any Bowels and Mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having
the same Love, being of one accord, of one mind. Unto which I shall subjoyn the
same Apostles pathetical prayer, The Lord of Peace himself give you Peace
always by all means, and the God of Patience and Consolation grant you to be
like minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus, that you may with
one mind, and with one mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Before I leave this seasonable and necessary Argument, let us in a few words
consider, what is to be done in Differences of Judgment and Divisions of mind,
to heal the breaches, and to recover the Peace of a disjointed and dilacerated
Church.

And here it cannot be denied, but that in all ages of the Church, there have
been, and still are like to be, Varieties of Judgment among the Members
thereof. For 1. The best Proficients 1 Cor. 13. 9.
know but in part, and Prophecy but in part. 2. There are many things very
abstruse and difficult in the disquisition of divine Truth; Religion has its 2
Pet. 3. 16. Heb. 5. 11.
(...), things hard to be understood, as well as other Sciences. 3. There is in
many men much Romans 14. 1.
weakness of Judgment, to make search and enquiry into these things, or to
discover veritatem in puteo latentem. 4. There is much carelessness of heart in
many men to try the spirits, and to prove all things; they Mat. 13. 21
sleep while the enemy sows Tares. 5. There is in many men a Levity,
Lubricity and Discomposedness of mind whereby they are apt to be Ephesians. 4. 14.
Romans 16. 18 Col. 2. 4 1 Reg. 13. 18, 19.
carried away with every wind of Doctrine, and out of Simplicity and Credulity
to be wrought upon by the cunning of those who are skilful to deceive. 6. Some
have 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4 Jud. v. 16
itching ears, harkening always after new things, whom Manna will not please
without Quails, who have some particular men's persons in admiration, and give
up themselves by a blind obedience and implicit Faith, into their hands, to be
led by them into novel and singular Opinions. 7. Prevailing of Lust and
domestical Interest, does in many men darken their mind, and entangle their
Judgments, and betray them unto that sad condition of being 2 These. 2. 10, 11.
1 Timothy 6. 10
given over to strong Delusions to believe Lies. Upon these and such like
Reasons there have been always Differences in the Church: We find a contention
between Acts 15. 39. Gal. 2. 11, 13 1 Cor. 1. 12, 12
Paul and Barnabas, and between Paul and Peter; We find some for Paul, others
for Apollo, and some for Cephas, and others for none of them all, but for
Christ without them; we find some 1 Cor. 3. 12.
building upon the foundation Silver and gold, and others Hay and stubble. We
read of great differences between the Eastern and Western Churches, touching
the Observation of Easter, and between the Roman and African Churches in the
matter of Rebaptization; of many sharp Dissentions between sundry great and
famous Bishops and Pastors of the ancient Churches. To say nothing of the
present sad experience which we may everywhere observe of the same Truth, the
Matthew. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 19
Scripture has foretold it, and it cannot be otherwise, that there must be
Heresies and Offenses; nevertheless we must not hereby be discouraged from
using all pious and prudent Endeavors for pacification of the persons so
dissenting; concerning which Accommodation we are to distinguish;

1. Of Opinions, whereof some are in the Mat. 7. 24 1 Cor. 3. 9, 10 Heb. 6. 1
Foundation, in those primitive Articles of Faith, and Essentials of Religion,
on which the house of God is built; the errors contrary whereunto are
subversive, 2 Pet. 2. 1
pernicious and damnable; some are only in the Superstruction, which are not
Aug. de Peccat. Orig. cap. 23.
Fidei, but Quaestionum, which do not overturn the Edifice, nor endanger the
Vitals of Religion: such were in the Romans 14. 5, 6. 1 Cor. 8. 8, 9
Apostles time, Disputes touching Meats, and Drinks, and Days, and Things
indifferent; wherein though men abound in their own sense, yet it must ever be
with Meekness, and with humble submission to the Spirits of the Prophets, and
to the Judgment, Order and Peace of the Church.

2. Of Persons; Some are Ephe. 4. 14. Esaias 3. 12 Jer. 23. 16, 26, 32. ^ 29. 8.
Matthew. 7. 15 Acts 20. 29, 30 2 Timothy 3. 13 Tit. 1. 10 2 Pet. 2. 1 2 John v. 7
Mark 13. 22 2 Timothy 2. 14. 18. Gal. 2. 4
Seducers, who out of Pride, Enmity against the Doctrine which is according
unto Godliness, carnal ends, desire of Advantage and Domination, do sow Tares
in the Church, and cause Rents and Divisions therein; such were Hymeneus,
Philetus, Diotrephes, and others. Others are 2 Cor. 11. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 6 Col. 2.
8 Ephesians. 4. 14
seduced people, who through Ignorance, Credulity, Simplicity, Facility and
Flexibleness of Spirit, are led away captive by the cunning Craftiness of them
who lie in wait to deceive.

Again, Some are men of meek, humble, peaceable and quiet spirits; amongst whom
though there be differences of Judgment, yet they do upon common Principles of
Faith and Holiness, agree in love, and join in pursuing the same common
Salvation; neither monopolizing the privileges of Saints, neither judging, or
despising the other, neither holding any Error By. Lawd. Conser. sect. 36. page
315. 316.
supinely, pertinaciously, uncharitably or factiously. Others are men of
turbulent, seditious and tumultuating Dispositions, who love to kindle flames,
to foment Divisions, to make Sides and Factions, that they may fish in troubled
waters; these things being premised, we may touching Accommodations thus
conclude.

1. There can be no Syncretism, or accommodation where the Differences are in
points destructive to the foundations of Religion, and against the very
Essentials of Faith, Worship and Obedience; there can be no reconciliation 1
Cor. 10 21. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 17 Gal. 1. 8, 9
between Christ and Belial, between damnable Heresies and the Doctrine which is
according unto Godliness. Tit. 3. 10 Eusebius. H^st. l. 4. c. 13.
Heretics are to be admonished, and in case of Pertinacy to be rejected,
therefore there may be no brotherly Communion with them. But seduced persons
are in the spirit of 2 Timothy 2 25, 26.
meekness to be instructed, and if possible to be restored, and won unto the
Truth, and delivered from the snare of the Devil.

2. Though the Differences at first view be not so pernicious and dangerous,
yet if it be evident that they be purposely sowed by men of turbulent and
ungracious spirits, merely to kindle flames, to foment Seditions, to lay the of
perpetual Divisions or Commotions in Church or State, to gratify the common
enemy, and to be subvervient unto such Ends and Designs, as wherein Truth and
Holiness is endangered; in this case the Apostle has taught us, both by his
Example Gal. 2. 4, 5.
not to give place by subjection for an hour unto such men, and Romans 16. 17.
by his Doctrine, to mark and to beware of them.

3. Where a Syncretism and Agreement is allowable, yet we must love Zac. 8. 19.
Heb. 12. 14.
Peace and Truth, follow Peace and Holiness, 2 Cor. 4. 2. Basil. in Psalm. 14.
1. edit. Graecolat. Paris. p. 153. and Greg. Naz. Orat. 1. p. 20. B.
not adulterate, or in any case betray, or play the Hucksters with the Word; as
it is said of the Samaritanes, that they 2 Reg. 17. 33.
feared the Lord, and served their own Gods. We must not temper, or reduce
divine Truth to the Rules or Dictates of our own Lusts, nor captivate our
Conscience to our carnal desires. 1 Reg. 12. 27, 28, 33. 2 Reg. 16. 10.
Jeroboam and Ahaz acted inordinately, when they erected a Worship dissonant to
Gods Will, and subservient to their own; for we 2 Cor. 13. 8.
can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth; Pro. 23. 23.
buy it we may, sell it we must not for any other gain.

4. Where the Fundamentals of Religion are safe, and on all sides unanimously
embraced, and the differences purely problematical, and such as do not at all
endanger the Vitals and Essentials of Religion, Romans 15. 1 Gal. 6. 1. Ephesians. 4.
2, 3.
mutual meekness, tenderness and forbearance are to be used, as amongst
brethren and fellow members. Disputes are to be managed with all calmness of
Spirit, without Passion, Animosity, Exasperation, invidious Consequences, or
any thing tending to the violation of brotherly love; hereby we preserve the
Communion of Saints, when we own one another as brethren, and not as strangers:
We credit the Gospel of Peace, and adorn our mutual profession of the same
common Faith: We make way to the more clear Discovery of Truth, when no Passion
or Prejudice does dazzle our eyes, or overcloud our Judgment; We stop the
mouths, prevent the Insultations, and take away the advantages, which the
common adversary promises to himself by our differences and Dissentions.

The Means to be used unto such an Evangelical Accommodation, are,
1. Out of a sincere love of all truth, to wait with humble, docile and
tractable hearts upon God, in the use of such means as he has appointed, for
the revealing of his mind unto us touching those things about which we differ,
and for that purpose with single hearts to study the Scriptures, and to weigh
every opinion in the balance of the Sanctuary; 2 Timothy 3. 16 Act 20. 32. Luke
14. 2^.
This, the Apostle says, is profitable for Doctrine and for Reproof: to this
he refers the Church against all danger of Wolves; out of this our Lord
revealed to his Disciples the things which concerned himself; by this the
Optatus contra Parmen. l. 5. Aug. Epist. 19. c. 1. ep. 48. and 112. contra ep.
Parmen. l. 1. c. 2 c^nt. Lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 85. de Unitat. Eccles. c. 3. 6
17, 18, 19. in Ps. 2^ Exposit. 2.
Ancients desired to have the Controversies in their times stated and decided.
And when any of them teach us to try Doctrines by Ecclesiastical Tradition, and
the witness of the Church, they speak of Apostolical Churches, which Tertullian
calls Matrices and Originales, and not barely of the peremptory decision of
some one or other Tertul. cont. H^rmog. c. 2^. Dr. Field Appendix. part. 3. c.
7. page 42.
present or particular Church; for they were able to draw down from the
Apostles, Tertul. de praescript. cap. 20. 21.
Traducem fidei, as Tertullian calls it, a Doctrinal Succession, to assign the
Time, the Authors, and the Posteriority of those Heresies, whch they gainsaid,
as he says, Advers. Hermog. cap. 1. contra Marcion. lib. 5. c. 19. contra
P^axeam. cap. 2.
Solemus Haereticis compendii causa de posterioritate praescribere. Now because
we cannot understand the things of God but by the Spirit of God, for A^ts 16.
14. 2 Cor 3. 16, 17 1 John 5, 2^
he it is who opens the heart, and draws away the vail, and gives us an
understanding; and because the Scripture has told us, that Gods people shall
be John 6. 45 Aug. de G^^t. Ch^isti. c. 13. and de praedesti^at. sanctorum cap.
8.
taught of him; therefore we must in our studying thereof, pray unto God with
Job 34. 32.
Job, That which I see not, teach thou me; and with Psalm. 119. 66.
David, Teach me good Judgment and knowledge; and with the Ephesians. 1. 17.
Apostle, beg of God the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of
him; that in any thing wherein we are Phil. 3. 15.
otherwise minded, he will reveal even that unto us.

2. To agree in the Fundamentals, in the mystery of Godliness, the Unity of the
Faith, the Principles of Doctrine, the Rule by which we are all to walk, in the
Joh. 17. 3. 8. 24. Act. 4. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 1. 23. 2. 2. 3. 11.
saving knowledge of God and Christ, unto which eternal Life is annexed, and
without which it cannot be had; in the Joh. 4. 24. 16. 23. Heb. 7. 25. Col. 3.
17.
spiritual Worship of God, calling upon him, and coming unto him, in and by
Christ; and in those primary grounds of Christian Obedience, Repentance,
Sincerity, Love of Christ, Self-denial; and where there is an unfeigned and
unanimous Agreement in these, there is a ground laid for discovery of the Truth
in matters of smaller Difference. Agreement in Principles is a fair preparation
unto agreement in all those Conclusions, which are naturally deducible from
those Principles: and the more clearly we understand the Comprehension of
Principles, the more exactly we shall discern the genuine Connection of true
conclusions, and the inconsistency of those which are false and fallacious.

3. In the things whereunto we have attained to Phil. 3. 16.
walk by the same Rule, to hold the 2 These. 2. 10 Aug. de Great. Christi. c. 13.
Truth in love, to 1 Timothy 1. 19
keep faith and a good conscience; for Christian Doctrine is a 1 Timothy 3. 16
Mystery of Godliness, and saving Knowledge, a 1 Timothy 6. 3. Tit 1. 1.
knowledge which is according unto Godliness, and therefore the best way to
find out that wherein we differ, is, to obey that wherein we agree; The Lord
having promised, Joh. 7. 17. 10 4.
that they who do his Will, shall know his Doctrine; that he will Psalm. 25. 9,
14.
teach the meek his way, and reveal his secret to them that fear him; that unto
him Psalm. 50. 23.
who orders his Conversation aright, he will show the Salvation of God.

4. To be spiritual and heavenly minded; for as heavenly bodies, so heavenly
minds are the proper subjects of Serenity and Tranquillity; Inferiora
fulminant. Sen. Pacem summa tenent. Lucan.
Storms and Tempests are the Effects of earthly exhalations; heavenly Orbs are
steady and regular, have no Combustions nor disagreements in them; Schisms and
Divisions are 1 Cor. 3. 3
from the flesh, and come from us as Men, not as Christians. As the reasonable
Soul does bind the parts of the body together in Unity; when that is gone, they
are in a near disposition to dissolve, and fall asunder: So the 1 Cor. 12. 13.
Ephesians. 4. 3
Spirit of Christ is the bond of his body; the Apostle calls it* The Unity of
the Spirit in the bond of Peace; the more we have the Phil. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5.
mind of Christ, the less we shall do things through strife, vainglory,
revenge, or any other inordinate passion; for the James 3. 14, 17.
Wisdom which is from above, is pure and peaceable; but that which tends unto
envying and strife, descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual and
devilish.

5. To study and cast about for Peace, to do all that is Romans 12. 18. Romans 14.
19. Heb. 12. 14
possible, and what soever lies in our power to produce it; to follow after
it, and all the requisite expedients which conduce unto it; if it fly, pursue
it; if it hide, search for it; find out, as 2 Chronicles. 24. 4, 13. 2 Chronicles. 34. 8.
13.
Jehoash and Josiah did Masons and Carpenters, and spiritual workmen to repair
the breaches of the house: to Romans 14. (...).
have our private Opinions and Problemes to our selves before God, rather then
by our unseasonable venting of them, to scandalize and offend our brethen, and
to endanger the quiet of the Church.

6. To be of a meek, humble and calm spirit: 1 Cor. 13. 5, 7.
Love is not easily provoked, is long suffering, kind, self-denying, bears,
believes, hops, endures all things. An Hammer makes no noise upon wool, so
a Prove. 15. 1
soft Spirit turns away Wrath. Some men are so hot, so opinionative, so
contentious, so wedded to their own conceits, so impatient of dissent, that
none can have Peace with them, who will not mancipate and render up their
Reason and Judgment into their hands. But though it be our Duty to try all
things, and hold fast Truth, when we have found it, yet we must hold it with a
Spirit of Meekness. Meekness is the fittest disposition to receive truth; Jam.
1. 21.
Receive, says the Apost. with meekness the ingrafted Word; And Meekness is
the fittest disposition to teach Truth: 2 Timothy 2. 25.
In Meekness, says St. Paul, instructing those that oppose themselves. 2 Timothy
4. ^.
Long-Suffering and Doctrine must be joined together. Self-willedness and
hastiness of Passion, are Obstructions unto the progress of Truth; else the
Apostle would not have entered a Caveat against them in a Bishop: for, says he,
Tit. 1. 7.
a Bishop must be blameless as the Steward of God, not self-willed, not soon
angry, etc.

7. To be of a candid Judgment; not to widen, but as much as may be to narrow
Differences, and to reduce Controversies to as near an Agreement, as is
possible; and in the managing of them, to retain Suavity and Ingenuity; not to
infer without undeniable Evidence, odious and invidious consequences from those
Doctrines of our brethren, which we our selves dislike; but to believe other
men as perspicacious to discern, and as tender to decline such desperate Rocks
as we our selves. It argues great want of Charity toward others, and of
Humility in our selves, when by our perverse Disputings, we go about to charge
such opinions upon others, as from their own mouths we are assured, and
therefore should in Charity believe, that they do detest. Pride in our selves,
and Prejudice against others, are Two great Impediments to the healing of
Divisions.

I shall shut up all with one observation out of the Text more, which is this,
That what Christ in the beginning of the verse did undertake, I will feed the
flock of slaughter, in the latter end thereof he makes it good, I fed the
flock. Christ never undertook more in a way of Office then what he finished,
nor more in a way of Promise then what he performed. He undertook a difficult
service, to feed his Church not only with his Doctrine but with his Blood; he
had a Joh. 10. 18.
Command and Commission to do it, and this Commission he accepted, Heb. 10. 7,
9.
Lo I come to do thy will O God. And though it were so hard a duty, that his
humane nature did shrink, and as it were draw back from it, Mat. 26. 39
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, yet he submitted his
will to the will of his father, and was Phil. 2. 8. Joh. 17. 4.
obedient even to that servile, ignominious and cursed death, which his humane
nature so earnestly declined. And in like manner what he undertakes to work in
us, he Heb 12. 2. Phil. 1. 6. Psalm. 138. 8.
will finish, as well as what he undertook to work for us; he is as the
Author, so the finisher of our faith; when he has begun a good work in us, he
will perform it unto the day of Christ.

He Joh 16. 7. Luke 24. 49.
Promised to send his spirit upon his Disciples, and Act. 2. 33^
he did send him; he Luke 9. 1.
Promised unto them power to cast out Devils, and Luke 10. 17.
they did so; his name is Rev. 3. 14.
Amen, the faithful and true witness, and all the promises of God in him are
2 Cor. 1. 20.
yea and Amen; if he promise peace, or grace, or salvation, he will give it:
his fidelity, power, honor, love, mercy, oath, and covenant, are so many
assurances unto his people that what he has undertaken to do for, in, or unto
them, shall undoubtedly be done. He will do every work of Salvation Heb. 7. 25.
to the uttermost for those that come unto God by him; if he begin faith, he
will (...) ^2 1.
finish it; if he begin holiness, he will Col. 2. 10.
complete it; if he Act. 3. 16.
heal, he heales perfectly; Joh. 13. 2.
if he love, he loves to the end: Every work of his is perfect.

There are works of his yet to do, to Joh. 11. 52 Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Isai 2. 18. Romans
16. 20. 1 Cor. 15. 25
Gather the people of God that are scattered abroad, to destroy the idols
utterly, to tread down Satan and death under our feet, and he will do all
before he give up his kingdom to his father.

There are promises of his yet to be fullfilled, to Joh. 14. 2, 3.
come again and to receive us unto himself, Joh. 6. 40.
to raise us up at the last day, Mat. 12. 20.
to bring forth judgment unto victory. And the experience which the Church has
had of his Love, Power, and fidelity in former works, and promises, should
raise up their hearts to trust in him assuredly, for the accomplishment of
those which are yet behind ( Heb. 13. 8.
for he is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever.) This we may plead in
our prayers, do 2 Samuel 7. 25.
as thou have said. This we may apply in our endeavors toward holiness; he
has said he will Mic. 7. 19. Ezekiel. 11. 19. 36. 26
subdue our iniquities, he will take away an heart of stone, and give an heart
of flesh; for this end he was manifested 1 John 3. 5, 8.
to destroy the works of the devil, and upon this Word Ps. 119. 49.
I will Hope. This we may support our drooping and desponding hearts under, in
any time of diffidence, and discomfort; when I begin to fear that my sins are
greater then can be pardoned, stronger then can be mortified, deeper then can
be eradicated; His Power is ever accompanying his mercy; what he begins, he
will finish: he has said he will Isai 55. 7.
abundantly pardon: therefore we may say, Number. 14. 17
I beseech thee let the power of my Lord be great according as thou have
spoken* Mic. 7. 20.
He will perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham; his word is an
invincible bar to all our fears.

FINIS.

