ANNOTATIONS ON THE BOOK OF Ecclesiastes.

LONDON, Printed by I. Streater, 1669.

ECCLESIASTES, OR, The Preacher.
The Argument.
THe Author of this Book both by the Style, and by the Title of it appears to
have been Solomon, since no other Son of David was King in Jerusalem, but he.
He seems to have written it in his old Age, when he took a more serious view
of his past Life. The Honors, pleasures, wealth, wisdom, he had so abundantly
enjoyed: The Errors and miscarriages which he had fallen into: the large
experience, and many observations he had made, of things Natural, Moral,
Domestical, Civil, Sensual, Divine: the Curious and Critical inquiry he had
made after true happiness, and what Contribution all things under the Sun
could afford thereunto. Concerning which, He does, 1. In the general discover
the utter vanity and insufficiency of all things here below to make a man
Blessed, in regard of their mutable nature, of their weakness and
disproportion to the Soul of Man: of the weariness which is contracted by the
studying of them: and the impossibility of ever drawing from them more then
ha^^ been formerly extracted; and consequently the fruitless attempt of any
that should ever after go about to receive satisfaction from them. 2. He
demonstrateth this General Proposition touching the most Vain Vanity of all
things under the Sun, by an Induction of those particulars, from which, above
all others, men usually expect the greatest Contentment. Those are, 1. Wisdom
and Knowledge both natural and moral, for inquiry whereinto no man was ever
furnished with greater abilities and stronger inclinations in himself; or with
more fitting provisions and assistants from without, then Solomon was, in
regard of the greatness of his dignity and estate; and yet after all he
concludes, That Wisdom and Know^edge do but increase Grief and Sorrow, so far
are they from bringing such blessedness to the Soul, as may fully satisfy the
desires thereof. 2. Pleasures and Delights, which he had as much advantage by
his greatness to Enjoy, and by his wisdom to Examine, as ever any other man
should have: and yet all the content he expected from them, did end in hatred
of them, and despair of ever mending his condition by them. 3. Honor,
greatness, and power in the World, concerning which, he shows that it is so
far from making men happy, as that without the fear of God to correct and
^emper it, it is the occasion of much wickedness to those that have it, and of
much misery to th^se that suffer under it: It usually breaking forth into
oppression and violence, whereby men in power carry themselves like beasts
toward their brethren, and shall themselves dye like beasts, undesired, and
unlamented. It being likewise matter of much discouragement to men that are
oppressed by it, making them weary of their lives, careless of their labors,
resolved rather upon quiet idleness, then upon envied employments; and to get
what they can privately to themselves, then having been publicly useful, to ^e
repayed with no other Rewards then wrong and danger: by which means Society and
Community of services amongst men, so greatly beneficial to public interest,
are obstructed and dissolved. 4. An outward form of Religion and of Divine
Worship, into which foolish men by carnal confidence, and superficial
performances, do also put diverse vanities, and make even Gods service unuseful
to their Happiness. 5. Riches and great Possessions, which are so far from
satisfying the heart of man, as that they occasion more cares, less sleep,
less quiet, are snares and occasions of much Hurt to the owners of them, who,
living, possess them with sorrow; and dying, part with them with wrath and
indignation: Having little benefit by them in their life, as having not power
no enjoy them: nor in their death any comfort from them, as leaving them to
they know not whom, being not at all exempted by them either from misery or
mortality.

And having thus discovered the vanity of the principal things from whence the
Heart of man might have expected satisfaction: He does thereupon prescribe many
excellent means for healing and abating of that Vanity, and for procuring
tranquillity unto the Mind, and peace and comfort to the life of a man. Such
are, Contentation of heart in the sweet and fr^e Enjoyment of all outward
Blessings, with thanksgiving, and in the fear of God. Quiet and Humble
Acquiescency under the holy and powerful providence of God, in all the Events
which befall us in the World. Sincerity of heart in his worship, and prudent
Piety in our vows, prayers, and addresses unto him. Patience of spirit under
all the oppressions we meet with in the world. A composed preparedness of mind
to undergo sorrows and afflictions. Prudent and pious moderation of spirit in
our behavior toward all men, that so we may preserve our names from Cal^mnie,
and our persons from danger. Meekness, Charity, Patience toward such as
offend, considering Common frailty, and our own weakness. Sobriety of mind,
contenting our selves with a measure of wisdom and knowledge, and not busying
our selves with things too high for us. Practical Prudence, which may render us
beautiful in the eyes of others. Loyalty and obedience toward Magistrates,
that our lives may not be made uncomfortable by their displeasure. Wisdom to
discern of time and judgment. Preparedness of heart against inevitable evils.
Submission to the Holy and invincible Providence of God, admiring his Works,
adoring his Judgments. Joyful fruition of Comforts. Conscionable and
industrious walking in our particular Callings. Wisdom how to carry our selves
amidst the many Casualties which meet us in the World, so as that we may by our
loyalty toward our Superiors decline the danger of displeasure from them: and
by our Charity to Inferiors, lay up a good foundation for our selves, against
the time to come. Lastly, Moderation in the use of Comf^rts here: And
preparation by the fear of God, and keeping of his Commandments, for death and
Judgment hereafter. That by these means as our Life is sweet, so our Death may
be welcome. That the Piety of our Youth may help us to bear the Infirmities of
our Age, and to lift up our Heads in the day of Redemption.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter we have, 1. The Inscription of the whole Book, ver. 1. wherein
the Author thereof is described by his Natural Relation, the son of David; His
Civil Relation, King in Jerusalem; and his Church-Relation, a Preacher; or a
Penitent Soul, returning into the bosom of the Church, from whence by many
gross miscarriages he had secluded himself. 2. A general Proposition, setting
forth the utter insufficiency of all things under the Sun to make a man
Blessed, and the extreme vanity which is in them, in relation unto such an End,
(however otherwise useful and benef^cial they may be, within their own sphere,
when sanctified, to sweeten and comfort the life of a man, who has placed his
Happiness in God:) insomuch, that all the labor which is taken to extract
happiness from the Creature, will be wholly fruitless, and without any profit
at all, verse. 2, 3. 3. The proof of this general Proposition;

1. By man's mortality, whereby he is quickly removed from the fruition of them;
whereas that which makes a man happy ought for ever to abide with him, verse. 4.

2. By the Instability of all other Creatures, They come and presently they go,
and are never in a fixed condition: If comeing, they make happy; then
departing, they leave miserable again. By which imstability of the creatures,
being themselves continually unsatisfied, is employed, 1. Their weakness to
minister satisfaction to so noble a creature as man, verse. 5, 6, 7. 2. The
restless and fruitless Labor which is taken in seeking satisfaction from
things which only affect the senses, since the Eye is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear with hearing, verse. 8.

3. By the continual Vicissitudes and returns of the same things, which having
failed once, yea often before, are never likely to afford further supplies,
then already they have done (which indeed are none) toward the happiness of a
man. And therefore except they can minister some new matter ^f satisfact^on to
the soul, which was never found in them before, and which indeed they will
never do; impossible it is, but the same disappointment which others have met
with, must likewise befall those, who shall from the same things seek for that,
which the wisest of men heretofore were never able to extract from them, verse.
9, 10, 11.

4. By Solomon's own experience, who by the dignity of his place, by the
inclination of his heart, by the greatness of his wisdom and learning, and by
the abundance of his wealth, was able to go as far as any other man could in
this enquiry after true happiness; and when he had set himself to make a most
Critical and Accurate search into all things here below, does conclude of them
all in general, and of the most excellent of them all in particular, namely of
wisdom and knowledge, That they are not only Vanity, and so unable to
satisfy the Soul, but are further Vexation of spirit, as causing much grief
and sorrow to that heart which is immoderately conversant about them.

Verse. 1. THe words of the Preacher, the son of David, King in Jerusalem.]
These words are the Inscription of th^s Book, setting down the Author thereof
by his Parentage, dignity, and design in this writing. The Author is prefixed,
as owning and avowing the doctrine therein contained: His dignity is added, to
set on the drift and scope of the Book the better. A King. Such a King, the son
of David, so piously educated, 1 Reg. 2.2, 3. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Prove. 31.1. so
solemnly by God selected and separated to that Honor, 2 Samuel 7.12 -- 15. 2 Chronicles. 1.1. so admirably endowed with inward wisdom, whereby he was fitted, as
in special for the work of Government, 1 Reg. 3.12, 28. so likewise for all
natural and moral inquiries, 1 Reg. 10.3. 1 Reg. 4.29 -- 34. So rightly
furnished with all outward means to further such an inquiry, 2 Chronicles. 9.22. so
fixed and wholly taken up with it, sometimes vitiously taking his fill of
outward pleasures, 1 Reg. 11.1. sometimes critically, purposely setting himself
to extract the quintessence of all sublunary perfections, Eccles. 1.17. and
lastly, being instructed by God, an inspired person, and called out to publish
this as a Preacher of so necessary a truth to Gods people; In all these
respects, there is much Authority added to what the Wise man delivers in this
Book, and he do^^ hereby excite the attention of the people thereunto, as unto
the words of a penitent Convert, and of a wise, holy, and potent Prince.

The words of the Preacher] Some read it as a proper name, the words of
Koheleth son of David, and so would have it to be one of the names of Solomon,
as Jedidiah, 2 Samuel 12.25. Lemuel, Prove. 31.1. It is usually out of the Greek
rendered Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher: as if Solomon had publicly delivered it
to the Congregation, (as we find sometimes Kings and extraordinary persons have
spoken to the people in their Church assemblies, 1 Reg. 8.1.12.) But it seems
chiefly to signify Solomon's repentance, and re-uniting himself to the
congregation of Gods people, from whence by his idolatries and other apostasies
he had departed: and so the sense is, The words of the soul, or person
congregated or gathered unto the Church, or congregation of Saints, Ps. 89.6.
viz. of the son of David, King in Jerusalem. Some were not to be admitted into
the congregation at all, Deuteronomy. 23.3. Nehem. 13.1. and others by idolatry and
apostasy, did shut out themselves from the assemblies of the Saints, by joining
themselves to other gods. Now here Solomon does by solemn and serious
repentance return into the bosom of that congregation, from which by his
idolatry he had departed, and turned his heart from the Lord God of Israel, 1
King. 11.9. And does therein, and thereunto declare the vanity of all other
ways, save only the fear and worship of the Lord, unto true happiness. And
herein he imitateth his father David, whose name is happily here for that cause
mentioned, that as David being converted did publish his repentance unto the
Church, in that solemn penitential Psalm, Psalm. 51. So his son, having fallen
from his integrity, did take the same course to give glory to God in the great
congregation, Psalm. 40.10. and to make known his repentance to all the Church,
that thereby he might glorify God, and strengthen his brethren. Whence he
frequently in this book gives himself this title, as of a penitent convert,
Chap. 1.12. and 7.29. and 12.8, 9, 10. The word is a Participle or Adjective of
the feminine gender, yet joined here to a verb masculine, as elsewhere to a
verb feminine, Chap. 7.27. There, because of the grammatical congruity, Here,
with relation to the person thereby signified. They use to supply the sense
with the word nephesh, soul, which is mentioned presently after it, Chap. 7.27,
28. and so that word is elsewhere supplied, 2 Samuel 13.29. so where it is said,
Genesis 49.6. My glory be not thou united unto their assembly; the Noun is
masculine, the verb feminine, to signify that by glory, the same was to be
understood in that clause, which was expressed by the feminine Noun, the soul,
in the former clause: and so glory seems elsewhere to signify the soul of a
man, Ps. 30.12. If it be inquired what may be the cause why Solomon does not
prefix his proper name to this Book, as to the other two of the Proverbs and
Canticles: Though it be not necessary to be curious in questions of this
nature, yet this may be inoffensively conjectured; 1. That he seems hereby to
intimate, That by his former sins he had as it were forfeited his name of
Peace, and so we find that by reason of those his sins, God stirred up
adversaries against him, 1 King. 11.14, 23. 2. To note his sincerity, who now
chose to be known rather by the name of a penitent convert, than of a peaceable
Prince, as if he who had troubled Israel by his sins, did no longer deserve his
name of peace, as the prodigal said to his father, I am no more worthy to be
called thy son. So in Scripture, men have taken new names suitable to a new
condition, Genesis 52.28. Ruth. 1.20. Mar. 3.16, 17. Nehem. 9.7. The other
additions likewise to his name of penitence may seem to be looked on by him as
aggravations of his sins. 1. That he was the son of David, a godly father, who
had given him such holy education, who had provided him materials to build Gods
house, and greatly encouraged him to advance the worship of the Lord, who had
been an example to him to take heed of falling into gross sins, that the son of
such a father should fall so souly. 2. That he was a King on his fathers
throne, and that not by right of inheritance, but by special designation from
the Lord, who had singled him out above his brethren, and had appeared unto him
twice, and gave him wisdom and princely endowments for so great a place, that
he should defile the throne whereunto he had been so graciously advanced, and
from thence give to all the people so sad an example of sensuality and
apostasy. 3. That he was a King in Jerusalem, an holy City, where was Gods
throne as well as the thrones of the house of David, that he should defile the
Lords land, and his dwelling place: These were considerations worthy for such a
penitent to have his eyes on, for his greater humiliation. Thereby teaching us,
1. That the sins of the child are greatly aggravated by the godliness of the
parent, Jer. 22.15, 16, 17. 2. That the sins of the child are greatly
aggravated by the falls and miscarriages of the parent, Dan. 5.18 -- 23. 3.
That sins are greatly aggravated by the dignities and privileges of those that
commit them, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9. Deuteronomy. 32.12 -- 19. Amos 2.9 -- 13.3.2. 4. That
the greater the person is that sins, whereby the scandal to the Church is
likewise the greater, the more solemn ought his repentance to be, Numb. 12.14,
15, 16. 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13, 15, 16, 18, 19. 5. That the power of grace is
exceeding great, which can subdue the hearts of the greatest men unto the
heaviest yoke of public and solemn repentance, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. And further,
from the description of the person, and his writi^g of this book, we may
observe, 1. That eminency of wisdom without the continued assistance of grace,
cannot keep a man from gross and foul lapses. Never a wiser man than Solomon,
and never any Saint fell into more foolish lusts. God is pleased sometimes to
suffer men to fall into such sins, the contrary graces whereunto they had most
eminently been adorned withal. As David, a most spiritual man, into fleshly
l^st; Lot, whose righteous soul had been vexed at the filthy conversation of
the Sodomites, into another sort of unnatural impurity by incest of his
daughters: Job, into impatience; Moses, the meekest man alive, into great
passion of mind, Numb. 20.10. Peter, the boldest Disciple, into base fear and
cowardice of spirit in denying his Master. 2. That height of honor, and
abundance of wealth, are sore snares and temptations, even to the wisest and
most excellent men, Mark 10.23, 25. 1 Timothy 6.9. Isa. 39.1, 2. 3. That
repentance sets a man most against that evil by which he had most dishonored
God, and been foiled under temptation. Abundance of knowledge and treasures
drew Solomon's heart too far from the Lord, and being converted, he sets himself
most to discern the emptiness and vanity of them. So Zacheus, Luke 19.8. And
Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.37, 38. 4. That the Lord makes the falls of his servants
very beneficial unto his Church; David's fall was an occasion of his penning
some excellent Psalms, and Solomon's of writing this excellent book, setting
forth the vanity of those worldly things, whereby even wise men are many times
drawn away from God. 5. That the Saints, after some great offense given by
their falls to the Church, make it their business, upon their repentance, to do
some more notable and eminent service to the Church: as Peter who had been most
fearful in denying Christ, was after most forward in preaching him, and most
bold in the profession of him, Act. 1.15. and 2.14. and 3.12. and 4.8. and 5.29.

V. 2. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, All is
vanity.] The scope of the wise man is, to direct us in the right way to true
happiness. And this he does, first negatively, assuring us that it is not to be
found in any thing under the sun. Secondly, affirmatively, that it is to be
found only in God and his service. For the former, this is the last issue and
result of all that curious inquiry which Solomon made into the utmost
excellencies of creatures here below. He was furnished above all other men with
all variety of requisites for such a work, set himself critically about it, to
dissect as it were, and take a through view of the creature, and having so done,
this is the upshot, that All is nothing but very vanity. And this he does in a
vehement and pathetical manner, that it may be the more observed. He does not
say, All is vain; but in the abstract, (which is much more emphatical) All is
vanity: Not vanity only, but vanity of vanities, that is, extreme vanity. The
Genetive case of the Noun, according to the use of that tongue, supplying an
Adjective of the superlative degree, Genesis 9.25. Cant. 1.1. Hos. 10.15. 1 Timothy
6.15. And this proposition he doubleth and repeateth again; thereby intimating,
1. The unquestionable certainty of it, Genesis 40.32. Isa. 8.9* 2. The great
consequence of it, as being a truth necessary to be inculcated, that it might
make the deeper impression on the heart, Ezekiel. 21.27. Psalm. 62.11. Rev. 18.2.
3. The na^ural unaptness which is in us to give credit to it, or to take notice
of it, except it be thus inculcated upon us, Jer. 22.29. 4. The earnest
affection of the wise man in pressing this necessary truth, with which he
himself in his repentance was so deeply affected. Repetitions argue vehemence
of affections, and earnest contending for the things so repeated, Ezekiel. 16.6.
Luke 23.21. Gal. 1.8, 9. Psalm. 93.3.

And because it might be thought to be true only of some things, and that some
other things which Solomon had not looked so narrowly into, might happily have
more excellency in them, therefore he adds, to prevent this objection, that
All is vanity. All, not simply, but with limitation to the subject matter of
which he treats in this Book; Every thing severally, all things jointly. Not
any one thing alone, not all things collectively and together are able to
satisfy the soul, and to make it happy. It is true, the works of God are all
good and excellent, sought out of all those that have pleasure in them. But
good in their kind and order; of excellent use to set forth the glory, power,
wisdom and goodness of God, and of necessary service for the use of man. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Yet withal vain in other respects; 1. Comparatively vain, when put
in the balance with God, and heavenly things, Job 15.15. Isa. 40.15, 16, 17.
2. Vain by that superinduced vanity, whereunto they are subjected by the sin of
man, Romans 8.20. 3. Vain in order unto happiness, the full possession, the most
vigorous fruition of them, cannot bring real satisfaction to the soul of a man;
Man himself, the noblest of them all, and that at his best estate, being
altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5, 6, 11. Psalm. 62.9. and 144.3, 4. They are vain.
1. In regard of their unprofitableness unto such an use, Jer. 16.19. 2. In
regard of their falseness and deceitfulness to those who lean upon them, Job 15
-- 20. Ps. 31.7. and 62.10. Jon. 2.8. 3. In regard of their instability and
impermanency, as being under the bondage of corruption, Romans 8.20. 1 Cor. 7.30,
31. Ps. 39.11. 2 Cor. 4.18. And in all these respects useless unto happiness;
for that which makes a man happy, must bear a through proportion to all the
wants, desires and capacities of the soul, and must withal be of an equal
duration and continuance therewith; neither of which is to be found in any
worldly thing.

says the Preacher] Both by inspiration, as a Penman of the holy Ghost: and
by experience, as one who had learned it dearly, and to his cost. He sets his
name as in the inscription to the whole book, so here, a second time to this,
which is the sum of the whole book, confidently owning the truth thereof; as
sometimes the Apostle adds his name emphatically, to set on what he affirms
or desires, 2 Cor. 10.1. Gal. 5.2. Philem. ver. 9, 19. So 1 Pet. 5.1. 1 John
1.1, 3. They who speak to the Church, should do it experimentally, and from
demonstration of the truth to their own hearts, that they may be confidently
able to own, and to avow what they say.

V. 3. What profit has a man of all his labor which he takes under the sun?]
Or, what remains and abides with a man of all his labor? What is added to
him, or what more has he by it?

of all his labour] The word imports toylsome and troublesome labor, and so
rendered by the Septuagint, (...); and by Aquila, (...).

under the sun] This may relate to either passage of the verse, either, what
remains to a man under the Sun; that is, nothing under the Sun will tarry or
abide with him. Or, of all the labor which he has labored under the Sun; or
in relation to worldly matters here below. There is a conversation and a labor
in order to things above the Sun, which will remain with a man, and profit him,
Phil. 3.20. Col. 3.1, 2. Joh. 6.27. But labor in earthly things will not do
so. We are said to labor under the Sun, because earthly labor is done by the
light of the Sun, Psalm. 104.22, 23. Joh. 9.4. and because by that light we are
more comforted in the fruition of them, as Eccles. 11.7. and because the
benefit we expect from our labors, is wrought instrumentally by the warmth and
influence of the Sun, Deuteronomy. 33, 14. Here then the wise man proves his general
proposition. Whatsoever is unprofitable and perishing, is very vanity: All
things under the Sun, about which the anxious and toylsome labor of man is
conversant, are unprofitable and perishing, for nothing of them will remain
unto him, or abide with him. Therefore they are all vain. And this he
propounds by way of interrogation, which makes the negative more
unquestionable, as appealing to the conscience of every man, and challenging
any man to disprove it. The Scripture usually denies more emphatically by way
of interrogation; as Genesis 30.2. 2 Samuel 7.5. compared with 1 Chronicles. 17.4. Matthew.
16.26. Zech. 1.5. And he further insisteth on this point as certain and
necessary, Chap. 2.11. and 3.9. and 5.15. The Sum is this; 1. Whatever fruit we
have from worldly things, we get it with very hard and toylsome labor, either
of the mind or body, Genesis 3.17, 19. Job 5.7. 2. However that labor be useful
and subservient to our temporal condition, yet it is wholly unprofitable in
order unto happiness. 3. The foundation of this unprofitableness, is; 1. It
does not cause a man to excel; it adds nothing of real worth unto him at all,
Jam. 2.1 -- 6. Eccl. 9.14, 16. Ps. 49.12, 13, 20. 2. It does not abide with
him; all the comfort it brings, is dying comfort; it stops at the grave, and
goes no further. Now nothing is profitable to a man which he cannot transport
beyond the grave; which he does not carry with him into another world, Job.
1.21. and 21.21. Psalm. 49.14, 17. Jo^ 6.27. 1 Timothy 6.7. Those works are
ben^^icial which follow a man, Rev. 14.13. therefore we must lay out our labor
upon a life that abides and abounds, Joh. 10.10. Isa. 55.2. and not labor in
the fire, and for every vanity, Hab. 2.13. Luke 12.6. Matthew. 24.38, 39.

V. 4. One generation goes, and another generation comes, but the earth
abides for ever] By Generation is meant the time wherein a Body of men do live
and continue together, so we read of this or that Generation, Luke 21.32. Heb.
3.10. the second, third, tenth generation or ages of men yet to come, Deuteronomy.
23.2, 3, 8. A man's own generation, or ages of men yet to come, Deuteronomy. 23.2, 3,
8. A man's own generation, or the age wherein he lives, Acts 12.36. There is a
constant succession of men to one another, a fixed time, as the days of an
hireling, Job 7.1. -- 10. and 14.14. The inward principles of change and
mortality are always working, and life is like a shepherds tent, which does
not continue in one place or stay, Isa. 68.12.

But the earth abides or stands for ever] Continues much longer than the
men that are upon it; for ever, notes often a long time, so long as the
present course and order of nature is to continue, Ps. 119.90. so long as such
or such an administration lasts, Genesis 9.12. 1 Samuel 2.30. 1 Samuel 13.13.
otherwise we know the earth is to be changed, and in some sense at the least to
pass away, as now the inhabitants thereof do, Matthew. 24.35. Psalm. 102.25, 27.
There seems to be a double sense in the words, both Consonant to the present
argument. 1. That man cannot be happy by any thing which is here below, in
regard of his transitory condition, fathers going, and children succeeding; a
man's labor happily may enrich him, or bring him to honor, but it cannot
lengthen out his days beyond one generation, and then he and all his
acquirements must part, and in this respect, the earth on which he treads, is
in a condition better than himself, for it abides to the end. 2. Man seeking
happiness from the earth and earthly things, must needs be disappointed of his
expectation, because he passes away, and the earth stays behind him. If he
could carry the earth along with him, he might happily promise himself his wonted
contentments, but the earth abides where it was, when he goes from it, and can
enjoy it no more, Job. 7.10. Ps. 49.17. Here then we may observe. First, a
determinate time prefixed to the life, states, honors, offices of men, at
uttermost they are but for one generation, wherein every man has his service
to do, his warfare to ^ccomplish, his race to run, Job 7.1. and 14.5. 1 Cor.
9.24. Phil. 3.14. 2 Timothy 4.7. Act. 13.36. Secondly, the providence of God in
continuing the several succeeding ^ges of men, that he may still have a seed ^o
serve him, that one generation may declare ^is works to another. That the
admirable ^ontexture of the works of providence, ^arried along by pieces,
through various successions of men, may at last most gloriously set forth his
wisdom, justice and goodness, Psalm. 22.30, 31. and 102.18. Isa. 38.19. Eccles.
8.17. Thirdly, a man's labor un^er the sun, is for himself and his posterity:
his labor about heavenly things will abide with, and benefit himself for ever.
Fourthly, so long as the generations of men continue, so long does the Lord by
his decree continue the earth for their supportance and salvation, because he
has given it to the children of men, Deuteronomy, 32.8* and when the generations of
men are ended, it shall then appear that the whol^ Creation was subject to
vanity, and (...) the bondage of corruption, Romans 8.20. 2 Pe^ 3.5, 7.

V. 5. The sun also arises, and the sun goes down, and hastes to the pla^^
where he arose] Or, pants toward the place. A metaphor from one who run
earnestly to some mark, or presses fo^^ward with strong desire to something
would attain, Psalm. 119.131. Job 7.^^ A like expression, Psalm. 19.6, 7. an^
104.19. whereby is signified an unwe^^ried, yet constant and regular motion
founded in a Covenant or ordinance Heaven, Jer. 31.35, 36, and 33.2^ Job 38.33.
from which without a sp^^cial and extraordinary restraint from (...) (as Josh.
10.12. Isa. 38.8. Job 9.7* it never varieth. Having thus affirmed all things
under the sun that they are (...) he here begins with the sun it (...) which
does as it were weary it self out of breath with continual motion. 1. If it did
bring happiness to a man in its rising, it would remove it again in its
setting. 2. Though the earth abides for ever, and the sun moves regularly
over it with its warmth, and the winds blow on it to refresh the fruits
thereof, Cant. 4.16. and the waters pass through it to make it fruitful, Genesis
2.10, 11. yet all this can benefit a man only in his own generation, but cannot
convey any durable happiness unto him. 3. The earth abides always alike, the
sun moves, the winds blow, the rivers run after one constant manner in one age
as in another. If they have never yet made any hap^y, they never will, because
they do minister but the same comforts again. 4. Mortality and mutability here
is as natural to ^an, as standing to the earth, the motions ^f the sun, the
circuits of the winds, the ^owing of the Rivers: so that it is as im^ossible
for him to be happy by creatures ^n earth, as it is to alter the covenant of
day (...) night: or to stop the regular and inva^^able courses of the Heavens.
5. The sun (...) his course, observes his times of rising (...) setting, and
though he set, he rises in (...) glory again, but when man goes, he ^^turns
hither no more, Job 14.7, 12. 6. Observe the constant and steady obedience of
other creatures to that law of working, which was primitively implanted in
them, they act as it were knowingly, Psalm. 104.19. willingly, Romans 8.20.
vigorously with joy and strength, Psalm. 19.5. and thereby shame those who have
indeed a principle of light and reason, but act not in conformity unto them.

V. 6. The wind goes toward the South and turns about unto the North, etc.
As the sun, so the winds have their courses, whereby is noted the uncertainty
of outward things, if they please in their coming they must disquiet in their
departing, where^as the matter of happiness must be ever pre^sent and
permanent. Here we may also not the wise providence of God in the circui^ of
the winds and other sublunary creature which he brings out of his treasure,
(...) directs as it pleases him for the uses (...) men, one while making
them helpful to (...) part of the earth, and another while to an^^ther, Psalm.
135.7. Job 37.7. and 38.2* Jer. 10.13. Deuteronomy. 28.12. Psalm. 78.2* Genesis 8.1. Exodus
8.1. and 14.21. He see^^eth likewise to have respect to those wind^ which in
some parts of the world, have a (...) regular and uniform motion, in (...)
months of the year, blowing constan^ out of one quarter, and in others, out of
another. The words [going, circuiting, whirling about, returning] are used to
show the restless and unquiet nature of these things, their busy and speedy
motion, as if they were ever out of their place; all which show how full of
vanity they are, and represent the disquiet agitations of the mind of man, till
it fix upon him that is immutable.

V. 7. All rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full: unto the place
from whence the rivers come, thither they return again.] Though rivers hastily
run into the sea, as into their cistern, yet the sea is not filled, so as to
swell above the earth, or overflow the bounds within which God has decreed it
to stay, Job 38.8. -- 11. Psalm. 104.8, 9. Jer. 15.22. The reason whereof is,
because there is (...) perpetual and proportionable return, as fast (...) by
some channels waters go from their ^ountains to the sea, by others they return
from the sea into the earth again. Thus, which ^ay ever we cast our eyes, we
every where meet with evidences of inconstancy and mutability here below, as
testimonies of that ^anity which all things under the sun are subject unto. 1.
By the continual motions of these ^retures, he seems to describe the
restlesnes of the mind of man, in enquiring after good. 2. The dis-satisfaction
which it every where meets withal, finding no reason to rest or stay there,
whither it had formerly hasted with greatest speed. As all rivers cannot fill
the sea, so all creatures cannot fill the heart of man. It moves every way,
forward and backward, to the South and to the North, from one content unto
another for full satisfaction, but can find none, Psalm. 39.6. and 74.11, 19.
Prove. 19.21. Luke 10.41.

V. 8. All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it: The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing] All things, to wit, all
these and the like things. This is a close of the former argument. Having
showed the unquiet motion of the sun* winds, rivers, he here concludes his
Induction of particulars, with a general assertion, that as it was in them, so
it is in all things else, no man is able with words to ru^ over all
particulars, but as it is in some, so is (...) in the rest which cannot be
numbered. They are said to be full of labor or wearines, because they weary out
man in his studies and endeavors about them, Genesis 3.17, 19. Psalm. 127 2. Here
is also another argument provi^^ the main proposition, whatever things bring
toylsome labor and weariness with them cannot make a man happy, but are
altogethe^ ^ai^ as to such a purpose: But all things un^der the Sun do bring
unto him that is conversant about them toylsome labor and weariness, therefore
they cannot make men happy. This toil and weariness does not only appear in
grievous and unpleasing labor, whereunto men are against their wills
compelled, Job. 5.7. Lam. 5.5. Jer. 20.18. nor only in those labors which the
Lord is pleased to blast and frustrate of an expected end, when men labor as
it were in the fire, and reap no fruit of all their pains, Habak. 2.13. Hag.
1.6. Levit. 26.20. Isa. 17.11. and 55.2. Eccles. 5.16. Luke 5.5. But it is also
true of those labors which a man sets about with greatest delight and
willingness, they also have weariness and satiety attending on them; the very
honeycomb bringing a loathing with it, Prove. 27.7. And this general he proves
by a double instance. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing] and accordingly, it is in all other numberless particulars. A man may
cloy and tire out these faculties, before he can at all satisfy them. He
seems to instance in these rather then others, 1. Because the exercise of
them is easiest, and least labor is spent in the using of them; there is not
much force or stress put forth in seeing an amiable and beautiful object, or
in hearing some excellent music. 2 Because they are the most curious and
inquisitive senses. 3. Because their delights are sweetest: as being senses
which are nearest cognation unto reason, and are principal instruments and
handmaids to the soul in her noblest operations. Now if the most spiritual,
unwearied, rational senses cannot be satisfied, but that they are pricked with
further desires of new objects to delight them, Acts 17.21. or satiated and
glutted with the excess of what did delight them before; how much more is this
true in those other faculties, where there is more labor in pursuing their
objects, and more loathing in fruition of them, Prove. 27.20. And this is such
labor and weariness as no man can utter it; no man can express how many ways
any one faculty may be wearied out, nor recount all those objects, which when
they minister some delight, do yet leave no satisfaction behind them. As the
happiness which we expect in God, cannot be uttered, 1 Cor. 2.9. 2 Cor. 12.4.
so the labor and weariness which the mind contracteth by excessive search into
the creatures, cannot be uttered neither.

V. 9, 10, 11. The thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that
which is done, is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the
Sun, etc.] The substance of these verses is this, If no man has ever hitherto
been able to find out happiness in the creature, let no man think now or
hereafter to do it, since there is no new thing out of which it may be
extracted. All natural causes and effects continue as they were at the
beginning, Genesis 8.22. Jer. 31.35, 36. and all humane and voluntary actions,
counsels and studies, having the same principles of reason to produce them, and
the same objects to draw them out, are in substance the same now as heretofore.
And though some discoveries of new things have been made, as the Mariners Card,
the Art of Printing, Gunpowder, etc. of which learned men have written, yet
from defective and insufficient principles of happiness, such as all natural
things are, no thing, though new, can be sufficient unto such an End, since the
particulars cannot afford that which the general has not comprised within it.
As face answers to face in water, so the courses of natural causes and
effects, and the hearts desires, counsels of the men in one age, do answer unto
those of another, Matthew. 24.38, 39. Prove. 27.19.

V. 10. Is there any new thing whereof it may be said, See this, It is new?]
This is a challenge to any man to procure any new thing if he can, with a
peremptory repeating of the former assertion, and denying the success of any
such attempt. He speaks of such new things as may far surpass the things
which had been discovered before, as to be able to satisfy the heart, and make
it truly blessed. And this he confidently denies, that any thing can further
be extracted out of the womb of nature in order unto humane happiness more then
had been already discovered. Men may happily flatter themselves in their
inventions, as if they had invented new things which were not before, and such
as may afford more matter of content and satisfaction then other men in former
ages have found. But he shows that this is but a mistake, for It has been
already of old time which was before us.] The discoveries of former ages have
been as pregnant toward satisfaction of the heart, as any of after ages can be.

V. 11. There is no remembrance of former things, neither shall there be any
remembrance of things that are to come with those that shall come after.] If
new things be found out, as many old things are forgotten, so that still the
stock of nature is as defective toward happiness in our age, as in another.
Shortness of life, and narrowness of experience, causes us to forget the
things which have been before us, which were they all in our distinct view, no
one thing would occur without it is pattern and parallel, at least something as
excellent as it in former ages: and as things past are forgotten by us, so
things present will be forgotten by those that shall come after us.

Here then we see, 1. The aptness which is in man to nauseate and grow weary of
the things which he is used unto, though they be otherwise never so excellent,
Number. 11.6. 2. The wantonness of our hearts in having an itching desire after
new things, and such as former ages were unacquainted with, Acts 17.21. 3. That
it is Ignorance and inexperience which makes things appear new, which indeed
are old. 4. That the vanity which our forefathers have found in things here
below, is an infallible argument that we shall find the same, and shall
certainly miscarry, if we think to get more satisfaction out of the Creatures,
then others have gotten before us, Job. 8.8, 9. and 15.18. 5. That new things
are not to be looked for under the Sun, or in the course of natural causes and
effects: But in a spiritual and heavenly conversation all things are new,
durable, excellent. In the study of Gods Word and ways, there are ever new and
wonderful things to be discovered, Psalm. 119.18. 2 Cor. 5.17. 2 Pet. 3.13.
Rev. 21.5. Gods mercies and judgments are wonderful, and he does many times
strange things, which neither we nor our fathers have known, Deuteronomy. 432 -- 36. 1
Cor. 2.9.

V. 12, 13. I the Preacher was King over Israel in Jerusalem. And I gave mine
heart to seek and search out by wisdom, concerning all things that are done
under heaven: This sore travel has God given to the sons of men, to be
exercised therewith.] Having showed the vanity of things under the Sun in
general: He now proceeds unto some special and principal things, wherein men
might be apt to place felicity. And he begins with the knowledge of things
natural and humane: showing, that if any man could in that respect make himself
Happy, he himself had more means to do it then any other man. And the better to
gain belief to what he should deliver, He gives it them upon the word and
experience of a Convert, a King, an Inspired King, a most wise and Active King,
a King in Jerusalem, the seat of God; provoked unto this inqu^ry by the strong
inclination of his own heart, by the special Call and direction of God, by the
eye and help of that habitual wisdom which by prayer he had obtained of God in
a more eminent manner then any other man; and by his zeal toward the people of
God, and toward h^s house at Jerusalem. I, being such a person, so completely
furnished with all internal and external advantages, do testify the truth
which I have delivered upon mine own most exact and accurate trial, That All is
Vanity.

I the Preacher] Or the Convert, who am returned by repentance unto the
Communion of Saints, from whence by my sins I had formerly wandered, am able now
by sad experience to seal the truth which I have so dearly bought, touching the
vanity of all outward things. So this Book was the fruit of Solomon's Conversion
and returning to the bosom of the Church.

was King over Israel] This Book therefore was written when he was on his
throne, furnished with wisdom from God to manage his Royal Office, and with
abundance of wealth to prosecute this inquiry after true happiness, 1 Reg. 3.7.
-- 13.

ever Israel] Gods peculiar people, a wise and understanding people, Deuteronomy. 4.6,
7. for whose good Solomon had sought his wisdom, and out of the care of whose
welfare in soul and estate, he had made this sollicitous search.

In Ierusalem] This being expressed thus twice, in this, and in the first
verse, has some emphasis in it. In Jerusalem was the House of the Lord, and
the Testimony of Israel, Psalm. 122.1, 2, 3. Here God was in a special manner
present, and might most comfortably be sought, Psalm. 132.13, 14. There were
continual attendances of the Priests, officers, and wise men about the Temple,
1 Chronicles. 25.26. There were the thrones of Justice, and public conventions of
State, Psalm. 122.5. There were the Masters of the Assemblies, or a College and
Senate of the most learned men of the Nation, Eccles. 12.11. 2 Reg. 21.14. so
that there he met with all the furtherances which a learned and wise man could
desire in the prosecution of such a design.

And I gave my heart] I did cheerfully and purposely set my self about it, and
made it my business and delight, 2 Chronicles. 11.16. 1 Chro. 22.19. 2 Cor. 8.5.

to seek and search out] Searching is more then seeking, and denotes an orderly
and accurate exploration, such as merchants use, who with great diligence
procure rarest commodities out of several Countries, Eccl. 7.25. Ezekiel. 20.6.

by wisdome] An excellent instrument in such an inquiry.

all things done under the Sun] All natural causes and effects, all humane
counsels and events: this phrase is much used by Solomon in this Book, whereby
is limited the subject matter about which he inquires.

this sore travel] Or, afflicting labor; as Chap. 2.23. and 4.8.

has given to the sons of man] It is his ordinance, he has called them to
search his works and ways.

to be exercised] Or afflicted and distracted therein, therefore not at all to
be made blessed thereby.

From hence we may observe: First, That the best way of teaching is out of our
own experience, and exact disquisition, Psalm. 66.16, 17. Gal. 1.16.

2. That sound repentance does notably fit a man to know and search out the
Will of God, and to discover and teach the vanity of all other things, 2 Timothy
2.25. Jam. 1.21. Luke 22.32. Psalm. 51.12, 13.

3. That men in highest authority are by their studies as well as their power
to seek the welfare of those over whom they are set, and to endeavor with all
their hearts to fit themselves with wisdom and abilities for discharge of
their office, 1 Reg. 3.7, 8, 9. Luke 2.52. Act. 6.4. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15.

4. That the piety, age, dignity, authority, experience of a person, though it
add nothing to the truth it self, yet has a great power to persuade and
prepare the hearts of hearers to the entertainment of it, Philem. verse. 9. 2
Cor. 10.7, 8. and 11.5, 6, 22 23. and 12.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.11. 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. and
15.8, 9, 10.

5. That largeness of Gifts and Helps from God, should quicken us unto a more
cheerful and vigorous study of our duties, Matthew. 15.16, 17.

6. That largeness of heart in knowledge of things natural, moral, Humane,
Divine, are Royal Endowments, and things fit for a King to set his heart upon,
Prove. 31.4. The greater our place, power, wealth is, the more noble and serious
should our thoughts and employments be.

7. The more men abound with worldly things, the looser should they keep their
hearts from them, and the more should they study the vanity of them, lest
otherwise they steal away their hearts from God, Psalm. 62.10.

8. The dignity, wisdom, piety of a people being duly considered, does whet
and add vigor to the studies and cares of those who are set over them for
their good, 2 Reg. 3.8, 5. Mar. 6.5, 6.

9. We should improve the benefit of places and persons amongst whom we
converse, to fit our selves thereby for the service of the Church. It is not
only a comfort, but a furtherance unto wise and learned men, to live in places
where wisdom and learning is professed, Act. 1.4.

10. It is a great comfort when men have helps and encouragements answerable to
their employments, and having such, when they have hearts to use them, Prove,
17.16.

11. Here are the right principles of successful diligence in our places; 1. A
willing heart, when a man goes about his work with all his strength, Eccles.
9.10. 2. Attendance on the Call of God, and for that reason submitting unto
travel and pains, Act. 26.19. Gal. 1.15. 3. Stirring up the gifts which God
has given us as furtherances unto duty, 2. Tim. 1.6. 4. Exquisite inspection
into the businesses about which we are employed, that we may not through our
own negligence come behind in any gift, 1 Cor. 13.31. and 14.12.

12. It is the will of God, that even our honorable and our necessary
employments should be accompanied with sore travel, that we may be kept humble
in our selves, weaned from the creature, and made the more thankful for any
assistance the Lord gives us in our Labors, and for any blessing upon them,
Job. 5.7. Genesis 3.19.

13. The study of the Creatures is of excellent use to lead us to the knowledge
of the Creator, Romans 1.19. Ps. 111.2.

V. 14. I have seen all the works that are done under the Sun, and behold all
is vanity and vexation of spirit.] The former words showed the exactness of
Solomon's search into natural and humane things. That it was the labor of an
aged Convert, (for Solomon was drawn away from God in his old age, 1 Reg.
11.4.) of a wise King, furnished with all Helps for such an inquiry: That it
was an accurate and deep search, not loose or superficial. That it was
undertaken with great impulsion of heart, and with a special Call of God: and
now after all this, he concludes,

1. That he had seen] That is, diligently heeded, and fully understood, as to
the issue of this inquiry, all the works done under the Sun, Exodus 3.3. Eccles.
2.13, 14.

all the things] That is, the several kinds of them, 1 Reg. 4.33. He had gotten
as large and as intuitive a knowledge as humane curiosity or industry, with all
manner of furtherances could attain unto. Which appears not to be an arrogant
boast, but a true account of the fruit of his studies, the Holy Ghost
testifying the same thing of him, 1 Reg. 4. 29 -- 34. and 10.23.

2. That he found all to be vanity and vexation of spirit.] Not only vain and
ineffectual to confer Happiness, but which is worse, apt to bring much
affliction and tro^ble upon the heart of him who is too earnestly conversant
about them. From several original Roots, there are by Interpreters given
several explications of this word, Evil, or Affliction of Spirit. Breach,
contrition, torment of Spirit; feeding upon, or consuming of the spirit; or
vanity and feeding upon wind, as fruitless labor is expressed, Hos. 12.1. 1
Cor. 9.26. Thus he applies his general conclusion particularly unto all kind of
knowledge, Natural and Moral. There is sore travel in the getting, danger of
forgeting it again, discovery thereby of more Ignorance then a man observed in
himself before* insufficiency and impossibility of perfecting the
understanding, and satiating the desires thereof. Such and many other
Considerations make Knowledge it self, as to the procuring of true Happiness,
altogether Vain.

V. 15. That which is crooked cannot be made strait] This is the Reason of the
vanity of Knowledge, because it cannot rectify any thing in us which is amiss,
nor supply any thing which we want to make us happy, Eccles. 7.13. The wisest
and wealthiest King with all his power and knowledge was not able to remedy all
the evils which he saw, or to supply all the defects which he could discover.

The words may be understood two ways; 1. In relation to Knowledge it self, to
show the vanity and vexation thereof: For, 1. Much of it is exceeding tortuous,
intricate, and abstruse, there are many knots and difficulties, Dan. 5.12. So
it cannot be clearly and plainly demo^strated, but in the inquiries thereinto
the mind will be left dark and unsatisfied; there are (...), not only in the
Scripture, 2 Pet. 3.16. but in the book of nature too, Job. 28.20, 21. and
37.14, 15, 16. and 38.16-23.2. the defects of this kind are innumerable, the
things which a man knows not, are infinitely more then those which he
knows, Job 11.6. -- 9.

2. In relation unto the efficacy of knowledge. The heart and life of man is
naturally crooked and perverse, very tortuous, wicked, and deceitful, Jer.
17.9. Psalm. 12*5.5. and it is exceeding defective both in principles, and in
power to do good as it ought, Romans 3.23. 2. Cor. 3.5. Now all the most
exquisite natural knowledge is not able to rectify these things, either to
restore man to his original integrity, or supply his manifold defects. Such
knowledge will puff up, 1. Cor. 8.1. but it will not sanctify, Romans 1. 20, 21,
32. Jude. verse. 20. The Lord indeed by his grace and spirit does both, Luke
3.5. Psalm. 84.11. 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. Ephesians. 3.19. 1 Cor. 1.5. but no natural or
acquired knowledge is able to do it.

3. As it cannot rectify that which is amiss in man, so neither in any other
thing. Sin has brought much disorder, corruption, confusion upon the whole
Creation, Romans 8.20. infinite are the defects and failings every where. And
none of this can all the wisdom of man be able to correct, but he must still
leave it as he found it, vain and imperfect. So it will be till the time of the
restitution of all things, when God will make a new earth and a new heaven, and
deliver the Creature from the bondage of corruption, into a glorious liberty,
Act. 1.21. 2 Pet. 3.13. And all this he affirms of the most excellent natural
knowledge; how much more vain and unprofitable are the perverse and impertinent
studies of many men, which have nothing of solidity or usefullness in them,
Col. 2.8. 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. Romans 1.22. 1 Cor. 1.20.

V. 16, 17. I communed with mine own, etc.] This is a Prolepsis wherein he
meets with an objection, viz. That the knowledge of the creatures might make
a man happy, though he had not attained unto it, not for any defect in them,
but in the narrowness of his own understanding. To which he answers, That if
any man could have found it out in them, he should, in regard of the greatness
of his parts, and exquisite industry; as Chap. 2.12.

I communed with my heart] I cast up my accounts, and exactly viewed the fruit
and sum of all my lab^urs in getting knowledge. I did seriously deliberate, and
take a view of mine own heart, Psalm. 4.5. True wisdom makes a man thoughtfull
and discursive within himself.

I am come to great estate, and have gotten, or added, more wisdome] Or, I have
gotten great estate and wisdom, and a^ded to it, I have exceeded and increased
in wisdom. So the word seems elsewhere to import, 1 Samuel 20* 41. Esaias 9.3.
Amos 8.5. Or, I have come to be a great man, Joel 2.20. to do great things.
(...).

then all they that have been before me] 1 King. 4.30. and 10.27. yea all that
come after him too, Christ only excepted, 1 King. 3.12.

in Ierusalem] Where the study of wisdom was, more then in other places.

my heart had great experience. Had seen much wisdom and knowledge] Wisdom
seems to note the general knowledge of things Divine and humane; Knowledge, the
experimental: or wisdom the Habit and instrument; knowledge, the acquired
perfection gotten by the help of that habitual wisdom. Here, 1. He seems to
have magnified wisdom in his choice, which also may be employed in the word
(...), 1 Reg. 3.9.11. 2. To have increased it. 3. To have carried it into his
heart, it was inward and experimental knowledge. 4. To have delighted in it,
and gone seriously and with full pupose about it.

gave my heart] See verse. 13. The more wise any man is, the more he labors
to grow in wisdom.

to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly] Chap. 7.25. Hereby he
understands moral, political, and practical knowledge, in order to its better
government, to observe the difference between wise and virtuous, and between
foolish and wicked actions: the word rendered folly, is in this only place
written with the letter (...) Sin, in all others with the letter (...) Samech,
and so may be here rendered either folly, or prudence. And this he found to be
vexation of spirit, or feeding on wind; observing how short men came of the
one, and how much the other did abound. Or finding by his own experience, that
neither the perfection of moral wisdom, so far as it is acquirable by humane
diligence, nor yet the pleasures and delights of vicious and foolish could
quiet and settle the heart of man, 1 Cor. 1.20. Eccles. 11.8, 9. A bare
speculative knowledge of good, and an experimental presumptuous knowledge of
evil, such as Adams was in eating the forbidden fruit, are so far from making
men happy, that they increase their misery.

But here Solomon may seem to have committed an error against the moral
wisdom which he here professed to enquire after, namely, in speaking of much
so his own eminency in gifts beyond other men, Joh. 8.13. He does it not
falsely, arrogantly, nor proudly and vain-gloriously, to magnify himself, but
humbly, in acknowledging Gods gifts, and necessarily to discover thereby the
truth of that doctrine he was now teaching the Church by his own experience:
and so it is lawful to make mention of Gods gifts and graces bestowed on us, as
the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 14.18. and 15.10. 2 Cor. 11, 5, 6.

V. 18. in much wisdome] Or, in the abundance of wisdom, as Psalm. 72.7. and
51.1. Prove. 20.6, 15. Hos. 8.12. Or in the man who is much in wisdom, or who
has much wisdom, Job 11.2. The sense is every way the same.

is much grief] Or, anger, or indignation. Whence the Chaldee Paraphrase, The
more knowledge any man has, without repentance, the more wrath is upon him
from the Lord, as Luke 12.47. But the meaning, according to the scope of the
context, is, That abundance of wisdom is always accompanied with a proportion
of trouble and perturbation of mind; as indignation, to see how little fruit,
and how much disappointment a man does meet with in it, and how little account
is made of it in the World, as Eccles. 9. Grief and discontent, when the more
wisdom a man has, the more ignorance he does discover in himself, and the more
pains he must take to go on unto more knowledge yet unattained; and yet still
find his crookedness of mind, and manifold defects uncorrected, unsupplyed;
fear of losing, and forgetting what with so great pains had been gotten. Some
begin the next Chapter with these words, and so make them a transition to the
next endeavor of Solomon, to find out happiness in some other thing; and so
the sense runs thus; Forasmuch as in much wisdom there is much grief, etc. and
this was not the way to attain true happiness and content to toil and weary
out my self with pain, sorrow of mind and body in the attaining of wisdom:
Therefore I said in my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, etc. Yet
the purpose of the Wise man is not to deter men from so noble a labor as the
study of wisdom and learning, but to raise up to the study of heavenly
Wisdom, and the fear of God, whereby their other knowledge would be
sanctified, sweetened, and made excellently useful and comfortable to them.

CHAP. II.
BEing disappointed in his expectation from the knowledge of the Creature, he
now resolves to search what good may be found in the use and fruition of it,
and so sets himself to try what content either sensual, or rational pleasures
could bring to the heart; which he does, from verse. 1. to ver. 12. and finding
that he had changed for the worse, he goes back again to the consideration of
wisdom and madness, and finding as much disappointment the second time, as he
had done the first, verse. 12 -- 23. He concludes, that there is no comfort nor
tranquillity to be found in the use of Creatures, till by the favor of God it
be sweetened unto us, Verse. 24, 25, 26.

Verse. 1. I Said in my heart] I purposed Within my self, and did resolve with
intimate affection to try what pleasures would do, Chap. 1.16. Luke 12.19.

Go to now] It is an adverbial form of exhorting and quickening his heart unto
such a course.

I will prove thee with mirth] Or, by mirth, as by the instrument of enquiring
after happiness, Judge. 6.39. 1 King. 10.1. I will make trial another way
whether pleasures will content thee, Psalm. 26.2. the word being deriveable from
another root, admits of another sense, but to the same purpose, I will pour out
my self in delights, or I will abound in delights. Pleasures do melt and pour
out the soul; hence Reuben is said to be unstable as waters, Genesis 49.4. Ezekiel.
16.15. Lusts have a greediness and excess in them, Ephesians. 4.19. I will wholly
give my self, my heart shall flow forth into delights, I will fully gratify my
senses, and indulge my fancy in all pleasing things.

therefore enjoy pleasure] Or, see good. To see, is to enjoy, Isa. 53.11. Psalm.
34.8. and 4.6. Live plentifully, indulge to thy self all delights, restrain not
thy self from any desire of thine eyes.

V. 2. I said of laughter] By laughter, he means any excess of joy, and
merriment, when the heart is so full, that it cannot contain its delight
within, but it breaks forth into the face, voice, and outward behavior, Genesis
21.6. Psalm. 126.2. Luke 6.21.

or I said to laughter, Thou art mad] By a Prosopopoeia. Excess of joy
transporteth the mind, and as it were displaceth reason, argues much levity,
vanity, incomposedness of judgment. True joy is a severe and serious thing,
keeps the heart always in a stayed and fixed condition, but the joy which
breaks forth into laughter, is like the crackling of thorns, Eccl. 7.6. and
has a sorrow at the bottom of it: as a madman, the more merry he is, is the
more miserable, Prove. 14.13. Jam. 4.9.

and of mirth, what does it?] What good or profit brings it with it? Job
35.6, 7. Matthew. 20.32. The interrogation bids a challenge to all the masters of
mirth, that were to produce any one satisfactory fruit which it affords. Thus
we see by the example of Solomon, that the heart cannot stay long on any one
enquiry wherein it meets with dis-satisfaction, but it quickly hasteneth unto
another, as a Be flies from flower to flower, when there is not enough in one
to satiate it, as a sick man that removes from one bed, couch, chamber, unto
another for ease, and finds none, Esaias 57.10. Jer. 2.23, 36. 2. That in such
kind of changes usually the heart goes from better to worse, (...) here
Solomon from wisdom to pleasure^ 3. Here is observable the nature of sensua^
mirth, it tends toward excess, and so toward undecency and madness: for here
is not condemned moderate, but excessive pleasure, when a man gives up his
heart to it, and makes it the business of his life.

V. 3. I sought in my heart] Upon serious deliberation, and further exploration
of that good which men may in this life attain unto, finding that neither
wisdom alone, nor pleasures alone, could bring me unto it, I purposed to
temper them together; and since I found that wisdom and knowledge was
accompanied with grief and sorrow, I intended to mitigate those griefs with
bodily delights: and yet so, as that my wisdom might restrain those delights
from any excess, and from disabling me in the duties which I owed to God or men.

to give my self unto wine] To draw my flesh with wine. Or, to draw forth my
flesh unto wine. Abstinence does shrink and contract the body, and keep it
under, 1. Cor. 9.27. Dan. 1.10. feasting and mirth does draw it forth, Psalm.
73.7. That leanness or wasting of body which by hard studies I had contracted,
I now purposed by more delicacy of living, and indulgence to draw forth into
freshness, fullness and beauty again. Or, to draw with wine, to spend more time
in feasting, banqueting, and delights then formerly I had done. So drawing
signifies sometimes continuance and prolongation of a business, Psalm. 85.5.
Isai. 13.22. Ezekiel. 12.28. So the glutton, Luke 16.19.

unto wine] (i. e.) By a Synecdoche, unto all kind of delicates in eating and
drinking, in banqueting and feasting. As bread signifies all necessaries, Amos
7.12. with 6.11. so wine all delicates, Prove. 9.2. Cant. 8.2. and 2.4.

yet acquainting mine heart with wisdome] Or, leading my heart by wisdom,
resolving to keep such a temper, as to carry my self not licentiously, but
wisely in the use of pleasures, to keep my self from being captivated unto, or
swallowed up of these carnal delights, as using them not sensually, with a
brutish excess, but critically and rationally to find out what real content
they do afford unto the heart of an intelligent man. I did so give my flesh
unto wine, as though I kept my heart for wisdom still.

and to lay hold on folly] By folly, he means those pleasures, the laying
hold on which he found in the event to be nothing but folly. Thus to lay hold
on them is fully to possess a man's self with them, and to embrace and apprehend
them with all one^ strength, Isa. 56.4. 1 Timothy 6.19. Phil. 3.12, 13. It may
likewise seem to intimate thus much, That he held folly from mixing with his
pleasures, or coming into his heart along with them, to hold it as a man holds
an enemy from doing him any hurt, Judge. 12.6. and 16.21.

till I might see what was that good for the sons of men] This was the end of
his enquiring; it was not to drown himself in sensuality, but to discover what
kind of course was that, which would render this present mortal life more
comfortable to a man. He did it not vitiously, but to make an experiment only.
Solomon found in himself emptiness and indigency, he felt strong opposition
after some good which might supply those wants; and he had active principles of
reason to enquire what that good was, which Nature did so much want, and so
greatly desire. And this reason and habitual wisdom he employed to the
uttermost, to discover that good under heaven which might most perfectly
satisfy the wants and desires of the reasonable soul.

under (...)] As before under the Sun. He was not ignorant, but that in the
Heavens there was a supreme and infinite good, which the glorified soul should
enjoy unto endless satisfaction; but he speaks ^here of that good under the
Sun, which may most sweeten the mortal life of man.

all the days of their life] That is, time good which is durable, and
commensurate to the Soul that feeds on it. Now most of the things he here
recounteth are only for some seasons of life; as painful studies, vigorous
pleasures, active negotiations, when age and and infirmities come, they forsake
him; and so these good things dye before the man that should enjoy them, 2 Samuel
19.35. Psalm. 90.10. Eccl. 1^.3, 4, 5. Therefore in this enquiry, the duration
of the good, is as requisite to be considered as the quality of it; whether it
will continue with a man as a stay and comfort to him all the days of his
life. Nothing will do this but godliness, Psalm. 92.13, 14. There can be no
time, no condition in a man's life, wherein the fear of God will not be
comfortable unto him.

Here we observe; 1. That in all these inquiries Solomon begins with his heart,
thereby noting unto us, That the good which must satisfy a man, must bear
proportion to his heart, and to his inward man. 2. That he tempers his
pleasures and (...) pains in seeking knowledge, together; teaching thereby,
that the right use of pleasures, is not to take up the whole man, but to
mitigate the bitterness and pains of severer studies thereby. 3. That a man
has never greater need of the bridle of wisdom, then when he is in pursuance
of carnal delights. 4. That pleasures and folly are very near of kin; and a
very hard thing it is to hold folly so fast in, but that it will get loose, and
immixe it self in carnal delights. 5. That a free and full indulgence unto
pleasures, though not upon sensual, but critical and more curious aims, will by
degrees steal away the heart, and much abate more spiritual and heavenly
delights: corruption ever creeping in with curiosity, Prove. 20.1. and 23.3, 6.
It is a noble and high frame of spirit, to look out in every thing which a man
undertakes, after that which is truly and principally good for his heart, in
the use of that thing. 7. That the comfort of a man's life under heaven, is to
be doing of that good which God has given him his strength and life for. 8.
That nothing is truly the good of a man's life, which is not commensurate in
duration and continuance thereunto, and which will not properly minister
comfort unto him into whatsoever various conditions of life, as sickness,
poverty, bondage, disfavour, old age, etc. he may be cast into.

V. 4. Having upon further deliberation, declared his purpose, to search for
good amongst pleasures and bodily delights; he now shows what magnificent and
royal provisions he made, in order to that design, sumptuo^s diet, stately
buildings, vineyards, gardens, orchards, forests, parks, fish ponds, honorable
retinue of servants; possessions of all sorts of cattle; treasures of gold,
silver, and all precious things; music vocal, instrumental; and all these in
great abundance, as far as royal wealth could procure, largeness of heart
desire, or exquisite wisdom contrive: In all which he took exceeding much joy
and delight, being withheld by no manner of impediments from the full fruition
of them; yet in the conclusion, he passes the same censure here, as he had
done before, That all was vanity, etc.

I made me great works] I did not stoop to base and inconsiderable things, to
find out that pleasure which might satisfy my desires, but I sought it in
magnificent works, becoming the royal state of a King; as Esth. 1.4. Of which
works, he does immediately subjoyn a large catalogue.

I builded me; Or to my self, or for my self (it is Datrius's Commody) houses,
large and stately, thirteen years in building, 1 Reg. 7.1 -- 13. and 9.15, 17,
18, 19. Houses for habitation, and houses for state and pleasure;
winter-houses, and summer-houses, Amos 3.15. David had built an house of Cedar
before, 2 Chronicles. 2.3. but Solomon contenteth not himself with that.

vineyards] Cant. 8 11. David likewise had vineyards, and orchards, and cattle,
and treasures, and servants set over all these, 1 Chronicles. 7.25 -- 31. yet
Solomon will have them in greater magnificence, having no wars nor troubles to
interrupt him, as his father had.

V. 5. I made me gardens and orchards] Gardens for flowers, plants, spices,
Cant. 6.2. orchards, or paradises for trees of all sorts; under which we may
comprize forests and parks, or places for choicest cattle, Cant. 4.13, 14.
Neh. 2.8. which were places of great pleasure and delight, Esth. 1.8.

V. 6. pools of water, to water therewith the wood, etc.] Artificial ponds, and
receptacles of water, whether arising from springs, or otherwise by aqueducts,
and other means derived thither, 2 Reg. 18.17. These used to be in, or near
great gardens, and near princely works, 2 Reg. 20.20. Neh. 2.14. and 3.15. Genesis
2.9, 10. Cant. 7.4. To water the wood or forest, whereby he seems to mean
the gardens and orchards, before mentioned, for the spaciousness of them. So a
forest is elsewhere called an orchard or paradise, Neh. 2.8. These things in
these hot Countries, were accounted special blessings, and from thence they
have their name, Josh. 15.19. These things he had as materials for his wisdom,
1 Reg. 4.33.

V. 7. I got me servants and maidens] Some he bought or hired from abroad,
others were born unto him in his house: and these he had for the manifold
duties of his royal family: Such had David, 1 Chronicles. 27.26. -- 31. and so
Solomon, 1 Reg. 4.7. and 5.16, 17. and 10.5.

And had servants born in mine house] Sons of mine house; the children of an
handmaid born in her masters house, were born servants unto the master of the
house, Genesis 14.14. and 15.3. and 17.12. Jer. 2.14. hereunto David alludeth,
when he says, I am thy servant, the son of thy handmaid, Psalm. 116.16. The
servants of Solomon, which were certain public officers, appointed by Solomon,
we read of long after, Ezra 2.58. Neh. 7.60. who may seem to be those of the
Canaanites, whom Solomon made bondslaves, 1 Reg. 9.21. Some, by sons of the
house, understand those officers whom Solomon did set over his house, to order
the Affairs thereof, 1 Reg. 4.27.

possessions of great and small cattel] Or, I had cattle both great and small,
or herds and flocks. The first word is general to all cattle, great or small;
the two next, the species of that general, Genesis 34.23. 1 Reg. 4.22, 23, 26.

above all that were before me in Ierusalem] As more wisdom, Chap. 1.16. so
more wealth, and provisions for that wisdom to work upon, 1 Reg. 3.13. and
10.23.

V. 8. I gathered me also silver and gold] I heaped it up; as Psalm. 33.7. 1
Reg. 9.28. and 10.14. and 15.27. The ways of this great gain were Tribute, 1
Reg. 10.25. Honourers presents, sent out of the high admiration of his wisdom,
from other Princes, 1 Reg. 10.10. and 4.34. and merchandise, or free-trade into
remote Countries, 1 Reg. 9.26 -- 28. and 10.15, 28.

and the peculiar treasure of Kings and of Provinces] Precious rarities, or
most choice and desirable things, which men use to lay up in their treasures;
the chief rarities of several Countries, 1 Chronicles. 29.3. Hence whatsoever is
intimately dear and honorable, is metaphorically called segullah, Exodus 19.5.
Psalm. 135.4. Mal. 3.17. The Apostle renders it (...), Tit. 2.14. others,
(...), that which is of principal worth and esteem, Isai. 39.2. The preciousest
and most desirable things, which Kingdoms and Provinces could afford, or
wherewith Princes and Provinces did use to present him, 1 Reg. 4.21. and 9.11.
and 10.2, 10. 2 Chronicles. 9.9. and 10.24.

I gat me men singers and women singers] These as well as those, because
naturally their voices are sweeter then men's: So we find them joined, 2 Samuel
19.35. 2 Chronicles. 35.25. So we read, that not only Moses and the men, but Miriam
and the women did sing at the overthrow of Pharaoh, Exodus 15.1. and 20.21. 1 Samuel 8.6, 7.

and the delights of the sons of men, viz. musical instruments, etc.] The word
translated musical instruments, is no where else used in the Scripture, and
has various interpretations put upon it. Some understanding by it, beautiful
daughters, denominated from their breasts, as elsewhere from their womb, Judge.
5.30. Others, for choice and delicate women, taken as a prey in war, as we
find there the manner was: and others for diverse other things, as we find in
Hierom, Drusius, Mercer, and others. But the most received sense, and most
agreeable with the former delight of singers, is musical instruments.

V. 9. So I was great, and increased] Or, added to my greatness; as Chap. 1.16.
1 Reg. 10.23.

also my wisdom remained with me] This he adds, 1. as a rare and unusual
thing, that pleasures should not at all smother and suppress wisdom; 2. As an
Argument toward the main conclusion, that in the midst of all these delights,
he did intend the business for the which he used them, namely, by wisdom to
observe, what real good and satisfaction they did bring to the heart of man.

V. 10. And whatsoever mine eyes desired, etc.] It might be objected, That his
wisdom happily and his fear of God, restrained both his eye and his heart from so
full a fruition of these delights, as were requisite to extract all the comfort
of them; so Job restrained his eye, Job 31.1. and Solomon advises a glutton to
restrain his appetite, Prove. 23.2. Numb. 15.39. To this he answers, That
whatsoever his eyes desired, (as the eye is one of the principal seats of
desire or lusting, 1 John, 2.16. Josh. 7.21.) he did not reserve any thing of it
from them, which withheld his heart from any joy: Neither did any accidental
hinderance intercede, as war, or sickness, or sorrow, or any notable
affliction; which might debar him from a liberal and cheerful use of all this
his greatness. The eye is here taken synecdochically for all the senses, (for
in this ample preparation there was provision for them all.) Much labor and
care he had taken to make those provisions for the flesh; (as the Apostles
phrase in another sense is, Romans 13.14.) and there was no other fruit of all
that labor, but having gotten them, to enjoy them.

my heart rejoyced] That is, I my self did intimately rejoice and please my
self in the fruit of my labors.

this was my portion of all my labour] This was all the fruit, benefit, and as
it were, inheritance, which my labors in this kind did purchase for me. A
metaphor from the manner of dividing inheritances, Numb. 18.20. or spoils, 1 Samuel 30.24.

V. 11. Then I looked on all, etc.] After all this, I turned and looked back,
or took an impartial survey of all my works, which with such painful labors
and trouble I had wrought: and found, that the fruit was not answerable to the
toil which was sustained for the reaping of it: but that this also was vanity,
a perishing, withering, and dying comfort, a feeding upon wind, and that it
left no abiding benefit behind it, Chapter 1.3.

V. 12. And I turned my self, etc.] Here Solomon does once more seriously apply
himself, as he did before, Chap. 1.17. to take a view of wisdom and folly.
Because it might happily be objected, That at the first consideration of them, he
might let many things slip, which were of weight and moment in his present
inquiry. Because, second thoughts, and solemn review of former studies, may
happily beget some retractation, and discover some error: The later day being
usually the disciple of the former; and we use to say, that the second thoughts
are the wisest: therefore when the Scripture will put a thing beyond question,
it says it over again, Gal. 8.9.

I turned my self] This notes reconsideration and special heedfulness, to
inquire a new into a business, and likewise a weariness of those pleasures
which had disappointed him, Joh. 20.14.

to behold wisdom, and madness and folly] To compare the one with the other,
that I might the better understand them, as contraries serve to set forth one
the other. There is nothing more usual in Solomon's Proverbs then this kind of
Antithesis, to put contraries together for natural illustration.

for what can the man do that comes after the King] Here man and king; the
king seems to be opposed, what further progress can any more private man make
in this disquisition, then I who am such a king? This is a Prolepsis or answer
to a tacit objection; for it might be said, that it was a high and bold
attempt for one man out of his particular experience to pass so confident a
sentence of vanity, and vexation, upon all wisdom and greater works. To this he
answers, that no man after him, could do more in this enquiry then he had
done, who was so eminent in wisdom, in power, and in industry, that was as it
were fitted and stirred up by God unto this business; and therefore if any man
after him should set about the same work, he should do no other thing then that
which the king had done before him. This appears to be no arrogant boast in
Solomon; because the Scripture testifies the same of him, 1 Reg. 3.12. The Man
who will not believe it upon my report, but will make trial of it himself, if
he will go with the same wisdom and integrity about it as] have done, shall
find the same vanity in the bottom of every creature, as I have found. So here
are two reasons why Solomon challenges belief in this point. 1. The advantages
which he so great a king had above any other man, to draw forth all the flower
and quintessence of the creature. 2. The double diligence which he used in it,
in not only viewing thoroughly once, but reviewing again the things upon which
he passed such a judgment.

what the man] The words intimate a kind of i^dignation, disdain, undervaluing
of any one who should attempt such an inquiry after him, as Psalm. 8.4. Quid
dignum tanto tulit hic promissor hiatu; what is the man who comes after the
king, whom they have made king before; so some read the words: but the most
genuine and coherent sense is that which our translation expresses; he that
comes after can do nothing but what they have done: i.e. what is done already
before them. The active voice indefinite used for the passive, as Isa. 9.6.
Jer. 12.6. Genesis 16.14. 1 Samuel 23.22.

I would observe hence, 1. That the double and multiplied experience of wise,
great and good men, does gain much credit and strength to the doctrines so
confirmed, 1 John 1.3. Heb. Chap. 11. and 12.1. Jam. 5.10, 11.

2. That the more prejudice is in the heart of men against a truth, the more
care must be used to vindicate the same from all show of exception, Tit. 1.11.
and 2.8. Act. 6.10. and 18.28.

3. For a man to speak the truth of himself touching the gifts of God bestowed
on him. and to mention his own experiences, only aiming therein at the glory
and truth of God, and edification of the Church, is no arrogance, or violation
of modesty, but an improving of Gods gifts to the ends for which he gave them,
Chap. 1.16.

V. 13. Then I saw that wisdom excels folly: etc.] That there is an
excellency in wisdom more then in folly, etc. This Solomon confesses, that
indeed there is a great difference between wisdom and pleasures, that being
many ways more excellent then those; and therefore though the study of wisdom
be not without pain and sorrow, Chap. 1.18. yet it is not therefore to be
rejected: Wisdom leaves behind it some permanent good, as the word here
imports, whereas pleasures do perish in their use, and nothing stays behind
them but the sting and sorrow. The sorrow of wisdom is in the getting, but the
sorrow of pleasures is after the using, and enjoying of them. It is true,
wisdom and knowledge are vain, in order to a higher and nobler end then they
bear propotion unto. viz. to make man truly happy, yet they are of excellent
use, and singular ornaments to the soul which has them; so the Apostle, though
he tell us that charity is more excellent then gifts, the one serving for
edification only of others, but the other for sanctification of a man's self,
yet acknowledges that they are all operations of Gods Spirit, and bestowed on
men for very profitable uses, and accordingly to be earnestly desired, 1 Cor,
12.4, 7, 31. and 14.1, 39. we are so to esteem gifts, as that we prefer
salvation and happiness before them, Luke 10.20.

As far as light excels darknesse] Wisdom to the mind being as light to the
body and therefore the Rabins called their wise men, the light of the world; as
our Savior his Apostles. Matthew. 5.14. Light is many ways comfortable, it
shows things in their distinct forms and shows, it discovers any thing
hurtful, that it may be avoided; or beneficial, that it may be embraced,
whereas darkness confounds all things, and exposes a man to many dangers.
Light is pleasant in it self, Eccles. 11.7. and it is metaphorically used to
express the most excellent things, as joy, Psalm. 97.11. Ester. 8.16. liberties,
and deliverance, Isa. 9.1. Glory, 1 Timothy 6.16. Prosperity. Mic. 7.9. Life it
self. Job 3.16, 20. and usually, wisdom and knowledge, whereunto it is here
compared, Dan. 5.14. And it is very useful and necessary for direction in our
works and labors, Joh. 11.9, 10. But darkness on the other side is very
uncomfortable; it is used to express the most calamitous and disconsolate
condition, Job. 30.26. Eccles. 5.17. Isa. 8.22. Amos. 5.18.20. Isa. 50.10.
Eccles. 11.8. very unusefull, as putting a stop to all labor, Exodus 10.23.
Josh. 4.9. very dangerous, as causing a man to stumble at every stone, to fall
into every pit, to wander out of his way, etc. Josh. 11. 12. and 12.35. and
folly and ignorance in the mind, is usually expressed by the name of darkness
Ephesians. 4.18. and 5.8. Romans 1.21. In the creation, darkness was the first evil
which God removed, and light the first good creature that he made, Genesis 1.2, 3.
light excels darkness, as the beautiful and orderly frame of nature does
the first confused chaos.

V. 14. The wise man's eyes are in his head] The reason of the former
comparison, a wise man is in the light, but a fool in darkness. In his head, as
in a watchtower, from whence he sees his way before him a far of, takes
notice of things to come, as well as things present, is circumspect, and
heedfull, judicious, and wary in his undertakings; Therefore they who are
called wise men in one place, Deuteronomy. 16.19. are called men that have their eyes
open, in another place, Exodus 23.8. They do in the beginning of a business
look forward to the end of it, they forecast events, foresee consequences;
their eyes try their ways, as Psalm. 11.4. so looking straight forward,
denotes pondering and weighing a man's actions, Prove. 4.25, 26. here it is that
Moses said to his father in law, who was a very wise man, thou shall be to us
instead of eyes, to guide and counsel us, Numb. 10. 31. where the LXX. render
it, (...), thou shall be an elder, a counselor, a guide amongst us; so Job
says of himself, that he was eyes to the blind, Job. 29.15. A counselor, and
guide unto them. Thus the excellency of wisdom is described by the eye, as
being the principal part of the body and most beneficial to the whole, 1 Cor.
12.16, 17, 21. Mat. 9.22. and what the eye is to the body, that is to the mind,
Ephesians. 1.18.

But the fool walks in darknesse] Hereby we understand what is meant by
having the eyes in the head, namely, to have them useful for guiding and
ordering our ways, so as that we may not err, wander, stumble, fall, mistake,
miscarry in our affairs. The Antithesis should have run thus, but the fools
eyes are in his heels, or he has no ^yes to see; but the use of Scripture is
to put in the place of the antithesis, that which shall in sense amount
thereunto, as Prove. 12.27. the one part of the verse is parabolical or
proverbial, but the Antithesis is plain and familiar; so Prove. 14.3. and 15.19.
The fool is rash, heady, inconsiderate, cannot discern events, nor foresee
dangers; knows not which way to choose, or to refuse; his eyes are any where,
rather then in his head, Prove. 17.24. is carried headlong in his business,
easily snared and taken, Prove. 4.18, 19. 2 Pet. 1.19. Matthew. 13.15, 16. By
darkness here, we may understand blindness, Act. 13.11. and then walking in
darkness, is a discovery of folly; when a man wants eyes, and yet will be
wandering and venturing abroad; when he knows not whither he goes, nor what
dangers are in his way.

Thus far he has showed the excellency of wisdom above folly, now he shows
wherein, notwithstanding they do so far agree, as that vanity belongs unto them
both.

And I perceived] The meaning is, notwithstanding this excellency of the one
above the other, yet I perceived that one event happens to them all] They are
equally subject to the same unhappy events; the wisest man that is cann^^ by
his own counsel exempt himself from the same common calamities which other men
fall into: As two ways which seem to part, the one turning to the right hand,
and the other to the left, and yet both at last bring to the same Town, Chap.
9.2. and 3.19.

V. 15. Then said I in mine heart] i.e. Therefore, or hereupon I said in mine
heart, if it happen to me, even to me, as to the fool, to what end have I taken
so much pains to be more wise and learned then he, being by all my wisdom not a
whit protected from those evils which he has by his folly exposed himself unto,

That this also is vanity] Some make this to be a judgment on that hasty and
angry inference, why was I then more wise? and so the meaning to be; This was
my infirmity and vanity, to undervalue wisdom, and measure it by the casual
events which befall it, as Psalm. 73.13 -- 15. and 77.10. But the meaning is,
that in this respect wisdom is no more able to make a man happy, or to bring
perfect tranquillity to the Soul, then folly is: albeit in other respects there
be a singular excellency in it above the other.

Here then observe, 1. That the most excellent endowments of mind that are,
cannot perfectly satisfy the heart of man.

2. That yet there is a special beauty and goodness in such gifts, to draw the
light of the heart unto them, as being to the mind, as the eye to the head,
the guide and the beauty of it; or as light to the eye, a most congenial and
suitable good unto it.

3. That events and successes depend not upon the counsels of men, nor upon the
gifts of God bestowed on them, but his Providence has the casting voice, and
does overruled and order them all as pleases him, Eccles. 9.11. Psalm. 127.1,
2. many times those who have least wisdom or goodness, have greatest success,
Job 21.7 -- 13. Psalm. 73.3 -- 12. Jer. 12.1, 2. Hab. 1.13. Mal. 3.15. and many
times the wisest and most circumspect men, are most frustrated in those courses
which were contrived with greatest skill and cunning, 2 Samuel 17.14. Job 5.12,
13, 14. Isa. 19.11 -- 14. 1 Cor. 1.20.

4. That notwithstanding the Providence and Counsel of God has the
pre-eminency in the events of things, yet that hinders not the excellency of
wisdom above folly, neither are we thereby at all encouraged to find fault
with our selves for any labor in the use of means, only we must so use them*
as not to deifie them, nor to trust in them, but wholly to depend upon G^d for
his blessing on our counsels, to submit to his wise and holy purposes, when
they are disappointed; to admire his goodness when at any times he turns our
imprudence or improvidence unto good, and makes the event not answerable to
our follies, but to his love.

5. That we cannot judge of the wisdom or folly, the goodness or badness of men
by outward events, because these happen alike to all, Chap. 8.14, and 9.11.

V. 16. There is no remembrance, etc.] What he observed in the general before,
he now makes good in two particulars, viz, oblivion, and death, which are both
alike common to wise men and to fools. Wise men may seem to secure at least
their names, though they cannot their bodies from mortality; by such
magnificent works as Solomon here wrought, and by such noble contemplations as
he was conversant in; but he assures us here the contrary, and elsewhere, that
Piety only keeps the name from rotting with the body, Prove. 10.7. Psalm.
112.6. Psalm. 49.11, 12. Jer. 17.13. Time will eat out all the monuments of
wisdom; or though they continue, yet the renown of a wise man does him no good
at all, he is not after death sensible of it, or comforted with it, so Chap.
1.11. new wise men that arise in after Ages, will darken and eclipse the honor
of those that went before them: and so will it be done to them in the Ages that
follow. To be sure, no mere wise or great man's honor, separated from Piety,
will hold pace with his being; at the last day there will so much shameful
matter be discovered against the wisest of wicked men, as they shall the ^^se
all their renown, and shall appear to be vessels of dishonor and shame for
evermore, 1 Cor. 4.5. 2 Timothy 2.20.

And how dies the wise man? as the fo^l] The second fate, common to both. Th^s
how, is a passionate interrogation, noting grief that it is so; wonder that it
is no otherwise; and indignation or disdain that things so exceeding different
in their worth, should both of them perish alike. Thus there is a Quomodo
dolentis, of grieving, Lam. 1.1* admirantis, of wondering, Acts 2.7, 8.
Indignantis or objurgantis, of chiding and disdain, Joh. 5.44. Matthew. 23.33.
And because it may be objected, That this Argument may as well disable Piety
from making a man happy, as wisdom: Since the same question may be framed of
them as well as of these* How dies the just man? as the unjust; (...) must
remember that Piety follows a man^ and so abides with him after death, which
no other acquired excellencies do either as ornaments or as comforts, Rev.
14.13. Death does not cut off their spiritual life and union with Christ, which
was that which made them happy here. Wicked men are dead* being alive, 1 Timothy
5.6. and good men liv^ in death, Joh. 11.25, 26. Mat. 22.32. therefore the Jews
called their burying place domus viventium, the houses of the living* Therefore
there is no durable Life or Honor but in the fear of the Lord.

V. 17. Therefore I hated life, etc.] Thi^ is the effect which this great
vanity of the most excellent humane endowment wrougth in the heart of Solomon,
made him weary of living to so little purpose, as to dye at last like the
basest of men. He saw no loveliness or desireableness in life it self, (though
^he chiefest outward blessing) all the course ^hereof being full of evil,
grievous, crucia^ing, disquieting labor, all which at last ^uns down like the
waters of Jordan, into the same lake of death, with the other refuse of men.
Many men's poverty, pains, sickness, worldly troubles, have caused them to
complain of their life; but here is one who had health, peace, honor,
abundance of all the contents which the world could afford, not murmuringly,
but as it were judiciously and critically making the same complaints. The
greatness of his wisdom being such, as that all the comforts of life were too
narrow to satisfy the inquiries of it, he saw little valuable or desirable in
it.

Here observe, 1. That life it self is too mean a thing to bring full content
to the soul of man. It must be something better then life which must do it,
Psalm. 63.3.

2. That in the greatest confluence of worldly things, the life of a man may be
full of grievous labor, and he weary of it, not only out of anguish of
spirit, but of natural wisdom observing the vanity thereof.

3. That the wisdom of man, without making use of the grace of God, is very apt
to undervalue the greatest outward blessing which humane nature is capable of;
as Solomon here does life. There is ^aturally so much distemper in the heart of
man, that except all things answer his own desires and expectations, he will
fall out with his very life, and pick quarrels with the choycest blessings that
God here affords him. As a little cloud hides the light of the whole Sun from
the eye, so amidst a multitude of enjoyments, a little labor or trouble which
comes along with them, does darken the beauty, and remove the content of them
all, Genesis 30.1. Psalm. 59.15. Esth. 5.13.

4. Concerning this point, of being weary of Life, or hating it as an unlovely
and undesireable thing, we may note, 1. That Life is the choycest and principal
outward blessing which God here affords us, and that unto the comfort and
preservation thereof all other outward blessings are directed, M^tth. 6.25. 2.
That though in a way of obedience we are to undervalue it at the command of
God, when he calls on us to lay it down, Luke 14.26. Act. 20.24. 1 John 3.16.
Joh. 12.25. and in comparison of a better life we may groan for a deliverance
from it, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. yet it is a great fault out of
passion, murmuring, outward troubles, nay out of largeness of heart, as here
Solomon does, to dis-esteem and wax weary of so great a blessing, Genesis 27.46.
Numb. 14.2 Job 10.1.. and 36.20. Jon. 4.3, 8.

V. 18. Yea I hated all my labor, etc.] All those magnificent and excellent
works, which with so much labor I had wrought. They were all so far from
ministering unto my heart any solid contentment, that I grew wholly out of love
with them, had no regard nor respect at all unto them. If by hatred here, and
in the former verse, be meant only an abatement of that love and delight which
his heart might over-sensually take in them, then this was a very commendable
fruit of the vanity which he discovered in them, according to the counsel of
the Apostle, upon the same ground, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. 1 John 2.15. Love not
the world, that seems to be, a worldly and secular life, or Temporal Being; nor
the things of the world, that is, the provisions and materials which are the
fuel of lust in the world: and so hatred sometimes signifies an abatement and
moderation of love, Matthew. 10.37. compared with Luke 14.26. Joh. 12.25. Genesis
29.30, 31. But if by Hatred, is meant a detestation and abhorrency of them, so
as to leave off all care of duty to be exercised in wordly things, according to
the travel which God has appointed for the sons of men, Chap. 1.13. Ephesians.
5.28. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10 -- 13. and this to do, because we find not that plenary
satisfaction from them, which they were never ordained to administer, then this
was an inordinate hatred, which did not belong unto the works themselves,
(being in themselves good) but unto the sinful distemper of the heart from
whence it proceeded. Such was the sullen distemper of Israel in the Wilderness,
Numb. 11.6. and 20.4. Jon. 4.1.

Because I should leave it unto, etc.] Here the Wise man does subjoyn reasons
of this his weariness and dislike of all his past labors: 1. Because he was to
leave them; there was a necessity of parting with them at the last. As the
heart of man in this state of corruption is naturally apt to cleave to the
world and worldly things, so there is a peculiar delight in those works which
are the fruit of his own wisdom and labor; and he finds it more hard to wean
and take off his affection from them, then from any other. As the Apostle says
of a man's own proper lust, so we may of his own labor and work, that it does
more easily draw away the heart, Jam. 1.14. therefore when God punishes such
men, he usually does it in the works of their own hands, in their principal and
peculiar employments; as Tyrus in her merchandise, Ezekiel. 27.27. Pharaoh in his
River, Ezekiel. 29.3, 4. The Wise man is apt to glory in his wisdom, and the
strong man in his strength, etc. Jer. 9.23. Dan. 4.30, 31. This is the first
ground of vexation, They must leave their wealth to others, Psalm. 49.10, 12.

V. 19. And who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool?] 2. And the
reason of his forementioned dislike of all his labor, because he must leave
them to the man that comes next after him, who happily may be very unfit to
succeed him in so wise and great works. It is not in man's power to leave the
works of his hands, when he must himself no longer enjoy them, unto such as are
most likely to improve or preserve them: but be he what he will, wise or
foolish, he must have not only the fruition of my labors, but the dominion
over them, Psalm. 39.6. And this is a great vanity, to know a man's self how to
get great things, and to know how to preserve, and to enjoy them; but not to
know what will become of them at the last: A wise man it may be will alter all;
a fool will scatter and dissipate all, and so all the fathers wisdom may
quickly come to naught by the sons folly, Psalm. 39.7.

Wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my self wise] Which by my
labor and by my wisdom I have gotten. He understands humane wisdom in
managing worldly affairs to the best improvement, Isa. 10.13. Ezekiel. 38.4, 5.
These are the two great principles of humane actions, Wisdom to direct;
Labor, to execute: Wisdom by counsel guides labor; and Labor through
experience increases wisdom. That wisdom is fruitless, which does not
produce labor; and that labor is useless, which is not managed by wisdom.
Some conceive, that Solomon here did foresee, at least, that Rehoboam by his
folly might scatter many of those great works, and lose much of that ample
power and wealth which his father by his wisdom had gotten, 1 Reg. 12.13, 15.

V. 20. Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labor,
etc.] I went about, or, I circled. The meaning is, Having turned hither and
thither to take a view of all humane actions, and every where discovering
notable vanity in them all, I found my self, after I was wearied in this round,
brought at last to utter despair and despondency of spirit, being without hope
of ever finding out that in any of my labors for which I h^d undertaken them.
When I found, after all my labor, this sad uncertainty attending on them, that
it was out of my power to dispose them for the future so, but that they might
fall into the hands of a fool that would demolish and dissipate them all; who
by his folly, would extinguish the monuments of my wisdom; and by his luxury,
the fruits of my labor: Then I bestirred my self to make my heart despair, to
call it wholly off from all my labors. The word imports a desisting from a
purpose or work undertaken, a changing of a man's counsel, finding the attempt
to be fruitless or unfeasable, Isa. 57.10. Jer. 2.25. and 18.12. There is a
Rational despair, when a man having erroniously sought for some good from that
which is wholly unable to afford it, does thereupon give over so fruitless an
inquiry, and betake himself to that which is more effectual, Isa. 55.2. and
there is a passionate despair proceeding from that frowardness of heart which
such a disappointment is apt to produce in carnal minds, when because a man
cannot enjoy that good from a thing which he expected, he will therefore wholly
fall out with it, though it be otherwise good in its degree, and does bring
such comfortable fruit as God appointed it for. This is a sinful despair: For
the Lord has made many promises unto the labor which we take about outward
things, Prove. 12.24. and 13.11. and 31.31. Psalm. 128.1, 2. And has a word of
blessing ever proportionable to those ends and uses for which he has appointed
them, Deuteronomy. 28.2 -- 8. Matthew. 4.4. If Solomon mean here the former despair,
then it was an effect of his wisdom, dictating unto him not to place his hopes
upon vain things, which would delude and abuse him, but to take off his heart
from the inordinate love of empty things. If the later, then it was a corrupt
and froward aversion from things good in their degree, because the providence
of God might happily dispose otherwise of them than he desired. Duty and labor
about outward things, belongs unto us, but the disposition of them into what
hands he pleases, belongs unto God. In the mean time, it is a good argument
to draw off the heart from anxious and inordinate toil about worldly things:
and rather to employ our thoughts about the education of our children, lest
much wealth in the hands of a foolish son, prove an argument of our folly;
whereas a little estate with principles of wisdom and piety instilled into him
that must enjoy it, will be a greater blessing unto him, and an evidence of
more wisdom in our selves.

V. 21. For there is a man whose labor is in wisdom, etc.] i. e. who, 1. by
his habitual skill and faculty of contrivance. 2. by his experimental and
improved knowledge; and 3. by his just, honest, and righteous dealing;
concurring all 4. with diligent labor, (unto which kind of principles so
attempered, the blessing of God is usually annexed,) does get a fair and full
estate: and when he has all done, must leave it to another who never took
thought about it, nor stirred hand or foot toward the gathering of it. This is
a third reason of the wise man's weariness of his life and labors, namely, that
he should be a very drudge for another man, and should use all his skill and
pains, and suffer so much anxiety and disquiet only to purchase rest and
idleness for his successor. And this is a great and sore evil, that the labor
should be one man's, and the fruit thereof another, and is often threatened as a
punishment, Job. 5.5. Hos. 7.9. and 8.7. Deuteronomy. 28.30, 31, 32, 33. Psalm. 39.6.
Prove. 13.22.

shall he give it for his portion] Or, shall he give his portion. That which in
all reason after so much labor should have been the portion of him who
labored for it, he is compelled by death to give or leave it to another man,
and so to make it that other man's portion.

V. 22. for what has man of all his labor, etc.] What is there unto a man of
all his labor? Nehem. 6.6. viz. what profit, comfort, advantage, can a man
have of such labor wherein all the pain is his, and all the fruit and benefit
another man's? Chap. 1.3. and 3.9. Psalm. 39 6.

vexation of his heart] Hereby are noted those discruciating, disquieting,
careful thoughts, whereby he does project and contrive within himself all ways
of gain, and how to increase and preserve a great estate, Psalm. 49.11. Hab.
2.5, 6. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. This may refer to all the three Reasons before given;
1. What has man left to himself of all his labor and vexation when he is dead
and gone, all the world is then gone to him, Job 1.21. 1 Timothy 6.7. Ps. 49.17.2.
What good has he by all that pains which was taken for another man, who if he
were wise, would be able to take the pains for himself, and if foolish, will be
likely to make all another man's pains fruitless, which he took to provide for
him, Job 27.16, 17.3. What has he of all his Labor more than the other man
who sa^e still, and lived quietly, and saw him toil and drudge to get him an
estate who labored not for it? nothing at all more as to contentment and
fruition, much more as to weariness and vexation.

V. 23. For all his days are sorrows, and his travel grief] etc.] These words
are very emphatical, to set forth the pain and trouble of such a man who toyls
for others: and the wise man closes this disquisition as he did the first,
Chap. 1.18. only this is expressed with greater emphasis, as being the greater
evil of the two; as verse. 21. 1. The words are many, to show the greatness of
the trouble. 2. The word translated sorrows, signifies a very painful and
cruciating grief, the grief of some sore wound, Genesis 34.25. Jer. 51.8. and used
in the case of Isreal's sorrow in their bondage in Egypt, Exodus 3.7. and in
Babylon, Lam. 1.12. and to express the sorrows of Christ, Isa. 53.3, 4. See Job
33.19. Prove. 14.13. 3. The abstract is used for the Concrete, it is not said,
all his days are sorrowful, but very sorrow it self, which adds much force
to the sense, as Genesis 3.6. Ps. 5.9. and 39.5. Hag. 2.8. Genesis 12.2. Cant. 5.16.
4. The word is in the plural number, all his days are sorrows, (i. e.) full of
sorrow, great sorrow, and variety of sorrow; as Isa. 63.6. 2 Pet. 3.11. So it
is said, that the Sodomites were smitten with blindness, Genesis 19.11. 2 Cor.
1.3. Eccl. 5.6.

and his travel [or anxious and careful labour] grief. Or, indignation, his
wearisome employments, full of disquietness, and of continual solicitude,
meeting withal with many miscarriages and disappointments, do stir up much
grief and displeasure of heart.

Hereby is noted the exceeding great trouble of heart, which arises out of an
inordinate conversing about worldly things, and apprehension of parting with
them. For the less measure there is in the labor of getting them, the more
trouble there is in the thoughts of parting with them. If the life of the best
men be full of evil and labor, Genesis 47.9. Ps. 90.10. Job. 14.1. and 5.7. Our
mother brings us forth in sorrow, and unto sorrow: much more unquiet must be
the life of those who labor in the fire, and for very vanity, Habb. 2.13.

yea, his heart takes no rest in the night] The night was appointed by God for
man to rest in, as the day to labor, Ps. 104.23. and 127.2. Job 4.13. But such
a man depriveth himself of that blessing, which God by the very season offers
him, Job 7.3, 4, 13, 14. Eccl. 5.12, 13. Prove. 3.24. Or, if such a man's body,
through labor and weariness, do sleep, yet his heart is still taken up with
unquiet thoughts and cares; for the heart may be awake when the body sleeps,
Cant. 5.2.

V. 24. There is nothing better for a man, than to eat, etc.] In this verse,
and so to the end of the Chapter, is contained that which is the whole sum and
subject of this book, which is to show, wherein the only good which a man can
attain unto in his labor about worldly things, does consist, and the happiness
of this present life, which is to get the heart seasoned with the s^ar of God,
and to be good in his sight, or approved of him; and then in the assurance and
joy of his favor, to make use of all outward good things with quiet
contentment, with freedom, cheerfulness, and delight, which is a special
blessing which the Lord gives unto his own servants. The Apostle puts all this
into two words, Godliness and Contentment, 1 Timothy, 6.6.

The words admit of a several reading, though all run to the same issue. There
is nothing better for a man, then -- so our version. The word [ then] according
to the reading is to be supplied, it not being in the Original. And so
Interpreters agree, that such a word as nisi, or tantum, may be understood, as
it is necessarily to be supplied elsewhere; as Isa. 1.6. where, in the
Original, the words run in this manner, There is no soundness it, wounds and
bruises, etc. where the word but, or only, is necessarily to be supplied; no
soundness, [ but] wounds or bruises: So here, There is not good for a man that
he eat; the word but is to be supplied, There is not, or it is not good for a
man but that he eat: It is expressed, Chap. 3.12. Others read the words with an
interrogation, Is it not good for a man that he eat, etc.? ( i. e.) It is good.
Others ^ead thus, This good is not in a man, (i. e.) in the power of a man,
that he eat and drink, etc. As he cannot help it, but he must in time leave his
outward things, which with so much labor he has gotten, and that to such as,
it may be, will not dispose of them to his desire; so even while he does
actually possess them himself, it is not in his power to use them, much less to
enjoy with delight and pleasure, without the special gift of God. All amounts
to the same issue; which is this: Since there is in all the studies, labors,
affairs of men so much vanity and vexation, as has been here discovered, by
the ablest and wisest inquirer into the creature; it remains, if we would
effectually free our selves from this vanity and vexation, that giving over
those anxious and disquieting labors, we betake our selves to a free,
cheerful, and comfortable use of those good things which God has blessed us
withal; and that so we may do, to commend our selves by sincerity of heart unto
God, from whose hand and gift alone this mercy proceeds, and not from the
power or will of man.

make his soul see, or enjoy good] i. e. Make himself to enjoy the good which
outward blessings do afford, the like phrase making ^o see good is ^sed, Ps.
4.6. and 50.23. su^ra, verse. 1.

in his labour] 1. In the fruit of labor, ^ot of idleness. 2. Of his own
labor, of that which is righteously his own, not gotten from others by
violence or injustice.

this also I saw that it was from the hand of God] Or the special gift of God,
as verse. 26. Chap. 3.13. and 5 19. 1 Chronicles. 29.16. It may seem but an easy
thing when man has, with much toil and trouble, gotten provisions about him,
to eat the fruit of his own labors, yet he has no power to do it without Gods
blessing.

Here we may observe. 1. That the utmost good of all worldly labors reach no
further as to real benefit, then the supply of body, Eccles. 6.7. 1 Timothy 6, 7,
8.

2. That it is not in the power of man, after all his hard labor for these
things, either to use them, or with cheerfulness and joy to delight at all in
them, without the special hand and gift of God; to say nothing of sickness, or
other distempers within, and of robbers without, which may take away the taste
of any sweetness in them, and consequently the desire of them, 2 Samuel 19.35.
Job 33 19, 20. so that the floor and the winepress shall not feed us, Hos. 9.2.
and 2.9. There is such a sordid and base cruelty in the mind of a man toward
himself, as to defraud and grudge himself the fruit of his own labor, Eccl.
6.2, 4, 8. much less can a man with cheerfulness, contentment, and sweet
tranquillity, make use of these blessings without the special favor of God unto
him therein, Prove. 10.22. Ps. 128.1.2. Nehem. 8.10, 12. 1 Chronicles. 29.22. Act.
14.17. Deuteronomy. 8.12 -- 18. Phil. 4, 11, 12, 13.

3. That the happiness of this life stands in a free, cheerful and contented
enjoyment of the good blessings of God, together with the sense and comfort of
his fatherly love, 1 Timothy 6.4.

4. That all the sweetness of outward blessings stands in this, that they are
reached out unto us, from the hand, and sanctified by the blessing and grace of
a merciful Father, Ps. 37.16. Prove. 15.16. 1 Timothy 4.5. 1 Timothy 6.17. It is the
love of God which puts sweetness into all outward mercies.

5. Honest labor whereby a man's bread is his own, is the proper object of our
comfortable fruition. Then only we can rejoice in our eating and drinking, and
other outward delights, when in them we taste the sweet of our righteous
labors, Prove. 16.8. Ephesians. 5.28. 2 These. 3.12.

V. 25. for who can eat, or who else can hasten thereunto more than I?] He
proves what he had said, that it is the gift of God; because he so wise, so
wealthy a Prince, who had so great variety to hold up his delight, could of
himself find nothing in all his great estate, but matter of vexation. What
power can others have to enjoy them, when he could not; or else it may refer to
the former part of the foregoing verse. There is nothing for a m^n then to eat
and drink and enjoy good in his labor: this he proves by his own experience.
As by his own experience, he has all along proved the vanity and vexation of
the creatures in other respects; so here by his own experience he proves, that
the only tranquillity is, having made sure of the favor of God, to eat and
drink with cheerfulness. He does not mean sensual Epicure-like surfeiting on
the creatures, but a quiet and free contented use of them; who is fit to eat of
my estate, and to make haste so to do, i. e. readily and cheerfully to do it,
then I my self who labored it? and I unto whom God has given such plenty, and
such readiness of heart to use it, can by my own taste of Gods goodness give to
others a judgment and assurance hereof. So verse. 10, 12.

who else can hasten thereunto more than I?] This notes a special promptitude
and cheerfulness of heart, which Solomon did put forth in the fruition of the
good things he had gathered, as Job 20.2. others read it, who has taken more
care thereunto, to abound in delights and contents then I? Others, who has
quicker senses to discern the comforts of them, then I? but the first sense
seems more genuine; for as in the former verse, he spoke, 1. Of eating and
drinking, or of the free using of Gods blessings. 2. Of making the heart to
enjoy them: So here he tells us that his practice, was suitable, who can eat?
that relates to the former; and who can hasten more than I, that relates to the
later.

V. 26. for God gives to a man that is good in his sight, wisdom, and
knowledge, and joy, etc.] Having commended this free and comfortable use of
Gods blessings with Godliness and contentment by the author of it, it is the
gift of God: He here further commends it by the subject of it, unto whom God
does afford so excellent a gift: many gifts of God are common to good and bad
men, Matthew. 5.45. 1 Cor. 13.1, 3. but this is a peculiar blessing which he
bestows on his beloved, Ps. 127.2. the subject of it is a good man; the
Character of that good man, he is good in his sight, good in the judgment of
God, who tries the heart, Genesis 17.1. 1 Cor. 10.18. Romans 12.1, 2. 1 Timothy 2.3.
Heb. 13.21. The gift of God to this man. 1. Wisdom to get, 2 Knowledge to use,
3. Joy to use cheerfully and comfortably all outward blessings, and this is
illustrated by an Antithesis.

but to the sinner he gives travel, to gather and to heap up,] i. e. He gives
them up, or leaves them to their own greedy desires, to gather and heap
together with much anxiety and tormenting solicitude, Habb. 2.6. Luke 12.18.
Ps. 39.6.

That he may give to him that is good before God] That is, that God may dispose
of it by his own overruling providence, besides and against the purpose of the
gatherer, to whom he pleases, or to those that fear him, making wicked men but
the drudges and purveyors for others. Isa. 10.7. Prove. 13.22. and 28.8. Job
27.16, 17. Est. 8.1, 2. Isa. 65.13, 14. as wicked men built the Ark, but Noah
enjoyed it, according to the Greek proverb, one man makes the garment, but
another wears it.

This also is vanity] viz. for a wicked man to labor for others whom he loves
not, nor ever intended his labor for.

Here we see, 1. Goodness consists in approving a man's self to God. 2. That
sweet and perfect contentment is peculiar unto good men. 3. That wisdom or
skill to get riches, is the gift of God, Deuteronomy. 8.18. 4. That knowledge to use
them, being gotten, is likewise Gods gift, as verse. 24. 5. That good men only
are the proper subject of true joy, Gal. 5.22. 6. That amongst other curses,
God does many times punish wicked men with giving them up to the insatiable
desires of their covetous hearts, to weary themselves in gathering wealth to no
purpose of their own, of Eccl. 4.8. 7. Gods providence, that many times
disposes the labors of wicked men for the use and good of the godly.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter the wise man proceeds, in discovering the vanity of worldly
things, and of all men's toil and labor about them, in regard of the total
uncertainty of future events, as having their whole dependence on the
predeterminate purpose of God, and not at all on the anxious care and thoughts
of man. And that therefore since man is not able to alter the series and
contexture of events, foreordained by God, he ought with contentment of heart
to enjoy his condition, and to fear the Lord, and depend on his providence,
which is not possible for him by all his own solicitude to prevent or escape.
And therefore, though he may cheerfully enjoy present blessings, yet he must
not have his heart glued to them, nor build his chiefest hope on them, in
regard they are so variable, and subject to unavoidable changes and
uncertainties. So that the doctrine of the ten first verses of this Chapter
seems to be; 1. An argument enforcing the former counsel of the wise man, Chap.
2.24. That since there is a set and prefixed season for all, even the most
contingent events, and that it is out of the power of man by all his thoughts,
counsels and cares, to break through the limits of Gods providence in the
guidance of them; therefore our wisest way is to yield our selves unto God, to
depend on his counsel and provision, to rest contented in that which he gives,
and not to disquiet our selves with the cares, fears, hopes of such things, as
are wholly without the order of our wisdom or power. 2. A caveat in the use of
outward comforts, still to remember that they are changeable, subject to time
and providence to wear them out, and deprive us of them: and therefore not to
be offended, if we have not always our desires, nor enjoy them so long, and in
so constant a tenor of success, as we could wish our selves. 3. A further
observation of vanity in outward things, in the various actions of other men,
as he had before discovered in his own labors.

V. 1. To every thing there is a season] A predeterminate and an appointed
time: So it is used, Esth. 9.31. Ezra 10.14. Nehem. 13.31.

to every purpose] To voluntary and contingent things, which seem most in a
man's own power; yet these are overruled, for their beginning, duration, and
ending, by the providence of God. To every purposed business: Where note; 1.
That all events in the world, both natural and contingent, voluntary, or
fortuitous, are all of them limited and bounded for their beginning, duration
and ending, by the providence of God, Psalm. 31.15. Job 14.14. Acts 17.26. So we
read of a time for wrath, Psalm. 37.13. Ezekiel. 7.7. Hos. 5.7 Isa. 40.2. A time of
love, Ezec. 16.8. 2 Cor. 6.2. A time to work in, Joh. 2.4. A time to suffer in,
Joh. 7.30. and 8.20. and 13.1. and 17.1. It is great wisdom for men to observe
the providence of God in this point, that they may accordingly behave
themselves toward him, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. Luke 19.42. Eccles. 9.12. Jer. 8.7. 2.
That whatever are the thoughts or cares of men, yet the purposes of God must
stand; no man can by his anxious fears or contrivances, mend or alter his
condition. Means we must use in obedience unto God, and expectation of his
promised blessing, but events and successes we must wholly leave to him, Isa.
46.10. Prove. 19.21. Psalm. 33.10, 11. Matthew. 6.27. Jer. 10.23. 3. That all
things under the Sun are subject to continual Changes; there are various
revolutions and vicissitudes of events, now one thing, and anon the contrary,
to the intent that men should, neither be wanton in prosperity, nor desperate
in adversity, but should always fear before the Lord, and seek for a kingdom
which cannot be shaken, 1 Cor. 7.29 -- 31. Prove. 27.1. Jam. 4.13, 14. Dan. 2.21.

V. 2. The Wise man subjoyneth an Induction of several particulars, obvious to
every man's experience, whereby he demonstrateth the truth of this general
Proposition. Some of these particulars are things natural, and wholly out of
the power of man: others humane and voluntary, such as are done and directed by
the Skill of man. To teach us, that all the most free and contingent actions
are under the Law of Gods providence, directed and limited thereby, as well as
those which are most natural and necessary, 1 Reg. 22.24. Isa. 10.5, 6, 7. Act.
4, 27, 28.

Some again begin with pleasant instances, and end in sad ones. Others begin
with sadness, and end with delight. The Lord as he pleases ordering the
affairs of men so, as that sometimes they have their good days first, and
afterward sorrow: sometimes evil first, and after, deliverance, Luke 16.25.
Job 42.12. Joh. 21.18.

Another thing to be remembered here, is, That the Lord does not by every one of
these particulars signify what is good or lawful to be done, but only teach
us, that not only the good actions of men, but their sins, not only their
serious actions, but those which are most Ludicrous and vain, are all of them
under the decrees and overruling counsels o^ God, directing of them and their
seasons a^ it pleases him, Matthew. 10.29, 30. Genesis 45 5. and 50.20. Judge.
21.21, 22, 23.

A time to be born, or to bear nd bri^^ forth] Called the hour of a woman, Jo^^
16.21.

and a time to die] Called the (...) wherein a man must depart, Joh. 13.1.
(...) though the sentence of death has sometim^^ been revoked, Isa. 38.1, 5.
yet the pred^^terminate time fore-fixed in the purpose God was not altered.

V. 3. A time to kill] There is a pro^^^dence of God in the violent deaths of
men, directing actions either sinful or fortuitous, as it pleases him, 2 Reg.
10.30. compared with Hos. 1.4. Exodus 21.13. 1 Reg. 22.34. Hos. 6.1. 1 Samuel 2.6.
Job. 30.26.

to beat down, and to build] Jer. 1.10. and 18.7. and 31.28. Isa. 5.2, 5.

V. 4. A time to weep] viz. From the Lord; for he speaks all along of the
providence of God, in whose hand all our times both of sorrow and of joy are,
Psalm. 80.5. Ruth 1.20, 21.

and a time to laugh] Psalm. 126.1.2. Genesis 21.6.

to mourn] As in Funerals and public calamities, Chap. 12.5.

to daunce] i. e. greatly to rejoice, and express joy in the outward behavior,
2 Samuel 6.14. Act. 3.8.

5. A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather them together] Some by
this, understand the erecting of trophies over conquered enemies, as Josh.
8.29. 2 Samuel 18.17, 18. Zach. 9.16. Others, the demolishing or erecting of
buildings, all ordered by Gods providence, Luke 13.4. Judge. 9.53. Lam. 2.2, 5,
7, 8, 9. and 4.1. Zach. 5.4. Mic. 1.6. 2 Reg. 3.25. Mar. 13.1, 2.

to embrace, and to abstain from embracing] 1 Cor. 7.5.

V. 6. to get] Prove. 10.6.

to cast away] Either out of necessity, as Jon. 1.5. Act. 27.18, 38. or out of
charity, Prove. 11.24. Eccles. 11.1. or out of special duty to God, Heb. 10.34.
Matthew. 10.37.38, 39. and 19.29.

V. 7. To rent] As the custom was in mourning, Job. 1.20. Joel 2 19.

to speak, to keep silence] According to difference of seasons, Prove. 26.4, 5.
and 25.11. Amos 5.13.

V. 8. A time of war] 2 Samuel 11.1.

Thus Solomon by an Induction of diverse particulars, and those very various,
and each by way of Antithesis with his contrary joined to him, some natural
actions, some civil, some domestical, some vicious, some virtuous, some serious
and solemn, others light and ludicrous, some wise, some passionate; by all
these he assures us, that there is a holy and wise work of God in predefining,
ordering, limiting, tempering, disposing of all these and the like affairs of
men, and so qualifying in the life of a man one contrary with another, and
ballancing prosperity and adversity by each other, that in every condition a
good man may find cause of praising God, and of trusting in him, and of
exercising this tranquillity and contentment of mind, even in contrary
conditions because the holy hand of God is in the one, as well as in the other,
Job. 1.21. Phil. 4.11, 12.

V. 9. What profit has he that works, in that wherein he labors? As Chap.
1.3. Matthew. 6.27. In vain is it for a man by any anxious toil to go about to
effect any thing according to his own will, if the counsel and providence of
God be against it. When he builds, God may pull down, or put in some accident
and casual event which shall divert, or undo all: Yet he does not intend to
restrain men from needful Labor in their Callings; but from trusting in or
building on their Labors, and fretting if such fruits follow not thereupon as
they intended and expected; but patiently to submit to the holy Will of God,
unto whom it belongs to dispose of our persons, of our liberties as it
pleases him. Whence observe, That carking and caring is indeed a striving with
the irresistible providence of God, which no labor of ours can alter, or bend
to our wills, Isa. 45.9. Jon. 4.1, 8, 9. as on the other side, glorying of our
own strength and wisdom, is a robbing him of his honor, Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18.
Habak, 1.16. Labor is subordinate unto providence, but must never strive with
it. There is no profit to any m^n in his Labor, without Gods blessing, which
therefore he must pray for, and rejoice in, without fruitless anxiety for the
future.

V. 10. I have seen the travel] Chap. 1.13. men might be apt to think when they
see so many turns and changes in the world, that all things are carried by a
blind and rash disorder, casually and uncertainly, as it falls out, without any
beauty or order in them. To this he answers, That it is God who has given unto
men this travel to exercise themselves in various and contrary employments,
passions, events, and that he does, though we do not suddenly observe it,
direct them all unto a beautiful issue: all these contraries work together for
good, Romans 8.28. Again, men might think on the other hand, If man have indeed
no profit of all his labor, but when all is done, God alone orders the Event,
then to what end should he weary himself in so fruitless an employment? To this
also there is an answer in these words; God has given to man his work, which
he is to undertake in obedience to Gods command: and God does usually dispense
his mercies unto us in the use of means, and by a blessing on our labors,
Prove. 10.4, 22. Joh. 21.3, 6. Act. 27.22, 31. And though Labor do not effect
what we expected from it, but Gods providence should (as sometimes it does) act
contrary to, or diversely from our endeavors, yet this good there is in honest
Labor alone, and this End God has in requiring it of us, we are Exercised
therein, and so kept from idleness, and the evil effects which would follow
thereupon. Labor is not only a duty, but in this respect beneficial, (even
when it miscarrieth as to the principal end aimed at in it) that the heart is
thereby kept in that station and order wherein God did originally set it, Genesis
3.17, 18, 19.

V. 11. He has made every thing beautiful in his time, or in the time and
proper season thereof.] This is a further commendation of the wise providence
of God in the government of the world, and all the events which happen in it,
to the end that men may with more quietness and contentment acquiesce therein.
We might be apt to stumble and be offended at the seeming confusions which are
in the world, and the great uncertainty of affairs therein. But howsoever it
seem so unto us, who are not able to put together all the pieces of Gods
providence, nor to foresee that frame and feature which he will form them unto
at the last, yet this is certain, that as in the w^rk of Creation all things
were very good, Genesis 1.31. So in the work of Gubernation and Providence, All
things will at last appear to be very beautiful, and those things which seemed
but as confused heaps when they lay asunder, will when Gods whole work is done,
(Isa. 10.12.) and they are all put together, appear to have been full of order,
and decorum: as beauty in the body arises out of an equal temperament of
contraries together, and so in a curious piece of hanging various colors
wisely mixed, make an elegant piece: and letters which in the Printers boxes
seem all confused, and signify nothing: yet being set together by an exquisite
Copy, they afford us a learned and elaborate work; as we see in the History of
Joseph and his brethren, of David's troubles and Kingdom: of Mordecai, Esther,
and Haman, of the Jews crucifying of Christ, etc.

Again, God has made every thing beautiful in its time] As cold, and frost,
are as orderly, as necessary, as useful in the winter, the season for them, as
fruits, and flowers, and other delights are in the summer. Sorrow and
Affliction is in the season of it as useful and needful for men, and in its
kind as beautiful, as mirth and joy in another season, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Jam.
1.2, 3. and 5.7, 11. Eccles. 7.13, 14. Ps. 104.24.

also he has set the world in their heart, etc.] These words are in this place
very difficult, and variously both rendered, and understood. Some read them
thus, Quamdiu seculum est, as long as the world, or worldly things continue,
the Lord does put into the mind of man the work which God does from the
beginning to the end, excepting only that which man cannot find out, or attain
unto: and so the sense to be, That God has in the book of the world, and of
his providence in the Government of all things therein, so legibly represented
to the mind of man his righteous and beautiful ordering of them all, that man
may if he set himself about it, easily discover Gods wonderful wisdom therein;
as Act. 14.17. Romans 1.19, 20. only indeed some things are unsearchable to
humane reason, which he is to admire and adore, waiting till the time of the
revelation of Gods righteous Judgments for the full and distinct understanding
of them, Romans 11.33, 34. Job. 9.10. and 11.7, 8, 9. Others, by putting the
world in men's hearts, understand according to one of the usual acceptions of
the word, (...), a desire implanted in man of eternity and perpetuity, and so
the sense to be, That albeit God does make every thing good and beautiful, yet
the heart of man is so set upon immortality, that he cannot provide amongst any
of Gods works here which have a beginning and an end, or are measured by time,
any thing wherein his heart may fully and finally rest.

But that which seems most agreeable to the scope of the place, and grammar of
the words, is this; God has indeed made every thing beautiful in his time,
and thereupon men ought with quiet and cheerful hearts to observe Gods
providence in all things, and therein to rest, without anxiety or discruciating
care: but man cannot find out the work of God, nor observe the beauty thereof
so exactly as he should, which is the reason that he does not so patiently
aquiesce therein. Of this defect he gives two reasons:

1. That they have the world in their hearts, they are so taken up with the
thoughts and cares of worldly things, and are so exercised in the sore travel
belonging unto them, that they do not naturally look up to the wise and holy
disposition of God, so as to rest therein. This duty is the remedy of such
cares, Matthew. 6.26, 30, 32. and such cares as are the hindrance of this duty.

2. They cannot find out the work which God does from the beginning to the end]
Man being of short continuance does not many times live to observe a full point
in the works of God. Their beginning may be in one age, and their end in
another. That part which I see in my days, may appear to me full of disorder
and confusion, as heaps of stone and lime, and other provisions toward a
goodly building: whereas if I did live to see the end of God in such works, it
would appear, that in their time, or maturity they would be full of beauty:
that fruit which is most sweet and delicate in its season, is sour and
unpleasant while it is yet green. It is the End of Gods work which sets forth
its beauty. Works of Providence, as works of Creation, may begin in a Chaos,
and seem without form and void, Genesis 1.2. but they end in admirable order and
beauty, Chap. 8.17. Psalm. 37.37, 38. Jam. 5.11. Hab. 2.3. So here is the
doctrine of the excellent beauty which is in Gods Providence. The reason why
man is not thereby persuaded unto contentment and patience in all estates,
namely, his natural impotency to observe the same. The grounds of that
Impotency, 1. His worldly-mindedness. 2. His short continuance: yet he ought by
faith, and by the evidence of Gods dealings in other ages, to rectify this
defect, and upon that ground to build his cheerful enjoyment of blessing while
God bestows them upon him. So it follows,

V. 12. I know that there is no good in them: but for, etc.] I know by my trial
and experience, that there is no good in or for them, i. e. for men; but only
with contentment of heart to rejoice in Gods blessings, and to do good in his
life, i. e. to live in the fear of God; as Chap. 2.24, 25. or to do good unto
themselves in a liberal enjoyment of their life and labors, as Psalm. 49.18. or
to do good to others in the time of their joy, as Neh. 8.10, 12.

V. 13. And also that every man should eat, etc.] Here are the parts of this
contentment, to eat, drink, enjoy our labors, and to rejoice in them. Whereby
is meant not a gluttonous, luxurious, and intemperate use of these things, as
they, 1 Cor. 15.32. Matthew. 44.49. but a free and comfortable use, without
anxious thoughts for the future, moderated by the fear of God, as before, Chap.
2.24.

V. 14. I know that whatsoever God does it shall be for ever, etc.] Here from
the unchangeableness of Gods providence, the permanent and irrecoverable course
of his counsels, the Absolute perfection of his works, wherein there is nothing
defective, which requires addition, nothing superfluous, or to be taken from
them; he does further teach us with willingness and contentment to submit to
God, whose Counsels we are no^able by all our cares to alter or disanul.

shall be for ever] The w^^^s themselves may alter and vanish, but the Counsel
of God is constant and immutable, and he does in a stable and fixed way dispose
of all things to holy ends, beyond the power of any Creature, either to alter
or evade it, Mal. 3.6. His decrees are like chariots proceeding out of
mountains of brass to note firmitude and immutability, Zach. 6.1.2. which no
power can shake or remove, Isa. 38.10. Job 38.31 -- 35. and 40.8. and 42.2. Job
9.12. Isa. 14.27. and 46.10.

and God does it, that men should fear before him] Gods decrees and immutable
providence should not drive us either into despair and a wilful neglect of all
means, in the use whereof God expects that we should wait upon him, and in
which as in the way of his providence, he uses to work good for his people:
nor do they allow us to lean on our own wisdom, and to deifie our own
councels, or burn incense to our own nets; but by them we are taught, in
consideration of the Sovereignty, power, and wisdom of God in all things, to
stand in awe of him, to submit unto him; in blessings to be thankful, in
sufferings to be patient, because still it is the Lord that decrees, orders,
disposes and over-ruleth all, Job 1.21. 1 Samuel 3.18. 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. Psalm.
37.5* 7.

V. 15. That which has been, is now, and that which is to, etc.] Chap. 1.9.
This is an explication of what was last said, V. 14. to show how what God does,
is for ever: The things themselves pass, and others succeed in their places,
but this series of things is carried on regularly and uniformly by a standing
Law and fixed decree, appointing a perpetual and proportionable Succession of
things one after another, as it has been from the beginning, Genesis 8.22. Jer.
31.35, 36. Job 38.10, 33.

and God requires that which is past.] That which time thrusts forward, and
so makes to be past, God restores and brings it back again. And this is also
an excellent argument of contentment in our estate, be it what it will: 1.
Because God deals not in a strange and unusual manner with us, otherwise then
with others before us; that which now is our Case, has been the case of other
good men, and will be the case of others when we are gone, 1 Cor. 10.13. A
humame Temptation there, is that which God does usually exercise men withal,
as elsewhere the rod of a man, 2 Samuel 7.14. 2. Because God tempereth our lives,
and does not keep us always in one and the same estate. In trouble he brings
back and restores comfort to those that wait on on him, Psalm. 126.1, 4. as to
Job, Chap. 42.12. In abundance, he can shake our mountain which we thought
immovable, and bring back our sorrows again, Psalm. 30.6, 7. so that in both
respects we ought to carry an awful, reverend, and humble heart toward God in
all conditions, quietly referring our selves in every estate unto his Fatherly
disposal, who best knows what is good for us.

V. 16. And moreover I saw under the Sun the place of Judgment, etc.] I saw
another Vanity under the Sun. Having formerly showed the vanity of knowledge,
and of pleasures, and of humane Labors, in regard of the internal anxiety and
travel of mind that does accompany them, and of the external changes they are
subject unto, and manifold miscarriages and disappointments which are incident
unto them, together with the remedy hereof, a free and cheerful enjoyment of
Gods blessings with piety toward him for the present; and a comfortable
dependence on his holy providence, with godly fear for the future: upon a
visible objection which might be made against the providence of God, (which he
had so much commended) with which Temptation many good men have been shaken, to
wit, the prosperous impiety and oppressions of wicked men, and the sad
condition of the innocent and oppressed, Job 21.3. -- 13. Psalm. 7.2. -- 5. Jer.
12.1. Habak. 1.13, 14. he proceeds to vindicate the doctrine of providence,
and to show the vanity of men in honor and great place without the fear of
God: (for all the vanities in this book are still to be understood in that
sense, the fear of God being the remedy of it, and that which makes all other
outward good things sweet and comfortable to us,) The greatest honor without a
holy use of it, is so far from making a man happy, that it is an occasion of
much wickedness amongst men, one man proving a devil and wolf unto another, and
making no other use of power, then lions or bears do, to mischief others by.
This wickedness is aggravated, in that it was committed under the pretense of
Gods Ordinance; Magistracy and Courts of Justice were erected by Gods
appointment to be Sanctuaries and places of refuge for wronged innocence to
repair unto for succor and relief: now then, for those who were ordained to
comfort and help poor and oppressed persons, to be themselves through bribery,
partiality, and injustice, the greatest oppressors, and that with so high a
hand, as to make the very tribunals of judgment, to be slaughterhouses, and
shops of cruelty, This was a great vanity amongst men, and a great Temptation
whereby a poor man's comfortably waiting on the providence of God is in danger
to be shaken.

We here note, 1. That power without Piety, is very apt to degenerate into
cruelty and oppression. It is an unweildy and a wilful thing, that wants much
balance of humility and self-denial to temper and allay it, Isa. 1.21, 22, 23.
and 10.13, 14. Jer. 22.14, 17. Mic. 3.9, 10, 11. Habak. 1.13, 14. Ezekiel. 22.25.

2. That it is the height of impiety, to fetch power and advantage from any
ordinance of God, to commit it, Isa. 5.20. 1. Sam. 2.17. Jer. 23.25, 38. Jer.
14.14, 15. 1 Reg. 22.11, 12, 24. Joh. 19.10. Isa. 36.10. Mal. 2.8.

3. That wickedness is many times grossly aggravated by the circumstance of
place where it is committed, Hos. 6.8. Ezekiel. 8.6, 9, 17. Isa. 27.10. Mal. 1.7.
Matthew. 21.12, 13.

and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there] This is the same
thing repeated, as the use of that tongue, and of the Scripture is, whereby may
be signified, How usual a thing it was in places of Judgment, here and there,
one as well as another, to find this corruption, Jer. 5.5. Isa. 5.7.

V. 17. I said in my heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked, etc.
This is the censure Solomon passes upon this vanity, that though power do
oppress, and the poor be oppressed, yet this ought not to discourage good men
from contented waiting on the providence of God, nor to encourage or embolden
wicked men in their ways of tyranny or oppression, because the Lord will in
due time review all again, and pass a righteous judgment upon the one and the
other.

I said in mine heart] I comforted my heart against this vanity by the
consideration of the righteous Judgment of God.

God will judge the righteous] By a sentence of absolution.

and the wicked] By a sentence of condemnation.

for there is a time there] ( i. e.) With God, in the judgment to come. The
antecedent is to be understood in the relative, as Number. 7.89. Him, for, God,
Esth. 9.25. She, for Esther, Psalm. 114.2. His Sanctuary, for, Gods Sanctuary,
Job 1.2^. naked shall I return thither; namely to the earth.

Here we see, 1. That faith can look on the pride and power of wicked men as a
very vain thing, even when they are in the height of their greatness, Job. 5.3.
Psalm. 92. 7. and 39.5, 37. and 10.20. and 35.36. Habbak. 2.7. Luke 12.20.

2. That it is matter of comfort to men oppressed, that the Lord will judge
their cause over again, and right them against their oppressors. Therefore
they ought patiently to wait on him, and to expect what issue he will give them
out of their troubles, Eccles. 5.8. Jam. 5.7. Psalm. 7.6, 7, 8, 9, 11. and 9.4,
9.

3. There is a prefixed time beyond which God will no longer suffer innocence
to be oppressed, nor tyranny to prevail, and we are patiently to wait for Gods
time, who will certainly come when wicked men have filled up their measure,
Act. 17.31. Jam. 5.7, 8. Job. 21.30. Psalm. 37.13. Habbak. 2.3. Zach. 5.5 -- 7.

V. 18. I said in my heart concerning the estate of the sons of men] The order,
condition, manner of men, or concerning men themselves, as Psalm. 110.4. Eccles.
8.2. or concerning the degrees of men, superiors and inferiors.

That God might manifest them] I saw that man being in power, did not, could
not rightly consider his own frail condition, and therefore that God must
manifest them, in his righteous judgment, or by his word unto themselves, and
make them know their own natural vileness, and that they are, as to outward
respects, but as the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20. as Psalm. 82.6, 7. ye are
Gods by office, but ye shall die like men; so here, men by reason, by power, by
dignity, But ye shall die like beasts. Others thus, That they might clear, or
purge God when he judges them, and shall make them see that they lived like
beasts, Psalm. 51.4. Others, that God indeed has chosen and advanced them to
dignity, but by what is seen, and does outwardly appear of them, they are by
their cruelty and injustice, no better then beasts; as Mic. 3.3. Zeph. 3.3.

That they themselves are Beasts] Heb. A Beast. Or that these are as a Beast to
those, or as a beast to one another; the singular number is put collectively,
they act the part of all kind of hurtful beasts one toward another: so Christ
called Herod a fox, Luke 13.32. and the hypocritical Jews, vipers. Luke 3.7.
See Psalm. 22.12, 16. and 10. and 57.4. 2 Timothy 4.17. Ps. 80.13. Ezekiel. 22.27.
Jer. 5.6. Psalm. 68.30. Amos 4.1. Mat. 7.6. 2 Pet. 2.22. Ezekiel. 2.6.

Some render these words (...) by Secundum rationem humanam; and thence infer,
that Solomon speaks here according to the judgment of carnal and corrupt
reason, and under a Prosopopoeia, does deliver the judgment of Atheists and
Epicures, touching the mortality of the Soul, and the total parity of condition
between men and beasts in regard of mortality, who thence allow themselves in
all kinds of violence, oppression and luxury: and so they understand all that
follows to the end of this Chapter, to be spoken as in the person of an Epicure
and Atheist: The same events happen to man and beast, their end the same, their
original and matter the same, their senses, breath, notions the same, their
soul alike earthly, for who knows that man's goes upward more then a beasts, and
therefore it is equal, that they should live sensually, without fear or care
for the future, as beasts do.

But the necessity of such a sense does not appear, since the wise man's purpose
here seems to be no other but to humble the highest of men, as in the former
words, by consideration of Gods Judgment over them; so in these to the 21.
verse, by the consideration of their own mortal and earthly condition; wherein
as to many particulars they agree with the brute beasts: for he speaks not here
of man's immortal or heavenly Condition; but throughout this Book the Scope is
to show the vanity of earthly things, and of humane actions in order unto
things under the Sun; which vanity is by no means to be remedied, but only by
the fear of God. The vanity of all the honors and labors of this life, he
here discovers by the equal condition in mere outward respects between men
and beasts.

V. 19. For that which befalls the sons of men, befalls beasts, even one
thing befalls them] For as for the Event of the sons of men, and for the
Event of beasts, one Event is to them both, Psalm. 49.10.

as the one dies, so dies the other] Or, as is the death of the one, so is
the death of the other, Chap. 2.15, 16.

they have all one breath] They draw in and out the same air; by the same kind
of vital organs, man's breath is in his nostrils, as the breath of beasts, Isa.
2.22. Job 27.3, 4. Genesis 2.7. He speaks not of the soul of man, but of Animal
and vital breath, which is common to both, Ezekiel. 37.5.10. So we read of the
common provisions which God makes in regard of this life, for beasts, birds,
fishes, and men, and the common fate which attends them all, Psalm. 104.11, 12,
14, 15, 21, 23, 27 -- 30.

so that a man has no pre-eminence above a beast] In outward respects, without
piety to raise him above a mere corporal and sensual use of them: nay in many
outward things beasts have the pre-eminence, some more strength, others more
agility; some more exquisite senses, others longer life, most more healthy,
more hardy, able to work more, able to bear and endure more, then man.

for all is vanity] All equally vain and mortal.

V. 20. All go into one place, all are of the dust, and all return to dust
again] As they agree in one vital principle, so are they subject to one Law of
mortality, their original, in regard of bodily constitution, the same, and by
dissolution their condition in regard of bodies the same, Genesis 3.19. Job 34.15.
Psalm. 22.16. We must still remember, that he speaks of man's mere natural
condition, as he is under the Sun. Otherwise, in regard of man's future
condition, his body is again to be raised, and brought to Judgment.

V. 21. Who knows the spirit of man that goes upward, and the spirit of the
beast which goes downward to the earth?] It is true indeed there is a future
happiness belonging unto men who have immortal souls, which beasts have no
right unto, nor are capable of; The soul of the one goes upward, Chap. 12.7.
Luke 18.22. Act. 7.59. whereas the souls of beasts perish. But no man can by
sense discern the ascent of the one, or the descent of the other; and Solomon
speaks not of man's future celestial happiness in this Book, but of the vanity
of all outward things, without true piety, to satisfy the heart of man while
he is under the Sun. As for the other celestial happiness, it cannot be
discerned by a natural disquisition, but is revealed in the word unto a few, 1
Cor. 2.9 -- 11.

V. 22. Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better, then that a man
should rejoice in his own works] He repeats his former conclusion, Chap. 2.23.
and 3.13. from these vanities, since there is so little difference in outward
things between a man and a beast; therefore to remedy this vanity, he is in the
fear of God, while he lives, to enjoy with cheerfulness and contentment his
own labors; for that only which he so does enjoy, is his own portion: and not
to trouble himself with thoughts or cares for the future, since being gone, he
has no more share in them, nor knowledge of them.

for who shall bring him to see what shall be after him?] If he h^ard them up
for others, and use them not himself, what good will he have of them when he is
gone? Who can foretell him what use shall be made of them, what good shall be
done with them; therefore let him take comfort of them himself before he die,
Chap. 5.18.

CHAP. IV.
HAving showed the vanity of oppression, and injustice in those who are in
place of power and judgment, who carry themselves like beasts to their
brethren, and must themselves die like beasts, un-desired, un-lamented. He
shows further in this Chapter diverse other vanities, which are consequents
upon oppression, and misgovernment; both in persons oppressed, whose life is a
weariness to them, Verse 1, 2, 3. and in other men; who thereby are subject to
be envied for their industry and prosperity, Verse 4. and thereupon some
foolishly give over all employments, Verse 5, 6. Others scrape together what
they can get, and live privately alone, out of the eye of the world, and from
being observed, Verse 8. and thereupon he returns to show the vanity even of
the greatest power, when it thus oppresses the people, Verse. 13, 14. yea, the
most regular power, through the mutability of the affections of the people,
Verse 15, 16.

Verse. 1. SO I returned, and considered all the oppressions, etc.] Returned and
considered, ( i. e.) considered again; the verb is put for the adverb, as is
usual in Scripture, in verbs which signify repeating, or iterating of an
action; as Genesis 25.1. Abraham added and took a wife, ( i. e.) took another
wife, or married again. Psalm. 106.13. They made haste and forgot, ( i. e.) They
soon forgot: Hos. 9.9. They were profound, and corrupted themselves, ( i. e.)
They deeply corrupted themselves: So Isa. 64.4. Genesis 26.18. Romans 10.20. Psalm.
6.10. He had considered violence and injustice in the seat of judgment, before
Chap. 3.16. and had showed the vanity of that, and yet notwithstanding that a
good man should endeavor to rejoice in his labors. But when he looks on it
again, he finds instead of rejoicing, nothing but the tears of oppressed men,
without strength in themselves, without comfort from others, which must needs
render their live^ very grievous and irksome to them.

all the oppressions] It imports, either violent, or fraudulent detaining of
men's goods or rights (...) them, Jer. 22.3. Luke 3.14. and 19.8. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Jerem. 5.26, 27.

and behold the tears of such as were oppressed] The greatness of this evil is
set forth, 1. By the grief of such poor oppressed persons, it squeezed forth
tears out of their eyes, Lam. 1.2. 2. By their helplesness, they had no
comforter: It is some ease of a man in sorrow, to see others pity him, and a
great aggravation of misery to be without a comforter, when a man's adversaries
are so powerful, so malicious and cruel, that others are afraid, so much as
to pity him, Job. 6.14, 15. and 19.21. 3. By their impotency to escape from the
hand of their oppressors. So much is employed in the next words, which way ever
we read them, whether so, as to repeat the negative of the former clause with
the later, which is usual, Psalm. 1.5. Job 30.20, 25. and 31.20. thus, And no
power from the hand of their oppressors, namely, to escape from them. They
have no power but to weep, none to help themselves. Or else, as we read it, On
the side of their oppressors there is power, so much as to keep others from
comforting them. So the word hand, is sometimes rendered by the word side, Psalm.
140.6. Prove. 8.3. The doubling of that clause, notes the sadness of their
condition; as Job calls once and again for pity, Job 19.21.

V. 2. Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead, etc.] I esteemed
the dead more happy. The dead which are already dead; this is emphatical; our
mortality, makes us, as it were, dead while we live, much more our lusts,
Matthew. 8.22. Ephesians. 2.1. 1 Timothy 5.6. Rev. 3.1. Prove. 9.18. There are dead men
that are yet living, and dead men that are already dead. Men are said to be
dead likewise that are in any desperate condition, under any invincible
calamity, as Jews in Babylon, Isa. 26.19. Ezekiel. 37.11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 15.31. 2
Cor. 1.9, 10. Oppression is, in the Scripture account, a killing, a devouring
of poor men, eating them up, gnawing their bones, Hab. 1.13. Psalm. 10.8 -- 10.
and 14.4. Zeph. 3.3. Ezekiel. 22.27. Mic. 3.2. 3. Psalm. 8.3, 4, 5. The emphasis
then of the place is this, I esteemed those more happy who are already quite
dead, then those who do thus continually die, and languish away under the
cruelties of their oppressors. This may seem to be spoken after the judgment
of the flesh, because grievous miseries and oppressions make men weary of their
life, and choose rather to die. Death is a haven to such a soul after shipwreck,
Job. 3.13 -- 16. Jon. 4.3. 1 Reg. 19.4. And indeed life being the greatest of
mere outward blessings, and that whereunto all the rest are ordered, Matthew.
6.25. it can hardly be either rationally or piously undervalued, because of the
evils which crush and lie heavy on it, or the contrary thereunto desired, save
only in order to the escaping evils which are worse then death, and to
obtaining of good things which are better then life. In which sense the Apostle
desired to depart, that he might be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. Therefore he here
speaks according to the judgment of men under oppression, and who lie
g^oaning and sighing amidst many miseries, whose reason is darkened by the
weight of their sorrows; for oppression, in this sense, makes even a wise man
mad, Chap. 7.7.

more then the living who are yet alive] By the living who are yet alive, he
seems to mean those poor men, who languish and pine away under their
oppressions, of whom we can say only, as we do of a man ready to die, He is yet
alive, his breath is not quite gone, he does live, and that is all; as Luke
10.30. He does not simply prefer death before life; but the ease and quietness
of death, before the miseries and sufferings of a dying life, Job. 3.17.18, 19.

V. 3. Yea, better is he then both they, etc.] He speaks only according to
the judgment of sense, and with relation to the greatness of outward miseries,
which he, who is yet unborn, has not seen in others, or felt in himself, Job.
3.10. and 10.18, 19.

seen the evil] To see good is to enjoy it, Chap. 2.24. To see evil is to have
experience of it, and to suffer it; in which sense the Serpent told Eve, that
her eyes should be opened to know good by the loss, and evil by the danger of
it, Gen 3.5. and this kind of not being, or not having been born, though it
cannot reasonably or piously be preferred before a sorrowful life, which will
consist with the fear of God, yet it may, before a cursed condition, which
sinks a man under the wrath of God, Matthew. 26.24.

Here then we may observe, 1. The sad condition of men under the power of
oppressors, when they have not so much abatement of their Misery as to be
pitied. 2. The cruelty of powerful oppressors, which deterrs others from
compassionating those whom they oppress. 3. The dangerous temptation which
oppression exposes men unto, even to be weary of life, as we see in the case
of Job, Jonah, Eliah, and others. 4. The inconvenience in cases of difficulty,
which relate any way to conscience, to consult with carnal reason, which will
easily lead us into extremes.

V. 4. Again, I considered all travel and every right work] Here he proceeds
to another vanity, arising out of the former of oppression and misgovernment,
under which men usually are discouraged from all ingenious and useful
undertakings, from all noble enterprises of any sort, by reason of the envy and
danger, which, partly through the jealousies of superiors, partly through the
malignancy and evil eye of equals, or inferiors, they are by their eminency
and industry exposed unto. By every right work, we are to understand not so
much works done in integrity toward God, as the ingenious and accurate works
of humane issue, done by the wisdom and practick cunning of Artificers in any
kind; such as the wisdom of Bezaleel, Exodus 31.3, 4. and Hiram, 1 Reg. 7.14.

that for this a man is envied of his neighbour] That the more he deserves for
his industry, and ingeniousness of invention, the more he is exposed to envy
and danger; envy being like those moths and cankers which usually feed on the
richest garments, as we see in many examples, Genesis 4.5. Numb. 11.27 -- 29. 1 Samuel 18.7, 8. Genesis 26.12 -- 14. and 37.8. 1 Samuel 17.28. Dan. 6.3, 4, etc. And
this is a great vanity and disappointment, when that from whence a man might
have expected credit and thanks from the world, shall procure him hatred and
danger, and must needs thereupon be a great disquieting of heart, and
discouragement against so fruitless endeavors, Prove. 37.4. Psalm. 73.12, 13.

V. 5. The fool foldeth his hands together, and eats his own flesh] This is
one fruit of this danger and envy, taken up by foolish and sloathfull men,
they refuse to take pains, and rather choose to be poor then to be envied. Here
is the character of an idle person, 1. He is a fool, to make so absurd an
inference, that for fear of envy and trouble, will not only neglect duty, but
undo himself. 2. He foldeth his hands; puts himself into a posture of idleness,
composeth himself to do nothing. Labor requires the stretching forth of the
hands, Prove. 31.19. Laziness wraps them up in one another, Prove. 6.9, 10. and
26.14. and 19.24. 3. He eats his own flesh; brings himself to extreme
poverty, contracteth weakness in his body, enfeebleth his mind, wastes his
stock, consumes his family, brings the curse of beggary upon himself and
his. For as the diligent hand makes rich, Prove. 13.11. So the slack hand
makes poor, Prove. 10.4. He thinks it a part of wisdom to spare his pains, and
sit quiet; and because he cannot attain so much dexterity and skill as a other
man, therefore enviously to sit down and gnaw his own flesh, either with hunger
or indignation, Prove. 26.16. Whereas indeed he is a fool, ( i. e.) 1. A wicked
man, in neglecting the duty of labor, which he owes to himself, to his
family, to his generation, and whereunto by the ordinance of God he is
appointed, Genesis 3.19. Tit. 3.14. 1 Thessalonians. 3.10, 11. 2. An absurd man, to reason
himself into contempt and beggary, and to be cruel to himself, because he is
fretted at other men, Prove. 11.17. Ps. 27.2. For as he had before touched the
vanity which arises from others, so here that which arises from a man's own
self.

V. 6. Better is an handful with quietness, than both the hands full with
trouble and vexation of spirit] This may be here taken, either as Solmons own
words, and then to import a seasonable remedy against the evils here spoken of,
viz. envy, idleness, and covetousness, namely, sweet contentment with a
competent estate, rather than vexation with a greater, Prove. 15.16, 17. and
17.1. Ps. 37.16. Luke 12.15. Or rather as the words of the sluggard, and then
they are his apology for his laziness: If he strive to excel in his profession,
he shall many ways disquiet himself, he cannot do it without much travel, nor
after all that travel be free from much envy and danger. And therefore he
rather chooses a smaller portion, with more ease and contentment. In which,
there is a great deal of false arguing; 1. It is false, when he calls his
slothful and idle way of living, rest or quietness. For true tranquillity of
mind is the consequent of a fruitful conversation, Ps. 119.165. bodily rest a
fruit of honest labor, Ps. 127.2. Eccl. 5.12.2. It is false, when he calls
industry in a man's course of life, vexation of spirit, whereas honest labor
takes off the heart from many vain thoughts and desires, which would more
sorely vex it. 3. It is a great profaneness to palliate his own sin, under the
name of rest and quietness of spirit, and under the protection of Gods own
truth to find an hiding place for his bruitishness and sensuality; as Saul
pretended sacrifice to excuse rebellion, 1 Samuel 15.15. 2 Samuel 15.7, 8. Prove.
7.14, 15. Hos. 12.8. 1 Reg. 21.9. 4. It is alike profaneness to give ear to the
wisdom of the flesh, against the duties of our calling, and to argue from
inconveniences, which we fear to discourage our selves from those labors which
God has promised to bless. God says to encourage us unto duty, That his light
shall shine on our ways, he will comfort and bless us in them, and his angel
shall keep us in our ways, Ps. 91.11. but the sluggard says to discourage
himself, There is a Lion in the way, Prove. 22.13. as if Lions were more
terrible to affright, than Angels to protect. 5. It is a vain conceit, to think
contentment is tied unto a small estate, and vexation to a greater; whereas
true content knows as well how to abound, as how to want, Phil. 4.11, 12. and
discontent will make men as anxious, as froward, as impatient under a small
estate, as craving, hoarding, coveting under a greater, Prove. 30.9. Ps. 59.15.
The words of this verse are proverbial, the former part, by the word handful,
expressing a little estate; as Ps. 72.16. Ezekiel. 13.19. The other, by hands
full, a greater and more plentiful, gotten with all the strength and labor of
the whole man, Mic. 7.3.

V. 7. vanity under the Sun] Another vanity, and quite contrary to the former;
as fools when they avoid one extreme, fall into the other.

V. 8. There is one alone, etc.] One, (i. e.) one by himself; as Genesis 19.9. and
not a second; that is, either no companion, or member in his family to provide
for, or no heir to succeed him in his estate; none for whom he can say, It is
this man for whom I labor. See v. 15.

neither child nor brother] His labor is not founded in any natural love of
those for whom he is bound to provide, 1 Timothy 5.8. Genesis 47.12. Prove. 17.17. but
merely on the inordinate love of riches themselves.

This covetous wretch is here described, 1. By his solitariness, he lives all
alone, he cannot endure two months in a house.

2. By his excessive labor; there is no end of all his labor: He toyls
infinitely, and without measure, Isa. 2.7. Job. 22.5. Some by labor,
understand wealth gotten by labor. He has a vast estate, and yet is as greedy
as if he had nothing.

3. By his insatiable desires, neither is his eye satisfied with riches] He
has enough for his back, his belly, his calling, the decency of his state and
condition, but he has not enough for his eye. Though he can but see it, and
have no use of it, yet he is displeased that he sees no more. The eye is the
instrument of coveting, 1 John 2.16. Josh. 7.21. Chap. 1.8. and 2.10. A
covetous man, though he have as much as his eye can see, yet he would have more
still, Isa. 5.8. Hab. 2.5. Prove. 30.15. Job 40.23, 24.

4. By his folly and inconsiderateness, he does not weigh with himself the
absurdity of his so living, he still goes out of himself in labor after
riches, but never comes to himself, to reason and argue the case, or to call
himself to an account of his doings, Jer. 8.6. Luke 15.17. Ps. 4.5.

5. By his Inhumanity and self-cruelty, denying those comforts to himself,
which God has given him, using himself worse than God would have the Ox used
in the Law, Deuteronomy. 25.4. Treading out the corn, and yet muzling himself, Chap.
6.2.

6. By the groundlesness of this cruelty, He has none, while he lives, for
whom he does it, and when de dies, he leaves no heir, kinsman, second to enjoy
it, but undergoes all his toil, and bereaves himself of all comfort, for he
knows not whom, Ps. 39.6. The censure of all which is, that it is vanity, and a
very sore and grievous affliction.

V. 9. Two are better than one] Good more than one: so the comparative uses to
be expressed; as Chap. 7.1, 2, 3, 5, 8. Prove. 8.11. Hag. 2.10. upon occasion of
the solitary life of this miser, he shows the benefit of society, and mutual
helpfulness which thereby one man affords unto another, therefore God made
woman for a companion and an helper unto man, Genesis 2.18. and Christ sent forth
his Disciples by Two and Two, Mar. 6.7. Luke 10.1. not only that they might be
joyful witnesses of the truth which they were to deliver, as Moses and Aaron,
Joshua and Zorobbabel, in reference unto whom we read of, Two witnesses, Rev.
11.3, 4. and in that respect the Apostle usually joyneth one or two more to
himself in the inscription of his Epistles, as joint witnesses of the truth of
the doctrine therein delivered, 1 Cor. 1.1. 2 Cor. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. Coloss. 1.1.
1 These. 1.1. But withal, That they might with more ease and success carry on
the ministry, wherein they were employed, and help mutually to strengthen, to
encourage, to comfort one the other.

because they have a good reward for their labour] Or, a Benefit mutually from
each other in their labor, by counsel, by comfort, by assistance and
cooperation, by supply of any want, or infirmity which may befall each other,
1 Samuel 23.16, 17. 2 Cor. 8.18, 19, 22. Act. 13.2, 5. Prove. 27.17. Act. 19.29.
Phil. 4.3. They do both promote the common good, they do the more easily
compass it, they do the more sweetly enjoy it. This mutual benefit is further
opened (...) some particulars of mutual danger, mutual rest, and mutual defense.

V. 10. If they fall,] That is, if one or either of them fall, the plural is
used distributively or partitively to either of the singulars: as, The wicked
men they fly, Prove. 28.1. i. e. every man. She shall be saved, if they abide,
1 Timothy 2.15. i. e. if any of them abide. Falling, here, may be understood in
all senses, for corporal falls, into a pit, from a horse or the like.
Metaphorically, if they fall into diseases, disgraces, dangers. Spiritually,
into sins or errors. In any adversities, The society of friends is useful to
pity, to restore, to support, to convince, to comfort. Whereas such a solitary
worldling as he spoke of before, is forsaken of all, and has none to stand to
him. This is sometimes the lot of the godly in trouble, but then God stands by
them, Ps. 22.11. 2 Timothy 4.16, 17.

But woe to him that is alone] Woe to him, is in the Original, one word made of
two; as is observed out of Kimchi. It is here an interjection of grieving, with
a denouncing of some evil which is coming toward a man: It is once more used
in this Book, Chap. 10.16. and hardly at all elsewhere in that sense. Woe to
him that is alone, or, to him that One, when he falls, and there is not a
second to lift him up.

V. 11. Again, if two lie together, then they have heat, etc.] This also may be
understood not only literally, as 1 Reg. 1.1, 2. but metaphorically for all
kind of mutual assistance, and encouragement in any work which is to be done,
Heb. 10.24. Luke 24.32.

V. 12. And if one prevail against him] i. e. Some stranger or third person
assault, and be too hard for him, that is, for one of the two, then two or
three shall stand against that One, and shall be easily able to resist him. See
2 Samuel 10.11. Jer. 41.13, 14. Ps. 127.5. This is another benefit of society and
friendship, aid and protection against assaults, whether outward, or spiritual
in Temptations from Satan. In all those, and so proportionably in all other
cases, in war, in peace, in danger, in business, day and night, in the
multitude of counselors there is safety, Prove. 11.14. and 14.22. provided that
this Society be undertaken in the fear of God, and in good and lawful things,
otherwise, combinations in wickedness are cursed, Ps.64.5, 6, 7. Ps. 83.3 -- 9.
Nahum 1.10, 12. Prove. 11.21.

two shall withstand him] Or, stand before him with confidence and courage to
help one another. Standing, is a military posture, Ephesians. 6.11, 13, 14. Ps.
94.16. Esther 8.11. Standing before one, as an enemy to destroy him, Rev.
12.4. Hence that expression of looking one another in the face, 2 Chronicles. 25.17.

a threefold cord, or a triple twisted thread, is not easily broken.] A Proverb
setting forth the strength and benefit of concord and society.

V. 13. Better is a poor and wise child, etc.] From this verse to the end of
the Chapter, Solomon proceeds to set forth the vanity of the Highest and most
eminent condition amongst men, namely, of Kingly dignity, which he shows both
in foolish and wilful Princes, who refuse to be counseled, and in all other,
be they never so circumspect. To manifest the former, he takes first one of
the most contemptible persons one could think on, and compares him with one of
the most honorable, a child to an aged man, a poor child to a potent King.
Childhood is alone very contemptible, and exposed to neglect and scorn; looked
on as rash, heady, unstayed, without judgment or experience, Isa. 3, 4, 5. 1
Reg. 3.7. 1 Cor. 14.20. Ephesians. 4.14. 2 Chronicles. 13.7. Hereunto poverty being added,
will make such an one much more neglected, Eccles. 9.15. Jam. 2.3, 6. Prove.
14.20. 1 Timothy 5.12. on the other side, old age alone is venerable, though but
in an ordinary person, Lev. 19.32. Isa. 3.2, 3. Gray hairs alone are a Crown,
and beauty, Prove. 16.31. how much more honorable, when they are joined with a
Crown; yet this poor child being wise, is preferred before that aged King being
foolish and intractable; as Prove. 19.1. The wisdom of such a child here, is
his knowledge of God in his word, whereby a young man is instructed how to
order his ways, as that of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. Ps. 119.99, 100. The
foolishness of such a Prince is, He knows not to be admonished, He cannot
counsel himself, and he will not be counseled by others. So, not to know, does
import a foolish obstinacy and impotency in the mind, a neglect of what is
offered unto a man to consider of, Isa. 56.11. and 7.16. contrary to that which
is called knowing, or considering in the heart, Deuteronomy. 8.5. Prove. 29.7.

Here we see, 1. That wisdom makes the meanest person honorable, makes the
face shine, Chap. 8.1.

2. That the fear of God teaches children wisdom, 2 Timothy 3.15. 1 Samuel 16.18.
and 18.5. Ps. 119.98, 100. Dan. 1.20.

3. That intractableness of heart against counsel, is an evidence of folly.
Solomon, though the wisest of Princes, yet had a Counsel about him of aged and
the most able men, whose counsel Rehoboam rejecting, showed his weakness, 2 Chronicles. 10.6. and 13.17.

4 That old age, and power, without a corrective of wisdom, are very likely to
render men wilful, and opinionative, Job 32.9.

V. 14. For out of prison he comes to reign] Out of the house of men bound,
Judge. 16.21. Genesis 40.3, 7. Isa. 14.17. from the midst of bonds and fetters. He
cometh] Namely, the poor and the wise child: For these words are a confirmation
of those before, from the event which happens to both, The wisdom of the child
advances him from a prison to a throne, from chains to a Crown. The obstinacy
and folly of the other, hurrieth him from power to poverty; from honor to
contempt. Out of prison he comes to reign i. e. from the lowest and most
obscure condition, Job 5.11. Ps. 113.7, 8. Genesis 41.14, 39 -- 44. 2 Samuel 7.8.
Dan. 2.25, 48. and 3.26, 30. and 6.3.

whereas also he that is born in his kingdom becomes poor] Or, whereas he in
his kingdom is born poor, i. e. is made poor. So passing from one condition to
another, is a kind of birth: but the other sense is more emphatical, he who
from his childhood was a King, and in actual possession of his Throne, becomes
poor, Ps. 149.8. Job 12.19, 20, 21. 2 Chronicles. 33.11. and 36.3, 4, 6. 2 Reg.
25.6, 7. Dan. 4.30 -- 33.

V. 15. I considered all the living, which walk under the Sun, with the second
child that shall stand up in his stead] These two verses set forth another
vanity attending upon Kingly power, not for the fault of the person, but
through the inconstant and fickle disposition of the people, who ever have, and
ever will be given to changes, worship the rising Sun, and grow weary of him
who is likely soonest to leave them.

all the living] That is, all the present generation of men living under a
present Prince or Government. He speaks of the generality of men, and therefore
expresses them under a general notion of living men, Job. 30.23. Dan. 4.17.
And withal, to intimate a ground in them of what he here considered, when the
father is going away, and the son ready to succeed, they think that they must
live and be preserved by the living, and not by the dead, and accordingly
worship him under whom they expect protection and preservation of life; for,
for that end was Government instituted, 1 Timothy 2.2.

which walk under the sun] Elsewhere, which see the sun, Chap. 7.11. another
expression intimating this to be the popular humor of the generality of men,
o^ the vulgar people, who go up and down the streets; as the vulgar are
distinguished from the greater and nobler sort, Jer. 5.1, 4, 5. or walking may
be joined with the following words, viz.

with the second child] I observe that the generality of people walk with the
second child, join themselves unto him, and flatter and crouch to him,
forsaking in their affections and behaviors the father, because he is about to
forsake them.

which shall stand up in his stead] Namely, in the fathers or predecessors
stead. By standing up, he means, rising to the Throne, Dan. 11.2. they look
on the predecessor as falling, sinking, lying down, stooping toward the grave,
and therefore apply themselves to his heir. Whereby he notes as the
unhappiness of Princes, who if they live long, live to see their glory dye
before themselves; so the fickleness of the generality of the people, who do
not honor Rulers for their office sake, as they ought to do; and especially
should reverence it the more, by how much the more experience they have had of
happiness under it, Romans 13.1 -- 5. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. but honor them merely
out of interest and self-respect, not considering so much present duty, as
future advantage. There is naturally in the minds of the people a weariness of
being long under one Prince, a querulousness and repining at every thing which
pincheth them, and thereupon a desire to change him for the next, not so much
out of choice or assurance that he will be better, but out of natural levity
and inconstancy; as sick men change beds, chambers, couches, but carry their
disease with them, they love changes for the very change sake, 1 Samuel 8.5, 18,
19, 20. and 12.12, 13. 2 Samuel 15.12. 1 Reg. 2.15. 2 Samuel 20.2. Prove. 14.21.

V. 16. There is no end of all the people, etc.] By all the people, he means
the giddy and inconstant multitude, whose levity and discontent with their
present estate, is the cause that they thus desire continual changes, and
reject to day whom yesterday they adored. There is no end of all the people, or
to all the people] There are infinite numbers of people in every age and
generation who stand thus affected: it is not a contingent or unusual thing,
but very common. It is not a vanity which Princes have experience of only
sometimes, as in some few persons; but it is the general disease of the vulgar,
to stand thus variously affected toward their Princes in all ages. So this
phrase, There is no end, is used to express a great or infinite number, Isa.
2.7. supra, verse. 8. Job 22.5. Nahum. 3.3. Again, There is no end to all the
people] The people never put an end or a stop to this vanity, but it passes
on, from one generation to another. They which went before did so, so do these
now, and so will they do which follow. 3. By no end, may be meant no
satisfaction to desires, no through and fixed acquiescency of heart in the
people toward their Princes, they will still entertain expectations of new
men, and new events to satisfy their desires. So the word End, is used for
that wherein the heart may acquiesce, and look no further for something else,
Prove. 23.18. They do not terminate and fix their affections in one man, be he
never so wise or worthy, but grow weary of him, and join themselves unto his
Successor.

even of all those that have been before them] Namely, before the father and
the son, or successor which was second unto him. The word [ before] may
signify either in the presence of them, i. e. who have been officers under
them, or done service, and born allegiance to them, 2 Samuel 16.19. 1 Reg. 10.8.
or else an antecedence in time unto them. They who were before them, did thus
languish in their affections to the father, and apply themselves unto the son.

They also that come after shall not rejoice in him] i. e. In the son, unto
whom now they seem so zealously, and with so much loyalty to join themselves.

not rejoyce] That is, they will be weary of him, troubled with him, wish
themselves freed from him. The verb negative by a (...), seems to import the
Affirmative contrary unto it, as is usual in Scripture, Exodus 20.7. Prove.
17.21. Zach. 8.^7. Romans 4.19. This then is Hereditary to all people, There is
no End of it, they can never be settled or contented with the present estate, as
they before did dislike the father in expectation of the son, so they after
will cast off the son in expectation of the grandchild, and so it will be in
all generations.

This is vanity and vexation of spirit] This must needs be matter of
indignation and grief to Princes, to see so much falseness and inconstancy in
their people, to see their Honor grow old and decrepit with their bodies.

CHAP. V.
THe Wise man having spoken of the vanity which attends on the very highest
condition of men here below; seems here to make a kind of digression, and to go
yet higher unto the consideration of that which principally concerns man in
this Life, to wit, The worship of God. This is the supreme Remedy of all the
other Vanities, and may seem here to be subjoyned (as also it is in the end of
the Book) to that purpose, to show, that though neither knowledge, nor
pleasures, nor honors, nor crowns can make men happy, though it be beyond the
sphere and activity of any Creature to administer complete tranquillity to the
heart of a man, yet even in this life a man may be happy by worshipping of God,
and Communion with him. As if he should have said, We have gone through the
World, and sought high there for satisfaction, as ever any man could arrive,
even to Crowns and Thrones, and yet have missed of it. It remains therefore
that we go higher yet, before we can be truly happy, and that is from the World
to the Sanctuary; from the Thrones of Princes, to the Thrones of Grace; from
the Creature, to God, In whose service alone there is complete felicity.

But besides this I take it, the scope of the wise man is, by way of Prolepsis
or answer to a tacit objection, to discover yet a higher and a stranger vanity
than any he had spoken of before, namely vanity in the worship of God, not as
it is in it self, but as it is performed by vain and foolish men. They might
say, we do easily agree with you in all that you have said, we know we must
look above the Creatures, if ever we intend to arrive at true Happiness.
Therefore what pains soever we take about things under the Sun, yet we seek for
our Happiness* no where but in God, and in his service. Solomon now,
acknowledging the truth of this in the Thesis, That the Worship of God is the
true felicity of man in this life, does withal assure these men, that they may
put vanity in the very Worship of God, and render that by their foolish and
carnal performance wholly unprofitable to any such end, yea there may be
therein diverse vanities, verse. 7. for discovery and avoiding whereof, he
prescribes a solemn caveat to those, who being convinced of vanity in the
Creatures* do go to God in his Worship to mend themselves.

This is, 1. General, relating to all parts of Gods Worship, which is in our
Approache^ unto God, to look to our affections, and to prepare our hearts to
meet with him, not resting in outward sacrifices, which are but the oblations
of fools, who think they do well, when in truth they do the contrary, verse. 1.

2. Particular, in some species of worship:

1. In Hearing, which he says must be done with Readiness, with a docile and
tractable spirit, yielding up it self to the whole counsel of God, verse. 1.

2. In Prayer and speaking unto God, where is first condemned a double Vanity*
Rashness of tongue, Hastiness of heart, both enforced by consideration of
Gods Greatness, and of our own Vileness, verse. 2. Secondly, prescribed
fewness of words, without vain and unnecessary babbling, and that because of
Gods Majesty, and the folly of so doing, verse. 3.

3. In Vows, which being once made, are to be performed, and that cheerfully,
without grudging or delay; which doctrine he does, 1. prove, 2. vindicate from
shiftings and excuses. He proves it, 1. By the the folly of the contrary
course, it argues a levity of spirit to dally, and to be off and on with God,
who as he is constant himself in all his Promises, so he expects constancy
from us in all ours. 2. By Gods dislike of such folly and falseness, verse. 4.

Next he vindicateth it from a double excuse which men are apt to make:

1. It was free for me to vow; the thing was in mine own power, therefore it is
not so heinous a thing though I do fail, because I was not bound to what I
vowed till I had vowed it. This he answers, That it had been better to have
kept this Liberty still, and not to have vowed, then after vows to resume
Liberty when it is too late, verse. 5.

2. But I was mistaken, there was an Error in my Vow. To this he gives a
double answer, and sets it on with weighty considerations: First, Look well
before thou vow, that thou do not bring a bond of sin upon thy self: Suffer not
thy mouth to cause thee to sin. Secondly, Take heed of pretending error and
oversight, out of unwillingnesse to do what thou have promised: Say not that it
was an error. For consider, 1. Thou art in the presence of the Angel. 2. Thou
provokest Gods anger. 3. The damage which by that anger thou will suffer, he
will destroy the work of thy hands, disappoint thee in that benefit, the
preservation whereof thou did aim at in excusing thy Vow. 4. The folly of
such vain excuses. There is a vanity in all parts of Worship when undertaken by
fools or wicked men: the fools sacrifice, verse. 1. the fools voice, verse. 3.
the fools vow, verse. 4. Diverse vanities in all this, verse. 7.

Now having showed the vanities in the carnal performance of Divine Worship, he
does (as he had done formerly in the other Vanities which he spoke of before)
prescribe a Remedy of this also, viz. The inward principle of all Right and
spiritual Worship which is to fear God, verse. 7.

And because it might be objected, That Piety it self is not likely to secure a
man's tranquillity and peace, in as much as we find poor and righteous men every
where, all a Province over, oppressed and persecuted by great men in high
place: he removes this objection, 1. By showing the compassion of God and his
Justice, He sees and regards it. 2. The greatness and power of God, that he is
higher then any of those that oppress his servants, verse. 8.

Now he proceeds to another Vanity, which is in Riches and outward
possessions. They are of two sorts;

1. Substantial and Real wealth, in the profits and Fruits of the Earth, Corn,
Cattle, etc.

2. Instrumental, in that which is by men's agreement made a measure to other
wealth, viz. silver and gold. Concerning both which he shows, 1. The
excellency of the former, in regard of real and general profit, before the
later, verse 9. 2. The vanity both of the one and the other, when 1.
inordinately loved. 2. Immoderately increased.

This vanity is showed, 1. Absolutely, in that the Inordinate love of them is
unsatisfiable, verse. 10. and that troubles and cares are proportionably
increased in the Increase of them, verse. 11.

2. Comparatively, and that 1. in respect of any Real benefit and good in the
fruition of them. The owner has no more true profit by them, (further then
that he looks on them as his own) then any of his friends and servants, who are
fed and clothed by them as well as he: only his cares are increased. 2. In
respect of consequent rest and quietness, the servants heart is less troubled,
his body more refreshed then the owners, verse. 12. 3. In regard of the evil
effects of Riches:

1. The damage and hurt which sometimes a man lays up with them against
himself, verse. 13.

2. The uncertainty of their abode with a man, having hurt the owners, they
perish themselves, verse. 14.

3. The certainty of parting with them, They must dye, they cannot carry one
handful away with them, verse. 15, 16.

4. The sordid and uncomfortable use of them, verse. 17.

5. Impatiency and fretfulnesse in parting with them, or in getting of them,
verse. 17.

Lastly, he gives the Remedy of this Vanity and Vexation, in the right use of
Riches, viz. In a free and cheerful enjoyment of them: which is here commended,

1. By its goodness to the owners.

2. By its comeliness and commendablenesse toward others.

3. By its Equity, It is the fruit of a man's Own Labor, and provided for his
Own Life.

4. The End of it, and his Right to it, It is His Portion, all that he is ever
like to get by it, verse. 18.

5. The Author of it, it is a special gift of God, 1. To give Riches. 2. To
g^ve an heart to enjoy them, verse. 19.

6. Freedom hereby from the trouble of all his Labors, when himself tastes
the fruit of them, and has experience of Gods special blessing, in answering
the desires of his heart, and causing him comfortably to enjoy them, verse. 20.

Verse. 1. KEep thy foot when thou go to the house of God] He had gone up and
down the World, from Learning to Pleasures, from Pleasures to Honors, from
Honors to Thrones, to find out Happiness, and had met with nothing but
Vanity. Now he sends us to a fitter place to find it, The House of God, whether
his Temple, or other Synagogues, where God is present to those that serve him,
here they shall find remedies against the vanity of other things, and that
which will stay and fix their hearts, Psalm. 73.16, 17. Psalm. 4.6, 7. Only we
must take heed of putting vanity into Gods Worship, lest we be there
disappointed of our ayms, as well as elsewhere. This Caveat he gives us in
those words, Keep thy foot] or, each foot. The letters are plural, the points
direct to read it in the singular number. So foot, for feet, Psalm. 119.105.
This Enallage of numbers is very usual, the singular for the plural; as Psalm.
14.1. The fool has said, etc. They, i. e. fools are corrupt. In that day a man
shall cast away his idols which they have made, Esaias 2.20.

Keep thy foot] Seriously advise how thou art to behave thy self in Gods
presence, look to thy heart and affections, let thy heart be fixed, thy
affections composed, thy thoughts ordered, call all that is within thee
together to serve him, Psalm. 57.7. and 103.1. A Metaphor from men that walk in
dangerous ways, who take heed to their steps lest they stumble and fall: Or
rather an allusion to the speech of God to Moses, Exodus 3.5. So Exodus 19.21.
Josh. 5.15. As Mephibosheth dressed his feet, when he went to David, 2 Samuel
19.24. So they used washings, and purifyings before they came into Gods
presence, Exodus 19.14 15. Number. 8.7. Psalm. 26.6. Heb. 10.22. Lev. 19.30. and
16.2, 3. Genesis 28.16, 17. Exodus 40.32.

and be more ready to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools] Or, Draw near
to hear, rather then with, or as fools, to offer a sacrifice, who think to be
accepted for their outward work. The Infinitive used for the Imperative, as
Exodus 20.8. Matthew. 5.39. Luke 22.42. or we may read it in the Infinitive, thus,
for to draw near to hear, i. e. to bring before God an obedient heart, is
better then when fools do give a sacrifice. Or, then to give a sacrifice of
fools. He does not forbid or condemn sacrifices, but he prefers obedience,
and shows the vanity and folly of those, who are very forward in the outward
acts of Religion, without the love and service of the heart, 1 Samuel 15.22. Hos.
6.6. Isa. 1.11 -- 18. Amos 5.21, 22, 23, 24. Psalm. 50.17. and 51.16, 17. Isa.
66.2, 3. Prove. 15.8, 21, 27.

be more ready] The word is, Draw near to Hear. It is a word very frequently
used in Scripture, to express our addressing our selves unto the solemn Service
and Worship of God, Lev. 1.9. 1 Samuel 14.36. 2 Reg. 16.12. Psalm. 73.28. Isa.
5.8.2. Ezekiel. 44.15, 16. Matthew. 15.8. whereunto there is a frequent allusion in
the New Testament, Ephesians. 2.18. Heb. 4.16. and 7.25. and 10.1, 22. and 11.6. It
imports a serious composing of our hearts, in an humble, reverend, and holy
manner to appear before God, and to have a comfortable access unto the Throne
of grace, Lev. 10.3. Heb. 12.28, 29.

to hear] Whereas there are two parts of Worship, sacrifice and obedience, be
thou most careful of this, which is the spiritual and inward part of service,
rather then of that which fools, hypocrites, wicked men can offer as well as
thou. Be ready to receive Instruction, and to accept of what God says, Psalm.
85.8. Job 34.32. 1 Samuel 3.10. Act. 9.6. and 10.33. Jam. 1.19. Be ready to obey
and give up thy will to every one of Gods holy Commandments, Psalm. 119.128.

then to offer the sacrifice of fools] Then as fools, ( i. e.) wicked men do,
to offer up sacrifice, and neglect obedience, Mich. 6.6, 7, 8.

for they consider not, know not, that they do evil.] Some would have the word,
But, to be supplied, They know not but to do evil: They can only do evil, even
when they worship God; as Isa. 1.6. See Chap. 2.24. Others thus, non attendunt
ad facere malum, or ad factionem malt: which is to the sense of our Version.
They are here called fools, and that is further expressed, by want of
knowledge: They know not, and that does further appear by doing of evil, Isa.
1.3, 4. Jer. 8.9. The most natural sense is, as we render it, They know not
that they do evil: when they do evil, they consider it not, they understand it
not; the like phrase, 1 John 2.6, 9. (...). He that says to abide, (i.) that
he abides. He that says to be in the light, (i.) that he is in the light. So
here, They know not to do evil, (i.) that they are doing of evil. And hereby is
meant by an Auxesis, they think they do very good service; So when the Lord is
said not to command a thing, the meaning is, that he does forbid it, Lev. 10.1.
He will not hold them guiltless that take his Name in vain, (i.) he will hold
them very guilty, Exodus 20.7. He will withhold no good thing from them that
walk upright, (i.) He will largely supply them, Psalm. 84.12. He will not break
a bruized reed, (i.) he will bind them up and strengthen them, Isa. 42.3.
Abraham was not weak in faith, (i.) he was strong, Romans 4.19. Men may think
they do God good service, when they do greatly offend him, Isa. 66.5. Prove.
14.12. Isa. 58.2, 3. Hos. 8.2, 3. Joh. 16.2. Act. 26.9.

These things are here observable;

1. That in Gods Worship we do in a special manner draw nigh unto him.

2. That when we do so, we ought to prepare and compose our hearts and
affections by faith and humility to appear before God.

3. That a prepared heart brings purposes of obedience, and to hear God in all
that he shall say unto it.

4. That mere outward service without the heart prepared obediently to serve
the Lord, is but a sacrifice of Fools, a mere formal and ceremonial worship.

5. That Hypocrites may think they please God, when indeed they provoke him,
and know not that they do evil, Joh. 4.22.

V. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth] Having spoken in general of the due
preparation of the heart unto Gods service, he now gives direction in the
particulars of prayer and vows.

Be not rash] Go not about Gods Worship as men that in a fright or terror
being amazed, fly hastily they know not whither. Do not precipitate thy words,
nor speak any thing hastily, unadvisedly, according to the dictate of carnal
and hasty desires before God, or in his house and presence. We know not what to
ask as we ought, Romans 8.26. and are very apt to put our own greedy and sudden
passions into prayers, complaints, deprecations, to think God deals not well
with us if we be not answered according to our wills, and in our own time,
Psalm. 31.22. and 116.11. Job 10.2, 3, 18. Jer. 15.18. Jon. 4.2, 3. Matthew.
20.20, 21. Psalm. 77.7 -- 10.

and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God] Out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.34. Therefore the remedy
of rashness in our words, is to compose our thoughts and affections aright; to
let our heart guide our tongue, not to bring raw, tumultuary, indigested
thoughts into Gods presence, but to get a collected heart, to pray with
understanding, with spirit, with judgment, and according to Gods Will; as David
found his heart to pray to God, 2 Samuel 7.27. and called together his scattered
affections, that he might fix them upon God, Psalm. 103.1. Dan. 9.2, 3. Romans
8.26, 27. 1 Cor. 14.15. 1 John 5.14.

We may likewise understand the Caveat, as directed against that carnal pride
and contradiction of spirit, whereby the heart is apt to rise against God and
his Word, when we hear of more spiritual service required by God, then our
foolish sacrifices do amount unto, or our carnal hearts are able to perform,
Jam. 1.19, 20. Romans 10.21. Acts 13.45. and 28.19.

before the Lord] That is, in his House or Sanctuary. Therefore they who sin
here, are said to provoke the Lord to his very face, and to do evil before his
eyes, Isa. 65.3. and 66.3, 4.

for God is in heaven, and thou on the earth] These are two Arguments to
enforce this Caveat upon us; the one drawn from Gods greatness, the other from
our vileness* Mean persons behave themselves with all honor and reverence,
when they supplicate unto men of honor and eminency. Much more should men do
so unto God. So Christ teaches us in prayer to come unto God, as with
confidence and comfort, because he is a Father; so with reverence and fear,
because he is a Father in Heaven, Matthew. 6.9.

His being in Heaven denotes, 1. His dominion over us as Lord and Master, Ephesians.
6.9.

2. His glory and majesty above us, 1 Reg. 8.27. that we might learn to fear
before him, Mal. 1.6. Deuteronomy. 28.58. Heb. 12.18, 29.

3. His holiness and purity, Deuteronomy. 26.15. Isal. 57.15. and 63.15. Hereby to
raise us unto heavenly mindedness in our approaches unto him, Col. 3.1, 2.
Lam. 3.40* 41.

4. H^s power to answer us, and to do for us according to our desires, 2 Chronicles.
20.6, 7. Psalm. 115.3. Matthew. 5.45. and 7.11.

5. His omniscience, he looks down on us, and sees how we behave our selves
in his presence, Matthew. 6.32. Psalm. 11.4. and 33.13, 14.

6. His justice and displeasure against evil doers, Psalm. 14.2, 3. Romans 1.18.
In all which respects, we ought to take heed of all hasty, rash, and unadvised
frame of heart in Gods presence. Man's being on earth, signifies his baseness
and vile condition, his great distance from God, and by reason of corruption,
his great dissimilitude unto him. He is of the earth earthly, 1 Cor. 15.47.
Psalm. 10.18. This consideration of our natural and sinful vileness, should
greatly humble us in our approaches unto God, Job 4.19, 25. and 4.5, 6. and
40.4. Genesis 18.17. Isa. 6.5.

therefore let thy words be few] First, use not rash and vain babbling, and
empty, heartless repetitions as the heathen, Mat. 6.7. but weigh and choose out
words to speak unto him, Job 9.14. Eccles. 12.10. He speaks not against all
length in prayer; for Christ prayed whole nights: nor against all repetition,
when it proceeds from zeal, love, and holy fervency; as that of Daniel, Chapter
9.16, 18, 19. but of that which is a clamorous and vain ingeminating of the
same thing without faith or wisdom, 1 Reg. 18.26. Secondly, let thy words be
few, (i. e.) Let not thy vows be more then thou may comfortably perform.

V. 3. For a dream comes through the multitude of business, and a fools voice
is known by multitude of words*] (i. e.) As multitude of business produces
dreams, so multitude of words discovers folly. When two sentences are
connected together by a Copula, there is frequently imported a similitude
between them, Prove. 17.3. and 25.23, 25, 26, 27. and 26.3, 7, 9, 11, 14, 17,
20, 21. Isa. 53.7. Another Argument moving unto the former duty, because, as
certainly as much business produces dreams, so much speech discovers folly
within, Prove. 10.19. Eccles. 10.11 -- 14. Jam. 3.2.

V. 4. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it.] He gives
direction in the other particular, wherein men use to address themselves unto
God, viz. Vows: And as he did in the former forbid rash hastiness, so he does
in this, warn to take heed of grudging delays. A vow is a solemn promise, or
permissory oath made unto God, wherein a man does voluntarily bind himself
unto something, which was in his own power to bind himself unto. He does not
direct us here to make such a vow, but having made it, to take heed of breaking
faith and promise with God, who never fails in any promise of his unto us,
Josh. 21.45. nor delayeth to perform it in its time, Exodus 12. 41, 51. Heb.
2.3. 2 Pet. 3.9. This then is the first Rule concerning vows, That lawful
vows must be speedily and cheerfully performed, Psalm. 66.13, 14. and 76.11.
Numb. 30.2. Deuteronomy. 13.21. Isai. 19.21. Matthew. 5.33. God would not have an
alteration in a vow, though it were for the better, Lev. 27.10. Thus Hanna made
haste to perform her vow in dedicating her child unto God, as soon as he was
weaned, 1 Samuel 1.11, 24, 28. God calls on Jacob, and minds him of his vow made
before, and expected that he should go to Bethel, and pay it as he had
promised, Genesis 35.1. compared with Genesis 28.20, 22.

for he has no pleasure in fools] He is greatly disple'sed with those, who go
about one while to flatter him in making a vow, and afterward to mock him in
refusing or delaying to perform it, Prove. 20.25. This is one reason, drawn from
the folly in offending God; whereunto there is another adjoined.

V. 5. Better it is that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow
and not pay] It was arbitrary, and in our own power to make the vow, for vows
were to be of things in a man's power, Numb. 30.3 -- 15. Deuteronomy. 23.22. Acts 5.4.
But it is not in our power whether, being made, we will pay it or no, for we
bring a bond upon our souls, and the vows of God will be upon us, Psalm. 56.12.

V. 6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin] These words contain the
second Rule concerning Vows, which is to teach us to avoid all rash Vows
which are unadvisedly made, and that is done two ways;

1. When we vow things sinful, when our mouth causes us to sin,

2. When in lawful things we vow, and presently repent, seeking after shifts
and evasions to elude the obligation, and to excuse our selves. Suffer not thy
mouth, by making an hasty vow, to cause thy flesh] That is, thy tongue, or thy
self to sin. Flesh is taken by a Synecdoche, for ^he whole man, Genesis 6.12.
Isai. 40.5. Romans 3.20. It may seem here to be used for the whole man, to
intimate, that rash vows are usually grounded upon fleshly, rather then
spiritual reasons. A man did not go about them with his soul and spirit, upon
solemn and serious grounds, but to gratify himself in some carnal interest or
other, or to carry on some sinful end, Acts 23.12, 13. Mal. 1.14. 2 Samuel 15.8,
9. Prove. 7.14. A like expression, Eccl. 11.10.

neither say thou before the Angel] By the Angel some do understand the Priest,
or Messenger of the Lord toward the people; so they are called, Job 33.23.
Mal. 2.7. Rev. 1.20. for in the case of an Oath, wherein there was error or
ignorance, the person was to bring a sacrifice, and the Priest was to make an
atonement for him, Lev. 5.4, 5, 6. And then the meaning is, Do not when thou
have vowed, repent and grudge, and go to the Priest, acknowledging an error or
ignorance, that so thou may save charges, and lick thy self whole, by
offering a sacrifice to excuse a vow. Others, understand the Angels of heaven,
who are sent forth for the good of the Elect, and who observe our behavior in
Gods Worship; as that in the Apostle uses to be understood, 1 Cor. 11.10.
Matthew. 18.10. Luke 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.21. the Greek reads it, (...). Before God; it
may happily be meant of the Temple or House of God, where they did pay their
vows, Psalm. 66.13. wherein there were Cherubims drawn, in token of the
presence of the Angels, and their protection to the Church, 1 Reg. 6.29, 32.
Others, understand it of Christ, who is the searcher of hearts, and will not be
mocked, cannot be deceived; who is the Angel of the Covenant, and who is in the
midst of his people, his Candlesticks, when they come to Worship, Exodus 23.20,
21. called the presence of God, Exodus 33.14. Mal. 3.1. Isa. 63.9. Josh. 12.41.
It seems to me to have some allusion to the history of Balaam, who when the
Angel stood in the way against him, made such an excuse as this, It was an
error, I knew not that thou stoodst against me, if it displease thee, I will
go back, Numb. 22.34.

That it was an errour] That is, either do not vow so rashly and unadvisedly,
as to be at last brought to a necessity of confessing a sinful error, but
advise before hand that thou may not err. Such a rash vow was that of
Jephthah, Judge, 11.30, 31, 35. and that other of Saul, 1 Samuel 14.24, 29, 39,
40. Or else, do not excuse thy self for breaking thy vow, by saying, thou did
it imprudently, and were mistaken in it, it was an ignorance which thou art
willing, by some sacrifice, or other way of devotion to expiate; as sacrifices
were to be offered for the ignorances of the people, Levit. 2.27. Numb. 15.24,
25. Heb. 9.7. Do not cover a wilful prevarication with a specious pretense,
nor after vows make enquiry, Prove. 20.25.

wherefore should God be angry at thy voice] The word signifies foaming anger;
why should he through anger foam against thee? An interrogation of dehorting.
As, Why will ye dye, (i. e.) Be careful that you may not dye. This is one
reason, God will be angry. Another, Thou shall feel his anger, he will destroy
the Work of thy hand, He will not bless those endeavors, for the
accomplishing whereof thou did make that vow; thou destroyest the vow, he
will destroy thy work, Deuteronomy. 28.15, etc. The third follows.

V. 7. For in the multitude of dreams, and many words, there are many vanities:
but fear thou God] Or, In multitude of dreams, there are also vanities: and so
in many words. Or, as in multitude of dreams, so also ^f words there are diverse
vanities. Some take (...) not for a Noun, but for the Infinitive mood of the
Verb; and render it thus, Quia sicut in multiplicare, or, quando multiplicantur
somnia, etiam vanitates multiplicantur: sic se habent verba multa. As when
dreams are multiplied, vanities also are multiplied, so is it in many words. In
all, the sense is the same. Mercer, a most learned Interpreter, makes the
connection and sense to be thus, I have given thee these cautions to be tender
of thy behavior in the presence of God, that thou may not by dreams,
fancies, vanities, or multitude of difficult businesses, be brought to utter
any thing rashly before God, but amidst all dangers or dreams, or vanities, or
difficulties, to fear God, and not to suffer thy self to be withdrawn from him
by any temptations. But the words seem to prescribe the same remedy against
rash vows, as before against other hasty addresses unto God, verse. 3. There is
a (...) in the conjunction copulative, as elsewhere, Genesis 43.8. and. 25.34. The
plural and vanitates, is as much, as plurima vanitas, great vanity, or many
vanities; as Prove. 1.20. Wisdoms, (i.) principal or excellent wisdom, Isa.
64.6. Our righteousnesses, ( i.) most righteous action, Genesis 19.11.
Blindnesses, ( i.) Thick and through blindness: Psalm. 45.15. With gladnesses,
( i.) with great gladness: 2 Pet. 3.11. What manner of persons ought we to be
in holy conversations and godlinesses, (i.) In all manner of holy conversation
and godliness: Cant. 5.16. His palate is sweetnesses, and he is altogether, or
every whit of him is desires, (i.) Most sweet, and most desirable: Dan. 9.23. A
man of desires, (i.) Greatly desired o^ beloved: Isai. 53.3. A man of sorrows,
(i.) Full of sorrows.

but fear thou God] This is the remedy of all vanities in Worship, to serve God
rather with inward reverence and fear, then with rash, hasty, many, formal,
empty expressions. The fear of God is the foundation of all holy duties, Chap.
12.13. Isa. 29.13. Deuteronomy. 28.58. Mal. 1.6. Heb. 12.28, 19.

V. 8. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent, etc.] The
connection of these words with the former, st^nds thus: The fear of God does
many times expose men unto injury and violence, and that every where, all a
Province and Country over, and that not only from ordinary persons, but from
great men, and that without remedy; because, if happily they have recourse unto
judgment and justice for ease, even they find wresting, perverting, distorting
of justice: So that a man's tranquillity in this life, may seem to be but little
mended by Piety and fear of God, whereby he is in danger of being reduced to
poverty and distress. This is a stumbling block, which may cause men to be
offended at the ways of God, Matthew. 11.5, 6. and 13.21. Gal. 5.11. and good
men have stumbled at it, Psalm. 73.12, 13. Against this temptation, he here
subjoyns a seasonable antidote, they should not be much amazed at it, but
rather comfort themselves, that there lies an appeal to a higher Court, where
they shall certainly be righted, and their innocence vindicated. If thou see
the oppression of the poor; and that such oppression, as that thou have no
remedy against it, but it is powerful enough to wry and pervert judgment: And
yet further, no escape from it, but it meets with thee all the Nation or
Province over. If you see a poor man that fears God, not only suffer under the
meanness of his condition, but under fraud, calumny, rapine, violence, where
ever he goes; as Ezekiel. 18.12, 18. Job 20, 19. Mic. 3.2. Job 24.2 -- 12, and
19.7, 8. Psalm. 74.20. Jer. 6.6, 7. and 20.8. Ezekiel. 8.17.

marvel not at the matter] Be not amazed or astonished at it: so much the word
imports, Isa. 13.8. Job 26.11. Think it not a strange thing, 1 Pet. 4.12* Do
not think hardly of God, nor distrust his Providence, or grow weary of his
service. What wonder at all is it to see power crush poverty; or wickedness
suppress Piety? Psalm. 37.8, 9.

at the matter] Or, at the will, or purpose, to wit, of God, in suffering, and
ordering this thing: for these things happen not without his appointment and
providence, Hab. ^.12. Isa. 10.5. Psalm. 17.13.

for he that is higher then the highest regards, and there be higher then
they] Higher, viz. God, who is higher: the relative without the antecedent,
which is very usual: or, The High from above; The High regards it. It seems
to be a vehement and emphatical Anadiplosis: the same word is used for from
above, Genesis 27.39. and 49.25. This kind of elegant and emphatical repetition is
frequent in the Scripture, Psalm. 22.1. Jer. 7.4. and 22.29. Ezekiel. 21.27. 2 Samuel
18.33. 1 Reg. 18.39. Judge. 5.30. Psalm. 98.4, 5, 6. and 124.1, 2. Hos. 2.2. Dan.
10.19. And according to this sense, God is said in a way of Judgment to look
down from heaven upon the violence of great men, and to speak from thence in
his wrath unto them, Psalm. 2.4, 5. and 11.4, 5, 6. Exodus 2.23, 24. 1 Samuel 9.16.
Psalm. 93.4. Or, He that is higher then the High, God, who is the High above all
the Earth, the High and Mighty One, above the Potentates of the World, who are
called High ones, Isa. 24.21. Isa. 2.11, 12. 2 Samuel 23.1. He that is King of
kings, and Lord of lords, Higher then the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27.

regardeth] Observes the violence of proud men to avenge it. Or keeps the
poor who are oppressed by them, Isa. 3.14. Prove. 22.22, 23. Psalm. 10.12 -- 18.
and 11.5. and 68.5. and 72.14.

and there ^e higher then they] Namely, The Holy Angels, who are sent forth for
the good of the Church, Heb. 1.14. who pitch their tents about believers, and
are Guardians over them, Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11. who behold the face of God as
Ministers ready to execute his commands in behalf of them, Matthew. 18.10. whose
service God is pleased to use in the punishment of Tyrants, and subversion of
States, Isa. 37.36. Act. 12.23.

V. 9. Moreover, the profit of the earth is for all] Here he returns to
consider the vanity of all kind of Riches; amongst which, though some are to be
preferred before others, as namely corn and cattle, which are the profits of
the earth, yet both the one and the other are unable to make the possessors of
them happy. Yet withal, the words may seem to have some relation to what went
before, namely, That God in his providence has so ordered things in the civil
body, That the Head cannot say to the Foot, I have no need of thee: the King
himself wants the help, and cannot subsist without the labor of poor men,
and that may be a check unto oppression and violence.

the profit of the earth is for all] Or, above all other profit. He commends
husbandry, consisting in tillage and grazing, above all other ways of gain, as
extending to the necessary supply of all men whatsoever; for bread is the
staff of life, Isa. 3.1. Genesis 41.55. Prove. 24.27. and 27.23, 24. and 31.16.
Adam even in Innocence was to have dressed the earth, Genesis 2.15. There is an
excellency or profit of the earth, in, or above all. The substantive is put for
an adjective of the superlative degree; as Genesis 12.2. Psalm. 21.7. and 88.9.
Cant. 5.16.

the King himself is served by the field] Or, the King himself is for the
field: or the King is served for the fields sake, that under him men may
quietly labor and eat the fruits of the earth: or the King himself dresseth
his field, is as it were a servant to his field to order and husband it. It
lies on him to take care of husbandry, that he and his people may be nourished.
The most simple meaning is to show, that from the meanest to the greatest, the
fruits of the earth are necessary for every man's supportance. Therefore Joseph
reserved the fifth of the fruits of the Earth for Pharaoh, Genesis 47.24. and it
is recorded for the commendation of King Uzziah, that he was a lover of
Husbandry, 2 Chronicles. 26.10.

V. 10. He that loves silver shall not ^e satisfied with silver; nor he that
loves abundance with increase] This may be understood either Absolutely by it
self, to set forth the unsatiable greediness of covetous wretches, whose
desires are like the grave, and never say, It is enough, Habak. 2.5, 6, 8, 9.
Isa. 5.8. or Comparatively, with relation to what was said before, There is a
profit and real benefit which the Earth brings unto those that labor about
it, but money though a man increase it never so much, and though it appear
never so lovely unto him, yet it cannot of it self satisfy any desire of
Nature; if a man be hungry, it cannot feed him; if naked, it cannot cloth him;
if cold, it cannot warm him; if sick, it cannot recover him. As it is an
instrument of traffic, which answers unto All things, Eccles. 10.19. So it
may be a defense to a man, Chap. 7.12. and may provide other things for him.
But if God should withhold the fruits of the Earth; and forbid that to bring
them forth, abundance of wealth would be as useless as so many stones: a man
has no good of money, nor of other ^rades, further then they purchase or
manage for us the fruits of the earth.

The later clause some thus render it, He that loves it, shall not have any
increase by, or in the abundance thereof. Increase here, is a word which
signifies Increase of the earth, such fruits as may be eaten: and money is not
fructus edulis, though it come out of the earth. But the prefix (...) set
before the word Abundance, being sometimes a note of the Accusative case, and
expressing the object of an Action, we may well record it as it is in our
Version; He that loves abundance; as Genesis 34.1. and 37.2. Prove. 9.5.
Multitude, or Abundance, here, is taken in the same kind, for gathered wealth,
as Psalm. 37.16.

V. 11. When goods increase, they aro increased that eat them] He showed the
vanity of the love of money; here he shows the vanity of Husbandry and great
possessions: or else goes on upon occasion of the last words, he that loves
abundance, shall not ^e satisfied with increase; because as his wealth
increases, his charge and family, and friends, and retinue will increase
likewise. The possessour can have no more real good, nor satisfaction from his
great estate, then his servants have, many hands must be set on work, and
consequently many bellies filled, many backs clothed, and they all have their
real share as fully, as he himself in the things which he possesses: no man
had greater experience of this then Solomon, of whose numerous Family, and
large expenses we read, 1 Reg. 4.22, 26. So we read of the great Family of
Abraham, Genesis 14.14.

and what good, or what profit is there to the owners thereof] Chap. 1.3. and
2.14. and 3.9.

saving the beholding of them with their eyes?] He has no advantage above
others, save that he sees them eat that, the property whereof is his: and this
is some good; for it is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive, Act.
20.35. or, he can only please himself with looking on his land on moneys as
his own, whereas the real benefit which they yield, does accrue unto others as
well as to himself. And if his eye have any advantage above his servants in
this respect, Theirs have an advantage above his in another; for they are
refreshed with sweet sleep, which his are usually deprived of.

V. 12. The s^eep of a laboring man] Or of a servant, or of him that tilleth
the ground, or is conversant about any painful trade and work, Genesis 4.2. 2 Samuel
9.10. Prove. 12.11. Isa. 19.9,

is sweet] Whether he eat little or much: If he eat little, his labor causes
sweet sleep: If much, his healthiness and strength causing good concoction,
does not suffer his sleep to be disquieted with crude and offensive vapors.
Besides labor taking up the mind, does free it from those careful thoughts
and covetings which are usually the hinderers of sweet sleep.

but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep] This may be
understood either of abundance of wealth, with the many cares, businesses,
fears, troubles, which are consequent thereupon, Genesis 41.29. Prove. 3.10. Luke
12.16, 17. or of fullness of diet, gluttony and excess of delicious fare, which
causes distempers, and so hinders sleep. This seems rather to be intended,
(because he mentioned eating before) and so to be directed against rich
Gluttons, who spend their time in riot, feasting and excess, and so overcharge
Nature with intemperance, beyond its strength, Luke 16.19. and 21.34. which
causes indigestion and malignant vapors whereby sleep is removed or
disquieted, Eccles. 8.16. Prove. 4.16, 17. and this is a great vexation; for
sweet sleep is a blessing of God to man, Psalm. 127.2. Prove. 3.24.

V. 13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun] An evil that
causes Sickness, a very grievous and bitter evil. Or an Evil falling on men,
Chap. 6.2.

riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt] Prove. 1.19. Either being
unto them occasions of sin, and fuel of lust, causing pride, vanity,
oppression, violence, gaming, gluttony, idleness, excess, Hab. 2.9, 10. Luke
12.15 -- 21. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Luke 16.19. Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12. and 8.10, 11, 12.
Prove. 30.9. Jam. 2.6, 7. and 5.3 -- 6. or else exposing them unto envy and
danger, to rapine and violence, Prove. 13.8. 2 Reg. 25.6, 7, 9, 12.

V. 14. But those riches perish by evil travel] Or, with much affliction.
Either by their own improvidence, imprudence, luxury, etc. or by the fraud,
circumvention and violence of others, or by casualties and miscarriages in
trading: or by some secret blast and curse from God, Prove. 23.5. and that after
much travel and toil to get them, after much solicitude and anxious care to
keep them, after much providence and tenderness toward his children to lay up
for them.

he begets a son, and there is nothing in his hand] O^, in his power and
possession, Dan. 2.38. Joh. 3.35. 1 Reg. 20.6. 1 Chr. 29.12. his hand, (i.)
either the fathers, to to leave unto the son; or the sons, to inherit it after
his father.

V. 15. As he came forth of his mothers womb, naked shall he return to go as he
came] Though he could secure all his wealth from perishing, yet he himself must
leave them, and go out of the World as naked as he came into it, And that which
has no power to free us from death, to comfort us in death, to go with us into
another World after death, is no foundation of happiness or solid tranquillity,
Job 1.21. Psalm. 49.17. 1 Timothy 6.7. Luke 12.20, 21.

to go] (i.) To dye, Chap. 6.4. Job 16.22. Psalm. 39.13. Phil. 1.23. Return,
viz. to the Womb of the common mother, the earth, Job. 1.21. Eccles. 12.7.

and shall take nothing of his labour] That is, of his estate gotten by hard
labor, Chap. 2.19. Prove. 5.10. Deuteronomy. 28.33. which he may carry away, or cause
to go along with him, in his hand. He cannot carry so much as one handful of
all that he has with him.

V. 16. And this also is a sore evil] As before, verse. 13. That though his
Riches happily are not kept for his hurt; nor do not perish in his time, yet they
will not at all keep him from death, nor profit him in it. Riches will not
profit in the day of wrath.

that in all points as he came, so shall he go] His death and his birth are
over against one another in an exact proportion.

and what profit has he that has labored for the wind?] For that which will
not stay, which cannot be held fast, which is emptiness and very vanity. So
words of wind, are empty and vain words, Job 16.3. A man walking in wind, that
is, a lying Prophet, Mic. 2.11. so to reap a whirlwind, Hos. 8.7. to fill the
belly with the east wind. Job 15.2. to inherit wind, Prove. 11.29. to bring
forth wind, Isa. 26.18. To feed upon wind, Hos. 12.1. To speak into the air, 1
Cor. 14.9. To beat the air, 1 Cor. 9.16. Are expressions of very vain and
fruitless enterprises. Here money is compared to wind; The one has wings to
fly away with, Prove. 23.5. so has the other, Psalm. 104.3. The one cannot be
held, Prove. 30.4. neither can the other, 1 Cor. 7.31.

V. 17. All his days also he eats in darkness, and has much sorrow and
wrath with his sickness.] Or, according to the words in their order, thus,
Also all his days he eats in darkness, and much sorrow, and his sickness,
and wrath. A further vanity of Riches in the hands of a covetous worldling, he
denies himself a full, free, and comfortable enjoyment of outward things, he
cannot unbend himself from his ^arking cares even when he goes to eat, but as
he gets, so he uses and enjoys his wealth in darkness, i. e. (for the words
following are Exegetical) in sorrow, and wrath, even unto very sickness.

All his days he eats in darkness] It may be understood either literally,
that he does so lengthen out his labor, and grudge to spare himself any times
even of necessary refreshment, as that he deferreth eating till it be dark, and
till he can work no longer. Or rather Metaphorically, he eats without any
pleasure, and with much trouble and anxiety of mind; so much darkness commonly
imports, Isa. 49.9, 10. and 50.10. Mic. 7.8.

and has much sorrow] Or, indignation. The word in some Copies (as the Learned
observe) is read with the points of a noun; in others, of a verb, and so they
render it, multum irascitur, or indignatur, he is very angry, or he sorroweth
much, and has sickness, and wrath. The meaning (as I conceive) is, he eats
in darkness, basely, and wretchedly, as a slave to his riches; he storms,
grieves, frets, is even sick with anger and vexation, at the expenses he is put
unto in keeping but a mean and a sordid Table. The Greek by a very easy
mistake in the letters which are much alike, read it thus, All his days he is
in darkness, (...), and in mourning, and in sorrow, and in sickness, and in
wrath. His sickness, for, he has sickness. The Affix is used for the separate
and absolute pronoun; as Psalm. 115.7. Ezekiel. 29.3. Our reading, He has sorrow
and wrath with his sickness, (where the conjunction copulative is rendered by
the preposition [ with] as sometimes elsewhere, 1 Samuel 14.18.) seems to
intimate such a sense as this, All his days, or while he lives, he eats in
sorrow, and when he falls sick, and is in danger of death, he has much wrath
and indignation in his sickness, for fear of parting from his wealth, which he
so dearly loves, and has so hardly labored for.

V. 18. Behold, that which I have seen, It is good and comely, etc.] Here is
subjoyned a remedy of this Vanity, setting forth the right use of riches, to
take away all this sinful anxiety which is conversant about them; which is, in
the fear of God comfortably to enjoy his good blessings, without afflicting our
selves for the future, but casting ou^ cares upon him, who cares for us.

that which I have seen, is this] He speaks out of experience, and upon exact
study and inquiry after the truth; as 1 John 1.1, 3. Joh. 1.14. Chap 1.13. and
2.24. and 3.22.

It is good and comely] Good and comfortable to a man himself. Comely, decent,
honorable, and of good report toward others. Or, there is a good which is also
comely. Or, it is good, yea, it is comely. Or, Behold I have seen that which is
good, that which is comely. The like manner of expression, 1 Samuel 15.20. Psalm.
10.6. Teaching us in our conversation, 1. To look unto that which is good in it
self, and then to that which is decent toward the world, Phil. 4.8.

that a man eat and drink, and enjoy good of all his labour] Or? In all his
labors, to sweeten his labors with a comfortable fruition of the fruit of
them. Of all his labors; so the Preposition (...) is used, to signify as much
as Ex or De, Exodus 12.43.

all the days of his life which God gives him] When God gives life, we should
not deny the comforts of it to ourselves.

for it is his portion] All the good he can ever have from them: A metaphor
from division of heritances; or from distribution of meat at a feast. It is
that which God has allotted him of all his labor. But withal, he must
remember, that God allows him but a part; God himself, and the poor, and his
family, country, friends, challenge part likewise in those goods, wherewith God
has blessed him, Prove. 3.8. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. 1 Cor. 16.2. Gal. 6.6, 10. 2 Cor.
12.14. 1 Timothy 5.8. Isai. 23.18.

V. 19. Every man also to whom God has given, etc.] Here is only a further
insisting on the same argument; as Chap. 2.24. and 3.13. and 6.2. He shows, 1.
That God gives us our wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. 2. That he gives us dominion over our
wealth, that we may not be captivated unto it; every man is a slave to his
estate further then God sets them free. 3. Wherein this power stands; 1. in
using it, to eat thereof; 2. in using it proportionable to his condition; or as
Divines speak, Secundum decentiam statuti, to take his portion: 3. To use it
with fruition and cheerfulness, to rejoice in it, 1 Timothy 6.17. 4. Not to let
his joy swallow up his duty, nor his delight his labor, but to sweeten his
labor with joy, and to moderate his joy with labor, Ephesians. 4.28. 5. To use, and
to enjoy his own, the fruit of his own labor, not to be burdensome or injurious
unto others, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.

V. 20. For he shall not much remember the days of his life] Some make the
sense to be thus, Although he give not much, or although it be not much which
God has given, (which sense the distinguishing Accent does somewhat favor)
yet he shall remember, that all his life long, God sweetneth that little unto
him with the joy of his heart: And a little with joy and cheerfulness, and Gods
blessing, is better then much riches of the ungodly, Psalm. 37.16. Prove. 17.1.
Luke 12.15. Prove. 15.17. Dan. 1.15. But our Translation prefers another
sense, which seems most consonant to the drift of the place, He that in this
manner, does cheerfully enjoy the blessings which God gives him, shall not,
with much sorrow or weariness, remember the troubles of his life; neither shall
his labor be very irksome or grievous unto him, because the Lord does answer
him, or does proportionably unto his labors, return comfort to him in the joy
of his heart, in the joyful and contented fruition of them.

because God answers him in the joy of his heart] Answers all his labor
with joy, gives him such joy of heart, as is a full compensation for all his
labor. As money is said to answer unto all things, in a proportionable value
to them all, Eccl. 10.19. so shall his joy bear a full value to all the labor
which was taken for it. Other expositions there are, but this is most genuine
and natural.

CHAP. VI.
IN this Chapter is continued a further description of the common vanity of
riches, in the hands of a covetous person. He is here set forth,

First, By the good things which he has; 1. Riches in abundance, riches and
wealth. 2. Honor, and both to the uttermost of his desires, verse. 2. 3. Many
Children. 4. Many years, a great old age, verse. 3, 6.

Secondly, By his misery, which makes all that vain unto him. 1. God gives him
not power to enjoy it. 2. A stranger eats it. 3. His Soul is not filled with
good. 4. He has no burial, verse. 2, 3.

Thirdly, the censure of all this: 1. Absolutely, 2. Comparatively. Absolutely;
It is first, an evil; secondly, a common evil; thirdly, a vanity; fourthly, a
disease, verse. 1, 2. Comparatively, an untimely birth, o^ abortive is better;
For, 1. He is born dead, and so free from sense of miseries, which the other
discruciated himself withal. 2. He departs in darkness, without the loss of
light and comfort, which the other denies unto himself. 3. His name is covered
in darkness, the others name is odious, verse. 4. 4. He has not seen the Sun,
nor known any thing: the other has indeed seen the Sun, but has seen no good,
nor known any thing but sorrow and vexation, and at last goes to the same
place, verse. 5, 6. This vanity he furthers opens:

First, By the narrow use of Riches, and all the labor conversant about them;
it terminates in the body; it cannot satiate the mind nor appetite; that is,
if evil and covetous, insatiable; if wise and prudent, above satisfaction by
these things, verse. 7. That they cannot satisfy the mind, appears, because
then wise men might find out some more good in them then fools; but the wisest
can have no more out of them, then for their mouths, and so have fools, and the
poorest men that know how to live, as well as the richest, verse. 8.

Secondly, By the vanity of wandering and endless desires; the wise, the
foolish, the rich, the poor have things present and necessary, so long as they
live, they have enough to that use; and this is a real fruit, much better, then
to let the heart wander and weary it self in endless desires, verse. 9.

Thirdly, By the impossibility of mending a man's condition by these things, or
of raising him above the state of mortality and infirmity. A man will be but a
man how rich soever he be, and all his wealth will not guard him against the
evils incident to humanity, verse. 10. He will be still never the better by such
things, as do but increase vanity, verse. 11.

Fourthly, By the ignorance of man to make the best use of things, and to
resolve himself, whether a great, or a moderate estate be better for him;
especially considering the shortness of his life, and the ignorance of what
will become of his Estate or Family after he is gone, verse. 12. Thus we may
connex the two last Verses, with the Argument of those before: or rather we may
take them for a general conclusion of all the precedent vanities, since so many
things there are which increase vanity, what is man the better for them, verse.
11. For first, amongst them all, he can hardly know what is good for himself.
2. If he do, he can enjoy that good but a little while, his very life (the best
outward blessing he has) is vain, and but a shadow 3. When his life is over,
he shall be never the better for any thing which comes after him. 4. Neither
can he please himself with the foresight of what shall be after him, because
he cannot tell it to himself, neither can any man else declare it to him.

Verse. 1. THere is an evil which I have seen under the Sun] He shows the misery
of a discontented covetous disposition, and that it is a special gift of God to
bestow upon a man the sweet enjoyment of outward blessings, which when he has,
he is apt enough to deny unto himself.

and it is common amongst men] Or much and great. Covetousness is both a great
sin, and yet a very usual and frequent sin, that it is to be met with, in all
parts of the habitable world, where ever the Sun rises and sets. The
commonness of sin, does not at all extenuate the greatness of it, but rather
aggravate the same, Psalm. 14.2.3. Jer. 5.1.5.

V. 2. A man to whom God has given, etc.] There is a man, who has all things
that heart can desire, not only riches, but substance of all sorts, lands,
movables, with honor and great place, 2 Chronicles. 1.11, 12.

so that he wants nothing for his soul of all that he desireth] He is not
defective, or destitute of any thing which his soul can wish for; his substance
extends to all just and large desires; it cannot be exhausted or worn out,
Deuteronomy. 8.9. Isa. 51.14. 1 Reg. 17.16. He speaks not of the boundless desires
of covetous men, which are never satisfied; but of the just desires, which a
man of dignity and honor could have, in order to the decency of his estate,
and to the quality of his place. He cannot rationally wish for any thing
toward the satisfaction of his just desires, which his estate will not
plentifully afford him, Psalm. 73.7. Luke 12.17, 18. Job 21.7 -- 13. Psalm.
17.14. All this a covetous wretch is said to have from God, not in a way of
blessing, as if God did prosper and approve of his sordid, or sinful ways of
gain; but in a way only of providence, his Sun shining on the just and unjust,
Matthew. 5.45.

yet God gives him not power to eat thereof] Chap. 5.18, 19. To eat of them,
imports a moderate and prudent use of them, for necessity and delight, taking
a man's own portion; this is a special curse and judgment of God, when a man
has not an heart to enjoy the blessi^gs which God bestows on him: as the
contrary is a blessing from God, Chap. 5.19.

but a stranger eats them] One that is in no relation of neerness, blood,
friendship to him: or an enemy, who spoileth and plundreth him of them. This is
noted as a great affliction, Hos. 7.9. Deuteronomy. 28.33. Isa. 1.7. Lam. 5.2. Jer.
5.17. Here the Learned observe a difference, between a man's own use of his
goods and a strangers; for he himself does but eat of them; but a stranger
eats them. The former notes care, moderation, providence: The later, cruelty
and devouring, without pity without measure.

This is a vanity, and an evil disease] Not only a fruitless thing, but a
very grievous trouble, when a man by sordid thoughts, baseness of spirit,
unquiet and incessant cares, greedy desires, distrustful jealousies, anxious
fears, thronging employments, keeps himself from taking any delight in his
abundance, and pierces himself through with diverse sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10.

V. 3. If a man beget an hundred children] He spoke before of one, who had none
to succeed him in his estate, but a stranger; here, he shows the misery of a
covetous person to be as great, though he have many children, and live many
years. These be greater blessings in themselves, Psalm 127.3, 4.5. therefore
children were called the glory of their Parents, Hos. 9.11. Job 5.25, 26. Psalm.
21.5. and 128.6. But covetousness takes away the comfort of them.

an hundred children] Very many,; a certain number for an uncertain; as 1 Cor.
14.19. Prove. 17.10. 1. Sam 18.7.

many years, so that the days of his years be many] He seems, speaking of
long life, to correct himself, and call it rather many days, then many years:
so Genesis 47.9.

and his soul be not filled with good] Or, satisfied with good. Either in
regard of his own insatiable desires, or of some curse of God, mixing
biternesse therewith; as Chap. 5.10. Job 9.25. By his soul, is meant (...), his
appetite and desires; as Genesis 34.8. 1. Sam. 20.4. Psalm. 103.6. Others,
understand this of the vanity of children and old age without riches, when a
man is so poor, that he has nothing to satisfy nature while he lives, and
cannot leave enough to bury him when he is dead Which sense is touched at in
the Contents of the Chapter, in our English Bibles.

and also that he have no burial] Either through cruelty of mur^herers and
spoylers, or through neglect of heirs and successors, who deny him an
honorable interment. It is a part of humane misery to be without burial, Deuteronomy.
28.26. 1 Re^. 14.11, 13. 2 Reg. 9.37. Isai. 14 20. Jer. 8.2 and 16.4. and
22.19. 2 Chronicles. 21.19.

I say, that an untimely birth is better then he] In regard of outward
respects, never to have felt good or evil, not to be born at all, or to be born
and die at once, then to live long in misery, and then dye without love or
honor from any. Hereby is noted the base condition of such a person, who is
worse then an untimely birth, which has not had the ordinary comfort of the
meanest living creatures, to see the Sun, Job 3.10, 11, 12, 16. Psalm. 58.8.

V. 4. For he comes in with vanity] ( i.) He is born, Job 1.21. Josh. 1.9. To
no purpose. That which never comes to perfection, but melts and vanishes
away as soon as it is born, is born in vain.

and departs in darknesse] Or, into darkness, or, obscurely without any
notice. A Periphrasis of death, Eccl. 11.8.

his name shall be covered with darknesse] (i.) Shall utterly be forgotten;
there shall never be any mention of him.

V. 5. has not seen the Sun] Job 3.16. Has not felt any worldly delight, and
therefore is not affected with the loss o^ it.

nor known] Has had no use, either o^ sense or reason, and so cannot compare
the evil of loss with the good of fruition.

this has more rest then the other] For he rests immediately from the wom^,
whereas a covetous man lives a toylsome and unquiet life, and then parts with
all, unwillingly, into the condition of the abortive.

V. 6. Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told] Whereas it might be
objected, that the one has lived a long life, and that alone is a blessing;
and therefore in that respect, he is to be preferred before an untimely birth.
He answers, That long life, without seeing good, does but lengthen out
misery; It is not the life, but the good, which makes a solid difference, Psalm.
34.12. else the evil of the day, Matthew. 6.34. makes day and life it self
undesirable, Job 3.20 -- 23 and 7.1, 2.

Do not all go to one place] As well he that lives longest, as he that never
saw the Sun: and though one never saw the Sun, yet if the other never saw good,
but only wea^ies himself with sorrows and vanity, and goes to the same dust;
what difference is there between them?

V. 7. All the labor of man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not
filled] For his mouth; For his bodily sustenance, and the services of life.
Here is first a Metonymie of the subject, the mouth for the nour^shment which
is put into it: and then a Synecdoche, of the part for the whole; food being,
though the principal, yet but one part of man's necessary provision; all which
the Apostle comprizeth in food and raiment, 1 Timothy 6.8. All the real fruit
which any man can reap of all his worldly labors, is to have his daily bread,
the bread of his allowance, or food convenient for him, Prove. 30.8. Things
simply necessary for life, and things secundarily necessary for the decency of
his condition, and proportion of his quality and degree in the world.

yet the appetite is not filled] (i.) Either the covetous desires of a
worldling remain still insatiable, he is not contented with his own portion, he
cannot contain his heart within the limits of reason or religion; but though he
have abundantly sufficient for all his wants, yet he toyleth still as if he had
nothing, Chap. 4.8. Or else, The Soul is not filled; riches may benefit the
body, and feed, and cloth, and comfort that, but to the nobler part of man,
they can afford no satisfaction, they do not bear any proportion at all. They
cannot hold the soul, Luke 12.19, 20. They cannot help the Soul in a day of
trouble, Prove. 11.4. Zeph. 1.18. They cannot follow it into another World,
Psalm. 49.17. They have no suteableness, either in excellency or duration unto
it.

V. 8. F^r what has the wise more then the fool, etc.] This question is a
denial, The Wise man has nothing more then the fool. Internal excellency there
is in wisdom above folly, Chap. 2.13. But here he speaks with relation to
wealth, and the outward events of things, in which regard, the Wise man has no
peculiar prerogative above the fool. The one fares as deliciously, is clothed
as richly, has Lands and Revenues left him by his Ancestors, as well as the
other. The wisest man can but provide for back and belly, and such other
conveniences, as outward things are proper to supply; and so much may he do who
has Wealth without Wit. Outward things promiscuously happen unto all, and
beyond their own use, they are not able to supply a wise man more then a fool.

what has the poor which knows to walk before the living?] A poor man that
lives, has the substantial benefit of outward things as well as the richest or
the wisest. What has he less then the rich? he knows how to get his living,
and walk through his short time of life, as well as the other. Or, what has
the poor wise man, who by his industry and prudent conversing amongst men does
maintain himself, more then the poor foolish man, who makes a shift to live as
well as the other?

to walk before the living] That is, to live decently and discreetly amongst
men, Chap. 4.15. Isa. 42.5. Psalm. 56.13. Chap. 7.12.

V. 9. Better is the sight of the eyes, then the wandering of the Desire] By the
sight of the Eyes, he means things present, and in possession, which we have
before us, in our eye, and in hand: by the wandering or walking of the Soul, he
means an insatiable and endless pursuit of the heart after things which we
have not, and cannot easily overtake. So sight is opposed by the Apostle to
Faith, Because Sight looks on things in possession; Faith, on things in
expectation, 2 Cor. 5.7. and so property or possession is before called the
seeing of things with the eye, Eccles. 5.11. And on the other side, unsatisfied
desires are expressed by wandering of the heart up and down, Isa. 57.10. Jer.
2.25. and 14.10. when the mind is not stayed and fixed with contentment in its
present condition, but like a Be flies from flower to flower, from creature
to creature, to gather more. This then is the plain meaning of these words, It
is better for a man quietly and contentedly to enjoy the things which he has
in present possession, then to rove up and down, and weary himself with anxious
and unsatisfied desires after things which he has not: since the poor man has
as much the substantial and principal benefit of outward things, as the Rich,
namely life and health, and food convenient: since the wisest man that is, can
fetch no more real good out of wealth, then fools themselves do enjoy from it,
It is much more comfortable to enjoy what we have, then endlesly to weary our
selves in hoarding and hunting after more, Matthew. 6.25 -- 31. This is the same
in sense with that, Chap. 4.6. but spoken here by Solomon as a remedy against
covetous desires; there, by the sluggard, as an apology for his laziness.
Though some would have it here understood in the person of a covetous Rich man.
As if he would answer Solomon's question: What good has one more then another,
the wise then the fools, the rich then the poor? yes says the covetous rich
man, he has an Estate to look on, the other is continually vexed with want and
desires: and it is much better to be in possession of a good Estate, then to
languish under poverty, and be ever in a craving condition. But the former
sense is more genuine.

This also is vanity and vexation of spirit] That is, in the later sense, It is
a vain and troublesome thing to possess good things only to look on them, and
not to use them. Or rather in the former sense, the wandering of the fool up and
down after new gain, and denying it self the comfortable fruition of present
contentments, is vanity, because much can do a man no more real good, then a
little cheerfully used: and vexation of spirit, because insatiable desires
bring perpetual disquiet upon the heart of a man.

V. 10. That which has been, is namel^ already] He shows the vanity of
wandri^^ desires, and greedy endeavors after gre^^ter things then God has yet
afforded a man for whatever things have been or are, wh^^ther a man be rich or
poor, noble or (...) his condition comes not unto him by chanc^ but is
prae-assigned him, in the purpose an^ decree of God, and therefore much bett^^
is it for him contentedly to enjoy what Go^ gives, then with a vain and
ineffectual amb^^tion, to strive for things without his rea^^ Especially since
no things acquireable (...) humane industry, can exempt or protect man from the
evils, or common miseri^ which mankind is exposed unto. Let (...) grow as Rich,
as potent, as Honorable the world can make him; A man he was (...) and he will
be but a man still, from earth he came, and to earth he will go, he lies under
a decree of mortality and infirmity, which by the help of no worldly wealth or
greatness, he is able to break through.

That which has been, The name of it is called already] That is, Its state,
quality, order, condition, every thing belonging to the nature and being of it,
every thing externally happening unto it, is all pre-ordained in the counsel
and decree of God. He by his immutable and irresistible providence has*
assigned unto every one his order, and does (...) his wisdom dispose of all
things belong^ng unto men, They are under his care and ^llowance, and therefore
ought not anxi^usly and sollicitously to insist upon provi^^ons for the future,
but rather comfortably to ^^joy things present, and in a conscionable ^^scharge
of duty, to wait for a like blessing (...) providence of God for hereafter, as
ever ^^fore they have had experience of, Psalm. ^.11, 31, 14, 15. 1 Samuel 2.7, 8.
Act. 2.^. and 4.28.

and it is known that it is man] Be his ^^alth or honors what they will, yet a
frail, ^^rtal, mutable, earthly creature he is still, ^he was before. And
though men have (...) so dementated with worldly greatness, (...) take Divine
honor to themselves, and to think themselves lawless, and exempted from the
bonds of other men, yet it is known and visible, that they remain men still,
and so God will at last make them known to themselves, Psalm. 9.20. Ezekiel. 28.6,
9. Isa. 2.22. and 31.3.

Neither may he contend with him that is mightier then he] He cannot implead
God, nor enter an action or suit in Judgment with him, he cannot call him to
an account, or judge him; he may not think by contending with God, to alter or
break through the order of his providence or decrees, Isa. 45.9. Job 9.2, 3,
12. Jer. 50.44. Job. 4.17. Romans 9.20. Ps. 51.4. 1 Cor. 10.22. Ezekiel. 22.14. Ps.
33.10, 11. Job. 34.23.

V. 11. Seeing there be many things which increase vanity, what is man the
better? This is commonly understood as a furth^^ argument against insatiable
desires of wealth because where there are many of them, the^ increase does but
increase vanity, that is (...) usual concomitant of great abundance, more
cares, more distractions, more fears, more troubles and employments come along
wit^ them, and yet man is not a whit bette^ then he was before, he was fed, and
cloathe^ then, and he is no more now. Can he car^ry any of them with him? can
he find (...) any more excellency in them? will the^^ any real advantage remain
unto him more then his own portion, and comfortable accommodations by them? But
I rather conceive these words to be a solemn conclusion of all the former
discoveries of vanity in the creatures, and repetition of what he gave
summarily before, Chap. 1.3. It was there laid down as the Proposition which he
undertook to demonstrate, and having demonstrated it, it is here in the close
of the whole discourse resumed again, and the whole drawn together in one brief
recapitulation, seeing there are thus many things, wi^dome, folly, pleasures,
honors, crowns, riches, that increase vanity, what is man the better in regard
of solid happiness and contentment for any, or for all of them?

V. 12. For who knows what is good for man in this life?] Amongst such
variety of things under the Sun which the heart of man is apt to be drawn unto,
neither he himself nor any other is able certainly to inform him, which of all
those is best for him to enjoy and reap comfort from. Whether it be better for
him to be rich or poor, in a (...) or low condition, in a private retirement,
or in public service; some men's grea^ness has undone them, or other men's
meanness has secured them, 2 Reg. 25.9, 12. Some men had not been so wicked,
if they had not been so learned; others had not been so vicious, if great
wealth had not excited and been fuel to feed their lusts. Achitophel might have
lived longer with less wisdom, and Nabal with less wealth. No man can tell
whether that which he snatcheth at, as the silly fish, with most greediness,
and greatest expectation of contentment from it, may not be tempered with
poison, or have a hook under it, and so be the occasion of his greater misery,
Romans 1.22. 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. Romans 6.21. Prove. 1.13, 18, 19.

All the days of his vain life which he spends as a shadow] If he do by
chance, rather then by election, happen upon that way and course which was best
for him, yet his very life, the best of all outward blessings, is it self but a
very vanity and shadow. It is but a very little while before he must part with
it, and all those comforts which rendered it peaceable and cheerful to him. A
very elegant description of the shortness of man's life, All the number of the
days of the life of his vanity, which he spends as a shadow: 1. He calls
them days, not years. 2. Days that may be numbered, which likewise intimates
fewness of them, as Job. 16.22. Isa. 10.19. Psalm. 105.12. Number. 9.20. 3. A life
of vanity; a very vain life. The substantive for the adjective; as Psalm. 31.3.
and 68.31. Psalm. 140.12. Romans 7.24. Ephesians. 4.24. Phil. 3.21. 4. A life spent
like a shadow, that has little of substance while it lasts, and does presently
vanish away, Ps. 39.6. and 144.4. Job. 14.2. Jam. 4.14. Job. 8.9.

for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the Sun.] As a man can
have little satisfaction by outward good things here in his own sight and
lifetime, so can he promise himself as little in name or family, when he is
gone, because he can by no means foresee or foreknow future and contingent
events, Chap. 2.18, 19.

CHAP. VII.
THe Wise man having set forth many vanities of this life; and the great
disappointment which men meet with, who seek for happiness and satisfaction
from them, and thereupon the vexation which naturally arises from such a
disappointment: and having interwoven some general remedies against these
vanities, namely, the fear and worship of God, and the cheerful enjoyment of
outward blessings: He here proceeds to many other particular means of healing
the vanities of this Life, and procuring tranquillity and peace to the mind of
man in the midst of them. Such are, 1. A good name, ve. 1. 2. A composed
preparedness of mind to entertain death, the chiefest outward evil, and
consequently to bear any any other sorrow, verse 2, 3, 6. 3. Moderation and
patience of spirit to bear with present evils, and to digest injuries,
expecting the end and issue which God will give, verse. 7 -- 10. 4. Wisdom to
defend a man's self against the vanity of Riches, verse. 11, 12. 5. Acquiescency
in the Government of all things by the wise providence of God, verse. 13, 15. 6.
Contentation of heart in all estates, as well adversity as prosperity,
considering Gods wise and just tempering of them together for our good, verse.
14. 7. Prudent and pious moderation of our behavior, so as that we may not by
rash zeal, or inordinate walking, expose our selves to danger and trouble,
verse. 16, 17. 8. Resolution and constancy in the fear of God, verse. 18. 9.
Wisdom of meekness, charity, and patience toward such as offend, considering
the general frailty of humane nature, and the experience and sense of our own
weakness, verse. 19 -- 22. 10. Contentment with such a measure of wisdom as is
in this life attainable, and not to busy and disquiet our thoughts with things
which are above us, verse. 23, 24. Now as before in the handling of humane
vanities he did occasionally intermix some Remedies thereof: so here in
handling the remedies of it, and the means to obtain tranqui^lity of mind, he
does here and there intermix some other vanities, which are great occasions of
vexation and unquietness to the heart of man: one principal one, whereof he had
had very sad experience, he does here subjoyn, namely, the bitterness of an
ensnaring woman, verse. 25 -- 29.

Verse. 1. A Good name is better then precious oyntment] Or, A name is good
before good ointment. A name, for, a good name, as, a wife, for, a good wife,
Prove. 18.22. By a good name, understand that which has its foundation in an
innocent, unblameable and profitable life, when a man has reverence in the
conscience of others, 2 Cor. 4.2. for the name of the wicked will rot, Prove.
10.7. So to be a man of name, is meant an eminent person, renowned in his
generation, Genesis 6.4. 1 Chronicles. 5.24. and names of men, Rev. 11.3. and 3.4. may
seem to note special persons of honor and renown.

better then sweet oyntment] So the name of Christ which signifies his
gracious doctrine, Act. 9.15. is compared unto sweet ointment, Cant. 1.3.
called the sweet savor of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14, 15. Precious Aromatical
ointments were things* greatly in use and esteem amongst the Israelites, and a
special part of their treasures: appointed by God to anoint the holy vessels of
the Tabernacle, Exodus 30.22 -- 33* used in the consecration of persons to
offices of honor and eminency, Exodus 28.41. 1 Samuel 16.13. Psalm. 89.20. called
therefore the oil of gladness, Heb. 1.9. Isa. 61.3. used likewise in Feasts,
great entertainments and expressions of joy, Amos 6.6. Esther 2.12. Psalm. 23.5.
Luke 7.46. Reckoned amongst the special blessings of God, and treasures of that
people, Psalm. 92.10. Job. 29.6. Deuteronomy. 33.24. Prove. 21.20. Isa. 39.2. whence
some would have it here taken synecdochically to signify all kind of riches,
before which Solomon does here prefer a good name; as also Prove. 22.1.

and the day of death, then the day of ones birth] Some understand here a note
of similitude to join the two clauses together, As a good name is better then
sweet ointment, so is the day of death then the day of Birth. Others repeat the
former clause in the later, unto such a man who has a good name, better is the
day of death, then of birth. And the clauses seem to have Cognation with one
another: for the day of Birth is a time of festivity and rejoicing, and
accordingly used to be celebrated, Genesis 40.20. Mar. 6.21, 22. in which kind of
solemnities, they used to anoint themselves with sweet ointments: as on the
other side, in days of sorrow, they abstained from them, 2 Samuel 14.2. Dan.
10.23. On the other side, The day of Death removes a man wholly out of this
world, and leaves nothing of him behind, but only his Name and Memory, which
the Lord threatens wicked men to blot out, and cause it to rot, Deuteronomy. 29.20.
and 32.26. Prove, 10.7. Job 18.17. But the name of good men remains behind them,
as the sweet savor of a precious perfume, when the substance of the perfume it
self is consumed with the fire: or as spices when they are broken and
dissolved, leave an excellent scent behind them. And so the meaning is, That
although the day of birth be a day of feasting and joy, and the day of death a
day of sorrow and mourning, yet unto a good man this is much better then the
other, and the memorial which he leaves behind him, is much sweeter then that
of spices or perfumes. If we take the later clause alone, without connection to
the former, then they relate unto the many vanities and vexations which the
life of man is exposed unto; in which consideration, That day which delivers a
man from them, is better then that day which lets him into the possession of
them: for man is born unto much trouble and sorrow, Job. 5.7. and 14.1. but a
godly man's death puts a period to all his sins, to all his sorrows, Romans 7.24.
Rev. 14.13. 2 Cor. 5, 6, 7, 8. Phil. 1.23.

V. 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning, etc.] As to a good man, the
day of his death is better then the day of his birth, because it puts an end
unto all those sorrows and vanities which he was born unto: so for those that
remain alive, it is better to go to a funeral, the house of mourning, then to a
feast, or a birthday solemnity, the house of jollity and rejoicing.

for that is the end of all men] Or, in the which is the end of all men. In
which house of sorrow, a man is minded of the common end of all men. A man
sees his own end in the end of another man, and is admonished of his frailty
and mortality, for it is the way of the whole earth, Josh. 23.14. Heb. 9.27.

and the living will lay it to heart] Or, will put it up, and fasten it to his
heart; will be seriously and sadly affected with it, and have deep impressions
thereby made upon his spirit, of the greatne^s and power God, who draws away
our breath, and we perish, Psalm. 104, 29. and of his own vanity and baseness,
even in his best estate, Psalm. 39.5. putting in the heart, notes diligent
attendance on a thing, (...), Deuteronomy. 11.18. Isa. 42.25. Luke 21.14. whereas
feasting and jollity is very likely to draw off the remembrance of God, Job.
1.5. Deuteronomy. 8.12 -- 14. Isa. 22.13. Amos 6.3 -- 6. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Isa. 5.11, 12.

V. 3. Sorrow is better then laughter] That sorrow which arises from the
meditation of death, a sad, sober, and composed temper of spirit, whereby a man
is rendered capable of instruction, and sensible of serious things which concern
his peace, is better, and does a man much more good, then laughter and the
jollity which belongs unto Feastings. The word signifies anger, and so by
some is the sense rendered, that charitable and wholesome Anger which reproves
men for their faults, and so makes them sorrowful, is better then the
flattery of Parasites, which feeds their foolish lusts with laughter and vain
mirth, and so tendeih unto ruin.

for by the sadness of the countenance] Heb. by the illness or badness of the
countenance, Neh. 2.2. badness of heart, 1 Samuel 17.28. The heart is made
better. Vain lusts and foolish exorbitant light affections are check'^ and
suppressed; as the outward man is grieved, the inward man is amended, Prove.
2^*30. 2 Cor. 4.16. and 7.9, 10. whereas o^ the other side, empty mirth does
dissolv^ the heart, and let it out unto more vanity Chap. 2.2, 3. Hos. 4.11.
Esther. 1.10. Sam. 25.36.

V. 4. The heart of the wise is in the hou^^ of mourning] He proves sorrow to
be be^^ter, wholsomer for the soul then laughte^ by the judgment and choice of
wise me^ and of fools. That which wise men prefer, is indeed better then that
which fools make choice of; but wise men prefer spectacle^* places, occasions
of sorrow; fools make choice of the contrary: ergo that is bette^ then this.
Wise men consider the end of things, and choose the most proper means unt^ the
best ends: whereas fools look only on things present and before their eyes. By
the house of mourning, we understand any plac^ or object which occasioneth
mourning; (...) the grave is called domus seculi, the house (...) ages, or a
man's long home, Eccles. 12.5* So a trench is called a house of measures* 1 Reg.
18.32. Isa. 3.21.

The heart of the wise] When his body is elsewhere, yet his thoughts and heart
are thinking on the evil day, which wicked men thrust far from them, Amos 6.3.
So Job in prosperity did with a religious fear forecast evil, Job. 3.25. Neh.
2.2 -- 5. Psalm. 137.6.

but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth] Though he may by poverty,
business or many other diversions be absent in his body, yet by his good will
he would have his share in every merry meeting, his heart is upon pleasures,
and his love runs wholly that way, so that he is amazed and overwhelmed through
unpreparedness of heart when any sudden evil overtakes him, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. 2
Pet. 2.13, 14. Houses of joy we read of, Isa. 32.13. Here then we are taught to
moderate our selves in regard of outward pleasures, because love of them is the
character of a fool, and of an heart estranged from God, Job 21.12, 13. Prove.
21.17. 1 Cor. 7.30. 1 John 2.15, 16.

V. 5. It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, then for a man to hear the
song of fools] He instanceth in another cause of sorrow, namely, the rebukes of
wise and good men, which though they may sad the heart of a man for the
present, yet they are much more wholesome and beneficial, then the songs and
flatteries of ungodly Parasites, which sooth men in their sins, and feed the
flame of their lusts and corruptions. It is better to hear, (i.) patiently, and
obediently to listen to the counsel and reproof of a prudent friend, who does
seasonably, and faithfully discover his errors to him, then that a man should
hear the song of fools, Prove. 13.18. and 15.31.32. and 27.6. Psalm. 141.5. It is
a token of a wise and teachable disposition, to receive with meekness the words
of reproof, as David did, not only from Nathan a Prophet, 2 Samuel 12.7 -- 13.
but from Abigail a woman, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. Heb. 13.22. Prove. 9.9. and 17.10.
By the song of fools, understand any flattering speeches, or any merry and
pleasant discourses, being a Synecdoche, whereby all kind of jests, and
bewitching pleasures are signified, Isa. 24.8, 9. Genesis 31.27.

V. 6. For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the
fool:] The voice of thorns, so the noise of chariots, is called the voice of
chariots; and the noise that fire makes in stubble is called the voice of a
flame, Joel 2.5. Ezekiel. 1.24. Fools are here elegantly compared unto thorns,
they are burdens to the place they live in, Genesis 3.17, 18. They are
intractable, he must be fenced* which touches them, 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. They are
unprofitable, good for nothing but the fire, Heb. 6.8. The laughter of these
fools, that is, all those flatteries, jests, vain and frothy discourses,
mimical and apish practices, whereby they beget laughter, and feed the delights
of vain men like themselves, are compared to the noise of thorns burning under
a pot: as these make a sudden blaze, and a great noise, but do no good,
presently go out, and the meat is left as raw as when it was put in; in
stipulis magnus sine viribus Ignis Incassum fuerit: whereas a solemn fire in
coals or great wood, boyleth the meat without any such noise: so the effuse
mirth and jollity of fools, ( i.) of wicked men, though it may seem to promise
more pleasure and content, then the more sad and severe conversation of serious
men, yet that does suddenly vanish without leaving any solid joy behind it;
whereas the reproof of wise men sinketh down into the heart, and helps to work
out the scum and vanity which lay within it, Psalm. 58.9. and 118.12. and as the
crackling of thorns to the ear, so the laughter and vain mirth of fools to the
heart of a wise man is wholly offensive and unsavory. Hereby seems likewise to
be noted the aptness of vain men to be caught with every light and empty
pleasure, as fire does suddenly take in thorns, and pass through them, Exodus
22.6.

V. 7. Surely oppression makes a wise man mad, etc.] This may be understood
two different ways: 1. That even wise men when they see innocence oppressed,
and violence prevail instead of justice, or when they themselves are
unrighteously oppressed, are hereby much shaken and discomposed, tempted to
passion and indignation against so great disorder, Psalm. 73.2, 3, 8, 13, 21.
Prove. 23.17. Hab. 1.2, 3, 13, 14. 2 Samuel 16.9. and then the later clause is
thus to be taken, and It, namely oppression, destroys the heart of a gift, (
i.) An heart endowed and adorned with excellent gifts from above; which sense
the Chaldee Paraphrase favors: and many times when two substantives come
together, the later is taken adjectively, as Psalm. 5.6. a man of blood (i.) a
bloody man. Psalm. 140.11. A man of tongue, ( i.) an evil speaker. Luke 4.22.
words of grace (i.) gracious words. Ephesians. 4.24. holiness of truth, (i.) true
holiness: and in this sense likewise does the Septuagint, and the Vulgar
Latin, render this clause, (...). Perder Robur Cordis Ejus. So by Cor muneris,
they understand Cor munificum and liberale.

2. Oppression, ( i.) wealth gotten by oppression, makes a wise man mad. When
a wise man turns oppressor, and sees bribes and gifts come in apace, he
becomes mad in greediness to get more, or mad in violence against his poor
neighbors, or mad in his understanding, his eye is blinded, his heart is
infatuated and besotted, he is bereft of his wonted wisdom, ruining his family
when he thinks to raise and to establish it: and so gifts destroy the heart, (
i.) his understanding, Hos. 4.11. Deuteronomy. 16.19. Exodus 23.8. Either sense will
consist well with the scope of the Wise man in the whole context, which is to
persuade unto patience against fretfulness, when oppressors grow rich, and run
madding after gain, and to direct them to wait quietly and observe the end of
such men, (as David also directs, Psalm. 37.37, 38. and 73.17.) and not to
break forth into anger and madness at the present disorder which we conceive to
be in these things.

V. 8. Better is the end of a thing, then the beginning* etc.] This maxim
holds in many things: The Beginnings are difficult and painful, the End
fruitful, and rewards those pains; as in the studies of learning, in the ways
of virtue, in the bearing of afflictions, etc. Heb, 12.11. on the other side,
the beginnings of vice seem sweet and pleasant, but they end in bitterness,
like the role that was sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly, Rev. 10.9,
10. 2 Samuel 2.26. So in business, a man may suddenly enterprise some great
work, and glory in the conceit of his abilities, who after comes off with shame
and is not able to finish it, for want of wisdom to forecast events, Luke
13.28 -- 32. 1. Reg. 20.11. perseverance is that which crowns and honors an
enterprise, Matthew. 10.22. Heb. 3.6. Rev. 2.26. Many begin in the spirit, who
end in the flesh, Gal. 3.3. They use to say of the Devil, that he cannot change
his feet. He can begin like a Saint, and transform himself into an Angel of
light, but he will still end like himself. But though this be appliable many
ways, yet here the scope of the Wise man is to arm us with moderation of
spirit against the present and prevailing oppressions which we meet with.
Although thou see much violence, and do thy self suffer much evil thereby, yet
do not despond, nor give over waiting upon God, do not look only on the present
face of things, but patiently expect what issue he will give, go on in his way,
be not dismayed nor affrighted from any good purpose; many times the end is
comfortable, when the beginnings are troublesome, and they who sowed in tears,
do reap in joy, Ps. 126.5, 6. Ps. 73.17. Jam. 5:11. Heb. 10.36, 37. Phil. 4.5.
Isa. 10.12, 24, 25.

and the patient in spirit, then the proud in spirit] Long in spirit. That can
long restrain and keep in anger or impatience. This is frequently in Scripture
attributed unto God, Exodus 34.6. Neh. 9.17. Ps. 145.8. and is the evidence of
his power, Number. 14.17, 18. Nahum. 1.3. and so it is of wisdom and strength in
a man. Prove. 14.29. and 16.32.

then the proud in spirit] The proper Antithesis had been, then the hasty, or
short in spirit, as the expression is, Prove. 14.29, 17. Exodus 6.9. But his
purpose is to show, that patience is rooted in humility; the meaner esteem men
have of themselves, the more willing they are to endure what God inflicts, and
to wait his time for an issue out of trouble. Whereas pride and high-mindedness
makes men wilful, and impatient of any opposition, Prove. 13.10. Therefore when
God humbled David, we find how strong he was to bear the Railing and Cursing of
Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.11, 12. Hab. 2, 3, 4.

V. 9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry] Do not fret at the oppression
and violence which thou see in humane affairs; do not rashly and hastily give
way to murmuring and impatience. So the Chaldee Paraphrase understands it of
contumacy and frowardness against God and his providence, when things go not as
we would have them. Be not hastily nor revengefully angry against rich
oppressors, Psalm. 37.1. Prove. 23.17, 18. and 24.19. Chap. 5.2. Anger is
naturally an hasty passion, and very apt to prevent reason. The Philosopher
compares it to dog which barketh at a man before he observe whether it be his
master or a stranger; and to an hasty messenger which runs away without his
errand. And therefore slowness and deliberation is necessary to keep it in,
Jam. 1.19. Prove. 19.11. and 15.18. Tit. 1.7. It being of it self very wilful,
and hasty, Genesis 49.6. Hab. 1.6. David was overtaken in this point in the case
of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.21, 22. and the disciples, whom our Savior rebukes for
it, Luke 9.54, 55.

for anger rests in the bosom of fools] A thing is said to be in the bosom,
when it is much loved, cherished, delighted in, Deuteronomy. 13.6. and 28.56. Joh.
1.18. Ruth 4.16. fools delight in anger. It rests. It is in his proper place,
it never departs from him, Is ever at hand, ready to enrage and inflame him.
A wise man uses anger as Physic, in its proper time, but a fool uses it as
his constant diet. It is bound up in the heart of a fool, and as it were sewed
and sealed up in it. It is an Inmate in a fool, it is but as a passenger
through the heart of a wise man, it does not lodge in it all night, Ephesians. 4.26.
therefore the Apostle exhorting unto perfect patience, directs to us to pray
for wisdom as the foundation of it, Jam. 1.4, 5.

V. 10. Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better then
these] He does not forbid us with godly sorrow, and holy zeal to bewail the
corruption of the days wherein we live, and to be sensible of the sins or
judgments which make them evil; for there is no question but some ages are
worse then others, there were purer, and then darker and corrupter times of the
Church, Genesis 6.11, 12. Amos 5.13. Ephesians. 5.16. 2 Timothy 3.1 -- 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
Luke 18.8.

But 1. He condemns our aptness to pass over the good things which we enjoy
in our own age, and to look only on that which pincheth us, to complain of
wrong, oppression, injustice now, as if former ages had not the like reasons or
other evils, which we are freed from, to complain of as well as we. Israel had
Gods presence, and Manna in the Wilderness, and they value not that, because
they miss the onions they had in Egypt, Exodus 16.3. Number. 11.4, 5, 6. and 14.1
-- 4.

2. He teaches us not to charge the evils we lie under unto the times, but to
our sins, which make the times evil: for that is all one as if a man should
think he should be better, if he were removed into another chamber, or did lie
on another couch. He that is wicked now, would have been so in the best of
times, Matthew. 23.30. Thou can not change the world, thy work is to mend thy
self: a bryar is but a bryar, though it be in paradise; and a lilly is a lilly,
though it grow in a wilderness.

3. According to the scope of the place, his principal purpose is, to reprove
that repining disposition which is in us, whereby we are apt to murmr at the
providence of God, because he has given us our lot in an age of trouble, when
violence happily and oppression prevails: and so foo^ishly to charge God, as if
humane affairs were not balanced with so equal and indifferent distribution of
blessings as they ought to be; do not, says he, question the Government of the
world, nor the wisdom and righteousness of God therein; Leave Gods work unto
him, to whom it belongs to temper and order the several ages of the world in
what manner it pleases him. Attend thou on thine own duty, be contented with
the present condition of the times, study how to serve God in thy generation,
leave not thy station, depart not from thy rank, afflict not thy self with the
things which thou can not help, walk with God, as Noah did in the worst of
times, Genesis 6.9. and let the badness of the age thou live in, make thee more
wise, more circumspect, more humble, as fire burns hottest in the coldest
weather.

otherwise thou do not wisely inquire concerning this matter] This is a
(...), the meaning is, It is a foolish arrogance to complain of the providence
of God, as if thou were wise enough to teach him, or to mend his works, Job,
38.2, 3. Job 21.22.

V. 11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it, etc.] This is to be
understood comparatively, for wisdom is good of it self alone, but it is
better, more useful and beneficial to a man's self and others, when it meets
with an inheritance: As the Rabbis say, Bona est lex cum via terrae; Wisdom
without wealth is despised, Chap. 9.15. and wealth without wisdom is a snare,
a temptation, fuel of lust, pride, vanity, luxury, oppression, 1 Timothy 6.9.
Psalm. 49.6. Prove. 28.11. Therefore as life, expressed here by seeing of the
Sun, is uncomfortable without the means and supports of life, an inheritance to
maintain it: So an inheritance is unweildy and harmfull without wisdom to
order it. But wealth in the hand of a wise and good man, is an excellent
instrument, whereby he is enabled to do much good, Isa. 23.18. Prove. 3.9. Isa.
60.6, 9. Luke 16.9. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Here we see, 1. It is not having of
wealth, but right using of it, which makes life comfortable; for a fool may
have it. 2. That wealth without wisdom to use it aright, is not good unto the
owner of it. 3. That it is an especial skill and wisdom, so to manage an
estate, as that it may be for good to our selves and others. 4. That wealth is
a great ornament unto wisdom, Prove. 14.24. and a great instrument unto the
works thereof: Therefore they use to say, That wealth is the sinews of action
5. That it is happier for a wise man to have an inheritance, an estate derived
on him from his ancestors, then to be put to get wealth by his own labor and
industry: Res non parta labor sed relicta.

and by it there is profit to them that see the Sun] That is, by wisdom with
an inheritance, there is more profit, or more excellent advantage to men in
this life, then if they were separated. Or, though wisdom with an inheritance
be good, yet the fruit of wisdom is more permanent, and more excellent and
beneficial, then the profit of an inheritance.

V. 12. For wisdom is a defense, and money is a defence] In the Original the
words go thus, For in the shadow of wisdom, and in the shadow of money. But the
excellency of knowledge, etc.] Where there is either an Ellipsis of some Verb,
supplied by the Chaldee version, As a man is preserved in the shadow of wisdom
so is he preserved in the shadow of money. And by others, A man rests, and is
sheltred against danger under the shadow of wisdom and of money* Or else an
Hypallage, In the shadow of wisdom, that is, In wisdom there is a shadow. The
doubling of the prefix Beth, notes the proportion of the one, and the other,
in that which is in common affirmed of them; as the one is a shadow, so is the
other. And so the vulg^^ Latin renders it, As wisdom defends, so money
defends. Which kind of proportion is commonly expressed by a double Caph; as
Isa. 24.2. Or lastly, the Preposition (...) may here from a Nominative Case, as
Psalm 55.18. Hos. 13.9. and in other places, as some learned men have observed.
A shadow, (i.) a Defense, by a Metaphor borrowed from the shelter, which in
those hot countries men received under trees from the scorching heat of the
Sun, Job. 7.2. Isa. 25.4. and 30.2, 3. Psalm. 121.5, 6. Number. 14.9. Jon. 4 6, 8.
Wisdom is thus a refreshing defense from oppression and danger, Prove. 3.18.
Eccl. 9.15. Act. 23.6 -- 9. And money is a defense; It will arm, it will
ransom and buy a man out of danger, Prove. 13.8. and 10.15. and 19.4.

but the excellence of wisdom is, that wisdom gives life to them that have
it] They both defend, and therefore both together are very profitable; but of
the two, wisdom is the most excellent; he means spiritual wisdom, joined with
the fear of God which is the beginning of it, for this gives life, Prove. 3.16.
and 9.11. which riches cannot do, Psalm. 39.5, 6. and 49.16 -- 19. Prove. 11.4.
Rich Nabal died with sorrow, when wise Abigail saved the life of the family, 1 Samuel 25.33, 37, 38. Therefore wisdom is better then wealth, Prove. 8.11. and
16.16. and 4.5 -- 10. Many times a man's wealth shortneth his days, either by
his own luxurious and inordinate use of them, or by exposing him to the cruelty
of thieves and murderers. But a man's wisdom will fence him against such
dangers; or at least will quiet and comfort him under them, that he shall not
sink nor despond.

V. 13. Consider the work of God: for who, etc.] He seems to have prescribed
wisdom, with an inheritance, or unquestionable estate, to be the best remedies
against oppression, violence, and those other evils, which in a bad age we are
apt to complain of. But because such may be the badness of the times, and so
prevalent the injuries and corruptions thereof, as that neither wealth or
wisdom can defend a man against them: He here therefore directs to another
act of wisdom, namely, to look above the creatures, and all second causes, unto
the righteous hand and irresistible providence of God in them all; and where
wisdom cannot mend our condition, nor make the times, or the men thereof, or
our affairs therein, so right and orderly as we would have them, there to let
it, at the least, teach us contentment, silence, and an humble acquiescency in
the good pleasure of the Lord. Many things there are, which no humane wisdom
can rectify. In a public Pestilence or Famine, no ability of man can purge
the air, or open the windows of heaven to supply us. In a shipwreck, no wisdom
of man can rebuke the winds and seas, and command a calm. But in all such
cases, wisdom must teach us to submit to God, and to wait upon him.

See the work of God] (i.) Diligently view and take notice, in the course of
the world, of Gods overruling providence. The Scripture commonly uses words
of external senses, to express the actions of the soul within, Chap. 2.24. and
3.10.

the work of God] Namely, his righteous government of the world; when thou art
apt to complain of the times, and the oppressions therein, then remember, how
crooked soever things are, it is God that ordered and appointed all things; and
it is vain for thee to think, that by thy solicitude or anxiety, thou can
rectify every thing which thou art apt to complain of; for the decrees of God
are unalterable, like mountains of brass which cannot be moved* Zach. 6.1.15.
Therefore make that light by patience, which thou can not correct.

for who can make that straight, which he has made crooked?] This shows the
unalterableness of Gods order, which he in his providence has placed things
in. It may be understood, 1. In the course of nature, Be not angry, nor
fretfull against Gods work, in unseasonableness of winds or weather, in losses
by sea or land, in sicknesses and infirmities or deformities, which God
brings upon thee or thine; nor at the miscarriage of any means, or weakness
of any endeavors thou usest to rectify these things. This sin was the fault
of Israel in the wilderness, they murmured at things which they could not mend,
Exodus 17.2, 3. Numb. 11.4, 5, 6, 2 Reg. 6.33. Jon. 4.8, 9. 2. In Civil policy,
and the managing of humane societies; If thou see great concussions in States,
depopulating of Countries, translating of Kingdoms, plucking down and rooting
up, the Sword devouring as it pleases; wonder not, murmur not, but seriously
consider, that God has an overruling providence therein, and whatever else
displeases thee, yet rest silent and contented with what he does, Job 9.5 --
13^ Job. 12.14 -- 24. Psalm. 75.6, 7. Isa. 2.10 -- 19. Dan. 2.11. Jer. 18.6 --
10. and 47.6, 7. Ezekiel. 14.17. 3. In the sins and prevailing wickedness of men
in any kind, when thou see men incorrigible in wickedness, so crooked, that
no means will reclaim or rectify them; consider the work of Gods most
righteous judgment in hardening whom he will; and remember that God is so holy
that he would not suffer sin to prevail, if he were not also so wise and
powerful as to order it to his own glory, and that no wickedness of man shall
proceed further, then to execute what his pre-determinate counsel had
appointed, and that the remainder of it he will restrain, Romans 9.18. 1 Samuel
2.25. Genesis 50.20. Exodus 7.3, 4.2 These. 2.11, 12. Act. 4.28. Romans 11.8. Psalm.
76.10.

V. 14. In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity
consider] In the day of good be thou in good. Or, be thou good; That is,
joyful, and cheerful. The prefix (...), sometimes denoting a Nominative Case,
as some learned have observed. Or, it may note a fullness of joy; Be thou very
joyful: as the like phrase seems to import, Exodus 32.22. 1 John 5.19. Joh.
9.34. Mark 5.3, 25. Psalm. 29.4. and 33.4. When God gives thee prosper^ty, do
thou enjoy it with a cheerful and a thankful heart.

but in the day of adversity, or, in the day of evil consider, or, see] Times
of trouble and affliction are called evil days, Amos 5.13. Ephesians. 5.16. Eccl.
12.1. Consider; he does not say, Be thou in evil, or do thou droop and languish
under thine affliction; but consider the righteous providence of God, behave
thy self wisely, and sutably to his visitation; see from what hand it comes, to
what issue it tends; be not fretfull; use not sinful means to extricate thy
self out of trouble; look on it as the work of God, which though it seem
crooked unto thee, yet thou can not make straight, verse. 13. nor by
murmuring, or wrestling, mend thy self. Therefore in the day of evil, see to
thy self, take heed of any undecent and unbeseeming behavior of heart; so much
the word seeing sometimes does import, Mar. 12.38. and 13.9. 1 Cor. 10.12. as
also serious observing of what is proposed unto us, 1 Samuel 24.11. and accurate
perpending and attendance upon it, that we may learn something by it, So should
we behave our selves in the time of trouble, Mic. 6.9. Psalm. 94.12. and 119.71.
Isaiah 26.11. and 42.25.

God also has set the one over against the other] Has so ordered and tempered
the life of man, that good and evil should be, as it were, interwoven with one
another, that the vicissitude of them should take of the heart, either from
surfeiting on prosperity, or desponding in adversity; as God has set Winter
and Summer, Day and Night over against one another, Genesis 8.22. Psalm. 74.16, 17.
so good and evil in the life of man, Lam. 3.38. Isa. 45.7. that in prosperity,
a man might not say, He shall never be moved; nor in adversity, He shall never
be delivered; but that in the one, he might learn moderation; and in the other,
might exercise faith and hope, and might thankfully receive both good and evil
at Gods hand, Job. 1.21. and 2.10. Habet has vices conditio mortaliu^ ut
adversa ex secundis, ex adversis secunda, nascantur. As in a curious and well
proportioned building, one side does exactly answer unto that which is
over-right it, Ezekiel. 40.21. as in a balance, the weight in the one side, does
poise and answer to the wares in the other; so does God measure forth good and
evil in the lives of men, and proportion them to one another, so as may be best
fitted for humane frailty, and most conduce unto the spiritual good of his
servants, 1 Cor. 10.13. Psalm. 90.15. and 103.9, 14. 2 Cor. 1.4, 5, 9, 10. Isa.
57.16 -- 18.

to the end that man should find nothing after him] Or, To the end, that man
should not be able to find out, or to foresee any thing that is to befall him
afterward; that it being impossible for him, by his providence or prudence, to
prevent that order and vicissitude of events, which God has foreordained, he
may thereupon resolve patiently to submit to the will of the Lord, (which must
obtain notwithstanding all our unquietness) and to adore the wisdom and
goodness of God, who as he does by his Sovereign authority, whatsoever it
pleases both in heaven and earth, so does he by his admirable wisdom, and
Fatherly goodness, so dispose of things, and so temper them together for the
good of his servants, that none, who comes after him, can mend his work, be
able to order things better to his own advantage then God has done; and
hereupon since no man can find out any thing superfluous, any thing defective,
any thing irregular in the work of God, any thing which if he had been,
consulted, might have been better done; every man therefore ought to take heed
of fretting or complaining, or finding fault with the providence of God toward
him, and believe, that what the Lord does, is best done, and accordingly
acquiesce in it, and with silence and submission yield unto it, 1 Samuel 3.18. 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. and 16.10. Ps. 39.9. Acts 11.17, 18. Isa. 39.8. Romans 8.28. Job
9.22.13, 14, 15, 32. Mic. 7.9. Lam. 3.26 -- 39. Job 40.4.

V. 15. All things have I seen in the days of my vanity, etc.] He confirms
the former doctrine of Gods dark and wonderful providence, by his own
observation and experience. All these things have I observed in my vain and
short life, Chap. 6.12.

there is a just man that perishes in his righteousness] Is oppressed and
ruined, being innocent; or, for his righteousness; as Naboth, 1 Reg. 21. Hab.
1.13. In, sometimes is as much as for; as Genesis 29.18. Hos. 12.13. Genesis 18.28.
Jon. 1.14. Matthew. 6.7. Act 7.29.

and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life] Lives impunely in a wicked
way without control, and that many times, because he is wicked, Job 21.7. Jer.
12.1, 2. The Lord hereby teaching us, that there is a day to come wherein he
has appointed to judge the world in righteousness, called the day of the
revelation of his righteous judgments, Acts 17.31. Romans 2.5. He is most just
and righteous now in all his ways of providence, but many times in them he
hides himself, Isa. 45.15. that he may exercise the faith and patience of his
servants, and that the perdition of wicked men at the last, may by his long
suffering and patience toward them, be the more conspicuous.

V. 16. Be not righteous over much] Some would have this spoken in the name,
and according to the judgment of carnal Reason, as a politic precept unto
neutrality and indifferency in good courses, seeing piety and righteousness
does so often expose men unto danger, be not therefore over-forward and
religious, over-wise and scrupulous; be not so inflexible upon grounds of
conscience, remit a little of thy strictness, and accommodate thy self to the
exigence of times and circumstances, slacken thy hand, strike sail, loosen the
rudder bonds in a tempest. Why should thou unnecessarily expose thy self
unto danger? But I rather conceive that the name of the mean is here given to
the extreme, for a man may many times do a thing conscientiously, and upon an
opinion of duty, and thereby involve himself in much trouble and danger, when
indeed there was no necessity so to do. 1 Samuel 15.21. 2 Samuel 21.1, 2. Joh.
13.8. Romans 10.2, 3. Phil. 3.6. Act. 26.9. Joh. 16.2. Col. 2.18. 1 Timothy 5.23.
and in this sense the meaning is, be not righteous overmuch, be not too much
bent on a thing, just in thine own opinion, but temper thy zeal with godly
wisdom, advise with others, lean not on thine own understanding; make not thy
self over-wise, as if thine own private judgment were ground enough to
regulate all thy behaviors by, flatter not thy self in any opinionative
confidence of thine own ability to judge of all that is fit to be done, but
think soberly of thy self, Romans 12.3. The more humble thou art, the more wary
and circumspect thou will be, and the more wary, the more safe. Some apply this
against too much rigor and severity in censuring of men for unjust, when we see
them perish, or for righteous when we see them prosper, grounded upon the
doctrine of the former verse. But I rather take it for a Caution and direction
to moderate our zeal with prudence, least it bring upon us the forementioned
danger* Matthew. 10.16. It was the commendation of Agricola in Tacitus, Retinuit,
quod est difficillimum, ex sapientia modum. Quisquis plus justo non sapit, ille
sapit.

V. 17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish, etc.] Though there is
a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness, do not thou thereupon
take courage to let loose the reins to all lust, or to make the impunity of
others an encouragement to any excess of wickedness in thy self, for this is
folly and madness to run against a rock, because some one or other has escaped
shipwreck. He does not here allow any degree of wickedness, but because in many
things we sin all, and no man by his greatest vigilance can preserve himself
wholly from miscarriage, therefore he warns us to beware above all, of
breaking forth into presumptuous sins, and superfluity of naughtiness, Jam.
1.21. Excess and profuseness of evil, 1 Pet. 4.3. greediness of lust, Ephesians.
4.19. Jer. 6, 7. and 2 23, 24. and 8.6. Hos. 4.2. Mic. 7.3.

why should thou dye before thy time?] why should thou by excess of sin
consume thy body, waste thy strength, cast thy self into the danger of civil
justice, or under the curse threatened against desperate sinners, Ps. 55.23.
Prove. 10.27. Job. 15.32.

V. 18. It is good that thou should take hold of this, etc.] Take hold, that
is, firmly and constantly keep to it, and never let it go, Isa. 56.4. Job 17.9.
Prove. 4 13.

of this] Meaning either that which he speaks of in the present verse, the fear
of God, whereby the heart will be preserved from vicious and imprudent
extremes, and the dangers ensuing thereupon. Or else, the mediocrity he before
spoke of, it is good that thou hold fast this counsel, to follow the middle and
safe way, sincerely keeping unto duty, and yet wisely declining danger, and
then the clauses [of this] and [from this] must relate unto the two former
precepts, it is good that thou take hold of this, namely, that thou be not
overmuch wicked, and withal that thou withdraw not thine hand from that,
namely, that thou be not righteous overmuch.

for he that fears God shall come forth of them all] Of all those dangers,
which extremes are likely to draw men into. He that orders his ways in the
fear of God, turns aside neither to the right hand, nor to the left, but does
observe one precept, as that he departs not from another, shall thereby be
preserved from the dangers which lie on either hand, Ps. 34.9 -- 16. shall have
comfort in trouble, and deliverance out of it; for the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom, he does teach them how they may walk without offense, Ps.
25.12, 14. Job 22.28. Ps. 32.7, 8.

V. 19. Wisdom strengthens the wise, more than ten mighty men that are in
the City] By wisdom he means that wisdom which he advised in the three
preceding verses, that fear of God, whereby men are taught to keep an holy
moderation, and to avoid all unnecessary and imprudent extremes in evil times,
this wisdom will keep a man from the dangers mentioned verse. 15. more than
ten, that is, many mighty men, or principal commanders can preserve a city. A
godly man, who has God for his friend, and his Angels pitching their tents
about him, is thereby much safer from dangers, than a city is by the power of
many Dynastae or Potentates, who are entrusted with the defense of it, 2 Reg.
6.16. Eccles. 9.16. Isa. 8.10. 2 Samuel 20.16 -- 22. Prove. 24.3, 4, 5. Zach. 2.5.
Ps. 34 7. Prove. 3.21 -- 26. and 4.12, 13.

V. 20. for there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins
not] Though some conceive these words to have no relation or connection to the
words going before, or following after, yet they seem to have a very fair
aspect both ways. 1. To the former words; there is no man so just, but he will
sometimes be overtaken with sin, which will easily expose him unto danger, if
he have not spiritual wisdom to behave himself, in a fair accommodation
toward other. 2. To the following words, there is no man so just, who does not
sometimes fall into sin, and therefore he ought to bear with the errors and
failings of others. The common corruption of the best men requires of them,
both wisdom toward themselves to prevent danger, and charity toward their
brethren to forgive offenses: wisdom toward themselves, that they give not
occasion to any to reproach and speak evil of the ways of God, Col. 4.5, 6. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11, 12. Ephesians. 5.13, 16. 2 Cor. 11.12. 1 Pet. 2.12.15, 16. Charity
toward others, when they are overtaken with a fault, as considering
themselves, who are without Gods continued assistance, equally obnoxious to the
same miscarriages, Gal. 6.1. Col. 3.13.

not a just man upon earth] For the Saints in heaven are made perfect, they sin
no more, Heb. 12.23. The words in their absolute sense are a full testimony of
the imperfection of our inherent Righteousness in this Life, and that even
justified persons come very short of that exact and perfect obedience which the
Law requires, Ps. 103.3, 4. and 143.2. 1 Reg. 8.46. Isa. 64.6. Prove. 20.9. 1 John 1.8, 10. Romans 7.14 -- 23.

V. 21. Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken, lest thou hear thy
servant curse thee.] Set not thine heart upon all words that men speak, or all
things that they do unto thee: set not thine heart overcuriously to know them:
when thou do know them, lay them not to heart, be not troubled at them, do
not set thy self to revenge them, let them not disquiet thy mind, see them, and
see them not, 1 Samuel 9.20. 2 Samuel 13.20. 1 Samuel 25.25. and 1 Samuel 10.27. Prove.
19.11. and 20.3. It is a great point of wisdom to dissemble injuries, to
connive at them, to take no notice of them, to pass them by with meekness and
neglect, 2 Samuel 16.10, 11. This meekness he requires to be showed even toward
mean and abject persons, or toward the poorest servant in a man's family, who
does sometimes, it may be, through our own provocation, utter some hard and
undutiful speeches against us, Joh. 31.13, 14.

V. 22. for oftentimes also thine own heart knows, that thou thy self
likewise have cursed others] The order of the words seems to be inverted; for
the meaning is, thou art conscious to thy self that thou have oftentimes cursed
or spoken evil of others. The consideration of our own frequent passions and
infirmities should move us patiently to suffer, and willingly to pardon the
oversights of our brethren, Gal. 6.1. Tit. 3.3. Jam. 3.1, 2. Matthew. 7.1 -- 5.
The more sensible any man is of sin in himself, the more meek and charitable he
will be toward others. Pride is the ground of contention and censoriousness,
Prove. 13.10.

V. 23. All this have I proved by wisdom: I said I will be wise, but it was
far from me.] He professes the truth of all which he had before taught, that
wisdom is an excellent protection to a righteous man against his own
corruptions, and dangers ensuing thereupon, and confirms it by his own
experience and trial, according to that great wisdom which God had given him.
Yet withal, he acknowledges how short he came of that perfection in wisdom,
which he promised himself by the diligent use of means to attain unto.
Professing the great difficulty he found therein: 1. He was endued with the
Spirit of God, and with his fear, which is ever accompanied with spiritual
wisdom, Ps. 119.99, 100. 2. He had a personal and extraordinary promise of
wisdom above any other men, 1 Reg. 3.12. 3. He had used all the means to
increase this excellent grace of God in himself; 1. He did very highly prize
it, Prove. 3.13 -- 26. and 8.11, 12. 2. He had the benefit of a Religious
education, and his fathers instructions to quicken him in it, Prove. 4.4 -- 13.
3. He set his heart wholly upon it, that according to the property of wise men,
he might be yet wiser, and get more knowledge, Prove. 9.9. and 10.14. Eccles.
1.13. 4. He prayed earnestly unto God for it, (which is an excellent means to
get wisdom, Jam. 1.5. Ephesians. 1.17. Col. 1.9.) 2 Chronicles. 1.10. 5. He had humility,
and a due sense of his want of wisdom, (which also is a fit disposition of
heart to be taught of God, 1 Cor. 3.18. and 8.2. Ps. 25.9. Matthew. 11.25.) 1
Reg. 3.7. 6. He had all outward furtherances and accommodations toward the
getting of it, wealth, peace, power, authority, to call in all the assistances
which might be useful unto him in it, Eccles. 2.9, 10. 7. He had an
extraordinary stock of infused wisdom to begin withal, which he greatly
improved by long and accurate experience, 1 Reg. 4.30. Eccles. 1.16. And yet
after all this he professes, That though he said he would be wise, Though the
purpose of his heart was wholly set upon it, yet he found that it was far from
him. Teaching us thereby, 1. The unsearchable deepness and distance of wisdom
in its whole wideness from the noblest and most sublime understanding of man,
Job 28.12 -- 21. and 37.15 -- 23. and 38. per totum. Romans 11.33, 34. 2. That
the most perfect Saints are the most sensible of their imperfection; as the
more delicate the senses are, the more sharply are they affected with what
offends them, Romans 7.14 -- 24. and 12.3. 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. and 13.9, 10. 3. That
it is the nature of spiritual wisdom to discover spiritual wants, and the more
the soul knows of God, the greater does it discern and bewail its distance from
him; as things nearest the Center make more haste unto it, Exodus 33.11, 18.

V. 24. That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out?] Or,
that which has been, is far off, and exceeding deep: the word is doubled, to
note the superlative degree, as Prove. 20.14. He shows the cause why he was
far from wisdom, because the works of God, whether of Creation, Redemption, or
Providence, are very profound, abstruse, and mysterious, greatly distant from
the eye, and beyond the comprehension of the weak and narrow reason of man,
Prove. 2.4. Job 11.6 -- 10. Ps. 139.6.

V. 25. I applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out wisdom,
etc.] Or, I and my heart turned every way, left no means unattempted, exactly
to discover wisdom, etc. The using of many words unto one purpose, implies the
exquisite and curious search which Solomon made in this inquiry; as Deuteronomy.
13.14. See Chap. 1.13, 17. and 2.3, 12. Solomon was not so much discouraged by
the difficulty, as provoked by the excellency of wisdom, and made no other use
of the profoundness and abstruseness thereof, than to multiply his endeavors
in searching after it.

to seek out wisdom and the reason of things.] The curious art and subtle
contrivances of things: the same word is used, verse. 27, 29. Chap. 9.10. 2 Chronicles. 26.15. whereby we are taught in the disquisition of knowledge,
especially that which is spiritual, not to content our selves with a
superficial show, but to get rooted and grounded principles, that we may be
able with full assurance to give a reason of the hope which is in us, 1 Pet.
3.15. and to have a distinct comprehension of the truth, that we may be rooted
and fixed on it, Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18. and 4.14. and give a clear and deliberate
Judgment upon it.

I, and my heart] That is, I did heartily and seriously seek out. The
copulative Vau, does either import a preposition, I with my heart did search,
as 1 Samuel 14.19. or a more clear explication; I, that is, my heart: so the
learned conceive that copula many times to signify as much as, That is, as
Genesis 35.12. 1 Chronicles. 21.12. 2 Samuel 17.12. 1 Samuel 17.40. and 28.3.

And to know the wickedness of folly, even of foolishness and madness] Or, the
foolishness of madness: as the Apostles expression is (...), a sinning sin,
Romans 7.13. so here the Wise man expresses the desperate wickedness and folly
of corrupt hearts: by wickedness of folly, and foolishness of madness, thereby
signifying the vast and deep corruption and deceit which is in the heart of
man. The knowledge whereof he did search after, that he might be the better
able to convince and to dissect the consciences of others, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
Heb. 4.12. Ezekiel. 14.5. Isa. 49.2. Ps. 45.5. Rev. 1.16. only his study is in
this order, first he searches and seeks out wisdom, as an antidote against
the danger of his second studies, to discover the wickedness, folly, and
madness of sensual pleasures. And therefore we shall observe, that in the
particular wickedness which he specifieth in the next verse, namely, the
inticements of a whorish woman, he does often premise the Commendations of
wisdom, and the study of that, as an effectual prevention of that mischief,
Prove. 2.10 -- 19. and 5.1, 2, 3. and 6.6, 20 -- 24. Prove. 7.4, 5. and 9.10 --
13.

V. 26. And I find more bitter than Death the woman whose heart is snares and
nets, etc.] He shows the discovery which he had made by his study to find out
the wickedness of folly, and foolishness of madness, by instancing in one
particular vanity of the wiles and subtilties of harlots, which it was
necessary for him to add to the former catalogue of vanities, that he might
give to the Church then, and leave a record for all posterity to take notice of
his special Repentance for those gross miscarriages which by that means he had
been drawn into. And here he gives, 1. The Character of an whorish woman,
described, 1. By her subtilty. Her heart is snares and nets, her cunning
devices to deceive and entangle sensual persons, are as gins laid to catch
silly creatures, who are entised with the bait, but discern not the danger, See
Prove. 2.16. and 6.24, 26. and 7.5. and 9.16, 17. and 22.14. 2. By her power,
her hands, wherewith she catches, holds, embraces him, are as strong cords
to hale simple fools as an ox to the slaughter, Prove. 7.13, 21, 22. Judge.
16.15 -- 19.2. Here is the great danger of these nets and bands to the souls of
men.

They are more bitter than death] More pernicious, and bring more heavy
miseries with them. We read of the bitterness of death, 1 Samuel 15.32. and of a
worse bitterness, the end of a strange woman is bitter as wormwood, and her
steps take hold on hell, Prove. 5.4, 5. Death may be sweetened and sanctified,
made a welcome and desirable thing to a believer, 1 Cor. 15.55. Phil. 1.23.
Luke 2.29, 30. But the bitterness of hell is incurable; death may be
honorable, to dye in a good cause, in a good old age, to go to the grave in
peace, lamented, desired, with the sweet savor of an holy life, and many good
works to follow one, Rev. 14.13. Phil. 1.21. Ps. 116.16. But to consume and
putrify alive, under a Tabes of impure l^sts, to perish, as Tiberius did at
Capreae, quotidie perire me sentio, to shipwreck a man's honor, ruin his
estate, shorten his years, consume his flesh, put a hell into his conscience,
to bury his name, his substance, his soul, his carcass, in the bosom of an
Harlot; this is a bitterness beyond that of death, Prove. 5.9, 10, 11. and 6.26,
33. and 9.16, 17, 18.

who so pleases God, shall escape from her, but the sinner shall be taken by
her] Here is intimated the great wrath of God against this sin. It is a sin
which he uses to give over reprobates, and those whom he in special manner
hates, unto; a sin which few repent of, to take hold of the paths of life
again, Prove. 2.19. and 22.14. Amos 7.17. Romans 1.24 -- 28. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. A man
is not preserved from the power of this temptation by his own wisdom or
strength, but only by the supernatural grace of God.

V. 27.28. Behold, this I have found, (says the Preacher,) etc.] This, which
he had spoken of, verse. 26. or which follows, verse. 28.

says the Preacher] This added, 1. To give credit from his wisdom and
experience to what he here affirms: especially having made so distinct and
accurate an inquiry, weighing and comparing one by one, to find out the
account, and to come to a determinate and clear judgment in the case, and to
make a certain conclusion. 2. To testify to the Church his repentance. This
have I found, says the soul, which, by sound repentance, is returned unto the
Congregation of Saints, which was before ensnared in the nets and bands of
seducing women, and that upon serious and sad recollected thoughts, which he
has not yet given over, but does insist upon the same penitent inquiry still.

one man amongst a thousand have I found, but a woman amongst all those have I
not found] The meaning is not to condemn one sex rather than the other; for
all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23.) and Solomon
had known good and wise women, as well as men, Prove. 18. 22. and 19.14. Prove.
12.4. and 31.10 -- 30. But he speaks here of his observation, according to
his former sensual conversation with wanton women, which seems to be the reason
of the number here mentioned: for Solomon had a thousand wives and concubines,
all strange women of the neighbor wicked nations, which turned away his heart
from the Lord unto idols. Amongst all these thousand, Solomon had not found one
good one, 1 Reg. 11.1 -- 9 Or the s^btil counsels of one man, amongst many, may
more easily be discerned, than of any harlot, because their flatteries and
dalliances do steal away the heart, and put out the eyes and judgment, and
infatuate a man so, that he can look no further than the present delights
wherewith they do bewitch him, Hos. 4.11. Judge. 16.17 -- 21. Prove. 7.21, 22.
and 5.6.

V. 29. Lo, this only have I found, that God has made man upright, but they
have sought out many inventions,] This only: He could not discover all the
streams of wickedness and folly amongst men: but the original and fountain of
them all he does discover, namely, the corruption of the heart of man by the
fall; this he found, that their wickedness was not from God, nor by creation,
but from themselves, and their willing entertainment of the temptation of the
serpent. Some more subtly expound these words, as a confirmation of the
former: God made Adam Right, and so he continued so long as he was alone: but
when the Woman was given unto him, she tempted him, and then they sought out
many inventions. Because the woman was first in the transgression, 1 Timothy 2.14.
But here he speaks of both Sexes together under the name of man, and shows,
that they were made without any of this sinful and subtle wisdom, after the
Image of God, endowed with divine wisdom to discern the way unto true
happiness, and with perfect ability to pursue the same, Genesis 1.26. Col. 3.10.
But though he were made upright, yet he was as a creature, mutable, and so
subject to be overcome by temptation, and accordingly he did easily admit of
the temptation of Satan, and sought out many inventions of his own, did not
content himself with that way to happiness which God had prescribed, but
fancied to himself an higher perfection, and yielded to follovv those new ways
unto blessedness, which Satan and his own deceived heart, did suggest unto
him, and so fell from his primitive honor, and became like the Beasts that
perish, and contracted a bottomless and unsearchable depth of sinful deceit,
which none but God can thoroughly search and discover, Jer. 17.9. Isa. 57.10.
Jer. 2.23, 24. and 32.22. By many inventions, he means all these vain, though
crooked counsels, and carnal shifts wherewith men do pacify, palliate, excuse,
defend all their sinful courses, Psalm. 119.133. Romans 1.21. 2 Cor. 10.5. Genesis
6.5. Ludovicus De Dieu translateth the words thus, Ipsi autem quae sierunt
cogitationes Magnatum, They sought out the inventions of mighty men, or of the
Angels, who were not contented with their own station, but forsook it, Jud. v.
6. and so relates to the temptation of the Serpent, Ye shall be like unto
Gods, you shall be advanced into a nobler and more honorable condition, then
now you are in, Genesis 3.5. these thoughts, being suggested by Satan, they
ambitiously entertained, and so fell from their primitive perfection.

CHAP. VIII.
THe wise man proceeds in this Chapter, to give further precepts touching
tranquillity of life. And they are, 1. Practical prudence with the fear of God,
which stamp a kind of majesty and luster on the face of a man, and make him to
be had in reverence of others, verse. 1. 2. Obedience to Magistrates, without
hastily attempting, or obstinately persisting in any rebellious design it being
in their power, as they please, to avenge themselves upon us, verse. 2.3, 4, 5.
3. Preparedness of heart to bear inevitable evils, by a prudent observation of
times, and judging of what is in a concurrence, of such and such circumstances
fittest to be done, and where things are dark and undiscernable, to dispose our
hearts quietly to yield to the providence of God, verse. 6, 7, 8. 4. Because it
is a very great temptation unto disquietnesse and impatiency of spirit, when a
man lives under wicked Rulers, against whose cruelty* all a man's wisdom and
meekness can hardly be security enough: He therefore, 1. observes the
providence of God in this particular, verse. 9, 10. 2. the reason of that
insolence and excess of evil in the lives of such men, verse. 11. 3. the grounds
o^ comfort unto good men in this temptation* and of terrors and restraint upon
evil men, notwithstanding their present power and prosperity, verse. 12.13.
Laying down a general proposition concerning Gods providence in the affairs of
this life, whereunto good men should submit. verse. 14. 5*

A cheerful enjoyment of outward and present blessings, without anxious
solicitude for the future, verse. 15. 6. A patient resting in the providence of
God, admiring his works, and adoring the unsearchablenesse of his counsels;
whose judgments, though they may be secret, yet they cannot be unrighteous,
verse. 16, 17.

Verse. 1. W Who is as the wise man? and who knows the interpretation of a
thing?] He had set his heart to seek out wisdom and folly, Chap. 7.25. And
having there handled the later of these two, as the use of the Scripture many
times is, when two members or branches of a subject are proposed, to handle the
later first, and then to resume the former. Behold how good and pleasant it is
for brethren to dwell together in unity, Psalm. 133.1. Pleasant as the precious
oynment of Aaron, verse. 2. Good and profitable, as the dew of Hermon, verse. 3.
Isa. 56.3, 4, 6.) he does here return to the former member, showing the
excellency of wisdom, whereunto no other is to be compared. The prefix Caph
may be understood, either as a note of similitude, Who is as the wise man? (i.)
None is to be compared to him: And so it may be understood as spoken of
himself, Who has attained a greater measure of wisdom then I have? who yet
with my utmost studies have not been able to find out the perfection of it.
Chap. 7.23, 24. Or it may be taken pro not a veritatis, and so the sense to be,
that no man can attain unto perfect wisdom, as verse. 16, 17.

and who knows the interpretation of a thing?] Here are two sorts of wise men
noted unto us, 1. He that is wise in himself: 2. He that is able to teach
others wisdom. Or, who is able truly to judge of all affairs, and rightly to
discern what in every case is to be done, or left undone? Dan. 2.4, 5, 7. and
4.3.16.

a man's Wisdom makes his face to shine] This seems to allude to the
brightness of Moses his face, Exodus 34.29, 30, 34. the like whereunto we read
of Stephen. Acts 6.15. Hereby is noted, 1. That wisdom does beautify a man
with tranquillity of mind, and cheerfulness of countenance, spem front
serenat, Psalm. 4.6, 6. Prove. 15.13. and 16.24. Psalm. 34.5. 2. That it makes
his light of holiness to shine out unto others, Matthew. 5.16. Joh. 5.35. Phil.
2.15. 3. That it renders him reverend, venerable, amiable in the eyes of
others, and does conciliate special honor and favor unto him, in the hearts
of those that converse with him, Job 29.7 -- 16. 4. That it inlightneth his
eyes, that he may more clearly understand what he is to do, and to leave
undone; the light of the Lord shines on his ways, Psalm. 25.9. Job 22.28.
Psalm. 32.8. 1 John 2.20.

and the boldness, or, strength of his face shall be changed, or, doubled] By
the strength of the face, we may understand fierceness, Impudence, sourness,
austerity; as Dan. 8.23. Deuteronomy. 28.50. Prove. 7.13. and 21.29. Isa. 3.9. Psalm.
10.4. Jer. 4.3. wisdom changes all this into mildness, meekness, and
serenenesse of countenance; as Moses was the wisest and holiest, so he was the
meekest man, Numb. 12.3. Prove. 11.2. 2. By strength of face, we may understand
confidence and courage; For the righteous is bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. Guilt
and shame cast down the countenance, Genesis 4.5, 6. Righteousness and wisdom
embolden it, 1 Samuel 1.18. Job 11.15. Luke 21.28. And in this sense, some read
the text thus, (which the Original word well bears) The strength of his
countenance, his confidence and courage shall be doubled, Chap. 9.19. Isa.
40.31. Prove. 4.18.

V. 2. I counsel thee to keep the kings commandment, and that in regard of the
oath of God] I to keep. There is in the Original an Ellipsis, and something
necessarily to be supplied, as is usual in other places, Psalm. 120.7. Hos.
14.8. 2 Cor. 9.6. Matthew. 25.9. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. 1 Timothy 4.3. Genesis 25.22. Matthew.
21.30. I, if thou will admit of my counsel or persuasion, thus advise thee. It
is put Elliptically, to intimate a special Emphasis, and to give authority to
the precept, Gal. 5.2.

To keep the Kings command] To observe the mouth of the King. The Angels are
said to see, or observe the face of God, in token of obedience and readiness to
execute his commands, Matthew. 18.10. Esth. 1.14, 1 Reg. 10.8. The mouth is often
used for the command, which proceeds from it, Exodus 38.21. Numb. 4.27. Josh.
1.18. Our obedience must not be according to our own fancies or conjectures,
but according unto the prescript of the Law, for the Law is the mouth of the
Magistrate. This is one special part of prudence, in order unto tranquillity of
life, to be faithful and obedient toward Magistrates, and not to make our
selves wiser then the Law.

and that in regard of the oath of God] These words are both an enforcement,
and a limitation of the duty prescribed;

1. An enforcement: It is necessary to yield obedience unto Magistrates, not
only out of fear toward them, because of their sword, but out of conscience
toward God, and because of his vows that are upon us, Romans 13.5. and so it
seems to relate unto some covenant and oath of fidelity, which was taken by
them toward their Princes. We read of the covenant between the king and the
people made before the Lord, 1 Chr. 11.3. and a promise or league made in the
presence of God, was likely to be by the intervention of an oath, as the
covenant between Abimelech and Abraham, Genesis 21.23, 24. See Genesis 26.28, 29. and
31.44, 53. And this may seem to be intimated in that phrase of Giving the hand
under Solomon; which we render, By submitting themselves unto him, 1 Chronicles.
29.24. A like Ceremony, whereunto Abraham's servant used, when he swear
faithfulness unto him, Genesis 24.2, 3. and 47.29. So giving the hand, was a
ceremonial confirmation of some sworn covenant or promise, Ezra 10.19. Ezekiel.
17.18, (...), Iliad. 2. And hence some here by Iuramentum Elohim, understand
the Oath of the Magistrates, who are sometimes in Scripture so called, Exodus
22.28. Psalm. 82.1, 6. Josh. 10.34. Thereby to teach them to rule for God, not
by their own lust, but by his Law, and for the good of his people. But I rather
understand, by the Oath of God, an oath sworn unto God, Isa. 19.18. and 44.4. 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 14. and 34.31, 32. So that we are bound to be obedient unto
Magistrates for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13 -- 17. as servants are required
upon the same account, to yield obedience to their masters, Ephesians. 6.5 -- 8.

2. This clause contains a limitation, by which our obedience unto men is to
be bounded: Keep the Kings Command; yet so, that thou do not violate thine oath
and obedience due unto God. Thy service to the one, must be such as will
consist with the fealty to the other; for we are bound unto God and his service
by oath and covenant, 1 Pet. 3.21. Neh. 9.38. and 10.29. Psalm. 119.106. and no
subordinate obedience to others must make us forget our duty unto him, 1 Samuel
19.1. and 22.17. Dan. 3.16, 17, 18. Act. 4.19. and 5.20. 1 Pet. 2.17. Prove.
24.21. 1 Reg. 21.3. Esth. 3.2. 1 Samuel 14.45.

V. 3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight, etc.] Or, Go not hastily out of his
sight. When two Verbs finite come together, either the later is to be taken
infinitively; as Deuteronomy. 2.31. Esth. 8.6. Psalm. 102.13. or the former
adverbially; as Genesis 24.18. 1 Samuel 4.14. Hos. 9.9.

Be not hasty to go] It signifies such haste, as arises out of terror and
perturbation of spirit, in which sense the word is frequently taken, Exodus
15.15. 2 Samuel 4.1. Job 23.15. He shows the root of Rebellion, namely,
impatience, fear, perturbation of spirit, whereby men fling off from their
Allegiance. Servants are said to stand in the presence of their Lords, 1 Reg.
10.8. Esth. 1.4. So that hasting out of their presence, implies, a declining
and casting off of obedience, Jon. 1.3. 1 Reg. 12.16. This is one part of
obedience here forbidden, hastiness in taking offense, discovering of choler
and discontent, flying away in passion, either from the presence or from the
Commands, or from the anger of a King; not remembering that Kings have many
eyes, and can see at a great distance, and long arms, and can easily reach
those that fly in discontent from them. Obedience, innocence, calmness of
spirit, a meek and yielding disposition, may secure and reconcile a man, (for a
soft answer turns away wrath) when turbulency and unquietness will but plunge
him into greater disfavour and danger. Another and worser Error, is wilfully
to persist in disobedience, and to boil up the former passion into habitual
stubbornness.

Do not thou stand in an evil thing] If thou have been transported with
perturbation, and gone out of the way, cool and draw back betime; do not harden
thy self in thy defection, but labor, by forbearance and mildness, to recover
his favor again, Prove. 15.1. and 25.15. and 30, 32. To stand in a thing, is to
have a fixed and unmoved resolution upon it, 1 Cor. 7.37. Ephesians. 6.11, 13, 14.

for he does what soever pleases him] This is not spoken to confirm, or give
allowance unto any revengefull and cruel Actions of Princes, as if their power
did serve to execute their own lusts; but he shows, besides the sinfulness of
it, how unsafe, and how fruitless it is to resist those, who have power to do
what they please, and who being injured and provoked, can easily break in
pieces those who rise up against them.

V. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power: and who may say unto him,
What do thou?] Think not that thou shall be able to escape the wrath of a
King: for if he but speak the word, he has power enough to reach thee where
ever thou go: Where ever the Command of a King comes, it is accompanied with
power enough to be avenged on any that provoke him. He never wants instruments
to execute his displeasure. When Saul pronounced death upon the Priests, there
wanted not a Doeg to set upon them, 1 Samuel 22.18. Dan. 5.19.

and who may say unto him, What do thou?] This elsewhere spoken of God, who
works all things by the counsel of his own Will, and does whatsoever he
pleases both in heaven and earth, Job 9.12. But of Princes and Magistrates it
cannot be absolutely and so fully spoken; for being subject unto Error, and
miscarriages, they may with humility and wisdom be admonished, 1 Samuel 14.45,
46. But he speaks here of the great power which they have, against which the
people dare not to mutter, Prove. 30.31. and ought not without much reverence to
contest withal, Job 34.18.

V. 5. Whosoever keeps the commandment, shall know no evil] This may be
understood either of the Commands of God, Piety and godly Wisdom will teach a
man to walk so circumspectly, as that he shall not provoke the wrath of the
King to his own ruin: or of Commandment of the King, whereof he spoke, verse. 2.

he that observes his commandment, shall know no evil,] None of the danger
before mentioned, verse. 3. shall live securely, and quietly out of fear, Romans
13.3, 4. 1 Timothy 2.2.

and a wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment] This is a
qualification of the precept, a wise man will not for fear of danger, or hope
of advantage, do all that is commanded him by a blind obedience, but he
considers the season wherein, and the manner how to execute commands: or he
knows to find out a proper season, and right way to apply himself unto the
Prince, to prevent his displeasure, to gain his favor, to qualify or alter
his Commands, if they be any way grievous, 1* Chron. 21.3. Judge. 6.27. Genesis
32.7, 8, 13, 16, 17. and 33.12, 14. 1 Samuel 25.18 --. 1 Chronicles. 12.32. Neh. 2.4,
5, 12, 16. Esth. 4.5. and 7.2. and 8.5, 6.

V. 6, 7. Because to every purpose, there is time and judgment: therefore the
misery of man is greater upon him. For he knows not that which shall be: for
who can tell him when it shall be?] Because to every purpose or enterprise
there is a proper season, and peculiar manner of acting, upon which narrow
points, the happy success of such undertakings do depend, and this cannot
without much wisdom be duly observed: hence it comes to pass, that the
misery of man is great upon him. This general is to be applied to the
particular case, a man by incurring the displeasure of his Prince, brings
much misery upon himself, because he wants that wisdom, which should suggest
a proper opportunity, and right way of regaining his favor again. When there
is ignorance and folly within, dangers and snares without, it is hard for a man
to walk safely. There is no greater part of wisdom then the prudent observing
of times, circumstances, and the right manner of transacting businesses that
are of weight and consequence unto us, Jer. 8.7, 8. Amos 5.13. Luke 19.44.
Prove. 15.23. Act. 22.25 -- 29. Act. 23.6, 7.

for he knows not that which shall be.] Because a man cannot foresee future
events, nor exactly judge of the consequences of actions, therefore it is very
difficult to avoid many of those miseries which by reason of this ignorance do
attend him. There is one season, and one manner of acting, which would have
been seconded with success, if a man could have foreseen it, but any other
time, any other way of proceeding, would miscarry: great therefore must needs
be the misery of man by reason of this ignorance, who has ^ thousand ways to
miss the mark, and but one to hit it. A man cannot so much as fore-appoint his
own actions for the future, much less foresee the consequences and issues
which would follow thereupon, Prove. 27.1. Jam. 4.14. None can foretell a man
what shall be, but God alone, Isa. 41.^3. and 44.7. and 46.10. Only this a
wise and holy man may be sure of, that whatever falls out shall be for his
good, though it may be contrary to his desire and expectation, 1 Cor. 3.22.

V. 8. There is no man that has power over the spirit, to retain the spirit,
neither has he power in the day of death.] By spirit, he means the breath of
life, or the soul. So it is often understood, Genesis 6.19. Job* 7.7. Isa. 42.5.
Psalm. 104.29. Luke 8.55. Jam. 2.26.

This may be understood, 1. Generally, to signify the weakness which is in man
to help himself against the greatest future evil, namely, death: no power,
industry, wisdom, can keep the Soul, when God by death requires it: no man
has the dominion over his own life, to live as long as it pleases himself;
nor over death, to repel and resist Heb. 9. it when it comes, Psalm. 49.7 --
10.27.

2. Particularly, to the present argument of obedience to Princes, whose wrath
is as the roaring of a Lion, whose displeasure cannot be avoided. An offender
has no power to retain his life, when supreme authority passes judgment
against it: and therefore we ought wisely to take heed of those provocations
which are likely to cast us under so great danger: for the punishment of
rebellion can no more be avoided, then the Wind can be held fast. Therefore we
ought to keep our selves still within the bounds of duty, and that will
preserve us from evil, as verse. 5.

to retain the spirit] To shut it in, to keep it from going away. Neither has
he, or any man, power in the day, or over and against, the day of death, to
adjourn and prorogue it; aequo pede pulsat pauperum tabernas, regumque turres.
The power of a King is as little against death, as the power of the meanest
beggar. And therefore some have observed, That whereas when David is mentioned
upon other occasions, he is usually spoken of by the name of King David; when
his death is spoken of, there is no mention of his Dignity and Office, but
only of his name, 1 Reg. 2.1.

and there is no discharge in that warr] Or, no weapon wherewith we can prevail
in our war with death. There is no apparatus bellicus against such an
Adversary, no arrow or javelin that a man can let fly in this combat; Or,
there is no mission into this battle, in vain does any man go forth to make War
against death. So the word seems to be understood, Psalm. 78.49. (...). So
Symmachus renders it. It is not possible to stand in battle array against such
an adversary: the Septuagint render it thus, (...). There is no mission or
dimission in that war; which sense our Interpreters seem to follow, in their
Version, There is no discharge in that war, no man can have a Vacation or an
Exa^ctoration from that warfare. There is no protection or deliverance from the
hand of death.

neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it] Unquiet
wickedness, sinful shifts, which men in danger are apt to betake themselves
unto, though a man turn himself every way, and move every stone, yet he shall
not be able to deliver himself. Saul and Pilate would fain shift off the guilt
of their sins upon the people, 1 Samuel 15.21. Matthew. 27.24. and Caiaphas
pretended necessity for his persecuting of Christ, Joh. 11.50. but this did not
deliver their souls. By wickedness, here may be understood, in relation to the
argument of the text, Rebellion, Sedition, disobedience against Magistrates, as
1 Samuel 24.13. The words are a (...), wickedness shall not deliver, that is, It
shall destroy those that use it; as Romans 1.16. Psalm. 51.17. Prove. 17.21. Prove.
11.4.

V. 9. All this have I seen, and applied mine heart unto every work, that is
done under the Sun: There is a time wherein one man rules over another to his
own hurt.] With his wonted transition he passes on to the observing of another
Vanity, which was to be found amongst men; I applied or gave mine heart unto
every work, as Chap. 7.25. teaching us with special attention to observe the
ways of Gods providence in the world, Psalm. 111.2. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. When he
was thus considering of the right means of living comfortably, by yielding due
obedience unto Government: He found that some Princes were so tyrannical and
intolerable, that it was very hard for men to live quietly under them, they go
on without control, and miserably afflict the poor people, Prove. 28.15, 16.
for whose good and comfort they were appointed, Romans 13.4. God thus pleasing in
his Justice many times to punish the sins of a Nation, by giving them up into
the hands, under the will of unrighteous Governors, Zach. 11.6. Hos. 13.11.
Job 34.30. Isa. 10.6. and 14.20. and 19.4. But he shewthe vanity of such
Tyrannical courses. They tend at last to the hurt of those that use them: the
Rod which beats the children, is usually at last thrown into the fire. As
their power has put into their hands a greater liberty of sinning, so has it
heaped up for them a greater measure of wrath, Isa. 10.12. Dan. 11.36 -- 40.
Isa. 14.4 -- 23. 1 Reg. 15.29, 30.

V. 10. And so I saw the wicked b^ried, who had come and gone from the place of
the Holy: and they were forgotten in the City where they had so done: This is
also vanity.] These words are obscure, some understanding the former part of
wicked Rulers, and the later part of good Rulers: others, the whole, only of
wicked ones. The sum of the former sense is this; When I considered the rule of
Tyrants over others, I observed that when they were dead and buried, they did
as it were come and return again in their Children or wicked Successors, who
reigned like them, Job 8.18, 19. or when they had been deprived and deposed,
and so as it were buried, I saw them return to domination again. But other good
men, who had walked with God in his holy place, are driven out of sight, made
to run into corners, and as it were buried in forgetfulness, Prove. 28.12, 28.
Psalm. 12.8. even in that City where they had done Right. This he looked on as a
great Vanity, that the memory of good men should perish; and wicked men should
be had in honor. But the other sense which applies all to wicked Rulers,
seems to be more genuine, and is followed by our Translation; I saw wicked
Rulers continue all their life long in the place of the Holy one, to be had in
great honor, and after they had gone in and out before the people in the place
of Justice and Government, (which is the Throne of God) I saw them
magnificently buried in very great pomp and solemnity, Luke 16.22. yet being
dead, notwithstanding all those flatteries and formalities in their funeral,
their name and memories did quickly perish and dye with their bodies, insomuch,
that in that very City where they had lived in so great power, and been buried
in so much state, they were presently forgotten, neither the Nobleness of their
Families, nor the flatteries of their Creatures, nor the magnificent Monuments
erected for them, were able to preserve their names from rottenness, Psalm.
37.9, 10, 35, 36. Prove. 10.7. By the place of the Holy, or of the Holy one, as
Hab. 3.3. understand the Tribunals of Judgment, whereon they sit as his
Vicegerents, Deuteronomy. 1.17. Psalm. 82.1. Exodus 22.28. 1 Chronicles. 29.23. 2 Chronicles.
19.6* By coming and going, seems to be intimated the administration of the
public Office of Government, elsewhere expressed in the like manner, by going
in and out before the people, Numb. 27.17. Deuteronomy. 31.2. 1 Reg. 3.7.

and they were forgotten] The Septuagint render it, and they were praised; upon
an easy mistake of one letter for another in the original word.

where they had so done] Others, where they had done right, in the first of the
two former senses; (...), as Symmachus: or where whatsoever they did was
accounted Right, and so it is appliable to the later sense.

This is also Vanity] All the power and pomp of wicked men in their life, and
funerals, is but mere Vanity, since when they are gone, their names and
memorials perish with them.

V. 11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily:
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.] Here
is intimated the Reason why wicked Rulers go on without remorse or control in
their tyranny and oppression all their life long; namely, because the Judgments
of God threatened against them, are not presently put in execution. The
prosperity of wicked men does exceedingly strengthen and harden them in their
wickedness. This proceeds from infidelity, and a root of Atheism in their
hearts, they cannot see afar off; or if they do, yet because evil seems far
from them, therefore they go on securely, abusing the goodness and
long-suffering of God unto presumption, which should have led them unto
repentance, Romans 2.4.

First, we here see that there is sentence pronounced against every wicked
work, Isa. 3.10, 11.

Secondly, That the Lord is slow in putting that sentence in execution, being
willing that men should repent, 2 Pet. 3.9.

3. That the sentence being pronounced, though it come slowly, yet it will come
surely against ungodly men. It is every day nearer and nearer, and the longer
it stays, the more heavy it will be. It comes with feet of wool, but it will
strike with hands of lead, Genesis 6.3.

4. That wicked men abuse Gods patience unto presumption, and because they see
all well with them, do despise his threatenings to their own destruction, Isa.
5.19. Jer. 5.12. and 17.15. 2 Pet. 3.4. Ezekiel. 12.22. Psalm. 55.19.

5. That Impunity makes wickedness more excessive and outrageous, and the
heart of man is the more filled and emboldened in wickedness, by how much the
more experience it has of Gods slowness to wrath, Matthew. 24.48, 49. Prove.
7.18, 19, 20. 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.

therefore the heart of the sons of men is full in them, or is f^lly set in
them to do evil.] is bold in them, so Aquila: therefore the sons of men do
evil, (...), with a fearless and presumptuous heart; so Symmachus: the phrase
notes an height of confidence and resolvedness on sinful courses, called in
the Scripture, madness, excess, greediness, rushing, breaking forth,
superfluity, etc. Esth. 7.5. Act. 5.3. Genesis 6.12, 13. Luke 6.11. Jer. 50.38. 1
Pet. 4.4. Ephesians. 4.19. Jer. 6.7. and 8.6. Hos. 4.2. Jam. 1.21.

V. 12, 13. Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
prolonged: yet surely I know, etc.] Here he answers the Temptation whereby
good men are apt to be offended at the prosperity of wicked men, Psalm. 73.2, 3.
Jer. 12.1. and wicked men to be hardened in their sins thereby: Though a sinner
do continue to do evil, and escape punishment an hundred times, never so often,
as Chap. 6.3.

and his days be prolonged] Or* his punishment delayed: or God do put off his
anger, and not straightway execute it upon him, Chap. 7.15. Isa. 48.9. Deuteronomy.
4.40. Exodus 20.12. yet surely I know, and do considently affirm, That it shall
be well with them that fear God, Isa. 3.10, 11. The order of the consequence is
inverted, and first the remuneration of good men is mentioned, before the
punishment of evil men, to strengthen their faith, and to comfort them against
the oppressions and injuries of their potent adversaries, because usually the
rage of Tyrants does vent it self against those that fear God.

which fear before him] This is the character of a good man, they fear God
sincerely, they tremble at his presence, they labor to commend their hearts
and consciences to him in well doing, Isa. 8.13. When wicked men prosper and
rage, they fret not, they fear not their cruelty, but still they hold fast
their integrity, and go on steadily in obedience and patient waiting on God.

But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days,
which are as a shadow] It shall not well] This is a (...), less being said then
is intended: for the meaning is, It shall be very ill with him; as Exodus 20.7.
Psalm. 34.5. Romans 1.16. Psalm. 84.12. Isa. 42.3. Romans 4.19. Revel. 12 11.

neither shall he prolong his dayes] Long life is oftentimes promised as a
blessing, Prove. 28.16. Exodus 20.1^. Psalm. 91.16. Prove. 3.2. and the contrary
threatened as a curse, Psalm. 55.23. and though they seem to live long, their
longest life is but as a shadow, which suddenly is gone, Psalm. 144.4. wrath
does at last certainly overtake them. Whereas in Scripture sometimes prolonging
of ones days, relates to a life after death, and a victory over it, Isa. 53.10.

V. 14. There is a vanity which is done upon the earth] He does not pass this
Censure upon the wise and righteous providence of God, who orders all the
seeming confusions and disorders which are in the world, and who is pleased
after a seeming inequality to dispense good or evil unto men, contrary to what
our reason does judge most equal and righteous, Job 9.22. and 21.7, 8. But
first he speaks according to the judgment of flesh and blood, which is apt to
judge hardly of so strange a distribution, Psalm. 73.13, 14.2. He does it, to
show the vanity of all outward things which do variously happen unto men under
the Sun, which being distributed without any great difference, sometimes evil
things to good men, and good things to evil men, do lead us necessarily to
think but meanly of them, and to look after a further Judgment, wherein rewards
and punishments shall be in a more notable manner dispensed, Chap. 7.15. 1 Cor.
15.19. And even in this distribution there is much goodness showed to one man
in his sufferings, whereby his graces are exercised: and much wrath and justice
to others in their prosperity, whereby they are many times hardened and
ensnared, Psalm. 69.22. Hos. 13.6.

V. 15. Then I commended mirth, because a man has no better thing under the
Sun, then to eat, and to drink, and to be merry, etc.] Some make this to be a
sensual and carnal deduction drawn from the former observation, that since by a
man's most circumspect walking he can no more free himself from evils, then if
he lived more loosely, and since evil men do many times go away with the
rewards of good men, and good men suffer such things as they had not deserved:
since a man gets nothing by his holiness, nor loses any thing by his
wickedness: It is therefore the best way to take our pleasures, to eat and to
drink and be merry, and to take no further care then how we may for the present
gratify our licentious desires, 1 Cor. 15.32. Isa. 22.12, 13. Amos 6.3 -- 6.
Psalm. 73.11, 12. But I rather understand the words in the sense formerly
expressed, Chap. 2.24. and 3.12, 13, 22. and 5.18. Since it is impossible for a
man to free himself from those common vanities and temptations which are under
the Sun, Therefore there is no greater wisdom, no better remedy of our present
vexations, then to compose our hearts in an holy calmness and security, not
over-curiously or querulously to inquire into the dark providence of God in
the World, but with an holy submission to commit our selves to the Lord, and in
his fear, and with cheerfulness and thanksgiving to enjoy the present blessings
which his bounty has bestowed upon us, without any unquietness of spirit at
the disorders we see, or any anxious and sollicitous thoughts touching any
thing which for the future we may fear, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.

for that shall abide with him of his labor, the days of his life, which God
gives him under the Sun] This is the only fruit which a man can reap in this
life from all his labor; greater benefit he can never expect from any thing
under the Sun, then to have food and raiment, with cheerfulness of heart in the
use of them.

V. 16, 17. When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business
that is done upon the earth] He here concludes with a reason why a man ought
not anxiously to perplex or disquiet his thoughts about the Works of Gods
Providence, in the Government of the World, why good men are afflicted, and ill
men advanced; because when a wise man has applied his mind, made it his
business, broken his sleep in this inquiry, yet he shall come short of what he
promised himself, and must at last acquiesce in the Sovereignty and Dominion of
God, whose Works are unsearchable, and whose Judgments past finding out:
therefore we must suppress all rash censures of those things the reasons
whereof we are not able to attain unto, and with calmnesse and tranquillity of
spirit, labor to enjoy present comforts rather then to busy our selves with
curious and fruitless inquiries.

to see the business that is done on the earth] That is, to discover and get a
clear, distinct and satisfying account of all the works of Gods providence in
the world, to comprehend the reasons of the administration and Government
thereof, to have a rational view of the compages and whole frame of humane
affairs, to reconcile all the seeming absurdities and incongruities which
appear in them, to look exactly into the Temperament and Composition of so many
infinite, and contrary events, unto the making up of one most exquisite and
beautiful work

for there is that neither day nor night sees sleep with his eyes] As Chap.
2.23. This he speaks of his incessant study, in denying himself necessary
refreshments, out of the intentnesse of his mind in this inquiry, as strong
and fixed thoughts will keep away sleep from our eyes, Psalm. 127.2. Ecles. 5.12.

a man cannot find out the work that is done under the Sun] Cannot perfectly
understand: or search into the counsel of God in the government of humane
affairs, his secret Judgments, his admirable contrivances, his various
wisdom Job. 11.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 36.6, and 92.5. a man can neither by labor, nor
by wisdom, (the two great Engines and Instruments of discovery,) attain unto
it. He does not hereby discourage us from searching into the works of God,
which elsewhere we are directed to observe, Psalm. 111.2. and 104.24. and 105.5.
and 106.13. Isa. 5.12. But only teaches us after all, to adore the depths of
his wisdom, to rest satisfied that whatever he does, how contrary so ever it
appear unto humane reason, is righteously, holily, and wisely done. Secret and
wonderful his works may be, but they are never unjust: and therefore when we
cannot understand them. we must admire and adore them, Job 9.2 -- 14: and
40.2.3. Romans 11.33 -- 36.

CHAP. IX.
IN the end of the former Chapter, the Wise man observed the secret and hidden
course of Gods providence; and in this, proceeds in the same argument, taking
notice of a confused administration of the world in common Events which do
equally befall both the good and the bad, even as death at the last happens to
them all alike, verse. 1, 2, 3. Whereupon he resumeth his former remedy against
this vexation, to wit, that we should comfortably enjoy life, and the good
things thereof, while we have time to do it, and not defer it till it be too
late, because when death comes, it deprives us of all the comforts and delights
which this present life does afford unto us; upon which occasion he praises
life before death, because therein we have the liberty of enjoying all good
things under the Sun, the sense of all which Death does bereave us of, verse. 4,
5, 6. And therefore since the days of our life are but Vanity, we ought with
much cheerfulness and intention of mind to enjoy all the sweet contentments
which life does afford us, yet so, as not to leave the duties of our Calling
undone, this being all the portion which we can have in this life of all our
labors, verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. After which he falls into the contemplation of
another wonderful providence of God, whereby events seem to befall men, rather
by chance, then by reason and counsel, and contrary to those previous
dispositions by which we are led to expect far different effects from those
which do come to pass, verse. 11. The reason whereof in part he subjoyns,
namely that invincible ignorance which is in all men of the proper seasons
wherein actions are to be done, or else disability to foresee and prevent the
evils which are coming toward them, and do suddenly surprise them, verse. 12.
Lastly lest he should seem to dictate unto us a supine neglect of all good
means toward our desired Ends, in regard that things seem to be governed
rather by chance, then by counsel, He shows the excellent use of godly wisdom
to deliver us out of such dangers, by an example of One poor, but wise man, who
being in a little City meanly manned and defended, did by his wisdom deliver it
from the power and military assaults of a mighty King which came against it.
Yet showing withal a very great Vanity amongst men in neglecting so wise a man
because of his poverty, verse. 13, 14, 15, 16. whence he concludes, by showing
the excellency of wisdom, that silent wisdom is better then clamorous and
bustling power, and then all instruments of war. And withal, that as one wise
man may avert much danger, so one wicked man may destroy much good, verse. 17,
28.

Verse. 1. ALl this I considered in mine heart] I gave all this to my heart. I
laid it up in mine heart. It notes special study and attention thereunto, Luke
2.51. and 21.14.

even to declare all this] To prove, examine, perfectly to understand, and
clearly to manifest all this. The word signifies to purify and purge, because
when a thing is soyled and defaced, it is the more difficultly known, 2 Cor.
3.16.17., 18.

That the Righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God]
That the persons and works of the best and most prudent men are not in their
own power or disposal but are guided by a Divine providence, and by a secret,
invisible, and unpreventable direction from above, by him who works all
things, by the counsel of his own Will: To be in the hand of God, notes, 1.
Subjection to his power, Joh. 3.35. Matthew. 28.18. Joh. 5.22. 2. Direction and
guidance by his povidence, Act. 4.28. Jer. 10.23. Prove. 16.9. and 20.24. Exodus
34.24. 3. Ruling by his powerful though sometimes secret and invisible
Government. So the hand of the King, notes the command or order given by the
King, 1 Chronicles 25.3. 4. Custody and protection from evil by his care Ester 2.3.
Isa. 62.3. Joh. 10.28, 29. Our works are transient things, and as they come
from us, seem to vanish away, and to be no more, they are quickly out of our
hands: but they are always in Gods hands, and written in his book, he
reserveth them unto the time of Retribution, and keeps an exact Record and
Register of them: So that no one of them shall be unrewarded, Heb. 6.10. Our
persons, our times, our employments are in the hand of God, men cannot do to
us, or dispose of us as they will, Joh. 19, 10, 11, neither can we dispose of
our selves as we please: but he who is wisest, and knows what is best for us,
and what uses we are fittest for, does as it pleases him, order both our
persons, our times, our places, our callings, our work, our wages, as may be
most for the glory of his Name, whose we are, and whom it is our happiness to
serve in whatsoever station he shall be pleased to place us in, 2 Samuel 15.25.26.

no man knows either love or hatred by all that is before them] The words
admit of such a reading as this; The Righteous, and the wise, and their works
are in the hand of God: Also Love and Hatred, to wit, are in the hand of God,
He loves whom he will, he hates whom he will, Romans 9.11, 12, 13, 15, 16. No
man knows any thing that is before him: no man can discover the counsel or
the love and hatred of God by any outward things which he looks on, the same
things equally happening to the good and to the bad, Chap. 8.14. Matthew. 5.45.
Or, no man can know whether the things which he loves, or the things which he
hates, shall befall him, though he guide his works with never so much
rectitude and prudence; events depending on the providence of God, and not on
the counsel of man, Romans 9.16. Jer. 9.23, 24. Isa. 45.9. Jam. 4.13, 14, 15.

V. 2. All things come alike unto all: and there is one event, etc.] Some would
have these words, and so forward to verse. 13. to be the perverse judgment of
the flesh, and the voice of Atheists and Epicures upon the doctrine of
providence before observed: But we must remember, that Solomon speaks only of
outward things, and the different administration of them: and of the remedies
of vanity and vexation, in regard of our condition here under the Sun,
restraining and limiting all the confused events of worldly things by the holy
hand and wise providence of God: And all the precepts which might otherwise
seem to savor of Sensuality and Epicurisme by the fear of God, and honest
labor in our vocations: which things being premised, all that is here set
down, does well consist with the will of God, and the scope of Solomon in this
book, which is to set down such rules de Tranquillitate animi, as may make a
man comfortably to digest the vanities of this life, and sweetly to pass over
the time of his pilgrimage here.

All things come alike to All] Omnia sicut omnibus: So Symmachus, (...), All
alike unto All. This is the reason why we cannot judge of love or hatred by
outward things: for albeit good things are promised unto good men, and evil
things threatened unto evil men; yet God does so proceed in the execution of
these promises and threatenings, as that faith only can discover the difference;
all things outwardly, and to the eye of sense appearing alike to all: As if the
Lord had subjected all things to the domination of Fortune, rather than of
Justice; and that the events of the world, were all rather casual and
contingent, than either predetermined by the counsel, or governed by the
providence of God.

one event to the righteous and to the wicked, etc.] Moses dies in the
wilderness, as well as those that murmured. Josiah in the wars as well as Ahab.
Is Abraham rich? so is Nabal: Is Solomon wise? so is Achitophel: Is Joseph
honored by Pharaoh? so is Doeg by Saul. And usually, as to outward things, the
advantage is on the side of the worst men, Ps. 73.12, 13. Mal. 3.15.

to the righteous and the wicked,] In regard of their spiritual state and
condition toward God. Not that any man is perfectly righteous in this life,
Chap. 7.2^. but inchoatly by the first fruits of the Spirit. Comparatively, in
opposition to the wicked. Evangelically, by sincere dispositions of heart, and
by the ordinary prevalency and dominion of grace.

to the clean and unclean] Between whom great difference was to be made, Ezekiel.
22.26.

to him that sacrifices, and him that sacrifices not] That carefully
observes, or profanely neglects the worship of God; as we see in the
examples of Jeroboam and Jehu.

as is the good, so is the sinner] The doubling of the prefix Caph, notes an
equal comparison, and absolute similitude between the things compared, Genesis
18.25. and 44.18. Isa. 24.2. 1 Reg. 22.4.

and he that sweareth] Namely, falsely or rashly, without truth, or judgment,
or righteousness.

as he that fears an oath] The character of a godly man, who does so
reverence the great name of God, Deuteronomy. 28.58. that by the fear thereof, he is
kept from swearing rashly by it, and when he is called to swear, does it with
an awful regard toward that glorious and fearful Name.

V. 3. This is an evil amongst all things that are done, etc.] When I consider
the course of providence, I found this to be one of the most grievous things
which happens under the Sun, That all things, the same equal events, both in
life and death, do happen not only to the just and the unjust, but even to the
maddest and most desperate of sinners, who all their life long do give up
themselves unto all excess of wickedness.

This is an evil among all things] It is not evil in regard of God, who does
all in a most wise and holy manner: but evil, that is, grievous and troublesome
unto man to behold, a great temptation unto him to consider, that just and wise
men should be exposed to the self-same miseries, with fools and ungodly.

an evil amongst all things] Or, above all other evils: So some render it, hoc
pessimum, this is the worst of evils. As the Superlative is often expressed by
an Adjective, governing an Ablative case with the Preposition Caph: Examples
whereof, the Learned give in, 1 Samuel 17.12. Prove. 30.30. Cant. 1.8. Luke 1.28.
Jer. 49.15.

yea also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, etc.] Yea also; That
upon occasion hereof, when men see that it is all one, whether men be good or
bad, as to any outward difference in things here below; they judge it vain to
serve the Lord, they despise all threats, they undervalue all promises, they
let loose the reins, and run headlong unto all kind of wickedness and madness,
all sort of furious, headstrong and desperate excess, with boldness and
presumption, See Chap. 8.11.

and after that they go to the dead] After a life spent in madness and
sensuality, then they dye. Or, Their later end is to go to the dead: (...); so
Symmachus. Others, After that, (i.) Following their own heart, running after
their own lusts, they do at last fall into the pit. The end of all their
madness is death, Romans 6.21.

V. 4. For to him that is joined to all the living, there is hope] In the
written Text it is, Who shall be chosen? but the Masoreths direct the reading
to be, instead of chosen, joined, by a transposition of the Original letter^.
This correction some Learned men have conceived unnecessary. Some rendering it
thus, For what or which shall be chosen? Thereby meaning, how difficult it is
to resolve, which state or condition to choose, that of the living or of the
dead. Yet quickly passing a judgment on the side of the living, in regard of
the hope a man may have, while he lives, of bettering his condition. Others,
annexing these words unto the last of the former verse, thus, After all men's
madness, their end is to dye: Who shall be chosen out, or exempted from that
common condition? Since therefore all men, without any choice or exemption, must
dye, most miserable is the condition of those mad men, whose hearts are full of
wickedness, even till death overtake them: For while men live, there is some
ground of hope, but the mightiest of sinners, when once dead, are past hope,
and in a worse condition than the meanest men who are yet alive. Others,
retaining the marginal reading, render it thus, by an interrogation, For who
will be joined, to wit, with the dead? Who will choose a dead man for his
companion, since that is, of all, the most hopeless condition? But this is a
forced sense; herein therefore Interpreters do most agree, As for him that is
joined to, or is a companion of the living, He has hope. While life remains,
what evils ever befall a man, he is in hope to break through, and to mend his
condition: some good things however he does yet enjoy: But, as to the good
things of this world, after death there is no hope. Symmachus, whom the vulgar
follows, renders it thus, (...); Who shall always continue alive? Unto such
a man there would be hope. Pagnum and Montanus keep the reading in the Text,
and render it thus, Whosoever is chosen unto, or amongst the living, unto him
there is hope. The Septuagint renders it differently from all, (...); Who is
there that communicates with, or toward all the living? They seem to follow,
not the written Text, but the reading; and so by communicating, mean joining in
fellowship with the living: Who is there that shall have the society and
communion of all the living? Surely none. According to the sense of Symmachus,
and Hierom. Marinus Brixianus offers two other senses; 1. By reading the word
actively, with a different punctation, thus, Whosoever chooses any thing while
he is yet alive, he has hope to compass and to effect his desire. 2. By
keeping to the written Text, in the passive sense, thus, Whosoever shall be
chosen unto any life, or condition of life, he may therein have hope; which
makes a clear and a good sense. The Adjective, which we render, Living, being
usually taken for the Substantive or abstract, to wit, for life; as Genesis 2.7.
Ps. 21.4. Prove. 18.21. Ps. 63.3. I take it, the expression we find Isa. 4.3.
may give light unto this place. Every one that is written among the living: To
be chosen among the living, here; seems to be the same, with being written
amongst the living, there. It is an allusion unto Cities, wherein there is a
Matricula or Record kept of such as were Freemen: whereunto the Scripture
seems to allude, Ps. 87.6. Ezekiel. 13.9. Heb. 12.23. Jer. 17.13. Luke 10.20.
Ps. 4.3. For as the Elect are said to be written in the Book of life, Dan.
12.1. Ps. 69.28. Rev. 17.8. and 21.27. and 22.19. so the living may be said to
be elected unto life; as all such Enrolements, in the Records of a City, do
follow upon a preceding choice of the persons so enrolled.

for a living Dog is better than a dead Lion] A proverbial speech, whereby is
meant, that the basest and most contemptible person while he lives, is in a
better and more hopeful condition than the most honorable, when he is laid in
the dust. The Scripture uses the Metaphor of a Dog, to denote the vilest and
most abject persons, 2 Reg. 8.13. Matthew. 15.16. Rev. 22.15. Phil. 3.2. as on
the other side; a Lion is the most noble of beasts, Prove. 30.30. yet a dead
Lion is exposed to the scorn of the weakest and most fearful creatures,
according to the Greek Epigram: (...)* The lowest expression of a vile thing,
which the Scripture uses, is, A dead Dog, 1 Samuel 24.14. 2 Samuel 9.8.

V. 5. For the living know that they shall dye] By this knowledge, they gain
much, if they rightly improve it: For, 1. Hereby they are persuaded to repent,
and to fit themselves to meet with the king of terrors. 2. Hereby they are set
seriously to consider, how this unavoidable evil may be sweetened, and
sanctified unto them, that they may comfortably desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, which is best of all, 2 Cor. 5.4. Phil. 1.20. 3. Hereby they are
excited unto duty with more vigor, when they look on this as the day of grace,
as the time of light, wherein only they can work, Joh. 9.4. Isa. 38.18, 19. Ps.
118.17. Job. 14.14. Ps. 39.1.4. and 90.12. But 4. and which seems most
pertinent unto this place, knowing that they shall dye, and that the present
comforts of this world, are for the use of the living only, and not of the
dead; therefore they set themselves comfortably to enjoy the good blessings of
God here, while they have time to use them, and by a cheerful and thankful
enjoyment of present mercies, to fit themselves for a happy dissolution. For
godliness teaches us, both quietly to enjoy the world, and willingly to leave
it when God calls.

but the dead know not any thing.] This is not spoken absolutely, for the
spirits of just men are made perfect, and are with Christ; but according to the
subject matter in the context, They know nothing of the things of the world, or
any outward comforts and blessings here below under the Sun, they can no longer
be delighted with the knowledge or fruition of earthly things, Job 14.^1.

neither have they any more reward] He speaks not of the reward of a holy
life, for so the dead have a reward, because their works do follow them, Rev.
14.13. but he speaks of the comfortable use of outward blessings, as the only
reward which worldly things can afford them for all their labor; as it is more
plainly expounded in the next verse, and Chap. 3.22. and 5.18, 19. and 8.15.

for the memory of them is forgotten] They are wholly removed from all humane
and worldly conversation with men, their house, their families, their friends
know them no more. So far are they from enjoying and knowing outward things,
that the living do by degrees forget them, Isa. 26.14. Job 10.8, 9, 10.

V. 6. Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now perished] He
speaks in relation to outward things; living men meet here with objects of
all sorts, some lovely, some hateful* some things that they pity, some that
they envy. But when they are dead, they have no knowledge left of any such
things, and consequently no affections at all toward them. And because it were
endless to recount particulars, therefore he concludes in general, That they
have not any more a portion for ever in any thing under the sun] They have not
the possession, the fruition, so much as the contemplation of any worldly
things; They carry away nothing with them; their glory, their contents do not
descend after them. A covetous man does no more dote upon wealth, nor an
ambitious man upon honor, nor a sensual voluptuous man upon pleasure, all
their thoughts, desires, emulations perish; therefore if ever we will enjoy the
good blessings of God, it must be while we live, because there is no knowledge
nor wisdom in the grave whither we go, Ps. 49.17. Luke 12.20. Job 3.17, 18,
19. and 7.7 -- 10.

V. 7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry
heart] In as much as the dead neither know, nor enjoy any of these worldly
blessings; and in as much as God gives them to his servants in love, and as
comfortable refreshments unto them in the days of their vanity: Therefore he
exhorts unto a cheerful fruition of them, while we have time and liberty so
to do, that so the many other sorrows and bitterness which they shall meet with
in this life, may be mitigated and sweetened unto them. He speaks not (as some
conceiv^) of sensual, epicurean, and brutish excess, but of an honest, decent,
and cheerful enjoyment of blessings, with thankfulness, and in the fear of God.

Go thy way] It is used adverbially, as much as ag^ igitur, eia Agedum, by way
of adhortation, or encouragement; as Genesis 19.32. Prove. 1.11. Eccles. 2.1. Isa.
1.18. and 55.11. Since in death thou can have no love, nor sense of any
outward blessings, therefore hearken to my counsel, make use of thy time, and
enjoy mercies while thou may.

eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a good (i.) a merry heart] As
a sad heart is called an evil heart, Neh. 2.2. 1 Reg. 21.7. Ruth. 3.7. Eccles.
7.3. Enjoy the fruit of thine own labors; as Chap. 3.22. When he says, Thy
bread, wine, etc. he shows, that our comforts and delights must be bounded
within our own labors and possessions; though stolen waters, and bread of
deceit may be sweet, yet it has gravel and bitterness in it at the last, Prove.
9.17, 18. 1 Thessalonians. 3.12. And also, that our delights must be proportioned to
the decency of our condition; we must eat, panem statuti, our proper portion
and dimensum, and not either luxuriously exceed, or sordidly live beneath our
own estate and condition, Prove. 30.8.

for God now accepts thy works] It is pleasing unto God, that when thou have,
in the fear of his Name, and in obedience to his Ordinance, labored, and by
his blessing, gotten thee thine appointed portion, then thou should, after
an honest, cheerful, decent, and liberal manner, without further anxiety, or
sollicitousness enjoy the same. This is the principal boundary of our outward
pleasures and delights, still to keep our selves within such rules of piety and
moderation, as that our ways may be pleasing unto God; And this shows us the
true way to find sweetness in the creature, and to feel joy in the fruition
thereof, namely, when our persons and our ways are pleasing unto God; for
piety does not exclude, but only moderate earthly delights, and so moderate
them, that though they be not so excessive as the luxurious and sensual
pleasures of foolish Epicures, yet they are far more pure, sweet, and
satisfactory, as having no guilt, no gall, no curse, nor inward sorrow and
terrors attending on them, Nehem. 8.10.

V. 8. Let thy garments be always white] Food and raiment are the substantials
of outward blessings, 1 Timothy 6.8. Having directed unto cheerfulness in the one,
he here directs unto decency and comeliness in the other. Whiteness was
anciently an expression of things pleasing and delightful. Albosque dies
h^rasque Serenas, in Silius Italiens. Candidus and felix proximus (...) eri^,
in Ovid. So the white stone of absolution, is called a white stone, Rev. 2.17.
the Asses on which persons of Honor did ride, were white Asses, Judge. 5.10. In
like manner they did use in the Eastern Countries to use white garments, as
expressions of dignity and honor, Esth. 8.15. Therefore our Savior showing
his glory to Peter, and James, and John, in the Mount, had his garments white
as light, Matthew. 12.2. And the glory of the Saints in Heaven, is expressed by
white Robes, Rev. 3.4, 5, 18. and 6.11. and 19.8. Here it is used as a Symbol
of joy and cheerfulness; as on the other side, Blackness is the color of grief
and sorrow, Jer. 14.2. They were wont to use white garments at feasts and
joyful solemnities: when he says, let them be always white, as it is to be
understood not absolutely, as if they were never to mourn, Chap. 7.2. this was
the sin of the rich Glutton, Luke 16.19. but with restriction to the rules of
seasonableness and decency, Prove. 5.19.

And let thine head lack no oyntment] This likewise was an expression of joy
used in feasts, Luke 7.46. Joh. 12.3. and in triumphal solemnities, whereunto
the Apostle seems to allude, 2 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16. And in the like occasions
of rejoicing, Amos 6.6. Prove. 27.9. As in times of humiliation and sorrow, they
were wont not to anoint themselves, Dan. 10.3. The meaning is, that we should
lead our lives with as much freeness, cheerfulness, and sweet delight, in the
liberal use of the good blessings of God, as the quality of our degree, the
decency of our condition, and the Rules of Religious wisdom, and the fear of
God do allow us, not sordidly or frowardly denying our selves the benefit of
those good things which the bounty of God has bestowed upon us.

V. 9. Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest] See Life, or enjoy life.
So Symmachus, (...); as 1 Pet. 3.10. Eccl. 2.1, 24.

with the wife whom thou lovest] Therefore he speaks not in the person of an
Epicure, to whom stolen waters are sweet, Prove. 9.17. but of a lawful and
chaste love; as Prove. 5.15 -- 19.

whom thou lovest] This is the character of a wife, and the duty of the
husband, that which makes their communion comfortable, Ezekiel. 24.16, 18. Ephesians.
5.25, 28, 29. therefore the husband is called the friend of his wife, Jer.
3.20. There is a special freeness of delight and liberty of love which is
allowed in this relation, though still within the bounds of honor and
sobriety, Prove. 5.19. Genesis 26.8. It notes also the difference between conjugal
and adulterous love, that is, a love wherein a man may live joyfully, or may
sweetly enjoy his life with comfort; whereas the pleasures of the other lead
unto death, Prove. 2.18. and 5.3 -- 11. and 6.26, 32, 33. and 7.23.

all the days of the life of thy vanity] As Chap. 6.12. This is repeated
again, to mind us in the midst of all our earthly contentments, that they are
perishing and Temporary things. This living joyfully All our days, is to be
understood as the Always, in the former verse, with restriction to the duties
of piety and humiliation, 1 Cor. 7.5. and also it intimates the duty of
cohabitation, that they should not depart one from the other, 1 Cor. 7.10.

which ^e has given thee] That may refer either to the wife, which Solomon
elsewhere tells us, is the gift of God, Prove. 19.14. or to the days of the
life of our vanity, which also are the gift of God, Job. 10.12. Act. 17.25. Ps.
31.15.

this is thy portion in this life] As Chap. 2.24. and 3.13. and 5.18, 19* and
8.15. when thou dyest, thou shall carry none of these comforts away with thee;
in the next world there is no enjoyment of these kind of blessings, Ps. 49.17.
Matthew. 22.30.

V. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might] Having
instanced in the principal outward comforts of life, food, raiment, marriage,
he concludes with a general precept, that in all things else wherein the
Tranquillity and comfort of life did consist, they should freely and cheerfully
make use of them, before they go into their graves, where, as they shall have
none of these outward materials to work upon, so neither, if they had them,
should they have any wisdom or skill to make use of them, or to reap delight
from them.

Whatsoever thy hand finds to do] Whatsoever is within thy power, and thy
abilities can reach unto, whatever works in thy Calling do belong unto thee, or
whatsoever state and condition the providence of God shall put thee in, Genesis
32.13. Lev. 5.7. and 12.8. Number. 6.21. Judge. 9.33. whatsoever just occasion of
honest cheerfulness does offer it self unto thee, embrace it.

do it with thy might] Vigorously, industriously, instantly, do not slack time,
nor defer it till it be too late, Romans 12.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.8. Tit. 3.8, 14.

for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whither thou goest] In this life thou have opportunities of doing good, of
delighting thy self in the studies of knowledge and wisdom, of improving thy
strength and invention to pleasure thy self and others, Therefore work while it
is day, and while thou have yet an opportunity, Joh. 9.4. and 12.35. Gal. 6.10.
while there is strength in your hand, while there is wisdom in your head,
while the vigor of your faculties last: for in the Grave, or in the state of
death, whither thou art every moment hastening, there is no place for any of
these things, that is not saculum operis, but mercedis. If thou will be
rewarded then, thou must work now. Carpe diem, quam minimum cr^dulus postero.
Iam te promet nox. Though this be appliable unto all duties of piety and
charity, yet the scope of the place aims principally at the enjoyment of the
comforts and commodities of this present life, which we are cheerfully while
they are put into our hands, to enjoy, and not put them off till death, when we
shall have neither skill nor strength to use them. Here also we may observe
what manner of delights he allows them, namely, such as arise from honest
labors, and are guided and moderated by art, knowledge, and wisdom. Our
delights must not be sensual, but ra^ional and industrious.

V. 11. I returned and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong, etc.] These words some make to be the observation
of another Vanity under the Sun, to wit, That Events and Successes do sometimes
fall out quite otherwise then the preparation or probability of second causes
do seem to promise: That things are so done usually in the world, as that no
reason can at all be given of them. Others make them a kind of corrective to
the former precept of living joyfully in the use of all outward blessings;
Though it were to be wished that man could thus evenly and comfortably pass
over his days, yet when I further considered, I found, That no man can ever
enjoy a stable and constant Delight in this world, in regard that future events
do oftentimes quite vary from those principles and preparations which went
before them. The words seem to have relation both to the general scope of the
Chapter before, Touching the powerful and unsearchable providence of God,
Chap. 8.16, 17, and 9.1, 2. and also to the words immediately preceding: for
whereas he had advised, That whatever our hand finds to do, we should do it
with our might: Lest any man should thereupon presume, that things must needs
fall out according to those abilities which he brings unto the effecting of
them, He here directs us to look up in all our works, above second causes,
not to trust in our own gifts, nor to attribute any thing to our own strength,
to remember, that it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but
in God who shows mercy, Romans 9.16. and accordingly to implore his assistance
and blessing in all our labors, who works all our works for us, Isa. 26.12*
Psalm. 127.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. Prove. 10.22. Jer. 9.23. And having done our
duty, and used such good means as God affords, then quietly to refer the
success unto God, in whose hand are all the ways of the children of men, and
upon whose good pleasure do all the issues of things depend.

I returned and To see] The Infinitive Mood is put for the Indicative; as Jer.
14.5. Zach. 12.10.

I saw under the Sun] I considered the things which are done in this Life
amongst men, and found by my observation, That the race is not to the swift]
That swiftness does not ever avail a man to win the prize, or to escape danger,
2 Samuel 2.18, 23. Jer. 46.5, 6. Amos 2 14, 15, 16.

nor the battle to the strong] That the strength of the mighty does not always
avail them either to fight or conquer, Judge. 7.7. 1 Samuel 14.6. 2 Chronicles. 14.9 --
12. Psalm. 33.17, 18.

nor yet bread to the wise] Livelihood and subsistence to men whose wisdom
should commend them to honor and great place, Chap. 10.6, 7. Psalm. 127.2.
David was put to desire supplies from Nabal; and Christ, in whom were all the
treasures of wisdom, was ministered unto, Luke 8.2. Matthew. 8.20. 2 Cor. 21.26,
27.

nor riches to men of understanding] We read of rich fools, 1 Samuel 25.2, 3, 25.
Luke 12.16, 20. and of poor wise men here, verse. 15.

nor yet favor to men of skill] Joseph cast into prison, Daniel in the Lions
den, David hated of Saul.

But Time and chance happens to them all] Their Endeavors do arrive at such a
success as the Council of God had pre-ordained, which is wholly hidden from our
eyes, and therefore seem to fall out many times rather at adventure, and
casually, then according to any regular means that have been used in order unto
them. Whereby we learn, that Divine providence has a wise and holy hand in
ordering the most casual and fortuitous Events, to the execution of his
righteous counsels, 1 Reg. 22.34. Esther 6.1 -- 11. 1 Samuel 6.7 -- 12* 2 Reg.
3.22 -- 24. He does not hereby dishearten us from the use of means, but direct
us in the use of them, not to sacrifice to our net, nor to glory in our own
wisdom, but to wait upon the blessing and providence of God, to give him the
praise of our successes, and quietly bear whatever miscarriages he has ordered
to befall us, 1 Cor. 1.31. Jam. 4.13 -- 16. 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.

V. 12. for man also knows not his time] Events are then said to be casual,
when no praevious knowledge or counsel has made way unto them. Therefore to
prove that even able, wise, and skillful men are subject in common with others
unto Time and chance, he here adds, That man knows not his time] (...), so
the Septuagint: (...), so Symmachus: His proper season and opportunity of
working. But by the similitudes here used to illustrate this ignorance, It
should seem, that His Time, notes the time of evil and calamity, which many
times befalls a man when he little dreams of it. This is called his day, or his
hour, Psalm. 37.13. Joh. 16.4. and 13.1. Calamity comes as a Thief in the night,
unseen, unexpected, Matthew. 24.50. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. Luke 12.20. Or as a snare which
a man thinks not of, Luke 21.35.

As the fishes that are taken in an evil net, [evil and exitious unto them,]
and as the birds that are caught in a snare; so are the sons of men snared in
an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them] Many times when we think
things to go best with us, as the fish and the bird go with much hope and
promise of good to themselves, unto the bait and snare: so men fall into evil
by those very means by which they promised much good unto themselves, Esther,
5.12. Psalm. 69.22. 2 Samuel 13.28. Luke 12.19, 20. He intimates likewise, that
as the wisdom of man can easily deceive the simple birds, so the providence and
power of God can be too hard for all the wisdom of men, and ensnare them in
their own counsels, Job 5.12.13, 14. Prove. 11.5, 6. He can suddenly infatuate
them, Isa. 19.11 -- 15. or suddenly start up some unexpected circumstance,
which shall vary the nature of the whole business, though otherwise never so
wisely contrived, 1 Samuel 23.27, 28. Job 22.10. Psalm. 64.7.

V. 13, 14, 15, 16. This wisdom have I seen also under the Sun, and it seemed
great unto me: There was a little City, etc.] These words may be understood
either as the Observation of another Vanity, namely, the disrespect which is
showed unto wisdom when it is over-clouded with poverty, by the example or
parable of a little City, delivered from a great King, by a poor despised man:
or else in Relation to the words next preceding, thus; Though it be true, that
sometimes Events fall out contrary to the second causes, so that even wise men
are disappointed in their works of those ends which regularly should have
ensued upon them; yet wisdom ought not therefore to be despised, no not in the
meanest persons; for as sometimes God does deny success to the most proper and
probable causes, so does he at other times give great deliverance by unknown
and unthought on means. The scope is to show the excellent use of wisdom, and
how highly it is to be valued, though it be as a treasure in an earthen vessel,
2 Cor. 4.7. though brought unto us by mean hands: as David blessed God for the
wise counsel of Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. and Naaman rejected not the advice
of a little maid, 2 Reg. 5.2, 3, 4. wisdom, in but a woman, saved a City from
destruction, 2 Samuel 20.16 -- 22.

It seemed great unto me] However the wisdom of the poor man was undervalued
by others, yet it seemed great unto me; so much the greater, by how much fewer
helps and means he had to attain unto it.

There was a little City, and few men within it] Here in a parable, he shows
the excellency of wisdom, by the greatness of the danger from which it
delivers; set forth by a little City, with few men, and weak defense,
assaulted by a great King, with a numerous Army, and strong bulwarks: so that
the disadvantage was every way on the City side.

now there was found in it a poor wise man] He found in it: Verbs active of the
third person are used sometimes passively, Isa. 9.6. Hos. 10.2. God many times
makes one wife and holy man a means of delivering a whole people, Prove. 11.11.
Genesis 50.20. 1 Reg. 2.12. 1 Samuel 17.8, 9, 51, 52. Deuteronomy. 32.30.

And he by his wisdom delivered the City] As one Archimedes at Syracuse, by
his Art, did more toward the defense of the City, then all the rest that were
in it; (...).

yet no man remembered that poor man] This deliverance was wrought by a poor man
whom no man made any account of, nor expected any such good from, being an
obscure unknown person: and when he had wrought it, no man looked after him, to
return him thanks for it, 2 Cor. 4.7.

Then said I, wisdom is better then strength] As Chap. 7.19. Prove. 21.22. and
24.3, 4, 5. Hereby we are taught to consider the goodness of things in
comparison one to another, and to prefer that which is most excellent, 1 Cor.
12.31. and 7.38. 1 Samuel 15.22.

V. 17. The words of wise men are heard in quiet, more then the cry of him that
rules among fools] Are heard, that is, ought to be heard. As a son honors
his father, Mal. 1.6. that is, he ought to honor him.

are heard in quiet] That is, either are to be delivered with submission and
meekness, Prove. 25.15. 1 Reg. 12.7. Or, Are to be heard with a tractable and
calm spirit, without pride or contradiction, Job. 29.21, 22. Jam. 1.21. A wise
man speaking, though without clamor, contention, or ostentation, does by his
weighty and seasonable advice, more calm the spirits of his hearers, and by his
sober and serious counsel more powerfully prevail with them, then all the angry
and passionate words of such as have more power, but no skill to manage it:
Ille regit dictis animos and pectora mulcet.

V. 18. Wisdom is better then weapons of war: but one sinner destroys much
good.] Wisdom is not only better then strength, but then strength armed and
seconded with military provisions: the poor man's wisdom did not only deliver
the City from the great King and his numerous Army, but from his bulwarks and
fortifications which he had raised against it.

but one sinner destroys much good] By the opposition between a sinner and a
wise man, It is evident, that Solomon's Wise man here, is also a godly man:
otherwise God uses to infatuate and defeat the counsels of worldly wisdom, 2 Samuel 15.31. Isa. 19.11 -- 14. Isa. 29.14. and 44.25. 1 Cor. 1.19.

one sinner] Some render it, Qui in uno peccat. He that in war through folly
and inadvertency commits one Error, may destroy a whole Army: for they say,
In bello non licet bis peccare. That one Error in Absalom in preferring the
counsel of Hushai before Achitophels, did undo his whole enterprise. But it is
rather to be understood in opposition to the one poor wise man, verse. 15. one
wicked man like Achan will endanger the Camp. Josh. 7.1 -- 5. 1 Cor. 5.6. as
one leak in a ship, one spark in a barrel of gunpowder will suddenly undo all.
One fool can throw a jewel into the Sea, which a thousand wise men cannot get
up again: (...). ^rex totus in agris unius Scabie cadit.

CHAP. X.
IN the later end of the former Chapter, he showed the excellent use of godly
wisdom in order unto tranquillity, both private and public, and the mischief
which one fool might do in destroying much good: which last clause in that
Chapter, he proceeds in the beginning of this, to demonstrate by three
instances, showing first how folly destroys a good name, which he illustrateth
by an excellent similitude, verse. 1. Secondly, how it spoils a man's actions and
undertakings, which by wisdom might be dexterously managed, verse. 2. Thirdly,
How it defaceth a man's whole behavior, and conversation, verse. 3.

Then he proceeds to show the excellent use of true wisdom, in relation to
our behavior toward Princes, and Persons in Authority, whereby, through
prudent Caution, meekness, and gracious deportment, a man may restrain in
himself all thoughts, speeches, or attempts tending unto rebellion, and may
allay and pacify the displeasure which had been conceived against him, in the
mind of the Ruler; whereas folly transporting a man into any disloyal
resolutions, does but ruin himself, and end in fruitless and weary labor.
Concerning those kind of disloyal Affections, He shows, First, The Rise and
occasion of them, which may be double. First, Undutifull and Revengefull
passions, upon any private displeasure of the Ruler against us in our own
particular persons, verse. 4. Secondly, Envy or Indignation growing out of
Errors in Government; when a man observes foolish and unworthy persons to be
advanced, and those more Honorable and deserving to be depressed and
discountenanced, verse. 5.6, 7.

Secondly, he shows the great danger of Disloyalty, and that 1. In regard of
actions and attempts, which usually prove pernicious to their Authors, and this
illustrated by many lively similitudes, verse. 8, 9, 10, 11.

2. In regard of rebellious and foolish speeches, contrary unto that gracious
circumspection and decorum which wisdom would teach a man to observe, in the
which through the heat of passion, a man usually proceeds on from bad to
worse, verse. 12, 13, 14. Concerning which he shows, 1. The mischief which
they bring, verse. 12. 2. The vanity and fruitlessness of them to the person
that utters them, verse. 15. 3. The root of them, ignorance of civil affairs,
and want of skill to converse with men, verse. 15. 4. The nature of them, they
begin in folly, they end in madness, they proceed in babbling, and multiplicity
of words, concerning things which a man cannot foresee or know any thing of
them, verse. 13, 14.

3. In regard of inward Thoughts and Affections; concerning which he shows
how little security a man can promise himself even in his most secret and in
most projections of disloyalty, in as much as God has invisible and unexpected
means to bring it all to light, verse. 20.

And because Princes might happily hereupon think themselves free from all tie or
duty toward their people, because they should be free from all danger and
rebellion from them: He does therefore further show the necessary dependence
which Prince and people mutually have in regard of Weal and Woe. Thereby
deterring Princes from Tyranny and misgovernment: (whereby they utterly subvert
the end of Gods ordinance, which was for the peace and prosperity of the
people.) And also directing them unto the right means of Government, and proper
virtues requisite thereunto, which are, 1* Wisdom, and maturity of judgment,
that he be not a child, verse. 16. 2. Nobleness of mind, not only in regard of
blood, but chiefly in virtuous endowments, raising the soul above all sordid
and base designs. 3. Temperance and sobriety, eating and drinking to strengthen
unto duty, not to disable or indispose unto it, nor to incroach upon it, verse.
16, 17. 4. Diligent attendance, and superinspection over the house of the
Commonwealth, that there may be no ruptures in it, but that all be sound, and
in good repair, verse. 18. 5. Moderation in delights, not feast for laughter,
nor spend the life in mirth and drinking, because excess in these will require
a proportionable increase in money and treasures to maintain them, whence will
necessarily arise oppressions and extortions upon the people, verse. 19.

Verse. 1. DEad flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a
stinking savor: so does a little folly, etc] In these words the wise man does
by an elegant similitude or proverbial speech, illustrate what he had last
spoken, namely, That one sinner destroys much good, as one dead fly does
corrupt and mar a whole vessel of most precious ointment, which in those
Countries was had in great account, 2 Reg. 20.13. It is here applied unto a
man's good name, which is compared unto sweet ointment, Eccles. 7.1. Cant. 1.3.
and as a fly, though but a little creature, can taint and corrupt much
precious perfume, a little mixture of folly and indiscretion will stai^ and
blemish the Reputation of a man, otherwise very wise and honorable. And this
so much the rather, because of the malignity and ingratitude of men, who do
more hastily censure one error, then value many graces, and with whom one small
miscarriage does blot out the memory of all other deservings: as one little
cloud does serve to overshadow the whole body of the Sun. Therefore it
concerns us to walk so much the more unblameably, that we may not by the
least oversight or folly blemish our profession, or cause it to stink in the
nostrils of others, Genesis 34.30. Phil. 2.15. 1 Timothy 6.1. 2 Cor. 6.3. 1 Pet.
2.15. much less by our leaven sour the whole mass, and derive infection upon
many others, 1 Cor. 5.6. Gal. 5.9.

Dead flies] Flies of death, the Genitive Case in the place of an Adjective,
Psalm. 2.9. and 31.3. Romans 7.24. Phil. 3.21. Judge. 7.13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. 2 Pet.
2.1. This may be taken either actively, flies which cause death, as the plague
of the Locusts is called death, Exodus 10.17. poisonous flies which do render
sweet ointment deadly and mortiferous, as instruments of death, P^al. 7. 14. (
i.) which do cause death: Or else, passively, flies which are dead, and by
their putrefaction do taint the ointment in the which they are drowned.

Dead flies do cause] The Nown is plural, and the Verb singular, which may
properly thus be rendered, Any one of dead flies does cause the ointment to
stink; as Exodus 31.14. Romans 1.20. Thereby intimating the great mischief and
damage may be from very small causes.

cause to send forth a stinking savour] Heb. makes to stink, exhaleth or
belche^^ forth; thereby noting a continual Emanation of unsavouriness, so that
the stink dot^ never cease or give over. When two Verbs o^ the same Tense come
thus together, Grammarians tell us, that the former has an adverbial
signification, as Jer. 13.18. Humbl^ your selves, sit down, (i.) sit humbly
down* Hos. 9.9. They have made deep, they ha^^ corrupted, (i.) They have deeply
corrupted. Romans 10.20. Esaias is bold and says, (i.) speaks boldly. So here,
foetere fecit, eructat, (i.) foetide eructat. Which is well rendered in our
Version, causes to send forth a stink.

so does a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honour] The
note of similitude is wanting, as in many other places, both in the (...), and
in the (...), as Prove. 11.22. Jer. 17.11. Psalm. 125.2.

so does a little folly] Here is an Ellipsis of the Verb, which is to be
repeated out of the former member, namely, It causes to send forth a stinking
savor; as Genesis 1.29, 30. The more eminent any person is for wisdom and
honor, the more circumspect ought he to be in his conversation, because a
little folly and oversight will much diminish his reputation; as spots are
soonest observed in the whitest and finest garments, and envy (like worms and
moths) does usually feed on the purest cloth, Neh. 6.11. Hierom and the Vulgar
read the words to another sense, Pretiosior est sapientia and gloria parva a^
tempus stultitia. That sometimes a little folly is more precious then wisdom
and honor, 1 Samuel 21.13. But this, besides the grammatical incongruity,
holds no proportion to the former part of the verse, whereunto it answers,
and therefore is neglected by the best Interpreters.

V. 2. A wise man's heart is at his right hand, but a fools heart at his left] A
like kind of proverbial form we had, Chap. 2.14. The right hand is usually the
most expedite and ready for action, does its work more surely, more speedily,
more decently, therefore the right hand is the dearest of the two, Matthew. 5.29,
30. and it is noted as a thing strange and unusual when men have been left
handed, or able to use both hands alike, Judge. 3.21. and 20.16. 1 Chronicles. 12.2.
So the meaning is, A wise man's heart is ready and prepared unto every good
work, he does things with judgment and counsel, he does with mature advice and
deliberation so weigh his actions, the circumstances, consequences,
probabilities, and events of them, as that he may not afterward repent of his
behavior therein. He works by the guidance of his heart, Prove. 15.22. Luke
14.28 -- 30. But a fool is left handed in his works, does all his business
bunglingly, praeposterously, inconsiderately, either when he advises about
business his hand is absent, and does not execute it; or when he works and
goes about it, his heart is absent, and does not direct it. A wise man has
the command of his heart, knows how to use it seasonably, opportunely, and in
conformity to times, places, persons, so that his undertakings may be
successful and prosperous: whereas a fool is transported with passion, amazed
at difficulties, perplexed with uncertainties, at his wits end, and knows not
which way to take, or what to resolve, goes about his business as awkwardly and
undecently, as a man would do whose right hand were tied behind him, and had
only his left hand to help him, Prove. 2.10 -- 15. and 4.26. and 13.16. and
16.22, 23. Examples of this wisdom we have in Jacob, Genesis 32. Joseph, Genesis 41.
David, 1 Samuel 16.18. Abigail, 1 Samuel 25. Jethro, Exodus 18.19. the Woman of
Abel, 2 Samuel 20. Paul, Act. 23.6. and of the contrary folly, Numb. 14.40 -- 45.
1 Reg. 12.8. Isa. 19.11 -- 17.

V. 3. Yea also when he that is a fool walks by the way, his wisdom fails
him, etc.] Not only in his private actions and undertakings, but in his open
conversation amongst men, in his motions, gestures, behavior, gate,
countenance, usual deportment, he is destitute of prudence and common
discretion, and bewrays the folly of his heart, by the affected fondness of
his conversation.

and he says to every one, that he is a fool] The Septuagint render it, (...),
whatsoever he thinks on is folly. Symmachus in Hierom, He suspecteth of all
men that they are fools. Whereunto the Vulgar answers, Cum ipse insipiens
sit, omnes stultos aestimat, being a fool himself, he accompteth all other men
fools: as to him that has the Jaundies every thing seems yellow; and to him
that has a distempered palate, every sweet thing ^asteth bitter; to him that
has a vertiginous brain, every fixed thing seems to turn round; so to a man
made up of pride and folly, other men much wiser then himself do appear fools.
The Chaldee renders it, All men say that he is a fool. But the most emphatical
is as we read it, He says to All men, That he is a fool: He does so palpably
discover, and as it were proclaim his own folly, by his gestures and behavior,
as if he would himself tell them that he is a fool, Prove. 6.13. and 12.23. and
13.6. and 18.2. Jude verse. 13.

V. 4. If the spirit of the Ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place]
Here he shows the excellent use of wisdom in ordering our conversation
toward Superiors, teaching us to bridle all disloyal passions, to restrain
all unlawful attempts, to keep our selves in the same eaven and unmoved temper,
whatever provocations we meet with to the contrary.

If the spirit of the Ruler] The Chaldee hereby understands the power and
dominion of any ruling lust, by which a man should not suffer himself to be
shaken from his steadfastnesse, nor removed out of his place, or from his duty.
But this is inconsonant with the series of this Chapter, which is much taken up
in the Errors of Government, and the inconvenient passions which those Errors
may produce in the minds of the people. Others understand it of the spirit of
Rule and Government, as we often read of the spirit of Judgment. of Prophecy,
of Revelation, of Wisdom, of Knowledge; so the skill of Governing, is called
the Spirit of God, 1 Samuel 10.10, 11. and 11.6. and 16.14. Isa. 11.1, 2. And
they understand it thus, If the Lord advance thee unto high place of power and
Government, Leave not thy place, continue humble and lowly still, forget not
thy duty toward thy brethren; as Deuteronomy. 17.15 -- 20. But the later clause of
this verse plainly leads us to another sense; If the spirit, that is, the wrath
and displeasure of the Ruler rise up against thee; so passion is sometimes
called, Chap. 7.9. Prove. 25.28. Judge. 9.23. 2 Chronicles. 21.16. And it seems to
denote high displeasure, like that of Saul, of whom it is said, That he
Breathed out threats against the Church, Act. 9.1. His rage was as a Terrible
Blast of a storm against a wall, Isa. 25.4. And this is further intimated in
the phrase of Ascending or rising up, as a grievous Tempest, or as a flame of
fire, 2 Samuel 11.20. Ezekiel 24.8. Psalm. 78.21, If the high displeasure of the
Ruler be, though unjustly and injuriously, lifted up against thee, as Potiphars
against Joseph's; Saul's against David; Labans against Jacob; Paul's against the
Church of Christ, leave not thy place] Contain thy self within the bounds of
thine own calling and condition, do not either through fear and despair
withdraw thy self from thy duty, nor through insolence and impatience, rise up
in disloyalty against him, whose spirit is risen against thee; keep still in
the rank of a subject, and behave thy self with that lowliness and submission
which becomes a subject. He speaks not against a prudent withdrawing from a
storm, and hiding a man's self, as Jacob ^led from Esau, and David from Saul,
and Elias from Jezabel, and Christ from Herod, Matthew. 10.23. but of disloyal
and rebellious defection, going out of his sight, Chap. 8.3. as Israel to their
Tents, 1 Reg. 12.16. He requires us for conscience toward God, to suffer
wrongfully, and to be subject even to those that are froward, and injurious, 1
Pe^. 2.18, 19. Not to violate our Allegiance, nor to attempt any conspiracy
against them, but only in our sufferings, to make our prayers and complaints
known unto God, who is a Judge between them and us, and is able to vindicate
our innocence, and to deliver us out of their hands. Every man must keep his
station, as Soldiers in an Army are to stay in their own rank, 1 Cor. 7.20,
21. A man cannot expect to have Gods blessing any where, but in his own place.
His promises and protection are annexed unto our duty, Psalm. 91.11. 2 Chronicles.
15.2. This was the sin of the Ten Tribes against the house of David, Hos. 8.4.
and of Absalom and Sheba against David himself, 2 Samuel 15.10. and 20.1.

for yielding pacifieth great offences] This is a reason ab utili, to persuade
unto the duty. For whereas a man might happily conceive, that the wrath of a King
is implacable, and their lost love unreconcileable again, and that therefore
their case being desperate, a man were as good give over duty, as perish under
it: He shows, that by submission and lenity of spirit, a man may not only
recover the favor, but prevent and preserve his Prince from many offenses.
Some render the wo^ds vir sanans, an healer, pacifieth great offenses; and so
the Septuagint, (...): He that by gentle behavior, seeks to heal the wound
and breach between him and his Sovereign, shall pacify great offenses. Or, as
a man in a course of Physic, will abstain from those things which are hurtful
unto him: so a wise man will leave off all those sins, whereby the anger of the
Ruler may be stirred up against him. Wisdom is of an healing nature, Prove.
12.18. and 16.24. as we see in the carriage of Abigail to David, 1 Samuel 25. and
of the Woman of Abel to Joab, 2 Samuel 20. others rendering it by mollities or
remissio, yiel^^ng* or fainting, give a double sense of it; First, That a man's
yielding to temptations and passions of disloyalty, does cause many offenses to
rest on him, does bring with it many other sins, through fainting in the day of
adversity, Prove. 24.10. Secondly, that yielding for a while unto the tempest,
does break the force of it, and cause the heart of a man to relent and to melt
toward those, who do with calmnesse and humility endeavor to divert it, Prove.
15.1. and 25.15. As a tempest which breaks strong Oaks that resist it, does
no hurt unto the weak Corn which yields unto it: Or as Wool or mud, does more
abate the force of a Canon bullet, then walls of stone that stand stubbornly
against it. See Judge. 8.1, 2, 3. Genesis 32.13 -- 20. and 33.4. 1 Samuel 24.16 --
19. and 25.32, 33.

V. 5, 6. There is an evil which I have s^^n under the Sun, as an error which
proceeds from the Ruler, etc.] Here is intimated another cause of defection
and rebellion against Princes, namely, misgovernment, when through their error
and inadvertency, unworthy persons are exalted, and men of eminency and desert
depressed.

There is an evil] Another evil, or a common evil; an evil under the Sun, in
humane affairs.

as an errour] Which is indeed an error: It is here Caph veritatis, not a note
of comparison, or similitude, but of truth; as Judge. 13.23. Neh. 7.2. Hos. 4.4.
and 5.10. Luke 22.44. By error, is noted a fault committed ignorantly and
through inadvertency; as Levit. 4.2. Numb. 15.24. Whereby we are taught to put
the fairest construction upon the faults of Superiors, in the case of
misgovernment; it being so easy a thing for them, who must see much with other
men's eyes, and cannot possibly have a clear knowledge of the worth of all
persons whom they advance, but may easily be carried into mistakes by the
flatteries, or plausible pretenses of those that serve them, to be deceived in
their opinions, of the fitness of persons for those places of trust, wherein
they do employ them.

Folly is set in great dignity; and the rich sit in low places] Fools are very
highly advanced: The abstract for the concrete, to denote men extremely foolish
and wicked; as Psalm. 5.9. 1 Cor. 2.14. Phil. 3.2. Cant. 5.16. This is matter of
much grief and trouble to good men, when power is put into the hands of men, as
Vicegerents for God, who yet will use it all against him. When the great
interests of States and Churches, shall be entrusted in the hands of those, who
have neither skill nor hearts to promote the good of them, Psalm. 12.8. Prove.
28.28. and 29.2. Esth. 3.1 -- 15. This the Lord is often pleased in his
providence to permit, sometimes for the punishment of a wicked people, Job 34
30. Isa. 19.4. Hos. 13.11. Zach. 11.6. Prove. 28.2. Judge. 9.23, 24. and
sometimes for the trial of his faithful servants, and to stir up in them
earnest prayer for those who are in authority, that according to their duty
they may be friends to those that are pure of heart, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Prove 22.11.
Psalm. 101.6, 7, 8. And sometimes to show the greatness of his power in
destroying tyrants, Exodus 9.16.

and the rich sit in low place] This is to be understood in opposition to the
former; and so by rich is meant, men of noble endowments for wisdom and
goodness, Psalm. 45.12. To sit in low place, or in an abject and despised
condition, is noted here as a posture of mourning and great sorrow; as Jer.
13.18. Humble your selves, or make your selves low, sit. So Isai. 47.1. Ezekiel.
26.16.

V. 7. I have seen servants upon horses, and Princes walking as servants upon
the earth] By servants, he means men of a low and base condition, fitter to
be the tail then the head, Genesis 9.27. Lam. 5.8. which is a thing extremely
preposterous and absurd, when servants do bear rule, men of slavish condition
are advanced above those that are free, noble, and pious, Prove. 19.10. and
30.21, 22. Deuteronomy. 28.43, 44.

upon horses] This is a note of honor and dignity, Esth. 6.8, 9. Jer. 17.25.
Ezekiel. 23.23. Hereby he means, That abject and vile persons, who ought to be
under government, were exalted unto the Throne, and unto places of trust and
honor. Such an one was Athenion in Greece, who of a poor and mean person, grew
up to be a proud and potent tyrant; laid aside wise Counselors, spoiled
Temples and Cities, wasted men of their estates, and filled pits with treasure;
as Athenaeus, lib. 5. reports. And the like, Zenophon relates, lib. 2.
Hellenic (...)

and Princes walking as servants upon the earth] As David seems to have
walked when he fled from Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.30.

V. 8, 9. He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it, and who so breaks an
hedge, a serpent shall bite him. Who so removes stones, shall be hurt
therewith: and he that cleaves wood, shall be endangered thereby] These are
four Proverbial similitudes, tending all unto one end, viz. to show, that evil
usually returns on the heads of those who were authors of it; (...). Psalm.
7.15, 16. and 9.15, 16. Job 5.13. Prove. 11.5, 6. and 26.27. Esth. 7.10. 2 Samuel
17.23. Exodus 14.28. and 18.11. Obad. ver. 15. Isa. 33.1. Judge. 1.6, 7. Quod
quisque ^^lieno excogitavit supplicio, excipit suo. He that made the fetters
for another, does many times wear them himself.

The application of this general, in the present case, is, First, against
Princes, who do so advance unworthy men, and depresse the well deserving; such
disorders in Government do, many times, redound unto their own sufferings, and
while they oppress the people, they do supplant their own Thrones, Prove. 16.12.
and 25.5. 2 Reg. 8.8.15.

Secondly, against such as attempt to alter the long established, and wholesome
Constitutions of Nations and People, and do rashly over-turn the foundations of
Laws and Customs; such changes are usually mortiferous to the undertakers of
them, Prove. 22.28. and 24.21, 22.

Thirdly, against the undutiful and rebellious carriages of people toward
their Princes and Rulers, which commonly are pernicious unto the authors
thereof, as we find in the examples of Absalom, Sheba, and others, 2 Samuel
18.14. and 20.22. 2 Chronicles. 23.15. and 25.3. and 33.24, 25. Esth. 2.21, 22, 23.

he that diggeth a pit shall fall into it] It is a similitude drawn from
Huntsmen, who dig pits, and then cover them over again, as if they were firm
ground, by which means the beasts passing on them, fall in and are taken. Many
times in the digging of such a pit, the earth falls on him that opens it. It
is used Metaphorically, for an attempting of evil to ensnare another man, Job
6.27. in the which snare many times a man is taken himself, Psalm. 10.2. and
9.15. Prove. 5.22. Dan. 6.24.

and who so breaks an hedge, a serpent shall bite him] Serpents and Adders
use to harbor in old walls and hedges, so that without much caution, he that
rashly removes them, is in danger of being slung by them, Act. 28.3. Now as
hedges do enclose grounds, and distinguish the property of one man from
another; so the Lord has set an hedge about his own ordinance of Magistracy,
which he will not have violated by any disloyal attempts, as the phrase is used
in another case, Job 1.10. Ezr. 9.9. And all traiterous attempts against the
Ordinance of God, is a breaking of that mound, and an incroaching upon that
authority, which seldom escapes some mischief or other, which the contrivers
thereof did not foresee, nor were wise enough to prevent. It is a dangerous
thing to confound rule and subjection, and to break down the partition wall
between the one and the other. They who are impatient of rule over them, have
ruin very near them.

Who so removes stones shall be hurt therewith] He that goes about to
demolish a building, and to pull the great stones out of the walls thereof,
(...); shall be put to pain and labor thereby; So the Septuagint: (...), shall
be broken and torn thereby; So Aquila: (...) shall be hurt, and suffer evil
thereby; So Symmachus. So dangerous is the attempt of those, who go about to
unjoynt, and dissolve the ligaments of Government. A-like expressions we find,
Zach. 12.13. Matthew* 21.44.

and he that cleaves wood shall be endangered thereby] Or, heated thereby; The
Chaldee, shall be burnt thereby: Shall not do it without danger, if his Tools
be blunt, as it follows in the next verse. We find mention of danger in this
employment, Deuteronomy. 19.5. 2 Reg. 6.4, 5. So all these four Proverbial Similitudes
tend unto one and the same end.

V. 10. If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edg, then must he put to
more strength: but wisdom is profitable to direct] This seems to relate to the
words next immediately before it. He that cleaves wood, if the iron be blunt,
shall be endangered and overheated thereby, as being every stroke necessitated
to put to more strength, and all in vain, till wisdom, by whetting the weapon
do get the better of the wood. Nay, the more strength is used, when the iron is
too blunt to enter, the more danger there is of its recoiling upon him that
uses it. So in the present case, the more violent and froward the passions of
men are against Governors, the more danger do they create unto themselves.
Princes being like strong Oaks, that are not easily wrought upon by opposition:
But wise, mild, and gentle behavior may break their displeasure: as wisdom
directing a man to whet his iron, will with less labor cleave the strongest
Timber. Like hereunto was that of Esop to Solon, that we should speak unto
Princes (...); either very little, or that which may sweeten and please them.

then must he put to more strength] Or, then it will overcome the strength of
him that cutteth. Some understand it of an Army; it will exercise and weary the
whole strength of an Army, to cleave wood with it. Or, in War, though the arms
be blunt, so that strength can do little good, yet wisdom may supply that
defect, and get the victory; as Chap. 9.15, 16.

but wisdom is profitable to direct] Or, the the excellency of direction is
wisdom. The Infinitive Mood for the Noun, as Merc^^ has observed; as 2 Reg.
19.27. Psalm. 101.3. The direction which wisdom gives* is more profitable then
strength; it guides a man's actions without so much toil and labor, unto a
better end. It is, of all other, the most excellent moderator and director of
the actions of life; because without it, all other means are bootless and full
of hazard: without it labor is dangerous; there is wisdom requisite in the
most ordinary and meanest works, in digging, in bearing burdens, in cleaving
and hewing of Wood; as we read of a Porter, whom a Philosopher took and bred
unto learning, because he observed a natural wisdom and dexterity, in his
ordering of his burden for the more easy carriage; 1 Reg. 5.6. Isai. 28.24,
25, 26. Without it strength of body is useless; a blunt Axe will tire out the
arm of the strongest man, if he have not wisdom to whet it. Art and cunning
can move bodies, and apply Engines, which exceed all the strength of the body
alone, to stir or stand under. As we find what huge stones were placed in the
Temple, in our Saviors time, Luke 21.5. Josephus says of them, that they were
12. cubits one way, and 8. another. 3. Without it, eloquence is to no purpose,
for unless a man have wisdom to charm a Serpent before he bite, all a man's
eloquence afterward will not be able to heal him.

V. 11. Surely a Serpent will bite without enchantment, and a babbler is no
better] Or, If the Serpent bite without being charmed, or before he be charmed,
there is then no profit to him that is a master of his tongue, or an eloquent
man. A man's eloquence will do him no good, after the Serpent has bitten him;
except he do wisely charm him, before the danger become: The meaning is, that a
man should by meekness of wisdom, as by a charm, allay the displeasure of the
Ruler against him, before it break forth, and be too late to pacify him. Or,
according to the scope of our Version, A wise man should, by meekness and
discretion, charm his own bitter tongue, and spirit of detraction, whereby he
is apt to curse and revile the Ruler of the people. Such a vain babbler, whose
lawless tongue is ever finding faul^ with Government, and speaking evil of
dignities, is no better then an uncharmed Serpent, Psalm. 58.4, 5. Romans 3.13.
Or, as ^ Serpent bites most dangerously, which bite^ without hissing, does not
give warning of the harm, that a man might fly from it; so of all enemies, a
secret detractor is the worst.

The scope is, 1. To compare the spirit of disloyalty and murmuring in the
people against their Rulers, (so often forbidden, Exodus 22.28. Act. 23.4. Jude
verse. 12. 1 Pet. 2.23.) unto the biting of a Serpent, every rebellious and
traiterous speech against those who are over us by Gods ordinance and in his
stead, is full of deadly poison, Ezekiel. 2.6. a sin which the querulous
disposition of people is very apt to transport them into. Exodus 15.24. and
16.2. and.17.2. Numb. 14.2.

2. To compare the wise and humble behavior of men toward their offended
Governors, unto an Enchantment, whereby that serpentine spirit of detraction
is allayed (...) an adder is kept from biting by a charm. ^n the Original it
is, If the serpent bite, etc. We take the conditional conjunction for a
Confirmation or Asseveration of a truth. as we likewise render it in other
places, Psalm. 139.19. Prove. 3.34, and 23.18.

V. 12. The words of a wise man's mouth are Gracious: But the lips of a fool
will swallow up himself.] He here shows, How the words of wise men are not
only as a charm to prevent the biting of an enemy, but do further conciliate
favor and grace.

are Gracious] Heb. Grace. They are so comely and graceful in themselves, that
they minister grace to others, Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 4.6. and obtain grace and
respect from them. As Abigail did not only appease the wrath of David, but did
greatly draw his heart and love toward her, by her wise and gracious words.
Prove. 10.32. and 15.1, 2, 4, 26. and 16.23.24.

But the lips of a fool will swallow up himself] Or, will destroy, and drown
him, (...); so the 70. the noun is plural, and the verb singular, which may be
Emphatical, to note, that every one of his words do destroy: or do suddenly
ruin, as a whale, or a grave, does presently devour that which it swallows. A
foolish man by froward and disloyal speeches, lays snares against his ow^
life, provokes so much wrath and displeasure as thereby utterly to undo, and,
as it were* eat up himself, Prove. 19.28. Prove. 12.13 Romans 3.13.

V. 13. The beginning of the words of hi^ mouth is foolishness, and the end of
his talk is desperate madness.] Hereby we understand the Emphasis of the former
verse, where a plural noun was joined to a singular verb, noting, that every
one of his words, from the beginning to the end, tends unto ruin. The more
he speaks, the more folly he discovers* and goes on from evil unto worse,
according as his rage or distemper of mind does further and further transport
him. Corruption in the heart when it breaks forth, is like breach in the Sea,
which begins in a narro^ passage, till it eat through and cast down (...) the
banks, 2 Timothy 3.13. as the Pharisee and other Jews in their discourses wit^
Christ, did commonly begin with arguments (such as they were) and ended with
stones Joh. 8.33., 48, 59. and 10.24, 31. Act. 6.9 and 7.54.57. and 19.28, 34.
first they deal foolishly, and then they lift up their horn, Psalm 75.4, 5.
from reproaches they go o^^to oaths and madness, Psalm. 102.8. Act 22.22 23.
Prove. 21.24. 2 Samuel, 16.13. Prove. 26.18. and 15.28. Thus a furious man abounds
in transgression, Prove. 29.22.

V. 14. A fool also is full of words: A man cannot tell what shall be: and what
shall be after him who can tell him] Besides the madness and folly of such a
man's discouses, they are also many and endless. A wise man is contented with
words enough to express his mind, he speaks always pertinently such things as
may bring glory to God, and minister grace to the Hearers. He speaks with
choice and election, and therefore in measure and moderation. As the Orator
gives this for the reason why learned men do not make so long and tedious
Orations as others of weaker parts, quia doctis est electio and modus: They
choose a few things out of many, and weigh their words before they utter them.
Whereas fools pour out all that offers it self; verbis humidis and
lapsantibus, in ore non in pectore natis de fluunt; as he said, Prove. 15.28.
and 29.11. and 10.19. Eccles. 5.7. nature has given a man but one tongue, and
that well fenced in; but two ears, to teach us to be swift to hear and slow to
speak, Jam. 1.19.

a fool multiplyeth words] Uses many boasting discourses, vainly reports his
own undertakings and purposes, brags what he will do, and what he shall have,
as if all events were in his own power; whereas no man, much less a fool, can
either tell himself, or understand by any other man, what shall be after him.
There seems to be an Emphasis in the word, After him, He boasts what he
will do, whither he will go, what success he shall have, the next month, or
the next year, when happily the next month or year may be After him, he may be
cut off before it come, Psalm 49.11, 18. Luke 12.19, 20. Jam. 4.13 -- 16.
Eccles. 3.22. and 6.12.

The words may happily be a Mimesis, setting forth the humor of such a garrulous
person, who says, A man cannot tell what shall be after him; and then says it
over again, what shall be after him who can tell him? therefore let us indulge
to our genius, eat and drink, and enjoy our pleasures while we have time to
enjoy them. The former sense seems rightest.

V. 15. The labor of the fool wearieth every one of them, because he knows
not how to go to the City.] Having showed the many attempts of foolish men,
both in deeds and words, He here discovers the vanity and fruitlesnesse of
them all. All his boasting projects and undertakings prove but labor in vain.
As the Sodomites being smitten with blindness, wearied themselves to find out
the door, which they could not get to, Genesis 19.11. He tyreth and wearieth out
himself in matters which are most easy, and yet cannot overcome them: for even
children can find out the way into a City when they are near unto it. Or,
though he have not wit enough to keep a high rode, yet he will be wearying of
himself in abstruser things, which are as difficult as to foresee future and
contingent events: as in the former verse.

The sense seems to be much like that, verse. 10. as there the fool puts to
all his strength to cleave knotty wood wtth blunt tools, and all in vain;
whereas a little wisdom to whet his Iron, would make his work both more
easy, and more effectual: so here the fool, like an ignorant Traveller that
has m^ssed his way, goes up and down to little purpose, till he quite weary
himself, and yet can never find the way into the City for want of skill, or a
guide to direct him, which otherwise would have been most easily and speedily
done. Where wisdom is wanting to direct our actions, labor will be endless,
we shall sooner weary our selves, then effect any thing by blind endeavors. If
we understand the words in a civil sense consonantly to the other passages of
the Chapter before, then those words, [ because he knows not to go into the
City] do signify the Ignorance of such a man to convers with men, or to behave
himself wisely in civil or political relations: Whereas true wisdom is to
understand our way, and to make strait paths for our feet to walk in, and to
have the light shine on our ways, whatever relation we stand in, or whatever
employment we are called unto, Prove. 14.8. Heb. 12.13. Psalm. 5.8.

V. 16. Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a child, thy Princes eat in the
morning.] The Wise man is not only careful to keep Subjects from rebellion and
disloyalty, (which was the matter of the greatest part of the Chapter before,)
but also to mind Princes of their duty, that they be not wilful, sensual,
tyrannous, but that they manage their office with nobleness of spirit, with
temperance, and industry, and that by a most mighty argument, because They
cannot be good or bad to themselves alone, multitudes are concerned in it, and
the weal or woe of whole nations does depend upon it. A wicked Prince is a
great argument of Divine displeasure against a whole people, 1 Samuel, 8.6 -- 18.
Isa. 19.4. Job 34.30. Prove. 28.2. And a good Prince an argument of his Love,
and that he intends to bless such a Nation, 1 Reg. 10.9.

when thy King is a child] He means not so much in age; for many have in
their tender years, by the fear of God, and the help of prudent Counselors
governed their people aright, and some of them much better then afterward, 1
Reg. 3.7 -- 12. compared with 1 Reg. 11.4. 2 Chr. 24.2, 3, 17. and 25.1, 2, 14,
27, and 26.3, 4, 5, 16. But in understanding, in experience, in manners, when a
man childishly suffers the affairs of a Kingdom to be turned upside down,
to be broken to pieces by his carelessness, and through want of prudence and
skill to discern between right and wrong, Ephesians. 4.14 Heb. 5.13. Isa. 3.4. 1.
Cor. 14.20. Such a child was Rehoboam in the strength of his age, A child of
one and forty years old, 1 Reg. 14.21, 2 Chronicles. 13.7. when a man is, 1.
Ignorant or forgetful of his duty.

2. Changeable and easily turned out of it with every persuasion.

3. Passionate, easily angry, and fearful, and accordingly alterable upon such
sudden impressions.

4. Sensual, and given unto vain delights.

5. Craving and covetous, and so easily turned aside by gifts.

6. Vain and subject to be flattered by those who know how to make a prey of
him.

These and such like impotencies, argue childishness in one that Governs. The
wise man instanceth in one principal of these, viz. Sensuality, in the next
words.

And thy Princes eat in the morning] Though the King be a child, yet if he have
prudent and vigilant Counselors their care may recompense and supply his
defects* but where they likewise be as bad as he* Prove. 29.12. where all other
ministers of State follow only their private gain and pleasure, without any
regard unto public welfare, no wonder if such a Nation have a woe hang over it.

eat in the moring] Are riotous, luxurious, spend their whole time in sleep,
and excess* Rise not up unto service, but unto delights, consecrate the flower
and best of their time (which should have been given to God, and to the
public) to their own vanity and riot Jer. 21.12. Isa. 5.11, 12. Hos. 7.3, 4,
5, 6* Act. 2.15. Prove. 31.4, This is matter o^ patience unto the affl^cted
people, when they consider, that God does thus reprove Kings for their sake,
Psalm. 105.14.

V. 17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of nobles; and thy
Princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness.] The son of
nobles, that is, men trained up, instructed, and shaped with principles of true
Nobility, wisdom, and holiness. As a son of death, of perdition, of wrath, is
one devoted thereunto: so a son of nobles, is one nobly seasoned with
principles of honor and Government. As sons of God, Genesis 6.2. men bred in the
Church of God, and under a godly Education; sons of the Prophets: sons of
Physicians, men bred in such professions.

of nobles] From a word which signifies whiteness, either because persons of
honor did use to wear white rayments, Esther 8.15. Rev. 3.4. sit in white
thrones, Rev. 20.11. ride on white asses, Judge. 5.10. or to denote the purity
of manners which should be in Rulers, that they might be examples of all
integrity unto others, Rev. 19.8. By sons of nobles, then, he does not
understand men barely born of noble Parents, and who have noble blood in their
veins, (such an one likely might the child be of whom he spoke in the former
verse) but as there he meant a child not in years, but in manners and
qualities: (as the words Presbyter, Elder, Ancient, in the Scripture use, do
not so much signify age, as wisdom, and authority,) so here he means one
noble as well in virtue, as in blood and birth. This is the true nobility, when
piety, wisdom, righteounesse, courage, and the fear of God, do adorn the royal
blood, and render persons truly illustrious, and not dark and obscure
creatures, as mean persons are, Prove. 22.29, Deuteronomy. 1.13. Exodus 18.21. nobility
of blood, without nobility of virtue and holiness, adds nothing to a
Govenou^ at all, Psalm. 16.3. and 47.9. and 87.3, 4, 5.6. and 110.3. Act. 17.11.

and thy Princes eat in due season] In the time of eating, after they have
spent their strength in duty: As to every thing there is a fit time, Eccles.
3.1. so to this particular of eating and drinking, Psalm. 145.15. Matthew. 24.45.
Labor and service should go before eating, Luk, 12.35, 37. and 17.7, 8, 9.
Abraham's servant would not eat till he had done his business, Genesis 24.33. and
our Savior preferred his own Fathers work before his own Refection, Joh. 4.31,
32. Sometimes even wicked men have been so intent on their wickedness, as to
deny liberty of eating, drinking, and other refreshments, to themselves, till
their designs were to be accomplished, Act. 23.12. Prove. 4.16. and so we find
Magistrates so serious in duty, as to forbear eating, and to forbid it even
sometimes when it was necessary, Ezra 10.6. 1 Samuel 14.23. Temperance is in no
calling more requisite, then in the Calling of a Magistrate, Prove. 31.4.
Multitudes of businesses, and those of greatest importment, and such as do
often require immediate consultation and dispatch, (and such are many times the
affairs of States) will not allow liberty of eating and drinking, all delights
must be laid aside to attend them. Exodus 12.34.39. It was wickedly done by the
King and Haman to sit down to drink when the City was in perplexity, Ester.
3.15. to let public safety lie still, while private luxury was served.

for strength, and not for drunkennesse] The end of eating, is to repair that
strength which had been weakened in duty, and so to enable unto the attendance
upon duty again. It ought not to be the end of our liing, but only a necessary
means unto life, and unto the services thereof.

And therefore Gluttony and Drunkenesse are to be avoided, as by all men,
because of many other evils which are in them, so in special manner by Princes
and Rulers, because they do totally indispose for such weighty affairs as are
to be managed by wisdom and counsel, Isa. 28.1. Hos. 4.11. and 7.5.

V. 18. By much slothfulness the building decays: and through idleness of
the hands, the house droppeth through.] This is a proverbial form of speech, and
appliable unto all kind of businesses, showing the danger of idleness and
procrastination in them. And it is here used as an illustration of what he had
said verse. 16. to set forth the misery of a Land under childish and careless
Government, by a Comparison drawn from the lesser to the greater, from an house
to a State; for as an house being exposed to wind and weather, will in time
drop through, and so endanger the rotting of the Timber, and the ruin of the
whole, if the owner thereof do not by timely repairs prevent such a mischief:
so the Commonwealth, being exposed to various dangers, from the subtilty and
hostility of enemies abroad, and from the rebellion, sedition, and various
discontents of ill-affected people within it self, will be continually in
danger of dissolution, if Governors, who should be the Healers, Repairers, and
Builders thereof, be not exceeding vigilant upon its preservation and safety:
which if he be, he will have little time left for luxury and intemperance.

Here then, 1. A State or Kingdom, is compared to an House, as sometimes the
Church is, 1 Cor. 3.9. Ephesians. 2.21. and 3.15. Heb. 3.2 -- 6. 1 Timothy 3.15.
nothing more usual, then to call the Kingdom of Israel, The House of Israel,
the House of Jacob, etc. Isa. 2.6. and 5.7. Luke 1.33. Obad. verse. 18.

2. Princes are compared unto the Masters of the Family, and to those unto whom
it belongs to Heal and Repair the ruins and breaches in that great building,
Isa. 3.7. Job 34.17. Isa. 58.12. and 61.4. As elsewhere to foundations, Psalm.
82.5. (...) quasi (...). to Coverings, Ezekiel. 28.16. to Bars, which keep a
house from being broken open, Hos. 11.6. to the Coignes, or Corners in a
Building, which keep the Compages of a structure together, Isa. 19.13.

3. Misgovernment is compared unto carelessness in an Housekeeper, or Steward,
that does not in time prevent those ruins in an house, which a few breaches
uncured, will quickly draw after them. Which, to show the greatness of it, is
called in the duall number, double slothfulness, or the slothfulness of both
hands: and so the 70. (...), by slothfulnesses. The Building decays, is
vitiated, weakened, disjoynted, sinketh, inclines; the 70, (...), is brought
low: a proper expression, being spoken of the roof of the house: and so the
word is rendered, Psalm. 106.43. Job 24.24. And through idleness of the hands, so
the 70, (...); the word is, through the humility, abjection, demission, hanging
down of the hands, that do not put themselves forth, nor lift themselves up
unto labor; a^ Heb. 12.12. Exodus 17.12. The like expressions whereunto we
have, Psalm. 76.5. and 74.11. Prove. 6.10. and 19.24. and 26.15. Prove. 10.4.

the house droppeth thorow] Which first causes the walls and timber to rot,
and so tends unto ruin; and secondly, causes a man's habitation to be
irksome and uncomfortable unto him, Prove. 19.13. and 27.15.

V. 19. A feast is made for laughter, and nine makes merry: but money
answers all things.] These words, if taken absolutely and alone, are to show
the dominion of money in humane affairs above all other things; other common
things, even the best of them, Bread and Wine, (whereby the Scripture uses to
express most outward contents) have a definite and limited use, proper to
themselves, distinct from others. They tend to make men laugh and be merry, but
money is the measure of all things; It will feed, and cloth, and harbor, and
purchase, and extend as a civil Instrument unto all secular provisions. But
they seem rather to bear Relation to what went before; slothful men intend not
the supportance of their houses, families, or estates, but they spend their
whole time in feasting and luxury, and all that, not out of any store which by
their provident labors they had laid up, but by the constant expense of
treasure, and emptying of their baggs, whereby at last their houses, families,
estates, are wholly brought to ruin.

Some join the words unto the former, thus; Through idleness of the hands of
th^se men the house droppeth through, who make feasts for laughter, and prepare
wine to make their life merry, and whose money does readily answer all these
greedy lusts and desires of theirs, and does bring in supplies and fuel into
them. So this Verse looks back to verse 16. showing the Cause of the Woe
there pronounced against a Land whose Princes were luxurious, and by whose
slothfulnes in regard of public service, the House of the State was ready to
decay and drop through; for by riot and excess, which cannot be maintained
without vast proportion of treasure to answer all the exigences of them, such
Princes are constrained to crush and oppress the poor people, and to squeeze
them with heavy exactions, Jer. 22.13 -- 19. which is unto the hearts of the
people as a continual dropping in a ruinous house, causes them either through
sadness of spirit to fall and despond, and so to become an abject and low
conditioned Nation, Ezekiel. 17.13.14. 2. Reg. 15.20. or else stirs them unto
more resolute practices, to shake off the yoke which they are not willing nor
able any longer to bear, 1 Reg. 12.14, 15, 16.

They make a feast for laughter,] So facere panem, vitulum, agnam, are
expressions used for dressing of such things toward a feast or entertainment,
Dan. 5.1. Genesis 18.7, 8. 2 Samuel 12.4.

and wine makes merry] Laetificat vitam, makes a man's life merry, as
elsewhere Laetificat Cor, gives him a merry heart, Ps. 104.15.

But money answers all things] LXX. (...). Whereunto agrees the Vulgar,
pecuniae obediunt omnia, Money can command all things, to wit, which are
measurable thereby. It being the Instrument and element of Commerce, as the
Philosopher calls it. Symmachus, (...). Is profitable for all things, which
may be bought therewith: or Exaudit omnia, It hears the desires of men, when
men desire such things as they outwardly want; If they have money, that
ordinarily can answer this desire, and procure those things for them: a like
expression we find, Hos. 2.21, 22.

V. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: and curse not the Rich in
thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which
has wings shall tell the matter.] Because by occasion of such sins of
mis-government in evil Princes, men might be very apt through impatiency of
spirit, to break forth into disloyal thoughts and affection toward them,
however they might happily be by fear of danger restrained from seditious
speeches, or rebellious practices: He therefore concludes this whole Argument
with a strict prohibition of all hard and undutiful thoughts and risings of
heart against Rulers, notwithstanding their Errors in Government, and
Corruptions in living, not so much as secretly in their hearts to wrong them,
both for conscience sake, and for fear of wrath, as the Apostle likewise
directs, Romans 13.5.

Even in thy thought, or in thy conscience curse not the King] Entertain not
any l^ght, vain, contemptuous or dishonorable thoughts of him, do not wish any
evil to his person, crown or Government, not so much as in thy inmost and most
secret retirements, Exodus 22.28. 2 Pet. 2.10. Ps. 62.4. 1 Samuel 10.27. 2 Samuel
19.21. 1 Reg. 2.8. Isa. 8.21.

The second clause, neither curse the Rich, is a re-enforcing of the same
precept again, meaning by the Rich, the Governor, Isa. 53.9. In the chambers
of thy bed, or, in thy most secret retirement.

And left a man should presume so to do, as conceiving thoughts to be free, and
far enough out of the sight of the Governor to observe or avenge, He adds the
great danger like to ensue by means which they could not so much as imagine, or
suspect.

[ for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall
tell the matter] As if he had said, Thy thoughts and secret curses are heard in
Heaven, by him who will certainly punish them, however secret they are kept
from men. And the Lord can easily find our ways even by bruit Creatures, to
bring them to light: as he did rebuke the madness of Balaam by his ass, 2 Pet.
2.16. and punish the pride of Pharaoh and Herod by frogs, lice, and worms,
Exodus 8.6, 17. Act. 12.23. We read how a flight of Cranes did discover the
murder done upon the Poet Ibycus: and how Bessus, who had slain his father,
overthrew a neast of swallows chattering, because, says he, they accuse me for
killing my father. As our Savior says in another case, If these should hold
their peace, the very stones would cry out, Luke 19.40. So the Lord can by even
dead and inanimate Creatures, discover wickedness. The earth it self, which
drank blood in, shall disclose and reveal it, Genesis 4.11. Isa. 26.21. Hab. 2.11.
The Chaldee by birds of the air, understand the Angels of Heaven, who like
winged Eagles shall make report of secret wickedness. Others understand it of
fame, which is a swift, and as it were a winged Messenger; alluding unto that
which is said of Princes, (...)* That Princes have many Eyes, and many Ears,
and long arms, that can see, and hear, and punish offenses at at a greater
distance.

CHAP. XI.
IN the former Chapter he showed the excellent use of true wisdom, as a means
of Tranquillity of mind, and remedy against the vanity of outward things, in
ordering our behavior aright toward Superiors for prevention of those dangers
which their displeasure may subject us unto. In this Chapter he further
discovers the use thereof unto the same End of comfortable living, in
ordering of our behavior toward Inferiors, those especially that are in want.

Concerning which, we have, First, the precept it self, concerning substantial
and useful charity, verse. 1. with an effectual reason thereof, both drawn from
a Metaphor of sowing and reaping seed, verse. 1.

Secondly, the manner and measure of this our charity, which is to abound
toward all that are in want, and that enforced by a reason drawn from the
uncertainty of future Events; now thou art able; hereafter thou may be
disabled, therefore do good while thou have means so to do, and thereby provide
friends to thy self against any evils which thou also may fall into, verse. 2.

Thirdly, Both those are illustrated by many similitudes, in the which he does
by way of Prolepsis prevent such objections as the covetous hearts of men are
apt to make against this duty.

1. A man is apt to say, That he is nearest to himself, and must look after his
own supplies, and leave others to look after theirs.

To which he answers, That as Clouds are not filled with waters to keep them
to themselves, but to empty them upon the Earth: so Gods blessings are not
deposited to men only for their own good, but as Stewards they are to dispense
out of them unto others, verse. 3.

2. It may be objected, If I must relieve seven and eight, take notice of the
wants of many, It will be seven to one if much of this bounty will not be cast
away upon unworthy and ungrateful persons, who will make no return either unto
God or man for it.

To this he answers, That as it is all one to the master of a tree, whether
it fall North or South, for either way it falls to the owners use and benefit:
so that good which is done to any man in want, out of a desire thereby to
honor God, and to help our neighbor, shall prove beneficial unto him that so
does it, whatever the person be unto whom it is done, verse. 3.

3. It may be objected, That it is not yet a season to be thus bountiful, there
are many Impediments and discouragements thereunto, This charge, this loss;
that affliction or danger, or expense lies upon me, when I am gotten over
these, it will then be a fitter time to think on the wants of others, when I am
secured against mine own.

To this he answers by another similitude drawn from husbandry, He that will
not sow his seed lest the wind should blow it away, nor reap his corn, lest the
Clouds should rain and wet it, shall never want exceptions against that which
yet is necessary to be done. Therefore our duty is to embrace the present
opportunity, and leave the success for the future unto Gods blessing.

If we could certainly foresee better weather, and more seasonable
accommodations for our businesses to morrow than to day, we might happily pretend
some reason for delay of duty. But that is in Gods hand alone, as unknown unto
us, as the way of the wind, or of the souls coming into the body, or the
growing of the bones of an Embryo in the womb. Therefore it is our duty to do
good at present while we have opportunity, and to commit the success of all for
the future unto God, verse. 4, 5. Whereupon he repeateth the Exhortation in the
same Metaphor, sow thy seed, scatter thy charity in season and out of season,
in youth, in age, at all times, on all occasions, since thou know not which
will be most succesful, verse. 6.

And now having thus largely set down various precepts for making the life of a
man comfortable, and his mind quiet amidst all the vanities of the world, He
proceeds to instruct him how he may provide for death, and judgment, and so
secure happiness in another world too: for a man might be apt to say, when I am
thus thoroughly fitted by these many precepts unto a secure and comfortable
manner of living, having the favor of great men, the blessing of poor men,
peace within, and plenty without, when by godly wisdom, vexation of mind, and
the vanity and disquietness thereupon of all outward things is healed, and
removed. It cannot then but be a very pleasant thing to live, to see the light
of the Sun, and to enjoy those contents which by these means we have arrived
at, verse. 7. To this the Wise man answers, That albeit by these means life is
much sweetened, and the vanity thereof is much abated, yet it is never thoroughly
removed: But when all is done which can be done to render our condition here
comfortable, yet All that comes, both life, and the supplies thereof, are
still Vanity, and will pass away, and the days of darkness which follow, will
be abundantly more than the days of light which went before. And that
therefore we ought, by the timely remembrance of them both, to moderate our
delights in things present, and to prepare our selves to lift up our heads with
comfort in the judgment to come, verse. 8.

And because of all others, young men, whose blood is fresh, and spirits
active, are most apt to surfeit on present pleasures, and to put far from them
the evil day, slighting such admonitions as these; therefore the Wise man, who
had had himself as full a gale of youthful pleasures, as ever any other man,
and had found the vanity of them all, does by an Irony, deride the folly, and
by a solemn citation unto the Tribunal of God, awaken the conscience of such a
voluptuous Epicure, verse. 9. persuading him by the assurance of a future
judgment, wherein he must be called to a strict account for all the vanities
and miscarriages of his youth: and by the flitting condition of that age
wherein he does so glut upon them, to remove far from himself those sinful
excesses which would fill his heart with sorrow, and his flesh with sin.

Verse. 1. CAst thy bread upon the waters: for thou shall find it after many
daies] This is a proverbial form of speech, drawn from the manner of
husbandmen, who sow their land in expectation of a plentiful harvest, after
many days. Whereby the Wise man, in pursuance of his principal argument,
touching tranquillity and comfort of life, does persuade unto liberality
toward the poor, that their mouths and bowels may bless us. Some make it an
allusion to Merchants, who send their Estates in Ships upon the Sea, expecting
in time a return with much gain, called the Harvest of the River, Isa. 23.3. if
the Prophet do not rather there allude to the plenty of Egypt, by the
overflowing of the River, whereunto possibly the Wise man may likewise allude
in this place. Others, more generally, understand it of giving alms to the
poor, where all we do, may seem to be cast away, as if it were thrown into the
Sea. Though thou think, what is so given, is all lost, because given to those
who can never recompense thee; yet do thou lend in that manner, looking for
nothing again, Luke 6.35. being assured, that what is thus given to the poor,
is lent unto the Lord, Prove. 19.17. who will in his time, certainly repay it
with advantage unto thee. But I rather take it to be an allusion unto seed,
which is sowed on very fertile ground, which is near a river, or is made fat by
the overflowing of a river, Numb. 24.7. Isa. 32.20. So they used in Egypt to
make their land fertile, by drawing the water, when the river flowed over, by
art unto it, Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11. Therefore amongst other plagues, which the Lord
threatens Egypt withal, this is one, That their Rivers should be dried up; and
that which was sowed by them, should wither, Isa. 19.5, 6, 7. and so we read of
the seed of Sihor, Isa. 23.3. which was a River in Egypt, Josh. 13.3. Jer.
2.18. By casting the bread upon the waters, we understand, by or near the
waters; as Ps. 1.3. Genesis 41.1. because those places are the most fertile. When
he says, thy bread, he thereby teaches us, that our charity must be out of
our own estate, and according to that condition wherewith God has blessed us,
Ephesians. 4.28.

for thou shall find it after many daies] The seed which a man sows seems to
dye and perish, but the husbandman waits patiently for many days together,
and at last he reapeth a plentiful harvest, Jam. 5.7. as Isaac did, Genesis 26.12.
Mark. 4.8. And in like manner, that which is sowed in the bellies and backs of
the poor, will be repayed, as the seed is in harvest, manifold into the bosoms
of righteous men, Prove. 19.17. 2 Cor. 9.6 -- 10. Deuteronomy. 15.10. Matthew 19.22. Ps.
112.9.

V. 2. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight: for thou know not what
evil shall be upon the earth] By waters, is sometimes in the Scripture meant,
multitudes of people; as Isa. 8.7. and 17.12. Revel. 17.15. and the Wise man
here bidding us to cast our bread on the waters, does in this verse explain
what he meant thereby, namely, that we should disperse our good works, and
alms-deeds unto many, that we should be large hearted, and open-handed unto the
poor.

Give a portion] He alludeth unto the manner of their feasts and entertainments
in old times, when they did use to distribute portions to their guests, and to
send to the poor, 2 Samuel 6.19. 1 Samuel 1.4, 5. Genesis 43.34. Esth. 9.22. Nehem.
8.10.12. Isa. 58.7. Whereunto our Savior happily alludeth, when he says that
Mary had chosen (...); A good part or portion, Luke 10.42. Which custom of
distributing equal portions to the guests, we find in Homer and Plutarch, to
have been observed likewise among the Grecians; as also the custom of sending
portions from the Tables of greater persons, to those that were absent. Vide
Stuck. Antiq. Conviv. lib. 3. cap. 3.

to seven and also to eight] That is, to many: a definite number, for an
indefinite, 1 Samuel 2.5. Job 5.19. Mic. 5.5. So hereby is noted, large and
cheerful liberality to all in want, according to our abilities. We may not
think we have done our duty, when we have been charitable to one or two
persons; but we must disperse our bounty, as seed that is sown; and do good
unto all men, according to their need and to our condition, cheerfully and
incessantly. The necessity of a man may require it, when his person does not
deserve it, Luke 6.30. 2 Cor. 9.5 -- 10. Gal. 6.10. Isa. 2^.18. Prove. 31.20.

for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth] Embrace the present
opportunity of doing good, thou can not foresee how soon thou may be
deprived of it, since thou know not what a day may bring forth, Jam. 4.14.
Prove. 27.1. and 3.27, 28. Luke 12.20. Happily thou may dye, and leave thy
wealth to those who will shut up their bowels against the poor; however, what
they do shall not be put on thy account. Thou art a steward of thy estate, no
longer than for thine own life; and therefore be thine own Executor, and
consider the wants of the poor at present, therefore let not thy bounty be only
future. Happily God may disable thee another time, from doing that good which now
he puts into thy hand. It is wisdom to do Gods work in Gods time. Happily thou
thy self may fall into want, and stand in need of help from others; therefore
make thee friends of Mammon before hand, Luke 16.9. Ps. 37.26. and 41.1, 2, 3.
1 Timothy 6.18, 19.

V. 3. If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth: and
if the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where
the tree falls, there it shall be] He urges the duty of charity and bounty,
by elegant similitudes. Clouds that are full of moisture, do not keep it to
themselves, but shed it forth in showers on the earth, and on all kind of corn,
and herbs for the benefit of many; whence they are called the bottles of
heaven, Job. 38.37. and the chambers of the Lord: Ps. 104.13. from whence he
pours down rain according to the vapor thereof, Job. 36.27, 28. so should
rich men, Prove. 11.25. whom the Lord has filled with his blessings, as the
Scripture uses to express it, Deuteronomy. 33.23. Job 22.18. Prove. 5.10. Deuteronomy. 6.11.
Prove. 30.9. Phil. 4.12.18. not keep Gods blessings to themselves, but pour them
forth upon those that are empty.

and if the tree fall, etc.] This some apply unto death, as if we were thereby
warned to do good while we may, because death will at last cut us down, and
deprive us of any further opportunity, Eccl. 9.10. Joh. 9.4. and as death
leaves us, judgment will find us. But it seems rather to denote the benefit
of charity unto the authors thereof, that wheresoever their bounty and mercy is
placed, there it will be found again to their comfort; they shall not go
without their reward, as the tree on which side ever it falls, it will there be
found, when the owner thereof inquireth after it.

V. 4. He that observes the wind, shall not sow, and he that regards the
clouds, shall not reap] By these similitudes, he preventeth all those pretenses
and objections which carnal hearts are apt to make against the present season
of doing good, and are apt thereby, to defer and put it off to some fitter
time, when they shall have found out more fitting objects on which to place
their bounty. We are very apt to frame excuses against present duty, Hag. 1.2.
Act. 24.25. Prove. 3.27, 28. Here therefore the Wise man removes these
pretenses; He that will by every wind be deterred from sowing his seed, lest it
should be blown away; and by every cloud from reaping his corn, lest the
weather should be unseasonable, shall never do his business; because there will
never be wanting some discouragement or other: so he that is ever framing
carnal objections against doing good, shall over-slip the season, and never do
his duty, nor receive his reward. We are to take notice of the present call of
God unto any good work, and the present opportunity he puts into our hands, and
not delay service upon the fear of future contingents, which are not in our
power, Matthew. 6.34.

V. 5. As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do
grow in the womb of her that is with Child: even so thou know not the works
of God who makes all] By our ignorance of the works of Gods providence, he
warns us to be diligent in embracing every present opportunity of doing good,
and not to defer or delay duty, till happily the Lord will put us out of all
capacity to do it. This ignorance he proves a minori, If we know not things
more ordinary and familiar unto us, which happen every day, as the way of the
spirit.] Symmachus renders it, of the wind, which way it comes and goes, how
it rises and slackneth, Joh. 3.8. Or how the soul comes into the body, and
quickneth it; so the Septuagint, (...); Or, how the bones do grow; How the
several parts of the body, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, some hard, some soft,
are all shaped out of the same seed, Psalm. 139.13 -- 16. Job 10.10 -- 13. Much
less are we able to foresee the works of Gods providence, which are far off and
exceeding deep, Chap. 7.24. Therefore since we know not what shall be to
morrow, how God may dispose of our life or our estate* how long he may continue
unto us opportunities of doing good, we ought not to defer or put off duty from
time to time, but while we have a present season, to embrace it, Chap. 9.10.
Gal. 6.10.

V. 6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withold not thy hand:
for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether
they both shall be alike good] He infers from the former doctrine of the
uncertainty of future events, an hortatory conclusion, to be doing good on all
occasions, and to be assiduous and dililigent in the work which God has set us
to do, whether all our labor take effect or no. The Lord being sometimes
pleased to frustrate men's endeavors, and to defer the success they expected
from them; First, to try them whether they would persevere in their calling:
and continue therein with God, though they had not always alike encouragement.
2. To teach them, that successes depend not upon the labors of man, but upon
the will and free blessing of God. And he persisteth in his former Metaphor of
sowing seed; meaning thereby, First, in particular works of charity and mercy
to the poor; as verse. 1 -- 4. 2 Cor. 9.6. Ps. 112.9. Secondly, In general,
works of righteousness in our general or particular callings, Prove. 11.18. Hos.
12.10. Thereby teaching us, that works of mercy and righteousness do not
perish, but will bring forth an harvest of comfort, and great reward unto those
that abound in them, Gal. 6.8.

sow thy seed] Do thine own work, intend thine own calling, intermix not thy
self in things which belong not unto thee, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Be
liberal of thine own estate, Ephesians. 4.28.

In the morning sow -- and in the evening withold not thine hand, or let not
thine hand rest or give over.] Begin betimes, and be not weary of well doing,
but continue unto the end; be always doing of good, morning and evening, note
the whole day from one end of it to the other, Genesis 1.5. Dan. 8.14. Psalm.
104.22, 23. So Solomon bids us, be in the fear of the Lord all the day long,
Prove. 23.17. It is to be understood of the morning and evening of a man's life,
which should be wholly consecrated to God, Lam. 3.27. Eccles. 12.1. Psalm.
92.14. Matthew. 10.22. or of the morning and evening of a man's prosperity; as
soon as ever God gives thee an estate, begin to do good with it, and be not
weary of so doing, but continue to the end. God requires our charity to be set
about on the first day of the week, 1 Cor. 16.2. Gal. 6.9, 10. The night is
shut out of the time of working, or of d^ty, therefore while it is day, while
we have life and opportunity, we must ply our duties, Eccles. 9.10. Joh. 9.4.

for thou know not whether shall prosper, or whether will be most right, or
congruous, the one or the other, etc.] Thou may justly expect a blessing
upon all, however, though the success, as to men, be not alwa^es prosperous;
sometimes thy bounty is misplaced upon those that abuse it, or return evil for
good, yet with God, constancy in well-doing will not miss of its reward; and by
this largeness heart, thou may unawares entertain Angels, and bring
extraordinary blessings upon thy family, Matthew. 10.14, 42. Heb. 13.2. 1 Reg.
17.13 -- 16.

V. 7. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to
behold the Sun] By light, and beholding the Sun, we are to understand the time
of this present life, as is evident by what follows in the next verse; so Job
3.20. and 33.30. and withal, we may take in those pleasures and comforts
thereof, which serve to render it more sweet and contentfull. Some make it to
be a tacit objection, against that continual labor which he before prescribed.
Since life is short, we ought to use all the ways we can to render it
pleasant, and not weary out our time and strength in continual toil and labor;
it is much more sweet, to enjoy the light and pleasures of life while we may, 1
Cor. 15.32. whereunto they make the words of the next verse to be an answer;
That when death comes, the good we have done will remain with us, but all our
pleasures and delights will vanish into nothing. It may seem to relate unto the
former verse, as well as to that which follows; sow your seed in the morning,
and in the evening, so long as you have the light of the Sun to guide you; for
this is the chief comfort and sweetness of life, to be doing good while we have
time and opportunity, because the days of death and darkness are coming,
wherein we cannot work.

But it seems rather to be a Transition unto a new matter. In the former
parts of this book, the Wise man had set forth the vanity of all outward
things, and had prescribed many gracious and excellent means to remedy the
same, and to frame the heart of man unto Tranquillity and peace. But now when
by these precepts the life of man here is rendered as full of comfort, and
quietness, as an earthly condition is capable of, yet though his life be never
so sweet, there are great evils coming, which will require much meditation and
preparation of hear^ to fit a man for them: and there is a far longer condition
for the future, which will abide us after this life is gone; necessary
therefore it is unto the completing of that happiness whereinto he had all
this while inquired, to secure not only the comforts of this life, but the
assurance of a better, which is the business of Solomon in the remaining part
of this Book, by a timely meditation of death and judgment, and by the fear of
God, and keeping his commandments in our youth, to arm us against the terror of
future evils, and to fit us for that happiness, which is the whole of man, and
which will be thoroughly proportionable to his largest desires. And so the
meaning is this, It is true indeed, to enjoy the light of the Sun, and the
comforts of this present life, is a very sweet thing: Sensually sweet unto
those, who are voluptuous; Solidly and substantially sweet unto those, who by
all the foregoing precepts, have gotten wisdom to cure the vanity and vexation
of spirit, which otherwise outward things are apt to produce; yet both the one
and the other must remember, that though life be sweet under the Sun, yet it is
not long, much less, perpetual; days of darkness are to come, therefore unto
complete happiness there is yet more to be done, and such an estate to be
secured, as may bear full proportion to the capacities of an immortal soul, and
may make up the Whole of man.

Light is Sweet] Sweetness here is that properly which is the object of our
Taste, J^dg. 14.18. Prove. 24.13. but it is usual in the Scripture to attribute
that which is proper unto one sense, to another; as to see thunder, Exodus
20.18. to see the smell ^f a field, Genesis 27.27. It is a broken and concise
sentence, unto which something is to be added or understood, it is indeed sweet
to see the Sun; life is pleasant, but yet it is vanity, and will end in death;
by the meditation whereof, we are to abate our inordinate love of the profits
and pleasures of so vanishing a condition.

V. 8. But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all, yet let him
remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many. All that comes is
Vanity] Though it be a sweet thing to enjoy life, and the comforts thereof, and
though a man should live long, and all that long life should have his full of
worldly delights, yet the serious meditation of death, and the long abode we
shall after all those pleasures have in the house of darkness, will
sufficiently demonstrate the vanity of Temporal life, how long, or how
prosperous soever it have been; such a life we find described, Job 21.7 -- 13.
By days of darkness, are understood in opposition to light; and the seeing of
the Sun, in the former verse, that space of time wherein men shall lie in the
dust, Psalm. 88.12, 13. Psalm. 143.3. Eccles. 6.4. Job. 10.21.

for they shall be many] This some apply to the first words of the verse,
though the days of life be many, yet let a man remember the days of darkness,
and that will make him judge all things which happen in this world to be but
vanity: we may likewise read the words thus; If a man live many years, let him
rejoice in them all, he is not debarred the comforts and contents of them, but
let him withal temper and moderate the joys of life, with the meditation of
death, and know that every thing which happens, that every man which comes
into the world is vanity.

V. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes: But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into
judgment.] Since all that comes is vanity, as well youth as age, both which
he shows here and in the next Chapter: And since the days of life and
jollity here, how long soever, are very short and inconsiderable, in comparison
of the days of darkness which follow after them, he therefore persuades those
who are most subject to be transported with the pleasures of life, to remember
death and judgment, and thereby to restrain their inordinate desires. A young
Epicure, who is scornful and impatient of such cooling and chill doctrines as
those of death and judgment, might be apt to say; if the days of darkness be
so many, let us not make them more then they are by denying our selves the
pleasures of light, but let us freely indulge to our selves all our delights,
and live to the length of our desires, 1 Cor. 15.32. whereunto Solomon
answers in these words, 1. By way of Concession, 2. By way of sad and severe
praemonition. The Concession some would have to be real and serious, as if he
had said, I would not discourage thee from the use of lawful pleasures, nor
debar thee such contents as the flower of thine age do call for: only I would
have thee careful not to exceed the bounds of temperance and moderation, but
by the vanity of things present, and certainty of future judgment, to compose
thy mind to sobriety in enjoying, and to a readiness to depart from these vain
delights, as Gal. 5.13. 1 Pet. 2.16. enjoy pleasures, but be not drowned in
them; use honest delights, but be not a slave unto them: Thou see that all
here is Vanity, that the fashion of this world, the power, wealth, honor,
pleasures, strength, health, beauties thereof, all vanish and pass away, and
that all of us must be brought before Gods tribunal; and all our actions
undergo a severe trial: therefore let it be thy chiefest care to provide for
that account. But the place is much more Emphatical, if we understand the
Concession Ironically; as 1 Reg. 18.27. and 22.15. Ezekiel. 28.3, 4. Matthew. 26.45.
Since thou art wilful and scornful, take thy course, Rejoice in thy youth;
or, because thou art young, strong, healthful, and thy bones full of marrow,
Job 21.23, 24.

And let thine heart cheer thee] Symmachus, (...), Let it be wholly in good, or
in delights.

and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes] Do what
thou please, let thy wanton and wandering eye inflame the lusts of thy heart,
and let thy sensual heart give law to thy whole man, deny not thy self any
thing which heart can wish, or eye look on, Numb. 15.39. 1 John 2.16. 2 Pet.
2.14. and 3.2. Ezekiel. 23.16. Josh. 7.21. Jer. 18.12. Psalm. 81.12. Job. 21.7.
Thus sharply does the Lord deride the pride and folly of young men in their
career of Lust and Vanity, and as it were give them over to their own hearts
desires, Prove. 1.24 -- 28. Romans 1.28.

But know thou] Though thou Endeavor to blind thine own eyes with sensual
delights, to smother thy conscience, and to baffle those principles of fear and
restraint which God has planted in thee; Though thou would not see, yet thou
shall see and know to thy cost, Isa. 26.11. 1 Reg. 22.25. 2 Pet. 3.5.

that for All these things] For all the sins, vanities, and excesses of thy
youth, for all those things which are now so grateful to thy senses, though
they please thine eye, they will gnaw and sting thy conscience, Job. 13.26.
Psalm. 25.7. God, whose Word and fear thou now despisest, from whose eye thou
can not hide thy sins, from whose Tribunal thou can not withdraw thy
conscience; will bring thee] Perforce whether thou will or no, when thou shall
in vain call to Mountains and Rocks to hide thee, Rev. 6.16. Luke 23.30.

into judgement] The Judgment of the great day, Jude verse. 6. called the
Terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.10. Act. 17.30. the consideration whereof should
abate the heat of lust, and cause the heart of young men to tremble at the
wrath to come.

V. 10. Therefore remove sorrow from thine heart, and put away evil from thy
flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity] This is not to be understood
Ironically, as the former words of the verse foregoing, nor in that sense; but
seriously, as a seasonable precept unto young men, who are of all other men, by
reason of the heat of their blood, subject unto passions,, and unto pleasures;
the one seated in the heart, the other in the flesh^; from both which, he does
here forewarn them.

Remove sorrow, or anger and indignation from thine heart] If we read it
sorrow, then hereby is meant all those sinful pleasures which though the
deceitful heart look on as matter of joy, yet will certainly fill the heart
with sorrow at the last, Prove. 14.13. If Anger, or Indignation, then the
meaning is, that he should restrain all Inordinate passions and perturbations
of mind, especially take heed of swelling or storming at the will and ways of
God, or at any serious advice minding him thereof, James 1.19. Job 6.24.

and put away evil, sinful lusts, from thy flesh] From thy bodily members,
Romans 6.13. 1 Cor. 6.15. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Pet. 2.11. 2 Timothy 2.22. and so some
understand the word flesh, in the sense as it is used, Ezekiel. 16.26. and 23.20.
2 Pet. 2.10. Jude verse. 23.

for childhood and youth are vanity.] The reason of this advice, drawn from the
vanishing condition of youth, and the pleasures thereof: Youth is but as the
Aurora or early morning of a day quickly gone, from thence to noon, and from
noon to night, therefore care should be used to spend it in such a manner, as
that we may have an abiding fruit, and pleasure which will not vanish with the
years which were consumed in the pursuance of it.

CHAP. XII.
IN this Chapter the Wise man proceeds to demonstrate this Vanity of youth
and old age, which quickly run into Death, And then concludes the whole Book.

He had before by an Emphatical Ironie, deterred Young men from those
inordinate passions, and sensual pleasures, which that slippery age is most
subject unto, and that by the Consideration of that dreadful account which in
the last Judgment God will require of them. And because that age of of all
other is most apt to put the evil day far from them, and to look on Death and
Judgment as at a great distance, (as evil men use to do, Ezekiel. 12.27. 2 Pet.
3.3, 4. Amos 6.3.) therefore he does by a Prolepsis prevent that shift; Young
men might be apt to say, the things you press us unto are good, but we shall
have time enough before Judgment come, to think of them, old age will be a fit
season to draw off from the world, and to draw nigh to God. Solomon here
persuades from so dangerous a Resolution, showing the necessity of seeking and
serving God in our youth, in regard old age will be very unfit to begin so
great a work in.

Whereupon he shows, 1. The Vanity of Old age, setting it forth by a large
and an elegant Allegory, and by other expressions, Verse. 2 -- 6.

2. He presses the same duty by another argument: from the approach of death,
which takes away all means of Repentance and conversion, verse. 7. And having
thus by an Induction of many particulars showed the Vanity both of the
Creatures here below, and of the Condition of man under the Sun, who, were they
never so excellent, could not long enjoy them; He does conclude the whole book,
1. With resuming his first conclusion, verse. 8. 2. By vindicating the truth of
his doctrine therein, and in other his Writings, by arguments; 1. From the
Penman of them, His Piety, he was a penitent Convert; His wisdom: His
fidelity in teaching the people: His diligence, in seeking out choice matter to
teach them: His success in composing many excellent and profitable Sentences
for their furtherance in Piety, Virtue, and Prudence, verse. 9.

2. From the Quality of the doctrine which he taught, which he commends, 1.
Absolutely, and for it self, in regard, 1. Of the pleasantness. 2. The
uprightness. 3. The truth of it, verse. 10. 4. The Efficacy of it, set forth by
two similitudes of goads, and of nails. 5. The Authority of it, 1. In regard
of the office of those who dispense it, they are Masters of the Assemblies. 2.
In regard of the great Shepherd of the sheep, by whose Spirit it was revealed,
verse. 11.

2. He commends it Comparatively, from the Vanity of all other studies and
learning without this; All other Books are made without end or number, and read
without Satisfaction or Content; by these a man may be admonished; by others he
can be only wearied, verse. 12.

And having thus demonstrated the Doctrine he had in this book delivered, he
closes the whole with a most grave and solemn conclusion, containing, 1. A
summary abridgment of the means of perfect Happiness and Tranquillity of mind,
in two words, fear and obedience, fear of God in the heart, as the root;
Obedience to his Will in the life, as the fruit of that holy fear, verse. 13.

2. A strong Motive thereunto drawn from the future Judgment, upon which and
that final sentence of Absolution or Condemnation then to be pronounced, the
everlasting Happiness or Misery of Man stands, verse. 14. He will bring every
work to Judgment, therefore keep his Commandments: He will bring every secret
thing to judgment, therefore fear him, and sanctify him in your hearts.

Verse. 1. REmember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no pleasure
in them] Remember] We are naturally apt to forget God, and not to retain him in
our knowledge, but to live as it were without him, Psalm. 10.4, 5. Ephesians. 2.12.
and this most of all, when Earthly and Sensual objects draw the heart with a
stronger attraction; therefore the Wise man having dissuaded young men from
youthful lusts, does here exhort them as a necessary means thereunto, to
Remember their Creator, To set the Lord always before their eyes, Psalm. 16.8.
to be in his fear all the day long, Prove. 23.17. To compose themselves unto his
service, to keep in memory, to hold fast, to ponder, and stir up the thoughts
of him, and desires toward him in their hearts, 1 Cor. 15.2. Tit. 1.9. Prove.
4.4. Luke 8.15. Deuteronomy. 11.18. Psalm. 119.11. Luke 2.51. This Remembrance imports
love, desire, obedience, Verba notitiae connotant affectus, Psalm. 119.55. Isa.
26.8, 9.

We find Two Psalms amongst David's, with this Inscription, To bring to
Remembrance, so careful was he not to forget the dealings of God with him,
Psalm. 38.1. and 70.1. for this purpose were Sacraments instituted, Exodus 12.42.
1 Cor. 11.24. Feastivals ordained to keep alive the memory of mercies, Esth.
9.27, 28. Stones and Monuments erected for ^he remembering of Gods goodness,
Josh. 4.6, 7. the Law wr^tten on door-posts, fringes, frontlets, to be kept
ever in mind, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8, 9. for this purpose God has appointed his
Ordinances, and given his Spirit to his Church, to put them in remembrance, 2
Pet. 1.12. 1 Timothy 4.6. Joh. 14.26.

thy Creator] This word includes many reasons, why God ought to be remembered
and served by us.

1. He made us, and not we our selves, and we owe our service to him from whom
we receive our Being, Psalm. 100.2, 3. Remember he made all things for himself,
we are of him, therefore we must live to him, Prove. 16.4. Isa. 43.21. Romans
11.36. and 14.7, 8.

2. He made us after his own Image, to know him, and to have special interest
in him, and acquaintance with him; and being made like him, we are the more
obliged unto his service, Ephesians. 4.23, 24.

3. By that Power which created us, we are continually preserved; if he
withdraw it, we presently perish, In him we live, and move, and have our being.
The more vigor and strength we have, the more sensible we should be of that
Divine supportance, which continues it unto us, Act. 17.27 -- 30. Psalm.
104.28, 29.

4. He who has power to create, has power to destroy; and he will show the
same Almighty power, in destroying those, who live not suteably to the ends of
their Creation, 1 Samuel 2.6, 8. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. This creating power of God, should
teach us to fear him. Jer. 5.22.

in the days of thy youth] The choicest time of thy life, Lam. 3.27. Prove.
22.6. 2 Chronicles. 34.1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 3.15. Psalm. 119.9. therefore God required,
that the first ripe fruits should be dedicated unto him, Exodus 23.19. and the
first born, Exodus 22.29. And his sacrifices he would have to be young, Exodus
12.5. and 29.1. Lev. 4.3. We enjoy mercies in our youth, therefore we should do
duty in our youth; we expect eternal life from God, therefore we should not
withdraw any part of our temporal life from him. He requires to be served with
all our strength, therefore we may not put him off till our strength is gone.

before the evil days come, etc.] If thou will have God to pity and help thee
in thy evil days, thou must serve him in thy good days. The days of old age,
are called evil days, aetas mala, in Plautus, because they bring many pains
and troubles along with them: vitae hyems, the W^nter of our life, as Solon
called it, nam res plurimas, pessimas cum advenit affert. As the days of youth
are called, aetas bona, in Cicero, and aetas optima in Seneca: Because then
nature is strong and vigorous, and does most fully enjoy it self. Thine old age
will bring evils enough of its own, Do not thou bring upon it the bitterness
and burden of all thy youthful follies; repentance is a hard work, when thy
sins are fewer, and thy strength greater: When infirmities bend thy back, do
not keep thine iniquities to break it. Since the days of old age will be evil
days, Lay up as many graces as thou can to sweeten it, as many comforts as
thou can to strengthen thine heart against the evils of it. Gather, in
Summer, against such a Winter as this, Prove. 10.5. That old age may not be to
thee an evil age, but as it was to Abraham, a good old age, Genesis 25.8.

And the years wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them] This seems
to be added, as an aggravation of the evil of those evil days, that if they be
lengthened into years, yet all that while a man can find no matter of pleasure
or content, whole years together shall be full of weariness and sorrow. So Job
complains of the length of his misery, that he possessed months of vanity, Job
7.3. and Ezekiah, Isai. 38.12, 13, 15. The very strength of the years of an old
man, is all labor and sorrow, Psalm. 90.10.

V. 2. While the Sun, or the light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not darkened:
nor the clouds return after the rain] These words may be understood either
Literally, or Allegorically, as those that follow. Literally, the meaning is,
That unto old men, by reason of the decay of their senses, even the lightest
bodies seem to be darkened; they look upon the Sun at noon through the clouds
and scales which are over their own eyes. And whereas it is a pleasant thing to
behold the Sun, Chap. 11.7. this shall minister no delight at all unto them:
Light is little worth unto a man that is in misery, Job 3.20, 23.
Allegorically, It is by some understood so, as that the Sun, Moon, Stars,
Light, may refer unto some parts in man, signified thereby; (as the other parts
of the Allegory ensuing do) and thus: First, the Chaldee Paraphrase refers
it unto the face, and eyes; Before the glory and beauty of thy face be changed,
and the light of thine eyes be darkened, and the comeliness of thy cheeks be
abated, and the Apples of thine eyes, the Stars of thy countenance be
extinguished; and thine eyelids drop down tears, as Clouds after rain.
Secondly, others understand it of the weakening of the inward vigor of the
Soul, and rational faculties; Understanding, Perspicacy, Memory, Judgment,
Fancy; all which in the nature of man, answer to the celestial Lights. Others,
by Sun, Moon, Stars, and Light, understand the various sorts and degrees of
prosperity and joy, which men meet with in their younger years: and so the
sense to be, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before those evil
days come; wherein all thy light shall be turned into darkness, all thy
prosperity into sorrow, before greater and lesser comforts do all fail thee,
and thy days and nights be full of trouble and darkness, one calamity (like
storms in the Winter) coming upon the neck of another. Prosperity is usually in
Scripture compared unto the Sun, and to light, Judge. 5.31. 2 Samuel 23.4. and in
greater prosperity, then usual the light of the Moon is said to be as the light
of the Sun, and the light of the Sun seven fold, Isai. 30.26. and 60.20. And on
the other side, when great afflictions, such as swallow up all former joy and
contentments, come upon a man; the Scripture expresses it by the obscurity,
blackness, and falling of the Sun, Moon and Stars, Isa. 13.9, 10, 11. and 24.20
-- 23. and 34.3, 4. Jer. 4.23, 24. and 15.9. Ezekiel. 32.7, 8. Joel 2.10. and
3.15. Amos 8.9. Matthew. 24.29. And this sense seems most genuine, as
expressing the reason, why the days of old age are evil days, and years wherein
a man has no pleasure, because, both day and night, the life of such a man is
full of darkness and trouble. Therefore mention is made of Sun, and of Moon
and Stars, to note the incessant pains, aches, troubles, weaknesses which this
age is afflicted with, Job. 7.4, 13, 14, 18, 19. Psalm. 32.4.

nor the clouds return after rain] This likewise may be understood generally of
the troubles of old age; in the former sense, to no^e the continual returns of
them day and night. A proverbial speech, expressing the constant succession of
one grief, pain, disease, calamity, after another; as when the Wether is set in
to rain, one cloud is no sooner blown over, but another ucceeds and brings more
rain. Velut unda supervenit undae. Others, understand it of the Catarrhs, and
defluxions, which by reason of natural weakness, and want of heat to concoct
them, do still ascend from the stomach to the head, and from thence fall down
upon the breast and lungs; so that the head is ever rainy, never serene.

The former sense seems most pertinent, because in this verse, is a general
description of the miseries of old age, the particular specification whereof
follows in the rest. For as Usurers, before the whole debt is paid, do fetch
away some good parts of it for the loan: so before the debt of death be paid by
the whole body, Old age does by little and little take away sometimes one
Sense, sometimes another; this year one Limb; the next another; and causes a
man, as it were, to dye daily. No Sun can dispel the clouds and sorrows of old
age, but Christ, who is the Sun of Righteousness, and the bright Morning Star,
Mal. 4.2. Prove. 4.18. Rev. 22.16.

V. 3. In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong
men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease, because they are few, and
those that look out of the windows shall be darkned] The Body is here compared
to an House, or Castle, so elsewhere called, Job. 4.19. 2 Cor. 5.1. (...)
watchmen and Keepers, to (...) being broken open. By these, some understand the
outward Senses, which observe any danger approaching, and give timely notice of
it to have it prevented. Others, the inward Faculties of Memory, Wisdom,
Providence, which take special care of the common safety. Others, and the
most, The Hands and Arms, which are the principal instruments, which the Body
uses in repelling any evil from it. Others, understand the Ribs, whereby the
vital parts are fenced and hedged in, that danger may not easily come near
them: As the expression is, Job 10.11. Though the Verb, Tremble, seem to carry
the sense chiefly unto the Hands and Arms, which are more subject unto palsies,
and shakings; yet it is not amiss to take in many of the other: The Head, the
seat of the Senses, as the Watchman; the Arms, as the Soldiers in a Castle;
the Ribs, as the Walls and Works which serve to defend it: All which are much
shaken and weakened in old age.

and the strong men shall bow themselves] The Legs and Thighs, which were wont
to carry the body upright, shall now falter and shrink under their weight, and
buckle for feebleness, Isai. 35.3. Or, the Back, which is the strongest part of
the body (...) bearing burdens, shall bow and stoop under its own weight.
Symmachus renders it, (...), shall perish, or be corrupted; the Septuagint,
(...), shall be perverted, shall, as it were, trip up and supplant one the
other with crooked and unsteady motion. The old Wife in the Comedian, excused
her slow and faltering pace, because she carried a very heavy burden, the
weight of seventy four years. Cajetan understands it literally, when the
strongest men that are do fail, and stoop through weakness.

and the grinders cease because they are few] Dentes molares, the great
jaw-teeth, wherewith we grind our meat, shall cease and be unable to work,
because they are diminished and made few, or because they do diminish their
grinding, being sluggish and dull, both for want of strength in themselves, and
of appetite in the stomach.

and those that look out of the windows shall be darkned] The Vulgar, per
foramina, through the holes; as Zach. 14.12. It is elsewhere rendered, Windows,
2 Reg. 7.19. Isai. 60.8. Genesis 8.2. So it is understood of the dimness of the
eyes in old men, Genesis 27.1. and 48.10. Solomon Glassius in his Rhetorica Sacra,
by Windows understands Spectacles, which for weakness of sight, aged men are
necessitated to use: Cajetan applies it to all the Senses; and by foramina,
understands the holes of the Ears, Nose, Mouth, as well as of the Eyes. All
these for want of vital spirits, being blunted and dulled in their exercise.
But the words [ looking out] and [ darkned] plainly limit the meaning unto the
sight only, which through the want of spirits, dryness, and ineptitude of the
Organes, hardness of the membranes, defluxion of humors, and other
inconveniences, is much weakened in aged men. So that it is noted as a strange
thing in Moses, that when he was a hundred and twenty years old his eye was not
dim, nor his natural force abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7. and the like we read of Caleb,
Josh. 14.10, 11.

By these Infirmities, we should be taught, in our younger years, to provide
and lay in comforts against them, and not to trust in the strength of our own
Arms, which are so easily broken, but to make the Lord our Arm, and his Right
hand our Keeper, whose Arms are everlasting, Isa. 33.2. Deuteronomy. 33.27. Psalm.
121.5. Not to rest upon our own bottom, nor stay only upon our own strength,
by which no man shall be established, 1 Samuel 2.9. but to make the Lord our stay
and support, in whom there is everlasting strength: He is eyes to the blind,
and feet to the lame, he gives power to the faint, and to them that have no
might, he increases strength, Psalm. 18.18. Isai. 26.4. and 40.29. and 41.10.
Psalm. 145.14.

V. 4. And the doors shall be shu^ in the streets, when the sound of the
grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the
daughters of music shall be brought low] Various interpretations are given of
these particulars. Some understand the first clause, literally, The doors of
the house, by which he was wont to go into the streets, to visit his friends,
to walk up and down about his business, shall be now shut up; He shall, by
reason of his many infirmities, keep within doors, and abstain from all public
meetings, wherein, in his younger years, he was wont greatly to delight.
Others, refer it allegorically to the Body, here compared to an House, the
doors whereof toward the street, are, in old age, shut up, and made useless.
Whereby many things are understood, First, The two Lips, which are the doors of
the mouth outwardly, Psalm. 141.3. The word is in the dual number. Or, The
Mouth, which is the door of the heart: This may be applied, both unto eating,
and unto speech, unto the Oesophagus, and the Arteria, the passages for the
meat to go down to the stomach, and for the breath to go to the lungs, called
fistula cibaria, and fistula spiritalis. These pipes are happily here compared
unto the street, or passage down into several parts within the body, which have
doors or covers, that open one way, and shut another way when we eat and drink,
that our food may go right to the stomach, and not away to the lungs. These
doors in old age are, through weakness, shut up, and as it were off from their
hinges, do not so pliantly and readily do their proper office, as they were
wont to do. Whence difficulty of swallowing, and difficulty of speaking; unto
which two, most of the interpretations of this place may be referred. Some by
these two d^^rs, understand the Eyelids, when they are weak, and hang down
over the eyes. Others, All the Senses, which are the outward doors, by which
objects enter, and are admitted to the Soul. All which, in old age, are so
weakened, and unuseful, that they do very little service.

The next Clause, seems most to favor that sense, which, by Doors, understands
the passages of the meat down into the stomach, and of the voice from the
lungs, unto both which uses, the Teeth are greatly subservient.

when the sound of the grinding is low] This some apply unto Hearing, when that
grow weak. Others, unto the Concoction of the stomach, when that is decayed:
but the most probable interpretation, is that which applies it to the Teeth,
which being few, and weak, cannot readily crush and break harder meats, and so
make a lesser sound in eating, then young men do; frangendus misero gingiva
panis inermi. When the Teeth are gone, the lips are compressed, the mouth falls
down, the organs of feeding and speaking are much disabled. They who take the
former clauses literally, join the senses thus together, Old men stay within
doors, and walk little abroad, because the weakness of their appetite and
digestion does cause them to eat little, whereby their strength is much abated,
neither do they for this reason care to go to feasts, or merry meetings, all
desires and delights being in them wholly decayed and broken.

and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird] At the chirping or singing of
any little bird] An expression of the little sleep which old men have, by
reason of the coldness of the stomach, and difficulty of Concoction, sending up
fewer vapors to the brain, or less benign, so that they are easily awakened
with every little noise. It may also be understood of his weariness to lie long
in his bed, by reason of leanness and aches, so that he is willing to rise as
early as the birds leave their nests.

and all the daughters of music shall be brought low.] By daughters of music,
we may understand, First, Some organs of the body tending unto music, either
to sing our selves, as the artery for speaking, those fibra vocales which are
bended and inflected in singing; or the ear which judges of sounds, as the
palate of meats, when we hear others sing; or secondly, All kind of musical
consort and harmony, vocal or instrumental, which young men greatly delight in,
as Solomon did, Eccl. 2.8. but to old men are little delightful, they can
neither sing themselves, nor are greatly pleased with the music of others, 2 Samuel 19.34, 35. By these defects we are instructed in the days of our youth,
to open all the doors of our heart to let Christ in, that in old age he may be
with us, and when our appetite fails us, he may sup with us, Rev. 3.20. and
when our sleep fails us, he may give us rest; and when all other delights are
worn out, a good conscience may be a continual feast, Prove. 15.15* and may give
songs in the night, Job 35.10. Ephesians. 5.19.

V. 5. Also when they shall be afraid of that which is High, and fears shall be
in the way, and the Almond-tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a
burden, and desire shall fail; because man goes to his long home, and the
mourners go about the streets.] These are further degrees of the infirmities of
old age when it grows now more decrepit, and near unto the grave.

Also when they shall be afraid of that which is High] Either to go up to any
high place, for fear of weariness, or want of breath, or giddiness of brain, or
disability to hold out, or danger of falling from it; or lest any thing that is
over them should fall down upon them and hurt them.

and fears shall be in the way] They shall go slowly and timorously, lest they
stumble at every stone or little bunch that is before them, lest they be
thrust, and bruized by any that pass by them, lest weariness, sickness, or some
other infirmity come upon them, and hinder them in their Journey, lest any
thing run against them, and cast them down, no way is so smooth and easy,
wherein there will not be something to afright them.

and the Almond-tree shall flourish,] This some take literally, when the Almond
flourishes, in the beginning of the spring, when the grasshopper is fat in the
middle of the Summer, then shall the desires and delights (which in those
seasons young men were wont to take) fail them, they shall find no pleasure in
the most beautiful seasons of the year. And so they make the spring to be
described by the flowring of the Almond-tree, which does first bring forth
blossoms, Jer. 1.11. and the Summer, by the fatness of the grasshopper, which
then is most busy. Others understand it of Aversation from sensual desires,
and from pleasant fruits, as we find in Vatablus and Caietan, Omnis Cibus
suavis reprobabitur: flocci faciet coitum ob multam debilitatem. But he seems
to carry on the Allegory, and to compare the speed which old age makes to
overtake a man, unto the Almond-tree, which thrusts out her blossoms before any
other tree. And as the flowers of the Almond are evident forerunners of
approaching Summer, so is old age of death, The most agreed sense is, of Gray
hairs, which are here compared to the white flowers of an Almond-tree, and are
called flores Caemiterii. So (...), in Sophocles, a white hoary head.

and the grasshopper shall be a burthen] The lightest hop of so little a
creature shall be burdensome to him, he is impatient of any the smallest
weight. Allegorically may be understood, either the bowing down of his back,
and the sticking out of the vertebrae and bones thereof, which shall be a heavy
weight unto him. Or, the legs which in a young man were as nimble as the legs
of a grasshopper, shall now be heavy and swelled with gowts and evil humors, so
the Chaldee Paraphrase, the former sense is most general.

And Desire shall fail] The Desires of meat, drink, marriage, other pleasures,
whatever is delightful to the eyes, ears, palate, other senses, shall all fail:
A man shall abhor those things which in youth his nature did greatly incline
unto. Symmachus renders (...), shall be dissolved, so some understand it of
the mutual Confederation between the soul and the body which will be loosned
and broken. The Septuagint read it, (...); which word the Vulgar Latin
retains, being a shrub, whose fruit, Galen says, is good for a weak
appetite; and Avicen, ad irritandam Venerem: consonant whereunto is the Chaldee
Paraphrase. Athenaeus numbreth Capparis amongst other hot and salacious herbs.

Because man goes to his long home] Ad Dom^m Mundi sui, hic enim mundus non
est suus. So Caietan wittily, though impertinently, Domus Saeculi, The Long
Home is the Grave, whence men are never more to return into this world any
more. It is called a man's own and proper house, Isa. 14.18. They promise
themselves Houses for ever here, Ps. 49.12. but they have no abiding home but
in the grave, Job 7.10. The body is domus pernoctavionis, but the Grave Domus
aeternitatis.

and the mourners go about the streets.] Accompany the Hearse unto the Grave,
Jer. 9.17. Or his friends that visit him, go from him mourning, and expecting
his funeral. So we read of wailing in all Streets, Amos, 5.16. Those hired
mourners who with music were wont to praise the party deceased, (whereunto
alludeth the Evangelist, Matthew. 9.23.) we read of in Varro, lib. 6. de lingua
latin. vid. Scalig. ib.

Now from these Infirmities we may be instructed to take care, that amidst our
own fears we may be guarded by Angels, and led in our way, and upheld by the
Lords right hand, who has promised to give his Angels a charge to keep us in
our ways, and to make his way plain before our eyes, that we may have plain
paths for our feet to walk in, and every high thing may be taken down, Ps.
34.7. Genesis 48.16. Ps. 91.11. Ps. 37.24. Prove. 15.19. Ps. 27.11. Ps. 5.8. Heb.
12.13. Isa. 40.4. Luke 3.4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 10.5. to be trees of Righteousness,
and then we shall bring forth fruit, and flourish in old age, Ps. 92.12, 13,
14. When we can bear no burden our selves, If the Lord be ours, we may cast
all our burdens on him who cares for us, and will sustain us, Ps. 55.22. And
when All other desires fail, Let us labor to be in such a preparation for
death, as that we may say with Old Simeon, Lord now letrest thou thy servant
depart in peace; and with Paul, I desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is best of all, Phil. 1.23. And since the grave is our longest home, let
our greatest care be to have that a House of Rest and of Hope unto us; Christ
by his lying in it has sweetened it unto Believers. Lastly, let us so live, as
that we may dye without fear, and they who bewail us, may not mourn as they who
have no Hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.

V. 6. Or ever the silver Cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the
pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the Cistern.] Some
understand this verse literally. 1. Of the ornaments. 2. Of the more needful
instruments of life, whether they be more obvious and easy to come by, as to
draw water out of a Fountain with a pitcher; or more remote, which are not
gotten without labor and cost, as the drawing of water out of a deep Well with
a wheel and a chain. And so the meaning runs thus, Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy Youth, before God strip thee of thine ornaments wherein thou now
rejoycest, Thy plate, chains, rings, jewels, bracelets, which will then be too
heavy for thee to wear, nec sufferre potes majoris pondera g^mmae: 2. Before he
spoil thee of the other Helps and Commodities of life, and make both thine
extraordinary ornaments, and thine ordinary utensils all useless unto thee: or
happily in this sense the former clause may relate unto rich men, Let not thy
silver and gold bewitch thee: the later unto meaner men, Let not thy pitcher
and thy wheel take thee off from minding the things of another and a better
life. Others carry on the Allegory, making these things figurative and elegant
expressions of death, and of those evils which immediately forego it, to wit,
the dissolution of those parts which are most vital: for death, as in the
storming or battering of a Garrison, does first break and weaken the outworks,
the bodily limbs, and outward senses, and and after that sets upon the
in-works, and the Vitals. He here compares Life unto a Fountain, or Well, out
of which men draw water with a Cord, a bowl, or bucket, a pitcher, and a wheel.
And as when these are broken we can draw water no more, so when the Vital parts
are decayed, there is no hope longer to draw life into the body which is the
Cistern. This Life he compares, for the pretiousness of it, unto silver and
gold, for the weakness and fragility of it, unto a pitcher, and for the
in^^ability and unsetledness of it, unto a wheel.

Now besides this general proportion between life and these things as the
figures of it, Interpreters do make the particulars here mentioned to answer
unto some particulars in the vital parts of the body.

1. By the silver Cord, they understand the marrow or pith of the back,
continued from the brain as it were in a cord or string unto the bottom of the
back-bones, and for the white color of it, compared unto silver. It may also
be applied unto all the other Sinews and Ligaments of the body, which from the
head, as the Fountain, convey sense and motion upon the other parts. Hereby
also may not unfitly be understood the chain and sweet harmony of the Elements
and humors in the body, which being preserved in its due proportion, the body
does receive life from the Soul which is the Spring thereof, but being once
dissolved, life presently fails.

2. By the Golden bowl, they understand the Meninx or skin wherein the brain
and vital powers thereof are contained as in a bowl. Others understand the
blood which is in the heart, as in the precious Fountain of life. Schindler
renders it, Scaturigo Auri or aurea, and would have us thereby to understand
the Law of God, which is compared unto Gold: but the word is elsewhere used to
signify a vessel, Zach. 4.2, 3.

3. By the fountain, we may understand those principal parts from whence vital
supplies are drawn into the body, as from the Head, Sense, and motion; from the
Heart, spirits, and heat; from the liver, blood.

4. By the pitch^r, and the wheel, those Instrumental and subservient parts,
which from these convey those supplies into the several vessels of the body, as
into a Cistern, as the veins blood from the Liver, the arteries spirits from
the heart, the Sinews motion and sense from the brain. By all which we should
learn to draw water of life out of the Wells of Salvation, that out of our
belly may flow rivers of living water, through the continual supplies of the
Spirit of grace, that all our springs may be in Christ, and our life hidden
with him in God, Isa. 14.3. and 66.11, 12. Zach. 13. 1. John 4.14. and 7.38, 39.

In the second Chapter Solomon had showed us, The many choice varieties of
pleasure, riches, and other excellent outward blessings, in which he had sought
for contentment: and in this Chapter he has in a most elegant Allegory showed
us how quickly old age does break them all, and take away the comfort of them.

V. 7. Then shall the Dust return to the Earth, as it was: and the spirit shall
return unto God who gave it.] The Dust, that is, The body, to show the Original
of it, Genesis 2.7. The weakness of it, dust is the weakest part of earth, Ps.
103.14. The baseness and vileness of it, Job 4.19. Phil. 3.21. Genesis 18.17. Job
30.19. Our Original from the dust, Our Return unto the dust, should humble us,
and make us vile in our own eyes, and should warn us to make haste to secure a
better life before this be ended, and not to put off the endeavors toward it
unto old age, which happily we may never attain unto, and if we do, will bring it
self work enough for us to do. Death is swift, and uncertain: Sin, the longer
lived in, does the more harden: Repentance is not in our Call or command when
we please: and it is a work of the whole man, and the whole life: The work
deferred will be greater, the time to do it in will be shorter, the strength
to do it by will be less, bodily infirmities will disable spiritual actions.
God will have less honor and service from us, and we shall have more
sorrovv, and less comfort. Therefore remember thy Creator, before the Dust
return to the Earth whence it came.

And the spirit shall return unto God who gave it.] The Soul is called a
Spirit, to note the Immaterial substance of it, and its original, It came from
him who is the Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.9. Genesis 2.7.

shall return unto God that gave it] Ut stet Iudicio ante Deum? That it may
appear before his Tribunal to be judged: as the Chaldee well paraphraseth the
place. As certainly as the body goes unto the dust, so certainly the Soul
returns unto God to be judged. The godly are translated into Paradise, into
Abraham's bosom, into the condition of Just men made perfect, Luke 16.22. and
23.34. Heb. 12.23. The wicked into the prison of disobedient spirits, reserved
there in Hell unto the Judgment of the great day, Luke 16.23. 1 Pet. 3.19.

V. 8. Vanity of Vanities, says the Preacher: All is Vanity.] As
Mathematicians having made their demonstration, do then resume their principal
conclusion with a quod erat demonstrandum: so here the Wise man having made a
large and distinct demonstration, That the Happiness of man does not stand in
Any, or in All the Contents which the World can afford, both in regard of their
disproportion unto him, and their discontinuance with him, He does hereby
conclude his discourse, 1. With a confident affirming what he had in the
beginning undertaken to prove.

2. With a strong and solid vindication thereof from any Cavils which might yet
arise in the minds of men against it.

3. With a positive Conclusion containing the sum of the whole Book, and the
right means unto true Happiness indeed.

V. 9. And moreover, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people
knowledge: yea he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many
Proverbs. V. 10. The Preacher sought to find out Acceptable words; and that
which was written was upright, even words of truth.] Here Solomon commends
the doctrine taught in this Book.

1. Because it was the doctrine of a penitent Convert: for Repentance is an
excellent means to discern and acknowledge spiritual truth, 2 Timothy 2.25. James
1.21.

2. Because he was endued with wisdom from God, so that they came and sent
from remote Countries to hear him, 1 Reg. 4.30, 31.

3. He used this wisdom aright, he did not hide his talent in a napkin, but
being taught of God himself, he also taught the people; and being converted
himself, he sought to convert others, and hereby showed himself to be wise, and
a penitent indeed, Ps. 51.12, 13. John 4, 28, 29. Joh. 1.41, 45. Luke 2.17. and
24.33, 34, 35. Prove. 11.30.

4. Because he was exceeding considerate in the doctrine he taught, he gave
good heed unto it, and weighed it in the balance of wisdom. He was exceeding
diligent to learn of others, and to study himself. He was very perspicacious
and judicious, to select choice matter to teach the people, 1 Pet. 1.10.

5. Because he had been exceeding succesful in that disquisition, and had
composed many excellent and wise parables for instruction in piety, virtue, and
prudence, 1 Reg. 4.32.

Whereupon he does, sixthly, commend the doctrine he taught from the nature and
quality of it, 1. They were Verba desiderii, pleasant, delightful, acceptable
words, such as would be worthy of all entertainment, and minister solid comfort
and refreshment to the hearers, Psalm. 19.10. 1 Timothy 1.13.

2. They were Verba Rectitudinis, equal and right words, not loose, fabulous,
amorous, impertinent, which should satisfy the itch of the ear, or tickle only
a wanton fancy; but they were profitable and wholesome words; he did so seek to
please men, as that it might be unto edification, and for their profit, 1 Cor.
10.33. 2 Timothy 3.16. words written to make men sound and upright, Prove. 8.8. to
make their paths direct and straight, without falsen^sse or hypocrisy.

3. They were Verba veritatis, words of truth and infallible certainty, which
would not deceive or misguide those that should yield up themselves to the
direction of them, Psalm. 19.9. Joh. 17.17. A truth which is sanctifying and
saving, Ephesians. 1.13. and in these respects most worthy of our Attention and
belief. Many other books Solomon wrote, besides those which we now have
mentioned, 1 Reg. 4.32, 33. 2 Chronicles. 35.4. See Josephus Antiquit. lib. 8. cap.
2. Pineda de Rebus Solomonis, lib. 3. Sixtus Senensis Biblioth, lib. 2.

V. 11. The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.] Before, he showed
the Internal Quality of the doctrine taught in the Church; here, he shows the
use, virtue, Efficacy and Authority thereof, and that by Two excellent
Similitudes.

First, Of Goades, sententious and concise parables and wise Sayings, have a
notable a^umen in them to stir up the heart unto attention, and to urge our
sluggish affections forward unto obedience, as the goad quickens the Ox unto
labor. This is the nature of sound and spiritual doctrine, it searches,
pricketh, and extimulateth the hearers of it unto Duty, does not flatter any in
their sins, or security, but rouzeth them up, and awakeneth them, Psalm. 45 5.
Isa. 49.2. Act. 2.37. Heb. 4.12. Shamgar with an Ox goad slew six hundred
Philistines, Judge. 3.31. Such is the power of the word to mortify our lusts
and corruption.

Secondly, Of nails or stakes, by which we are fastened and confirmed in our
duties; a Metaphor either from Smiths and Carpenters, who fasten their work
together with nails; or from Shepherds, who fasten their hurdles and
sheep-pens together with stakes fixed in the ground, as likewise Tents were
wont with cords and pins or stakes to be pitched, Isa. 33.20. and 54.2. Isa.
22.23. elsewhere the word is compared unto an Hammer, where^y these nails are
thus fastened, Jer 23.20.

fastened by the masters of Assemblies] Or, planted and fixed; so the Apostle
compares preaching unto planting, 1 Cor. 3.6. and the Word is called (...), an
implanted, or ingrafted word, James 1.21. Some read the words thus, The words
of the wise are as goades, and as nails fastened, They are the Masters of
Collections, or the choycest and most principal Collections, unto which no
other writing is to be compared, unto which all other learning is to be an
handmaid, to wait upon it, and to be subservient unto it: and thus they are a
further commendation of the Scripture, from the excellency and preeminency of
them above all other writings. Others thus; As goads, and as nails fixed,
quibus fiunt Coagmentationes or Collections, so that the nails are the Masters
of the Collections, according to the former sense; They who forsake the Word,
have scattered, broken, disjoynted, discomposed minds and affections; But the
Word is of a knitting, and uniting virtue, Ephesians. 4.12.13, 14, 15, 16. Col.
2.19. Others, by this expression, understand those who did collect the doctrine
of the Holy men of God, and compose them in brief Summaries for the use of the
Church: such as were the servants of Hezekiah, Prove. 25.1. like unto that
College of wise and learned men, whom Justinian the Emperor employed in
gathering into one Body or Pandect the Abridgment of the civil Laws: and
likewise those Doctors and Pastors of the Church, whose work it is to fasten
these nails in the hearts of the people by their Ministry; as Peter did in
theirs to whom he preached, Act. 21.37. These are all very sound and mutual
consistent senses, which for substance agree in one end to show the efficacy of
the word. The Authority whereof is confirmed by the next clause,

Which are given from one Shepherd] Though the Collectors, Expounders, and
publishers of the word be many, some Prophets, some Apostles, some Evangelists,
some Pastors and Teachers; yet the word it self has its original from One
principal Shepherd, the great Shepherd of the sheep, and Master of the house,
He by his Spirit inspired it, and by the same Spirit assisteth his Ministers in
the dispensation of it; It is he that speaks in them and by them, so long as
they keep to their commission, and deliver nothing to the people but the
counsel of God, and that which they have first received. Christ is here, as
elsewhere, called a Shepherd, in pursuance of the Metaphor of goads and
stakes, whereby herdsmen drive their oxen, and shepherds pitch their caules,
John. 10.11. Heb. 13.20. 1 Pet. 5.4. Hereby then is noted, The Divine Authority
of the holy Scriptures delivered by Inspiration unto the Penman thereof for
the use of Church. The Spirit of Christ being in those that wrote them, 1 Pet.
1.11. 2 Pet. 1.21* 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Cor. 13.3. Heb. 1.1, 2. and 2* 3, 4. and
12.25. And also the duty of Pastors, to deliver nothing to the sheep of Christ,
but that which is his, and which comes from himself, Jer. 23.22. Isai. 21.10.
1 Reg. 22.14. Ezekiel. 2.7. Acts 5.20. and 20.27. 1 Cor. Ezekiel. 3.4. 1 Pet. 4.11. 1 John 1.1.

V. 12. And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many books
there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh] And further, The
Learned do by this word, join this verse unto the three former, as an inference
from them. And some render it thus. Quod reliqum est, that which remains as is
the result of all this inquiry is this, That since the Preacher was wise and
faithful, to seek out such acceptable words, words of truth, consonant to the
doctrine of other wise men, effectual, as goads and nails, delivered from the
great and chief shepherd of the flock: That I say which hereupon remains is
this, That thou my son be admonished by these words. Others begin the ninth
Verse thus, And rather, because the Preacher was wise, etc. and then here
repeat it, And rather, I say, by these be admonished, rather by these doctrines
of mine, then by any other humane and vain writings. Amplius his, cave,
quaeras, so Vatablus: and quod plus est istis, cave ab isto; so Cajetan.
Whatever others say, If they speak not according unto these words, there is no
wisdom in them, and therefore no heed to be given unto them, Isa. 8.20. These
are the most excellent Monitors thou can have; from these thou may most
richly be informed, and warned how to live, Psalm. 19.11.

of making many books there is no end, etc.] An argument to enforce the
exhortation, from the fruitlessness and vanity of other studies.

First, There is no end of writing them; one refutes what another wrote,
another vindicates what his adversary disliked. If happiness were to be sought
for in humane writings; The Volums are so infinite, the opinions so endless and
various, that it would be impossible for any man to find it out of them; when a
man had with much curiosity, and continual reading, wearied himself, and pined
his flesh away, he would find it all an unprofitable, and impertinent labor,
weariness to the body, without any satisfaction to the mind. Therefore let
these words, so few, and yet so full, be thy counselors: He that will not be
admonished by those, shall never be satisfied with any others: He that refuses
the Wheat, will be but choked with the Chaff. Well may we say unto this one
Shepherd, as Peter did, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of
eternal life, Joh. 6.68. These only are the Writings which make us wise unto
salvation, and do furnish us thoroughly unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.15, 17.
others are useful in their order: These only are the Rule of faith and life.

V. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God and keep his
commandments: for this is the whole duty of a man] Or, the whole end of the
matter, or the Sum and substance of the whole matter is heard; The discourse
of man's happiness, which in this Book I have undertaken, is at an end, no more
need be said of it; The sum of all is comprised in these two words, Fear God,
keep his Commandments; this is all man needs, to lead an happy life.

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter] This is an Exordium to stir up
attention; I will in two words give you an Abridgement of all that can be said;
therefore take special heed to remember them. The Verse begins with a great
Letter in the Original, which is as Buxtorf, in his Tiberius notes, to excite
the more heed and attention, the whole sum of the duty of man, being contained
in this short saying, wherein he observes the right order; for first, he
begins with the internal root of all obedience and worship, which is, a filial,
reverend, awful, and loving fear of God and his goodness in the heart, Hos.
3.5. Prove. 1.7. Secondly, He proceeds unto the fruit, which grows out of
this root of filial fear and love, shed abroad in the heart, which is an equal,
uniform, constant, universal observing of his Commandments; of all of them
without partiality; of all of them, as his, in obedience to his authority, in
the acknowledgement of His Holiness in them, and of his Dominion and
Sovereignty over us: keep His Commandments out of fear to displease him; out
of conscience to approve your selves unto him; out of care to bring glory to
his Name, to testify your thankfulness for his mercies, and your conformity to
his Will.

Thus to fear God, and to keep his Commandments, is the whole of man; About
this should he spend all the strength of his thoughts and cares; This is the
sum of all, which man can, after all his writing, reading, studying,
inquiring, in order unto happiness, attain unto; This is the whole happiness of
man, or, all the means which man can use to come unto happiness at the last:
This is the basis, and bottom of all that perfection which man is capable of;
It is the whole duty of man, and the duty of all men that will be happy, Job
28.28.

This necessarily, takes in the Doctrine of faith in Christ, because without
him we can do nothing; by faith in him, the heart is purified to fear and love
God; and by that fear and love, it is inclined to obey his Commandments, 1 John 3.5. Joh. 14.22.

V. 14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good or whether it be evil] This is a strong motive unto fear and
obedience: If the Excellency of the Doctrine do not persuade, let the Terror
of Gods Judgment drive unto duty, Because he has appointed a day wherein he
will judge the world in righteousness, Act. 17.31. 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. Romans 2.16.
and 14.10.

with every secret thing] It is the day of the Revelation of Gods righteous
Judgment. Hypocrisy shall be disclosed, Sincerity shall be rewarded, because
nothing is hidden from him, Heb. 4.13. All other things are vain, but it is not
vain to fear the Lord. They that do good, their works will follow them into
Heaven; and they that do evil, their works will hunt and pursue them into Hell.

FINIS.

