THE Peace of Jerusalem; A SERMON Preached in the PARLIAMENT HOUSE, Ian. 9.
1656. Being a day of private Humiliation kept by the Members thereof.

By Edward Reynolds, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe for George Thomason at the Sign of the Rose
and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

HOnoratissimis, Amplissimis, Consultissimis, D. D. Magnae Britanniae and
Hiberniae Senatoribus, in Magno Concilio Ardua Reipub. negotia assiduo and
indefesso studio tractantibus, Concionem hanc de pace Ecclesiae Alteram, Coram
ipsis in solenni jejuniorum die privatim habitam, ipsorumque jussu jam publici
juris factam,

In Honoris and humilimi obsequii Testimonium, D. D.C. E.R.

An Advertisement to the Reader
Good Reader,
A Sad and sudden sickness befalling my Loving Friend the Stationer, in whose
hand this Sermon was, to take care of the Printing of it, has been the cause
why the Publication thereof has been thus long retarded. Which I thought fit
to give an account of, for the satisfaction of those who have too long expected
it.

THE PEACE OF Jerusalem.
PSALM. 122.6, 8, 9. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that
love thee. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. For my
brethren and companions sake I will now say, peace be within thee. Because of
the house of the Lord our God; I will seek thy good.


THe whole world is divided into Civitas mundi Civitas De Illa Rege Diabolo,
hac rege Christo. Aug. Retract. lib. 2. c. 29.43. DeCiv. Dei l. 11. c. 1. l.
14. c. 1. l. 15. c. 1. De Gone. ad lit. l. 11. c. 15 in Psalm. 61.
two Congregations of men, the Church Malignant under Satan their Head, and the
City of God, under Christ their Head. The general universality of natural men
descending from the first Adam, and the In electis specialis quadam censetur
Universitas: ut de toto mundo totus mundus liberatus, and ex omnibus homin ibus
omnes homines videantur assumpti. Prosp. de vocat. Gent. lib. 1. ^ap. 3.
special universality of believers descending from the second Adam. This City
of God was collected at first in the people of Israel, therefore called the
firstborn, Exodus 4, 22. and holy to God as the first born, Ier. 2.3.

That which they were called from the rest of the world unto, was to know, to
serve, and to enjoy God: Know him they could not, but as he had revealed; serve
him they may not, but as he had enjoined. Gods service was prescribed both
quoad modum, and quoad locum, the manner how, the place where he would be
worshipped, the manner delivered to Moses from Sinai, the place promised to be
in due time revealed, Deuteronomy. 12.11, 14.

The Tabernacle was the visible evidence of Gods presence amongst the people,
placed first in Shiloh, Josh. 18.1. and there continued till the days of Eli,
all which time the people went up thither to sacrifice, 1 Samuel 1.3. Then the
Lord being provoked forsook Shilo, Vid. Torn. Anual. An. mundi 2940. and
Tarnov. euercit. Bib.
and gave his Glory, the Ark, into the hands of the Philistims, Psalm. 78.59,
60, 67. 1 Samuel 4.11. The Philistims by plagues were forced to bring it to
Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6.10. the men then being plagued for looking into it
(according to the threatening, Numb. 4.20.) persuaded those of Kiriath Iearim to
fetch it, which accordingly was done, 1 Samuel 7.1. after, Saul carried it into
the field, 1 Samuel 14.18. Thus we see that from the making of the Ark, till its
placing in Shiloh (where it continued about 350. years) and from the times of
its captivity till David brought it into Sion, which was about fifty years, it
was unsettled and itinerant. But after it was fixed by David in the City of
David, Jerusalem, or the South of the City, which he wan from the Iebusites, 2 Samuel 5.7, 9. (though it were removed from that part of the City to Mount
Moriah, something more Northward, where Solomon built the Temple) then it was
in the City which God had chosen to place his name in, from whence, it was not
to be by them removed, though God threatened to do to that place, as to Shiloh,
Ier. 7.12, 14.

This Psalm seems to have been compiled by David upon occasion of his settling
the Ark in the Tabernacle which he had made for it in the City of David, after
the Iebusites were ejected, the wall built, the place fortified, the Palace and
political Government there settled. And the use of it was (as it may seem) to be
sung by the people when they went up solemnly unto Jerusalem according to the
Law, Exodus 23.17. as an expression of joy that the Ark was fixed in one certain
place, and the Kingdom in one certain family (as visible testimonies of Gods
presence, and of the promised Messiah) and as an excitation unto prayer for the
continuance of so great a mercy, unto all pious endeavors to promote the
welfare of that City.

The parts of the Psalm are three. First, An expression of David's joy for the
House of God, the resort of the people* the public Worship there celebrated,
verse. 1, 2.

Secondly, A commendation of Jerusalem. 1. From the Unity of it, before it was
a City divided, for the Iebusites dwelt with the children of Judah there till
David's time, Josh. 15.6.3. Judge. 1.21. That part of it which was called the
City of David, was divided from the other part of the City, until Solomon's
time, 1 Reg. 11.27. yet notwithstanding that separation* the City is here said
to be compacted in one, because the Iebusites being cast out, though the
buildings were divided, yet the affections were united, and that made them a
beautiful City.

2. From the solemn worship of God, when the Tribes came up thither thrice a
year, ver. 4. an honor which God gave that City above any other in Judea, or
in the world, to place his name there, 1 Reg. 14.21. forbidding them to seek to
any other place, Bethel, Gilgal, or Beersheba, Hos. 4.15. Amos 5.5.

3. From the Civil Government there settled, which from thence derived welfare
into all parts of the Kingdom. Where there is the Sanctuary and presence of God
for Religion, Thrones of Justice for Government, no Iebusites to disturb the
one or the other, but an unanimous and sweet consent of the whole people in
both, this must needs be a City of praise, wherein good men could not but
rejoice.

Thirdly, An Exhortation, that inasmuch as such glorious things belong to this
City of God, therefore men would pray for the peace and prosperity thereof,
verse. 6, 9.

The words have no difficulty* Pray for, or ask after. It extends not only
to the Duty of Prayer for Peace, but of Consultation after the ways and means
unto it; which the Greek implies rendering it, (...).

Peace may be taken both generally for all kind of Happiness, and specially for
all Quietness and freedom from enemies.

Within thy walls] Ramparts or Forts. It is not enough to have outward
Fortifications and walls against enemies, except there be Peace within the
walls, and amongst the People, Palaces] which David built, 2 Samuel 5.9.12. Peace
within thy walls, amongst thy people; and within thy Palaces, amongst the
Princes and Peers.

By his Brethren he means the people of all the Tribes, who were greatly
concerned in the prosperity of that City, wherein were their foundations, Psalm.
87.1. It might seem no wonder if David pray for the peace of that place where
his own Palace and Throne was: But he does it not for his own but for his
peoples sake, whose welfare was bound up in the peace of that place: Nor so
much, for his own house, as for Gods House, (who had placed his name and
presence there,) would he seek the good thereof.

Now indeed the Church had not any certain seat as then it had, but Every City
is as Jerusalem, and every house a Temple, and in all places men may lift up
pure hands, Isa. 19.19. Mal. 1.11. Ioh. 4.11. But wheresoever God does place
his Candlestick, and give evidence of his presence, there every man ought to
recount such mercies with thankfulness, and by prayer, and all real endeavors
to labor that the peace and happiness of the Church, the purity of heavenly
Doctrine therein taught, and of spiritual Worship therein used, may be
conserved and continued always.

In the words are considerable two general parts 1 An Exhortation to a Duty. 2
Arguments to enforce it.

In the Exhortation two things, The Prophets Direction, v. 6, 7. Example, v. 8,
9.

In the Direction again two things, the Matter, Peace. Root, Love.

The Arguments are drawn from three Considerations. Our own good, Verse. 6. Our
Brethrens good, Verse. 8. The house of God, Ver. 8.

The principal Doctrine of the Text is this, That it is the duty of all that
love the Church of God earnestly, to pray for, and to seek the peace and
prosperity thereof.

The Jews were to pray for the peace of Babylon, while they were in it, Ier.
29.7. though after they are taught to curse it, Psalm. 137.8, 9. much more ought
they to pray for the place where the Lord had caused his name to rest. As we
must do good to all, so we must pray for all, but much more for the household of
faith, Gal. 6.10. 1 Timothy 2.1. Samuel dares not sin against God in ceasing to
pray for Israel, 1 Samuel 12.23. The Lord would not have us hold our peace for
Ierusalems sake, nor give him any rest, till he make it a praise in the earth,
Isa. 62.6, 7. and does greatly complain when there wanted men to stand in the
gap, and to make up the hedge, Ezekiel. 13.5, 30, 31.

You see the precept, you have it also in the practice of godly men in all
ages; Moses, Samuel, Elias, Noah, Job, Daniel famous for it, Ier. 15.1. Ezekiel.
14.14. Iam. 5.17, 18. Vid. Buxters. Lexicon Raebbinic. p 1078.
How was Moses and Paul affected, when for Isreal's sake they were contented to
be blotted out of Gods book, and to be an Anathema? Exodus 32.31, 32. Romans 9.3.
How was Isaiah affected with the calamities of the Church when he laid up
prayers in store above an hundred years for it before those calamities did
happen? Isa. 64.9. -- 12. How were Hezekiah and Nehemiah distressed with the
afflictions of Jerusalem, when they poured out their souls for mercy for it?
Isa. 37.14, 15. Nehem. 1.3.4, 11. How does the Angel pathetically complain to
God of the long and sore captivity of the Church in Babylon? Zach. 1.12. We
have Psalms full of holy importunity to this purpose, Psalm. 74, 79, 80, 102. If
I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning, etc. Psalm.
137.5, 6. It was the fruit of David's and Peter's repentance, to pray for Sion,
and to strengthen their brethren, Psalm. 51.18. Luke 22.32, I conclude the
General with that fervent and pathetical prayer of Daniel, chap. 9.16. O Lord,
according to all thy righteousness let thine anger and thy fury be turned away
from thy City Jerusalem, the holy mountain, because for our sins and for the
iniquities of our Fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to
all that are about us.

Now more particularly let us consider first, The Subject to be praised for,
Jerusalem; though that whole land be called the Lords Land, yet that City was
more peculiarly esteemed holy, as being the seat of Religion, the place of Gods
Sanctuary and presence, toward that place they were to pray, Dan. 6.10. In
that place they were to sacrifice, Deuteronomy. 12.6. from thence the Oracles of God
were sent forth not only into that land, but into all the world, Psalm. 110.2.
Isa. 2.2. Luke 24.49. For such places then, where the Ark and the seats of
Judgment are, we ought specially to pray that the Lord would protect his
Ordinances, maintain his truth, continue his glorious and holy presence with
his people, have a defense, and spread a covering upon all his glory. That he
would prosper fundamental Laws, the beauty and stability of Religious
Government; that he would keep out Blasphemies, Heresies, Schisms, Idolatry,
Superstition, Pollution, Profaneness out of his Church; Oppression, Violence,
Injustice, Disorder, Anarchy, Confusion out of the State. That the Tabernacle,
and the Tribunals, Religion and Policy may jointly flourish, Volumus pacem, sed
ignoramu^ absque charitate pacem. Hicron. Epist. Deu^ p^cem suam posuit in
medium nullias picis. Lutb^r.
they being the foundations of public happiness, and which usually stand and
fall together.

Next let us consider what peace we are to pray for. There is a sinful peace,
of which we are not to seek after. David was a man of peace, yet a great
Warrior. Solomon a King of peace, yet made Targets for War; Jerusalem a vision
of peace, yet therein were shields and bucklers. Christ a Prince of peace, Isa.
9.6. yet a Captain, a Leader, a man of War, with a Sword girt on him, Isa.
55.4. Exodus 15.3. Psalm. 45.3. Rev. 6.2.
and a Bow in his hand. The Church must so pray for peace, as to remember
still, that she is Militant, and has still Iebusites to conflict withal. Here
we may not have peace. We must contend earnestly for the faith, Jude verse. 3.
There must be no agreement between the Temple and Idols, 2 Cor, 6.16. No
Fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 1.11. no
reconciliation between Dagon and the Ark. As Christ is King of Salem, so of
righteousness too, Heb. 7.2. therefore peace and holiness must go together,
Heb. 12.14. Iam. 3.17. Israelites and Canaanites must not agree, Deuteronomy. 7.2.
Paul and Barnabas, peaceable and holy men, had no small dissension and
disputation with Pharisaicall and Judaizing Christians.

The peace which consists with holiness is threefold. 1. Heavenly with God. 2.
Internal between the members of the Church within themselves. 3. External in
civil conversation with all men. These we are to pray for, and to preserve.

First, Heavenly, to enjoy the favor of God, and to be in Covenant with him.
For if he be our Enemy, all the Creatures are his Soldiers, he can set in
order the Stars, hiss to the Fly, muster up Caterpillars and Canker-worms, arm
Frogs, animate Dust, turn the hands of his enemies to destroy one another.
Above all things therefore we must keep peace with God; for if he be not with
us, all other helps will fail, Isa. 31.3.

You will say, We are sure of this, for God has promised to be with his
Church, and never to fail it, the gates of hell shall not prevail against it,
Matthew. 28.20.16.18.

It is true, the Catholic Church, and the lively members of his body shall
never totally fail. Vid Whi^. con. 2. quaest. 3. and Gerar. loc. de Ecclesia.
c. 8.
But particular Churches and Nations never had a Patent of perpetual
preservation. Rome boasts of it, but the Apostle has entered a caveat against
that boast, Romans 11.20, 21. But all Gods promises of not failing us, are made
to those who keep covenant with him, otherwise he also will break with us. The
Lord, says the Prophet unto Asa, is with you, while you be with him, and if ye
seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you,
2 Chronicles. 15.2. I said, says the Lord unto Eli, That thy house, and the house
of thy Father, should walk before me for ever: but now the Lord says, be it
far from me; for them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me
shall he lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. The Lord mar^ied his Church for ever,
Hos. 2.19. but when she committed adultery, he gave her a Bill of divorce, Ier.
3.8. He said he would dwell in his Temple for ever, Psalm. 132.14. yet he
threatened to forsake it, Ier. 6.8. and accordingly did so, Ezekiel. 10.18.

We should consider this and tremble at it, as Josiah did, lest our mighty
sins, unthankfulness, unfruitfulness, animosities, Heresies, Blasphemies,
contempt of the Lords Messengers (the sin for which the Lord departed from
Judah, when there was no remedy, 2 Chro. 36.16.) should provoke him to depart
from us, to take away his peace, as he threatened, Ier. 16.5. to show us the
back and not the face, Ier. 18.17. And what a case is Gods own heritage in,
when he forsakes and hates it? Ier. 12.7, 8. If the way, and the joy, and the
name of the Lord be the strength of his people; Prove. 10.29. Neh. 8.10. Prove.
18.10.
what strength is left to them, when they are gone out of his way, and deprived
themselves of his joy, and cannot lay hold or lean upon his Name? As therefore
when men see the walls of their houses crack and open, they hasten to repair
them, and set up Props and Buttresses to support them; so when we see such
vicissitudes of distractions, war be land, and then war at Sea; again war at
Sea, and we know not how soon by Land again; shaking, shivering, convulsion
fits in the Church of God, many a breach and hiatus in the walls thereof, Truth
corrupted, Unity dissolved, the Foundations out of couse, it is high time to
think of making up breaches, repairing the waste places, and raising up the
Tabernacle of David, to beg of God that he will lay our foundations, and make
our windows, and set up our gates, remove our fears, rebuke our enemies, calm
our tempests, that after so many shakings and concussions, the Lord may at last
be pleased to speak in a soft still voice unto us.

Secondly, We are to pray for Brotherly Peace in the Church amongst the members
thereof; that as Christ is one, so they may be one, John 17.22. knit by Faith
to him, and by Love to one another, as the Curtains of the Tabernacle were by
loops and taches, that as we are one City, Household, Family, Assembly, Ephe.
2.19.3.15. Hebr. 12.22. so we may have one heart and one soul, Act. 4.32. In
the body, the head has not one heart, and the hand another; the eye has not
one Soul, and the foot another; but one heart does warm the whole, and one Soul
does quicken the whole: So should it be in the Church of God, we should have
one heart and one way, Ier. 32.39. walk by the same rule, and mind the same
thing, Phil. 3.15. gather up the stones, remove every thing that offends,
Isai. 62.10. not prefer ends or interests above the public peace of the Church
of God, apply our selves in all sweet ways of Christian correspondence, and
mutual condescension to make up the breaches, and to pour oil into the wounds
of the Church of Christ. It In the case of Religion every subdivision is a
strong weapon in the hand of a contrary party. Hist. of the Counc. of Tren. p.
49. Vid. Calv. O^us. de s^andalis.
cannot be but a joy to our adversaries, a blemish to our profession, a grief to
good men, a stumbling block to evil men, to see brethren fall out in the way,
to see the Church crumbled into divisions and subdivisions, and like a body
which has the itch, to see one member tear and scratch, and rub and gaul the
rest, and must needs give unspeakable advantage to our subtle and vigilant
Dissidia inter Christianos fovet Iulianus. Baron. An. 362. sect 285. Dissidia
nobis passim objiciunt pontificii. Ba^claii paraen^s. l. 1. c. 5.6. Fitsim.
Britann^m. l. 1. c. 5, 6, 7. Breerby Apolog. p. 679. Stapleton. To. 2. p. 429.
See Whites ^onference with Fisher. p. 583. Vid. Baron. All. 448. sect. 74.
Phil. Camerii Medit Hist. part 3. p, 21. Orat. H. Zanch. oper. to. 8. part
postr. p. 241. Crackenthorp. Cont. Spalat. cap. 43.
adversaries both to reproach, and to undermine us.

Thirdly, Romans 12.18.14.19. Col. 4.5.
we are to pray for external peace with all men, which is as much as in us lies
we are to follow, walking wisely, meekly, humbly, charitably, obligeingly
toward every one. And in as much as the Church is as the Ark on the Waters,
Waves, and Winds ready still to beat upon it, we should pray for it that it
may be delivered from the hands of strange children, Psalm. 144.7. Psalm. 8.2.
Psalm. 68.30.
and that the Lord would still the raging of the Sea, rebuke the enemy and the
avenger, the multitude of the Bulls with the Calves of the people, and scatter
those that delight in War. We have tasted of War both domestic and forain, but
the Lord has mingled it with much mercy. If our eyes had seen the fruits
thereof, as other people have felt, Cities burned with fire, Children wallowing
in blood, Virgins perishing under the lust of Villains, Widows mourning for
their dead, and dying for dareing to mourn; Towns turned into heaps, a Garden
of Eden into a Wilderness, no cattle in the Field, no Flocks in in the Fold, no
Heard in the Stalls, no Inhabitant in the City, no child to the Father, no
Husband to the Wife, no Money to the rich, no clothing to the delicate, no
Mercy in the Enemy, no Liberty in the miserable to bewail his misery; Children
howling for bread, the honorable embracing dunghils, Death creeping in at
Windows, overtaking them that fly, and finding out those that hide themselves,
we would learn to prize a recovered peace, and to pray for the continuance of
it.

Weighty are the Reasons in the Text to demonstrate and press this Truth upon
us. First, The condition of the Church, Epes. 4.4, 5.6. Gal. 6.16. Phil. 3.16.
Tit. 1.4. Iud. ver. 3. 1 Samuel 4.21.
a City compacted, and knit together by many strong bands, one Father, one
Head, one Family, one Rule, one Faith, one Love, one Baptism, one Spirit, one
Common salvation. No where is peace so natural, so amiable as in the Church.

Secondly, The celebrity of Gods Worship, which is the glory of a people; let
the Ark be gone, and the glory is departed: No so doleful a sight as the
desolations of the Temple, Psalm. 74.3.79.1. Isa. 64.10, 11, 12. All our
foundations and springs are here, Psalm. 87.1, 7. the wells of salvation, the
Fountain of the Gardens, the Graces and Comforts of Gods Spirit, which make our
souls like a watered Garden.

Thirdly, The Thrones of David, the Towers, Bulwarks, and seats of judgments,
in which things stand the external happiness of a Nation. Laws and Judges are
the foundations of the Earth, Psalm. 82.7. When they were corrupted with
injustice and violence, the Lord threatened that Jerusalem should become heaps,
Mich. 3.11, 12. Great reason therefore to pray for Jerusalem, that it may be a
City of Righteousness, a faithful City, Isai. 1.26.

Fourthly, the Benefits of this Peace. 1. To our selves, they shall prosper
that love it. God will not only hear the prayer by giving peace to the Church,
but by giving prosperity to him that made it. Such a prayer is like to Noah's
Dove, turns back again to him that sent it out, with an Olive branch in the
mouth. Yea, if the prayer should be denied as to the body of the people, yet
such a man should be heard for himself. He should be marked for safety, Ezekiel.
9.4, 5, 14, 14. there should be a hideing place provided for him- Isai. 62.20.
and a book of remembrance should be written for him, Mal. 3.16. He shall have
peace, though the Assyrian be in the land, Mich. 5.5. Isai. 43.2.

2. To our Brethren, Such a Prayer shall be like the Beams of the Sun which
diffuseth light and heat upon thousands at once. Gods people have public
hearts and aims, look after general and public interests. Moses was offered
to be the Father of a great Nation himself, Exodus 32.10. Loquitur plane
parentis affectu, quem nulla possit delectare felicitas extorribus quos
parturivit. Verbi gratia, si dives quispiam mulieri paupercula dicat ingredere
tu ad prandium meum, sed quem gestas infantulum relinque foris, quo niam plorat
and molestus est nobis, nunquid faciet Monne magis eligit ^^junare quam
exposito pign^re ^haro sola prandere c^m divite? Ita Moses, etc. Bern. in
Cantic. Sermon. 12.
O no, not so Lord, Lord think upon thy people. The afflictions of Joseph more
wound, then any such promise can comfort him. He dares not so unman so
unbrother himself, as to look upon his posterity, and forget Abraham's.

3. To the House of God. The conservation and propagation of his holy Doctrine
and Worship is so dear to all that are of David's mind, that they are willing
not only to purchase it with their prayers, but with their blood. I count not
my life dear unto me, says the Apostle, so I may finish my course with joy,
and the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus. And again, I am ready
not only to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus,
Acts 20, 24.21.13. They prefer Jerusalem above their greatest joy. And this
is an high honor that God does confer upon the prayers of his servants, that
whereas all their good and comfort flows from the house of God, the very house
of God it self does reap benefit by their prayers. Though it be his Rest, the
place wherein he delights, the place which he fills with his glory; yet the
glory of his own house shall be bestowed upon it, in answer to his servants
prayers.

We have considered the Duty: Before we make Application, let us consider the
Root and Ground of the Duty, which is Love. They shall prosper that love it.
The love of the Church, is the foundation of all our prayers and endeavors for
the prosperity of the Church: A man will not very hastily seek the good of
those whom he does not love, and therefore when Christ requires that we should
love our Enemies, he adds as a fruit of it, that we should pray for them,
Matthew. 5.44. Love made Jonathan intercede with his Father for David, even then
when he knew his displeasure against him. Much more will it move us to
intercede with God for his beloved people, the Spouse of his own Son.

1. Love is a fundamental Passion, the Fountain of all the rest: Aquin. 12. qua
5. art. 2. and 22. qu. 28. ar. 4.
Prayer is nothing else but the affection of desire sanctified and presented
unto God for the things we need, Love natural being the fountain of natural
Desires; Love sanctifified must consequently be the fountain of Prayers, which
are Sanctified desires.

2. Love is a special Root of obedience, Faith works by love, love has a
constraining virtue, is as the sail to the ship, the wing to the Bird, the
spirits to the blood, the wheel to the chariot that keeps all in motion. The
more love the more activity ever; the more we love the Church, the more
sollicitous we shall be for her peace.

3. Love has a very great interest in God, it is of him, and from him, and
therefore it can find the way unto him, 1 John 4.7, 16. as water which comes
from the Sea, runs to the Sea, the Lord cannot but hear the voice of his own
work in us. Every one that loves, is born of God; and a Fathers ear is open to
a loving child: This is the foundation of prayer, that we can call God Father,
Romans 8.15. Matthew. 6.9. Every one that loves, knows God. Other things are known
by knowledge, but God is known by love. Come taste and see how gracious the
Lord is. Experimental, comfortable knowledge of God we can have none but in the
face of Christ, in whom he is all love. When Moses desired to see Gods glory,
he answered him by causing his goodness to pass before him, Ioh. 15.15.
Exodus 33.18, 19. The more we love God, the more he reveals his goodness to us;
which knowledge of him is the ground of our calling upon him. God is love, as
things of a nature move to each other; Earth to Earth, Water to Water; so love
in us, moves to love in God. Now as if you bind a piece of wood to steel, the
Loadstone draws the wood for the sake of the steel to which it is joined, so
when our prayer is joined with love, it is thereby drawn up unto God, who is
love. Love is the Key of Heaven. As love to the Church made Esthers petition,
so love to Ester made the Kings answer: God will hold out the Scepter of his
love to those prayers which proceed from love. Love of the Brethren is an
evidence of Gods dwelling in us by his Spirit, which is a Spirit of Love, 2 Timothy 1.7. and the Lords ears are readily open to those prayers which are made
by the help of the Spirit of love in us, Romans 8.26. Ioh. 4.24. Lastly, where
there is love, there is confidence toward God, and confidence has free
access to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16. 1 Ioh. 3.21, 22.

4. Love has an excellent virtue in it to season all duties, is as salt in the
Sacrifice; it makes the duty hearty, and God loves cheerfulness as well in
praying as in giving. It makes a man urgent and importunate, quicquid agit
valde agit, puts up strong cries. It is strong as death, whch will take no
denial; It keeps the mind intent upon prayer. Love turned Mary's thoughts from
a mere civil entertaining of Christ into desires of hearing him. Love stirs up
Faith to eye and fix on ptomises, and quae valde volumus facile credimus. Love
facilitates duty, and makes the heart constant in it: Ruth loved Naomi and so
went through with her. Weak things by the strength of love will venture on hard
things; A Hen will fly upon a Dog out of love to her Chickens. One man with an
engine may move more then ten men with their own strength; Love is an Engine,
makes the soul able to manage hard duties, to shoot a prayer as high as Heaven.
Lastly, Love is full of arguments, no man will ever want something to plead in
behalf of what he loves. All the strength of the mind, and powers of nature
wait upon Love to contrive and cast about for the good of the thing loved. How
witty was the love of the woman of Canaan to her daughter, who could pick out
an Argument out of a Repulse, and turn that which seemed a Vid. Scull. observe.
in Mat. c. 42. Et Stuckii Antiq Conv. l. 2. c. 5.
reproach into a Petition.

Love is that which commends every service to God, the touchstone by which all
our duties are to be tried. Qu^a jactatione fit, uon dilectione. Aug. in Psalm.
43.
Martyrdom without love is nothing, 1 Cor. 13.1, 3. Sic docet Deus ut non
tantum often sat veritatem, verum etiam impertiat charitatem, Aug de Great.
Christ. c. 13, 14.
Truth without love is nothing, 2 These. 2.10. Prayer without love is nothing,
Doeg was detained before the Lord, but his hatred to David brought a curse upon
him for all his prayer, 1 Samuel 21.7. The Lord looks not to pretense but to
truth, and will answer every man according to the love, or to the Idols of his
own heart, Ezekiel. 14.1-5. A man may pray for the Church of God only out of self
Love (as the Jews were to pray for Babylon, Ier. 29.7.) because his own safety
is involved in it, as the life of the Ivy depends upon the standing of the Oak;
but true prayer for the Church is that which is grounded upon love of the
Church it self; upon zeal for Gods truth and worship, upon delight in his
Oracles and presence, because here only the means of salvation, and the word
of life is dispensed; because in the distresses of the Church Gods name is
blasphemed, the Blood and Spirit of Christ is injured, the glory of the Gospel
is eclipsed, the Enemies of God are comforted. What will thou do, said Joshua,
to thy great name? Nehemiah and Esther were great enough themselves, but the
afflictions of the Church made them mourn and pray.

And as no duties are acceptable unto God which do not proceed out of Love, so
no pretense of love is acceptable unto him, which does not put forth it self
into duty. This was the proof of David's love, I love the Lord, I will call upon
him, Psalm 116.1, 2. This the proof of Paul's love My hearts desire and prayer
for Israel is that they might be saved, Romans 10.1. when God is angry we find
Moses in the gap, Psalm. 106.23. When Israel flies, Joshua prays; when the
plague is amongst the people, David is at the Altar, 2 Samuel 24.25. When Enemies
are in Arms, Iehoshaphat and Asa are upon their knees; when Rabshekah is
railing, Hezekiah is entreating the Lord. Here is the proof of Love, it draws
out the soul into all zealous endeavors for the peace of the Church; where
there is no other ability, yet love will pray, and as Solomon says of a poor
wise man, we may say of a poor praying man, that he has a great hand in
delivering the City, Eccles. 9.15. The meanest Christian may pray for the peace
of the Church.

But I must apply my Exhortation in the use of this Doctrine unto those who
must do more then pray, who have hands, as well as knees; power as well as
prayer to put forth for God. In how unsettled and discomposed a condition the
Church of God is yet amongst us, every man's eyes sees, and I think, every good
man's heart does sorrow to see, the holy Ordinances of Christ by multitudes
quite forsaken, the holy truth of Christ by many corrupted with the leaven of
heresy and blasphemy; Emissaries, walking up and down to draw away credulous
and unstable souls into bypath, to follow every ignis fatuus which does
mislead them. Multitudes of active and vigilant enemies, who know not how to
work under a disguise, and by good words and fair speeches to deceive the
hearts of the simple. Multitudes of credulous, ductile, Romans 16 18.
and unstaid spirits tossed up and down, Ephesians. 4.14.
and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the slight and cunning
craftiness of men who lie in wait to deceive. We see how fast these evil weeds
have grown, what advantages the enemy has taken in all places to sow his cares
and to lay his leaven; How greatly his hopes have been raised, and his attempts
encouraged by the experience which he has of the lubricity and instability of
the vulgar people amongst us. As it is said that the Chief Priests moved the
people against Christ, Mar. 15.11. So the common enemy instills his poison into
the people, to try if by degrees he can bring things into a flame and
commotion, like that, Act. 19. and then have some crafty Demetrius in a
readiness to cry up Diana, and you may observe how cunningly the Scene is laid.

Vid. Anton. Fab. de Relig. regend. l. 1. c. 5. sect. 81. Melan. To. 3. in
Proes.
1. Cry up a boundless and universal liberty for every man to teach, to
publish, to insinuate into others whatsoever doctrines he please, be the
tendency of them never so destructive to truth, peace, and godliness.

2. Cry down the coercive power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, that
so there may be no hedge to keep the Wolves out.

3. Bring into contempt the faithful and able Ministers of the Gospel, as
hirelings and seducers, that so what ever Arguments they shall produce, in
defense of the Truth, may be wholly enervated and blown over by the prejudice
against their persons.

4. Decry Learning and the Schools of the Prophets, as things rather dangerous
then subservient unto Religion, that so there may be no Smith in Israel, least
the Hebrews make them Swords and Spears, 1 Samuel 13.19.

5. Cry down the maintenance of the Ministry, that when that is wholly taken
away, no man may breed his child to a hungry, lean, starved profession, that so
Emissaries who shall have an invisible maintenance from abroad may have the
freer entertainment to spread their snares.

6. Put Doctrines, which in their own proper colors would not be swallowed,
into a disguise, give them a Periwig (if I may so speak) and another name, that
they may not be known to be the thing which they are; that in the dark and
under a vail Leah may go for Rachel, and in a mantle the Devil may be Samuel.

I doubt not but that your eyes are open to see the danger: I beseeh you let
your hearts be awakened to consider of expedients to prevent it.

Aug. ep. 166. cont. ep. parmen. l. 1. c. 10. Cont. Crescon. Gram. l. 3. c. 51.
That Magistrates have a care and duty lie upon them to look after the interest
of the Church of Christ, and to see that that may be preserved from pernicious
and destructive evils, that the Officers and Members thereof do in their
several stations the several duties belonging unto them (though I doubt not but
you are settled in so wholesome a persuasion) give me leave in three words to
demonstrate unto you.

First, the Lord did expressly command that Idolaters and Inticers to Idolatry,
Blasphemers, Presumptuous and profane despisers of Gods Law, should be
punished. He that sacrifices unto any God, save unto the Lord only, he shall
be utterly destroyed, Exodus 22.20. He that blasphemeth, the Name of the Lord,
shall surely be put to death, and all the Congregation shall certainly stone
him; as well the stranger, as he that is born in the Land, when he blasphemeth
the name of the Lord shall be put to death, Levit. 24.16. The soul that does
ought presumptuously whether he be born in the Land or a stranger, the same
reproacheth the Lord, and that soul shall be cut off from among his people,
Numb. 15.30, 31. See Deuteronomy. 13.5 -- 16. Now these punishments could not be
dispensed but by those who did bear the Sword, therefore they that bear the
Sword have a care upon them to preserve the Church of God from destructive
evils.

Secondly, Princes are commanded to kiss the Son, whereby is noted their Love,
Duty, Care of him and his interests, not to suffer any to dishonor him, or to
profane his Worship, Psalm. 2.12. And for this purpose the Law was put into the
hand of the King, Deuteronomy. 17.18. not barely in order to his private conversation
(for so it was common to all) but as a keeper and maintainer of it, that he
might cause others to keep it too.

Thirdly, In conformity hereunto Godly Magistrates in the Scripture have from
time to time been zealous to vindicate the Church of God from all subversive
and dangerous corruptions, and to command that all things should be done in the
Church according to the direction of God in his Word. Ioshuah commanded the
Priests to take up the Ark and bear it before the people, Josh. 3.6. David took
special order for bringing home the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.2. In the first Book of the
Chronicles in many Chapters, we read of his singular care in setting in order
the Worship of God. And if it be said, That he did this by special direction
and inspiration from God. It is true he did so; But its probable that God would
have singled out a King for that service, if his purpose had been that Kings
should have attended only Civil Affairs? But to show that this care was not
extraordinary to one Prince only, we read of others taking the same course. We
find Asa purging the Church from Strange Gods, High Places, Images, and Groves,
and commanding the people to seek the Lord, and to do the Law: and this was so
far from unsetling the State, that it is said, The Kingdom was quiet before
him, 2 Chronicles. 14.2 -- 5. And after, upon the persuasion of the Prophet, it is
said, he took courage to do the like; Yea, he put away his Mother from being
Queen, because she had made an Idol in a Grove, and cut it down and stamped it,
and burnt it, Chap. 11.8, 16. and presently it follows, there was no more war,
etc. verse 19. and the very same Blessing followed the very same zeal in the
reign of Iehoshaphat his Son, He took away the High Places, and commanded the
people to be taught: and the fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms that
were round about Judah, so that they made no war against him, 2 Chronicles. 17.6 --
10. Hezekiah began his reign the first year and first month with reforming the
Church, and restoring Gods Worship, 2 Chronicles. 29.3 -- 11. and so continued to
do, Chap. 30.1 -- 3.12.22.31.1 -- 11.21. So Manasserh after his repentance, 2 Chronicles. 33.15, 16. Of Josiah this testimony is given, that like unto him there
was no King before him nor after him, 2 Reg. 23.25. and except only the unhappy
action wherein he died, there is nothing recorded of him, but his care to
purify the Church of God, 2 Chronicles. 34.35. The like holy care we find in
Nehemiah for the House of God, and the Officers thereof, Nehem. 13.9-14.22. And
in Zerubbabel to build the Temple, Zach. 4.7, 10. And we find when Idolatrous
corruptions crept into the house of Michah, and into the Tribe of Dan, it is
imputed to this, because there was no King in Israel, no Civil power to
restrain men from doing every one what was good in his own eyes, Judge. 17.5,
6.18, 1.

I know what will be said to all this, that it belonged to the Church of the
Jews only, whose Kings possibly were herein types of Christ; but that now the
people of Christ are a willing people, and therefore not to be under any
coercion.

Hereunto I answer, First, That what is written, is written for our learning;
The examples of good Princes in the old Testament are recorded for the
instruction and encouragement of Magistrates now. Otherwise by this pretense we
might cast off all the holy examples unto any good work, which are given us in
the Old Testament.

2. Though Christ's people be a willing people, yet so far as they have flesh,
they are weak as well as willing, Matthew. 26.1. and being subject unto sin,
they must needs be subject unto Government too; for weresoever there is a body
of men, who are, through sinful weakness, subject to miscarriages, there is a
necessity of some Government, and superinspection, to prevent, and to heal such
miscarriages.

3. Where there are the same Reasons of a practice, the same practice ought to
continue, except we find abrogation and repeal: But the same reasons remain
still. The Truth and Worship of God ought to be as dear to Magistrates now as
then; leaven and corruption creeps into the Church as well now as then. God is
as much dishonored, the Souls of men as much endangered, Satan as busy an
adversary now as then; therefore the same means ought to be used now as then.

3. There are Hypocrites and Heretics in the Church as well as a willing
people against whom we find severity used by Christ himself and his Apostles;
Christ made a scourge and drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, Joh.
2.15. Peter pronounced a doelful sentence upon Ananjas and Sapphira, Acts 5.4,
5, 9. These indeed were extraordinary acts; but they teach us that an
Evangelical Estate has need as well of a Rod as of a spirit of meekness, 1
Cor. 4.21.

5. It is prophesied of the times of the Gospel, that Kings should be nursing
Fathers unto the Church, Isa. 49.23. And of them the Apostle says, that they
are for a terror unto evil doers, and a praise to those that do well, Romans
13.3, 4. which words are comprehensive, 1 Pet. 2.14.
respecting good and evil as well in the first Table as in the second. Again,
the Apostle exhorts that Prayers be made for Kings and all in Authority, that
under them we may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty;
that which is the end of our prayer, is likewise the end of their power and
government; Col. de sum. Trin. and fid. Catholale Haereticis Manichaeis
Iudaeis, Paganis Acta Council. Ephesians. Yo. 5. cap. 14.19.
and if it be their duty to provide for quiet, peace, honesty, it is also to
provide for godliness too, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. And accordingly we find the great l
care of Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, Justinian and other Christian
Emperors in making Edicts, calling Councels, inhibiting Heresies, as we read
in the Histories of their times.

6. Whatever things are per se, subversive and dangerous to the prosperity of
States and Nations, come under the proper cognizance of the civil Magistrate to
prevent; but Heresies, Blasphemies, Idolatries, Impieties against God, do as
well endanger the prosperity of States as sins against the second Table. 1.
Because God is as much provoked by the one as the other, and it is remarkable
that the great sin mentioned in the case of the captivity of Judah, was their
despising of the Messengers of God, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.2. Because such sins do more
exceedingly divide and unty the bonds of love and amity which Christian truth
does preserve, then other more civil differences, and so loosen the hearts of
men from one another.

Lastly, This Doctrine has been Jewels defense, p. 519.610 Pet. Martyr (...).
Clas 4.3.1^ sect. 31, 32 33. Bp. Andrews Tortura Torti, p. 364.381. Dr.
Rainolds confer. with Heart. Bilso of ^hristian subje^tion D^ve^ant* de Iud. and
Number. fidei ca^. 16. p 9 9. Carleton of jurisdiction. Rivet explicat decal g p.
258.168.
by our learned Writers maintained against Bellarm. de pontif. Romans l. 1.6.7.
Lib de laices c. 17, 1^. Baron. An. 428. sect. 7.536. sect. 107.538. sect. 31
546. sect. 43.549. sect. 8.
Doctors of the Roman Church; for they are the men, who to maintain Papal
Supremacy, and to keep all Ecclesiastical power within themselves, have shut
out the civil Magistrate from it; which I only name, that you may consider
what hands they are that sow such Doctrines amongst us, with a purpose no doubt
to make use of a boundless license, to instill corrupt doctrines into as many
as they find fit tinder to catch that fire. Since therefore such a charge does
evidently lie upon Magistrates to use their power for the Peace and prosperity
of the Church, the Lord does accordingly expect from them the discharge
thereof. Where he gives talents, he will call for account.

But it may be objected, Is not this to abridge and annul that liberty which
ought to be indulged to the consciences of men?

I answer, First in general, and by way of concession, God forbid that any
should assume dominion over the consciences of men. The Apostle himself said,
We are not Lords over your faith, we are but helpers of your joy, 2 Cor. 1.24.
It would be a high and withal a vain attempt. An high attempt; for no man can
give Law further then he can reward, and punish, accuse and convince. But no
man can either search, or reward, or punish the conscience; therefore no man
can give Law unto it. And upon the same reason it would be a vain attempt; for
none but a divine eye can see the conscience, therefore none but a divine Law
can bind it. If such words or such writings be blasphemous and subversive to
Church or State, or both, and highly derogatory to the honor of Christ, civil
restraint can reach them; But thoughts it cannot reach; they are unsearchable
by an humane eye, and therefore unreducible to a humane power. And again, God
forbid we should straighten liberty which Christ has purchased for us. Let
every man stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made him free; whom
Christ has made free, cursed be that man who shall go about to entangle him in
any such yoke of bondage as is contrary to that freedom.

Secondly, In particular we say, 1. Where men agree in the main fundamental
Doctrines of truth and godliness, in the Substantials of Faith, Worship and
obedience, there ought to be a mutual love, toleration and forbearance of one
another in differences, which are not subversive unto Faith and godliness. So
long as we walk by the same rule, and mind the same things, wherein in other
things we differ, we are to wait upon God to reveal even the same unto us,
Phil. 3.15.

2. We say Christ did never either purchase or permit to any man, professing
himself a Christian, a liberty to subvert, or endeavor to subvert, by
blasphemous, heretical, idolatrous, or irreligious and impious Doctrine, the
foundations of Faith, Worship, and holy obedience which he has laid in his
Church, or to remove, if I may so speak, the ancient Landmarks of Christian
Religion. The great Truths of God, the great interests of the Gospel ought to
be dearer to us then the liberty of any blasphemous or impious tongue or pen.

3. Magistrates are wisely and cautelously to didistinguish between weak
brethren, and wicked malicious disturbers of the doctrines of salvation and
peace of the Church, as the Apostle does between the bewitched Galatians, and
those that bewitched them, concerning whom he says, I would they were even cut
off that trouble you, Gal. 5.12. Which imprecation he would not sure have
uttered against them, if in sowing their false Doctrines they had only made
use of a lawful liberty. Vid. ^huan Epistol. mad Benri^^. Gallis Regem Historia
suae pr^sixim.


4. With the word, such a lenity and moderation is to be used as first to
reprove, rebuke, exhort them with all long suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.2.
to admonish them once and again; and when they are found unreclaimable, then to
reject them, Tit. 3.10.

5. We are to distinguish between the conscience of the Seducer; and the
spreading and infection of his Doctrine. Opto equidem ut si fieri po^est, nemo
de fra^ribus pereat; Si tam^n quosdam schismatum Daces, and dissentionis
Auctores non potuerit ad salutis viam consilium salubre revocate, caeteritamen
vel simplicitate capti, vel errore inducti, vel aliqua fallentis astutiae
calliditat^ decepti, a fallalaciae vos laqueis ^olvite, etc. Cyp^. de unitat
Eccles.
It belongs unto the care of the Magistrate to endeavor the converting and
reclaiming of him, which though it cannot be effected, yet further and
principal care must be used to prevent the spreading of infection. This was
done in the Apostles time by rejecting an heretic, refusing to have brotherly
communion and society with him. So an effectual means may be used to keep the
leaven from the lump; use what mercy and lenity you judge most consonant unto
Christian meekness, toward the persons themselves; but above all things, be
zealous for the purity and peace of the Church, wherein divisions and
subdivisions exceedingly tend to weaken, to distract, to betray it. We have to
do with wise and vigilant, with subtle and sedulous Enemies, who formerly were,
and no doubt still are intent upon their design to shake this Nation from the
true Protestant Religion, wherein as the Duke of Roan gravely observed the
interest thereof did stand. And I believe if the new things which are broached
were duly examined, you would find in most of them, if not legible characters
(as in the doctrines which deny or diminish Original sin, and affirm free Will)
yet a secret aspect and tendency toward Rome. They cry down our Ministers as
no Ministers of Christ, and so did Champney, and Kellison, and the Romanists
heretofore. They cry down our Ordinances as polluted, and impure, and not to be
joined in; and so the Pope forbad the English Papists in Queen Elizabeth's time
to join in the same Worship and Ordinance with Protestants. they cry down
Learning, and Schools of Prophets; and what greater advantage can a learned
Papist have then to have none but unlearned Adversaries to dispute withal?
They teach Adoration of Christ in a sinful man at his feet, a plain manuduction
to adoration of Christ in an host. They tell you they dare not limit Christ's
body to Heaven, an handsome step toward corporal presence in the Sacrament by
Transubstantiation. They press to follow a light within, secretly intimating
imperfection, in the Scripture, unto which, why may not as well Ecclesiastical
Traditions be added, as an imagininary light? They say we must follow the
commands of that light, a shrewd preparation to any desperate attempt when
season and advantage calls for it. The Lord give you wisdom to foresee evils,
they are better prevented then suppressed. And for that purpose be pleased.

To encourage Orthodox, godly, and learned Ministers, and the Schools of
learning, vindicate and protect them from reproach and contempt. When Alexander
the Great sent Ambassadors unto Athens, requiring them to deliver up their
Orators into his hands; Demosthenes, in his Oration thereupon to the people,
Plutarch in Demost
tells them a fable out of Esop, that the Wolves being at war with the Sheep
sent a Message unto them, that if they would live at quietness, and have a firm
peace concluded, they should yield up their Dogs unto them: which as soon as
they had done they were devoured by the Wolves. The like Artifice use our
Adversaries now; That they may make a prey of the people, their principal care
is to pull down our Ministry, and Schools of Learning, that so the Watchmen
being removed, the sheep may be exposed to ruin.

To take care that all who own Christian Religion amongst us be required to
attend upon the Ministry and dispensation of the Gospel, Vid. Aug. Ep. 48, 50.
Aling. theolog. problematic. part. 3. probl. 19
that they may not presumptuously exempt and deprive themselves of the means of
grace and salvation, as of my knowledge some do, who have wilfully for these
many years withdrawn themselves from any Christian Assemblies where God is
worshipped, or his name made known.

To endeavor to heal and close up breaches amongst Brethren, that men agreeing
in Faith, Worship and Obedience, may be no longer strange to one another, but
join hand in hand against the dangers which are threatened from a Common
Adversary, who at those unhappy breaches has let in these little enemies to
open the door unto him.

To secure and set mounds about fundamental Doctrines, and for that purpose to
take care for public and private Catechizing.

To provide that Ministers may be known to be Orthodox in the great and weighty
Controversies between us and Rome, that Wolves may never privily creep in under
sheeps clothing.

To hinder the printing and spreading of dangerous and infectious Books either
from Ports or Presses; or any other way of diffusing leaven into the people.

I conclude with this profession, that I have not pressed this Doctrine of the
peace of the Church to the straitning or grieving of any who love our Lord
Jesus in sincerity. I know the best men know but in part, and must mutually
bear with, and pray for one another, that wherein they differ God will reveal
himself unto them. My aim and desire has been to preserve the foundations, to
keep Protestant Religion from such encroachments as may insensibly make way for
the endangering of it. We see what we could hardly have believed, how facile
and flexible the minds of many people are to be seduced and carried into
opinions, which some years since they would as hardly have been persuaded to
believe that they should live to embrace, as Hazael was that he should rip up
women with child.

The Lord make you tender of his people, vigilant against his enemies, zealous
for his Church, valiant for the Truth.

FINIS.

