A SERMON Preached before The King, UPON The twenty eighth of March 1669.

BY EDWARD Lord Bishop OF NORWICH^

Published by his Majesty's Command.

LONDON: Printed by Ia. Cotterel, for Philemon Stephens, at the Kings Arms in
Chancery Lane. 1669.

A SERMON Preached before the King, UPON The twenty eighth of March, 1669.
Philippians 3.8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.
OUr blessed Savior compares the Kingdom of Heaven to an Mat. 1^.45, 46.
hid Treasure, and a pearl of great price, which a wise Merchant having found,
sold all that he had to buy it. This hidden treasure is our life which is Col.
3.3.
hid with Christ in God: this pearl of great price is that which the Apostle
calls the Ephesians. 3.8. Vid. Aug. contra 2. Ep. Pelag. lib. 3. c. 7. de Great. and
lib. Arbit. c. 12.
unsearchable riches of Christ, the Phil. 3 9.
righteousness which is of God by faith. St. Paul, unto whom the Lord from
heaven Gal. 1.11.
did reveal this treasure and pearl, has in this chapter discovered himself to
be one of those wise Merchants, who parted with all for this inestimable
purchase. He looked on himself before as a rich man in things pertaining unto
God. Great dignity; of the 2 Cor. 11. Phil. 3.5.
stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin; an Hebrew of the Vid. Nicet.
Choniat. Thesaur. Orthodox, l. 1. c. 40. Baron. Apparat. Sect. 8, 9, 10. Drus.
de 3 sectis Iudaeor. l. 2. Ad voces N T. p. 131. Scultet. Exercit. Evang. l. 1.
c. 24, 25, 26. ^amero. T^. 3. in Matt. 20.3. Buxtorf. Lexic. Rab. p. 1851.
Hebrews. Great strictness of Religion, Act. 26.
a Pharisee, separated from the ways of the world. Great learning; brought up
Act. 22.3.
at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the Law
of the fathers. Great Phil. 3 6.
zeal and fervency, even unto persecution. Great sanctity in his own opinion;
Romans 7 9.
I was alive without the law once; Aug. Cont. 2 Ep. Pelag. l. 1. c 9.
Phil. 3.
as touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless. These things
before he came to the knowledge of Christ, he eesteemed very gainful,
advantageous, and meritorious to salvation, for he had Gal. 1.14.
profited in the Jews religion above many his equals: But when it pleased God
to reveal his Son unto him, he consulted no more with flesh and blood; he set
no more value on mere carnal privileges or performances, looked on them as
loss, and dung; on all his own righteousness, but as a Isa. 64.6.
Vide Bernard Sermon. 1. in festo omnium Sanct. de verbis Isaiae Ser. 5. in
dedicat. Eccles. Ser. 5.
menstruous cloth; durst put Praesume non de operatione tua, sed de gratia
Christi. Ambros. de Sacram. l. 5. c. 4. Quicquid est circa te vel in te unde
p^ssis praesumere, abjice a te, and tota praesumptio tua Deus sit. Aug. in
Psalm. 85. Nihil tuis meritis attribuas, nivil de te praesumas, in virtute tua
nihil ponas, in viribus tuis non confidas, in tua audacia fiduciam non habeas.
Omnia divino Dono, and divinae gratiae adscribe -- Confidentia tua semper sit
in Christo. Bernard de modo been vivendi Sermon. 3.
no confidence in any thing of his own, but in the alone Righteousness of
Christ Jesus his Lord, in the fellowship of his sufferings, and in the power of
his resurrection. He would Gal. 6.14.
glory in nothing but the Cross of Christ, he would rely on nothing but the
Grace of Christ, he would lose all that he might win Christ.

I have chosen these words, to open the excellency of the Gospel of Christ,
and of the saving knowledge of him thereby, in comparison whereof the Apostle
esteemed all his other dignities, privileges, righteousness, performances,
upon which he had formerly built the hopes of his salvation, to be all but loss
and dung.

I begin with the former of these, the excellency of Evangelical Doctrine,
called by the Apostle a 1 Timothy 1.11
glorious Gospel, 2 Cor. 3 9.
a ministration of righteousness which exceeds in glory, Act. 5.20.
a word of life, Joh. 6.63.
a Gospel of salvation, Ephesians. 1.13.
the riches of the world, Romans 11.12.
a treasure accompanied with the excellency of Divine Power, 2 Cor. 4.7 1 Timothy
3.16.
a great mystery of godliness; with other the like elogies, setting forth those
unsearchable riches of Christ therein, as draw forth the wonder and adoration
both of Men and Angels.

We shall consider the excellency of the Gospel, 1. Comparatively: 2.
Absolutely. For the former, I shall not put the whole world, nor all the
Diadems, Honors, Pleasures, and Revenues thereof into the balance with Christ;
he having assured us that it will little Matt. 16.2 Prove. 10.2.
profit a man to win them all, and to lose his soul: for though a man could win
the whole world, yet within a few years he would lose it again; but the soul
being once lost, is lost for ever, never to be recovered.

But I. we shall compare the Gospel with the state of Innocence in Paradise. It
cannot be denied, but that there were diverse things in that state of primitive
integrity, wherein Adam excelled any of his sinful offspring. Vid. Aug. de
Civit. Dei, lib. 14. c. 10, 11. de corrept. and great. c. 11. Damasc. l. 2. c.
12.
He was made then wholly Eccles. 7.2.
upright, without any mixture of corruption or infirmity, no evil of sin to
defile him, no evil of sorrow to disquiet him: Whereas, now the holiest men are
commanded and constrained to cry out, Matt. 6.12.
Forgive us our trepasses, deliver us from evil. He had no war between the
flesh and spirit, no inward combat between the law of the members, and the law
of the mind; no temptation of lust to entice or draw him away from God:
Whereas, the holiest men are now forced to complain, Romans 7.2.
O wretched man that I am, Gemit us sanctorum contra carnales concupiscentias
dimicantium. Aug. cont. Julian Pelag. l. 6. c. 23.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? He did not in that state stand
in need of a Mediator of reconciliation to restore him to the favor of God,
wherein he stood right and entire, by the law of his creation. He had no guilt
to fill him with shame or fear, or to drive him away from the presence of the
Lord. Yet in some respect the grace of the Gospel is more excellent then the
state of Adam in Paradise.

1. Herein is the manifestation of more glorious mercy and wisdom: For it was
most consonant to the goodness of God, to make reasonable creatures righteous
at first; but when they wilfully fell from their created integrity, it was
wonderful and Romans 3.24 5, 15-17. Ephesians. 1.6, 7, 2.5, 8.
free mercy to restore them again; wonderful and glorious wisdom to do it by so
great a condescension and contrivance as the Incarnation and Passion of theSon
of God. There lay no bond upon God at all to show mercy to a creature which had
cast him off, and rebelled against him. He might pari jure have left men
unredeemed, as he did the Angels, and have glorified himself in their just
perdition. It was mere and alone mercy which made the difference. He took not
the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham he took, Heb. 2.16.

2. By the Gospel the humane nature is more highly advanced, then it could be
in the first Adam, had he persisted in his integrity. First, in the person of
Christ, in whom it was Hypostatically united to the divine Nature, and advanced
Ephesians. 1.21. Phil. 2.9, 10 1 Pet. 3.22. Heb. 1 4.8. Col. 1.15, 18.
far above all principality and power, might and dominion, and every name that
is named. Angels, and Principalities, and Powers are made subject unto him. He
is the firstborn of every creature, and has in all things the preeminence. 2.
In all those who are spiritually descended from him, and estated by union and
communion with him in his fullness both of Grace and Glory. For certainly, Joh.
17.24
to be where Christ is, and to behold his Glory, when he shall come 2 These 1.10.
to be admired in those that believe, 1 John 3.2.
to be like unto him, to see him as he is, to Rev. 3.21.
sit down with him on his Throne, to be Romans 8.17
joint Heirs with him in his Glory, which are some of those exceeding great and
precious promises, which in the Gospel are made unto true Believers, are more
high and honorable expressions of the dignity of the Sons of God by gracious
Adoption, then any we can discover to have belonged unto Adam and his natural
posterity, had they persisted in that integrity wherein they were created. For
then the Reward would only have born proportion to the obedience whereunto it
related; but now it shall have its dimensions from the dignity of the Person,
and excellency of the price whereby it was purchased, both which do infinitely
surpass both the person and obedience of Adam, or any other mere man.

3. By the Gospel there is more divine and supernatural help afforded to
Believers, to carry them through their course of obedience unto glory, then
there was unto Adam in Paradise. Aocepit gratiam qua non posset peccare si
peccare nollet, nondum tamen tantam acceperat gratiam qua n^c peccare vellet.
Fulgent. de incarnat. and Gra. Christi, Cap. 12. Tale erat adjutorium in quo
permaneret si vellet, non quo fieret ut vellet. Aug. de corrept. and great. c.
11.
To Adam was given a posse non peccare si vellet, a power not to sin if he
would; and a power to have willed, if he would so have done: but he had not
special supernatural assistance given him to will; for if he had had that, he
had persevered. But unto believers there is such grace given, Trahitur miris
modis ut velit ab illo, qui novit intus in ipsis hominum cordibus operari, non
ut homines, quod fieri non potest, ^olentes credant, sed ut volentes ex
nolentibus fiant. Aug. con^. 2. Ep. Pe^ag. l. 1. c. 19.

Certum est nos velle cum volumus, sed ille facit ut velimus, etc. de great. and
lib. arbit. c. 16.17. Vid. de Dono perseverant. 22.23. -- De great. Christi, c.
24.25, 26. Euchirid. ad Laurent. c. 32. Ep. 107 and 143. Ad Simplician. l. 1.
qu. 2. Vid. Council. Arausican. 2. cap. 4, 6, 7, 9, 20, 23. Pet Diacon. de
Incarnat. Christi, c. 6.8. Fulgent. de Incarnat. and great. Christi, c. 17.18,
19, 20, 24, 29, 30. Bernard de great. and lib. arbit. and de modo been vivendi,
Ser. 3.


qua efficitur ut velint. It is God that works in us both to will and to do
of his own good pleasure, says the Apostle, Phil. 2.13. Thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power, says the Prophet David, Psalm. 110.3. I will
put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall
keep my judgments and do them, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 36.27. This point is
excellently handled by that renowned champion of the grace of God St. Cap.
11.12.
Austen in his book De correptione and Gratia.

II. The excellency of the Gospel will appear if we compare it with the Law of
Moses. The Priesthood thereof a nobler Priesthood, after the order of
Melchisedec; the Covenant thereof a better Covenant, established upon better
promises, as the Apostle proves at large in his Epistle to the Heb.
7.22.8.6.9.23.10, 34.
Hebrews.

1. The Law moral considered singly and alone, is a 2 Cor. 3.9, 7.
ministration of death and condemnation, a killing, enthralling, inexorable,
insupportable Law; insomuch that the people were not able to endure the
commands thereof, Heb. 12.20. Why should we dye? say they; This great fire will
consume us. If we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, then we shall
dye, Deuteronomy. 5.25. But the Gospel is a ministration of the Spirit and
Righteousness, and therefore more glorious, as the Apostle argues, 2 Cor. 3.7,
8, 9.

1. Hereby the curse of the Law is removed; for Christ came to bless us, Act.
3.26. Gal 3.13. Luke 24.47.
That repentance and remission of sins might be preached in his name.

2. Hereby we are delivered from the Law as a Covenant of life, Vid. Aug. de
great. Christi, l. 1. c. 8. de Spiritu and lit. c. 8.10.
though not as a Rule of living, the righteousness of Faith being substituted
in the room thereof, as the Apostle teaches us, Act. 13.39. Romans 3.20, 28.
Gal. 2.16.3.10, 13.

3. Hereby the Rigor of the Law is corrected, Christ procuring acceptance of
sincerity instead of perfection. He is the Heb. 13.10 Rev. 8 3.
Altar which sanctifies all our oblations, so that the Lord, notwithstanding
their defects, is well pleased with them, pardoning that in them which comes
from our weakness, and accepting and rewarding that which comes from his own
Grace, 1 Pet. 2, 5. Isa. 56.7.

4. Hereby the Coaction of the Law is sweetened by healing and assisting grace;
that whereas the Law does only drive by terror and bondage unto the doing of
duty, which otherwise we should rather have left undone: (Mallent licitum quod
male delectat, as St. Austin speaks) the Spirit of Grace in the Gospel, Romans
5.5.
Aug. de great. Christi, l. 1. c. 13. De not. and great. c. 57. Lex jubere tantum
potest, non adjuvare, de pec. meritis and remiss. l. 1. c. 11. and l. 2. c. 17.
Lex jubere n^vit, cui succumbit infirmitas, gratia juvare qua infunditur
charitas. -- In ipsa intus voluntate peccat, qui non voluntate sed timore non
peccat. cont. 2. Ep. Pelag. l. 1. c. 8.9. non fit in cord quod fieri videtur
in opere, quando mallet homo non facere, si posset impune. Ergo benedictio
dulcedinis est gratiae Dei qua fit in nobis ut nos delectet -- quod praecepit
nobis. Ibid. lib. 2. c. 9. and l. 3. c. 7. de spiritu and lit. c. 8, 9, 12, 32.
quod operum lex minando imperat. hoc fidei lex credendo impetrat. Ib. c. 1.3.
lex data est ut gratia quaereretur, gratia data est ut lex imple^etur, Ib. c.
19. Ep. 95. and 200. de not. and great. c. 15, 16. De bono viduitat. c. 17 18.
shedding abroad the love of Christ into our hearts, does cause us 7.22.
with delight to run the ways of Gods commandments, c Vt non sit terribile sed
suave mandatum: for the yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden light, and his
Commandments not grievous, 1 John 5.3.

5. Lastly, hereby the Irritation of the Law is rebuked; that whereas the Romans
7.8
Aug. de spir. and lit. c. 4. contra 2 Ep. Pelag. l. 3. c. 2.
restraints thereof did before exasperate corruption, that like an obstructed
River, Ab obice saevior iret, it gathered strength by suppression; now all the
channels of the heart being opened by grace, the course of obedience goes on
with more freedom, and lust is not able to gather head against it, as it was
wont to do.

2. The excellency of the Gospel will appear, if we compare it with the
ceremonial Law. For though quoad substantiam Foederis, the Covenant was the
same to them and us, Christ theirs and ours, 1 Cor. 10.4.
In veteri testamento est occultatio novi, in novo est manifestatio veteris.
Aug. de catechizand. rud. c. 4. de Civit. Dei, l. 16.1, 26. fides eadem nostra
and illorum -- Sacramenta pro temporum aiversitate diversa, ad unitatem tamen
ejusdem fidei concordissime recurrentia, Ep. 157. Justin Martyr, l. quaest. q.
110. Leo Ser. in nativ. Dom. c. 3.4.
the new Testament hidden in the Old, and the Old expounded in the New, as St.
Austin speaks; yet quoad modum Administrandi, there is as much greater
excellency in the Gospel then in the Law, as there is in the body or substance
then in the picture or shadow whereby it is represented.

1. The Law was dark and obscure, a veil over the eyes of that people; but in
the Gospel Christ is evidently set forth, Gal. 3.1. We see with open face the
glory of God, 2 Cor. 3.18. Aug. Ep. 120. c. 2. in Psalm. 73. cont. 2 Ep. Pelag.
l. 3. c. 4. Dr. Field of the Church, l. 1. c. 5.
Though the Jews had the same promises of eternal life, and an heavenly Country
with us, yet they were overshadowed with the Types of an holy Land, and
temporal blessings there; and therefore the Apostle tells them of another
rest, besides that of their Sabbath and Canaan: There remains a rest for the
people of God, Heb. 4 9.

2. The Law was exceeding Burdensome in many chargeable and painful
observances, a yoke which they were not able to bear, Act. 15.10. Whereas the
yoke of Christ is light and Matt. 11.30.
easy, unto the bearing whereof he encourages us by glorious promises, Omnia
quippe fiunt facilia charitate. Aug. de not. and great. c. 69.
and assisteth us by the supplies of his Spirit of grace.

3. The Law is weak and unprofitable, not able to make the comers thereunto
perfect, to expiate sin, to pacify God, to quiet conscience, or procure
salvation. It is true, by virtue of divine Institution, it was profitable to
the uses for which it was designed, namely, to prefigure and lead unto Christ
for that salvation which it self could not give. But Christ being come, the use
of it is wholly ceased, and it become to all intents Heb. 7.18.
weak and unprofitable. And therefore Moses and Aaron both dyed before the
entering of Israel into Canaan; the Lord thereby signifying, as Tertul. cont.
Marcion, l. 3. c^ 16.
Tertullian has observed, the mortality of the Law, and its impotency to bring
men into the possession of the Promises; that it was to give way to Christ, who
had an Heb. 7.24.
unchangeable Priesthood; and to his Gospel, which was an everlasting Gospel,
Rev. 14.6. Thus we see the excellency of the Gospel above the Law; for by it
only is ministered Grace to pardon the sins committed against, and to perform
the duties required by the Moral Law, and by it is Christ exhibited to
accomplish the Prefigurations of the ceremonial Law: For the Joh 1.17.
Law came by Moses, but Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ.

III. The excellency of the Gospel appears, if we compare it with any other
the most noble perfections acquirable by the uttermost improvement of natural
abilities, either in Genere notitiae, or in Genere morum.

1. The highest knowledge attainable by humane investigation is far below
Angelical Learning. But the Mysteries of the Gospel are so great, that the
glorious Angels gaze upon them with wonder and adoration* These things, says
the Apostle, the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. alluding to the
Cherubims with their faces on the Mercy-seat, Exodus* 25.20. Vid. Greg. Nyssen.
homil. 8. in cantic.
To principalities and powers is made known by the Church the manifold wisdom
of God, Ephesians. 3.10. This is one Branch of the Mystery of Godliness, That Christ
is seen of Angels, 1 Timothy 3.16. This is one great business of the Angels about
the Throne, to ascribe power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor,
and glory, and blessing to the Lamb that was slain, Revel. 5.11, 12.

Again, the highest natural knowledge in the world is no way Beatifical. A man
may, as to all such learning, be the greatest Scholar living, and yet perish.
But the right knowledge of Christ by the Gospel will justify and save those
that have it. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, Isa
53.11. It is a knowledge which makes perfect, Till we all come in the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, Ephesians.
4.13.

2. The Absit ut sit in aliquo vera virtus, nisi fuerit justus -- absit autem
ut justus vere sit, nisi vivat ex fide. Aug. con. 2 Ep. Pelag. l. 4. c. 3.
noblest Moral Seize which men can arrive at by the utmost improvement of
natural Reason alone, of the most generous Principles, of the precepts of the
best Philosophers, of the examples of the most eminent Heroes, will none of it
suffice to bring a man to Blessedness. The Apostle would not have concluded
better things then these to be but loss and dung, if he might have been saved
by them. But there is no other name under heaven, whereby salvation is to be
had, but by the Name of Christ, Act. 4.12. Thus the supereminent excellency of
the Gospel of Christ does appear, by comparing it with all other excellent
things; the excellency of created innocence; the excellency of the Law, whether
Moral or Ceremonial; and the excellency of the highest Rational or Moral
accomplishments.

We shall next demonstrate the excellency of the Gospel, by considering it
Absolutely in it self. And here let us first take a view of the
supernaturalness and sublimity of it. It is every where in Scripture Mark 4.11.
1. Cor. 4.1. Ephesians. 3.4.6 19. Col. 4*3^ 1 Timothy 3 9, 16. 1 Cor. 2.7, 10.
Chrysostom. in Rom 11 25. Casaub. exercit. in Baron. 16. n. 43. Abbot de verit.
great. Christi, p. 46.
called a Mystery, the Mystery of Christ, the Mystery of the Kingdom, a great
Mystery of Godliness, which signifies (...), as St. Chrysostom speaks, some
wonderful and unknown thing. The Apostle calls it Hidden wisdom, the deep
things of God, beyond the discovery of the noblest created Reason in the world.
That two natures should be in one Person, that God himself should take flesh,
that a pure Virgin should be (...) the Mother of God, as the Council of Ephesus
styles her; that he who blesses all, should be made a curse himself; who is
Lord over all, should become a servant himself; that the Prince of life should
dye, and the Lord of Glory be put to shame; that the sin should be punished,
and the sinner pardoned; that the Son of David should be the Lord of David, and
the Son of Mary, the Savior of Mary; and he who made the world, be born into
the World four thousand years after the world was made; these were Mysteries
shut up in the bosom of God, undiscoverable by any created wisdom till he
himself was pleased to reveal them.

Again, let us here consider the sanctity of the Gospel, as a great Mystery of
Godliness. The whole design and contrivance thereof being, 1. To set forth the
glorious righteousness of an holy God, that neither his verity nor sanctity
might be impaired by his clemency and mercy unto sinners. For though he spared
them, that he might in them show the riches of his Grace, yet he spared not his
Son, but delivered him up for us all, that in him he might declare his
righteousness, Romans 3.25.

2. Another design of the Gospel was to restore lapsed man unto that primitive
holiness wherein he had been created, Col. 3.10. for the grace of God which
brings salvation, does also teach us to deny ungodliness and wordly lusts,
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Christ gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from iniquity, Tit. 2.11, 14. and from
our former vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. And this the Gospel does not only
by the precepts thereof as a Rule of holiness, but by the grace thereof as a
Principle of holiness, Aug. Ep. 89.95. cont. 2 Ep. Pelag. l. 3. c. 7. de great.
and lib. arbit. c. 14.16, 17. Prosper. cont. Collatorem, c. 3.
helping us to do what we are commanded. Efficit Fides quod lex jubet. Lex
imperat, fides impetrat, says St. Austin. The Law only commands, but faith
obtains help to do what is commanded. The Law was given to demonstrate our
impotencie, but Grace was given to heal and to remove it.

Again, here offers it self to our view the admirable contexture of justice
and mercy, the unspeakable contrivance of Redemption and salvation by the
Gospel. There seems to be a kind of conflict between the Attributes of God,
as St. Bernard has observed; Ser. 1. in annuntiat. B. Mariae.
Justice and Truth resolved to punish sin, Moray and Grace resolved to save
sinners. No created wisdom could have found out a way to effect this, so to
sever the sin from the sinner, that Justice might satisfy it self upon the
one, and Mercy magnify it self upon the other. This could not be done, but by
such a Mediator and Surety as might be both able and willing to suffer the
wrath of God, and having so done, victoriously to rise up and triumph over Hell
and Death. All this is sound in the Lord Jesus. In him man suffered, In him God
conquered. His sufferings valid for satisfaction of Justice, and impetration of
favor, and by the infinite dignity of his Person, made applicable to the
persons of all that should believe^ Grace given unto them, that they may
believe and consent to their own Salvation. And thus all parties are satisfied,
and all willing^ God satisfied by the obedience of his Son, Joh. 13.31, 32.
Matt. 12.18.17.5. 2 Pet. 1.17. Isa. 53 11. Psalm. 17.15.32.1, 2.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Christ satisfied with the
salvation of his body, He shall see the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied. Believers satisfied with their pardon and inheritance, When I awake,
I shall be satisfied with thine Image. God willing to pardon sinners, Christ
willing to Redeem sinners, and sinners made willing by the Spirit of the Father
and the Son to enjoy the benefit of so great a redemption, and to obey the
precepts of so holy a Gospel. And thus Mercy and Truth are met together, Psalm.
85.10.
Righteoutness and peace have kissed each other. All the Religions that ever
were in the world could never show so glorious a temperament of exquisite
Justice, of most gratuitous Mercy, of unsearchable wisdom, as is revealed in
the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

4. Let us consider the necessity of the Gospel, by the Grace and Righteousness
whereof alone we are saved through faith in Christ, Ephesians. 2.8.

A thing may be necessary to an end, 1. By way of a Temporary mutable sanction.
So legal obedience was necessary unto life, by the first Covenant made with
Adam, Do this and live, Romans 10.5. by which since the fall no man can be saved.
2. By way of a final perpetual Decree never to be altered. Such is the Covenant
of Grace in the Gospel, confirmed by an oath to show the immutability thereof;
Heb. 6.18.
for Christ offered one sacrifice for sin for ever, upon rejection whereof
there remains no more sacrifice for sin. Heb. 10 12.26.
If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins, says our Savior,
Ioh. 8.4.

Again, one thing may be necessary to another two ways. 1. Necessitate causae,
as that which gives it its being, and foundeth a right unto it. So the payment
of a price is necessary to a purchase, and foundeth that right which the
Purchaser has thereunto. 2. Necessitate viae, without the which I cannot come
to the possession of the thing purchased. For though the price procure me the
property, yet I must go the way which will bring me unto it, before I can be
personally possessed of it.

The only cause of salvation is the free Grace of God, and price of the blood
of Christ, Act. 15.11. Ephesians. 2.5.
deriving a property thereunto upon us, 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Gal.
3.26, 28. 1 Cor. 6.17. Joh. 1.12, 13. 1 Cor. 15.49 Romans 8.17.
as one by faith with the Purchaser, by regeneration descending from him; by
adoption, joint heirs with him. But we cannot come to the actual possession of
that inheritance, without running that race of Evangelical holiness, which is
the way thereunto.

From these things thus distinguished, we gather this conclusion, that although
the Gospel were not originally necessary unto blessedness by the Law of
Primitive Creation, another Covenant having been made with Adam in order unto
life; yet upon supposition of the fall of man, and of the unchangeable sanction
of God, whereby the Covenant of Grace is made perpetual, so the Gospel is
indispensably necessary unto salvation, called in the Scripture the Gospel of
Salvation, Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 1.16. Tit. 2.11. Act. 28.28. Heb. 2.3.
the Power of God unto Salvation, the Grace of God which brings Salvation,
yea, by the name of Salvation it self.

1. The sacrifice of Christ necessary, Ad acquisitionem, to the purchasing of
blessedness for us, called by the Apostle (...), 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. 2 Thessalonians. 2.14.
Ephesians. 1.14.
and by an Hypallage, as some think, (...), A purchase of Salvation, of glory,
of Redemption. The blood of Christ was both a price of ransom, whereby we were
Redeemed out of misery, 1 Timothy 2.6.
(He gave his life a ransom for many, Ephesians. 1.11.
Matt. 20.28.) and a price of purchase of that eternal Glory unto which, though
it were his own, he could not ascend, so as to take possession thereof for us,
which was one principal business of his Ascension, I go to prepare a place for
you, Joh. 14.2. until first he had suffered, as himself tells us, Non ante
Rex gloriae a coelestibus Salutatus est quam Rex Iudaeorum proscriptus in
crucem. Tertul. de coron. mil. c. 14.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
Luke 24.26. for Christ having a double right unto glory; a natural right, as
the Son of God; and a purchased right, as the Savior of the world; reserveth
the former unto himself, and bestows the latter upon the Church.

2. The gracious Acts of Divine Love in Justification and Adoption necessary
unto the Ius ad rem, or deriving a title upon us. For sonship has a right
accompanying it: If sons, then heirs, Gal 4.7. The inheritance it self is
sometimes called by the name of Adoption, Romans 8.23. Gal. 4.5.

3. Faith and Repentance, which two Evangelical graces Christ has honored in
the business of Salvation above others, Dan. 9^7, 9. Job 42.6. Ezekiel. 20.43.
Phil. 3.9.
because they are humbling graces, the one teaching us to judge and abhor our
selves, the other to go out of our selves for righteousness; these necessary ad
Statum, to that condition wherein we are capacitated to receive the conveyance
of that inheritance, so purchased for us, and derived upon us. Repent and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out, Act^ 3.19^ He that believes in
him shall not perish, but have eternal life, Joh^ 3 15.

4. Evangelical obedience necessary to the Ius in Re, to the Actual possession
of this Inheritance, as the only way which leads thereunto. For without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. It is a gradus and an
inchoation of Glory. Thus we see the absolute necessity of the Gospel, wherein
we find Christ meritoriously purchasing, God graciously conveying, Repentance
humbly disposing, Faith comfortably receiving, and sincere obedience gradually
conducting us unto eternal salvation.

In the next place let us observe the All Sufficiency of the grace of the
Gospel unto the effecting of that blessedness whereunto it is so necessary. In
sickness Physic is necessary; but when Death comes, it is not sufficient to
withstand it. But there is a Plenipotency in Evangelical grace to consummate
our Salvation for us. Christ is able to save to the uttermost those that come
to God by him, Heb 7.25. Every thing which he did corporally for us, he will do
the same spiritually by his Grace in us. So that though we be yet imperfect in
our selves, yet we are complete in him, Col. 2.10. And as there was a
consummatum est pronounced upon his work on earth, whereby he wrought
Redemption for us, It is finished, Joh. 19.30. So there will be a consummatum
est pronounced upon his work in Heaven, whereby he applies Redemption unto us,
It is done, Rev. 21.6. Phil. 1.6.
He will perfect every good work which he begins, and be the finisher of what
he is the Author unto us. Heb. 12.2.
And this is a further demonstration of the excellency of the Gospel, That as
it is an only, so it is an all-sufficient means unto that blessedness which is
therein tendered unto us.

Lastly, the excellency of the Gospel will appear, if we consider the infinite
value and pretiousness of the things therein concerned.

1. The preciousness of the subject by the grace thereof Redeemed. It is true,
by sin our bodies are become vile, Phil. 3.21.
and our souls cursed, Gal. 3.10.
and might both be justly made vessels of dishonor. But if we view them in
their primitive integrity, made after the Image of God; in the Grace and Glory
whereof they are capable; in the immortal condition whereunto they are
reserved; in the honorable account which God has of them, when he has once
formed them for himself, Isai. 43.4, 21 Psalm. 4.3. Act. 15.14* 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.
Matt. 16.26.
a people for his Name, in whom he will be admired; in these respects we may
truly say that there is nothing which a man can give in exchange for his soul,
(...).

2. The preciousness of the price whereby we were purchased, the blood of God,
as the Apostle calls it, Act. 20.28.

3. The preciousness of the condition whereunto we are by the Gospel called. To
be justified from the guilt of innumerable sins. To have the peace of God which
passes understanding; Phil. 4.7. 1 Pet. 1 8. Psalm. 30.5.63.3.
the joy of salvation, which is unspeakable and glorious; the Favor of God,
which is better then life, shed abroad upon the Soul. 1 Cor. 15.55, 57.
To have the sting of Death pulled out, the fire of Hell quenched, the worm of
conscience killed, Gal. 3.13.
the sentence of the Law cancelled, and the Kingdom of sin destroyed and
demolished in us. Ephesians. 1.5.
To be Adopted unto the dignity of the Sons of God. 2 Pet. 1.4. Heb. 3 14. Gal.
2.20. Romans 8.29. 2 Cor. 3.13.
To be partakers of the Divine Nature. To have the life and likeness of Christ
formed in us* these are branches and veins of those unsearchable riches of
Christ, which in the Gospel are set before us.

Lastly, the preciousness of the Rewards which in the Gospel are promised unto
Believers, infinitely surpassing those which any other Religion makes to the
observers of it. They dreamt only of such delights as their narrow minds,
darkened with sin, and contracted unto baser objects, could frame conceptions of
to themselves. But the rewards of the Gospel are of a more sublime and refined
nature.

Such the endowments of the glorified body, which the Apostle gives us in four
words, 1 Cor. 15.42, 44. 1. Incorruption, nothing shall ever annoy or infest
it, as here poverty, violence, sickness, death, and other evils do. 2. Honor,
siderial splendour and pulchritude, like that of Christ in his transfiguration,
Matt. 17.2. Exodus 34.30 Phil. 3.21.
or of Moses coming down from the Mount^ For if wisdom here make the face to
shine, Eccles. 8.1. as we read of St. Stephen, That his face was as the face of
an Angel, Act. 6.15. How much more luster will Celestial Glory bring upon it,
Matt. 13.43. Chrystom. in Genesis Homil. 14.
when it shall be as the Sun, and as the brightness of the Firmament? Dan.
12.3. 3. Power and vigor to serve the glorified soul without any defect, Caro
sine mole and pondere, agilis mobilis, nullis clausa obstaculis, visu and aditu
penetrans omnia and attingens, quocunque voluerit sine impediment^ discurrens,
etc. Cyprian de resurrec. Aug. Enchirid. c. 91. Ep. 46. de Civit. Dei, l. 13.
c. 20, 22, 23. and l. 22. c. 19, 20, 21. Chrysostom. Ser. 6. in Heb. Ethic. and
to. 6. ad Theodor. lapsum, p. 70, 71. Edit. Savil.
infirmity or impediment whatsoever. 4. Spirituality, no need of clothing,
nutrition, or any other Animal provisions, it being perpetually supported and
preserved by the Spirit of Glory^

Such the endowments of the soul filled with the reward of blessedness. A sure
reward, Prove. 11.18. grounded upon immutable love, upon an unvaluable purchase,
upon unquestionable promises, whereof we have in our selves the earnest,
Quemadmodum nobis arrhabonem spiritu^ reliquit, ita a nobis arrhabonem carnis
accepit, and vexit in calum pignus totius summa quand^que redigenda. Securae
estote caro and sanguis, usurpastis and Coelum and regnum Dei in Christo.
Tertul. de resurrect. c. 51.
in our head the possession.

A great reward, a Crown, an heavenly Kingdom, a Kingdom of God, a weight of
Glory, Psalm. 19.11. Matt. 5.12. 2 Cor. 4.17.

A full reward, 2 John 5.8. no desire unanswered, no faculty unreplenished, no
sin, no sorrow, no labor, no tears unremoved. Thou shall make them drink of
the River of thy pleasures, Psalm. 36.8.

The mind filled with as much light, the will with as much love, the soul with
as much peace, as the whole capacity thereof is able to contain. Faith hightned
into vision, hope satisfied in possession, love completed in fruition, peace
consummated in immutable, inconcussible, and indeficient delectation. In these
four things seem to consist the endowments of glorified souls, so far as we can
here frame any judgment of the glory to come.

1. In a complete vision of God and Christ. Matt. 5.8.
Here we see but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12
in the book of the creatures, in the glass of the Word. But then we shall see
him as he is, face to face, 1 John 3.2.
we shall behold his face in righteousness, Psalm. 17.15. Rev. 22.4.
though not with a comprehensive vision (how can a finite comprehend an
infinite? Aliud est videre, aliud totum videndo comprehendere, says says St^
Austin, Ep. 112. cap. 9.
) yet with a beatifical and replenishing Vision, no desire of the mind
unfilled, unsatisfied with the knowledge of God and Christ.

2. In a complete possession of God and Christ. Here God is our God in a
gracious Covenant, in precious Promises, in the first fruits of the Spirit, in
the seeds of grace and peace, in comfortable provisions, in powerful
providence, in continual protection, in spiritual Ordinances. 2 Cor. 5.6. Romans
8 24, 25.
But all this while we are absent from the Lord, in hope only of things which
we see not. The Inheritance in our minority is reserved in heaven for us. Gal.
4.1. 1 Pet. 1.4.
But at last we shall be admitted into it. As our faith shall be changed into
vision, so our hope into a possession of God. We shall not be in a waiting,
expecting, longing, languishing posture, but in a plenary fruition of all the
blessedness, which the Covenant of Grace did by faith entitle us unto. No
faculty of the soul, not as full of God, as the Sun of Light, or the Sea of
Water.

3. In a complete similitude and transformation into the Image of Christ. Here
our Grace is mingled with corruption, the flesh lusting against the Spirit.
Matt. 26 41. Gal. 5.17.
As we are Similes per primitias spiritus, so we are dissimiles per Reliquias
vetustatis, Aug. de pec. mer. and remiss. l. 2. c. 8.
as St. Austin speaks. Hic. praeceptum est ut non peccemus, ibi praemium n^n
posse peccare. Aug. Con. 2 Ep. Pelag. l 3 c. 7.
But in Heaven we shall be wholly like unto him, for we shall see him as he is.
1 John 3.2.
As the Image of the Sun is formed in the glass on which it shines, Ephesians. 5.27.
so the glorified soul by seeing God has the untainted image of his Holiness
and purity shed forth upon it.

4. In a complete delectation arising from the vision, possession, and
similitude unto God; in whose presence is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.26.8.
at whose Right Hand are pleasures for evermore. Earthly delights are apt to
cloy, Matt. 25.4.
and produce a loathing. But in Heaven the delights are full and perpetual.
Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 12. c. 26.
Tota virtus Amare quod videas, summa felicitas habere quod amas. For it cannot
be that the highest and chiefest good should ever cause a fastidium, or
satietie in the fruition of it, Quantum se amantium sensibus inf^ndit largius,
tanto eos sui capaci^res efficit, satietatem faciens, sed sine fastidio. -- Qui
desiderat semper amat desid^rare, qui amat semper desiderat amare. Bernard.
Soliloq. 7.
since it comprehends eminently in it the particular and divided perfections
of all other desirable things. God himself being All in All unto us.

Unto All which we might add the excellency of the place where these glorious
things are reserved for us, 1 Pet. 1.4. Joh. 14.2. 2 Cor. 5.1.
where Christ has prepared and furnished mansions for his own Spouse. A
building of God, an house not made with hands, wherein the Lord will show that
glory to his Church, which no other creatures ever saw or can see.

Add hereunto the excellency of the company there: Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Heb. 12.22, 23. Joh. 17.24. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
All Saints and Blessed Angels; the glorious presence of the Lord Jesus, the
sight of whose Glory is the Glory of his Church.

Lastly, the Crown of all is the eternity of this Glory^ For the Mercy of God
is from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 103 12 Rev. 14.6. Heb. 7.24. Heb.
12.28. Heb. 10.12. Heb. 9.12. Matt. 6.20.
to those that fear him. The Gospel of Christ, an everlasting Gospel; his
Priesthood unchangeable; his Kingdom, inconcussible; his sacrifice for ever;
his redemption, eternal; no moth, no rust, no seed of corruption within; no
thief, no violence, no cause of corruption without. So long as there is power
in God to preserve us; so long as there is mercy and truth in God to reward us;
so long as God is our Father, and Christ our Head; so long shall believers be
blessed, and enjoy an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in the Heavens for us. Oh that any who know themselves to be
mortal here, and immortal hereafter, should rake in the dunghill of the earth
for content and comfort, and build their happiness upon loss and dung, upon
vanity and vexation, who have such gloririous things as these to look after,
and to secure unto themselves! Certainly no man lives up to the dignity of
man, who does not regulate his conversation by the pure and holy Laws of
Christianity.

Thus have I endeavored to show the excellencies of Christ, and the
unsearchable riches of his Gospel, as the alone necessary and indispensable
means unto all solid comfort in this life, and unto all true blessedness in
another, in comparison whereof all other the noblest endowments are not only
loss but dung.

All these things whereby I have proved the greatness of the Gospel, are
evident demonstrations of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ thereby,
since the dignity of science is founded in the Sublimity, Majesty, and
greatness of the subject known. So that I shall need add but one thing more,
which is particular to the saving knowledge of Christ, that it does not
discover only him and his excellencies unto us, but does convey them upon us,
and give us a right and interest in them. And hereupon it is

Romans 1.17. Gal. 2.20. Joh. 11.24.
An enlivening knowledge; I live by the faith of the Son of God. He that
believes in me, says our Savior, shall live though he were dead; which is
more then can be said of all the excellencies in the world, they all run like
Jordan into a dead Sea, the grave devours them without hope of a resurrection.
But our life in Christ is an abiding, 1 John 2.17.3.15. Joh. 10.10. Joh. 1.12.
1 John 3.1. Isai. 43 4.
and an abounding life. It is

An ennobling knowledge; it gives us a privilege, dignity, and power to be
called the Sons of God. It is

Isa. 53.11.
A justifying knowledge; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many. It entitleth us to all the merits of the Death and obedience of Jesus
Christ. It is

A sanctifying knowledge which purifieth the Heart; Act. 15* 9. Gal. 5.6.
and works by love; hereby we know that we know him, 1 John 2.3, 4. 2 Pet.
1.3. Tanto quis operatur, quanto Deum noverat; and tantum se nosse Deum
judicat, quantum pro Deo bonum operatur. Greg. in Ezekiel. hom. 22.
if we keep his Commandments.

Lastly, it is a saving knowledge. This is eternal life, to know thee the only
true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Joh. 17.3.


I shall very briefly conclude with but three words of Exhortation.

1. To my self and Brethren to whom the dispensation of this glorious Gospel is
entrusted, that we would be ever mindful of our commission. Matt. 28.21 Ephesians.
3.8.
Ambassadors must keep strictly to the Mandate of their Princes, and never
deviate from their instructions. Our Commission is to teach men to observe all
things whatsoever Christ has commanded: to preach unto them the unsearchable
riches of Christ; to take them off from all presumptuous sins, from all vain
delights, from all carnal confidence, from all self-opinion of their own
performances; to set forth Christ before them, as the desire of all nations;
Hag. 2.7.
to convince them of the All Sufficiency of his righteousness, and of the great
duties of faith and obedience which they owe unto him as King of Saints: 2 Cor.
4.5.
Not to preach our selves, our own fancies, passions, or interests, but so to
preach Christ Jesus the Lord, as becomes the excellency of his person and
offices, as becomes the Majesty and awfulness of the doctrines of Salvation.

2. To all in place of power and authority, that since Christ to whom all power
was given, did, and still does put it forth for our salvation; they also would
be exhorted to exert their power for the honor and interest of Christ and his
Gospel. By the light of their gracious examples, to render the beauties of
holiness amiable unto others: for the lives of great men are a kind of law to
those that are under them. By their zeal, courage and justice, to put to shame
the insolences of any who by profaness and atheism either of tongue, pen, or
life, dare offer any scorn or indignity to the Lord, or to the Gospel of Glory.
By their wisdom, and love to Christ, to use all means for promoting the Gospel
of Salvation, and removing out of the way whatsoever does obstruct the powerful
progress and prevalencie thereof amongst men. And here I cannot but with grief
of heart once more bewail those doleful divisions which deface the beauty, and
shake the stability of this once flourishing Church. For as in the natural body
solutio continui does both pain and deform it; so do breaches in the body of
Christ abate both the strength and comeliness of it; and while we thus by our
divisions lessen and weaken one another, we comfort and advantage a common
adversary.

Do not all learned and sober Protestants agree in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, in the vitals and essentials of true Religion, in the great
foundations of faith, worship, and obedience? Have they not all one Father, one
Head, one Faith, one Hope, one heavenly Canaan, whither they profess to be all
going? Why then should brethren fall out by the way? Why is not the health of
the daughter of my people recovered? I am no Prophet to foretell future events.
Yet since the Psalmist has told me that where brethren dwell together in
unity, there the Lord commands a blessing, Psalm. 133. Since he has joined
the peace and prosperity of the Church together, Peace be within thy walls, and
prosperity within thy palaces, Psalm. 122. Since the Apostle has assured me,
that if we be of one mind, and live in peace, the God of love and peace will
be with us, 2 Cor. 13.11. I cannot but upon these grounds verily persuade my
self, that if we would with a sincere eye, to the glory of God, the interest of
the Gospel, and the peace of the Church, (which things ought to be most dear
unto us) set our selves with a spirit of meekness and moderation to heal the
breaches, and reconcile the differences which are amongst us, that so (if
possible) we might be like the Primitive Christians, of one heart and one soul,
the Lord would say unto us as he did unto his people, when they laid the
foundation of his Temple, Hag. 2.19. From this day I will bless you. And if
this would not effectually do it, that which I have last to say, I am sure
would. Which is,

3. To persuade all who profess the Gospel to lead their lives agreeable
thereunto, to hold the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience, and to
express the lineaments ofChrist in their conversation. There is no precept more
frequently inculcated in the writings of the Apostles then this, therefore I
shall give it you in their words, as having most of aw and authority in them.
How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? There is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Ephesians.
4.1.21, 24.
Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called; Put off the old man, put
on the new man, if ye have heardChrist, and been taught by him, as the truth is
in Jesus. Col. 2 6.
As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. He that says he
abides in him, 1 John 2.6.
ought himself to walk even as he walked. Let your conversation be as becomes
the Gospel of Christ. Phil. 1.27.
Tit. 2.10.
Adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Show forth the virtues of him who calls you out of darkness into his
marvelous light. 2 Timothy 2.19
Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. Having
these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. 1 Pet. 1.14, 17.
Since we call God Father, let us pass the time of our sojourning here in fear.
For this end Christ was manifested, 1 John 3.8.
that he might destroy the works of the Devil. O let us not be like Gadarens,
to send Christ away, because he comes to drown our Swine, to destroy our lusts;
Luke 8 37.
let us not let go our Savior to hold fast our sins, nor prefer the momentary,
stinging, and perishing contents of the world, before the joys of Salvation
here, and the enjoyments of it for ever hereafter: let us with fear and
trembling consider, that it will be at the last day more tolerable for Sodom,
then for wicked Christians, whose judgment will be so much the heavier, by how
much the more glorious mercies have been revealed unto them, and despised by
them. The wise man tells us, Prove. 12.26 Psalm. 16.3. Phil. 2.15.
That the righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, as walking by a more
excellent Rule, and designing a more excellent End. O let us show the
excellency of our Religion by the excellency of our conversation, and shine
as Celestial Luminaries in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. Gal.
6.16.
And as many as walk according unto this Rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God. Now the God of Peace who brought again from the dead
the Lord Jesus, Heb. 13.20, 21.
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you
that which is pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

