THE SUBSTANCE OF TWO SERMONS One Touching Composing of Controversies.

Another touching Unity of Judgment and Love amongst Brethren.

Preached in two Honorable Conventions of PARLIAMENT.

The former, Jan. 27. 1657.

The other, Feb. 4. 1658.

By Edward Reynolds, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe for George Thomason at the Sign of the Rose
and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

Honoratissimis, Amplissimis, Consultissimis D. D. Harum nationum Senatoribus
IN MAGNO CONCILIO, Ardua Reipub: Negotia Assiduo and indefesso studio
Tractantibus BINAS HASCE CONCIONES De controversus inter fratres Componendis
Sedandisque unam: De Fraterna (...) and (...) Alteram In summi honoris
Debitique obsequii Testimonium. D. D. C.

E. R.

PHIL. 3. 15, 16. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and
if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.

Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, Let us walk by the same rule,
let us mind the same thing.


THe Caput and corpus unusest Christus, Aug. de Civ. dei l. 17. cap. 18. and
83. quaest. 69. and de unitat. Eccles c. 4.
Head and the Members, Christ and his People make up but one Christ, and one
Church; and this Church like Jerusalem a Psalm: 122. 3. Ephesians. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 12.
12.
City compacted within it self, wanting neither Comeliness to allure the love
of those that behold it, nor Strength to subdue the power of those that resist
it.

And in this building by how much the more curious the compacture is, by so
much the greater is the deformity and danger of any breach therein, whether by
Heresy, which untieth the bond of Faith, or by Schism which breaks the bond
of love. Christ is Isa. 9. 6. Heb. 7. 2.
a Prince of peace, and his Church a Kingdom of peace. When he Luke 2. 14.
came into the world he brought peace with him, and when he departed, he Joh.
14. 27.
left it behind him: there is (...)Greg. Niz. orat. 14.
nothing more contrary to the nature of the Church, nothing more advantageous
to the enemies of it, nothing does more tempt Hypocrites to forsake it, or
Strangers to despise it, then the distractions and differences which are
fomented within it.

What sad breaches are crept into the Church of God in these Nations, no man
but he that is a stranger in Israel, that dwells at the Antipodes can be
ignorant of. What great reason there is to have sad and mournful thoughts of
heart for the divisions of Reuben, for the differences and distractions which
are amongst us, every good man does easily apprehend; How much it is incumbent
upon those whom the Prophet calls healers, Isa. 3. 7. to put to their helping
hand to prevent further ruins, and to close up the breaches of Sion again, It
is needless for me to prove. Since therefore so long as we know but in part,
and prophecy but in part, it cannot be but that there will be variety of
judgments in the Church, I have deemed it not incongruous or unbeseeming this
present service, to open unto you out of these words of the Apostle, such an
heavenly way of calming and pacifying differences, as that no common Adversary
of our Religion or prosperity may make any use of them against us.

The Apostle having ver. 3. warned the Philippians to take heed of Dogs, and
evil workers, who endeavored to corrupt the Doctrine of the Gospel by
mingling Circumcision and other Legal Observances therewith, showing that
though he had as many Legal Privileges to rejoice in as any of them, yet he
cast them all away, and esteemed them Loss and dung, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ, and his interest in him and his righteousness; and the
communion he had with him in his death and Resurrection; He then proceeds to
exhort the Church to imitate his example, to prefer Christ above all, to press
forward unto more holiness and perfection, and in case of differences of
judgment, to wait in the use of means upon God by his Word and Spirit to
reveal his counsel further unto them, and by their holy lives, loving
affections, and united ends to prevent the danger, which otherwise their
different opinions might expose them unto.

(...) As many as be perfect] There is a double perfection, perfectioviae, and
perfectio patriae, perfection attainable in our way to Heaven, and perfection
expected in our heavenly country it self, opposed unto the other as the whole
to the part. When that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part
shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13. 10. Perfection in the way is two fold, 1.
Created perfection, that habit of Original justice whereby Adam was enabled
exactly to perform that obedience which in the Law written in his heart God
required of him, and thus no man, Christ only excepted, has since the fall
been a perfect man, Eccles. 7. 29. 2. Restored and Evangelicall perfection. ^.
And this again is twofold, perfection of Integrity and sincerity, perfection
of parts, as the child has all the parts of the Parent, and the believer as
soon as regenerated has all the members of the new man, grace for grace
wrought in him. And perfection of maturity or proficiency, perfection of
degrees, as Beza here renders the word by Adulti, men grown up unto a greater
measure of spiritual knowledge and grace. As many then as are sincere,
upright, and humble hearted, how great a progress soever they have made in the
grace and knowledge of God, must yet all of them be thus minded. It is not a
precept belonging unto babes only, but Apostles and Prophets, and the holiest
of saints must be thus minded, must renounce all carnal confidence, all self
performances, must suffer the loss of all, and esteem himself a great gainer
by the bargain, to win Christ, must acknowledge his own imperfection, and be
still contending unto more holiness.

(...)] If any of you be so carnal, as through the cunning of false Teachers,
and through ignorance and unacquaintance with our selves, or with Christ, are
seduced to think otherwise, I doubt not but he who has already called you,
will rescue you out of the hand of so dangerous an Error, If by Faith and
prayer you attend upon the word of truth, and yield up your selves to be taught
thereby.

(...)] Nevertheless, whereunto we have already attained, let us walk, or, we
ought to walk, etc. so the words are an Exhortation grounded on the tondition,
whereby the former promise is limited. If we be careful to walk in obedience
and love, according to the light which already we have received, the Lord will
reveal more of his will unto us, using the light we have, will be a very ready
means for the obtaining of more.

(...)] To walk by the same Rule, Ordines militum in exercitu. Homerus passim
vocat (...).
there seems to be a double Metaphorical Allusion in the Original words,
the one to a Military march, wherein a Soldier keeps his proper rank and
station, and obeying the Order and Rule which his Commander gives. The other to
an agonisticall or athleicall Rule, wherein was drawn a white line by which the
running of Phil. 2. 2.
the horses was to be guided, as the learned Pet. Fa. Agonistic. l. 2. cap. 7.
Civilian Petrus Faber in the second Book of his Agonisticon has observed.
This Line or Rule in our Christian race is the word of God, the Rule of Faith,
Love, and a Christian life, called walking in the Spirit, Gal. 5. 16. walking
according to Rule, Gal. 6. 16.

(...)] The same with being (...), like minded, of one accord, of one
judgment. Let not the perfect despise the weak, Let not the weak judge the
perfect, but (...), in these fundamental articles wherein we all agree in that
common salvation unto which we all contend, let the piety of our lives in
walking by the same rule of Faith and love, the unity of our judgment, the
concord of our affections, the concurrence of our ends, our consent and delight
in the same truth (all which are intimated in the words (...)) Let all this
declare to the Church of God and to our own Consciences, that in our
differences, Christ notwithstanding is not divided, but that amidst the variety
of our Opinions, the purity, piety, and peace of the Church is still preserved,
and let these things likewife predispose and qualify our hearts to admit of
the revelation of further truth out of the word, and so make way to the
reconciling of those differences which are yet amongst us. This I take in brief
to be the scope and meaning of the text.

Wherein we have 1. The difference inter Adultos and seductos in the Church
between perfect Christians, and Christians seduced. 2. The variety of
judgments and opinions, which by reason of that difference may grow. 3. The
right way of reconciling those differences. And that is

1. An humble submission of judgment, and willing attendance in the use of
means upon divine teaching, God shall reveal even this unto you. He will lead
his people into all necessary truth, and give them all things requisite to life
and godliness.

2. To have an (...), some main fundamental Doctrines wherein the dissenting
parties do all agree, which may be the measure and touchstone of all other
Doctrines, to hold nothing which is either inconsistent with the truth, or
unbeseemlng the Majesty of that foundation.

3. (...) To walk exactly and in order according to the things wherein we
agree, not to break our rank, or desert our station, contrary to the Rules
which we have received. So that two things are herein employed. 1. Piety of
life, to live answerably to the truths we know. 2. Sobriety, moderation and
prudence of Spirit, to serve God in the place and condition wherein he has set
us, and according to the measure of the Rule which God has distributed to us,
2 Cor. 10. 13. That neither by an unsuitable conversation we belly the truths we
hold, nor under any pretense of service we break forth to attempt any thing in
the Church beyond the place and station wherein God has set us.

4. To hold the truths wherein we agree in love, unity, and constancy, for why
should not the many truths wherein we agree, teach us to join in love, which is
a Christian duty, rather then the few opinions wherein we disagree, cause
breach in affection, which at best is an humane infirmity? The word here used
(...) in the use of Scripture usually notes not a bare rational and
intellectual act of the mind, but judicium practicum, such a judgment as
has an order unto practice, which is the same with Sapere, to have a savoury
relish of truth, and so to apply the mind unto it, as Matthew. 16. 23. (...)
Thou savourest not the things that be of God, Romans 8. 5, 6. (...), etc. They
that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh; and they that are
after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit; for to be carnally minded is death,
but to be Spiritually minded is life and peace, Col. 3. 2. If ye be risen with
Christ (...), set your affections, have your minds upon things above, Phil. 3.
19. (...), who mind earthly things, whose hearts, studies, inclinations,
affections are earthly and brutish. We are not therefore barely to think the
same things whereunto we have already attaind, to affirm them: but in the main,
to agree with one another in the same Ends and designs, that is, when we hold
the same general truths, in so holding (...), to have the same purposes, to
pursue the same intentions, to carry on the same designs of glorifying God,
edifying the Church, and saving one another thereby. These are the four
excellent ways which the Apostle in this Text prescribes to reconcile
Controversies, to close up Divisions, to reduce calmness and serenity upon the
face of a distracted and dilacerated Church.

We have briefly opened and analyzed the Words, Let us now take a short review
of them again for our further instruction and benefit.

1. We may observe a difference which the Apostle makes amongst the Members of
the Church: some strong, some weak, some perfect, some seduced, some listening
to Paul, and others to the Concision. As on the same foundation, some parts of
the building may be Marble and Cedar, other parts Lath and Tearing, some
strong, and others ruinous. As in the Heavens, so in the House of God, some
Stars differ from other Stars in glory, 1 Cor. 15. 41. He who has the fullness
of the Spirit, and a residue to give still unto him that lacks, does yet blow
by his Spirit where he lists, Joh. 3. 8. and divides to every one severally
as he will, 1 Cor. 12. 11. yet always (...), a measure only of knowledge, of
faith, of grace, of every needful gift, Romans 12. 3. which the Apostle calls
the measure of the gift of Christ, and the measure of every part, Ephesians. 4. 7,
16. unto which measure there will ever, while here we are, be something
lacking, 1 These. 3. 10. they who have most, have not a fullness, except
comparatively, and respectively to Luke 1. 15, 41, 67. Act. 2. 4. Acts 6. 37.
55. 11. 24. 13. 9. Tit. 3. 6.
some special service, as Zachary, Elizabeth, Stephen, Barnabas and others are
said to have been full of Faith and of the Holy Ghost. Otherwise the best must
say, as our Apostle here does, not as though I had already attained, or were
already perfect, but I follow after, and reach forth, and press forward. Some
have need of milk, others of strong meat, some babes, others of fuller age,
some unskilful in the Word of Righteousness, others senses exercised to
discern good and evil, Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14. Some Fitches, some Cmmmin, some
Bread-corn, Isa. 28. 27, 28. some have knowledge, and others weak consciences,
1 Cor. 8. 7. some are first born, and they have five talents, a double portion
of the Spirit, as Elisha had, 2 Reg. 2. 9. Matthew. 25. 15. others are younger
Children and have lower abilities, who therefore have not so large a stock, nor
so noble a service. Some Children by reason of their strength do perform work,
others by reason of infancy and infirmity do only make work, some are for the
School, and others for the Cradle, some for the Field, others for the Couch,
some for duty, and others for Cure, and yet all Children. With such admirable
wisdom has God tempered the body that there might be a various love amongst
the Members, in the strong to the weak a love of care, in the weak to the
strong a love of reverence, that the strong may learn to restore the weak, and
the weak to imitate the strong, that by those who fall, the strong may learn to
fear; and by those that stand, the weak may learn to fight; that the weak by
the strong may be provoked to emulation, and the strong by the weak may be
provoked to edification: that they who stand may be for the praise of Christ's
power and grace, and they who fall for the praise of his patience and mercy,
and that in the variety of different supplies unto the Members, the fullness of
the head may be admired.

Let not those therefore who have more eminent gifts superciliously overlook
and despise their inferior brethren, For who has made thee to differ, or why
do thou glory as if thou had not received it? rather thus judge, the more
thy gifts are, the greater must be thy service to the Church of Christ here,
and the greater thine accounts at his tribunal hereafter.

And again, Let not those who have not so great a measure, envy or malign the
gifts of others, for it is God who has made them to excel, and why is thine
eye evil, when thy Masters is good* rather thus consider, the Head cannot say
to the foot, I have no need of thee, and the best way to improve, and increase
the gifts of God, is with humility and uprightness to employ them. The Apostle
has spent one whole Chapter upon this argument to persuade Christians from
unbrotherly censures of one another upon difference of judgment in smaller
things, Romans 14. pressing this duty by many reasons. 1. God who is the Judge
receives men into his favor notwithstanding their differences, therefore they
ought not mutually to cast one another out of their own favor, verse. 3. 2. Our
brother is another servant, and not ours, therefore we ought not to make our
will or judgment the rule of his, (servants should have no will of their own,
but their Lords) since God can and Velle non videntur qui obsequuntur imperio
patris vel Domini Digest. de Regal. juris. leg. 4.
will keep him in service and from dangerous falls as well as us, verse. 4. 3.
He walks according to the light and persuasion of his heart, so that his
failing is erroneous only, but not pertinacious, so long as he does reverence
light, and resolve that his heart shall not reproach him, he is docile and
reducible by any clear conviction, his heart is Godward, though he do sometimes
miss his way, verse. 5, 6. 4. We must all be accomptable to a Common Lord, and
have thereupon work enough of our own to do, and therefore ought not to make
others accomptable unto us, we have none of us dominion over our selves,
therefore not over others neither; ver. 7. we have a Lord, who dearly purchased
the dominion over us, and before whose tribunal we must all give an account of
our selves, verse. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 5. By judging, despising, and offending one
another, we break the rules of Christian charity, grieving and endangering the
souls of our brethren, verse. 13. 15. we expose those good things wherein we
agree unto reproach, verse. 16. and prejudice the great things of the Kingdom of
God, Righteousness, Peace, Joy in the Holy Ghost (which are the things which
render us acceptable to God, and therefore should make us approved of one
another) by our uncharitabe altercations in smaller things, verse. 17, 18. We
hinder the peace and edification of one another, verse. 19. We minister occasion
of falling, stumbling and offense to our weak brother, ver. 20, 21. We abuse
our liberty by making it a ball of contention, when we might enjoy it within
our selves, without any such danger, ver. 22. We go about to entangle our weak
brother by inducing him to act doubtingly, and without a warrant and persuasion
of the lawfulness of what he does, ver. 22, 23. So then what ever be the
differences amongst true believers, who agree in the great things of Gods
Kingdom, the strong ought not to despise the weak, nor the weak to judge the
strong, neither ought to hurt, grieve, wound, offend the hearts of one another,
in as much as we are all fellow servants to one common Lord, who will judge us
all, and in as much as we are owned by that Lord, and accepted, the weak as
well as the strong, who does not so much value us by the degrees of our
knowledge, as by the sincerity of our love, who does not reap any benefit by
the difference of our services, but is pleased and glorified by the uprightness
of our hearts, yea possibly is more pleased with the conscionable tenderness
of the weak brother that errs, then with the confident and inexpedient liberty
of the strong brother who does not err.

II. We may here note wherein the perfection of a Christian stands, viz. in
(...), To think of Christ, and think of himself as the Apostle Paul here did.

1. To shake off all self opinion of our own righteousness, all moral
presumptions and steshly confidence in any performances of our own, in our most
zealous and blameless conversation, they are good in genere viae as paths to
Heaven, not in genere causae, as proper causes on which we may depend for
salvation. He that living in the Country has a rich Office given him freely in
the City, must travel from the Country to the City if he will enjoy it, but he
must not ascribe the enjoyment of it to his own journey, but to his Patrons
bounty. We must be dead in our selves if we will be alive by the life of
Christ, we must suffer the loss of all, and esteem it an excellent, bargain
for the gaining of him, we must not establish our own righteousness, if we will
be found in his, the Sancti viti quo altius apud deunt virtutum digoitate
proficiunt, eo subtilius indignos se esse de prehendunt, quia dum proximi luci
fiunt quicquid eos in seipsis latebar, inveniuat. Greg. Moral. l. 3^. cap. 1.
nearer any soul comes unto God, the more it learns to abhor it self, by his
light discovering its own deformities. The Isa. 6. 2.
Angels cover their feet and their faces, Heb. 12. 24.
Moses exceedingly fears, 1 Reg. 19. 13.
Elias wraps his head in his Mantle, the Isa. 6. 5.
Prophet Isaiah cries out I am undone, and holy Job, Mine eyes sees thee,
therefore I abhor my Job 42. 5, 6.
self, the greater our approaches and acquaintance is with God, the lower our
thoughts will be of our selves, the Stars disappear when the Sun rises. Though
Heaven be high, yet the more there is of Heaven in the soul, the more humble
and low it is. Mountains must be levelled to make a way for Christ. As the Plin.
paneg.
Orator said of Trajan Te ad sydera tollit humus, that his walking on the
ground raised him in the estimation of his people unto Heaven, we may say of an
heavenly soul, Te ad humum Caelum deprimit, the more heavenly, the more in the
dust. Qui deo placet sibi de se nil relinquit, Greg moral. lib. 10. c. 4.
the more we study to please God, the more nothing we are in our selves.

2. To rejoice in the Lord, and in his righteousness alone. I will make mention
of thy righteousness, of thine only, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 71. 16. All
mine own is as a menstruous cloth: so true is that of St. Austin, Aug. de Cv.
dei lib. 19. c. 27.
Justitia nostra potius in remissione peccatorum constat, quam in perfectione
virtutum.

3. To have communion and conformity to Christ in his death and resurrection by
inchoate holiness, by mortifying our earthly members, and glorifying God in an
heavenly conversation. 2 Cor. 5. 14.
The love of Christ constraining us to dye unto sin, because he died for it, to
give our selves Romans 12. 1.
Living Sacrifices unto him who was pleased to give himself a dying Sacrifice
for us. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Deo dicata membra nulla tibitemeritate usurpes -- non
enim sine gravi Sacrilegio in usus vanitatis assumuntur. Bern. in. Psalm. 90.
Sermon. 8.
For our own we are not, but his that bought us, Digest. de captivis and
postliminio l. 12. Sect. 7.
as the Civil Law says that a redeemed captive is his that bought him, per
modum pignoris, though not per modum mancipij, till he can restore the price by
which he was redeemed. This we can never be able to do, therefore we must ever
be the servants of him that bought us.

4. To be always so tenderly affected with the Sense of our own manifold
imperfections, and coming short of the glory of God, that thereby our hearts
may be the more inflamed, by an heavenly ambition and noble pursuit, to press
forward in the use of all holy means, unto more neernesse and intimate
communion with the Lord Christ. The Lord is pleased here in the Church
militant, in the land of temptation, by such slow and slender progresses to
renew his servants, Aug. de Spirit. and vit. cap. ult.
Ut sit quod petentibus largiter adjiciat, quod confitentibus Clementer
ignoscat, as Austin excellently speaks, that there may still be a residue of
Spirit and grace wherewith abundantly to answer the things which are desired,
and mercifully to pardon the sins that are confessed, that every mouth may be
stopped from its own praises, and opened in the praises of God, from whence it
comes to pass that Gods servants, being always Semper tibi displiciat quod
es, si vis ad id pervenire quod nondum e^ -- Si dixeris sufficit, peristi Aug.
de verb. Apost. Ser. 15.
displeased with their present imperfection, do press forward unto that
whereunto they have not yet attained; like the waters of the Sanctuary from the
ancles to the loins, the water of life within them never giving over flowing,
until it spring up unto eternal life, Joh. 7. 38. that those sins which in our
In r^nascentibus remittuntur in proficientibus minuuntur. Aug. Contr. Julian.
pelag. lib. 6. cap. 16.
justification are remitted, may be so daily in our Sanctification weakened and
diminished, that at last in our salvation they may be utterly removed. Aug.
Contr. duas Ep. Pelag. l. 3. c. 7. de p^cc merit. and Remiss. lib. 2. c. 7, 8,
13. 15. de perfect. Justin cap. 5. 8.
Hic enim non peccare praeceptum, in Caelo praemium. In this life not to sin
is our duty, in the next it shall be our reward and glory. Thus as Christ never
gave over his work on Earth, till he had brought it to a consummation, Joh. 19.
13. nor will give over his work in Heaven till that likewise be pronounced
consummate, Rev. 16. 17. 21. 6. For he must reign till he has put down all
authority and power, 1 Cor. 15. 24. that he may save to the uttermost those
that come unto God through him, Heb. 7. 25. so the servants of Christ rest not
in any past performances, are not weary of well doing, but labor to perfect
holiness in the fear of God; as by repentance they break off their sins and
do not finish them, (of which we read, Dan. 4. 24. Jam. 1. 15.) so by a
continual progress of Sanctification they labor to increase more and more, 1
These. 4. 1. to grow in knowledge and in grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. till they come to
be perfect men, and to that measure of the stature of the fullness in Christ
which he has intended for them, that they may be complete in him, and filled
with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 4. 13. Col. 2. 10. Ephesians. 3. 19. thus as
in the body, so in the soul, Hunger is usually a sign of health, and the
greater our present perfection is, the greater will be our longings after more
perfection. No man in those days was nearer God then Moses was, and no man
ever made, if I may in a spiritual sense so call it, a more ambitious prayer
then Moses did, Exodus 33. 18. I beseech thee show me thy glory. As Absalom when
he was brought from banishment, aspired higher to come into his Fathers
presence, 2 Samuel 14. 32. so the soul when it is once delivered from the
thraldom of sin, is still more and more ambitious of nearer approaches and
accesses unto God, Romans 5. 1, 2. Psalm. 42. 2. In these things consists the
highest perfection attainable here, in Remission of sin, in the gift of
Righteousness, in conformity to the death and Resurrection of Christ, in an
humble and penitent apprehension of our own failings, in renouncing all carnal
confidences, and in an importunate and indefatigable contention unto more grace
and glory.

III. In that the Apostle says, If in any thing ye be otherwise minded, viz.
touching Legal Rites, and Mosaicall Ceremonies, or touching the Doctrine of
Christian perfection, and the weakness of your present graces and seize,
the Lord will in due time out of his Word, and by his Spirit, if you be
careful in the use of means, and attendant upon his teaching, reveal the same
unto you. We may from hence learn, That in the best ages of the Church there
have been, and therefore we cannot expect but that there ever will be,
varieties and differences of judgment amongst the Members thereof; 1. While we
know but in part, and prophecy but in part, 2. While there is difficulty in
the disquisition of truth, 3. Weakness of judgment in men to make that
inquiry, 4. Carelessness to try the spirits, and to prove all things, 5.
Prevalency of some Lust or spiritual Interest darkning the mind, and
entangling the judgment. 6. Credulity in attending unto false Teachers, 7.
Itching ears, affecting and hankering after novell suggestions. 8. A too great
Reverence to the persons of men, having them in admiration, and giving our
selves up by a blind obedience, and implicit faith unto their hands, 9. While
there is sleepiness and inadvertency in the laborers, 10. Cunning and
Sedulity in the adversaries. 11. Unweariednesse in circumambulation and
supersemination of the envious man, we cannot expect but there will be (...),
men that will not in all things agree with their brethren, we cannot wonder to
see some Corn in the field of the Church smutted and mildewd, and kept back
from maturity by the twisting of weeds about it. When we remember the angry
dissentions between the Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 22, 23, 24.
Western and Eastern Churches in the case of Easter, the sad differences Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 3, 4. Cyprian. Epist. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76.
between the Roman Church, and the Affrican and other Churches, in the
business of Rebaptization in the days of Cyprian, the doleful Sozemen. l. 7.
c. 14, 15.
dissentions between d Sozom. l. 1. c. 16. Niceph. lib. 14. cap. 47.
Chrysostom and Epiphanius breaking forth e Cyril. ad Euoptium Episcopum.
into mutual imprecations, the great breaches in many famous and ancient
Synods, the differences of judgment between Cyrill and Theodoret, Basil and
Baron. Anno. 37 2. S. ct. 15 -- 25.
Damasus, Epist. Amaeb. apud Aug. Ep. 8. -- 19.
Austen and Hierom, Hieron. Apolog. advers. Ruffin.
Hierom and Ruffinus, Ussheri Gotschalcus. p. 38 --
Rhemigius and Hincmarus, Epiphan. Haer. 68.
Peter of Alexandria and Miletius, when they were both in prison and Confessors
for the truth: and of late years in the days of Ed. 6. between Fox Martyr. To.
3. p. 147.
Ridley and Hooper, afterward Martyrs, and in Queen Mary's Troubles at
Frankford.
days between the English Protestants in exile for true Religion; nay when we
consider that a Barnabas and a Paul had there contention, Act. 15. 39. That a
Peter and a Barnabas had there dissimulation, Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13. That the
Apostle has told us, that there would be some in the Church who would build
upon the foundation silver and gold, and others Hay and stubble, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
that some were for Paul, and some for Apollo, and some for Cephas, and others
for none of them all, but for Christ without their help, 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12. That
our Savior has said, necessary it is that offenses come, Math. 18. 7. and the
Apostle there must be Heresies or Sects, 1 Cor. 11. 19. Cyprian de unitate
Eccles. Origin. contra Celsum l. 3. Aug. ep. 105. de Civ. dei lib. 16. c. 2.
that the victory of truth, the malice of Satan, the hypocrisy of men, the
constancy of the perfect, the frailty of the seduced, the compassion, and
patience of the Lord may be discovered, well may we, as our duty is, wish, and
pray, and project for unity in the Church; but till Satan, and all the Enemies
of the Church be chained up, and the members thereof have attained unto their
full stature, there cannot be expected such an universal consent of judgments,
and harmony of Doctrines even amongst good men themselves, as shall not admit
of some variety and dissonancy.

IV. In this case of unavoidable differences amongst good men, there ought to
be mutual charity, meekness, moderation, tolerance, humanity used, not to
judge, despise, reject, insult over one another, not to deal with our weaker
brethren, (...) sed (...), as with aliens, but as with brethren, not to poceed
presently unto separation, Greg. Naz. Orat. 51.
rejection, anathematization, but to restore those that are overtaken with any
Error with the spirit Nazian. Orat. 12. 26. 37, 44. Aug. ep. 19. 64.
of meekness. The Apostle suffered some things (...), the exigences of the
Church requiring it, which in other cases they did not allow, they allowed
Jewish Ceremonies, some time and leisure for an honorable interment. We find
Optatus forcing even upon the Donatists the name of Brethren. It was grave
advice of Gregory Optat. lib. 1. Orat. 14.
Nazianzen in such disputes, (...), to decline all exasperations, to use all
meekness and condescension, so far as our duty to truth will give us leave,
that so though we cannot reconcile the judgments, yet we may gain the
affections of our brethren. It is noted of Basil that in the controversy
concerning the holy Spirit, he forbore all unwelcome words, and phrases,
whereby the Nazian. Orat. 10.
contrary minded were exasperated, and the unstable startled and made jealous,
and used such mild insinuations as might win and confirm men in the truth.

For a more particular stating of this point. Let us 1. distinguish of
Opinions. Some are in the Foundation, in those necessary Doctrines upon which
the House of God is built, 1 Cor. 3. 9, 10. Heb. 6. 1. Matthew. 7. 24. the Errors
contrary wherereunto are pernicious and damnable, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Some are only in
the superstruction which do not so nearly touch the vitalls and essentials of
Religion, which are not fidei but quaestionum, as Austin somewhere
distinguishes. Such were in the Apostles time disputes touching meats, and
drinks, and days, and things indifferent, Romans 14. 5, 6. and in our days
touching Forms of Discipline and Government in the Church, wherein men abound in
their own sense, with meekness, and with submission to the spirits of the
Prophets.

2. We are likewise to distinguish of persons, foam are Seducers, who out of
pride, enmity against the Doctrine which is according unto godliness, carnal
ends, desire of advantage and domination, do sow tares in the Church, and
labor to cause rents and divisions therein. Such were Hymeneus, Philetus,
Diotrephes, c. Others are Seduced people, who through ignorance and credulity
are led away captive by the cunning craftiness of those who lie in wait to
deceive, 2 Timothy 3. 16. Ephesians. 4. 14. Again some are pious, meek, and peaceable
men, others are of turbulent and tumultuating spirits, who love to kindle
flames, and to foment divisions, and to fish in troubled waters. Joachim.
Camerarius in the life of Melancthon complains of the faction of Flacius
Illyricus upon this account who loaded with challenges and reproaches as
betrayers and deserters of the truth, All who Camerar. de vita Philippi
Melancthones page 353. and 385.
were not as flagrant and vehement as themselves, contrary to the meek temper
of that good man, who would have all things which might without wickedness and
with a good conscience, be endured, rather then new wounds to be inflicted upon
the Church of Christ.

These things being premised, we conclude; 1. That there can be no Syncretisme
or Accommodation in case of differences, where the differences are against the
foundations of Faith, Worship, Obedience, and Holiness, there can be no
agreement between light and darkness, Christ and Belial, damnable Heresies, and
the Doctrine according unto godliness, 2 Cor. 6. 14. 17. 1 Cor. 10. 21. we must
depart from the impurity of Heretical Synagogues, Isa. 52. 11. Gal. 1. 8, 9.
Heretics are to be admonished, and in case of pertinacy to be rejected, Tit.
3. 10. therefore there may be no brotherly concord or coalescency with them:
but seduced persons are to be by the spirit of meekness and gentleness
instructed, and if it be possible be won unto the truth, and delivered from
the snare of the Devil.

2. Though the differences be not prima facie, so dangerous, yet
notwithstanding if it be evident that they be purposely sowed by men of
turbulent and ungracious spirits, merely to kindle flames, and foment
divisions, to lay the foundation of perpetual broiles and jars in Church and
State, to gratify the common adversary of the reformed Churches, and to be
subservient unto his ends and designs, in this case the Apostle has taught us
to mark such men, and to take heed of them, Romans 16. 17. and would not give
place by subjection for an hour unto them, Gal. 2. 4, 5.

3. Where a Syncretisme and agreement is allowable, yet we must love and join
peace and truth together, Zach. 8. 19. we must not betray the truth, or
dissemble it, or make a mixture of truth and falsehood, a kind of Samaritanisme
in Religion (for of them it is said that they feared the Lord, and served their
own gods, 2 Reg. 17. 33. and therefore Gods people would not admit them into
the society of building Gods house, Ezra 4. 1, 2, 3.) we must not add or
diminish one jot or title to or from divine truth, or temper and reduce it to
the Rules of mere humane wisdom. Jeroboam, and Abaz acted beyond their power,
when they set up ways of worship, subservient unto carnal interest, and not
according to the will of God, we can do nothing against the truth, but for the
truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. Math. 5. 18, 19. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.

4. When the Foundations and necessary Doctrines of Law and Gospel, of Faith,
Worship, and Obedience are safe, and on all sides unanimously embraced, there
in differences of an inferior nature, which do not touch the Essentials, and
vitals of Religion, mutual tolerance, meekness, and tenderness is to be used,
as amongst brethren, and fellow members. In the body, if a finger have a
Gangraene in it, which cannot be cured, the body cannot without danger of
deadly infection hold communion with that member, and therefore it is severed
and cut off, ne pars syncera trahatur; but if it have only a bile, or some
other less dangerous sore, the other parts love and cherish it, and are not at
all cruel and churlish unto it. And this is consonant to the Doctrine of
Sciptures, which teaches the Strong to bear with the infirmities of the weak,
Romans 15. 1. the spiritual to restore their Brethren with meeknels, Gal. 6. 1.
the members to have the same care of each other, 1 Cor. 12. 25. to do nothing
through strife, or vanglory, but in lowliness of mind to esteem others better
then our selves, Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3. with lowliness, meekness, long-suffering,
to forbear one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit,
in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3. To follow peace with all men, with whom
we may retain holiness too, Heb. 12. 14. Peace is the Ornament and Honor of
Religion, Psalm. 133. 1. and the wisdom which is from above is first pure, and
then peaceable, gentle, full of mercy, Jam. 3. 17, 18. God is a God of peace,
and Christ a Prince of peace, and his Legacy to his Church, was a Legacy of
peace, Hereunto he has called us, to be all of one mind, and to love as
brethren, 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9. Love and a spirit of unity and peace is the new
Commandment, the Ointment which ran down from the Head to the Members. He that
is not a man of peace, cannot be a man of God, this is an Ointment which
belongs only to Christ's body, Exodus 30. 33. Divisions are fruits of the flesh,
1 Cor. 3. 3. Contention a Child of pride Prove. 13. 10. Light vapors many times
come down in great Tempests, and light differences through pride may grow into
great storms, whereas Love covers a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4. 8..

And as it is consonant to the will of God, so it is greatly beneficial to the
Common Body. 1. Hereby we show forth the communion of Saints, that we are all
members of the same body, when we seek every man another wealth, 1 Cor. 10.
17, 24. One Body is animated by one Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. Genesis 13. 8.
Hereby we are known to be Christ's Disciples, Joh. 13. 34, 35. 2. Hereby we
jointly promote the welfare of the whole body, whereas biting and devouring is
the way to be consumed, Gal. 5. 15. 3. Hereby we prevent the insultations, and
advantages of Common Enemies, when we fall out amongst our selves, Hoc Ithacus
velit, and magno mercentur Atridae. 4. Hereby even civil interest and safety
is preserved. Charity is a Bond which keeps things fast together, Col. 3. 14. A
whole Faggot is not easily broken, cut away the Bond, and then without further
breaking the sticks will fall one from another. I will conclude this point with
two good sayings of renowned Calvin, the one touching Luther, though says he,
Calvin epist. ad Bullinger. Anno. 1544. p. 383. Edit. 2. fol. and p. 138.
he should call me Devil, yet I will still esteem of him as of an excellent
servant of Jesus Christ. The other of another person who is not there named,
such a man says he is a sincere Minister of Christ, a godly and a moderate
man, therefore though he dissent from us, I will not cease to love him still.

V. I shall now proceed to speak a few words touching the Rules which the
Apostle gives for reconciling difference in the Church: whereof the

First is, to attend upon God in those means and ways whereby he is pleased to
reveal his truth unto us, to dispossess our selves of prejudice and
partiality, and with candid affections and judgments to try the Spirits, as
being assured that in all points needful unto life and godliness, (...), he who
has already revealed that Greg. Naz. Orat. 44.
wherein we agree, will also reveal that wherein we differ, if with meekness
of spirit, without wrath and cavillation, we do wait upon his Word. And the
means thus to do, are

1. To study the Scriptures, which are the alone Rule of all Controversies, and
are able to make us wise unto salvation, and thoroughly to furnish us unto every
good work.

2. To attend on the Ordinances which open the Scripture unto us, the Ministry
which Christ has erected for this very purpose to perfect the Saints, and to
bring them by the unity of the Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God unto a
full stature, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.

3. Because the Scripture may speak, and the Ministry teach, and the heart all
the while be sealed up and hear nothing, except the Lord from Heaven speak, and
open the heart to attend, as he Heb. 12, 25. Act. 16. 14.
did the heart of Lydia, therefore we must ever remember David's Prayer, Psalm.
51. 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, otherwise seeing I shall Mr. 13. 13.
not see, and hearing I shall not hear. It is the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, which both opens Ephesians. 1. 17.
the heart to the Word, giving an understanding to know the Scriptures, and
opens the Scriptures to the heart, for he takes of Christ's, and shows 1 John 5. 20.
it unto us, Joh. 16. 14. the Spirit does not reveal truth unto us, as he did
in the Primitive patefaction thereof to the Prophets and Apostles, by divine
and immediate Inspiration, or in a way of simple Enthysiasme, but what he
reveals he does it by, and out of the Scriptures (which are the full and
perfect Rule of Faith and Obedience) as Christ opened to his Disciples in the
Scriptures the things which concerned himself, Luke 24. 27.

So then the only light by which differences are to be decided is the Word,
being a full Canon of Gods revealed will, for the Lord does not now as in
former times make himself known by Dreams or Visions, or any other immediate
way. To this the Apostle refers the Church against danger of Wolves, Act.
20. 32. This he says is profitable, (...), (...), 2 Timothy 3. 16. To this only
St. Austin had learned Aug. ep. 19. 48, 112, 166. clem. Alex. strom. l. 7.
Timorem and honorem defer. Cyprian cont. epist. Steph. o Aug. de Bapt. l. 2.
c. 3. l. 5, 26 Contr. literas Petiliani. l. z.
Si ad Divinae Traditionis Caput and originem revertamur Cessat error humanus.
85. de unitat. eccles. c. 2, 3. Tertullian Apolog. c. 47. de Resur. cap. 3.
contr. Marcion. l 3. c. 5.
Haec sunt causae nostrae documenta, haec fundamenta, haec firmamenta. Optat.
l. 5. Irenaus l. 4. c. 44. Tertul. de praescript c. 19, 21, 22, 33, 36. contr.
Marcion. lib. 4. c. 5. Aug. ep. 165. contr. Crescon. l. 1. c. 33. Vincent. in
commonitorio vid. Raynold. Conference with Heart. p. 141. -- 151. Field of the
Church. l. 3. c. 40
And this is the meaning of Tertullian, Optatus, Vincentius Lirinensis and
others, when they teach us to prove the truth of Doctrine by Ecclesiastical
Tradition, and the voice of the Church, for they speak of Apostolical
Churches, which Tertullian calls Matrices Ecclesias, and not of the the
peremptory Authoritative decision of any present Church, for they were all able
in so short a time as was between them and the Apostles, to draw down from the
Apostles a Doctrinall succession, which he calls Traducem fidei, and to assign
the time, Authors, and posteriority of those Heresies which they gain said, as
he says Solemus Haereticis compendij causa de posterioritate praescribere.

I decline controversy, thus only in a few words. 1. It is fit that he who
made the Word should be Judge of the meaning of it, 1 Cor. 2. 11. Hilar. de
Trin. l. 1, 3, 5.
Cum de rebus deisermo erit, concedamus cognitionem sui Deo, says Hilary.

2. When any Assembly of men assume to themselves a Judicature which they deny
to others, they will show some ground of the difference, and some Commission
directed to them, and not to others, which the Church of Rome endeavoring to
do, are forced (though with little advantage) Andrad. de council. Genesis l. 1.
fol 49. l. 2. sol. 123. Bellarm. de Romans pontif. l. 4. c. 3. Stapleton.
princip. fidei doctr. controv. 4. q. 2. and contr. 3. q. 1. in proaemio. Greg.
de Val. to. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 7. q. 5 sect. 28 -- 37
to fly to the Scriptures: So that in this overuling controversy, the
Scripture is made the Judge, and why not as well in all the rest, since in them
a lesser light then Scripture is presumed to suffice?

But then the Objection is, How shall I know the meaning of Scripture, whereof
one gives one sense, and another another, If there be not some infallible
Judge to have recourse unto? I answer, 1. Ad hominem how shall I know that this
man or Church is to give that final sense which my conscience is bound to rest
in, rather then another man or another Church. 2. We fay, That the Word is 2
Cor. 4. 3, 4 2 Pet. 1. 19. Theodor. de eurand. Graec. Affect. l. 8. Aug. de
doct. Christ. l. 2. cap. 8. l 1.
perspicuous and has notas insitas veritatis in all needful truth, as being
written not for Scholars only, but for vulgar and illiterate men. And that this
light in the Word is manifested unto us, 1. By the Manuduction and Ministry of
the Church, pointing unto the Star which is seen by its own light. 2. Because
we bring not such an implanted suitableness of Reason to Scripture as we do to
other Sciences in which the principles 1 Cor. 2. 14. John 1. 5.
are exactly consonant to the ingraffed notions of the mind, therefore, to
proportion the eye of the soul to the light of the Word, there is required 2
Cor. 3. 18. 2 Cor. 5. 17. 1 Cor. 12. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 2. 10. John 14. 21 Ephesians. 1.
17. 1 Cor. 2. 16
an act of the Spirit opening the eyes, and drawing away the veil, that we may
discern the voice of Christ from strangers, for having the mind of Christ, we
do according to the measure of his Spirit in us, judge of Divine truths as he
did.

But here again they object, That we make all Religion hang upon a private
spirit. To which Bellar. de verb. de^. l. 3 c. 3. Stapleton. de princip. doct.
controv. 2. q. 2. Dr. Jo. Whites way. p 50 -- 66. Jun. in Bellar. de interpret.
verbi l. 3. c. 3. Dr. Jackson of Scripture. l. 2. sect. 3. c. 6. s. 3.
we say, 1. That every true Believer has the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9. 2.
That Spirit does enable to know and to judge, 1 Cor. 2. 12. 1 John 4. 13. for
Believers have judicium discretionis, as the men of Berea, to try the things
which are taught them, Act. 17. 11. 3. That this spirit, though in a private
man, yet is not a private Spirit, because not originally from that man, as my
money, though private in regard of my property to it, yet it is public in
regard of the currantness of it. The Church by her Ministers has the ordinary
public power of expounding Scriptures: but not power to lead the people to
subscribe to such expositions as peremptory and infallible, for they have a
spirit of discerning to prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

The Sum of all is. There are differences in the Church in matters of
Religion: the removing of them is to be expected from divine Revelation: God
Reveals it by three concurrent means. Ministerialiter, by the service of the
Ministry. Judicialiter, by the Sentence of the Word. Efficaciter, by the
illumination of the Spirit, healing all that folly, inadvertency, unbelief,
impenitency, proud and contumacious reasonings, whereby the carnal mind is
not only indisposed to receive, but armed also to resist the truth, and thus we
having by Gods Spirit an eye, the Word having in it self an evidence, and the
Ministry directing this eye to this evidence, so much of Gods Counsel is
discovered as is necessary unto faith and holiness here, and to salvation
hereafter. John 7. 48. 1 Cor. 1. 19 -- 20.


And our Savior tells us that this Revelation is not always to the wise and
prudent (though learning sanctified be an excellent help hereunto) Vid Camero
in Mat. 18. 2. to. 2. p. 320, 324 Jackson of Script. l. 2. sect. 2 c. 3. sect.
9.
but unto Babes, Matthew. 11. 25. whereby are noted two preparative dispositions
unto the receiving of Divine truth. 1. Humility, and tractableness of spirit, a
meek and docile temper. The poor receive the Gospel. 2. Spiritual hunger after
the Melch. canus loc. Theol. l. 12. c. 11.
sincere milk of the Word, praying and crying for the knowledge thereof, that
we may grow thereby.

The second means for healing divisions in the Church is to have an (...), some
(...), some Fundamental Doctrines wherein all agree, this is the Bafis of
unity and concord in the Church. The Irenaus l. 1. 6. 3. Naz. Or. 14, 40 Aug.
Enchirid. c. 7. Tertul. de prascript. c. 13, 14. de Veland. Virgin c. 1.
Athanas. in Symbol. Iraene. us, l. 1. c. 1. Aug. ep. 57. Vid. Parker de
descens. l. 4. c. 3
Ancients call it, theRule of faith, the Seed of Doctrine, the Catholic Faith,
the Character of the Church, that which is Common to small and great. St. 1
Cor. 3. 10. 11 Heb. 6. 1: 2 Timothy 1. 13. Col. 1. 23. Ephesians. 4. 13. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Gal. 1. 6: Romans 6. 17. Romans 12. 6. 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14 1 Cor. 2. 2. 1 Timothy 6. 3
Tit. 1. 1. Phil. 1. 27. Rev. 14. 12.
Paul, the foundation, the form of sound Words, the principles of Doctrine,
the Faith of the Gospel, the unity of Faith, the Mystery of godliness, the Rule
by which we are to walk. And these Fundamentals are of three sorts. 1.
Fundamentals in Faith, that knowledge of God and Christ, unto which eternal
life is annexed, Joh. 17. 3. Joh. 8. 24. Acts 4. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 1. 23. 2. 2, 3,
11. 2. Fundamentals in practice, viz. Repentance from dead works, sincere
obedience, self-denial, love of the brethren, c. Luke 13. 5. Matthew. 5. 19, 20.
Romans 6. 1, 2. Romans 8. 1. Matthew. 16. 24. 1 John 3. 14. 3. Fundamentalls in
Worship, to worship God in Spirit and Truth, to call upon God in the name of
Christ as our Advocate and Propitiation, not to worship creatures, but to hold
the head, to keep our selves from Idols, and communion with Devils, Joh. 4. 24.
Phil. 3. 3. Joh. 16. 23. Col. 3. 17. Col. 2. 18, 19.

Where there is agreement in these Fundamentals, there is 1. A fair way unto
discovery of truth in the things of difference: for where true Principles are
laid, there is a great preparation unto all true conclusions deducible from
them, and the more clearly we understand the comprehension and latitude of
thesePrinciples, (which are Omnimm Doctrinarum Matrix) the more skill we have
to discern the genuine deduction of true conclusions, and the inconsistency of
those which are false and spurious, for matters of Division are to be measured
by the Doctrines which we have learned, Romans 16. 17. we must not suffer any
Doctrine to corrupt our judgment, or enthrall our Conscience, which does
either directly, or by visible and just consequence, overturn, or wrench, or
shake, or endanger the Foundation, we must not do with Doctrines in Religion,
as Herodotus says the Babylonians did with their Virgins, Herodot. in Clio.
sell the fair ones to raise portions for the foul, plead agreement in
Fundamentals for prevarication in other things, for the Rule is made to
rectify other Errors by, not to warrant them. They who consent not in this
necessary disposition to Peace, but will have al Opinions strike sail to theirs,
and will exercise Domination over the Faith and 2 Cor. 1. 24.
Consciences of their Brethren (which is the case between us and the Roman
Church, which boasts of her Infallibility, and that her Laws bind the
Conscience, as if the Pope and not Christ were to sit in Judgment at the last
day) these I say will be found to have been the greatest Scismaticks, who by
intolerable tyranny over the Bishop ushers Sermon. on Ephesians. 4. 13. page 7. Mornay
de eccl. cap. 3. 10. Genesis 13. 8.
Consciences, and cruelty over the Lives of men, have miserably torn the peace
and unity of the Church of Christ.

2. Where there is this agreement in Fundamentals, there ought to be mutual and
Fraternall affections, notwithstanding differences in other things, no
Reproaches, no Exasperations, no invidious consequences, no odious imputations,
no uncharitable digladiations, but an owning of one another as Brethren, and a
discussing and ventilating of the points in difference with a Spirit of Love
and meekness, saying to one another, as Abraham to Lot, Let there be no strife
between thee and me, for we be brethren.

III. The last expedient which the Apostle uses for pacification amongst
Brethren, is, To walk by the same Rule, and to mind the same things, that is,
notwithstanding all their differences, to preserve Aug. de Great. and lib. Arb.
c. 1 and depraedest. sanct. c. 1.
unity in these three things, unity of wills in Love, unity of holiness in
life, unity of ends in design. The Apostle puts Faith and Love, Faith and a
Gal. 5. 6 1 Timothy 1. 19 1 Timothy 3. 16 1 Timothy 6. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 13 Tit. 1. 1. Heb.
13. 9.
good Conscience together, calls Christian Doctrine a Mystery of godliness,
and knowledge which is according to godliness, without this, our judgments are
volatile and unfixed, for the heart is established by grace. He who holds truth
to serve turns, or makes it an Handmaid to his own lusts and ambition, like
that Atheist in Hierom, Fac me Romanae urbis Episcopum and ero protinus
Christianus, Hieron. lib. centr. Joan. Hierosolymit. Tertul, contr. Hermog. c.
1. Amant veritatem lucentem oderunt redarguentem. Aug. confess. Ariani non Deum
sed purpuram colunt. Socrat. l. 3, c. 21 Tertul. contr. Valent. c. 4. Theodorit
Hist. l. 1. c. 2. Arist. Metaphy. l. ^.
or like Hermogenes in Tertullian, Legem dei in libidinem defendit, in artem
contemnit, will for advantage be ready to set the truth to sail, and to
exchange his opinion that he may gratify his lust. And usually we find that
through men's own wickedness, and the just judgment of God upon them. Corrupt
lusts are the causes of corrupt minds, and that Carnal ends have been the
rise and original of dangerous Heresies, as Tertullian has observed of
Valentinus the Heretic, and Theodoret of Arius. Carnal ends and crooked
affections open a passage unto Heretical Opinions, and there is an excellent
speech of the Philosopher which gives us the reason of it, (...)

That commonly as men's courses of life are, so would they have the Doctrines to
be which their Isa. 30. 10, 11 Jer. 5. 12, 13, 31 Jer. 43, 2. M c. 2. 11. 2
Per. 3. 5.
Teachers instruct them, notable examples whereof we have in Scripture. The
best way then to know that wherein we differ, is to obey that wherein we agree,
for as a corrupt heart will make a corrupt judgment, so purity of heart is a
good step Aug. ep. 112. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. c 6. de Morib. eccles. cap.
17, 18. Greg. Naz. Orat. 34. Clem. Alex. strom. l. 6 p. 489.
unto unity of judgment, the Lord having promised that they who do his will
shall know his doctrine, Joh. 7. 27. that they who are his sheep shall discern
his voice, Joh. 10. 4. that the meck he will teach his way, and reveal his
secret to them that fear him, Psalm. 25. 9, 14. Let us therefore as we have
received Christ so walk in him, and we shall certainly reap one of these two
fruits, either we shall get to the knowledge of the truth, and so our
differences cease, or we shall so allay them with humility and love (as Austin
observes of Cyprian) that they shall never break forth into bitterness,
animosity, or scornful esteem of our fellow brethren.

I conclude all with a very few words of exhortation unto this Honorable
Assembly, all grounded upon the particulars of the Text.

1. To acknowledge with the Apostle your own imperfection. Solomon was sensible
of the disparity between his work and his strength, and so all good men are;
and thereupon, 1. Wait upon God for wisdom, Jam. 1. 5. 2. Do not precipitate
counsels, but mature them by grave and full deliberation. Ita enim nati estis
ut bona malaque vestra ad Remp. pertineant.

2. To settle and secure the weighty doctrines of righteousness by Christ
alone, of holiness and conformity to his death and resurrection, of
imperfection of humane righteousness, of necessity of daily progress in the
ways of grace, and of those means which Christ has set up in his Church in
order thereunto.

3. In making Laws and penalties to be tender toward the weak consciences of
your brethren. There is indeed a very great veneration due to Laws, and
Magistrates do with good reason expect to have their Sanctions obeyed rather
then disputed: But they must remember they are brethren as well as Magistrates,
and therefore must take heed of writing or binding heavy burdens; no Lawmakers
can know the lawfulness of his own Isa. 10. 1. Mat. 23. 4.
edicts more certainly then the Apostles knew that Legal ceremonies were
extinguished by the death of Christ. Yet knowing likewise the weakness of their
brethren the Jews, they did not presently put forth their Apostolical authority
to the inhibiting of them, but suffered them to die a lingering death. It is a
sad thing to be reduced unto that uncomfortable Dilemma, of choosing either
iniquity (as to a man's own conscience I mean) or affliction. And if by any
means he be brought unto it, he may take more comfort in suffering it, then
others in inflicting it. I speak not this to weaken the hands of Lawmakers, or
to derogate from the authority of Laws (unto which I shall ever both out of
principles of conscience and prudence, carry all Reverence and submission,
either cheerfully to do, or meekly to suffer.) But I speak it as an humble
caution, that since there are some of humble and quiet spirits who may
sometimes be otherwise minded, Laws may be made so exactly consonant to the
general rules of the word, and may have such prints and evidences of their own
goodness, wholsomness, and righteousness in them, as that they may not by any
rational exception or semblance of equity, be declined or objected against.

And I would here withal distinguish between men of a meek, humble and patient
temper, and others of busy, boisterous, turbulent spirits, who under pretense
of conscience do at any time engage in actions apparently inconsistent with
righteousness and peace; for we are sure that the Laws of Christ do require all
men to lead quiet and peaceable, as well as godly and honest lives, under the
Laws of men. And no man can with any probable pretense of good conscience
tumultuate against public order and peace in Church or State.

4. Since the Lord does heal breaches in his Church by his Spirtt and Word, as
the ordinary means thereunto, therefore special care should be had that these
means be duly used and applied by authorizing, countenancing, encouraging,
protecting, rewarding the faithful Ministers of the Gospel in the due discharge
of their duties; not suffering their persons, functions, doctrines, labors, or
comforts to be assaulted by any turbulent or malicious opposers.

5. To lay to heart the breaches and differences which are amongst us, and to
pour oil and balm into the wounds of the Church, and to apply all requisite
expedients for the closing of them, considering the great advantages which
adversaries take by our differences and divisions.

6. To countenance and encourage fundamental truths, wherein all agree, and as
much as may be to hinder those digladiations, whereby the common enemy is
gratified, and his interest promoted by animosities from the press, over which
it were very needful that there were a more provident superinspection: there
being a great difference between a liberty allowed men between God and their
own consciences, and a power to sow their tares, and to spread their leaven
into the whole lump.

7. To manage all councels and consultations by the Rule of the Word: For
though I am not of their opinion, who would have no other humane Laws, but
such as are formally to be found in the Scripture, yet there are there general
Rules of Equity, Truth, Justice, Expediency, Liberty, unto which all humane
Laws should be conformable.

8. To eye and mind the same things, to have all the same joint and honorable
ends, to have no divided interests, no domestical Reflections, but single
upright aims at the glory of God, the truth of the Gospel, the power of
godliness, the interest of Christ, the souls of men, the peace, tranquillity
and happiness of these Nations.

7. Lastly, to wait continually upon God for counsel and guidance by his
Spirit, for Acceptance with him and his people, for blessing and success upon
all righteous and honorable undertakings, that he would give you one heart and
one way, and cause you to know the way wherein you should walk, and do nothing
by you but that alone which may promote his glory, advance his truth, rejoice
his people, tend to the calming of unhappy differences, and to the reducing of
these discomposed Nations unto unity and serenity, For which purpose let us
pray, etc.

FINIS.
The Reader is desired to amend, by the sense, the Errors in false pointing,
and in one of the Sermons to correct these few faults.

Brotherly Reconciliation.

Page 5. line 14. put out the word A^^; l 16, read Athletical. p. 2^, 1. 8, for
will, r. must. line 26, for needful, r. necessiry.


