Ovid Travestie, A BURLESQUE UPON Ovids Epistles.

The Second Edition, Enlarged with Ten Epistles never before Printed.

BY ALEXANDER RADCLIFFE, of Gray's-Inn, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's-Head in Chancery Lane* near
Fleet Street. MDCLXXXI.

TO ROBERT FAIRBEARD OF GRAY'S INN, Esquire.
SIR,
HAving committed these Epistles to the Press, I was horribly put to it for a
Patron -- I thought of some great Lord, or some Angelique Lady; but then again
considered I should never be able to adorn my Dedication with benign Beams,
coruscant Rays, and the Devil and all of Influence. At last I heard my good
Friend Mr. Fairbeard was come to Town -- nay then -- all is well enough. To you
therefore I offer this English Ovid, to whom you may not be unaptly compared in
several parcels of your Life and Conversation; only with this exception, That
you have nothing of his Tristibus about you.

It Is you who Burlesque all the Foppery and conceited Gravity of the Age. I
remember you once told a grave affected Advocate, That he Burlesqu'd Gods
Image, for God had made him after his own Likeness, but he made himself look
like an Ass.

Upon the whole matter I am very well satisfied in my Choice of you for my
Judge; if you speak well of the Book, it is all I desire, and the Bookseller
will have reason to rejoice: though by your approbation you may draw upon your
self a grand Inconvenience; for perhaps you may too often have Songs, Sonnets,
Madrigals, and an innumerable Army of Stanza's obtruded upon you by

Sir, October. 28th, 1680. Your humble Servant, Alex. Radcliffe.

TO THE READER. Occasioned by the PREFACE To a late Book called, The WITS
Paraphrased.
BEfore I shall give you any Account of our Old Friend Ovid, or of his Life, I
am to inform you, that his Epistles have been ingeniously and correctly
translated by several Gentlemen; and withal, that he was of a good Family, and
a brave Fellow was he. Now, since the unhappy Accident of his Death, his Ghost
has been lately attempted to be raised by an unlucky Pretender to Poetry, who
indeed has not skill enough to disturb his Manes: He calls his Book, The Wits
Paraphrased, or, Paraphrase upon Paraphrase, that is, Throw Pelion upon Ossa,
Ossa upon Pelion, and away with it. This Book he has dedicated to his Patron
Julian, Secretary to the Muses, in hopes that he may get an Vnder-Writer's
Place somewhere about Pernassus: but alas! how can he ever hope for Preferment,
when he has blasphemed the best Poet of our Age, by mistaking Innocence for
Ignorance: I wish to God the last may not rise up in Judgment against him. He
(good Soul) is (as appears in his Epistle to his Patron) for none of your High
Flights; but, like an humble Sinner in a strict Diet, makes all his Simile's of
Close Stools with Velvet-Seats, and Pans that receive the Excrement. God save
us: What are we when we are left to our selves!

Now for his Preface, he would imitate that ingenious one of Mr. Dryden's to
Ovid's Epistles, in beginning with Ovid's Life, which has been wrote by as many
Men as there are Lives in Plutarch. And again, Our Paraphraser says, That Ovid
was as good a Wit as Himself or any other Translator; and, to prove that, he
says, Nescivit quod been cessit, etc. He might as aptly have said,

The Man in the Moon drinks Claret. Then he says, That he could find no such
thing as Clubbing with Ovid in all the Catalogue of Virgil, Catullus,
Propertius, or Tibullus: very truly said: for I suppose he knows nothing
farther of those Authors than the Catalogue.

Oh Tempora! Oh Mores!
The more the merrier!
He wonders, that so many Workmen should put their Shreds and Thrums together
to dress Ovid iv a Buffoon's Coat! why a silly Quaker, in plain Taunton Serge,
thinks a Scarlet Coat embroidered to be the Old Serpent!

He questions not but that there are more Fools in the World of his Opinion.
(The true Question is, Whether he is not single?)

Then he affirms, that, in his own simple naked shape, he comes nearer the
Original, than the best of 'em; when in Sapho to Phaon he begins at the sixth
Distich, Arva Phaon celebrat, etc. and goes back to the fifth, Uror ut
indomitis, etc. leaving out the eight Verses preceding; by which you may easily
guess that he had no other Authority for his Paraphrase (as he calls it) then
the Translation: It Is something strange, that neither Ovid himself, nor
Nineteen Judicious Translators, can give this Gentlemna the least hint or light
into Publius Ovidius Naso's meaning,

Quo te mori pedes? -- Now on a sudden he is started from Poetry, and is possessed
with the Spirit of sublunary Wealth, and wishes with all his heart that he were
as rich as a M. or a C. then would he quit all his title to Pernassus, and
engage never to write: oh, never to write any more, that is to say, he would be so
unconscionable as to have a good Estate for nothing:

God prosper long our Noble King -- Now, as he says, the late Translators have
already clipped the Original, and why should not he clip too: whereas my fear
is, he has clipped Ovid so close that it will hardly go:

When first King Henry, etc. I believe no Book has had severer usage than our
Paraphrasers; for, says he, it was hurried into the Press before it could make
any defense for it self: Now the meaning on it is, if it had met with impartial
Judges, it had never been Printed.

The Glories of our Birth and State, etc. But to conclude; Having wonderfully
showed his Reading in his Preface to his aforesaid Wits Paraphrased; in Scraps
of old Latin; and at last, to his eternal Glory, one bit of false Greek; he is
so far encouraged, that he gives any man a Challenge in Chaldee, Arabic, and
Syriack, though he confesses he knows nothing of the matter: But, to try him,
I Will leave him with this Syriack Hexameter,

Erytit ut aelutap snabucer bus enimget igaf. And to let you know that this
last Verse, though something rough, is not the effect of Indignation, I part
friendly; only with this Advice, That our Paraphraser would consider, and
follow any other Employment, more agreeable with his Genius (if he have any)
then that of Poetry.

THE TABLE.
SApho to Phaon, Page 1. Philis to Demophoon, p. 2 Hypermnestra to Linus. p. 16
Hermione to Orestes, p. 22 Canace to Macareus, p. 28 Ariadne to Theseus, p. 37
Leander to Hero, p. 45 Hero's Answer, p. 54 Laodamia to Protesilaus, p. 60
Oenone to Paris, p. 69 Penelope to Ulysses, p. 78 Phoedra to Hypolitus, p. 85
Hysiphile to Jason, p. 95 Paris to Helen, p. 105 Helen to Paris. p. 119
SAPHO to PHAON:
The ARGUMENT.
Sapho was a Lady very Eminent for Singing of Ballads, and upon an
extraordinary Pinch, could make One well enough for her Purpose: She held a
League with one Phaon, who was her Companion and Partner in the Chorus; but
Phaon deserted his Consort for the Preferment of a Rubber in the Ba'nnio. Sapho
took this so to heart, that she threatens to break her Neck out of a Garret
Window; which if effected, might prove her utter Destruction. Authors have not
agreed concerning the execution of her Design: But however she Writes him this
loving and terrifying Epistle.

WHen these my doggrel Rhimes you chance to see,
You hardly will believe they came from me,
Till you discover Sapho's Name at bottom,
You Will not imagine who it is that wrote 'em:
I, that have often Sung -- Young Phaon strove,
Now Sing this doleful Tune -- Farewell my Love;
I must not Sing new Jiggs -- the more's the Pity,
But must take up with some old Mournful Ditty.
You in the Bannio have a Place, I hear;
I in my Garret Sweat as much, with Fear:
You can rub out a Living well enough,
My Rent's unpaid, poor Sapho must rub off;
My Voice is cracked, and now I only houl,
And cannot hit a Treble for my Soul:
My Ballads lie neglected on a Shelf,
I cannot bear the Burden by my self;
Doll Price the Hawker offers very fair,
She Will Sing along with me for Quarter-share;
Sue Smith, the very same will undertake,
Their Voice is like the winding of a Jack.
Hang 'em, I long to bear a Part with you,
I love to Sing, and look upon you too;
Besides, you know when Songs grow out of fashion,
That I can make a Ballad on occasion.
I am not very Beautiful, -- God knows;
Yet you should value one that can Compose;
Despise me not, though I Am a little Dowdy,
I can do that -- same -- like a bigger Body:
Perhaps you will say, I Have but a tawny Skin;
What then? you know my Metal's good within.
What if my Shoulder's higher than my Head?
I Have heard you say, I Am Shape enough a-Bed:
The Mayor (God bless him) or the worthy Sheriffs
Do very often meet with homely Wives.
Our Master too; that little scrubbed Draper,
Has he not got a Lady that is a Strapper?
If you will have a Beauty, or have none,
Phaon must lie -- Phaon must lie alone:
I can remember, before my Voice was broke,
How much in praise of me you often spoke,
And when I shook a Trill, you shook your Ears,
And swore I Sung like, what do you call 'em -- Spheres;
You kissed me hard, and called me Charming witch,
I cannot do 't now, if you would kiss my Breech.
Then you not only liked my airy Voice,
But in my Fleshly part you did Rejoice;
And when you clasped me in your brawny clutches,
You swore I moved my Body like a Duchess;
You clapped my Buttocks, over and over again,
I cannot believe that I was crooked then.
Beware of him, you Sisters of the quill,
That Sing at Smithfield-Bars, or Saffron-Hill,
Who, for an honest Living, tear your Throat;
If Phaon drinks w'ye, you're not worth a groat:
And Ladies know, 'twill be a very hard thing
To sink from him the smallest Copper-farthing;
Avoid him all -- for he has used me so,
Would make your hearts ache, if you did but know*
My Hair's about my Ears, as I Am a Sinner,
He has not left me worth a Hood or Pinner.
Phaon by me unworthily has dealt,
Has got my Ring, -- though 'twas but Copper gilt;
Yet that which vexes me, -- The ungrateful Pimp
Has stole away my Petticoat with Gimp;
'Has all my Things, but had he left me any
I cannot go out alone, to get a Penny.
Phaon, I should have had less cause to grieve,
If like a Man of Sense, you would taken leave:
That you would be gone, had I been never so certain,
We might have drank a Pot or two at parting;
Or fried some Bacon with an Egg; or if
Into some Steaks, we'd cut a pound of Beif,
And laughed awhile, that had been something like;
But to steal off, was but a sneaking Trick.
My Landlady can tell, how I was troubled,
When I perceived my self so plainly bubbled:
I ran like mad out at the Alley-Gate
To overtake you, but it was too late:
When I considered I had lost my Coat,
If I had had a Knife, I Would cut my Throat;
Yet notwithstanding all the ills you did,
I Dream of you as soon as I Am in Bed;
You tickle me, and cry, Do like it Saff?
Oh wondrous well! and then methinks I laugh.
Sometimes we mingle Legs, and Arms, and Thighs;
Something between the sheets, methinks does rise*
But when I wake, and find my Dream's in vain.
I turn to sleep, only to Dream again.
When I am up, I walk about my Garret
And talk I know not what -- just like a Parrot*
I move about the Room from Bed to Chair,
And have no Satisfaction any where.
The last time I remember you lay here,
We both were dry in the Night, and went for Beer;
Into the Cellar by good luck we got,
What we did there, I Am sure you have n't forgot:
There stands, you know, an antiquated Tub,
Against which, since that, I often stand, and rub;
Only to see it, as much delight I take
As if the Vessel now were full of Sack;
But more to add unto my Discontent,
There Is been no Drink in the Cellar since you went.
There Is nothing but affords me Misery,
My Linnet in the Cage, I fear will dye:
The Bird is just like me in every thing;
Like me it pines, like me it cannot Sing.
Now Phaon, Pray take notice what I say,
If you don't bring the things you took away;
You know, my Garret is four Stories high;
From thence I Will leap, and in the Streets I Will die:
May be you will refuse to come -- Do -- do,
Y' had best let Sapho break her Neck for you.
Your afflicted Consort, Sapho.

PHILLIS to DEMOPHOON:
The ARGUMENT.
Demophoon was born in Holland, who took after his Father Theseus pretending to
the Art of Pyracy; he was cast upon Newcastle-Shore by adverse Winds (as the
Dutch Commentators say) but we are informed he came hither by his own choice.
No sooner arrived, but he heard that one Phillis, a single Woman, kept an Inn
in the Town; There he took up his Quarters: Phillis observed him as a lusty
Younker, and though his outward Habiliments were not very tempting; yet his
Person persuaded her so far, that she Married him, and entrusted him with all.
After some time, he told his Wife that his Occasions called him into Holland to
see his Father, who he said, was a Man of mighty Substance; He promised to
Return within a Month, but has not been heard of since. Therefore she writes
to him this Letter; but whether it came to his hands or no, has been a
question to this day.

YOur Absence does discover your Disdain,
You 've done enough to make a Stone complain;
You told me you would stay a Month, -- no more;
But by my Nature, I do find it is four.
I, who am Woman, and a Lover too,
Observe the changes of Moons, much more than you:
Indisposition in the Head, or Back,
Informs our Sex beyond an Almanac.
Sometimes I hoped -- but soon that Hope did sink;
Sometimes I thought -- I knew not what to think.
I made my -- self a Liar -- notwithstanding
There was no Ship -- I swore I saw you Landing.
Some Curses on your Father I bestow,
That old Dutch Rogue, think I, will not let him go:
But then again, that cannot likely seem,
The Maggot bites -- you're gone away from him;
What if you should be wrack't when hither bound?
No, -- you're too great a Villain to be drowned.
Whom shall I blame? whom but thy self -- fond Philly?
Who have lived now Thirty years, and art so silly.
When first you did within my Doors set footing,
I fell in Love -- forsooth -- A Pox of rutting;
The Devil sure will have that Doctor Hymen,
Who told me, that his Business was to try -- men:
He did believe -- you would prove an honest Man,
Marry 'm -- said he, with all the speed you can;
The Good old Man his Substance to increase,
Would match a Helhound to a Saint for Fees:
You swore such dreadful Oaths as never was heard,
By the Belgic Lion, and the Prince's Beard;
By Opdam's Ghost, and by the Dragon's Tail,
B' your Father's Head, and Mother's Farthingale;
By the great Cannons, and the Bloody Flag,
And by the Hogan Mogans of the Hague;
Your Execrations put m' in such a fright,
That all the Hair about me stood upright:
If on your Head these Curses fall you have named,
I must conclude, that certainly you are damned;
Hearing such bloody Oaths, you would not stay,
I made all haste I could to get y' away;
I furnished you with all I could afford,
Biscuit and Powdered Beef I put aboard;
A Flask of Brandy to your Girdle hung,
Better I Am sure, was never tipped over Tongue:
And when I patched your Sails with ancient Smock,
I thought they would have brought me home good luck;
But stead of that -- such was my fatal Hap,
I proved the Instrument of your Escape:
When you came hither in a low Condition,
Did I not stuff your Guts with good Provision:
The Suit y' had on -- was destitute of stitches,
I gave you then my Brother's Coat and Breeches;
But as for that -- Pox on it -- I Will never repent it,
What you had wanted, I had then presented;
If you had never paid -- here is none would stop ye;
But I must be your Wife too -- like a Puppy:
I wish to God that very day we met,
That into Gaol I had been thrown for Debt;
Then if I Would asked the Question -- you would have said
Thank you, forsooth, I Am not in have to Wed.
Well, well! Mine Hier! you have caught me now, it is true,
I hope I am the last you will undo.
The Dutch by Paint describe each others Lives,
And Draw their Neighbors Actions, and their Wives:
They Will Draw your Father as some petty Pyrate,
Doing small things, which People wont admire at.
He has been Rogue enough, but done no Wonders,
'Has robbed a Fisherman, of Eels and Flounders:
Perhaps he is Drawn making a Sailor drunk,
Diving in's Pockets -- to equip his Punk;
These are but Trifles to what you have done,
The Father's but a Coxcomb -- to the Son:
You shall be Drawn, first in your tattered Clothes,
Humbly complaining, full of Lies and Oaths;
And then you shall be Rigged from head to foot,
And from your Mouth, this Label shall come out;
Poor Phillis, of Newcastle upon Tyne --
'Twas I that ruined -- now you see, I Am fine.
What must I do? I have no Trading here,
And all my Neighbors do but laugh and fleer;
One cries, Where is your Husband Demo -- foe?
For your right Name, not one of 'em does know;
Another cries out -- Hey! for Amsterdam;
What! Was 'a Dutchman Phillis -- or a Sham?
Thus (as they say) they throw you in my Dish;
Would I could have you here but with a wish,
For these Rogues sake; 'twould be good sport to see
How well you would belabour two or three;
Then they would change Tone, and cry -- God bless ye both,
You are a handsome Couple, by my Troth:
No -- it is in vain to hope that you will return,
I must continue, as I am their scorn;
But yet I cannot forget the parting Day,
I thought you would have hugged your Breath away;
At last you spoke -- 'twas this confounded Lie,
Phil, in a Month this over again we'll try;
But I believe that Trick you 're trying now
With some tun-belly'd Rotterdam -- V'froe:
If Phillis should be talked on by the Dutch,
You Will say, you never heard of any such.
Phillis! Who Is she? Where does this Phillis dwell?
If you don't know, Demophoon, I Will tell;
This is Newcastle-Phillis, she that did
Once entertain you, Sir* at Board and Bed.
Some small Remembrance Phillis has deserved,
Had not this Phillis been, you might have starved;
She gave you Money, like a foolish Elf;
At last this Phillis gave away her -- Self.
I am that Phillis, if I had my due,
That should have Hanged my self for Loving you:
It will not be too late to do it still,
And if I Am in a humor, 'faith I will.
Then on my Grave let these few Lines be writ,
Which Phillis made her-self in Moody fit.
Here Phillis lies,
Had she been wise,
S' had Wed a Neighboring Scotchman;
And then she might,
Have lived in spite
Of any Drunken Dutchman.
HYPERMNESTRA to LINUS.
The ARGUMENT.
There was lately a Gang of English Highway-men, all of 'em having Wives or
Whores in London. Now the only means to detect 'em, was by bribing their Women.
In order to which, the Keeper of Newgate went to 'em all, promising them very
fairly, and with all, using Arguments how serviceable they would be to their
Country, in Discovering them; which they might easily do, when they came home
to Bed. The Women were easily persuaded, And one Night, ordered the Keeper to
be there at such a time, who seized them all; but Linus was praeadmonished by
his Wife Hypermnestra, so he escaped away in her Clothes; She bore the brunt in
his Apparel, and was Taken (supposed to be a Man) and Committed to Newgate, and
put into Irons. The rest of the Thieves were Hanged, her Trial was respited,
being not known who she was. Hypermnestra sends him this Letter.

TO thee poor Hypermnestra now complains,
Such is the Torture of my Iron Chains:
Shall it be called in Law, a Crime so heinous,
For being just to my own Husband Linus?
Let 'em torment me on, I do not care,
I Will not tell who I am, nor where you are;
If they should Hang me up in stead of you,
To the last Gasp, I swear I will be true:
I long to be revenged on those cursed Wives,
That did betray their Friends and Husbands Lives
Such Men were not in England to be found,
They Would bid the Devil stand, on any ground;
And all the Prizes that they got, they spent
Upon those Whores; yet they were not content.
Think on that Night we did together Sup,
When all the Company were Cock-a-hoop;
That fatal Night you all came from the Pad,
Your Booty very large, your hearts were glad:
Though in my sad Condition, it is not proper;
Yet, I can well remember all the Supper:
A stately Loin of Veal began the Feast,
I helped you half the Kidney at the least;
Four Turkey Poulets came next, you wished they would been
Four Turkey Merchants upon Mile-End-Green;
Roasted young Ducks, and Chickens fricazeed;
There was more Meat than we could eat indeed:
Wine in abundance -- I drank none but Sack,
But all you Men did ply it with Pontack:
To the top you filled a Glass, and drank to the best --
The Health as you began it, seemed a Jest;
I took't in Earnest to my self, and knew
That I should prove the best of Wives to you.
By Two a Clock you Men were almost Drunk,
Then each to Bed went to his Spouse, or Punk;
If they were all as kind as you to me,
Never was such a Night of Lechery:
At last you slept securely without warning
Of the strange Alterations in the Morning:
I knew betimes the Keepers would be there,
And all the Night I sweat, 'tween Sport and Fear;
At last I rose, and 'bout the Room I walked,
And thus at Random to my self I talked;
Have I not sworn a Thousand Oaths at lest,
That I Would betray my Husband with the rest?
What must I do? It Is true, I am his Wife,
What! Must I damn my Soul to save his Life?
'Hang all the Oaths in Christendom, said I;
He is my Husband, and he must not die.
With that I drew your Breeches on in have,
The Codpiece was so big, I was amazed;
I walked into your Coat, hanging on Peg,
I lost my head within your Perewig:
Having put on your Armor Cap-a-pee,
For by the weight, such was your Clothes to me;
You reached your Arm across -- had I been there,
You would have had the other bout, I fear;
I pulled the Sheet and Blanket from the Bed,
I plainly then perceived, 'twas as I said:
Rise Linus, Rise, said I, be very quick;
This is no time for any wanton Trick;
You're all betrayed -- The Constable's at Door,
You must not stay a minute of an hour.
I shuffled on my Clothes upon your back,
They did not fit -- I heard my Manteau crack:
No sooner were you gone, but in they bounc'd;
They seized on me, and swore I should be trounc'd:
And here they have me fast, with Bolt and Lock;
They know not yet that I have on a Smock.
Now you are safe, and I am here, dear Linus
Let Us seriously discourse the Affair between us:
If all the truth to them I should discover,
What can they say? 'twas acted like a Lover;
I may be sent to Bridewel, there they will bang me*
But all the Law in England cannot hang me.
While I lie here -- I am in little ease,
But when all is told, what shall I do for Fees?
If you don't use some means to get me freed,
Within few days, you will hear that I am Dead;
And then it is like they will bury me; if so,
Upon my Grave this Epitaph bestow:
Here lies a Wife, who rather than she'ld fail
To save her Husband's Life, died in a Jayl:
My Irons load me so, I Am fit to cry,
I would write more, but cannot; so God b'ye.
HERMIONE to ORESTES:
The ARGUMENT.
Hermione was the Daughter of Menelaus and Hellen. Her Mother ran away with a
young Fellow, one Paris, they went together beyond the Seas. Her Husband who
loved her well, persu'd 'em, and after many years, found his Wife and rescued
her from her Gallant, and without any resentment of the Injury, took her again.
During their absence, their Daughter (who had an Estate left her by her Uncle)
was committed to the Custody of her Grandfather, who Married her to a
School-fellow and Cozen German of hers, by Name Orestes. Her Father brought
home with him one Pyrrhus a wild young Fellow, to whom he Married her again,
taking no notice of the first match. She silly harmless Girl, wonders at the
design, and to her Husband Orestes writes this innocent Letter.

TO thee I write, my dear and only Cuz;
Nor will I be afraid to call the Spouse:
Though here is a Fellow come resolved to swear
I am his Wife, and he will make it appear:
He looks sometimes, as if he longed to eat me,
Sometimes he looks so gruff, as if he would beat me:
He says he is Achilles Son and Heir,
And bids me disobey him, if I dare;
He kisses me so hard, the strangest Man,
He gets a top of me do what I can;
With all my strength my Legs together join,
But with one Knee, he will open both of mine.
I call him Rogue and Rascal, filthy Sot,
And all the beastly Names I can get out:
I Am Married, Sirrah, therefore don't mistake it,
I have a Husband that will thwack your Jacket;
Yet that is all one, he cares not what is said;
But by the Hair he drags me into bed:
They talk of Girls, forced by unruly men,
They cannot be forced so much as I have been:
Yet all this while Orestes comes not near me,
I am afraid you do not love your Hermey;
You Will fight for Money, as you would fight for Life,
And will not you fight a little for your Wife?
One while my Father mist my Mother Hellen,
Lord! There was such a noise, and such a -- yelling,
He raised up all the People in our Lane,
And never was quiet, 'till she came again.
I would not have you make a noise for me,
But come and kill this fellow quietly;
Give him a good sound blow, and never fear man,
It is for me, your Wife and Cousin German.
You know my Guardian married me to you
When we were both so young, we could not do --
Now from beyond Sea comes my Father huffing,
And will needs marry me to this same Ruffian,
He vapors here about his Country Blood,
I guess your English Familie's as good:
He says, you have led a very wicked life,
And that you broke your Mothers heart with grief:
For talking so of you, I Would slit his Tongue,
And pull his Eyes out too, if I were strong;
It Is something strange, we are of a Generation
Where Ravishing has been a mighty fashion:
My Grandmother was ravished by one Swan,
A little Couzin by another man;
My Mother has been ravished once or twice,
And I am ravished now by her advice.
Must I with such a Rogue as this be matched?
A more unlucky Girl was never hatched.
My Mother left me here a little Wench,
Just big enough to clamber on a Bench;
She was stark mad for that young fellow -- Paris,
And after him she danced the new Fagaries:
My Father for his life could not forbear,
But ran a -- catter-wawling after her;
Now they are come home, but with such alt'red looks,
As if they were some strange Outlandish fo'kes.
My Father has a Beard below his Band,
I did not know my Mother, she is so tanned:
Toward my good, what did she ever do?
When she was gone, I learned to knit and sow;
I use my needle now as well's another,
But it is no God-a-mercy to my Mother:
When she came in, she knew not who I was;
This Girl, said she, is grown a strapping Lass,
She must be married, or she will grow too busy;
Look here, I have brought thee home a Husband Hussy*
With that he threw his Paws about my Neck;
Kill him, Orestes, or my heart will break:
I draw the Curtains when he is fast asleep,
And out of Bed, soon as it is day, I leap;
But I do toss and tumble all Night long,
As if by Bugs and Pismires I Would been stung:
Sometimes when I Am asleep, by chance there lies,
One of my hands squeezed close between his thighs*
I snatched away as soon as e're I wake,
With as much speed, as if I Would felt a Snake;
To the other side of the Bed, I jerk from him,
And sometimes lay one Breech upon the Beam;
Then after me, he by degrees will steal,
Pray Sir keep off, say I, I am not well;
He seems as if he did not understand,
And then he reaches out his hasty hand;
I speak as plainly to him as I can,
I tell him I Am not fitting for a Man.
Pshaw, Pshaw! says he, I know you do but jest,
'Pon the whole matter he is a filthy Beast:
For Gods sake Orey, Prithee now contrive,
Some way or other that he may not live:
For here I take my Oath upon a Book,
If you don't get me off by hook or crook,
That we may do -- as married People may,
I Will either kill my self, or run away.
CANACE to MACAREVS: Lately translated out of OVID: Now BURLESQU'D.
The ARGUMENT.
Macareus and Canace, Son and Daughter of Aeolus (a Trumpeter of the Guards)
being from children brought up together, at the last grew so intimately
acquainted, that they made bold to ly with one another. Canace proved with
Child by her Brother Macareus. She was delivered in the house; and the Nurse
contrived to convey the Child through the Hall when Aeolus was sounding his
Trumpet, accompanied with several sorts of Wind-musick; notwithstanding that
noise, the shrill Cry of the Infant was overheard by Aeolus, who sent it away
to be left in the Streets, and exposed to the mercy of the Parish; and to his
Daughter Canace he sent a Halter, with this Message, -- This you have deservd,
-- and you know how to use it. Canace hanged her self (as you may guess) before
she wrote this Letter.

BEfore these rude, distracted Lines you read,
Believe the unlucky Authress of 'em dead.
Ever to see me more's beyond all Hope,
One hand a Pen, the other Holds a Rope:
My blustering Father's troubled with a Whim,
And I must hang my self to humor him.
But when he sees my Carcass on the floor,
Surely he will cease to call me Bitch or Whore:
His puffing and his blowing will be vain,
He cannot puff me into life again:
His Mind is swelled much bigger then his Face,
I am (he says) his Family's Disgrace:
All his great Friends and Kindred are provoked;
What are his Friends to me when I am choked?
I with that we had stifled one another
That night I clung so closely to you, Brother:
Why did you love me more then did become ye?
It had been happy, if y'ad kicked me from ye:
When first, with pleasure, I lay under you,
Would y'ad been lighter by a Stone or two.
At first I wondered what should be the matter,
I looked like Death, and was as weak as Water:
For several days I loathed the sight of Meat,
And every Night I chewed the upper Sheet:
I Would such Obstructions, I was almost moap'd,
My Breath came short, my -- were stopped.
I called old Nurse, and told her how it was;
She, an experienced Baw'd, soon groap'd the Cause:
Quoth she, for this Disease, take what you can,
You Will never be well, till you have taken Man:
When I was young, I thought I was bewitched,
I scrach't my Belly, for it always itch'd.
The Truth I will no longer hide, said I,
I must enjoy my Brother, or I die:
She tickled me, and told me 'twas no Sin;
Nearer of Blood, said she, the deeper in:
Both you and I approved what Nurse had said,
So, without more a-do, we went to Bed:
You in my belly rummag'd all about,
To find this wonderful distemper out:
Too soon 'twould be discovered, was my Fear,
I could have let you searched for ever there:
But Nurse can tell how I did sigh and sob
When we perceived that you had done the Jobb.
I made the old Bedlam foot it up and down
To every Quack and Mountebank in Town,
For Dendelion, and Camelions-thighs,
Spirit of Saffron mixed with Vulters-eys:
I would have given all I had been worth,
TO have killed the Child, before it had come forth:
But the strong Rogue lay fencing in my Womb,
And did those poisonous Potions overcome:
Oh! when I saw the ninth Moon in the Wane,
Then I was in the Full -- of grief and Pain;
Then, then my Throws came on me thick and thick;
I groaned, but for my Life I durst not schreik
Until my Tortures came to such a growth
That Nurse with both her Hands did stop my Mouth:
I should have cried so loud, that every Neighbor
Would have discovered I had been in Labor:
No Woman yet that ever wore a Navel,
Endured so hard and so severe a Travel.
I cursed your Sex, and wished Rot a might come
On all the Stallions throughout Christendom.
At last you came; I knew you by your tread;
I peeped at you, though I was almost dead:
TO ward me you seemed to have some kind Remorse
But looked, as if you would have eaten Nurse.
You held my Back-parts, you could do no more;
Would you had never felt the Parts before.
Sister, said you, you shall not die this bout,
We Are both unlucky, but, we'll rub it out.
To see what words from those we love can do,
(Surely the Child Within me heard you too,)
For straight he sprang forth from me, and did seem
To make his passage in a flowing Stream:
'Twas hard enough: but now is a harder Case,
To hide the Business from my Father's face;
We did consult how to devise a way
Thorough the Hall our Bastard to conveigh.
My Father in Wind-Musick still delighted,
And all the Gang that night he had envited:
Fellows that play on Bag-pipes, and the Fife;
The old man always loved a noisefull Life:
They all did sound together after Supper,
And then to carry'm off, we thought, was proper*
Nurse, in her Apron, took the little Brat,
Swathed up in Linen, Rushes over that;
Quite through the Hall she went her usual pace,
And, unconcerned her self, humm'd Chevy-Chase*
Just to the doors' had safely carried him,
When the unlucky Wretch began to screme:
His little Organ made a shriller noise
Then all the Fluits, Recorders, or Ho-boies:
The old man pricked his ears up, like a Hare,
And after Nurse ran nimbly, as the Air:
Whither so fast, said he, old Mother Trundle?
Pray, let us see, What have you in your Bundle:
Quoth Nurse, -- It Is Mistress Canny's dirty Smock
Men into Women's secrets should not look.
He puffed away the Rushes from her Lap.
And there appeared the little sprauling Ape:
'Zounds, says my Father, What is here? A Kid!
My Daughter Canny's finely brought to bed!
He raised so great a Tempest in the House,
I thought that Hell it self was broken loose;
He raged so loud, the Bed shook under me;
Methought I was in some great Storm at Sea:
He rushed into the Room, and did discover
The bloody Sypmtoms of a Childbed Lover:
Our Sexes Stains by him were here discry'd
Which Women from their own dear Husbands hide:
With his own hands he did design to wound me,
But that he saw something like Murder round me:
The Bastard in the Sreets he did expose,
And what will be his destiny, God knows:
The little Knave, with Tears, did seem to answer,
As who should say, I beg your Pardon Grandsir.
Out went old Trump; I by his Looks could find
There was some mischief hatching in his mind,
In came a Fellow of the Bag-Pipe Gang
Whose very Whiskers seemed to say, Go hang;
Before his words came out his tongue did falter;
At last he spoke, Canny, look here is a Halter:
Your Father says, It Is this you do deserve;
If you will not use it, you may live and starve.
His most obedient Daughter he shall think me;
If I don't hang my self, the Devil-sink-me.
Since Whoring does produce such strange effects
Would I Would been born a Monster without Sex:
Let my young Sisters all be warned by me,
And curb betimes Incestuous Lechery.
This I request of you, Dear Brother Mac.
That of our wretched Child some care you would take;
If you can find him out, be not unwilling,
Toward his maintenance, to drop a shilling.
Let these my last Words be observed by you,
As I obey my Father's: -- so, -- Adieu.
ARIADNE to THESEUS, Lately translated out of OVID: Now BURLESQU'D.
The ARGUMENT.
Theseus, an English Gentleman, and one who for his diversion admired
Traveling, especially on Foot, having safely arrived at Calais, walked on
easily from thence to Paris, where he had not long been, but he received an
unmannerly Justle from a Cavalier of France: Theseus, whose great Soul could
not brook the least Affront, resented this so highly, that he challenged him,
fought him, and, after a long and skilful Dispute between 'em, fairly killed
him: Thesus was imprisoned in the Bastile; During his Restraint he held a
League with Ariadne, the Keeper's daughter: And, though the Prison was as
difficult as a Labyrinth, (such is the power of Love,) she soon contrived a way
for his Escape by night: and he, accompanied with Mistress Ariadne, footed it
back to Calais; where, both lodging together at the Red-Hart, he very unkindly
took the advantage of her Snoaring, and stole from her early in the morning;
and went off with the Pacquet-boat to Dover; from whence he gently walked to
London. Ariadne sends him These.

NO savage Bear, no Lion, Wolf, or Tiger,
Would ever use his Mistress with such Rigor;
Do You think you don't deserve ten thousand Curses,
For leaving me in Pawn at Monseur Forces?
I wonder what the Tavern-people think!
For here I sit, and dare not call for Drink
While by your side I innocently lay,
You might have taken leave, a civil way.
I was half wakened from a pleasant Sleep
By the melancholy sound of Chimney-sweep:
I stretched my Leg, to find out my Bedfellow,
But I could groap out nothing but the Pillow:
Thinking to have hugged you in my Arms so close
One of the Bed-staffs almost broke my Nose:
These. These. said I, I hope you are not gone;
I might as well have called the Man in the Moon:
I rent my Head-cloaths off, mortdieu! mortdieu!
What will become of me? What shall I do?
I opened the Casement as the Morning dawned;
And I could plainly see that I was pawned,
With calling you I tore my Throat to pieces,
The Echo jeered me with the name of Theseus:
To the top of all the house I ran undrest;
The people thought that I had been possessed:
At last, I spied you in the Pacquet-boat;
I knew it was you or so at least I thought:
Had you been walking, I had known your Stride,
And guessed your Strutt from all Mankind's beside:
Both Seas and Winds must needs be kind to thee
Thou art so like 'em in Inconstancy.
I thump my Breast, I rage, I storm and fume;
The House desires I would discharge my Room:
Quoth one of the Servants, Mistress Ariadne's
Past all recovery, overwhelm d with Madness:
Another cries, Mam'sell Com' portez vou'?
Fetch me my These. said I, What Is that to you.
When in the Boat I could no longer see you.
Ten thousand De'ills of Hell, said I, go we' you.
They think I Am drunk, I Am sure it is not with Wine;
The Score's too large; and you have left no Coin.
Into a Corner I am sometimes dogged,
And there I cry as if I had been flogg'd:
Sometimes I roll my Self upon the Bed,
And act those postures over that once we did:
To my own self with pleasure I repeat,
Here lay my Head, and there I put my Feet*
I often call to mind our amorous Work;
Then here, methinks I have you with a Jerk.
Sometimes they talk, that Ships are safe at home:
I listen then, to hear if you are come.
Were I a Man, into the Seas I Would douse,
And after you I Would swim, and bilk the house:
If I should offer to run home again,
My Fathered keep me in an Iron-chain;
I have betrayed the old Man's Trust for you;
I may go whistle for a Portion now:
When, for your sake, I stole the Prison Keys,
I little thought to see such days as these:
Oh! when your LOVE was mounted to a pitch,
You hugged me as the Devil hugged the Witch;
You swore, with Oaths most desperate and bloody,
The Queen of France to me was but a Dowdy.
I have more Whymses then a dancing Bear,
Sometimes I dream the Constable is here:
And though the Waiters very often wheedle,
Yet I suspect that they will bring the Beadle.
Again, I fear they will spirit me away,
And send me Slave into Virginia:
I was not bred a Drudge from the beginning,
Except it were to wash my Father's Linen.
Either to Sea or Land I durst not look,
To Heaven I cannot; you have stole my Prayer Book:
Your Valor made my Fortune so untoward,
I would to God that you had been a Coward:
Distressed Ariadne now complains,
Because such sprightly blood runs in her Veins:
They say we French are very Hot, it is true;
But yet our Sparks are Frost and Snow to you:
Cursed be the time when you first learnt to fence,
(Though that does never alter Men of sense.)
I fancy in what posture you were found,
One Foot heaved up, the other on the Ground:
As much of Warlike Grace you did discover
As any Roman Statue in the Loure.
Methinks I hear you speak to the Cavilier,
Sa! Sa! Mounseur, I have you here and there:
But now your valiant Acts are lost for ever,
By sneaking off, like a French-Ribbon-Weaver.
Had I not drank that Brandy over night,
I could have waked, and so have stopped your Flight.
Cursed be the Wind which was so kind to you;
Cursed be the Boat, and cursed be all its Crew;
Cursed may I be for trusting what you said;
Cursed may all Lovers be that Snore in Bed.
Poor Ariadne, thou art finely served,
Thy too much Love has brought thee to be starved:
The Servants pity me, and say't's a hard-case,
I Have nothing here to pay 'em with but Carcass:
This Carcass too has wept out all its Juice,
It Is grown so dry, it is fit for no Man's use.
Think, when you're rev'ling in your Cups at London,
That your Poor Ariadne here, is undone.
And when you come where People do resort,
To hear your Travels told were pretty sport*
With what tough Bit of Flesh you did engage;
You thought you should be killing him an Age:
Do not forget me when you tell your Tale,
Tell'em how I releas'dy' out of Goal;
And how with you I stole on foot through Allys*
And, pray forget not, that I am pawned at Callais*
And, when this Tale to your Companion's told,
Imagine Ariadne stiff and cold:
When dead, they will bury me in some back Garden,
For I cannot give the Parish-Clerk a farthing.
And it is for you I all these Sorrows prove;
So, Mr. Theseus, thank you for your Love.
LEANDER to HERO:
The ARGUMENT.
Leander an Usher of a School, and chief Poet of Richmond, having contracted a
more then ordinary Acquaintance with Mistress Hero, of Twitnam, a Governess or
Tutress to young Ladies; such a reverential esteem had they procured to
themselves at each place, that they could not conveniently meet without great
scandal; therefore the Usher frequently swam over to his Mistress by night, but
at this time the Thames was so rough, that he was constrained to convey his
mind to Hero by a Waterman in these Poetical Lines, wherein Love and Learning
strive to outvie each other.

YOur faithful Lover sends this Bille' dou'x.
Stuffed full of Love, but not a word of news.
Believe not, I think much of any Labor,
Could I have come my self, I Would never sent Paper;
The Thames is rough, the Winds so hard do blow,
I scarcely got a Waterman to go.
And if I would have given a thousand pound,
This was the only Fellow to be found.
I stood upon the Shore, while he went off,
The Boat once gone, I thought 'twas well enough
I must be careful whom I send by Water,
Our Family begins to smoke the matter:
Just as the Letter went, I had a fancy
Came in my head, I could have made a Stanza:
Go Paper, go, and kiss a whiter hand,
That often has put Leander to a stand.
Methinks, the Nymph perfumes it with her Breath,
And bites the wax off with her Ivory Teeth:
Her Shepherd would be glad to be so bit,
Until the aforesaid Teeth together met.
But then think I, these whimseys she will condemn.
The hand that writes, should rather make me swim;
Bold strokes in Poetry she hardly blames,
But such bold strokes should be upon the Thames*
Methinks it is an Age since I swam over,
I long until each Arm, does prove an Oar.
Fully resolved I came to the water side,
And thought the space between us but a stride.
I saw your house, and wished that I could clamber
To your watch -- light in the supremest Chamber:
I pulled off Coat and doublet twice or thrice,
But then I thought, -- be merry and be wise.
Thus I in Verse spoke to the mighty Boreas,
Thou blustering youth -- pray tell me why so furious;
Though amongst Winds thou art a great Commander,
Blow gently for the sake of poor Leander.
I cross no Sea (Here Thames is called the Sea,
Because it does with lofty Verse agree.)
I cross no Sea to Asia or to Afrique,
Upon the Account of Sublunary Traffic:
Ingots of Gold! alas! I do not seek 'em,
Give me my Heroes Love, them omnia mecum.
Boreas himself does sometimes leave off roaring
And goes a -- woing, I Will not say a -- whoring.
For several uses you, your breath may spare,
Do not so fiercely move our Richmond Air.
But all was vain, Boreas was still unkind,
I did repeat my Verses to the wind.
Had I but wings, I Would soar above the People
And place my self just now on Twitnam Steeple.
I well remember that first night I swam,
That happy night I first to Twitnam came;
I put off all my clothes, with them my fears,
And dous'd into the Thames over head and ears.
The Moon took -- care Leander should not sink,
And stole before me like a lighted Link:
I thanked her for her Love, and thus did greet her,
As far as my poor Talent went -- in meeter.
Ah gentle Moon, because you are kind to me,
I wish Endymion may be so to thee:
And as with him thou hold'st a private League
With thy broad Eye, so wink at my Intrigue.
Under correction to your Heavenly sense,
Your case and mine have little difference.
A Goddess you love one of human Birth,
My Mistress is a Goddess upon Earth:
Such sort of Beauty as she wears, is given
Only to such as do belong to Heaven.
And if you are not of the self same mind,
Begging your Pardon, Cynthia, you're blind.
With such like words I got near Twitnam sands,
And nothing all the way saw I but Swans.
At last I spied your Candle on the top,
Aye! now all is well, thought I, there is some hope.
But when you put your head out from the Cazement,
Then was Leander struck into amazement;
For two Lights more did from the Window seem,
Which made the artificial one look dim.
Your Eyes the Moon, and Candle made just four
I, like some Prince was lighted to the shore.
But you're to blame, when you perceived me come,
Nurse says, she could not keep you in the room,
But in your shift you would be running down;
You Will get some violent cold, and then you're gone
But to say truth, thou art a loving Tit,
Thou hug'st me in thy arms all dripping wet:
I can but think how strangely I did look,
When you put over my head a Holland Smock;
And hand in hand thus walking from the Thames
We seemed the Ghosts of two distressed Dames.
But when we came to Bed, we understood,
We were no Ghost, but real Flesh and Blood:
We did repeat more pleasures in one hour,
Than some dull Lovers do in forty score;
Because we knew our time was very short,
We could not tell the number of our sport.
Aurora does from Tithon's Bed escape,
Tithon perhaps will take the other nap,
See her Postillian Lucifer before,
And now the Business of the Night is ore;
The day appears, Leander must be jogging,
And home again among the Boys a flogging.
My well beloved Amo I forsake,
And to dull Doceo now I must go back.
A Substantive I Will always be to thee,
My pretty Verb Deponent thou shall be.
If we were in conjunction day and night,
Leander would not prove a heteroclite:
In Grammar we make Noun to join with Noun,
Why should not Twitnam join with Richmond Town:
'Twou'd make one mad to think a foolish River,
Or any surly Winds should Lovers sever:
But hold Leander, let no Seas nor Wind
Disturb the quiet Freehold of thy Mind.
When first I crossed -- my thought the Fish did gaze,
The Salmon seemed to peep upon my Face;
I could hear Boatmen call from Western Barge,
What Fish is that, my thinks it is very large.
They Would call me Porpus, and they would jeer and flout me;
But now by the name of Brother they salute me:
How do you, says one; Good morrow, the other cries;
I civilly return them, Bona dies.
The Fisherman that bobs all night for Ecl,
Now says, Your Servant, Sir, I wish you well:
God send you safe on the other side the Water,
I say unto him, Salvus sis piscator.
I hope those Haleyon Nights will soon return;
For want of 'em, does poor Leander mourn.
But if such storms in Summer time does hinder,
How shall I e're get to thee in the Winter?
If I do venture in, and should be drowned,
I hope by thee my Body will be found.
Thou Wilt roll it up in Holland or in Bucram,
Then may I truly say -- mors mihi Lucrum.
But let not this possess you I am dead,
A foolish whimsey came into my head,
We shall have many pleasant Nights between us,
I Will come and hugg my Hero ore-tenus.
Pray put these Lines up safe, for fear you lose 'em,
In that warm place where I would be, your Bosom;
And in a little time, dispute it not,
I Will come and justify what I have wrote:
For when the Weather changes I Will not fail ye,
And until then thou -- dulce decus Vale.
HERO's Answer.
LEander, thank you kindly for your Letter,
Though if y'ad come your self it had been better;
I cannot rest, I know not what is the matter,
I Am all afire, to have you cross the Water.
We Women when we have any thing to do,
Are ten times more desirous often than you;
Having dismissed your little Boys from School,
You can walk out in the Evening when it is cool;
You can divert your self a hundred ways,
I only stand upon the shore and gaze:
You have a Green in which you bowl or bett,
And now and then three or four shillings get;
Or to the Tavern, when you please, you go
And drink a Bottle with a Friend or so;
While I sit mop'd -- like a neglected Cat,
And now and then with old dry Nurse I chat:
What Is your opinion, Nurse, and tell me truly,
Do You think the Wind to Night will be unruly?
What will Leander come? or keep away?
'Faith I don't know, says she, it is like he may;
Such drousie answers I do seldom miss,
Do You think I have not a blessed time of this?
Up to my Chamber, when it is Night, I get,
And in the Window is my Candle set;
Perhaps I read a Play, or some Romances,
I soon grow weary of such idle Fancies:
Then I peruse your Letter over again,
And more and more admire your learned strain;
Then I ask Nurses Judgment in the case,
But she old Soul,'s as dull as e're she was;
I make her stand upright (there I mistake,
She cannot stand so -- for she has a huckle back)
I mean, I set her somewhere in the Room,
And she is to act as if you just were come;
My only Joy (say I) you are welcome hither,
How did thou swim to me this stormy weather?
Speak, let me hear some Music from thy mouth,
Nurse nods, and says -- I Am pretty well forsooth:
Thus I beguile the time till Morning -- peep,
Then I go into Bed and fall asleep.
And there I do enjoy you in my dreams,
Spite of the Devil or the rougher Thames.
Methought I saw you come stark naked in,
Wet were your Locks, and dropping was your Skin;
I with an Apron rubbed you up and down,
And dried you from the toe unto the crown;
Then presently we hugged with such a force,
I shook the Bed, and waked, and startled Nurse;
And finding it to be a Dream -- no more,
I grew as melancholy as before.
If in a dream such tickling Joys appear,
Much pleasanter 'twou'd be, if you were here;
I don't know what to think: you used to say,
Ten thousand Devils should not stop your way:
Why should the danger at this time be more?
The Wind blows hard, and so it did before;
But now I see which way it is like to drive,
A Richmond Wench as sure as I Am alive;
Au! say ye so? why then it is for her
This Storm is raised, Leander cannot stir.
But hanged that cannot be, I Am turned a fool,
Leander was and is an honest Soul:
As soon as I had said these words of you,
The Candle burned not as it used to do;
Says Nurse, there is a Stranger in the Light,
Master Leander will be here to Night;
With that she took the Brandy bottle up,
And pulled from thence a very hearty sup;
Says she -- if what I say should prove untrue,
I wish this blessed draught may never go through;
Therefore let us see you here to Night dear Nandy,
Or else poor Nurse must never more drink Brandy.
Perhaps you fancy you take double pains,
And make too great a trespass on your Reins,
To swim so far as you have used to do,
And after that to please a Mistress too;
Half of one half I Would ease you if I could,
And meet you in the middle of the flood;
But from the latter service never flinch,
I should be loath to bate you half an inch;
But after all excusing what I'ave said,
Pray do not cross the River hand over head;
I dreamed last night, I hope it is no ill Luck,
A Spaniel Dog was hunting of a Duck,
There were some reeds which under water grew,
And more, perhaps, than the poor Spaniel knew.
He was entangled there, and there was found,
I came to help him, but the Curr was drowned.
I do not tell this Dream to make you tardy,
But as a Caution not to be foolhardy.
The Wind will soon be laid, the Thames be clear,
Then you may cross it, without wit or fear;
Make much of This, for if you fail me, then
By all the Gods I Will never write again.
LAODAMIA to PROTESILAUS, Lately Translated out of OVID: Now BURLESQU'D.
The ARGUMENT.
In the War between England and Holland, one Protesilaus, an English Lieutenant
of a Fifth Rate Frigate, being Wind-bound upon the Downs; his Wife Laodamia,
hearing he was not gone off, sent him this Letter; and, like a fond Wife, gives
him strict Caution to avoid Fighting.

A Health to your Prosperity goes round,
And to your safe Return before you're drowned:
My Neighbor Iackson's Wife began it to me;
If I don't wish it, may it never go through me:
We drink, and fancy to our selves in vain,
That the good Winds will blow you back again.
I hate the Noise of a tumultuous Sea,
Give me a Tempest raised by you and me;
A Storm in which all Parts about us shake,
When we can hear the Bed beneath us crack.
At Gravesend, when we took our last Adieu,
The Parting Kiss, remember, I gave you:
I, like a shitten Girl, began to cry;
I had no mind, methoughts, to say, God b'w'y:
I heard Tarpaulins roar out, Hoise up Sail;
On Board, on Board; here comes a merry Gale:
In such brisk Gales poor Women don't delight,
They blow away the Pleasures of the night:
As you went off, I could not bear the Loss,
A Qualm came over my Stomach quite-a-cross:
Old Mother Crump, a very subtle Croan,
Saw by my Looks that I was almost gone:
A Pint of Brandy presently she brought,
And made me drink a very hearty draught;
She showed her Love, but what great good has't done?
How can I live with comfort now you're gone?
I wake, and find no Husband by my side;
I often think 'twere better I had died:
Till you return, I Will never be dressed again;
I have not combed my Head the Lord knows when:
A Glass of Wine sometimes my heart does cherish;
Were not for that, I fancy I should perish:
Because I go so taudry, like a Punk,
Some, that don't know me, think that I am drunk:
My Neighbors often tell me, Mistress Protes --,
You go so strangely, all the Street takes notice!
Says one, You do your Husband's Friends disgrace;
For shame! Put on a Petticoat with Lace:
Why should they think that I would wear a lac'd-coat?
When my poor Husband's in a Seaman's wastecoat?
Should I adorn my Head with Curles and Towers?
When a poor Skipper's Cap does cover yours.
These Plaguey Dutch; that they should break the Peace,
And not submit to us in English Seas:
Though, for my own particular, I swear,
If I could once again but have you here,
Let Dutch have Liberty to fish and foul,
I would not care a Farthing, By my Soul.
Methinks I see you now, and, by your looks,
You are engaging with a Butter box:
Methinks just now a Bullet did escape,
And hit my Neck, just in the very Nape.
But oh! I swoon, when I do think of Trump!
His Ship's now giving yours a bloody Thump!
Bless us, said I, Now, you are dispatched!
That Dog has been at Sea before you were hatched:
For Heaven's sake avoid him if you can,
He Is certainly the Devil of a Man!
If any Ship does make up toward you,
You may be sure Van-Trump's among the Crew:
There Is not a Shot does to your Vessel come,
But I receive the Pain on it here at home.
What am I better if you beat the Dutch,
And you come hopping hither on a Crutch?
How finely among the Neighborhood 'twould show*
To see you strut upon a timber Toe?
To rout the Foe is some great Adm'ral's Office,
In these Engagements you are but a Novice;
Your single Valor's nothing on the Sea,
Your Combat should be hand to hand with me.
Would I were in the Fleet with Trump or Ruyter,
To them I would become an humble Suitor,
And point out to them where your Squadron lay*
Directing them to shoot another way:
I Would speak t'em thus; Great Souls of Amsterdam,
Pray hear a silly Woman, as I am;
And let your Cannon my poor Husband shun,
He knows not to discharge a little Gun:
If you were Women, as you're Warlike Men,
He would perform great Actions wi' you then:
Your Fighting, Skirmishing, and Breaking Bones,
Are only fit for Men that want their Stones.
Just as you were commanded to your Ship,
Remember, at the Stairs, your Foot did slip;
Think on that Slip, and, when the Dutch are shooting,
Duck down your Head, as if you wanted footing;
I wish your Captain some great Coward were.
And durst not bring the Vessel up for fear:
I wish to God he would not fail too fast;
You Will come too soon, although you come the last.
When you return, they will ask how Matters stand*
I hope you will know no more than we at Land.
All the day long I smell no scent but Powder,
Each minute Guns go louder off and louder.
Most married Women long till it be night,
But, for my part, I hate the thoughts of it;
Unless, by chance, I sleep, and dream of you:
Fancy's the kinder Husband then of the two:
And when I wake, and feel the Linen wet,
I find, I Have wept for joy upon the Sheet:
This to Enjoyment gives but half content;
When shall we meet together by consent?
Oh, how I long to hear you tell in Bed
Some strange Romantic Tale of what you did!
But when you find you cannot prolong the Jest,
And, being at Stand, -- kiss out the rest.
Against both Wind and Tide why will you go?
You Would scarce come home if Wind and Tide said No*
You fight, methinks, about so mean a thing,
Which should have Privilege of catching Ling:
Old-Ling I hate worse than a Common Whore;
(Would you loved Fighting with the Dutch no more:)
I ate it once, and that against my will,
And sometimes fancy that I smell no't still.
But though thou art exposed to Seas and Wind,
It is some Ease unto my troubled Mind
To see thy comely Picture in the Hall,
Drawn to the Life with Charcoal on the Wall:
I prattle to it as if thou were here;
It Is late; Pr'ythee let us go to Bed, my Dear:
Methinks thou say, I Will humor thee for once;
Thou Wilt work me at the last to Skin and Bones:
I kiss the Wall, and do my Cheeks besmear,
And open my Mouth, as if your Tongue was there.
By all the pleasant Postures of Delight,
By all the Twines and Circles of the Night,
By the First minute of our Nuptial Joys,
When you put fairly for a Brace of Boys,
I do conjure you, have a special care,
And let not faucy Danger come too near;
For when I hear that thou art knocked of the head,
I Will hold you ten to one that I am dead.
OENONE to PARIS.
The ARGUMENT.
Paris was the Son of Priam a Wealthy Old Citizen and Alderman of London. When
Hecuba his Mother was big with Child of him, she dreamed a foolish conceited
Dream, which occasioned Old Priam to consult Lilly, who told him, That Paris in
process of time would occasion his house to be burnt down. Therefore the
credulous Alderman sends him into the Country far North to be disposed of as a
By-blow. When be grew fit for Service, he was entertained in a Gentleman's
House, where he contracted a Bosom-acquaintance with Oenone a Young Wench and
fellow Servant with him in the same house. His Father began to come to himself,
and hearing where he was, sent for him, and owned him as his Son; but before
that, he had disengaged himself from Service, and ran away with one Hellen, who
was Wife to Menelaus. Oenone being informed of All these proceedings, writes to
him this Letter.

AFter my hearty Love to you remembered,
Hoping you are not in Body distempered
More than my self at the writing hereof;
If it be so, we are both well enough:
Your Usage has been such to poor Oenone,
That none but such a fool as I would own'e'e;
I hear you're run away with Menels Wife,
I pity her, she will lead a blessed Life;
What mighty mischief have I done, I wonder;
You Will never have a younger, nor a sounder.
If by my means y' had met with some disaster,
Had I procured you Anger from your Master;
If I had given you that they call a Clap,
You Would had some small Excuse for your Escape:
But now you have had your ends, away to sneak,
Come! come! these things would make a body speak.
You were not then so Uppish -- when you said,
A Duchess was a T -- to a Servant Maid;
You were a Groom your self, you know it is truth,
Not all your Greatness not -- can stop my mouth;
If you were able to keep house you swore
You Would marry me for all I was your Whore.
We were together on a Summers day,
Both in the Stable, on a Truss of Hay;
You cannot forget some pretty pastimes there,
No body saw us but the Chestnut Mare:
You said such glorious things, the very Beast
Pricked up her Ears, and thought you were in Jest:
But I did prove the verrier Beast oth' two,
For like an Ass I thought that all was true;
Soon after -- you were taken from the Stable,
To wait upon my Master at his Table;
To undertake it you seemed very loath,
Did I not teach you then to lay a Cloth?
There Is no man but must have his first beginning,
Who learnt you then to fold your Table Linen?
Did you not often when the Cloth was spread,
Just in the middle put your Salt and Bread?
You have been threatened often to lose your place,
Because you knew not how to fill a Glass;
You poured in Wine up to the very top,
I told you you should fill but to the knob.
Did I not show you how to broach your Drink,
And tilt the Vessel when it began to sink?
I was your dearest Honey -- all that while
There was not such a Girl in Forty mile:
You carved my name upon the Trencher-Plates,
And on the Elmes before the outward Gates;
And as we see in time those Elmes increase,
So will my name grow greater with the Trees;
And any one that stands but at the door,
May see Oenone (your obedient Whore).
You never have been well, since those three Maids,
Rather those impudent and bold-fac'd Jades
Differed among them -- selves, which it should be,
That had the cleanliest shape of all the Three.
To you they came when you were in the Close,
The Little Field that was behind the House,
Stark naked did they come from top to toe,
Paris, say they, we will be Judged by you.
Heavens preserve your eyesight -- how you gazed,
Nor could you speak a word, you were so 'maz'd;
At last you Judged with many a hum! and haw!
Venus the finest Wench that e're you saw.
This was a Whitson Frolique, as they said,
A pretty prank to show you all they had.
To see how naked Women are bewitching,
Since that y' have minded nothing else but bitching.
Soon after that your project was of stealing
That over-ridden Whore that Mistress Hellen:
I must be gone a little while, you said,
(Then was this Business brooding in your head.)
You kissed me hard as if I could not feel,
And swore that you would be as true as steel:
Said you -- Doubt nothing, for the case is plain,
I Am proved the Son of an Old Alderman,
And sent for home, my Father's very ill,
I must be by, at making of his Will;
Oh that we could but bury the old Cuff,
Then marry you, all would be well enough.
You may've a richer Wife, but not a better,
For I am no such despicable Creature;
Not to disparage your good Lady Mother,
I can behave my self as well's another.
No Wife like me was there in Christendom,
When you were honest Pall -- Squire Sheepheard's Groom.
My Father's but a plain Old Man, it is true,
But's Daughter h'as been bred as high as you.
He is an honest Man, what ever I am,
And may be saved as soon as Master Priam.
Were I your Wife, my carriage should not shame
Your Mother Hec. -- though she is a stately Dame.
What though these hands have used a Drippingpan,
Yet on occasion they can furle a Fan.
Now on a little Folding Bed I lie,
(Though in that Bed sometimes lay you and I)
Yet I know how perhaps to hold my head,
If I were carried to a Damasque Bed.
If you had married me y' had met with quiet,
What can y' expect from her but noise and riot?
You now have caught a most notorious Strumpet;
Besides it is known, as if y'ad blown a Trumpet;
Where e're you come you will meet with frumps and Jeers,
Her Husband too, will be about your Ears.
In little time from you she will be budging.
She Will lie with any body for a Lodging.
When first of all we closely were acquainted,
(Which now it is too late, I have repented)
Cassandra was a Gipsey in the Town,
Who went a Fortune-telling up and down;
I gave her broken meat, which we could spare,
She Would tell me all my Fortune to a hair:
You love (says she) a Man not tall nor squat,
But a good hansome Fellow, (mark ye that?)
This Youth and you it is likely may do well,
If he escape but one -- they call her Nell.
But if they two should chance to lie together,
He Will break the heart of you, and of his Father.
Who this Nell was, I could not choose but wonder;
But now I know who it is -- a Pox confound her!
I Will make Cassandra 'Liar though, in part;
You Have vexed me, but you never shall break my heart.
This very Whore I speak on, ran-away
With such another Fellow to other day,
And when her clothes were gone, and money lavished,
She came and told her Husband she was ravished.
I Am sure I Am true, for here since you were gone,
Has been some loving Boobyes of the Town,
One of the Fellows surely is a Satyr,
He follows me, and swears he will watch my water:
We have a Servant come -- pretends to Physic,
He has a Cure for any one that-is sick;
He cures the Toothache; if your Finger's cut,
A Plaster to it presently he will put;
Freckles in the face he cures, and takes off Pimples,
'Hath taught me too the use of Herbs and Simples.
But I must beg my fellow-Servant's pardon,
Against Love there is no Herb nor Flower in the Garden:
For this Disease I must rely upon ye,
Come and live here again, you will cure Oenone.
PENELOPE to ULYSSES, Lately translated out of OVID: Now BURLESQU'D
The ARGUMENT.
There happening a Rebellion in Scotland, in that Army which went under the
Command of the Duke; Ulysses went Voluntier. The Rebels being quelled, the Army
returned home; but Ulysses lay loitring at some Inn on the Road; which when his
Careful Wife Penelope understood, she sent him this Epistle; giving him an
Account how Affairs stood at home.

YOur poor Penelope admires that you
Should ever use a Woman as you do!
Now every Soldier's at his own abode,
You, like a Sot, ly tippling on the Road:
You are not left behind 'em as a Spy,
TO inform, in case of second Mutiny:
The Devil of Hell will have that Fellow surely,
Who first began this plaguey Hurly-burly.
Had it not been for this unlucky Fight,
Y'ad stuck to work all day: -- to me at night.
Poor I must drudge at home all sorts of weather,
And knit, -- as Heaven and Earth would come together;
Twirling a Wheel, I sit at home -- hum -- drum,
And spit away my Nature on my Thumb:
Thus, while I spin, you, like a careful Spouse,
Go reeling up and down from house to house.
Being you stayed so long, I did conjecture,
You had been mauled by Sauny, the Scotch Hector:
Old Nestor's Son, that Fool, stood just by you,
When Is empty Scull, they say, was split in two:
And, when he dropped, for all you are so stout,
You wished your self at home, in shitten clout.
Yet, after all, Ulysses, I am glad
You are alive, though you're a scurvy Lad.
Our Neighbors here all day do tittle tattle,
And talk of nothing else but Blood and Battle;
Were you at home, you could not choose but laugh
To hear 'em crack and bounce, now they are safe:
Perhaps when three or four of them are met,
And round about a Kitchin-Table set,
There Is such a Noise, a Clutter, and a Din,
The Rebel Scots are routed over again.
Some with Tobacco-Pipes upon the Table,
Do valiantly demonstrate to the Rabble
The Foes chief Strength; with that another Spark
Hamilton's House describes; a third, the Park;
Another spils some Ale upon the Bench,
And, with his Finger, learns you to entrench;
One acts how fierce our valiant Soldiers ran-on,
Dismounts a Can, and tells you, it is a Cannon;
Another cries, Neighbors, observe and look.
This Pot's Sir Thomas, and this Glass the Duke.
Thus while the Husbands draw this bloody Scheme,
The Wives, behind their Chairs, were in a Dream;
Nay, some of 'em (I question whether'ts true)
Do tell some mighty Deeds performed by you;
That, being provoked, you like a valiant Man-drew,
And cut a Scotch-man's Luggs off -- by St. Andrew.
I Am never the nearer, though they are overcome;
If you will not mind your Business here, at home:
For my own part, I would not care a pinn
If they were still in Arms, and you in mine:
Pr'ythee, come home; I cannot choose but wonder
What-a-God's-name you can be doing yonder:
By every Post and Carrier to the North
I Have sent more Paper then your Neck is worth:
I Have sent to Hull, to Berwick, and to Grantham;
I might as well have sent a Post to Bantam.
Perhaps some Tapster's Wife subdues your Heart,
Or else her Drink's so strong you cannot part:
And, when you're drunk, Lord, how your Tongue does run,
That you have a House well furnished here in Town,
In which your Wife (or rather, Drudge) does dwell
As constantly at home, as Snail in Shell.
(But yet, when I remember parting Kisses,
Then, then, methinks, thou should be true, Ulysses.)
My Father says, you're drowned in the watery Main;
The old Man joques, and bids me wed again;
His Counsel, like himself, is still unsound,
I Would rather he were hanged then you were drowned.
Every day here comes a sort of Fellows,
Enough to make a foolish Husband jealous,
From Whetson's-Park, Moor-fields, or such like places,
Fellows with Cuts and Frenches in their Faces;
There are but seven Fingers amongst four,
And here they domineer, and swear, and roar:
Two of 'em say, they have been vast Commanders,
The other trail'd a Pike with You in Flanders;
There Is one of 'em, they call him, Merry Robert,
He, in a merry way, broke up the Cubboard;
Here has been Irus too, that Irish Thief,
W' has eaten up a Surloin of Roast-bief;
What signifies my Father or my Self,
We cannot secure our Meat upon the Shelf?
What great defense can Nurse or little Boy-make
Against a Fellow with a Horse's stomach?
The little Rogue, your Son, was almost drowned,
Padling about, he tumbled in the Pond,
But we recovered him with much ado,
I hope, he will prove a better Man than you.
In short, If speedily you do not come,
You will be eaten out of house and home:
The old Man's crazy, we from him must part;
And I have laid your usage so to heart,
That I am grown so withered now with Grief,
I look -- more like your Mother then --
Your Faithful Wife, PENELOPE.

PHAEDRA to HIPPOLYTVS.
The ARGUMENT.
Theseus having made his Escape out of France with Phaedra -- (whose Sister
Ariadne he deserted at Calais) when he came into England married her, and
brought her home to a Farm-House near Putney in Surrey, which he Rented of one
Mr. Jove; which House during his Travel, (or rather his Ramble) he committed
to his Son Hippolytus, who was a great Hunter, a hansome Fellow, and a Woman --
hater; for which two last Reasons Phaedra his Mother, after she had acquainted
her self with her Neighbors, and household affairs, fell desperately in Love;
insomuch that nothing would serve her but carnal copulation with her Son in
Law; to accomplish which, she humbly entreats him by this Letter to consider
her Condition.

TO you, my Lad, I send this amorous Scroul,
Wishing you health, with all my Heart and Soul;
Your Mother, and your Lover does beseech,
That with these Lines you would not wipe your Breech:
'Thank God, my Father gave his Children breeding,
And taught us all, our Writing, and our Reading.
By Letters Men have News, and Women find
Which way and how their Sweet-hearts are inclined.
Thrice I resolved to tell you all I thought,
But for my Blood I could not get it out:
I just began to say -- My dearest Poll,
Then laughed, and turned aside, and ruined all:
Though it is no laughing matter, for I own
I love the very Ground thou tread'st upon.
I Will tell thee, Poll, and mark me what I say,
If Love thou Sullenly do disobey,
Though he is a Boy, not half so big as you,
Yet Fairy-like he will pinch yo' black and blew;
On a full speed your Horse he will lead astray,
And like a Hare he will cross you in your way.
If he assaults -- you cannot beat him off
Either with hunting Pole or Quarter Staff.
'Hath sworn, (though to your Father I am wed,)
To bind you fast, and bring you to my Bed.
It Is true, your strength is great, his only Art,
You pitch the Bar, and he can throw a Dart.
What need I use these words? dear Polly -- come
Let us embrace, your Father's not at home.
You know my Reputation's very great,
Whoo'd guess that You and I should do the feat.
Oh how I Am stung, I have as little Ease,
As if I had distrub'd a Hive of Bees.
I purre and purre, just like our Tabby Cat,
As if I knew not what I would be at:
When Young, I could have cured these amorous stings
With Carrots, Radishes, or such like things;
Now there is no pleasure in such Earthly cures,
I must have things applied as warm as yours.
Where lies the blame, art thou not strong, and young?
Who would not gather fruit that is well hung?
Or who can called a Sin when we have done,
May Not I have leave to hug my Husband's Son?
Suppose our Landlord Jove, that gallant Wight,
Had a months mind to lodge with me a night;
Nay -- if his Lady too should give consent,
For you I Would quit him, though he would quit his rent.
Since you will not hunt in this my softer place,
Where I should get the better of the chase;
Since the large Fields and Woods you rummage thorough,
Disdaining my poor little Cunny -- borough;
I Will follow you over Ditches, and throu' Boggs,
And whoop and hollow after all the Dogs:
I Will speak to the hounds so well hey! Iowler, Bowman,
That none, but you, shall know I am a Woman:
I Will praise your Greyhound Delia, when you course,
She shall my Mistress be, and I Will be yours.
Under a hedge I Will squat down like a Hare,
And you alone shall find me sitting there.
Sometimes upon a Horse I Will get astride,
And after you, as I were mad, I Will ride;
For all our Generation have been so,
When they are in Love they know not what they do.
You Have heard that Mistress Europe was my Grandam;
She went away with Jupiter at Random.
Pasiphae my Mother was so full
Of strange Vagaries, that she sucked a Bull.
My Husband with my Sister lay -- or rather
I should have told you that it was your Father.
Poor Adne was stark mad for him, and now
I am (God knows) as mad in Love with you.
So that between the Father and the Son,
There are two Sisters like to be undone.
I never shall forget with what a Grace
You dressed your self in order for the chase;
Your Visage not too red, but only tan'd,
Of the same color with your brawny hand.
An ancient Bever on your head you put,
Like a three -- Pegeon Pie, in corners cut.
A little Jacket made of bluish green,
Which had the Death of many a Badger seen.
Your hair your own, which showed you not debauched,
Not nicely trimmed, for here and there 'twas notch'd.
I hate your Fellows with your powdered Wigs,
As m' Husband used to say, they look like Prigs.
You Would lasting Breeches made of Buckskin Leather,
To keep the fundamental parts from weather.
But when you reached your hanger from the Bed,
Another Weapon came into my head.
Not all your days can give you such delight,
Or half the Sport I Will show you in a Night.
Delia's your Joy, Delia does you bewitch;
Can you neglect a Christian, for a Bitch?
Cephalus your Companion and old Crony,
Valued a Dog better than ready money.
He Would get upon a Horse, though half asleep,
Ready to hunt before the Day did peep;
But when h'ad once tasted Aurora's sweets,
He found out better Game between the sheets;
For then unless she pleased, he durst not say,
(Nor did he wish) that it would e're be day.
Why should not we consent to try our skill?
I Am certain you and I can do as well.
Therefore dear Poll, I offer very fair,
Under Barn-Elmes I Will meet you if you dare;
Since none but Country Sports can humor you,
I Will wrestle wi' you there a fall or two;
Though of my Conscience I believe you will throw me,
But if you should, perhaps it will not undo me;
And when you have me down among the Trees,
You wanton Rogue, you may do what you please.
We Would no such opportunity before:
Your Father is at London with his Whore.
Therefore I think it is but a just design,
To cuckold him, and pay him in his coin.
Besides, he never was married to your Mother,
He first whor'd her, and then he took another,
What kindness or respect ought we to have
For such a Villain and perfidious Knave?
This should not trouble, but provoke us rather
With all the speed we can to lie together.
I am no kin to you, nor you to me,
They call it Incest but to terrify.
Lovers Embraces are Lascivious Tricks,
Amongst musty Puritans and Schismatics.
Did not our Master Jove choose him a Mistress,
Who should it be, but one of his own Sisters?
There Is no engendring can be truly good,
But when we fancy that we 're of a blood.
Under the names of Mother and of Son,
What pretty pleasant actions may be done?
All they will say, because I Am kind to thee,
I Am Mother both in Law and Equity.
Take heart of Grace, be not afraid of Spies,
I care not if there were Ten thousand Eyes;
I Will leave the door without a Bolt or Lock:
What if they saw us in our Shirt and Smock.
Nay I Will suppose we should be seen in Bed,
What can there to our prejudice be said?
That you came wet and dripping from the chase.
And I Would a mind to give you my warm place.
I did not think to 've said so much in have,
But Love like Murder must come out at last:
The Fort lies open, therefore scorn it not,
But come with speed, and enter on the spot;
Let us imagine now the worst can happen;
Suppose that you and I were taken napping;
And Theseus says, Begone you filthy Whore;
Away you Rogue, and so he shuts the door.
What if he does, why then for France with speed,
We shall be there supplied with all we need.
My Father dwells at Paris in good credit,
And well to pass is he, though I have said it;
There he is well known as Beggar knows his dish,
We'll live as bravely then as Heart can wish:
Therefore make haste, dream not of any harms,
Thou Wilt be secure enough within my arms.
When you go out, may you be sure of Game;
May your horse never tire nor happen lame:
At a default may the Dogs never be,
May Delia bring forth Whelps as good as she.
May you in the Field never want a draught of Beer,
Or Bread and Cheese, or such like hunting cheer;
While I sit pining for you here at home,
When I have cried out both my Eyes you will come.
HYPSIPYLE to JASON. Lately translated out of OVID: Now BURLESQU'D.
The ARGUMENT.
Jason, a quondam Footman, with some others, the nimblest of the same
Function, joined their Stocks, and purchased a Silver-Bowl, which they ran for
from Barnet to St. Albans; but, before the day of the Match, one Medaea, a
Gipsey, and Strouler in those Parts, took a more then ordinary fancy toward
Jason, whom she so dieted with new laid Eggs, or what the Devil it was else,
(she being suspected of Withcraft,) that he won the Plate; and beat two famous
Foot Jockeys, Whipping-Tom and Teage: Hypsipyle, his Wife, whom he had
deserted, hearing of his good success, and withal, of his Love-intrigue with
Medaea, caused this Epistle to be sent to him.

From So-hoe Fields, Feb. 27. 1670/80. Husband,
THE Neighbors in our Alley do relate,
That at St. Albans you have won the Plate.
How easy' a matter had it been for you.
TO have sent poor Hyp. your Wife, a George or two?
Did I, when Flannel was both dear and scarce,
Make you Trunk-hose to your ungrateful Arse;
I sewed so long, my Fingers still do ache,
And, in all Conscience, I deserve my Snack.
I can hear something, though I keep at home;
I hear, y' have beaten Teague and Whipping-Tom.
You ran so swift, and strong, the People say,
You bore down all that stood but in your way:
Before your foundred Fellows could come up
You won the Match, and seized the Caudle-Cup.
I know, y' have been a Rogue, and done me wrong;
Yet I Would hear this from your own flattring Tongue.
But why should thou ever hope for that, poor Hypsi,
Since Jason loves a Bacon-visag'd Gipsey.
As I was washing, the other day at door,
There came a Scoundril, ill-look'd Son-of-a-whore,
Who, jeering, asked if I were Madam Jason?
I Would like to have thrown Soap suds his ugly Face-on.
Said I, I Am Jason's Wife, for want of better;
Have you brought Money from him, or a Letter?
How does he do? Is he not very fine?
Come, come, let us see, I Am sure h'ath sent me Coin;
Quoth he, By God of Heaven, not a Souze;
He only bid me see you at your House.
The Fellow told m' a Tale of Cock and Bull;
At last, I asked about your. Tawny-Trull.
He said, Medaea's your beloved Gipsey,
And that you're often seen together tipsey;
But, he believed, 'twas but a Trick of youth?
A Trick! said I, the Devil stop your Mouth
Would I Would been lashed and whipped the City round
That day I married thee, loose Vagabond:
The Hangman in disguise read Common-pray'r
When we were matched, a very Hopeful Pair:
Cursed be the time I did admit you first,
And strove to quench your everlasting thirst:
What Plague possessed me when I brought you home?
This was no place to run with Whipping-Tom.
If I had taken but my Sister's counsel,
Y' had never set your flat-foot over the groundsel:
She bid me exercise the Fork and Spit;
We'd then good Goods, but now the De'il a bit.
'Twas well enough a year, nay, almost two;
What Fury has possession of you now?
Villain, remember, when you went away,
How often you Damned your self, you would not stay;
And smoothly said, No place shall us divide;
A Curse upon your base dissembling Hide:
I was so big that I could hardly tumble,
Yet I believed your Oaths, and durst not grumble:
Said you, Dear Hypsi. know that I am dead,
If I don't come before you're brought to bed;
You looked like Air, with Breeches close to thighs,
I fancied you would be back within a trice:
When you were gone, I to the Garret crept,
To see how nimbly over the Fields you tript;
As swift you went, so swift return you would make,
But all this haste was for that Bitche's sake:
Why do I rub my Windows, wash my Room,
Expecting still your Rogueship would come home!
'Twould never vex me, if you were not seen
With such a damned confounded nasty Queen:
A Witch, a Bitch, in whom the Devil dwells,
Whose Face is made of Grease and Wall-nut-shells.
Master, quoth she, ever from this Town you stir
You Will lose, (that is, Your Pocket's picked by her.)
A plaguey Jade, who curses Night and Noon,
And houls, and heaves her Arse against the Moon,
Contemning her as Authress of the Flowers;
Railing at all our Sex, and poxing yours:
No Childing-Woman does in Travel linger;
But toward her Pain this Fiend holds up a Finger:
She Will ride a Stick; when Sow is brought to bed,
Then Pigs have no more life than pigs of Lead:
She, with the Mother, at a door will wheedle,
And, in her Infant's heart, will stick a Needle:
This I believe, what ever of me you think,
S' has put some Rotten-post into your drink.
It Is strange, that I should suffer all these Wrongs
From her, whom I would scorn to touch with Tongs.
You Will lose the Name of beating Tom and Teague,
Whilst with this Whore you do continue League:
Nay, some do very confidently say it,
'Twas by her Witchcraft that you won the Plate:
Some think her Devil, others, new-laid Eggs,
Made you so fast advance your Bandy-leggs:
What can you find in such a Punck as she
Who from a Dunghill brings her Pedigree?
My Father dwells at Sign of Golden-Can,
An honest Vict'ler, a substantial Man:
It Is true, they say, he is a drunken Sot;
What then; in the Parish he paies Scot and Lot:
Old Bacchus, the Wine-cooper, was my Grandsire;
Let her produce such Kindred if she can Sir:
Her Children have been gotten in a Bog
By some large pintled Wolf, or Mastive Dog:
My Babes were neither got nor whelp'd in the Streets,
I labored for them 'twixt a pair of Sheets:
That they are yours, I Am sure, you need not doubt,
For they 're as like as if y' had spit them out:
Could they have gone alone, I Would made 'em amble
To your Apartment underneath a Bramble;
But I considered how your Whore would treat 'em,
Nay, it is ten to one, the Hag would eat 'em;
Or else, perhaps, she would stick their tender Skins
All full of Sparables, or crooked Pins;
Since of her own s' has murdered many a Brat,
Would she spare mine; oh! never tell me that.
Methink I see you and the hell-born Toad
Engendring in a Tree that is near the Road:
Suppose you were pursued, as y' are a Thief;
Where would you fly? where would you find relief?
What if your self and yonder Devil's dam
Should come to me, and try if you could sham?
Sure I should make you very welcome both,
And entertain you nobly, by my Troth.
I should toward you have some relenting Heart,
But it is my Goodness more than your desert:
And, for your Firebrand there, that loathsome Hag,
I would contrive the greatest Pain and Plague:
Her Nose being slit, to make her look more grim,
Like a Spred-Eagle on her Face should seem:
Her coarse black Skin should from her Flesh be rent;
I Would run a Spit into her Fundament;
And, Jason, this thy Punishment should be,
Thou should eat those, so often have swallowed thee.
But since it must not be, I am contented
To let my Spleen in cursing her be vented:
May she all Sustenance for ever lack,
Until she takes her Child from off her Back,
And puts it in her Belly for a Nuncheon,
And for the Fact be thrown into a Dungeon:
May she be burnt to Cinders as a Witch,
And you be hanged for loving of the Bitch.
Yours, as you have used her, HYPSIPYLE.
For John Jason, to be left at his Apartment, in a hollow Tree, between Barnet
and St. Albans.
PARIS to HELLEN.
The ARGUMENT.
Paris had lived a great while in Obscurity, at last being owned by Alderman
Priam a Rich Old Citizen, and received as his Son -- he set up for a Gentleman;
but very well knowing he could not be rightly accomplished without a Mistress,
and hearing Fame speak viva voce in the praise of one Hellen, who lived
somewhere in the North. He was at her house received, and during the absence of
Menelaus her Husband, he endeavored to break his Mind to her; but being not
through-pac'd in Gentility, his Modesty got the upper hand of his inclination,
therefore he presently had recourse to his Pen, and writes her this conceited
Lettter.

FReely and from my heart without compelling,
I wish all health and happiness to Hellen:
For if you're Sick, I Am sure to suffer pain;
As I Am a Lover and a Gentleman,
I need not tell you that I Am off oth' hooks,
Your Ladyship discerns it by my Looks:
For you whose Eyes have such a piercing quickness,
May see I Am overgrown in the Green Sickness;
So that upon the whole and perfect Matter,
I am your Servant, but I seem your Daughter.
I could eat walls as well as white bread crum,
But fear to eat you out of house and home.
For this distemper I Have read many Cures,
But the sole power of healing must be Yours.
Your Holiness (I cannot call you less,
That does on Earth perform such Miracles,)
Your holiness I say within few Weeks,
May fetch a lively color in my Cheeks.
But if we are too long e're we begin,
I Am apt to fear it may corrupt within.
It Is Love, it is Love, that makes me toss and tumble,
And in my Entrails does like Jollup rumble:
It Is as impossible you should not see it,
As it is to hide the Pox both small and great.
It Is Love, You know the effects of that disease,
Therefore pray fall to work when e're you please.
If at these Lines you do not jeer nor Jybe,
There is some hopes you may receive the Scribe.
And Madam know, I did engage the Stars,
Before I durst engage in Cupid's Wars.
This is a grand affair, I had been silly
T'ave ventured on it without consulting Lilly:
To him I went for my own happy ends,
And all the Planets he has made my Friends.
But above all, the most pellucid Venus,
Has promised there should be a Job between us;
She knows best what is good for you and me,
She does command our Fates and Powers do you see.
Without her leave no living Lover stirs,
Paris, said she, put on your Boots and Spurs.
She did consent I should ascend my horse,
And toward your Mansion bend my glorious course.
Never by her was riding yet forbidden,
Her Goddess-ship with pleasure has been ridden.
My heart's upon the racking trot -- alas!
But she can bring it to a gentle pace.
Next, Madam, know, your Sight was no surprise,
I loved you by my Ears as well as Eyes.
Your Fame has much out-sounded the Report.
Of the great Guns at taking of a Fort.
I came not here to seek terrestrial pelf,
I made this progress for your heavenly self.
The Womb of the Universe if I should rifle,
To your more secret parts 'twere but a trifle.
To see your ancient Pile, I do not range,
We have more lofty Fabrics near the Exchange.
'Twas for your sake I spurred my stubborn Steed,
For you alone through thick and thin I rid.
You're mine, what desperate mortal dares gainsay't?
Sure I may take my Planet's word for that.
I fain would tell your Ladyship a Dream,
If it would not too great a trouble seem.
My Mother dreamed, when she with me was quick,
She should bring forth a lighted Faggot -- stick;
I am that Faggot-stick, I burn apace,
Oh quench me, Madam, in your watring -- place.
I Have taken taken fire at you, as match at tinder;
Cool me, or else your Servant is a Cinder.
This was my Mother's dream, I now design,
Under Correction, to relate you mine.
I laid me down to sleep one Summers day,
Under the shade of a new Stack of Hay;
For we poor Lovers, such is our hard case,
Are glad to take a Nap in any place;
Three naked Ladies came, I well remember,
As naked as the Trees are -- in December;
They told me they would be judged alone by me,
Which was the most deserving of the Three;
The first would bribe me with a Purse of Gold;
My Judgment's neither to be bought nor sold:
The second offered me a Tilting Sword,
Knowing I never would take an angry word:
But says the third, and in my face she giggled,
With such poor toys you're not to be inveigled,
But if you value me above the rest,
Then know young -- man, you are for ever blessed.
Within a little time you shall arrive,
Where a resplendent Country Dame does live;
First you must court her like an humble Beggar,
At last she will yield, and you may lay your Leg -- over;
The Prize is yours, said I, you ought to take it,
I kissed her lower Parts, and so I waked.
My Dream is out, for thus I do explain it,
You are the Country Dame, and she the Planet.
Without delay I put on my accoutring,
And with full speed, I came to you -- a -- suitring.
But just as I was putting Foot in Stirrup,
Drinking with Friends a parting cup of Syrrup,
My Sister came to th'door, a mad young Lass,
Her name's Cassandra, but we call her Cass;
Brother, quoth she, beware, beware, I say,
You do not meet a Fireship by the way:
A strange wild Wench, I hope she did not mean
That any where your Ladiship's unclean;
Heavens forbid, Good Soul, she meant no more
Then flames of Love, as I have said before.
Being arrived at this your decent house,
Whom should I meet but your Illustrious Spouse?
He brought a Tankard out of good March Beer,
Cold Pork and Butter, and such household cheer;
He asked -- if ever I Tobacco took,
I said I Would take a pipe -- but could not smoke;
He showed m' his Garden, and his fine young Trees,
His Barn, his Stable, and his house of Ease:
I said, 'Twas wondrous pretty -- but my mind
Still ran on what my Planet had designed.
At last you came with such a dazzling grace,
I thought the Sun and Moon was in your face,
Lilly's and Roses, Pinks and Violets,
Your Looks were loaded with the vernal sweets;
Your poor adorer was in such amaze,
I vow and swear I knew not where I was;
Before I spoke I fell to private prayer,
Planet I thank thee for thy tender care;
Now thou have raised my Bliss to such a pitch,
I humbly beg, that thou would go thorough stitch.
At last I spoke, and bowed in seemly wise,
And paid obeisance to your sparkling Eyes;
Your Beauty's greater than your fame did boast,
So is a May Pole taller than a Post.
I Have heard, you once conferred your gracious favor
On Theseus, who was thought a cunning shaver;
With him your Ladyship has played some Gambols,
Proliques you have had, and many pleasant rambles.
But, by your Leave, your Lover was a Clown,
For leaving your bright Eminence so soon;
Do You think that Paris would have served you so,
Would he have let Illustrious Hellen go?
By Stix and Acheron your Servant swears,
Rather then part with you, he will lose his Ears;
When that hour comes for which we both were born,
And soon 'twill come, or Planet is forsworn;
When we shall lie entranced -- entranced I say,
Then if you have the heart to go, you may;
Hasten, forsooth, hasten the happy Job,
For till't be done -- my heart will shout and throb:
It Is very fit that you and I should join,
Your Family's very good, and so is mine.
My Father fined for Alderman, long since,
He Is now grown rich, and lives like any Prince.
If you would once make London your abode,
You Would hate a Village as you would hate a Toad.
Oh how your Ladyship would stare to see
Our City Dames in all their Bravery.
They Have Petticoats with Lace above their knees
Of Gold and Silver, or of Point Veni-ce;
Cornets and lofty Towers upon the head,
And wondrous shapes of which you never read.
How ill a Pinner with a narrow Lace,
Becomes the Beauty of so bright a Face?
A fairer Face no Mortal e're laid Lips to,
And I believe there are not whiter Hips too.
Too white to mingle with a Husband's thighs,
When I but think of that, my flesh does rise.
When toward me sometimes a Glance does pass,
Your poor Adorer looks like an Ass.
For if I should return you Look for Look,
I fear your Husband would begin to smoke;
And I Will behang'd, if ever Menelaus,
By any amorous Look of mine, betray us;
Were it not at your Table I Would abuse him,
For thrusting his great Paw into your Bosom:
That Warty Fist between your Breasts does seem
Like a brown George dropped in a Bowl of Cream.
I Am mad to see him draw his Chair so close,
And kiss, and hugg you underneath my Nose.
Then I go out, pretending to make Water,
Seeming to take no notice of the Matter:
To all true Hearts I drink a Cup of Wine,
A Health' that does imply both yours and mine;
Then seeming drunk, I tell some strange Romance,
And lay the Scene in Italy or France;
Of some bright Lady, and her brisk -- Gall -- ant;
By which two Lovers, you and I are meant.
But, Madam, to write more of this were nonsense,
My Planet h'as contrived the Business long-since;
By curious search I something can discover,
It Is in your Blood -- you're born to be a Lover.
What think you, Lady, of your Father Jove?
Show me a Town-Bull h'as been more in Love.
Your Mother, Laeda, too, who gave you suck,
H'as she not been as good as ever struck?
When s'had a lusty Youth between her thighs,
What do you think? would Laeda cry to rise?
Your Parents being as right as ever pist,
If you should be precise, you would be hist.
But if you must be constant to one Man,
With me to London make what have you can.
There we will provide a little Winter House,
And you shall pass for my renowned Spouse.
By what I see your Husband does approve,
That in your Absence here I should make Love.
Or would he else have gone, -- under pretense,
To buy a Horse -- a hundred miles from hence?
The Business seems to me, as plain a case,
As is the Nose upon your beauteous face.
To let you know that I should be no clog,
Did he not say, Love me and Love my Dog?
Nelly, said he, be kind unto my Guest,
And let his entertainment be the Best.
I presently his meaning understood,
If Yours be not the Best -- then nothing's good.
You see your Husband orders our affairs.
Therefore, dear Madam, do not hang an Arse,
But let us away to London -- Crop does wait,
Saddled and bridled at the Garden -- gate;
Crop's a good Natured Beast -- and carries double,
And will not think your Ladyship a trouble.
Strike while the Iron's hot, my Love is fervent,
Get up, and ride behind --
Your humble Servant Paris.

HELLEN's Answer to PARIS.
The ARGUMENT.
Hellen having received his Letter, at first seems wonderfully displeased at
his Impudence, in attempting a Lady of her unspotted fame; who was bred and
born in the Town where she lived, and was never called Whore. At length the
Storm's over, and she Tacks about, giving him an assurance of her readiness to
comply, but doubts her Gallant wo' not be constant. In plain English She Is as
willing as He.

YOur Letter's wrote in such a filthy style,
I did not think an answer worth my while,
Till I considered you might offer vi'lence,
And take advantage of a Woman's silence.
I Am sure you have not wanted drink or food,
I wonder in my heart you will be so rude.
It Is sine y'saith -- because you come from London,
You think a Country Body must be run down.
You of your Entertainment here may brag,
You were not used as if you would had the Plague.
My Husband did receive you as a Friend,
And would you to his Wife now prove a Fiend?
Perhaps you will say of me, when you are gone,
Hellen! a Lady! -- Hellen's but a clown.
I Will own the name, since you can say no more,
I Would rather be a Clown, then called a Whore:
Yet for all that, though I keep Cows and Daries,
I can behave my self as well as Paris.
Though I don't fleer like a young wanton Girl,
Yet you shall seldom see me frown or snarle.
Though you such breeding, and such manners own,
Let me deal plainly w'ye -- I think you have none.
Or could you else believe me so untrue,
To leave my Spouse, and run away with you?
Because a Fellow once did pick me up,
You think I Am to be stolen by every Fop.
He knew not whether I was Man or Woman,
But you conclude from thence that I am common.
When he perceived that I was none of those,
He very fairly brought me to my house.
And since I Am gotten quit of Master Theseus,
Our Paris would be nibbling too, God bless us! --
Though by my Troth I cannot blame your Love*
If I were sure that you would constant prove.
Dy'e think I should not be in dainty pickle.
If I should run away with one that is fickle?
You urged to me the example of my Mother,
As if the Daughter should be such another.
You don't consider Laeda was betrayed,
By one that courted her in Masquerade.
She thought sh'ad met a harmless plume of feather,
But at long-run he proved a Stallion rather.
His Family's the best in all the County,
All that you live by's, but a Trades-man's bounty.
But that is all one, where ever Love prevails,
Money's no more than paring of my Nails.
Sometimes I think you love me when you look
With Eyes unmoved, just like a Pig that is stuck;
And dabble with your fingers in my Palm,
And use to call the moisture of it, -- Balm.
If in the Glass I leave a little drop,
You Would say I Will drink your snuffs -- and suck it up.
Hellen you carved with Penknife on the Gate,
And I wrote Paris just a-top of that.
These are shrewd signs of Love, and without doubt,
You Would give a Leg or Arm to have a Bout.
Though you are not the first Man by a hundred,
That has seen me, and loved and gazed and wondered.
If you at first had come into our Town,
And courted Hellen in a Grogram Gown,
When I was but a silly Soul, God knows,
You might have made a Bridge of Menel's Nose.
Now he commands in chief, your Suit is vain,
To all true Lovers Marriage is a Bane.
But why should Paris for a Mistress long,
Since in your Sleep your Fancy is so strong?
You can see three stark naked at a time,
And take your choice of Beauty's in a dream:
Yet you left Honor, Wealth, and God knows what.
And all for me -- a pretty fancy that.
I know it is wheedle, -- but if all were true,
It is no more than I would do for you.
You guess my want of Skill, by being so plain,
For I Am not used to write to any Man,
Except to a Millener, (my Husband's Cozen)
Who sends me Gloves, -- and Ribbands by the dozen.
Well -- since it must be so -- let us be discreet,
Let not our Town take notice that we meet;
For they suspect already you're a Wencher,
There is not such a place on Earth for Censure.
Yet I cannot see, why we should be so nice,
I like you -- by my Husband's own advice.
I could not choose but laugh to hear him say,
Pray Love your Guest when I am gone away:
And all the while that Menelaus tarries,
You are committed to the charge of Paris.
The charge! Let us examine well the word,
Whether he meant your charge at Bed and Board;
Why should he not mean both as well as one?
He knows -- how much I hate to lie alone.
In my weak Judgment, it is an easy Case,
You are in all things to supply his place.
But for the Mastership you're like to tug
Before you have me at the closest hug.
'Twill seem to me, if you some force do use,
As if I had a Maidenhead to lose.
Lord! how I write; if I were to be damned,
I could not say it -- I should be so ashamed.
If I consent I Will hold you any money,
You Will serve me as you did you are dear Oenone.
She hoped she should be wedded in the Church,
Instead of that, you left her in the Lurch.
But if we now were toward London jogging,
It Is ten to one some Puppy would be dogging,
Or else some Neighbor on the Road would stay us,
And ask me after Mr. Menelaus.
Or we shall hear the Country People say,
Would you believe that she should runaway?
Marry not hansome Wives by this Example,
Since pretty Mistress Hellen's on the Ramble.
I Am strangely afraid of seeing Mr. Priam,
How I shall tremble when he asks whom I -- am.
Though for my Life I shall not hold from Laughter,
If Hecuba should say -- Your Servant Daughter.
But above All it is Hector that I dread,
That Hector certainly will break my Head.
Who'd think you two from the same Mother came,
He Is like a Lion, you are like a Lamb.
Let Hector prosper with his senseless hussing,
It Is knowing nothing now that makes a Russian.
While Paris shall be skilled in Lovers Arts,
And dive into our Sexes secret Parts;
Now you begin to think it is ten to one,
Your Suit is granted, and the Business done.
But not so fast, -- consult my Friend Clymene,
No doubt -- you will make the Business up between ye.
I Am loath to say it my self, she knows my mind,
And she can tell you how I am inclined.
When she informs you what must be transacted,
With too much Joy, I fear, you will run distracted.
FINIS.
Books lately published and sold by Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in
Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet.
DIvine Contemplations upon the Remarkable Passages in the Life of the Holy
Jesus: Written by the Bishop of Exeter.

Ovid's Epistles Englished by the Earl of Mulgrave, Sir Car. Scrope, Mr.
Dryden, and several other Eminent hands; The Second Edition, with the addition
of one new Epistle.

Truth found too late, a Tragedy Acted at the Duke's Theater: Written by Mr.
Dryden, with the Grounds of Criticism in Poetry: By the same Author.

Brutus of Alba, or the Enchanted Lovers; Acted at the Duke's Theater; a
Tragedy, which (in other Names) contains the Loves of Dido and Aeneas: written
by Mr. Tate.

The Counterfeits, a Comedy, Acted at the Duke's Theater; containing several
pleasant mistakes and adventures.

An Historical Discourse of Parliaments in their Original before the Conquest,
and continuance since.


