Gods fidelity, THE CHURCHES SAFETY: Opened in a SERMON Preached before the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Counsel, at Lawrence-Iury Church, on wednesday
Septem. 15. 1658. Being a day of Humiliation by them appointed.

By EDWARD REYNOLDS, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe for George Thomason at the Sign of the Rose
and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

Amplissimis, Praestantissimis, Consultissimis Viris D. JOANNI IRETON
Honoratissimo Domino Praefecto, MAGISTRATIBUS UNIVERSIS, TOTIQUE SENATUI
Celeberrimae Florentissimaeque Civitatis LONDINENSIS, Concionem hanc coram
ipsis habitam Ipsorumque jussu publici Juris factam, In Honoris and debitae
observantiae TESTIMONIUM, D. D.

E. R*

EZRA 9.15. O LORD GOD of Israel, thou art righteous, for we remain yet escaped
as it is this day: behold, we are before thee in our trespasses, for we cannot
stand before thee because of this.


IN the former part of this Book, we have a Narration of many great mercies of
God to his people after their long and sore captivity.

1. The Edict of Cyrus for return of the people, building the Temple,
restoreing of the holy Vessels, Chap. 1.

2. The pursuance of that Edict in the return of 49000 and upward, Chap. 2.

3. The beginning of the restitution of Gods worship, setting up the Altar,
offering Sacrifices, laying the Foundations of the House, with Trumpets and
joy, Chap. 3.

4. The special assistance and encouragement they received in the work by the
Prophets, notwithstanding the opposition of the adversaries, Chap. 5.1, 6, 14.

5. The gracious Decree of Darius for promoting the building, after it had been
obstructed, his Princely munificence thereunto, the command given to the
Enemies to be serviceable to the work, the finishing and dedication of the
House, and keeping of the Passover, Chap. 6.

6. The gracious commission of Artaxerxes to Ezra for further promoting the
worship of God at Jerusalem, his indulgence to Priests and Levites, ordering of
Magistrates and Judges, Chap. 7.

7. The expedition of Ezra, and diverse others with this Commission; The
delivery of the Silver, Gold, and Vessels which the King, his Counselors,
Lords, and all Israel, had offered to the house of the Lord into the hands of
twelve select men of the Priests: the gracious preservation of Ezra and his
company in their journey from the hands of those that lay in wait for them,
after they had solemnly sought God by prayer and fasting, their safe arrival,
delivery of the offering to the House of the Lord, success of the Commission,
Cap. 8.

Thus far things went comfortably on, and with good success, notwithstanding
the opposition and obstruction given to the work for a time by the Enemies
thereof, of which we read, Chap. 4.

But in this ninth Chapter we meet with a far more dangerous obstruction then
any had before been: an horrible sin committed by Priests, Levites, people,
wherein the hands of the Princes and Rulers had been chief, in mingling the
holy seed in marriage with the people of those Lands: contrary to an express
command, Deuteronomy. 7.1.3. Thou shall not make marriages with them, Vid. Serarium in
Ios. 6. quaest. 50. Pined. de Rebus Solom. lib. 7. cap. 4. and 6
etc. whereby the worship of God now newly restored, was in danger to be
speedily subverted again, Deuteronomy. 7.4. Exo. 34.15, 16. as we find by the example
of Solomon, 1 Reg. 11.4, 8. Hereupon Ezra is affected with zeal, sorrow, and
astonishment, ver. 3, 4, 5. and unto him were assembled every one that trembled
at the word of the God of Israel, to humble themselves before God: and to
consult what is so desperate a case was necessary to be done for diverting that
wrath which they had provoked, ver. 3, 4. Ezra prepares and composeth himself
in a solemn manner to pray, rends his garments, falls on his knees, spreads
forth his hands, stirs up his faith, takes the fittest season, the time of the
Sacrifice, when God might be minded by the blood of Atonement to recieve his
prayer with favor. ver. 5.

In the Prayer we have these particulars.

1. His abasement of himself, his shame, and consternation of spirit, a temper
essential to true humiliation: I will remember my Covenant says the Lord, and
thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, Ezekiel. 16.60, 61. and again, Ier.
3.5.31.19. Dan. 9.7, 8. Luke 18.13.
you shall loath your sel^es in your own sight, for all your evils that ye have
committed, Ezekiel. 20.43.

2. A general confession of their sins, and the sins of their Fathers, as
Nehem. 9.34. Dan. 9.8. the greatness, the growth, the continuance of them, Our
iniquities are increased over our heads, as Psalm. 38.4. (...).

(...). Homer. Iliad. 4.


A Metaphor from the swelling of waters, Psalm. 124.4, 5. our Trespasses are
grown up to Heaven, a further and stronger expression of the atrocity of them,
as 2 Chronicles. 28.9.

3. An acknowledgement of the justice of God in the punishment of their
iniquities, on Kings, Priests, and people, in captivity, poverty, and contempt,
ver. 7. as Psalm. 44.9-14. 79.1-4.

4. A thankful acknowledgement of restored mercies out of free and rich grace,
unto a small remnant of distressed Bondmen whom God had not forsaken in their
Bondage, but extended mercy unto, who were, 1. escaped out of their captivity.
2. Settled in their own land, as a nail in a sure place, as Isa. 22.23. 3.
Comforted after their darkness and sorrow, by lightning their eyes, who had
been long in Babylon as in a Dungeon, Zach. 9.11. by reviving and giving them a
resurrection, who had lien in Captivity as dry bones in a grave, Ezekiel. 37.12.
4. Aided and assisted by the special favor of the King of Persia, to set up
the House of God, and repair the desolations thereof, ver. 9. 5. Compassed
about with his protection, as with a wall, from the violence of Enemies, ver.
8, 9. as Isa. 26.1. Zach. 2.5. by all which considerations, the greatness of
their sins was exceedingly aggravated.

5. A particular confession of the present sin under the guilt whereof they did
now lie.

Wherein are considerable. 1. A patheticall acknowledgement that they are
wholly without excuse put to silence, for guilt stops the mouth, Mat. 22.12.
Romans 3.19. ver. 10.

2. A full aggravation of it by several considerations. 1. It was against a
severe Law provided in that very case, Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4. 2. Against the Equity of
that Law, the people were unclean, abominable. 3. Against the Promise annexed
to the Law, to eat the good of the Land. 4. Against the Chastening hand of God
which had been upon them. 5. Against the Measure of those Chastisements, they
were punished less then their iniquities deserved. 6. Against the great and
notable Deliverance which God had wrought for them beyond their thoughts or
hopes, ver. 11, 12, 13.

6. An implicit owning of the wrath of God, which might in this case justly
consume and make an end of them, and leave them no remnant, ver. 14.

7. An acknowledgement of Gods gracious fidelity in not consuming them, but
patiently bearing with them, and letting them remain escaped, ver. 15.

Lastly, the conclusion of the Prayer, the same with the introduction into it,
shame and confession of guilt* ver. 15.

O Lord God of Israel] who art in Covenant with them, and ownest them for thy
people, Deuteronomy. 26.18. and art afflicted in their afflictions, in whose
sufferings thy great name is concerned, in whose prosperity thy sole grace is
magnified. Thou art righteous] Just in thy Judgments in all that is come upon
us, Nehem, 9.33. faithful in thy Covenant in all that thou have said unto us.
And hereof thou have given us assurance, for we remain yet escaped,] According
to thy promise, that after seventy years should be accomplished in Babylon,
thou would visit thy people, and perform thy good word toward them, in
causing them to return to their own Land again, Ier. 29.10. 2 Chronicles. 36.21. we
have deserved by our Provocations, to be cut off from being a People, but for
thy Promise sake we yet remain, for thou have said, that the Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shilo come,
Genesis 49.10. that Immanuel was to come of the house of David, before the Jews
should cease to be a Nation, or should have their polity utterly dissolved,
Isa. 7.14. Isa. 8.9, 10. Isai. 10.24-27. We have deserved to have been kept
Captives in Babylon still, but for thy Promise sake we remain yet escaped,
because thou have said, that thou would cause us to come up out of our
graves, and bring us into the Land of Israel, Ezekiel. 37.12, 13, 14. It is by the
blood of the Covenant alone that thou have sent forth thy prisoners out of the
pit, Zach. 9.11.

The words are the close of a Penitential Prayer, wherein there is observable,
1. A Comfortable address to God as the God of Israel. 2. A Penitent
acknowledgement of his righteousness in the evils which they suffered. 3. A
grateful acknowledgement of his fidelity in the Mercies which they enjoyed. 4.
A demonstration of this great Mercy. 1. We remain, we are not consumed. 2. We
remain an escape, we are not detained in captivity. 3. As it is this day, not
only escaped, but favored, encouraged, assisted, to build Gods House, to
restore his Worship, though to this day we have had so great provocations.

O Lord God of Israel, Thou art righteous, we have sinned as a perfidious
people against a God in covenant, thou have afflicted us in measure, as a God
in covenant.

Afflictions are sweetened, Mercies are magnified sins are aggravated, sinners
are humbled and melted by no consideration more, then by the grace of the
Covenant, that we have to do with a God who is pleased to be called ours; when
he smites us, this is our Comfort, the rod is in the hand of a Father, he may
visit with stripes, but he will not break his Covenant, Psalm. 89.32-34. when he
loadeth us with mercies, this is our joy, that they are all appendices to
Christ, and rays, and Emanations of the Covenant, Romans 8.32. Ier. 32.41. If he
hear us, if he answer us, if he be gracious unto us, we shall weep no more,
though he give us bread of adversity, and water of affliction, Isai. 30.18-20.
when we review our sins, and set our selves seriously to turn to God, this
makes us loath our selves, this fills our faces with shame, and our hearts with
sorrow, that we have done it against a God in Covenant, who is pacified toward
us, Ezekiel. 16.62, 63. It is great presumption for aliens and strangers to
despise Gods authority, or abuse his bounty, but for an adopted people, whom he
has selected in a peculiar manner to be his own, and set apart for himself,
for whom he reserveth the choicest of his mercies, to whom he reveals the
secrets of his love, for these to sin, not only against Precepts and
Benefits, but against the Bowels of a Father, the blood of a Savior, the grace
of a Comforter, the Covenant of life, the Charter of Salvation, this is that
which should greatly abase us in our own eyes, that we should thus requite a
Father, Deuteronomy. 32.6. The Lord calls Heaven and Earth to be amazed at it, Hear O
Heaven, and give ear O Earth, for the Lord has spoken, for I have nourished
and brought up children, adopted them into my family, brought them into my
Land, advanced them unto my favor, vouchsafed my presence with them, set up my
Name and glory among them, and yet they have rebelled against me, Isa. 1.2. Be
astonished O ye heavens, and be ye horribly afraid, be very desolate, for my
people who have heard my voice out of Heaven, whom I have taken from the midst
of another Nation, by temptations, by signs, by wonders, by war, by a mighty
hand, by a stretched-out arm, and by great terrors, who have been the Fountain
of all their blessings, and the glory in the midst of them, have changed their
glory for vanity, and their Fountain for broken cisterns, Ier. 2.11, 12, 13.
This is matter of great pressure unto him, Amos 2.9, 13. and should much more
be so unto us.

Many aggravations there are in the sins of Gods people, which may greatly tend
to their humbling, and abasement. They are committed,

1. Against more glorious light, and more spiritual convictions, after they
have known God, and are known of God, Gal. 4.9. after he has taught them his
ways, and showed his covenant, and imparted unto them the secrets of his
salvation, Ps. 25.9, 14. after he had opened their ears, and sealed their
instruction to withdraw them from sinful purposes, Job 33.16, 17. after he had
caused them to hear a word behind them, saying, this is the way, Isai. 30.21.
and had showed them the salvation of God, Psalm. 50.23. and had been as it were
transfigured in their presence. The more the beauties of holiness are
discovered to the soul, the greater is the unkindness and disingenuity of that
soul, in giving entertainment to any sinful lust again.

2. Against special and more tender love, which love of Christ passes
knowledge, and therefore should constrain us to love him, that loved us, and
died for us, 2 Cor. 5.14. David had been highly honored by God, Solomon was
the beloved of God, and this made their sins both more strange, and more
atrocious, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9. Nehem. 13.26. you only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth, therefore I will punish you for your iniquities, Amos
3.2. Ier. 2.21, 22.

3. Against the breathings of the Spirit of Grace, whose motions being
quenched, whose operations being resisted, whose sweet and gracious pulsations
at the door of the soul being neglected, he is exceedingly grieved in the
hearts of his people, and provoked to withdraw himself and his Comforts from
them, Ephe. 4.30. Cant. 5, 6. and they put to cry hard for recovery of him
again, whom they had by their unkind usage grieved away, and caused to hide his
presence from them, Psa, 51.10, 11, 12.

4. Against the peace of God which should keep our hearts and minds in Christ,
from yiedling to temptations, Phil. 4.7. when the Lord speaks peace to the
souls of his people, and lifts up the light of his Countenance upon them, and
sheds abroad the love of his Son into them, this should fortify and garrison
the heart against the assaults of sin, the joy of the Lord should be the
strength of his people, Nehem 8.10. and the more comfort they have in being
acquainted with him, the more fearful they should be of being estranged from
him, the greater the sweetness of the peace of God, the greater the
bitterness of those sins whereby we forfeit it, and hide it from our selves.

5. Against that spiritual wisdom and understanding, which the Lord has given
us for this end, that we might walk worthy of him unto all pleasing, Col. 1.9,
10. True wisdom is the knowledge of the most honorable and most excellent
things whereby we discern things which differ, (...). Arist.
suggesteth the supreme and most necessary ends, and the most proper and
pertinent means conducing thereunto. Sets a man to consider how he may live
to the great uses for which he was made, is a wisdom unto salvation, 2 Timothy
3.15. makes him look to the way of life how he may depart from Hell, Prove.
15.24. 14, 8, 15. teaches him to walk circumspectly, and warily amidst the
many snares and temptations which are ready to seduce and mislead him, Ephesians.
5.15. makes him have his eyes in his head, Eccle. 2.14. that he may understand
every good path, Prove. 2.9. makes him study the will of God to the end that he
may keep it, Prove. 28.7. puts the heart and the right hand together, Eccle.
10.2. gives a spiritual evidence and taste of the beauties and sweetness of
holiness: shows it self in a good conversation, and in doing the Commandments,
Iam. 3.13. Psalm. 111.10. It is more improper for a holy man to yield up himself
unto any way or work of wickedness, then for a Counselor of State, or a great
Philosopher to play with Straws or Cherry-stones, to give up himself to Boyish
and Ludicrous vanities: and therefore holy men confess their sins in
Scripture by the name of folly, 2 Samuel 24.10. Psalm 73.22.

6. Against the hope of salvation, which teaches us to purify our selves as
Christ is pure, 1. Ioh. 3.3. our salvation will be to be like unto Christ, that
grace which makes us suspire after a likeness unto him in glory, will kindle in
our hearts a desire to be like unto him in grace, for grace is glory Inchoate,
as glory is grace Consummate, so much as we neglect duty, so much we shake the
hope of glory, Lord, says the Psalmist, I have hoped for thy salvation, I have
done thy commandments; Psalm, 119.166. though obedience be not a foundation
upon which to build our hope (for our hope must be in Gods word, not in our own
works, Psalm. 119.42.49.74.) Yet it is a fruit, and consequently an Evidence and
argument a posteriori to demonstrate it.

The salvation we hope for is to see God, and hereunto is required purity of
heart, Matthew. 5.8. as the object seen does make its own image in the eye which
sees it; so when the soul sees God in glory, Q^i sibi male vivendi licentiam
iud ^gent, totidem sunt Christi^nismi probra et ma^ulae. Calv. Opusc. de
Scandalis. Magna insanis est Evangeli^ non credere, cujus veritatem sanguis
Martyru^ Clamat, prodigia probant, ratio c^^firm^t, m^ndus testatur, Elementa
loquuntur, daemones confitentur. Sed long^ major Ins^nia, Si de Evangelii
veritate non dubitas, vivere tamen quosi de ejus falsitate non dubitates, Io.
Picus mira^dula Epist.
it is perfectly fashioned unto his likeness, and therefore without holiness
no man can see God, Heb. 12.14. So much as we blemish our holiness, we do
obscure and fully our hope.

7. Against the honor of Religion which is thereby exceedingly wounded and
reproached, 2 Samuel 12.14. the Apostle frequently exhorts us to walk worthy of
our high calling, so as becomes the Gospel, that we may adorn the doctrine of
our Lord Jesus, and put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, that they may
be ashamed who fasly accuse our good conversation, ut nemo de nobis male loqui
sine mendacio possit: to be tender of the name of God and his Doctrine, that
these may not be blasphemed, see Ephesians. 4.1. Phil. 1.27. 1 These. 2.12. Tit.
2.10. 1 Timothy 6.1. 2 Cor. 6.3. 1. Pet. 2.15.3.16. for though it be most
illogicall and absurd to charge an holy Doctrine with the blame of those sins,
which the professors thereof, contrary to the rules of their own profession,
and in obedience only to their own lusts; do commit; Yet so much ignorance and
malice there is in wicked men, as to blaspheme God for the sins of his
people, and to reproach the rectitude of the rule for the obliquity of their
lives, who swarve and vary from it. And by how much the greater ingratitude it
is to be honored by God as his servants are, and yet to dishonor him, by so
much the more heinous are those sins, whereby we neither sanctify God in our
own hearts, and open the mouths of others to pour contempt upon him.

8. Against the souls of our brethren, which are thereby greatly scandalized,
for as there is joy in Heaven, and consequently among the Saints on Earth
(whose affections and conversations are heavenly) for the conversion of a
sinner, and great mutual comfort in the communion of Saints, insomuch that the
joy of one is the joy of all the rest, 1 Cor. 15.31. 2 Cor. 2.3. So when a
converted person relapseth into any sin, it must needs sadden and offend the
souls of all who rejoiced in his standing, and possibly become a stumbling
block, and an occasion of falling unto them, as the Apostle shows, Romans
15-21. 1 Cor. 8.10-13.

9. Against the souls of the wicked, who are thereby hardened and encouraged.
Ezekiel. 16.54. when wicked men, who possibly had some conflict and regret in
their Consciences against those sins which their hearts hanker after, observe
holy men overtaken with them, and indulge unto them, like Benhadads servants,
they hastily catch at such an advantage, and are emboldened by their example
unto sin, whose holy lives they neither love nor imitate. Therefore of all
people, they who are called by Gods name, and have him for their God, should in
special manner humble themselves before him for their sins, as sins whereby
he is in special manner grieved and dishonored, should above all others take
heed of playing the wantons with divine grace; for though God be a tender and a
loving Father: yet he may be an angry Father, and who knows the power of his
anger? Psalm. 90.11. though thou be a Son, and an Heir of salvation, yet thou
may be Filius sub ira, a son under displeasure, and when thou art so, thou will find by sad ex perience, that one frown of his Brow, one stroke of his
Rod, has infinitely more bitterness in it, then there is sweetness in the
pleasures of a thousand sins. And since Gods own people do by their sins
contribute unto public Judgments, they should be the more careful to stand in
the breach, and to improve their interests in him for the procuring of renewed
mercies, to mind him of his gracious Covenant, and of his Fatherly relation
unto them, as the Church does, Psalm. 74.20. forget not the Congregation of the
poor, have respect unto thy Covenant, Thou, O Lord, art our Father, we are
thine, Isai. 63.16-19. Be not wroth very sore, neither remember iniquity for
ever, behold, see we beseech thee, we are all thy people, Isa. 64.9.

Thou art righteous] 1. In thy Judgments and chastisements which thou have
inflicted upon us, we cannot blame thy severity, thou did warn us before
thou did punish us, thy Trumpet did sound before thy Rod did smite us.

1. Thou art a Righteous Judge, when thou condemnest wicked men, their mouth
shall be stopped, thou will overcome when thou judge, Psalm. 51.4. Romans 3.19.
thou do not wrong them, for they shall receive according to their works.

2. Thou art a Righteous Father, when thou chastisest holy men, thou do not
wrong them, thou measurest and proportionest thy stripes not unto their sins,
but unto their strength, dealest with them tenderly, and suitably to their
cases and conditions: To purge them, not to consume them: thou have a Rod for
the Cummin, and a Staff for the Fitches, and a wheel for the Bread Corn, Isa.
28.27, 28. thy Rod is Virga Hominum, a Rod fitted to the condition of weak men,
2 Samuel 7.14. and the Temptations wherewith thou suffer thy Children to be
tempted, is (...), proportioned to the infirmities of man, 1 Cor. 10.13. thou
know our frame, thou remembrest that we are dust, Psalm. 103.14. that our
strength is not the strength of stones, nor our flesh of brass, that we dwell
in houses of Clay which are crushed before the Moth, Job 4.19.6.12. and
accordingly thou do in very faithfulness afflict, to refine, not to consume
us.

3. Yea when thy judgments are secret, yet they are righteous, when wicked men
prosper, and good men suffer, when wicked men are the Fan, and good men the
Corn, when the Weeds flourish, and the Corn is overtopped, when the wicked
devoureth the man that is more righteous than he, when the affairs of the world
seem to be out of course, and every man out of his place; All this while the
Lord makes way for the revelation of his righteous judgments: his work will be
beautiful in its time: all things will work together for good, as Materials in
a Building, Ingredients in a Cordial, Colors in a Table, Romans 8.28. The
prosperity of the wicked will work to his ruin, Prove. 1.3. the affliction of
the righteous will work to his glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Thus righteous in thy
judgments, neither thine Enemies, nor thy Children shall ever have cause
justly to complain against thee.

Thou art righteous] 2. In thy Covenant and promises: If thou should have
dealt with us according to our provocations, we had been consumed, Lam. 3.22.
Ier. 10.24. but thou have remembered thy gracious promise to our fathers, and
therefore we are preserved: Though our sins have forfeited mercy, yet thy truth
and faithfulness has fulfilled it: we owe not our remaining, that we are a
people, we owe not our escaping that we are a free people, unto any goodness of
our own, but unto the grace of the Covenant alone.

Gods truth and fidelity to his people that are in Covenant with him, is the
true ground of all their safety, he does not change, therefore we do not
perish, who otherwise from the days of our Fathers are gone astray, Ab eterno
per praedestinationem, in aeternum per glorificationem. Bernard Sermon. 2. in
Ascention^.
Mal. 3.6, 7. his mercies are from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 103.17.
from everlasting in predestination, to everlasting in Glorification; he gave
grace, and promised eternal life before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2.
before they were extant, or had any being, (further then in the purpose of God,
Ante mundi constitutionem vidit nos, fecit nos Emendavit nos, misit ad nos,
Redemit nos. Hoc ejus consilium manet in aeternum. Aug. Ser. 2. in Psalm. 32.
) on whom the grace was bestowed, to whom the life was promised. And what he
did from eternity purpose, he will not in time revoke, for his gifts are
without repentance, Romans 11.29. he does by his faith and fear preserve his
people through his power, unto that mercy which he has from eternity given
them, Ier. 32.40. 1 Pet. 1.5. of themselves they fall dangerously and
frequently from their own stedfastness, and then the Lord does chastise their
wantonness with the Rod of a Father, but does not utterly take away his loving
kindness, Psalm. 89.28-35.

1. The Covenant and grace thereof is free and absolute, not conditional and
suspended upon the unstable will of man: It is not of him that wills, or
runs, but of God that shows mercy, and shows it on whom he will, Romans
9.15-18. Between God the Father indeed, and Christ as a second Adam, the
Transaction of the Covenant was wholly conditional, he was to take from his
Father a Commission in our nature, to lay down his life, and to take it up
again, to fulfill all righteousness, to be made sin for us, to have our
iniquities and the Chastisement of our peace laid upon him, before he could see
of the travel of his soul, Yea he undertook not only for his own work, but for
ours, By the preciousness of his blood he purchased, and out of the plenitude
of his Spirit he supplyeth unto us what ever grace is requisite unto our
salvation. But I say as to us, the grace of the Covenant is thus far free and
absolute, that no duties are required of us, which are not as branches of the
same Covenant bestowed upon us: he has promised to give a new heart, and to
put a new Spirit within us, to take away the stony heart out of our flesh, and
to give us an heart of flesh, and to put his Spirit within us, and to cause us
to walk in his Statutes, to save us from all our uncleanness, to cleanse us
from all our iniquities, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27, 29, 33. and though he there tell
us, that he will be enquired of by the house of Israel to do these things for
them, ver. 37. yet we know it is he only who pours out the Spirit of Grace
and Supplication, whereby we make this inquiry of him, Zach. 12.10. Gal. 4.6.
Romans 8.26. True indeed it is, that when we believe, it is we only that believe,
and when we work, it is we that work, but our working is not the cause of his
grace, but his grace the cause of our working: Certum est nos velle and facere
cum volumus cum facimus sed ille facit ut velimus ut faciamus: Aug. de Great.
and Lib. Arbit. cap. 16.
And therefore the Apostle says I labored more abundantly they they all, to
note, that the labor was his, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with
me, to note, that the principle was God, Dys. Anchor, ipse Remunerator operis,
ipse Remuneratio tota. Bernard in Psalm. 91. Ser. 9.
1 Cor. 15.10. Thou have wrought all our works in us says the Prophet, Isai.
26.12. The works are ours, the strength is thine: ours the heart and the hand
that act, thine the Spirit and grace whereby we act: he does not withold his
love till our wills prevent him, Ille facit ut nos faciamus qu^ praecepit, nos
non facimus ut il^e faciat quae promisit Aug. Ep. 143.
and move him to extend it, but he does out of his own free love frame our
hearts unto the love of him, and work the will in us, which he requires of us,
Phil. 2, 12, 13. we repent because he turns us: he does not turn to us, because
we first turn to him: his love prevents ours and does not stay for it, 1 John
4.19. Ezekiel. 36.32. Isai. 48.9, 11. Inspirat charitatem ut quae discendo novimus
diligendo faciamus. Vid. Bradward. de causa Dei lib. 1. cap. 23.24 25.


2. The Covenant and the grace thereof is immutable, and therefore changes not
with the unstable will of man: God is not a man that he should lie, neither the
Son of man that he should repent, has he said, and shall he not do it? has
he spoken, and shall he not make it good? Numb. 23.19. his Covenant of grace is
confirmed by an oath, to show the immutability of it. This is as the waters of
Noah unto me, Iuratione Dei firmata promissio. Aug. de Civ. dei. lib. 16. cap.
32.
says the Lord, for I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go
over the earth: so have I sworn that I will not be wroth with thee nor rebuke
thee. For the Mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed: but my kindness
shall not depart from thee: Neither shall the Covenant of my peace by removed,
says the Lord that has mercy on thee, Isai. 54.9, 10. A Covenant thus founded
upon mere mercy, and sealed by an Oath, is more unmovable then hills, or
Mountains, the strong foundations of the Earth shall be sooner shaken then the
Oath of God miscarry: The oath of God is the strongest demonstration of the
immutability of his Counsel that can possibly be used, Heb. 6.17. for where he
swears he does not repent, Psalm. 110.4. Every work of mercy which he begins, he
carries on to a consummation, Phil. 1.6. the foundation of God remains sure,
cannot be infringed, shaken or undermined by the levity or inconstancy of the
will of man, 2 Timothy 2.19. what ever are the fluctuations of the heart of man,
the Counsel of the Lord shall stand, Prove. 19.21. Psalm. 33.10, 11.

3. The Covenant and grace thereof is most powerful and efficacious: Therefore
his Mercies are sure, his promises yea and Amen, because his word is settled in
Heaven, seconded with his power, which will find means to effect what ever he
has spoken, God has spoken once says the Psalmist, twice have I heard this,
It is a word constant and stable, a word doubled to note the certainty of it
(as Joseph said unto Pharaoh, Genesis 41.32.) That power and mercy belong to God,
Psalm. 62.11, 12. every promise which mercy makes, power performs, if mercy
promise an heart of flesh, and to put his fear into us, God has power enough
to make it good, he may as soon be an impotent, as an unfaithful God. Abraham
considered not the impotency of his own body, but the power of God to make good
his promise, and therefore staggered not through unbelief, Romans 4.19, 20, 21.
and so the Apostle argues touching the conversion of the Jews, Romans 11.23. If
they abide not still in unbelief, they shall be graffed in, for God is able to
graffe them in, Romans 11.23.

4. The Covenant and grace thereof is invincible by any adverse assaults,
nothing can alter or overruled the will of God, or cause him to recede from his
own purposes of showing mercy. If any thing could, sin could: But he has
assured us that that shall not. If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in
my Judgments, if they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then
will I visit their transgressions with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes;
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail, my Covenant will I not break, etc. Psalm. 89.30. --
34. though he punish, it shall be in measure; not unto rejection but unto
emendation, Isai. 27.8, 9. As to the guilt of sin, and damnation due unto it,
he will pardon it, I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no
more, Ier. 31.34. As to the dominion thereof, he will subdue it, and purge it
away, Micah 7.19, 20. Psalm. 65.3. As to the particular prevalency of any lust,
he will awaken us to repent. Make us by some word, or affliction, or mercy, or
example, or providence, to search and consider our ways and return from all
our evil doings, so he did David by the Ministry of Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.13. so
Peter by the look of Christ, Luke 22.61. so Joseph's brethren by his speaking
roughly unto them, Adeo Justice omnis Cooperantur in Bonum ut etiam si qui little
deviant and exorbitant* etiam hoc ipsum eis faciat proficere in bonum, quia
Humiliores redeunt atque doctiores. Aug. de Corrept. and Great. cap. 6. vid. de
not. and Great. 28. An vero ei peccata ipsa non Cooperantur in Bonum qui ex eis
humilior, ferventior, solicitior, timoratior and Cautior invenitur? Bern. Scr.
1. de diversi^.
Genesis 42.21. As to the Remainders of it, he will daily mortify and destroy
them, To. 6.6. sin then shall not break out so far as to annull and to
evacuate the Covenant: For who then should be saved? seeing in many things we
offend all, and by the grace of the Covenant alone are preserved from offending
more. Nay the Lord is so gracious to his people, that their very sins, which of
themselves do only defile and endanger them, are by Gods goodness ordered unto
their benefit. The Lord could keep his servants from falling, Jude ver. 24. and
preserve them blameless. 1 These. 5.23. but he is pleased sometimes to leave
them, that they may know themselves, and their own weakness, as he did
Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. that they may bemoan their own misery, and loath
themselves in their own eyes, Ier. 31.18, 19. Ezekiel. 20.43. that they may be
driven to live upon free grace and pardoning mercy, Psalm. 51.1. that they may
set the higher price upon the Lord Jesus, who is a Sanctuary for the chief of
sinners to fly unto, Isai. 8.14. 1. Tim. 1.15. that they may be the more
watchful over their loose and deceitful hearts, having once, yea twice been
betrayed by them, Job 40.5.34.32. that they may pray more earnestly for the
subduing and mortifying of prevalent corruptions, Psalm. 51.7-10. Romans 7.23.
these and other the like ways, the Lord has to order the very sins of his
people unto their good. And if sin shall not prevail against the covenant,
we are sure nothing else shall: he that pardons sin rebukes Satan,
conquereth the world, his love is above the reach of any thing to separate us
from it. Romans 8.33-39. none shall be able to take us out of Christ's or his
Fathers hands, Ioh. 10.28-30.

5. The Covenant and grace thereof is founded in the blood of Christ and
ratified by it: as he has by his blood purchased his people, Tit. 2.14. so
has he by the same procured for them all good things specified in the
Covenant, Romans 8.32. the blood of Christ can as well be vacated, as any branch
of the the Covenant be unfulfilled to believers, for whom they were all bought
with so precious a price.

6. His purchase is seconded by his Intercession, Intercession is the petition
of his blood, and therefore shall undoubtedly be granted, his Father hears
him always, John 11.41, 42. and he prays to his Father that his people may
be so kept, Vid. Camero. de Eccles. page 120.-126, in 4 to.
as that they may be with him, and behold his glory, Ioh. 17.11.15.24.
therefore accordingly they shall be kept.

7. Christ's Intercession is seconded with his Fathers love to his people, I say
not that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father himself loves you,
says Christ, John 16.26, 27. and therefore must needs be exceeding acceptable,
because Gods own heart is toward them, and his love upon them, as the woman of
Tek^a her petition for Absalom was easily granted by David, because his heart
was toward him before, 2 Samuel 13.39. and 14.1, 2.

Lastly, the Lord has promised his holy Spirit of Fear, Love, Grace, Adoption
unto his people, by the help of which they are preserved from the dangers
whereunto of themselves they are exposed, Ezekiel. 36.27. Isai. 59.21. upon these
and such like grounds it appears; That because God is righteous and faithful
in his Covenant, therefore we remain escaped.

And if it be here objected that the Promises are usually set forth as
conditional, The Lord is with you while ye be with him, and if ye seek him he
will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you, 2 Chronicles.
15.2. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land, Isai.
1.19. He that believes shall be saved, Mark 16.16. Ioh. 3.16. except ye repent
ye shall perish, Luke 13.3.

We answer, 1. Promises are in some places made absolutely, which in others are
conditionally expressed; as Heb. 13. I will not leave thee nor forsake thee,
Ier. 32.39. I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for
ever, I will give them an heart to know me, they shall be my people, I will be
their God, they shall return unto me with their whole heart, Ier. 24.7. If ye
will obey my voice and keep my Covenant, is a Condition in one place, Exodus
19.5. a free promise in another, ye shall keep my judgments and do them,
Ezekiel. 36.27. The mercy of the Lord is toward them that fear him, Psalm. 103.11.
There the fear of God is a condition. I will give them one heart and one way
that they may fear me, Ier. 32.39. there it is a free promise.

2. The Lord does not only give us good things under a condition, but does give
the condition it self to his people, compare Isai. 1.19. with Phil. 2.12. Acts
10.43. with Phil. 1.29. Ephesians. 2.8.

3. Precepts and Conditions are used as the vehicula of the grace promised. Of
our selves we can do nothing of those duties unto which Promises are annexed,
for all our sufficiency is of God, who works all our works for us, 2 Cor.
3.5. But the Precepts of the Word are the usual Instruments, by which he
works those things in us, which he requires of us, Romans 10.17.

4 Conditional Propositions do not imply that our performances work upon God
to do what he had said, as if the performance of duty were only ours, and then
the performance of promise alone his: But they intimate the order and connection
which the Lord has set amongst his own gifts, some whereof he has appointed
to be antecedent dispositions and preparations toward others consequent upon
them: He that believes shall be saved, this is a conditional promise, Faith
the condition, Salvation the Promise; But we may not so understand it as if
Faith were only ours, and Salvation alone his. But Faith is one Gift of God,
Antecedent to Salvation which is another Gift of God.

Use 1.
Now then since the Lord is righteous in all the ways of his Judgments and
secret providence, we must for ever lay our Hand on our Mouth, and put our
Mouths in the Dust, and beware of Murmuring and Repining against him, as if
his ways were not equal toward us: Behold he takes away, who can hinder
him? who will say unto him, what do thou? Job 9.12. we may in our Prayers
plead with God about his Judgments as Holy men have, Jer. 12.1. Habak.
1.2-4-13. But we may not quarrel at them nor murmr against them.

2. When the Lord does strangely vary his Providence toward a people, and
works unusual changes and alterations among them: stirs up some helps,
and then lays them by, calls forth others and quickly revokerh them,
fitteth men for great actions, and in the midst of those actions cutteth them
off; Our work here is not to censure either the Agent, or the Instruments, to
charge the dealings of God either as unrighteous or as unreasonable; but to
reflect upon our selves, and learn our unstedfastnesse in Gods Covenant, by his
diversifying of Providence toward us: 1. Sometimes we over dote upon
Instruments, and deifie them, as if God had no way to help us but one. And then
God breaks that Staff when we lean too hard upon it, to force us to lean upon
his Name again. 2. Sometimes we undervalue them, and will not understand that
God is doing us good by them, (as it is said of Moses, Acts 7.25.) and then God
suspendeth his work which he was about to do. 3. Sometimes the hearts of the
people are unprepared for mercies, and then God does not honor his Instruments
with settling them. Iehoshapbat was a good King, yet he did not work a perfect
Reformation, the high places were not taken away, and this the reason, the
people had not as yet prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 20, 32, 33. 4. Sometimes the guilt of old sins do remain uncleansed
away, as it is said of the iniquity of Baal-Peor, Josh, 22.17. and in this case
Instruments are too weak to divert wrath, 2 Reg. 23.25, 26. Never such a
Reformation as Josiah made about the eighteenth year of his reign, and yet
because the people returned but fainedly, Ier. 3.10. within a few years after
they were carried into Captivity. Our Savior was very near his Sufferings when
they cried Hosanna before him. The Sun often shows biggest, and shines
brightest, when it is ready to set; The Candle blazeth most when it is in the
Socket; Many times dying men, and it may be so with dying Churches, have a
lightning before death.

I speak not this to bode ill unto the Land of my nativity. If any say it shall
not be so, but we shall still have Peace, and Truth, and Holiness flourish, I
will cheerfully say as the Prophet did, Ier. 28.6. Amen: the Lord do so for
this Land: But withal, happy is the man that fears always, Prove. 28.14. The
sins of the people may weaken the hands of the best Instruments, and make them
unable to help us. It is noted as a cause of wickedness that men have no
changes, Psalm. 55.19. Ier. 48.11. But to be tossed and emptied, and exercised
with frequent alterations, and our sent to abide in us still, wanton under
Mercies, sullen under Judgments, after all our Physic to relapse, after all
that is come upon us, again to break the Commandments, this is a sad Symptom,
a great aggravation of our sin, and justification of Gods Righteousness in all
his dealings with us.

Again, since the Lord is the God of his people, and righteous to them in a way
of mercy and fidelity, We learn to acknowledge it a great Mercy, and to
glorify God for it, that we Remain yet escaped: that we may set up an
Eben-Ezer, and say thus far has the Lord helped us.

Many Considerations may set on the sense of this Mercy upon our hearts. 1. The
many sins which remain amongst us, even in the Israel of God: sad divisions,
sharp animosities, perverse Opinions, vanity, luxury; severe censurings, loose
walking, worldly mindedness, etc. 2. The many shakings, and universal
sufferings, whereby the Lord has made it appear that his quarrel was against
all orders of men, that the disease was all over, Isai. 1.6. Ier. 5.1-5. so
that none can blame others, but every one acknowledge the plague of his own
heart, and say as David did, I confess my sin, and the sin of my people, Dan.
9.20. Now various shakings and concussions in a Nation use to be sore presages
of greater Judgments, as we may see in Gods dealing with the ten Tribes before
their dissolution. What shakings have been amongst us, we need not recount, by
changes at home, by differences abroad, shakings on the Land, and shakings on
the Sea, shakings at hand, and shaking afar off, shakings by War, and shakings
by sicknesses, shakings in our minds by divided Opinions, shakings in our
hearts by divided affections, shaking in our estates by divided interests. And
whether these shakings have a tendency to dissolution we know not, (we are not
ignorant of the rage which has been upon many of our Protestant Brethren in
other parts of Christendom) But surely this consideration may lead us both to
glorify God that we Remain yet escaped, and to humble our selves under the
fear of his further wrath.

3. The powerful Preaching which has been in the Land which where it does not
kindly work, where it is not honorably entertained, does exceedingly ripen
Judgments, and make white for the sickle. It is compared to the shining of the
Sun, 2 Cor. 4.6. 2 Pet. 1.19. and to showers of rain, Deuteronomy. 32. which are
intended for the bringing forth of Salvation, and springing up of
Righteousness, Isai. 45.8. But if they fall upon sins, do hasten their
maturity, and make them nigh unto cursing, Heb. 6.7, 8. the sins of the Church
are Summer Fruits, they ripen faster then the sins of the World, the sins of
the Amorites were four hundred years a ripening, Genesis 15.16. the sins of Israel
in the Wilderness forty years, Psalm. 95.10. Gods patience toward the ten
Tribes after their revolt was but two hundred and sixty years; from the sins of
Manasseh to the Captivity brought upon Judah for those sins, little more then
one hundred years* As at Jerico the sounding of the Trumpet seven times did
lead in the falling of the wall, so the long sounding of the Word in the ears
of disobedient people, is a shrewd presage of ensuing ruin.

These considerations laid together, as should they justly awaken us to
Humiliation, so are they Evidences of Gods goodness toward us, in that such a
people Remain yet escaped. Escaped from the bondage of Popery, from the flames
of persecution, from the Spanish Armado, from the vault of Powder, from rigor
in the Church, from troubles in the State, from the terror of a bloody War,
from renewed attempts of trouble and danger, escaped from a Vote, extinguishing
and abolishing the whole maintenance of the Ministry, the consequences whereof
could not but have been unutterably miserable. Any one of these evils God might
have sharpened into a destruction. And yet after all this, Righteous art thou, O
Lord, for we remain yet escaped.

2. It reproves our unbelief, in consulting with flesh and blood, betaking our
selves to carnal shifts in time of danger, having a faithful Covenant, and a
righteous God to lay hold upon, whose alone fidelity is the ground of his
peoples safety, who knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, 2 Pet.
2.9. this was the sin of Ahaz in sending to the Assyrian to help him, when God
offered him a sign to confirm his trust in him, Isai. 7.11, 12. 2 Chronicles. 28.19.
The Christians in the Church of Corinth, being afraid to displease their
Heathen friends, and endanger themselves, would sit with them at the Idols
Table, and eat at their Tables meat offered to Idols: The Apostle diswadeth
them from using this Carnal shift to decline danger, bids them flee from
Idolatry, lest that which they in carnal wisdom might judge the means of their
standing, should prove the occasion of their fall, and directs them to trust
for safety in a faithful God, who would not suffer them to be tempted above
that they were able, but would with the temptation make a way to escape, that
they might be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13, 14.

3. In fears therefore and dangers we should be encouraged by these two
Arguments; 1. The Righteousness of God. 2. Our own present remaining escaped,
Faith in, and experience of the fidelity of God to help us, to trust in him at
all times: not to fear the wrath of man, but to secure the love of God, he
sometimes purposely brings his servants to difficulties, that they may make
trial of such a friend, who in six and seven troubles is at hand to deliver
them. Faith is a venturous grace, it honors God and lays hold on his
strength, Romans 4.20. Isai. 27.5. It is a victorious grace, and rises up above
difficulties, 1 Ioh. 5.4. all things are possible to it: Therefore in times of
danger let us plead Gods Covenant, and our own experience, Lord will thou now
destroy us seeing we remain, yet escaped, and are Monuments of thy Mercy? have
thou wrought so great deliverances, and done so many wonders, and snatched us as
brands out of the fire, to destroy us at the last? thou have delivered, and
do deliver, will thou not give us leave to trust in thee for deliverance
still? Though the Lord had broken us in the place of Dragons, and had cast us
off and put us to shame; yet even so we may lean upon his Name, and plead his
Covenant, Psalm. 44.17, 19. Psalm. 74.1-20. Isai. 64.8-12. Hab. 3.17, 18. How
much more comfortably may we plead it, when by the alone mercy thereof, we
remain escaped? When we may say as the people of Joseph did, Josh. 17.14. we
are a great people, and the Lord has hitherto blessed us? and may set up a
Monument as Samuel did, 1 Samuel 7.12. and say, thus far has the Lord helped us?
This is one chief Argument which Gods servants use in Prayer, to mind him of
his Word and Covenant, wherein he had caused them to hope, so Jacob, I am not
worthy of the least mercy, but thou said, I will do thee good, Genesis 32.9-12.
so Moses, we remain yet escaped out of the Land of Egypt, thou have brought us
out thence, turn from thy fierce wrath; Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy
servants, to whom thou swareest, etc. Exodus 32.11-13. and again, let the power
of my Lord be great, according as thou have spoken, pardon the iniquity of thy
people, as thou have forgiven them from Egypt until now; As they remain yet
escaped, so save them still; the same Mercy and Power can do it now which did
it before, Numb. 14.17, 19. so David, Thou have spoken of thy servants house,
for thy words sake have thou done these great things: and now O Lord establish
thy Word, do as thou have said, 2 Samuel 7.19, 21, 25, 27, 29. So Solomon, Let
thy word be verified which thou spakest unto thy servant David, 1 Reg. 8.26. So
Asa, O Lord we rest in thee, thou art our God, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. so Ieshaphat,
Thou art God -- our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chr. 20.6-12. no such plea in Prayer
as the free grace, the Word, the Truth, the Fidelity, the Righteousness of God.

4. This may comfort us against all the mutability of our own wills, Ut totum
Deodetur, Hominis voluntatem bonam and praparat adjuvandam and adjuvat
praeparatam. Aug Enchirid. cap, 32.

Si Deus misereatur etiam volumus ad eaudem quippe Gratiam pertinet ut velimus
Ad Simplicium Qu. 2. and Epist. 106.


whereby we are apt to start aside like a deceitful Bow; In as much as our
safety depends not upon our own performances, but upon the Covenant of God,
who is righteous and faithful; and will not suffer our weakness to annul his
promise, Romans 9.16.

5. This Caution notwithstanding we must take in, That we beware of playing the
wantons with the grace of Gods Covenant, because thereby we remain escaped; for
the Lord will not pass by the petulancy and lasciviency of any of his Children,
though he does not totally cast them off, yet he has sharp rods wherewith he
can chastise them. If they fly from his service, he can send a Whale to swallow
them, and can bring all his Waves and Billows upon them; if they keep not to
his Commission, he can send a Lion to tear them, he can make them feel the
weight of his Frown, though they do not of his Fury, and it may be, cause them
to walk in darkness, drooping, and disconsolate all their days, complaining of
broken Bones, and of a wounded Spirit, with strong cries, imploring the
comforts of that Spirit, which they had so unkindly greived and resisted.

As it is this day] escaped, escaped this day in which we lie under so sore and
heavy a guilt. This is a mavelous heightning of Gods Mercy, That we may
remain escaped in this day, a day of so great sin: and also a mavelous
aggravation of the sin, that it has been committed in this day, a day of so
great Mercy, wherein we remain yet escaped. Sin committed in a day of mercy,
is the more exceeding heinous: mercy extended in a day of sin, is the more
exceeding glorious. That we should so greatly provoke the Lord, this day,
wherein we remain escaped: O how prodigious and presumptuous the wickedness?
That we should remain escaped this day, wherein we have so greatly provoked the
Lord, O how admirable and unsearchable the goodness?

1. Sin in a day of great Mercy is exceedingly the more heinous. It is a
great aggravation of sin, when it withstandeth Judgments, when the Lord
changes the corrections, and men still hold fast their sins, Amos 4.6-12. and
turn not unto him that smites them, Isai. 9.13. It is a brand upon Ahaz that
in the day of his distress he sinned more, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. How much more
heinous is it to abuse Mercy and Loving kindness? It is the character of a
wicked man, that though favor be showed him, yet he will not learn
righteousness, Isai. 26.10. The Angel spared Balaam, and yet he ran greedily
after the wages of iniquity, Numb. 22.35. This is an unkindness the Lord often
upbraideth his people with, Deuteronomy. 32.13-15^ Ier. 22.21. Hos. 13.5. Amos 2.9-13.
This made Solomon's sin the greater, that he turned from the God of Israel, who
had appeared to him twice, 1 King. 11.9. This adds disingenuity,
unthankfulness, unkindness unto disobedience, when men neither fear, nor love
the Lord for his goodness: No surfets more dangerous then those which are upon
sweet things: no diseases more desperate, then those which reject Cordials; no
Fruits ripen faster; then those on which the Sun continually shines: as the
Apostle says of grace, where sin abounded, grace did much more abound, so we
may by an inversion say of sin, where grace abounds, there the guilt of sin
is the more abundant.

2. Mercy extended in a day of sin, is the more exceeding glorious, when the
Lord is pleased to proclaim mercy to a divorced people, Ier. 3.12-15. in the
midst of provoked wrath to remember mercy, Hab. 3.2. and when men go on
frowardly in their own ways, then to heal them, to restore comfort to them, to
create peace, Isai. 57.17-19. to heal a backsliding people, and to love them
freely, Hos. 14.14. To look back upon a denying Peter, Luke 22.61. To send a
pardon to an adulterous David, 2 Samuel 12.13. To call from Heaven to a
persecuting Saul, Acts 9.4. This is that which makes Mercy the more radiant,
which magnifieth the freeness, fullness, and superabundance of it, that it
rejoices against judgment, Iam. 2.13.

These considerations tend much to humble a people which remain yet escaped, as
we do this day.

The sad conjunctions of our sins with the Lords goodness, when the Lord says,
I will remember my Covenant, and thou shall remember thy ways, Then he says,
thou shall be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy
shame, when I am pacified toward thee, Ezekiel. 16.60-63. When we compare his
Mercy with our corrupt doings, then is a time to loath our selves in our own
sig^t, Ezekiel. 20.42-44. 36.25-32. Sin punished, does many times harden a sinner
in pride, as we see in Pharaoh. But sin pardoned, and subdued with Mercy,
should melt the soul into a godly sorrow, holy revenge, and self displicency
for it: They shall shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days.

O let us learn to bewail our wickedness, in that we have ventured on it in a
day of Mercy, as if we had been delivered to commit abominations, Ier. 7.10. as
if privileges were a protection to profaneness. Certainly if mercies be
aggravations of sin, no Nation in the world is less excusable then we. What
Nation in the Earth has God so honored with a long possession of his Oracles,
and glorious light of his Word? In so much that other Nations study the English
Tongue to read our Books; What Nation has ever had such manifold, such
miraculous deliverances? What Nation has the Lord Crowned with a greater
abundance of all good things? What means could be used to work upon a people
which the Lord has not made use of amongst us? If teaching would work upon us,
we have had his Word; If Chastisements would amend us, we have had his Sword.
If bounty would persuade us, we have been fed, and clothed, and healed, and
crowned, and compassed with mercies more then we can recount. If strange and
unparalleld Providence would awaken us, this Nation has never had for many
hundred years such a prospects of Gods works, such interwoven mixtures of
Mercies, of Judgments, of Wonders, of Terrors. Great Instruments raised up,
and taken away again, Wars raging, and again ceasing, Seas roaring, and again
calmed. And certainly the Works of the Lord should be sought out of his people,
Psalm, 111.2. and improved to their own account. Felt Judgments should make them
out of love with sin: Renewed mercies should make them in love with God. That
which humbles should heal them, that which comforts should cure them, that
which amazeth, should amend them.

2. This is a strong Argument in Prayer for penitent sinners to use, that God
has mercy in store even in a day of sin for his people: that though we have
trespassed against God, yet there is hope in Israel concerning this thing, Ezra
10.2. That though sin do ever forfeit mercy, yet it does not ever remove it;
though it do always provoke wrath, yet it does not always procure it; how will
mercy triumph in a day of repentance, when so great provocations have not
hitherto extinguished it? how will fire break forth in dry wood, when it has
prevailed against the green? needs must that Jewel be glorious in the Sun,
which glisters in the Night. This should exceedingly encourage us unto
Repentance. Does the Lorld invite backsliding Israel, does he wait to be
gracious to a secure people, does he pity us in our blood, and are his bowels
kindled toward us, when we compass him about with lies and deceit? does he
look back with pity upon a a denying Peter? does he speak pardon from Heaven
unto a persecuting Paul? does he show mercy on a Manasseh, filling Jerusalem
with blood and Idols? does he appear first unto Mary Magdalen, out of whom he
he had cast seven Devils? O who would not be encouraged by such examples, to
fly for sanctuary from the wrath to come, unto that mercy which has snatched
these as brands out of the fire? The Lord keeps as open house for us as for
them, Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17. his mercy as abundant for any other penitents as
for them, Isa. 55.6, 7, 8. his call and invitation the same to us as to them,
Ioh. 7.37, 38. The blood of Christ as effectual for us as for them, 1 Ioh.
2.2. They were set forth as examples to all that should after believe in him
unto eternal life, 1 Timothy 1.16.

Only let us beware of profaning this comfort by persisting in our sins: But
follow the example of these penitents here, though their sin had not removed
Gods mercy, yet Gods mercy did remove their sin. They entered into a Covenant,
swear to the Lord, gave their hands that they would put away their strange
wives, and separate themselves from the people of the Land, Ezra 10.3, 11, 12,
19. This is a Genuine work of true hope in mercy, when it makes us purify our
selves 1 Ioh. 3.3. no man can hope for glory, who is an enemy to Grace, for
glory is grace perfected, and we can hope for nothing which we hate, he that
hates Grace, does not love Glory.

3. We note that in solemn Humiliations there is a great Emphasis in these
words, As it is this day, It is a circumstance greatly considerable, The time
wherein we have sinned and escaped, Time greatly aggravates sin, Exodus 8.32.
Luke 19.42. Time greatly commends Mercy, that God kept touch with his people to
a very day, Exodus 12.41, 42. Therefore we should learn wisdom to improve time
unto duty, as it is said of the Children of Issachar, that they had
understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. Who
knows said Mordecai to Ester, whether thou be come to the Kingdom for such a
time as this, Ester 4.14. Let us therefore wisely consider the condition of the
times which God has brought upon us. Times of great and universal sickness and
infirmity, after he had not many months since upon Prayer, removed such
distempers in good part: surely his anger is not turned away, his hand is
stretched out still, because we have not unfeignedly turned unto him that
smites us.

2. Times of wonderful changes and unsetledness, many preparations and
attempts to heal the breaches amongst us, and many abortions and miscarriages
in those attempts, Honorable persons raised up by God to serve the Interests
of the Nations, and by his Providence laid down again. And when the Lord had by
his providence raised up this eminent Instrument, now gone to him, by whose
great Wisdom, accurate intelligence, indefatigable vigilance, and special care,
we might probably have supposed that by degrees things would have wrought unto
a composedness, and settlement in the midst of great Actions and great
Successes, he likewise is suddenly taken away. It is good to study the meaning
of God in these things. 1. That we should bewail our carnal confidence, and
learn to look up and to trust more in Him, and less in man. 2. To labor for
hearts established by his grace, that we may the more comfortably look for an
outward establishment in order and peace, for our settlement must begin in our
hearts, so long as our hearts are unsteadfast with God, his dealings may be
still in fluctuation and uncertainty toward us. 3. To acknowledge
notwithstanding these sad changes and concussions, this great Mercy, That we
remain yet escaped, that the Lord has not yet said unto us that he would cast
us off, has not exposed us to those flames and commotions which our sins have
deserved, but that yet we sit under our Vines and Fig Trees, and none make us
afraid.

Lastly, to cast Anchor on the Rock of Ages, and keep close to the Throne of
Gace, to secure his love and care of us, his presence and Throne amongst us,
who never dies, in whom there is everlasting strength, to get firm holdfast of
those Comforts which have nothing of Mortality, nothing of Lubricity in them,
which will stay with us while we remain here to sweeten all the passages of our
Pilgrimage, and accompany us unto the presence of the Lord, in whose presence
is fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand there are pleasures for ever more.

FINIS.

