SPES AUDACES ADJUVAT Holles coat of arms

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF THE Right Honorable Denzell LORD Holles,
BARON HOLLES of Ifield in SUSSEX, Lord High Steward of the Honors, Manors, and
Revenues of the QUEEN; Custos Rotulorum of Dorcetshire, and one of the Lords of
his Majesty's most honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.

By SAMVEL REYNER, M.A. and Rector of St Peter's in Dorchester.

LONDON, Printed for William Churchill Bookseller in Dorchester, MDCLXXX.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of the Right Honorable Denzell Lord Holles,
etc. Who Deceased Feb. 17. 1679. And was Interred in St Peter's Church in
Dorchester, April 10. 1680. Aged 81 years, 3 months, and 16 days.
Isai. III. 1, 2, 3. For behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts does take away
from Jerusalem, and from Judah, the stay and the staff:

The mighty man, and the man of war, the Judge, and the Prophet, and the
Prudent, and the Ancient:

The Captain of fifty, and the Honorable man, and the Counselor, and the
cunning Artificer, and the Eloquent Orator.


IT is the great unhappiness of the generality of the men of the World, that
they know not how to set a due estimate upon those things and persons, that God
does design to be blessings to them. For either they do idolize them, and set
them up in the place of God; or else on the other side, they do too too much
vilipend them, and are not thankful to the Almighty, for that blessing and
benefit they receive by them.

For the remedying of this double Evil, God is pleased to make use of a twofold
method. To cure our over-valuing of such Instruments, God is pleased to vilify
them, and to show us the Emptiness and Insufficiency that is in them to sustain
that Burden that we will needs lay upon them: Cease ye from man whose breath
is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of, Isai. 2.22.

To cure us of (or if you will rather, to revenge upon us) our unthankfulness
for them; God is pleased sometimes, very unseasonably as unto us, to take them
away, and deprive us of them: that so, by the mischief that will inevitably
attend their departure from us, we may be made to acknowledge the greatness of
that Blessing, that God did design to afford us by them.

The Jewish Church and State were at this time verging toward ruin and
destruction. 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
They had for a long time mocked the messengers of God, despised his words,
misused his Prophets; Isal. 29.21.
hated them that reproved them in the Gate; been unthankful for all those means
and methods of his Grace, that he had used toward them for their good.

And therefore God being now about to make a way for his Wrath: Psa. 78.50.
He threatens by the Prophet, that he would remove and take away all those
things, and Persons (especially) that had hitherto been their support and stay,
and that had staved off ruin and destruction from them. For behold, the Lord,
the Lord of Hosts, does take away, etc.

The external Happiness and Prosperity of every State, does consist in the
Enjoyment of those things and Persons, that my Text has respect unto, and
which here God threatens to deprive Judah of, viz. the Abundance of those
things which are necessary for the Conservation of Life natural; the military
power and strength that it has to preserve what is its own, and to resist
those that would invade our Rights; The Wisdom of our Counselors, the
Integrity of those that are to administer Justice between man and man, etc. To
which if you add Good Prophets also to instruct us in the things of God; There
is nothing then that is wanting on Gods part to be done, to make such a People
a Happy and flourishing People. And all this now God had done for the Jewish
Nation; but by their Unthankfulness for, and Unworthy walking of so great
mercies, they had provoked God to take them all from them again; which
accordingly he threatens here in my Text to do; and that in such a time too,
wherein (of all others) they could worst have spared them.

I shall not pretend to so much Curiosity, as to go about to make any Nice (or
at this time Needless) division of the Text. Nor shall I so much as pretend to
speak to every particular in it, which might otherwise administer sufficient
matter of profitable discourse. It shall suffice, as that which is pertinent to
the present occasion, to recommend only these two things from it, to your
observation.

First, That Great men in Great places, especially if they be Good as well as
Great, they are a great stay and support to the Church and State wherein they
are.

Secondly, That it is but a sad Prognostic of approaching Evils, when God
takes them away at such times and seasons, when their longer abode amongst us,
is more than ordinarily necessary. An Ominous Presage that, Psa. 78.50.
that God is then making a way for his Anger. Of these two I shall speak very
briefly, and promiscuously.

When the Kings and Princes of Judah were to be led Captive and destroyed; it
is then said of whole Israel, that it was no longer (...) the Glory of all
Lands as it is called Ezekiel. 20.6. But it was henceforth to be nothing but (...)
and (...) a desolation and astonishment, (...) a Hissing and a Curse, Jer.
25.18.

It is a Rueful Spectacle to see States and Kingdoms bereaved of such persons
as were eminently serviceable to them in their Administrations. Especially,
when the State of their public Affairs is such that their service is more
necessary than ever; Then all things run to Confusion presently.

It is a due Subordination of Princes and People, of Magistrates and Subjects,
of Rulers and Ruled, that creates Glory to any State or Nation. When the King
sits in his Throne, environed with a wise and honorable, with a faithful and
religious Council, that like Mordecai, Esth. 10.3.
do really seek the good and prosperity of the whole body politic. And when
from thence Justice and Righteousness flows down by the means of inferior
Magistrates, to all indifferently. And when thereupon the People love, and
honor, and obey their Rulers: there is the most Glorious spectacle that Earth
affords.

Then, if ever, will our sons be as Plants grown up in their Youth, and our
Daughters as Corner-stones polished after the similitude of a Palace. Then, in
all likelihood, when honest labor and industry is encouraged by those that are
in high Places, will our Barns be full, affording all manner of store. Then, if
ever, will be the time when we shall need to fear no breaking in from abroad,
nor breaking out from within our selves, nor hear any complaining in our
streets. O happy are the People that are in such a Case! But thrice happy then,
if to all these they have that also, which follows in the Psalm, if they have
the Lord for their God, Psa. 144.12, 13, 14, 15.

When God threatens that he would stretch out that (...) and those (...) the
Line of Confusion, and those stones of emptiness upon Jerusalem: he tells us
withal, how he would bring that evil upon them; and it is thus. The Nobles
should be called to the Kingdom, and there should be none there, and all her
Princes should be nothing. That is, there should be no Princes, or Nobles left,
that should be fit to take the Rule and Government of the State upon them. And
then he tells them, not (...) (Sarim) but (...) (Sirim) not Princes, but
thorns, should come up in her Palaces, not (...) (Chorim) but (...) (Chochim)
not Nobles but Brambles in the Fortresses thereof, and it should be an
habitation for Dragons, and a Court for Owls, Isai. 34.11, 12. When the Church
makes that sad complaint, Lam. 2.1, 2. that the Lord had to vered the Daughter
of Zion with a Cloud, and that he had cast down from heaven to the Earth (...)
the Beauty of Israel: in the sixth Verse, the Prophet tells us, when all this
misery did commence; viz. when God had despised in the indignation of his
anger, both the King and the Priest, (...)
or Prince. God is the God of Order, and not of Confusion, and when he intends
to preserve the Beauty, and Order, and Ornament of any Nation, he will then
with his own right hand sustain those Pillars of it, that are its Ornament.

But then as I said, Great men in high places, especially if good men too, they
are the strength and stability, the stay and support of the Church and State
wherein they are. What the Poets feigned of their Atlas, that he sustained the
Heavens upon his shoulders; is in a sober sense true of the Great and Noble men
of the Earth, (supposing them Religious withal) that are in place of Power.
They, under God, do sustain the World. The Burden of Church and State lies
upon their Shoulders, and like the strong Pillars of an House, they keep up all
from Ruin.

And when God in his righteous judgment suffers such Pillars once to be pulled
down; it is not long before all things in Church and State will run to
Confusion, as we lately found in this poor Kingdom, by sad Experience.

When there was no King in Israel, then every one did that which was right in
his own Eyes. Marvail not then, Judge. 17.5, 6.
if you find some Micah or other, even with an whole House full of Gods: when
once the Buttresses of Church and State are pulled down; men grow wondrously
religious then presently. Then, if there be any need of any, you may find
Priests in every Corner; Or if not, yet every one has the power of Ordination
in his own hands. Any of his Sons or Servants, may be consecrate to that
office, when he pleases. And none shall be found so vile, but he shall be
accounted worthy enough to discharge the most sacred services of the Sanctuary.

When there is once no King in Israel, Judge. 18.17, 18. Judge. 18.27. Judge.
19.24, 25.
no marvail then, to hear of many Micahs Houses robbed; many Laishes plundered
and undone; many Wives and Daughters ravished; many great and mighty Families
like that of Benjamin, Judge. 20.48.
brought to ruin. All these things were once done in Israel, when there was no
King there, but every one did that which was Right in his own Eyes. That Right,
was summum jus, no doubt. And all these things were once done in England too,
God grant they may never be done so again; when there was no King nor Nobles
left to sit at the Stern: but all those Pillars of Church and State were pulled
down, which should have kept up both from such Confusions.

Indeed, every way great is the blessing and benefit of good men in great
Places. For

First, Such will be careful, even out of Conscience, to preserve the just
Rights and Liberties of those that are of inferior Quality; and to break the
Teeth of Oppressors. And there is nothing in the World that has a more Natural
Tendency toward the general Ruin of any Nation, than the Invasion of the just
Rights and Liberties of the Populacy; and when Oppressors can, without fear of
Punishment, grind the faces of those that are of inferior rank.

For this naturally begets Hatred and Revenge in those that suffer wrong,
against those that do it. Besides, this naturally begets murmuring and Repining
against the Higher Powers; and men look upon them no longer as the Protectors
and Defenders of their Rights and Liberties (as by the Laws of God and man they
ought to be) but as so many Favorers or Abettors at least, if not the Authors
and Contrivers of their miseries.

And these Discontents now, are nothing else but the Seeds of Sedition sown in
men's minds, which when they have been once sufficiently heated by mutual
complaints, there wants nothing but opportunity to chip them, and then
immediately they spring up into open Rebellion, which puts all to the utmost
Hazard.

But now, when good men stand at the Princes Elbow, ready to receive the
complaints of the oppressed, and to do them right; and to brow-beat, and (if
that will not do) to break the teeth and arms of such sons of violence: this
both prevents that wrong and injury that would otherwise be done, conserves
peace and friendship between man and man, and both conciliates and confirms
that Love and honor, that fear and Reverence, that is due from the Subject to
the Sovereign Powers.

Secondly, Good men in great places, they do as much good by their Example, as
they do by their Power and Interest. Virtue and Vice, the one is the
Preservative, the other is the Bane and Destruction of States and Kingdoms. And
every one knows that the one of these (Virtue) is encouraged; the other (Vice)
is discouraged and dashed out of countenance, much more by the Example of those
that are in power, than by all the wholesome Laws that the wit of man can devise
to make -- Non sic inflectere sensus Humanos edicta valent, ut Vita Regentum.

In all Ages of the World, the Rations boni and mali, have been the same. Ever
since Moses's time to this moment, the Decalogue has been the constant
standing rule of our Obedience; and those Laws have the same Authority, and the
same Sanction now, that they had at first. But in all Ages, you may observe,
that men's carriage and deportment toward them have been different, according
to the Example that has been given them, by those that were in the highest
places.

If the Kings of Israel and Judah would be Idolaters; why so would the most of
their Subjects be too. But if they were careful to walk before the Lord in
their integrity, their People then would keep some tolerable decorum in their
manners also.

There is but one instance only to the contrary, that does at present occur to
my thoughts; and that was in good Hezekiah's time. Which, by the way, lets you
see, how necessary it is to the well-being of any Nation, that not only the
Prince himself be good and virtuous, but that his Nobles be so too. Otherwise
his single goodness and uprightness may not be able to stave off judgments from
his people: and consequently, we may learn hence, what a Blessing great men may
be (the (...) I mean, though they be not the (...) the greatest of all) if they
be such as they should be. And on the other side, what a Plague and Pest they
may be to the Community, when the good Prince, for want of Better, is forced to
make use of them.

I say the Instance, that I was speaking of, is in good Hezekiah's time. Who,
though he himself was one of the best Kings that ever swayed the Jewish
Scepter: yet he was yoaked with such a Company of Princes and Nobles, as scarce
a worse Character can be given to any, than that is which is given them, Mic.
3.9, 10, 11. They did abhor judgment, and pervert all equity; they built up
Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. The heads thereof did judge for
reward, the Priests thereof did teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof did
divine for money. No marvail therefore at that which follows. Therefore shall
Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and
the mountain of the house as the high places of the forest. And if you ask me
how I know this was in Hezekiah's time; why the Prophet Jeremy tells me so,
Jer. 26.18.

Besides, thirdly, God is pleased sometimes to prorogue and put off the
executions of his judgments upon sinful Nations, which are otherwise ripe
enough for ruin, for the sake of some few of those that fear his name,
especially if those persons be such as be (...); 1 Timothy 2.2.
such as have power in their hands and zeal enough in their hearts to do
service for him answerable to their Power. The Sodomites were ripe for ruin,
when as yet God would have spared them, if there could but have been found ten
righteous men amongst them. And the destroying Angels, we know, could not
execute that commission that they had against them, till righteous Lot was
removed from them, Genesis 19.22.

Nay a time there was, when one such good man, (...), that could, and would
have executed judgment for God; would have saved the City of Jerusalem from
destruction, Jer. 5.1. Some good men there were in Jerusalem at that time,
there is no doubt. It is more than probable that Jeremy himself and Baruch were
there. But alas! they were poor Underlings, men of inferior rank, that had
little or no Power and Interest. Alas! they could not defend themselves from
the wrongs and injuries that were done unto them; much less could they avenge
upon others, those daring abominations of theirs, that were haling Gods
Judgments down upon Church and State.

If there had been but a few such men among them, that could and would have
executed judgment for God, as Phinehas did: they might have done more toward
the rescuing of all from ruin, than a great many Jeremies and Baruchs could do.

They, like Noah, Daniel, and Job, might deliver their own souls by their
Righteousness (Ezekiel. 14.20.) But it must be some Phinehas or other, some one or
other (...), that by executing judgment for God upon his Enemies, must be able
to stay a public Plague.

The Psalmist tells us, that there was a time, when God was so far provoked
against Israel, upon their making of the Molten Calf; that he was even resolved
upon their destruction. And had certainly brought it upon them, had not Moses
his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he
should destroy them, Psa. 106.23. Ay, here is a man of God indeed, (as Moses is
called Deuteronomy. 33.1.) here is a man of God indeed I say, that can hold the hands
of the Almighty, that can dare to put himself into the Breach, even when Heaven
it self is making the Assault. Genesis 32.28.
One that is such an Israel and Prince with God, has such Power with him, and
Interest in him: ut non nisi Mosis permissuirasci possit Deus, God cannot
punish a Rebellious people, over whom Moses is set (I speak it with reverence)
before he have, as it were, asked Moses 's leave to do so. For so you find he
bespeaks him; Let me alone (says he) that my wrath may wax hot against them,
that I may consume them, Exodus 32.10.

I have now done with my Text; and I shall ease you of the trouble of a longer
attendance here, when I have spoken two words more. One of that Honorable
person whose Corpse is brought hither now to be Interred; the other to you
especially of the higher Quality, who are mournful Attendants upon this sad
Solemnity.

For the first, It was mine unhappiness (I confess) that I was one that had but
very little personal Acquaintance with this Noble Lord deceased. And that which
adds to it, is this, that I have received no Instructions (no, none in the
least) very necessary you will all judge, upon such an Occasion, I have
received no Instructions I say, from those that had opportunity of knowing him
better. Some of whom might have been so kind if they had pleased, as to have
imparted some at least of their Observations to me. For the want of which
therefore, it will be but a very lame and imperfect account, that I shall be
able to give you, either of him or his Actings; unless any man will be so
unreasonable as to expect, that I should speak either by Fiction, which in
truth is beneath me, or else by Inspiration which is as much above me.

Yet as the Sun in the Firmament casts forth such a brightness by his Rays, as
that there is none but is enforced to take some notice of it, though they
cannot so well Philosophize about it, as some others can, that have made it the
subject of their studies: So this Honorable person, whose Corpse lies here
before us, did move in such an Orb, and did shine with so much Brightness in
it; as that no one can be such a stranger in this our Israel, but he must of
necessity, have heard something of his Fame.

His Birth and Parentage was Noble and Honorable; he being a second son of the
Illustrious House of Clare. And that is some Incentive to honorable
undertakings, to derive ones Pedigree from honorable and virtuous Ancestors. A
great and noble mind will scorn to dishonor them so far, as to debase it self
to unworthy Actings.

My Lord was Noble by Birth, and no doubt he knew it, and did set a due
estimate upon it. But withal he knew, that Nobility by Patent alone, it was but
Nobility in Parchment. And that a man of true honor, must have something more
to make him honorable, than merely his Princes Favor or Fancy.

He was careful therefore to store his mind with all soul-ennobling virtues;
that so he might reflect a greater honor upon his Family, than that was which
he received from it. And that when it should come to his own turn, his Prince
might not set his Seal upon a Blank; but the Honor that he should confer upon
him, it should be as well the Reward of his own Desert, as the Token and Pledge
of his Princes Kindness.

And that is true honor indeed; that which being bestowed commends the
judgment of the Prince, more than his Fancy, and makes the World to know, that
he understands how to value men not by their fine Clothes, or their handsome
faces, or by the Recommendation of other Grandees: but by their own real worth
and virtue. So that indeed, such a person advanced to honor by his Prince, he
does at the same time advance his Princes honor, and not only receives, but
gives it.

About 23 years old, in King James's time, he was Chosen a Member of
Parliament, for a Town in Cornwall, and after his being Married unto the
Daughter and Heiress Apparent of Sir Francis Ashly, of this County, he was in
four several Parliaments Chosen Principal Burgess for this Town of Dorchester.
But indeed, the honor that we did him by choosing of him, was not comparable to
that honor he did us, in accepting of our Choice. The Prudence and Wisdom,
that he always manifested in those Assemblies; The constant zeal that he had
for his Princes true Interest (though not always rightly understood) and for
the Liberties of his Country; his constant opposition against all Innovations
in the Church, and against any thing that looked like a public Grievance in
the Commonweal: It did not only create him Honor and Renown among all good
Protestants, and good Patriots; but it did derive some Honor also upon this
Place; as making the World to know, that We also had some sentiments of those
virtues in our selves, for the sake of which we so constantly made choice of
him.

He had once the unhappiness indeed, to fall under his Princes Displeasure; and
yet none need much to wonder at it; since Kings see with other men's Eyes, and
hear with other men's Ears; and there never want those about the Courts of
Princes who do envy and traduce that virtue in others, that they cannot, or
will not imitate themselves. It is likely that some such persons had
misrepresented Mr. Holles to the King that then was; which might be the
occasion of that short displeasure that was conceived against him. But that
Excellent Prince was too wise to be long imposed upon; and it seems did quickly
find cause to surcease any farther prosecution of that displeasure.

This I am certain of, that it was not long before Mr. Holles gave such
Testimony of his Loyalty to his Prince, that the Antimonarchical Party that
then carried all before them in the House of Commons, quickly found that he was
not for their Purpose; and therefore turned him out of Doors. Yea, (if I be not
mistaken) they made the Land of his Nativity too hot to hold him, as thinking
that they could not sit secure in their Usurped Thrones, till they had got the
Seas between themselves and him.

What his particular Agency was in the happy Restoration of his Majesty that
now is, I am not able to declare. But the King it seems was so well acquainted
with it, and had such a grateful Remembrance of it: as that he thought that Orb
that hitherto Mr. Holles had moved in, was too low, and too little, for a star
of his magnitude and influence, and therefore advanced him into an Higher;
first making him a Peer of the Realm, then taking him into his Honorable
Privy Council; and two several times employing him as his immediate
Representative to foreign States and Princes. Where he discharged his Trust
with that Prudence and discretion, and yet with that State and Grandeur, as
created him Honor at home, and Admiration from abroad.

One Instance of the Greatness of his mind I cannot choose but remember. It is
reported of him, that when he was on his Embassy in France, at his departure
from thence, that King did offer him very rich and noble presents; which yet he
absolutely refused to receive: as scorning to accept any personal Kindness from
those hands, from which his Master, he thought, could not obtain justice. A
piece of self-denying Grandeur this, that, I think, cannot be often paralleled.

Let me add to all this, and above all this, that he was one that was as
faithful to his God, as he was to his King and Country. One that stuck close to
the Reformed Religion, understood its Principles, well and thoroughly,
professed and propugned them publicly, practiced them Conscientiously, lived
and died in it, and if he had been called to it, no doubt would have died for
it.

He was naturally of as high a spirit as the most daring Gallants of them all;
but yet he thought it not beneath him (as some others do) upon his bended Knees
daily to worship that God that made him. He would some times have thought scorn
to run away from the proudest piece of mortality that treads on Earth, but he
could never understand it to be any piece of valor or Gallantry, to run upon
the Almighty.

Prayers, and Tears, and Supplications, these he thought the most proper way of
addressing himself by, to the eternal God; but could never understand either
the Valor or the Courtship of those Fools and Madmen (as he accounted them)
that could dare the Almighty himself to Damn them.

In a word, look upon him which way you will, either as a Counselor to his
Prince, or as a Patriot to his Country, or as a Christian toward God: he was
one, that in a most inauspicacious time (as unto us) was taken from us. We of
this Place (if it had been the will of God it should be otherwise) could ill
have spared his Patronage, whom we found always ready upon all occasions, to do
us what good he could. The King, I am afraid, at this time especially, could
ill have spared his Counsel; and the Church and State I am sure, at this
juncture of Affairs, could very ill have spared that support, that both very
reasonably might have expected from him.

But what shall we say? he had served his Generation according to the will of
God. And God saw it time for him now to receive the Reward of all his Services,
and therefore took him unto himself. I shall conclude all, in applying to him
those words that are spoken of holy David, 1 Chronicles. 29.28. He died in a good
old age, full of days, and riches, and honor. And having thus brought him to
his Bed, we shall softly draw the Curtains about him, and leave him to an
Eternal Rest.

I have only one word more to add to you right Worshipful Gentlemen, who have
done him the honor to attend upon his Obsequies. And it is only to beseech
you, according to the Capacities you are in at Present, or that you may be
called to be in at any time hereafter, that you would endeavor to imitate that
Example that he has set you, and to supply his place. By the fall of this
great and good man, there is a great Breach made in the Fence of our Church and
State; if some or other do not fill up the Vacuum, God knows how soon
destruction may break in upon us.

I remember when I was a Boy at the University, it went current then among us
for true Philosophy, that when a Member or part of a man body was cut off; then
Anima retrahitur we said, the soul was not divided or cut off with that member,
but it was retracted to the remaining parts.

I wish with all my heart, for your own sakes, and for the sake of the Church
and State wherein we all live, that no one of all those Virtues that were so
conspicuous in this Noble Lord deceased, may die with him, but that they may be
all Retracted into his only Son and Heir, the noble Lord Holles that now is;
(As he inherits his Fathers Lands and Honors, so may he inherit all his
Virtues too, and if it be possble, may a double Portion of his Fathers Spirit
rest upon him) and into You also, Right Worshipful and beloved, who were his
Friends and Admirers; that You also may serve Your Generation by the will of
God, as he has done before you.

Which if you will be careful to do, all good men will love and honor you
while you live, and will heartily lament you when you are dead. Your Executors
shall not need then to hire any Hackney Tears to besprinkle upon Your Herses,
nor to tole men on by Rings or Ribbands, to attend your Funerals. But good men
will flock together out of Conscience, not to perform a Ceremony, but to pay a
Duty. And though perhaps the tenth part of the Company may not be in Blacks,
yet they will be all in Mourning.

But at the same time, when there is never so much grief and sorrow upon your
account here on Earth, there will be full as great joy and rejoicing in Heaven.
And before your Friends shall have laid that which is mortal of you into your
Graves, the holy Angels will have carried your Souls up into Heaven, with Joy
and Triumph.

FINIS.

