A Discourse upon Prodigious ABSTINENCE: OCCASIONED By the Twelve Months
FASTING OF MARTHA TAILOR, The Famed Derbyshire Damsel: Proving That without
any Miracle, the Texture of Humane Bodies may be so altered, that Life may be
long Continued without the supplies of MEAT and DRINK.

With an Account of the Heart, and how far it is interessed in the Business of
Fermentation.

By John Reynolds.

Humbly offered to the Royal Society.

London, Printed, by R. W. for Nevill Simmons, at the Sign of the three Crowns
near Holborn-Conduit: and for Dorman Newman, at the Chyrurgeons Arms in Little
Britain. 1669.

To the deservedly Famous, and my Honored Friend, Walter Needham, Doctor of
Physic, as also a Member of, and Curator Elect to the Royal Society.
SIR,
IT were a Solaecism of the first magnitude to entertain you with any thing
like a Narrative of the Superennial Fast, under all the Havooks and
depraedations whereof the Derby-shire Damsel has hitherto been sustained,
though emaciated thereby into the ghastliness of a Skeleton, to the great
astonishment of the Vulgus. Your correspondencies are so faithful, and your
Circumstances so advantageous, as wholly to supersede the necessity of my
engaging in, and the possibility of my gratifying you, by such a Province.
However, indulge me, while bemoaning my self, the liberty to tell you, that
concerning the Phaenomena's attending this prodigeous Abstinence, my own
thoughts have been so miserably ravel'd, and my scanty intellectuals so much
overmatcht thereby, that I could not with any Complacency look into those, nor
with any delight consult these. A just reverence to Reformed Theologues,
asserting a total Cessation of Miracles, forbad me to immure my self in any
such supernatural Asylum: and a praejudicate opinion of humane bodies in this
Animal State, allowed me not to Eurefuge my fluctuating mind in Physical Causes
clubbing together, by an Anomalous C^pulation, to engender so great an
Heteroclite. While thus lost in the Chaos of confused apprehensions, and
smarting under the Hirricano of my own tumultuary thoughts, I hurry away to a
very Worthy and Compassionate Friend, who with a little deliberation runs
through the Diagnosticks of my Malady, pitieth my case, and after some sharp
Conflicts, with his own Modesty, affords the Relief of a Philosophical Elixir
(for so I call the ensuing Discourse) wholly transferring the right, which he
had in the happy results of his own contemplations, upon me. Now (Sir!) what by
much importunity I extorted from him, for my own private satisfaction, I make
bold to tender the world a view of, under the Countenance and Protection of
your great Name, which is not only able to secure it from the Critical
Pharaphrases of an Envious Age, but also to command it the Justice of an
unpraejudicate perusal with such as know your worth. To my own grief, I have
found it much an Anodyne; or as a pleasant Lullabie to my whimpering fancy; the
issue of all has been rest: not knowing, but it may minister the like
seasonable relief to others, who have not Wit and Philosophy enough to start
any greater Objections, than my self; I judged it worthy to travail the World.
The confidence wherein I seek to entitle you to the Patrociny of it, is no less
than an assurance of your benign Nature, singular Ingenuity, and obliging
goodness, which have begotten and pupil'd in me, that persuasion, ever since I
had the happiness and honor to know you. Besides your clearer Intellectuals,
and your vast acquaintance with Natures Recondite Mysteries, made it wholly
incongruous to adopt any other the object of this Dedication. I do still
remember with the deepest resentments of a grateful heart, the happy
distinction betwixt parts Spermatique and parts Haematique, wherewith in pity
you relieved me, when anxiously enquiring, upon a Religious account, after the
principuum individuationis in humane bodies: a Notion (as to me it seems) more
able to rescue the Grand Article of our Creed concerning the Resurrection of
the same individual Body from under suspicion, and the many gross* absurdities,
that some Phylosophasters, and half-witted Atheists, would ^ain clogg it with,
than any offerture of Humane Reason, that I ever yet had the happiness to meet
with! Here (methinks I could break forth into an (...), and congratulate my
great, though late felicity, that the (...)) as Origin, in one sense or other
calls it) the Principle maintaining a Numerical Identity in Humane Bodies,
through the whole series of Vicissitudes, Changes, and Sanctorian
Transmutations; betwixt the Vterine Formation, and the Vltimate Reunition of
soul and body, should, after many a tedious search, and frustraneous
disquisition, at last be suggested by an hand able, in the maintenance of it,
to grapple with any Contradictor. In this you have satisfied not only my
reason, but my curiosity too; and therefore (Sir,) so great is my opinion of
your skill (absit omnis adulationis suspicio!) that whatever Dogma steps abroad
with your name written upon it, I could almost surrender up my self as a
perfect Captive to it (were I not a Man, and which is more, a Protestant) upon
an implicit faith! But I have, I know not well how, digressed, and stepped asid^
into things heterogeneous to the purport of this Dedicatory Address. I
therefore return to my ingenious friends Discourse, upon which, were my
judgment in these matters worth any thing, I could afford to be liberal in the
bestowance of my Encomium's. But as it is shrouded under your Patronage, so it is
submitted to your Censure: (this I am bold to do, knowing the Author, so much
an Admirer of you, that he cannot reluctate) whether more worthy your pity or
your approbation, none can better judge, than your discerning and deserving
self. Therefore such as it is, I leave it to your Mercy; and beg leave to tell
you, that I should presently fall out with my self, did I not, upon a faithful
Scrutiny, find my self in the number of those that really love and honor you.

Farewell.
Worthy Sir,
YOUR requests to take into consideration the so much famed prodigious Twelve
Months Abstinence of the Derby-shire Maid, having the force of commands, have
produced these lean results of the imposed Meditations. It cannot be unknown to
a Person of your large endowments and hot pursuit after substantial Science,
that both Divines, Medicks, Historians, yea, Poets and Legenders have presented
the Learned World with a great variety of wonderful Ab^tinents, some whereof I
shall briefly recite, as well to reserve your sliding time for more Noble
Employments, as to manifest that our contemporary Derb^^se, is not so sing^lar
as some may imagine.

Most certain it is, that the (...). Acts 7. 22.
Learned Moses Exodus 34. 28.
fasted 40. days, and as many nights whilst he abode on the Burning Mount; the
great 1 King. 19. 8.
El^jah, went as long in the (...) of a meal, and no less was the Fast of the
Matthew. 4. 2.
holy Jesus August. in Epist. 86. ad (...).
Sword^ Austin reports, that in his time one survived 40. days fasting: but
most strange is the Story fathered on (...) l. 14. c. 45.
Nicephorus of three Brethren affrighted by persecution into a Cave, where they
slept 373. years, as was known by the Coin they produced when they awaked. The
Learned (...) l. 6. (...) c. 1.
Fernelius says, he saw a pregnant Woman that lived two months without meat
or drink. (...) p. (...). hist. p. 914.
Zacutus Lusitanus reports, that at Venice there lived a man that fasted 40.
days, another there 46. days; and from Langius and Forstius (two considerable
Writers) another full three years, and that with just stature, good habit, free
countenance, and youthful* wit. The famous Sennert. pract. l. 3. par. 1. S^cl.
2. c. 2. de lo^a abstin. p. 383.
Sennertus is copious in such stories; he relates from Sigismundus and Citesius
(a person he says worthy of credit) that the people of Lucomoria inhabiting
some Mountains in Moscovy do every year dye in a sort, or rather sleep or
freeze (like Froggs or Swallows) on November. 27. and so continue in that rigid
state till April 24. in which time they use no evacuation, save only that a
tenuious humor distilling from their nostrils is presently condensed by the
ambient cold, much like to Isicles, by the which those patent Pores are
precluded, and the most endangered. Brain fortified against the fatal assaults
of brumal extremities. The same Sennertus rehearses a Story of a Virgin at
Padua (from Viguntia Professor there) who anno 1598. was afflicted with a
Fever, then a Tumor, then Arthritick pains, and pains in the Ventricle, and
whole abdomen, then with vomiting and nauseating of food, till at last she
could take no food for two months, then after another fit of vomiting, purging
and bleeding, she fasted eight months, and after a little use of food* she
fasted two months more. And to be short, he stories it of three persons that
fasted each two years, one three years, another four, one seven, another
fifteen, another eighteen, and one twenty, yea one twenty nine, another thirty,
another thirty six, and one forty years. Famous is the story (perhaps fiction
being Poetical) of (...) ubi supra. Plutarch. in Symp^ and l. de (...) in orb:
(...)
Epimenides (whose words St. Paul is thought to cite in his Epistle to Titus,
(...)) whom some report to have slept 17 years, some 77 years together; but
enough of story, those that are desirous to read more, are referred to
Marcellus Donat. l. 4. de med. hist. mirab. c. 12. Schenk. l. 4. observe.
Guaguinus, l. 3. hist. Franc. Petrarch. l. 3. de mirabil. c. 22. Portius de
hist. puellae German. Uspergensis in Chron. Lentulus in hist. admir. Apol.
Baccius l. de vini nutritione. Bozius l. 11. c. 4. de signis eccl. Fulgosius,
l. 1. c. 6. Lessaeus, l. 9. hist. Scot. Favorinus apud Gellium, l. 16. c. 3.
and especially L^cetus that wrote a particular Tract to solve the Phoenomena of
this Prodigy.

Now Sir, it would be our ambition to advance toward the same noble work, were
it not our duty to serve those awhile that blot all these stories with one dash
of unbelief: that pen certainly drops blasphemy that dares to raze the sacred
Records; and that uncharitableness which presumes to write falsehood upon all
humane testimonies, they that assent to nothing not confirmed by Autopsia are
unfit to converse in humane Societies; for how can I expect that any body
should believe me, whilst I my self will believe no body? it is an argument of
an empty brain to presume to comprehend all things, and thereupon to reject
those things from an existence in the world, that have not their science in its
intellectuals. Many things foreign and strange may well be admitted on good
testimonies, since, the most obvious objects are scarce pervious to the most
eagle-ey'd Philosopher; witness the mistakes discovered by D. Carts,
Gassendus, etc in Aristotle himself, one of the most sublimated wits in all the
Republic of Natural philosophy; and likewise the spots in Hippocrates and
Galen, those mirrours in medicine, modestly pointed at by our famous Harvey,
Glisson, Willis, etc. but further to satisfy these incredulous persons, it is
affirmed that some of these Abstinents have been (...)
watch't by the most wakefull eyes and jealous ears, to detect their fraud, if
guilty of any; as was that Maid that refused all food except only water, for
three years, by Bucoldian^us, with whom she abode for twelve days, at the
command of Ferdinand the Emperor, so that Apollonia Schrejerana was taken by
the Senate of Bern, and put into the Hospital of their Town, and there watched
till they were satisfied in the truth of her total abstinence.

But enough to these that cut the knot to save the labor of untying it; yet I
may not step aside to those in the contrary extreme, that believe a century of
such reports with a faith almost as miraculous as these miracles themselves,
for so they seem to them: but Sir, as it is humane infidelity to disbelieve all
such reports, because some are false, so it is superstitious charity to believe
all because some are true. Some persons as scant in their reading, as they are
in their travels, are ready to deem every thing strange to be a monster, and
every monster a miracle; true it is, the fast of Moses, Elijah, and the
Incarnate Word, was miraculous, and possibly of some others; yet why we should
make all miracles, I understand not; for what need have we now of miracles?
Since such supernatural operations 1 Cor. 14. 22.
are for them that believe not, not for them that believe, as witnesses that 2
Cor. 12. 3.
celestial Philosopher St. Paul; and thence we infer, Beings are not to be
multiplied without necessity. Moreover, to what end are such miracles wrought?
certainly, the infinitely wise Operator labors not for naught, therefore these
Abstinents, if miraculous, should confirm some Doctrine rejected, or refute
some Error received, enfranchise some Saints oppressed, subvert some
Wickedness exalted, foretell some extraordinary events and issues of Providence
to be performed, or for some other end, at which miracles have been usually
levelled; but not a Gry of these from most of our Abstinents; moreover, the fast
of our Blessed Savior and his Prodromi procured not the least detriment to
their health, but it is otherwise with most of these.

Near of kin to these Miracle mongers are those that suppose these pretended
Fasters to be invisibly fed by Angels; but it is incredible that such a favor
should be shown to persons of no known sanctity, as some of these (reported to
be Ethnicks) were; moreover, either this food was visible, or invisible; if
visible, it is strange, that vigilant observers, and jealous suspecters, could
neither discover the ingress at the fore-door, nor the excrementitious egress
at the backdoor; but if 'twere invisible, then altogether incongruous to our
bodies, and therefore miraculous; of which before. Neither is it of easy
credibility, that food should be supplied by Doemons possessing them; for we
read of no footsteps of such a possession i'th^ story, and 'twould be strange
if the Devil should grow so modest as to content himself with a single Trophy
of a captivated rational; and as strange, that a cloven foot should make such
inrodes and not leave a doubled yea redoubled impression. Cousin-germanes to
these are the presumers that the Fasters are dead, and acted by Demons; but
this notion is also incongruous not only to their transmigration, from feeding
to fasting without any show of a dissolution, but also to their regress from
fasting to feeding, (as it happened to some of these) and health again.

And as for the admirers of occult Philosophy who resolve these phrases into
the effects of occult qualities, we only repose, that though an antipathy to
this or that food, and possibly to all food, may cause abstinence, yet without
food I cannot understand how it gives sustenance; but others attribute all this
to the influence of celestial bodies, whose operations I deny not to be great
on sublunary wights, yet it is not imaginable that this universal cause
diffusing its energy so promiscuously, should now and then in a Century, here
and there in a Country produce such stupendous effects, without some
universal preparation and predisposition of Bodies to determine its general
efficiency to the production of such a Prodigy; but as the former affect
darkness, and these an invisible light, we leave them to their retirements,
whilst we hunt the more perceptible prints of natures progress in these
anomalous productions.

By this time, Sir, I hope you will grant that the old inconvenient and tottering
building is in a measure demolished, the rubbish removed, and the ground
cleared; let us now propound the necessities and conveniences, the ends and
uses by our new building to be supplied and attained, and then we'll fall to
the architecture it self; I mean, let us consider, what the defect of aliment
does require for the support of humane life. 1. The Natural Evacuations by
Urine, Stool, Salivation, Terms, and Transpiration, are so lavish, that without
reparation by feeding it seems impossible to avoid a sudden dissolution. 2dly,
How shall natural heat be preserved from extinction without a constant feeding
on the radical moisture? and how shall this Oleaginous humor be secured from a
nimble consumption, if it receive not additions from frequent feeding? 3ly, How
shall Fermentation be continued in the blood without new additions of Chyle?
and how shall Chyle be added, if no food received? 4ly, How shall there be a
supply of vital spirits, and consequently of animal, without food and
fermentation? 5ly, How can life consist without sleep? and how shall we attain
sleep without ascending fumes to the brain from ingested food?

For a foundation I shall premise a few severals; 1. The long finger of
powerful Providence is undoubtedly to be observed in the production of these
wonderful effects; though these be not advanced to the Zenith of divine
Miracles, wrought by the immediate hand of Omnipotency, yet the first cause
must be acknowledged in the proportioning, marshalling, dividing, uniting and
actuating of concurrent subordinate second causes for such Heteroclite
productions; Plato himself could say, (...), and the admirable D. Willis
acknowledges, that Natures Parent orders natural Si hujusmodi limitatiosis
causa inquiratu^, di^imus, quod naturae pa^ers pos^it i^ primoge to cujusque
r^i s^mi^e ta lem spi^itus salis and s^lp^^ris copiam quae pro^^^ eadis ^^times
corporum stam^^ibus, se^ ^^camenti s^ssi^^ret. Wills de ferment. p. 48. 49
Principles as to their quantity and mixture, and consequently as to their
operations.

2. It Is very evident that when higher causes shall disjoyn what Nature usually
conjoyneth, and vice versa, and exalt one Principle and depress another, then
very astonishing results appear upon the stage of humane bodies; such is the
stupendous voracity of some Helluo's, the monstrous digestion of your
Lithophagi, the strange metamorphosis of your sanguineans into midnight
melancholy, and of lucid intellectuals into piceous mopishness, etc.

1. Now to supply the defect of food in its most useful restoration of what
by daily Evacuations the body is deprived of; as I need not compute the vast
expense of the Microcosme by stool, urine, spitting and terms, these being
vulgarly known, so neither of the transcendent loss by transpiration, reckoned
by Sanctor. de statica medici^a.
Sanctorius to preponderate all the rest; all which exact constant additions to
be made by aliment, without which the body would quickly be depopulated. But 1.
let it be considered, that this person (as it is most credibly reported) emptyes
nothing by urine or stool; and it is probable next to nothing by salivation or
transpiration, not by salivation through a considerable defect of drinks; nor
by transpiration, because wanting food there is a partial defect of fermentation
in the blood, and thence of natural heat, and so by the coldness of the parts
the pores are precluded, and the diaphoresis impeded; whence it will follow,
that where the parts are duly warm, and the pores patent, there the more
active principles are apt to take flight, yet where the parts are cold, and the
pores cork'd up, there it is otherwise; as generous Wines and subtle spirits
left in open Vessels, will quickly bid adieu to their more volatile and brisk
Principles; yet if shut up in safe Vessels, these Fugitives are imprisoned and
kept to their daily offices: the same is verified ina queous humors, which
(our Kitchens as well as Laboratories experiment) quickly evaporate through
intense subjacent heats, but not without, and so it is here. Thus these
plentiful evacuations being suppressed, restoration by food is rendered less
necessary. Yet lest you should dread from this hypothesis a suffocating mass of
excrementitious humors to assault the heart, etc. I therefore subjoyn, that a
defect of nutritious assumptions must needs precede a defect of humors:
moreover, the blood commands much of these remaining humors for its own
chariot-use; neither may it seem dissonant to reason that the ventricle and
some of the intestines are used as a receptacle of the more tartarous and
terrestrial faeculencies; as Embryo's though they receive large quantities of
liquid nutriment, yet there is seldom observed the least excretion by the
fundament, but a retention of a quantity of excrementitious terrestreities in
the intestines during their whole abode in their maternal cells; likewise in
fermenting liquours the more active principles do precipitate the more sluggish
to the bottoms, chinks and walls of their continents; further it cannot be
denied, that by expiration there is a considerable evacuation, as appears both
by the heat of our breath, and its moisture, which is discovered by the
reception of it into any concavous Body. But 2. admit that there is some waste
either by salivation or transpiration, yet these being small, produce only a
lingering consumption, which does often consist for many years with a declining
life: such as our Virgins is.

2. How shall natural heat be preserved, if not fed by Oil, continually
supplied and renewed by aliment? There are Sir, diverse opininos touching humane
ignicles, and therefore it highly concerns us to proceed cautiously; it cannot
be denied that there is a potential heat more or less in all humane bodies,
which is the calor mixti, remaining when we are dead and key-cold; such as is
the heat of Sulphur, Arsenick, etc. (though in a great allay) this appears from
chemical operations on man's blood, by which it is forced to acknowledge its
endowments with spirits and volatile Salts in great quantities, and some
Sulphur also. Likewise it must be granted, that there is an actual heat abiding
in us whilst we live, and somewhile after death; this is obvious to the sense
of feeling it self: this is the heat (as I conceive) joined with the
primogenite humor to which Aristotle ascribes life it self. But yet Sir, I am
somewhat doubtful, whether this heat be properly called calor vivens, though
the great River. instit. med. l. 1. Sect. 4. c. 3. de calido innato. (...).
Arist. de respir.
Riverius term it so; or an immediate cause of life, though an Aristotle
himself pronounce it so: For certainly Holy Writ ascribes life to the blood,
the blood is the life thereof: and death to a dissolution of the compositum,
the body returns to the dust, and the spirit to God that gave it. But of this
dissolution (I suppose) the soul is not ordinarily the cause, but the body; and
what part of the body may more justly be challenged to be the Parent (if I may
so phrase it) of death, than the blood, which is in a famous sense the parent
of life? So then, Willis de morbis coavuls. p. 175. Netdham de form^o f^ctu, p.
138. Ioweri diatribae, p. 115. Ferael. de abdit. l. 2. c. 7.
most killing distempers must arise from the excessive multiplication,
consumption or depravation of the blood, and the pernicious effects thereof;
yet mistake me not, this hinders not other parts of the body, bowels and
humors to be often peccant, as undoubtedly they are by infecting the blood,
and receiving infections morbifick from it. Moreover, this heat continues some
hours without life, even after the dissolution; and as it is without life, so
is life often found without it, as not only in some Vegetables, as Lettuce,
Hemlock, Cucumbers, etc. but in Animals, as Frogs and Fish, which are said to
be actually cold, and the Salamander, reputed cold in a high degree. This heat
may possibly be but the effect of matter and motion, i. e. of the blood, or
before it of the seed impregnated with active principles, which through their
activity and heterogeneity suffer mutual collisions, or fermentations, whence
ebullition, and thence this heat, which is by circulation not only promoted,
but also conveyed to all parts of the body, and by the same causes preserved,
which possibly may prove the sum of Riverius ubi supra.
Riverius's implanted and influent heat. These things presupposed, 'twill not
be impossible to guess that this heat is no such Celestial fire, as the most
famous Fernelius would have it, but only the igneous result of the combinations
and commotions of the most active elementary Principles; and if there be any
other heat, it may prove to be (according to the conjecture of great Riverius)
the product of the immateriate soul; but of that I understand little, only this
is unquestionable, that the caelestial Soul chooses for its more immediate
organs, the most subtiliated, spirituous, and active parts of matter, such as
the vital and animal spirits, and the heat before mentioned, which seems to be
of the same Genius, and all but the mechanic productions of various
fermentations, percolations and distillations in the humane Engine: Wherefore,
I shall crave leave to dismiss this fire till we come to discourse of
Fermentations.

And so I pass on the next flame, which is the Biolychnium, or the actual flame
of the blood kindled in the heart, asserted both by Ancients and Moderns of
astonishing titles, and tremendous veneration; which devouring flame, if once
kindled, will quickly depredate all the oleaginous aliment, if not renewed by
frequent and plentiful assumptions; but, therefore it is greatly suspected to
have no existence in our bodies, because in these Jejunants it must needs
extinguish for want of Sulphurous supplies, and produce death to those that
have lived long enough to help to entombe it. It Is strange to me, that
provident Nature should require such vast supplies both of meat and drink, out
of which to extract a small quantity nutritious juice; which with diverse
Ferments, Colatures, Emunctories, and rapid motions, it endeavors to exalt and
defecate, and yet after all should expose what she has attained of purity and
activity, and consequently of noblest use by her unparalled artifices, cost
and toil, to the improvident disposal of wastfull flames; for indeed flames are
great wasters, as appears in the preparation of the Balsom of Sugar, etc. no
less wonderful it is that a flame should continually burn in the heart, and
yet the fleshy walls thereof not boiled, roasted, nor so much as a fuliginous
or cineritious color imparted. But lest Sir, you should be confident that this
perennial slame scorns an extinction by these few drops, I therefore commend to
your observation those numerous and plentiful buckets that are poured
thereupon by the dexterous hand of the very learned and Needham de format.
foetu. p. 129, etc.
candid Dr. Needham. But yet lest you should be so far praepossessed by the
determinations of venerable antiquity, as to reject this new Doctrine, and
avowedly maintain this unseen fire, I shall therefore add: 1. That this Flame
can be but small through the defect of bodily exercise, and freer ventilations,
(these fasters being mostly close Prisoners) as also of strong fermentations;
therefore the less the Lamp, the less Oil will sustain it. 2. Through the
defect of heat the pores are bolted, and transpiration restrained, whence a
scarce credible quantity of moisture is retained, which returning both by Veins
and Lymphaticks, gives no contemptible quantity of food to this fire. 3.
Through the restraint of Transpiration the igneous particles are secured from
their excursions, to the great increase of intestine heat; for in feeders the
loss of transpiration often kindles in the blood a feverish fire. 4. The Air
(as impregnated sometimes especially) entering by the mouth, the nose, and pores
in parts passing the various concoctions, may be converted into a humor not
altogether inept to preserve the lingering life of this dying flame. 5. In
pituitous bodies the abundance of phlegm through the various concoctions which
it undergoes in the body, may become useful in the room of more proper aliment
to this analogous Lamp in its Table-supplyes; which phlegm though some reject
as excrementitious, yet I suppose they do it only when consideration is from
home, of its usefulness in the mastication of our food, wherein (as some say)
lies the first concoction; at least therein lies the main preparation for the
grand concoction in the ventricle; the constant mixture of our food with our
spittle in the Jaw-mill, may enforce some considering men to think, that it is
nearer of kin to our natural moisture than has been formerly acknowledged. 6.
The colliquation of the parts of these emaciated bodies may yield Oil to these
Lamps; as it is usually affirmed in Hectic fevers; besides, if fire be nothing
but an innumerable host of sulphurous atoms breaking the Prisons of their
former compositions with other heterogeneities, Willis de Fermeat, p. 66.
then certainly all fire is (...), for nothing of that Sulphur remains, it
leaves only the heterogenious Principles, with which it was combined. 7. It Is
probable that the moisture of these jejune bodies is much not only condensed by
their cold, but also loaded with terrestreities through the non-reception of
aliment imp^egnated with active Principles; whereby it is rendered more durable
in this flame. As Oils the more impure, thick, and clammy they are, the less
fiercely they burn, but the more tenuious and spirituous, the more nimbly do
they flame and expeditiously consume. As my face and hair did sadly experiment
upon the unexpected and sudden conflagration of a quantity of the Oil of
Turpentine, as I not long since drew it from the fire; I dare say, the
Turpentine it self would not, or rather could not have served me so. 8. This
moisture being drawn from more jejune Principles (as air, phlegm, and lympha)
Willis de ^^br. p. 103.
is the less impregnated with intro-sulphurous particles, and therefore less
inflamable; Willis de Fer^. p. 8 66. French's Art of Distillation, p. 148.
as in oligophorous Wines, where the spirit and sulphur are greatly exhaled,
and with a quality abundantly dilated, there fire slowly burns. 9. It Is
probable, that the crasis of these bodies is so altered by the predominancy of
fixed Salts not duly actuated by powerful fermentations, Ioh. Baptist. Porta.
Card. de subtilitate.
that they much retard the consumption of Oil by this vital fire; Ludovic.
Vives i^ l. 21. c. 6. de Civitat. Dei Augustine.
as if Quicklime, Soap, or other saline concretes be added to Wax or Tallow,
they will (say Chemists) make a candle of far greater duration than ordinary.
Guido Pancirollus.
Strange is that story of St. Austine, who reports a Lamp to be found in the
Temple of Venus, that no storms could extinguish. Yet much more strange was
that Torch, reported to have burnt 1550 years in the Tomb of Tullia, Cicero's
daughter, which being exposed to the Air, by the opening of the Tomb, was
quickly extinguished: Now if our humors should chance to attain the
disposition of these ancient Oils, they might supply the Byolychnium long
enough. 10. Or if these fixed Salts should attain fluidity, as it is probable
they have done, because some of these Abstinents were of melancholic
complexions, Se^^ert. pract. l. 3. pa^l. 1. Sect. 2. de lo^ga absti^^tia.
then the sulphurous parts of the humors would be so fettered and oppressed
thereby, that they could not so quickly burst from under the yoke into violent
flames, but by degrees and leisurably as they could disentangle themselves;
from whence will arise a more durable though less forceable fire. Lastly, it
seems probable, that extraneous particles of fire may be conveyed into a body,
and therein lodged, which shall afterward cause heats to kindle therein. That
igneous particles pass from one body to another seems a matter of daily
experience: for it is not easy to demonstrate how our bodies are warmed by
their approach to the fire, if there be not fiery effluviums from the burning
matter that enter our bodies; and that these fiery atoms thus lodged in a
foreign body, may afterward by water, air, or the like, break forth into a
considerable heat, is very imaginable; as in Quicklime, which before it is
burnt is not at all subject to ^^mbustions by air or water; but when it has
endured the Kill-fire, then it is readily kindled by the addition of almost any
humidity; which humidities may not be supposed directly to contribute to the
kindling of the atoms, but to the dissolving of the Concrete, and thereby the
disentangling of the Atoms, whereupon they fly out into a considerable heat;
like whereunto is that Powder, boasted by Chemists, to take flame in your hand
by the only addition of Spittle. (...) Art of (...)
Thus Sir, having tendered a slender repast for your antique lamp, I crave
leave to attend the more modern Hypothesis of famed fermentation.

Thirdly, How shall Fermentation be continued in the blood without the addition
of chyle? and how can chyle be added without food assumed? (...) (...).
It is the opinion of ingenuous Henshavius that fermentation is caused by the
addition of chyle to the blood in the heart, like that of Wine by the adding of
Must, from whence does arise (he says) a necessity of frequent feeding: N^e^h.
de form. (...) p. 132. (...) de s^b. p. 113.
which the excellent D. Needham seems much to approve: and both the
incomparable Willis and ingenious Castle cite Hogeland for ascribing heat to a
fermentation in the heart, Cast^^'s Chym. Gal. p. 81, 82.
like to that which happens upon the pouring of Spirit of Nitre on Butter of
Antimony. R. Now Sir, to help us out at this dead lift also, I shall take
notice of the several opinions of the Learned touching the causes of
fermentation. 1. There is a ferment placed in the heart it self by the great
Willis and his Hypaspistes, Wi^lis de (...). p. 24, 25. ^e (...). 101, 102, 113.
the dexterous anatomist Dr. Lower, with Dr. Castle, and other renowned
Assertors of fermentation. This Sir would serve us eximiously, Low^^ Diatr. p.
121, 124. Castle's Chym. Gal. p. 81, 82.
to supply the defect of new chyle, if it were but sufficiently evinced; but I
must confess ingenuously though (as it is not unknown to you) I have labored to
advance the antique glory of the heart, yet I cannot satisfy my self, though I
would, that there is any such implanted ferment therein; for I find not this
ferment confirmed by any experiment, or other sufficient evidence, but (absit
invidia verbo) too precariously asserted: nor any necessity assigned for such a
ferment; the doctrine of fermentation being sufficiently demonstrated without
it; and though the honor ascribed to the heart may seem to require it, yet I
cannot approve of conferring honors, which infer a necessity of multiplying
Beings above what the opus and usus of Nature creates. Neither can I conceive
where this ferment should be nested; it must be either in the walls of the
heart, or in the chambers thereof; in the walls (says Dr. Castle from
Severinus, (...)
Danus, D. Carts and Hogeland) are mechanic spirits, seminal salts or
ferments; but yet (pace tanti viri) the heart by its carnous fibers, membranes,
color and consistence seems to be but a muscle, as our worthy Dr. Needham,
(...). foet. 132.
and acute Steno affirm; and if so, how a ferment should be there generated any
otherwise than in other muscles, Ste^o de Muse. and Gland.
I do not understand; it has not the Parenchyma of the Liver, Spleen, or other
parts which are colatures to the blood, whereby they easily separate, and
having separated retain what may conduce to constitute ferments; but the walls
of the heart seem only like other muscles to receive blood for their own
private use, but none for a public stock. Moreover, if there were such a salt
ferment, it is a wonder it does not discolor the rutilous fibers; as the salt
in the Spleen manifestly does, but leave it of the same hieu with other
nonfermenting muscles; neither are there any cavities within these walls
capacious enough to contain these mechanic spirits for public offices; nay it
is observable that the heart is more firm, fast, hard, and less stored with
porosities than other muscles: neither in the auricles, or venticles can these
spirits keep quiet possession, by reason of that impetuous torrent which many
times in every minute washes both flores and walls; and though these cavities
have their cellars, yet by the so frequent constrictions of the omnimodous
fibers causing the systole, there is not only a mixture of the blood at the
bottom with that on the top, but also a violent extrusion of both made in the
same pulsation: neither in dissections is there any considerable difference
found betwixt that in the heart, and that in the veins, as famous Harvey
observes. Yet with a non obstante to these premises I must tell you, I opine
that fermentation may not abusively be ascribed to the mechanic structure and
operations of the heart, though not enriched with an innate ferment, of which
hereafter more seasonably.

2. It is not unknown that several liquors are self-sufficient to command a
fermentation, and that perfective; as Wine, Cider, with other like
spiritosulphuro-saline-fluids, as also fruits of a more crass consistence, as
Apples, Pears, Plumbs, etc. whereof many are advanced, by lying, to a greater
perfection after pulled from their Mothers Breast; and it is at least a violent
presumption that the blood confected by such self-fermenting bodies, and they
exalted greatly by the various additional concoctions, percolations, and (as it
were) distillations in the transcendently exquisite, and proto-laboratories of
humane bodies is crowned with the same Diadem of self-fermenting principles:
and indeed an ordinary analysis of blood according to the rules of Pyrotechny
will discover all those principles of Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, Water and Earth,
lodged in its embraces which are sufficient to elaborate fermentations: which
is further confirmed in that when some of the innate fermenting principles, as
suppose Salts begin to languish, several artificial ferments prove highly
useful; De ferm.
under this notion (says the sagacious Will^) are the fixed Sa^ts of
Vegetables, Chalybeats, etc. of such Sovereign efficacy.

Thirdly, after various disquisitions touching the use of the Spleen, some
exalting it to the honor of sanguifying for the lower belly, others depressing
it to the vile use of a sink, it is now by many upon consideration of its
color, site, and vessels resolved to be a colature, wherein the more black and
feculent juice is severed from the blood, and being there reserved it becomes a
ferment to the scarle^ liquor; even as a small parcel of dough reserved in a
^aline condiment grows acid, and so arrives to the dignity of a levain, or
ferment to the new farinaceous mass. The principles which in this bowell are
supposed to be regent, are salino terrestrial, which by over long abode attain
fluidity, and so become acetous, like Spirit of Vitrioll, Nitre, and of other
saline concretes, and that which renders this the more probable, are the sour
belchings of hypochondriack persons, the whiteness of their tongues, the
soreness of their throats, the excess of their appetite, and the emaciating of
their bodies: all which seem to proceed from a preternatural acidity: and vice
versa, when the Spleen has lost its ferment, then the blood grows too insipid
as appears in Cachexys, Ascites, Tympanites, etc. These things premised, 'twill
be no difficulty to prove that the blood is fermented by the Spleen: it is but
very lately that I added Spirit of Vitrioll to a small quantity of the recent
blood of a Patient, which caused a visible fermentation, and such a coagulation
that it became almost of the color and consistence of our table Mustard, only
there remained some perfect black parts, but no red ones: from whence I
conjecture, that it is an acid humor which causes such a black s^diment in the
urine of many hypochondriack persons, and that the same humor it is that
coagulates the blood often, if not always, and renders it so unapt for
circulation: wherefore by the way, I would offer it to your consideration,
whether that sort of Scorbute and Melancholy which is rooted in blood more than
sufficiently hot, florid, and fluid (as oft-times they are) can ascribe its
origination to a mere acidity, or to fluid Salts: and consequently whether it
be not a misapplication of the nitrosulphurous Plants which renders them of
late suspected of impertinency? for to what end should these Plants be given to
those persons whose blood exceeds with salt and sulphur already? yet in the
colder more chachectical Sorts of Scurvy and Melancholy nothing possibly may be
found more proper; for it is well known that fixed salts and fluid salts, or
(which is the same thing) acid spirits do highly ferment, and cause a
considerable heat; as lately discovered it self to me in the preparation of
Tartarus Vitriolatus, whence I further conjecture that those preparations of
Chalybs, Coral and other saline concretes which rob them of their salts, or
(which is the same thing) that glut them with acidities so plentifully as to
leave no capacity to receive more acids do spil them eo nomine of their
fermenting virtue. But lest I should seem to transgress whilst I intend
searcely to digress, I return to remind you that you have a third ferment which
in these Abstinents is presumeable to be highly useful, for several of them
(not to say all) were Spleneticks before they were Abstinents.

Fourthly, It Is probable that the seminal humors in these Virgins may by a
long abode in their vessels grow acid, and thereby supply the blood with a more
than ordinary ferment. Here are two things supposed, the first is that the seed
is impregnated with salt, and that is proved by the many arguments of the
Philosophical Dr. Ente, (...)
the other is that the seed by its principles may elaborate the blood, this is
evident in females whose seed being grown fecundate and vegete; it so levains
the blood, that except it purge (...) by menstrual terms it exposes to
innumerable diseases; but much more manifest in men by the ^ruption of their
Beards, the greatning of their voice, the heating of their blood, esseminate
desires, etc. These things being evidently so, 'twill much strengthen our
Hypothesis to observe that most of these Damsels fall to this abstinence
between the age of fourteen and twenty years when the seed has so fermented
the blood, that various distempers will probably ensue without due evacuations;
except in our case, wherein through the defect of fermenting food we are
enabled to bear the excess of these so much the better.

Fifthy, There are several other innate ferments placed by nature in humane
bodies, as the Learned testify, De (...) p. (...).
as that ascribed by Dr. Willis to the brain, for the freeing the spirits from
the entanlemen^s of other principles to which they were married whilst they
abode in the blood, that so the brains distilla^ion might proceed the more
prosperously; likewise that in the reins, which is like Runnet to Milk, to
precipitate the serosities, that the ureters may exterminate them as useless,
burdensome excrements. There are many more assigned, yea more than can be
numbered, (...). c. 20. p. 139.
if Dr. Willis's Doctrine be true of a fermentation through the habit of the
body, caused by the concurrence of arterial blood and nervous juice; but these
I lightly pass over, because I conceive they are not immediately intended for
the elaborating of the bloody mass; yet I may not forget them, because working
upon the blood, it is not to be doubted but the veins derive somewhat of their
virtue with the retrieved blood.

Sixthly, But to approach yet nearer to our mark, I affirm that though there be
no edibles received, yet it follows not that there is no sort of new chyle to
renew the bloods fermentation: for First, In these cold bodies there must of
necessity be a far greater quantity (consideratis considerandis) of pituitous
humors than ordinary: for if transpiration be denied to our bodies but a very
small time, what a redundance of phlegm does presently oppress us: which phlegm
being led into the mouth by a great variety of salivating ducts, and thence
conveyed into the Ventricle may take off the acidity, the edge of the appetite,
by which they tolerate their abstinence with the greater patience; and also
suffer a sorry concoction, which is much advanced by the attendance of all the
concoctive forces to subact this sluggish matter, which is other bodies are
variously diverted by the great variety of food frequently admitted. Secondly,
It Is probable that some of these Fasters were more than ordinarily addicted to
phlegm before their abstinence, which is usual with those whose concoctions are
low, and with these it is more than an even lay they were not very high, which
must needs be augmented by the defect of urine and stool, which if granted,
adds somewhat to our purpose. Thirdly, The air received continually into the
Stomach by the Mouth and Nose, and also into the blood more directly, though
sparingly by the pores, and virtually, if not formally by the Lungs, may
contribute much to this humor, but more to the fermentation of the blood: that
the air is impregnated with Salts, Apolog. (...). p. 93.
the Learned Dr. Ente affirms and ascribes vegetation, as also the production
of various animals thereunto, as the worthy Willis does frost and ice: and it is
asserted by Chemists that Caput Mortuum's lixivated, if exposed to the open air
for a good space they shall re-attain their saline principle: and that salts
cause fermentation in the blood, has been already noted. Yet one step further
I may advance upon good ground, and that is, these salts may much renew the
ferment of the stomach also in lieu of other condiments. (...)
Moreover the Liver being an ample bowell, instructed with a great variety of
vessels, enriched with constant traffic from most of the Corporations in the
Microcosm, so curious in its elections and collections of the sulphuro-saline
commodities so diligent in reconding them in a peculiar Cell, and thence
transmitting them to the intestines upon all occasions; these severals, I say,
considered, it may be rationally inferred, that it is not only helpful to the
guts in their excretions, but also in their fermentations, whereby the chyle is
rendered not only more fermentiscible in the blood, but also more fermentesce^t
thereunto. Yet Sir, lest this lean meat should not satisfy your more delicate
pallat, I must advertise you, that the blood in these persons must needs be
sparing, and therefore the lesser chyle may ferment it, especially considering
that their fermentations are but small, as appears by the smalness of their
heat, and therefore pray do your self the right, not to expect an account of
robust ones.

Seventhly, The heart it self contributes much to this fermentation. It Is
acknowledged by all that the circulation of the blood being a rapid motion
through the indefatigable pulsation of the heart adds much to the fermentation;
we see that motion given to Wine, Ale, Cider, or Cream of Milk though
sufficiently fermented, will yet without a new ferment give a new fermentation.
But Sir, lest you should mistake me when I stumbled at an innate ferment in the
heart, and yet stood upon it that fermentation may be ascribed thereto, let me
unbosome my self, that you may see what the heart contributes thereunto. First,
The heart is as it were a cistern into which the bloody veins, milky veins, and
water veins, or lymphaeducts by mutual consent deposite their multiform juices.
Secondly, It has the force of a Mill by its quaquaverse fibers continually
busied in their constrictions and dilatations to grind and make small the more
crassy particles of the juices. Thirdly, Of a Mortar wherein the more exact
mixture of these different juices is highly promoted. Fourthly, Of a ^inne
expelling the blood sufficiently subacted, and then to the further execution of
its Offices, but too too troublesome; and by the way, the burden of the blood
may be one cause of its pulsation, for it is said, if a live heart be taken out
of the body, the prick of a Pin will renew its pulsation. Fifthly, Of a Pump to
give motion and according to the sanguiterious ducts to the several parts
distribution of this juice adapted to nutrition. Walaeus i^ Meth. (...).
Sixthly, Of a Loom wherein the blood is fermented. Seventhly, Of a kind of
Philosophical Furnace, wherein a spirital Biolychnium is kindled, I intend only
a heat perchance caused only by the motion and fermentation aforesaid.
Eighthly, Of a Pelican to rarifie and exalt the vital spirits. Ninthly, of an
Alimbeck (not vulgar) whereby the spirits receive a kind of separation (though
yet they run with the blood) which being condensed in the Refrigeratory of the
habit of the body (as the learned Walaeus expresses it) are the more easily
subject to the brains Philtration, and the nerves preservation. Tenthly, of a
potential Philtre, whereby there is made such a fegregation of homogeneous
particles into their proper classes, as renders the blood much more obedient to
the colatures, and emunctories of the body; as runnet in the milk potentially
separates the whey, and prepares it for an actual separation by the sieve; and
in chemical preparations the acid liquor, or diluteing large quantity of
weakening water, provoke a kind of fermentation, whereby the suspended atoms
in the strong Menstruums are precipitated, and so prepa^red for a more facile
separation: so that indeed all the Engines in Natures shop depend mainly upon
the right ^o^e, texture, and operation of the heart. From which it seems
apparent to me (which yet I submit to clearer minds) that the heart is further
serviceable to fermentation, and other offices of Nature, than merely Pump-like
to conciliate motion: which may be further confirmed by the site of the heart
in the center of the body, as also by it is firmest muniments by which it is
garrisoned on its back by the spine, on its face by the sternum, on its sides
by the ribs, under its feet by the diaphragme, and over its head by the canopy
of the pyramidall thorax, and lastly by its bu^^-coat the Pericardium; and
which is not nothing, the curious fabric with various camerations, the
ret^form fibers and various passages, the uniform procedure of Nature in the
formation of the hearts of Animals, whilst often it sports it self in the
building of other parts, and its primogeniture, as appears by the (...)
vesi-cula palpitans first formed in Eggs (according to the renowned Harvey)
the rudiment of the heart, and the bloods constant flux and reflux to and from
the heart, even then when the liver and lungs (though famous bowels) are passed
by unsaluted in the circulation of Embryo's; as also Natures great care to
supply the defective passages of those viscera by foramen ovale in the septum
of the heart, lest the intercourse of the blood with the heart should be
impeded, which hole is yet afterward precluded when the Infant is midwiv'd
into a new World; much of this curiosity of Nature about the heart, seems
utterly unnecessary, if it served only for motion; but we are sure that God and
Nature do nothing frustraneously. Neither am I yet satisfied, that the whole of
the bloods motion is to be ascribed to the hearts pulsation; for Conringius
affirms that in live dissections the blood strongly circulates a long time
after the left ventricle has lost its pulse; yea though the heart be taken
out, yet presently is not the motion of the blood destroyed; which seems to be
confirmed by the experiment upon Frogs, which leap so nimbly, and swim so
freely after their hearts are exempted, that they cannot be known from
unwounded Frogs that exercise in their company; the story whereof that most
dexterous Anatomist D. Needham has published; De format. foetu*
moreover, if a Ligature be applied to a Vein or Artery, whereby the pulse is
intercepted with the undulation of the blood also, yet the blood beyond the
bond runs its course toward the heart; and which is so much the more strange,
because it is the motion of a heavy body contrary to its natural tendency,
upward. Moreover, if the pulse of the heart were the only cause of the motion
of the blood, why then is not the menstrual blood thrust into other parts as
well as into the uterine? since the other parts equally with these receive the
constant force of the hearts even pulsations and impartial distributions;
likewise we see that the animal spirits in the nerves, with their juice, the
Lympha in its ducts, the Chyle in its thoracicks, the Seed in its seminals, the
Urine in the ureters, and the Phlegm in its pituitary Vessels are all in motion
without the force of any such Engine to give the origin thereto. Whereupon I am
apt to conjecture, that Nature has furnished several parts with an attractive
power, the blood with fermentation, and several Vessels with a kind of
Vermicular motion of their own (no doubt excited by the nerves) the Porta with
Asinus in the Liver, which serves for a Pump, and the Cava (or one part it)
with a pulsifick energy (by which blood is thrust into the right ventricle, as
the learned Walaeus asserts) by which the motion of humors is promoted; and
consequently that the rareness of the structure, unweariedness of the
pu^sations of the heart, etc. are designed to some higher ends, than merely,
and as such, to give motion, though that it does with an Emphasis.

Fourthly, How can Spirits both vital and animal be prepared and separated
without food, and frequent fermentations? ^. I. Whether there be a flux of
animal spirits through the genus nervosum seems yet not fully resolved; and if
no flux then the waste is small, and a small reparation may supply a small
waste; but I confess, I understand not how Narcotick fumes, nor redundant
humors restagnating in the brain can cause an Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Palsy,
etc. in the whole body, if there be no flux of spirits from the brain; nor how
the hurt from a Coach in the seventh Vertebre of the back (mentioned by great
Galen) could cause a Palsy in three singers; nor why we anoint the Vertebres
of the back for Palseys in the extreme parts, if there be no flux of spirits.
2. Supposing a flux of animal spirits through the nervous systeme, yet
(according to the Doctrine of famous Dr. Wharton) much of the nervous juice
separated by the glandules, De. (...).
is returned by the veins and Lymphaticks, and so not lost, though ense^bled by
its peregrination; and more yet deposited (according to Dr. Willis the great
Reformer of Physic) by the extremity of the nerves in the habit of the body,
is again retriv'd by the Lymphaticks, which serving in our Abstinents little or
nothing to assimulation (only somewhat to the cherishing of the implanted
spirits) is the more plentifully returned and so the loss (thus far forth) less
considerable than ordinary* 3. It Is apparent that there is a decay of these
spirits, as well as an obstruction in most of these Abstinents, as witnesses
their great inability to motion* 4. The fermentations mentioned before, though
small may contribute something to the increase of these spirits; for Chemists
know that there are few juices so (...), so sterile, but by the help of
fermentation may yield a not contemptible spirit. 5. Those spirits that pass
from the brain to the extremity of the body, and thence returned as before by
the Lymphaticks, and that more for^eably and plentifully being reflected by the
impervious cold and constipated skin seem rather tired than exhausted, which
may by the small ferments aforementioned, the contritions mixtions, and
exaltations of the heart, and the perpetual motions of the scarlet liquor be
rarifi'd and volatiliz'd to do at a dead lift further good service. 6. It Is
notorious, that sents do hugely affect the brain; as to instance in Apoplexies,
hysterical passions, and in some sort of Syncopes and Cephalalgies common
practice does demonstrate; so then if feeding animals perceive such strange
alterations by odoriferous exhalations (as of Assa faetida, Galbanum, Verrucae
Equinae, etc. which according to the prodigious invention of the most
Philosophical Dr. Willis are able to restrain the most violent explosions (like
those of Gunpowder, than which none more violent) of the Nitro-sulphurous
atoms with which in spasmodick distempers the nervous juice is impregnated,
(and by which it is reduced to the greatest disorders) why may not these
Abstinents be relieved by such enriched fumes also?

Fifthly, Aristot. de (...) and (...). c. 3.
without sleep no long life, and without food no sleep; for say the Ancients,
sleep is the binding up of the first Sensorium, (...). Galen. de sympt. cause.
c. 8. and de (...). c. 4.
or common sense caused by the food digesting in the stomach, elevating its
fumes to the brain, which there condensing stop the passages of the animal
spirits, whereby they are detained from their just visitations, whence the
senses are disenabled for the execution of their offices. R. 1. It Is not
certain that sleep is absolutely necessary to life, for we read of many that
lived waking: (...). de med. (...). hist. p. 23, 24, 25. l. 5. Patholog. l. de
(...). cap. c. 16. l. de Pro^identia.
It Is said that Ramus studied Philosophy so uncessantly, that he became blind,
or deaf, or both, through defect of sleep. Bhasis watched so long at his study
of Physic till at last he could not sleep at all; likewise a Doctor of the Law
studied so indefatigably, that he never laid his eyelids together for four
months; yet all recovered by the use of Hypnoticks. The most inquisitive
Galenist Fernelius reports a certain man to have survived 14 months waking.
The grave Heurnius relates a story, from (he says) a truly learned man Ierom
Montuus, of a Noble Matron that lived 35 years without sleep, nor hurt thereby;
and of another that lived 10 years waking. Seneca reports that Maecenas lived
three years without sleep, and at last was recovered by music. 2. But I affirm
not that our Jejunants are Vigilants, and therefore add, that though these
persons receive no external food, yet airy condensations and concretions, the
phlegmatic humors, colliquations of the parts, etc. afford matter for such
vapors, and so much the more plentifully, because they are environed with a
thick wall, whose very ^revises, and much more gates, and public out-lets, are
so close shut up and barricado'd, that these troops of Exhalations that were
wont to be dispersed, are now crowded together, which assaulting the brain may
do much to bind up her common sense. 3. It seems probable by Apoplectical
Dormitators that a cold humor lodged in the brain is a great causer of sleep;
and why such a humor may not lodge in a sufficient proportion in these
constipated brains to procure intermitting sleeps, I see not. 4. It Is apparent
that Narcoticks, as Opium, and in their measure, Wines, Tobacco, etc. provoke
sleep, not by any cold quality, for they are all proved to be hot, but ('it is
probable) by adding such a ferment to the blood, as renders the spirits
separated in the brain more torpid, ignave, and consequently inept to motion,
and the execution of their offices; or, (which is almost the same thing) as
renders the blood inept for separation of spirits in the brains Alembick,
whence the wearied spirits for want of fresh supplies are be^almed and
quiescent. So then if the humors in the bodies of these Abstinents should
happily partake of these Narcotick sulphurs, they may prove somniferous without
the elevation of fumes from digesting food. But Sir, lest you should be
startled at this unphilosophical discourse, in representing sleep rather as a
non-emission of spirits from the brains, than a non-immission of them to the
brain from the external senses, and consequently as a negation of action rather
than of passion, I crave leave to mind you, that I am not only deficient in
the beard, but much more in the brain of some very great Philosophers who rank
not only the external senses but the first internal or common sense in the
predicament of passions; which I confess I cannot understand, because I know,
that when devout persons are taken up in divine services, though their eyes be
wide open, and presented with various objects, yet they see them not, because
they mind them not; likewise when diligent Students are intent on their books,
they hear not the Clock that strikes at their ears; and sound sleepers with
lethargical persons feel not the pulling and haling of their friends that would
awake them, etc. From whence I conjecture, that though objects act ad ultimum
virium upon the external senses in imprinting their species, yet that causes
not sensation, except there be an actual attendance of the sensitive spirits
upon the sensible objects, a framing of their effigies or species, and a
conveyance thereof to the understanding. Can you imagine that Columbus his
journey to the Indies, his surveying that unknown World, and returning a map
thereof to his own Contrymen, was a mere passion of his, and only the action
of a novel Jig of American Atoms? or Camden's perambulation through all the
Coasts of this Island, with his observations thereon, which he digested into a
valuable volume, was merely his suffering, but wholly the doing of subtle
spirits, and ethereal globules magically charmed into a once happy
combination. But to return, 5. Cold juices, as of Housleek, Lettuce, Violets,
etc. will conduce to our sleep, and it is not to be doubted but the Juices in
these bodies may be cold enough to effect the same. 6. The animal spirits in
these persons being but languid, are the less active, and consequently can give
the fewer repulses to the insinuating courtships of somniferous causes. 7. The
spirits of these languishers ('it is probable) are scant and defective, and
therefore easily tired by their constant operations, and consequently easily
persuaded either by a command of the Heaven-born Soul, or an Exhalation from
the earthy body to yield to this temporary death. 8. Great security of mind,
pleasing Fancies, either from Imagination (such as some of these are said to be
swelled withal) or from the senses affected by Music, dropping waters,
gliding Rivers, whistling winds, etc. are usual promoters of insensation. By
all which you may perceive that there are more doors (...) our Bedchambers than
one.

Thus Sir, to satisfy your curiosity, I have traveled somewhat an unbeaten,
yet not altogether unpleasant path, and that I might not return these fruits of
my travels as jejune and sterile as the Country visited, I have therefore
taken a slight view of some of the Monuments of Antiquity, as also of the
stately superstructures of the new model that occurred in our Journey; yet
there is one thing remaining that should have been premised; and that is an
exact history of our Damsel, but that you cannot expect, because you did not
demand, and I suppose you did not demand, because you knew I was unable to
perform; yet that I might not seem to build on the sands, I shall present you
with a short Narrative received since I began this Discourse, from a person of
known ingenuity and honesty, and therefore most worthy of credit.

This Abstinent is one Martha Tailor a young Damsel, born of mean Parentage,
inhabiting not far from Bakewell in Darbyshire, who receiving a blow on the
back from a Milner, became a prisoner to her bed for several days, which being
expired, she obtained some enlargement for a time, but by increasing distempers
was quickly remanded to her bed-prison again; where continuing some time, she
found at last a defect in her Gula, and quickly after a dejection of appetite,
so that about the 22. of December, Anno 1667. she began to abstain from all
solid food, and so has continued (except something so small at the seldom
ebbings of her distemper as is altogether inconsiderable) till within a
fortnight before the date hereof, which amounts to thirteen months and upwards;
as also from all other sorts both of meats and drinks, except now and then a
few drops of the Syrup of stewed Prunes, Water and Sugar, or the juice of a
roasted Raisin, etc. but these repasts are used so seldom, and in such very
small quantities, as are prodigiously insufficient for sustentation; she
evacuates nothing by urine, or stool, she spits not that I can hear of, but her
lips are often dry, for which cause she takes water and sugar with a feather,
or some other Liquids, but the palms of her hands are often moist, her
countenance fresh and lively, her voice clear and audible, in discourse she is
free, her belly ^^ap'd to her backbone, so that it may be felt through her
Intestines, whence a great cavity is admitted from the Gartilago ensiformis to
the Navil, and though her upper parts be less emaciated (though much too) yet
her lower parts are very languid, and inept for motion, and the skin thereof
de^iled with a dry pruriginous scurf, for which of late they have washed them
with milk; she sleeps so sparingly, that once she continued five weeks waking:
I hear nothing of any extraordinary previous sanctity, though since her
affliction, being confined to her bed (which lies in a lower room, by the
fireside) she has learned to read, and being visited so plentifully by the
curious from many parts, as also by the Religious of all persuasions, she has
attained some knowledge in sacred Mysteries, but nothing of Enthusiasm that she
pretends unto. And lest she should prove a Cheat, she has been diligently
watched by Physicians, Surgeons, and other persons, for at least a fortnight
together, by the appointment of the Noble Earl of Devon; as is already
published by Mr. Robins B. of D. that is, Ballad-maker of Darby, whose Ballad
(they say) does much excel his Book. Likewise several other persons at other
times have been pleased to watch for their own satisfaction, who detecting no
fraud, have given the account above mentioned, which was for the main confirmed
to me by a Sophy, the renown of whose wisdom has often made England to ring,
who assured me, that he had an exact account of her.

This story being born thus out of due time, it may seem necessary to make some
reflections therefrom on the precedent discourse. And 1. her Age confirms the
probability of a ferment in the seminals. 2. An antipathy to meat was not the
promoter of the Tragedy, but an inability to swallow. 3. Her assumptions of
Liquors, though seldom and slender, contribute not only to a petite concoction
in the Ventricle, but also to a fermentation in the Heart. 4. Her restrained
Evacuations by Urine and Stool add much to her moisture, as well as to our
trouble to render the assumption and nonevacuation consistent: to the
performance whereof, let it be remembered, that in this respect she was formerly
compared to Embrio's, who use no excretion by the fundament, but retain in
their Intestines the more crass feculencies, till the time of their exclusion
the uterine embraces; which is the rather to be admitted, because she, as well
as they, receives nothing but liquids; only in this she differs, they evacuate
by the Urachus into the Allantoides their urinal excrement, but she has no
excretion of Urine at all: the defect whereof may yet be supplied by these
three advantages which she has above them, as is her expiration, extraordinary
transpiration in the palms of her hands, and the far smaller quantity of
Liquors that she receives. 5. Her non-excretion, and the dryness of her mouth,
argue the remanding of the humors to the further services of Nature. 6. The
Atrophy of the parts, and inability to motion, seem to argue a defect of
nervous juice and animal spirits; which weakens the necessity of our giving a
perfect account how Nature may be completely sustained in the absence of food.
7. Her impetiginous Eruptions argue the saltness of her blood, which adds the
greater probability to the several saline Ferments mentioned before. 8. Her
sparing sleep shows not only the no-necessity of the ordinary measures of
healthful Dormitators, but also that sleep may be conciliated otherwise than
by the powerful mediation of fuming food. 9. There Is no cause from any
antecedent sanctity to ascribe this mirandous production to miraculous causes.
10. Her abode in a lower Room does accommodate her with a moister Air, which is
more generative of humors, 11. Her propinquity to the Fire conduces to the
extraneous reception of igneous Atoms. 12. Her non-pretensions to Revelations,
and the constant visits she receives from persons of all forms, may serve to
occlude not only the mouths that are so unevangelical as to cry her up for a
Miracle, but those also that are so unphilosophical as to cry her down for the
cheat of a Faction.

Now Sir, should I take my hand from the Table, did I not suspect that some one
may possibly reply upon me, and say, If I take it to be possible to live
without food, it is a wonder I fall not my self to this piece of frugality; I
therefore add, though with this jejune Table one may possibly live, yet it
follows not that I can, for according to the old Saw, that which is one man's
meat is another man's poison: And even in Physic it is affirmed by that noble
Philosopher Esquire Boil (a worthy Fellow of the Royal Society, of whose
admirable designs I would you should know that I am a great admirer) that some
medicines as particularly, Scept. Chym. p. 251.
Salt of Amber is effectual for Epileptical Children; not so for adult
Epilepticks; and the deserving Dr. Castle affirms, that Mercur. dulc. is more
safe for children, than grown persons, especially if irrigated with acidities.
But Sir, Chym. Gal. p. 26.
I find my self launching into a wide Sea, I shall therefore tack about to do
my Devoire, and crave your acceptance of this slender Offering, and your
quietus est for the present, giving you assurance that in so doing you may
hereafter command

SIR, King-Norton. Feb. 25. 1668. Your Observant Servant, Jo. Reynolds.


