Die Mercurij, 28. Augusti, 1644.

ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that Master Earl do from this
House give thanks to Master Reyner, for the great pains he took in the Sermon
he preached at the entreaty of this House at Saint Margarets Westminster (it
being the day of public Humiliation) and to desire him to print his Sermon;
and it is Ordered, that none shall presume to print his Sermon without license
under his handwriting.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Samuel Enderby to print my Sermon.

William Reyner.

BABYLONS Ruining-Earthquake AND THE RESTAVRATION OF ZION.

Delivered in a SERMON before the honorable house of COMMONS at Margarets
Westminster, at their public Fast, August 28. 1644.

By William Reyner Pastor of the Church of Christ, at Egham in Surrey, and a
Member of the Assembly of Divines.

Dan. 7.26, 27. But the judgment shall fit, and they shall take away his
Dominion to consume and to destroy it unto the end. And the Kingdom and
Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be
given to the people of the Saints of the most high; whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.

LONDON: Printed by T. B. for Samuel Enderby, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Star in Popes-head-Alley. 1644.

To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses Assembled in
Parliament, and now sitting at Westminster.
Honorable Senators:
HAving had for a long time strong apprehensions out of the word of God, of an
approaching storm upon the Nations of Europe, for the ruining especially of
Antichrst's Kingdom; I thought it not unmeet for the times and Auditors
(having your honorable call to the Work) to treat in your presence upon such a
subject. The Kingdoms and states of Europe are grown old, and a man would
think, were come even to their years, and full ripeness in all kind of
sinfulnes and profaneness, but chiefly in idolatry and persecution in the
Ecclesiastical, and in tyranny and oppression in the Civil state, and that
under and against a great deal of light and means that either they had or
might have had. And there is a mervailous concurrence and agreement, both in
the general Comminations of the word against sins so aggravated (besides the
examples) and in the particular Prophecies and Praedictions of the last times,
all of them pitching upon this, as that period of time wherein the Lord will
visit. The Lord is certainly driving on a great Work both of mercy and
justice; of mercy toward his own (though by a way of severe correction) in
their Humiliation, Purgation, Probation, Reformation, Redemption from bondage,
and at last, in the Restoration and great enlargement of the Church: Of
justice, against his incurable enemies of all sorts and sizes, in their
perdition. We must not be moved that the Work is so long in finishing among
us, being happily not much more then begun. There is assuredly a great deal for
a public calamity, still to do (alas too much) in every Country, City,
Town, Parish, Family, Person; many both persons and things are yet (as it is
to be feared) among the Litigants on both sides, that are to be removed and
subdued. Besides, the Lord uses to deal with men as men, the great power of
the wicked cannot by humane means (which God is pleased to use) be suddenly
and easily breken.

Neither can the godly, ^^sa. 48.10.
whom the Lord will not refine as silver, purging out all their dross at once,
be suddenly hammered unto a sufficient humiliation, reformation, etc. But this
divine agent chooses to work upon them according to their receptivity.
Neither let any be scandalized at some interruptions and rebates, as I may say,
in the Lords proceedings, and at some successes now and then granted to his
Churches adversaries; you shall find the like in all the great acts of God that
be of the same nature: But all things are carried on by the steady hand of the
Almighty, though through many oppositions, repulses, contingencies, etc. among
men, to their designed end and appointed period. Not to speak of this, that
had not the enemies some encouragements, as the Lords work would hardly, by
them, be perfected and finished upon his own people, so neither would they be
hardened to their own destruction: If Pharaoh had never been released of the
first plagues, he would scarce have perished in the Sea at last: I hope it will
neither be unprofitable nor unacceptable, as a Watchman, to put your honors,
and by you, others in mind of these things. I do not deny, but in the course
of humane affairs, there will be treaties among men, for the composing of
those differences that God casts in, to be the occasion and means of executing
his decrees: Yea, there must (and for some reasons peradventure there ought to)
be such: But I know I speak to men too wise to believe that God's quarrels can
be taken up by humane treaties; but they will without fail attain the issue
by God himself before prefixed, and by his Word threatened and promised.

Neither do I doubt but that the Church shall obtain her desired peace and
rest in the end, when God's Work is finished, though no such means were used
at all, and give law to all her enemies; till which time I look for no solid
and durable quiet to be by the people of God enjoyed; yea, I am confident upon
the faithful word of God, that the Saints shall then enjoy things, which would
be but by a few even of themselves now desired, and by the adverse party never
yielded. The Temple of Solomon was built in a peaceable, the latter Temple in a
troublesome time; but now though there be great noyses of Axes, Hammers and
tools of Iron, partly about the preparation for the new building, but chiefly
about the pulling down of the old, (which is the great work in hand) yet when
the appointed time of building is come, the Church may promise unto her self
from God, and undoubtedly expest, an absolute cessation from all these
disturbances in Church and Commonwealth, and a time, (far above all that ever
were) of admirable freedom, serenitie and tranquillity.

There are some few things: concerning the happy estate of the Church, in her
promised future reformation, which time would not then suffer me to bring in; I
have here made bold briefly to add them, without which the former would have
been imperfect. I have purposely pretermitted some things subject to doubt and
exception; I humbly present all to your judicious view, whom God has thought
worthy to make his Instruments to begin so great a Reformation in these
Nations, which will (I fear not) have a good influence by divine blessing,
upon others also abroad; hoping steadfastly, that the same God will through his
infinite mercy in Christ, by your hands in due time, finish the same. Which is
the daily desire and prayer of him that is

Humbly devoted to your service in the Lord, WILLIAM REYNER.

BABYLONS ruining Earthquake and the restoration of ZION.
Haggai 2.6, 7. For thus says the Lord of Hosts, yet once, it is a little
while and I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry
Land: And I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come,
and I will fill this House with glory, says the Lord of Hosts.


THE Prophet Haggai lived and flourished after the return from the Captivity
of Babylon: His prophecy is spent, partly in reproving the people of the Jews,
for their negligence in not building the Temple of the Lord appointed for his
worship; partly in declaring Gods hand against them for the same, in their
Corn, Cattle, and otherwise, because they came to build, and even to siele
their own house, and let Gods House lie waste; partly in exhorting and
encouraging them unto the building.

This last he does diversely: First, he tells them the Lord was with them, chap.
1. ver. 13. and chap. 2. ver. 4. And that therefore they need not fear the
oppositions of their enemies; who formerly, so often as ever they began to
build, did by their complaints to the Kings of Persia still stop the work, and
that his spirit did remain among them; now this was to be done, not by might,
not by power, but by the spirit of the Lord, as Zec. his contemporany Prophet
tells them, Zech. 4.6. even against might and against power; and this according
to the Covenant he made with them, when they came out of Egypt, chap. 2. ver.
5.

Next he assures them, that the disire of all Nations should come to this
house, and that he would fill it with glory.

And whereas this house might seem to be a despicable and contemptible thing,
compared with the sumptuous Temple of Solomon that was before it, which made
the old men weep when they saw the foundations of it first laid, Ezra 1.12. he
comforts them against that, and tells them, that the silver and gold are his; so
that if true glory had consisted in them, he could have given them in
abundance, for the adorning of this second Temple, but he had a greater glory
to bestow upon it, namely Christ, and in this place he would give peace (viz.
by Christ the Prince of peace) unto his people.

The words may be divided into two parts: First, a Commination against the
Nations as an antecedent, or a thing that in act and execution should go
before. Secondly, a consolation unto the Church, as a consequent, or a thing
that in accomplishment should follow after the Commination.

The Commination is in these words, I will shake the Heavens and the Earth,
etc. I will shake all Nations; the Consolation in the words following, and that
consists of a double promise: First, The desire of all Nations shall come:
Secondly, God will fill this house with glory. Both these are set out by two
circumstances. First, of the person that says these things; secondly, of the
time. First, the person; Who is it that says this? Answ. He that is able to
make good what he says, thus says the Lord of Hosts; and this to make all
more sure, is put both before and after the Commination and Consolation.
Secondly, we have the circumstance of time, and that is double. First, Quoties,
how often shall this be before Christ come? Answ. Once. Secondly, Quando, or
quam diu, when or how long is it before it be? Answ. ere it be long, yet a
little while.

The sense of the Words.
The Prophets living in the Eastern regions did frequently use the phrase and
style of the Eastern Nations; they did not always in a plain, downright
manner, declare things as they be, as we for the most part do; but did use
many high phrases, tropicall speeches, and other figurative exornations, many
continued metaphors or allegorie's, aenigma's and dark riddles, hyperbolees,
and excessive speeches many emblematicall and hieroglificall expressions; these
puzzle us when we read them, but were familiar to the people of those times and
places.

Heavens were used not only for the celestial bodies above, but sometimes to
set forth a State of dignity and prosperity: Earth a state of mediocrity hell
of adversity. Again, sometimes heavens were used to set forth things
appertaining to the Church, or ecclesiastic State; earth, things appertaining
to the Commonweal, or civil State, as we shall hear afterward: Seas and
dry Land making up the whole Orb of the universe, are put comprehensively and
extensively to signify the extent of this shaking, so as it should be of all
the world round about, as it is interpreted even in the next Words, I will
shake all Nations, see further, verse 22.

By shaking we are to understand, the raising of great stirs in those Nations
among all estates; whereby great alterations should follow, and desolations.

That such a sense is not insolent in the Scriptures, we may see in an instance
or two, Isa. 14.12, 13, 14, 15. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning, etc. Thou saidest I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt
my throne above the Stars of God, etc. Yet thou shall be brought down to
hell, etc. Who was this Lucifer? Answ. None other but the King of Assyria, as
appears by the context.

What were the Heavens and Stars he exalted himself above? Answ. The great
estates and Princes of the world compared thereto. What Heaven was he fallen
from? Answ. from his high Sovereign Dignity and Majesty, To what hell was he
brought down? Answ. To utter confusion and ruin; for not long after this, an
hundred eighty five thousand of his Army were slain by the Angel of God in
one night, himself shortly after killed by his own sons in his Idols Temple,
and a little while after this, his whole Kingdom brought to destruction, and
the Soveraignity transferred to another Family, viz. that of Nebuchadnezzar
King of Babylon, and that Kingdom at length also ruined.

Look upon another instance, Jer. 4.23, 24. I beheld the earth and be hold it
was without form, and void, and the Heavens, and they had no light; I beheld
the Mountains, and lo they trembled, and all the Hills moved lightly, etc. Did
the Prophet Jeremy indeed see any such thing? was the earth like an old
confused Chaos without all form and void, so as no Grass nor Tree did grow
upon it? had the Heavens so lost their light, as that neither Sun, Moon, or
Startes did shine? Did Jeremy see the Hills to skippe and leap? No such matter
surely, but this was all the meaning, that there was a great confusion in the
Land among all estates both in Church and Commonweal as appears in the
verses following, which tell us that the fruitful places were even become a
Wilderness, the Cities broken down and the whole Land desolate.

Let us go on in the interpretation: And the desire of all Nations shall come.
Some understand this of Believers, the desirable people of all Nations; others
of other things; but no doubt it is meant concerning Christ by anticipation who
was to be afterward the desire of the Nations.

The words are to be read thus, (...)


The learned in the Hebrew affirm such a Synrax, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning
Godcrea^ed, word for word, Gods he created, denoting out the Trinity of the
persons in the Godhead, (...)
and the unity of their Essence and Act in creating the World.

And I will fill this House with glory: Not with an external glory of silver
and gold, nor with a ceremonial glory, such as the Arc, which was called the
glory of Israel, 1 Samuel 4.21, 22. Psalm. 78.61. which was now quite taken away,
Jer. 3.16. (for God would now teach them to take their hearts quite off from
ceremonies, and to look directly for the Messiah) but he would fill it with the
glorious presence of Christ, who had the glory of the only begotten Son of
God, John 1.14. who is the Lord of Glory, James 2.1. who is the true Glory of
Israel, Luke 2.32. who shows his people the way, and is himself the undoubted
means of glory.

Now from the words thus understood, we may observe these two general
Doctrines; one from the commination, the other from the consolation.

First, that great concussions,

Secondly,

We will begin with the former of these, and in opening of it observe this
method. First, we will set down some proofs and examples of it in the
Scriptures. Secondly, give some grounds and reasons of the Lords proceedings in
this manner, such as the Scripture leads unto. Thirdly, we will declare some
signs and indices of such an approaching storm and earthquake, and then apply
it.

First therefore; we shall find such earthquakes foretold and threatened before
the Reformation of the Church, wherein the Lord intends not to ruin the Church
as we are apt to imagine) but to restore and reform it. See for this, Amos 9.8
9, 10, 11. Behold the eyes of the Lord are upon the sinful Kingdoms, and I
will destroy it from off the face of the earth, saving that I will not utterly
destroy the house of Jacob says the Lord, for lo I will command, and I will
sift the house of Israel among all Nations, like as Corn is sifted in a sieve,
etc. All the sinners of my people ^all dye by the sword, which say, the evil
shall not overtake nor prevent us: In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle
of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up
his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old, etc. Lo here, the Lord
will first destroy the sinful Kingdom (though not the whole Nation, for those
are two things.)

He will sift the whole Nation, so that no grain shall escape tossing, and cut
off the enormous transgressors among his people; and then when this is done, he
will restore his Church, set forth under the Type of the Tabernable of David,
as we see it expounded by the Apostle James, Act. 15.14, 15, 16, 17. other
predictions we have of this kind, Isa. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Zech. 13.8, 9.

We shall also find instances in the Scriptures of such mighty earthquakes in
the course of Gods providence going before notable Reformations of the Church,
and we will begin with this mentioned in the Text.

There have been four famous Monarchies in the world the Babylonian, the
Persian, the Grecian and the Roman Monarchies. The Babylonian was lately
fallen it was now about the midst of the Persian Kingdom, which continued
for some 228. years, and then was utterly overthrown by Alexander the
Macedonian called Alexander the Great. He brought in the Grecian Kingdom
which continued divided amongst his successors (but with infinite troubles)
200. and odd years, and then was subdued by the Romans. All these great
changes (besides very great ones among the Romans themselves) happened between
the time that the Prophet Haggai flourished, and the coming of Christ. The
people of God, the people of the Jews were under all these Monarchies, Neh.
9.36, 37.
and held their Kingdom in vassalage of them, and as tributaries to them, and
therefore must needs partake of their commotions, as indeed they did, for there
were great alterations in the Jewish State, both in Commonweal and Church.

For the civil State, sometimes they were under a Prince of their own Nation,
sometimes under a foreign Governor; as Pilate the Roman Deputy was over
Jerusalem, and the principal part of that Country in the time of our Savior:
Sometimes they were under Princes of the house of David, as Zerubbabel and
others: Sometimes their Princes were of another Tribe, as the Macchabees, who
are said to be of Lev: by the Fathers side, and of the Tribe of Judah by the
Mother, till at length Herod the Idumaean tyrant, by the favor of the Roman
Emperors usurped the Kingdom, slew Hircanus the King his Father-in law,
together with his own Wife and Sons, being all of the Bloodroyall and line
of David, many of the Nobles of Judah the whole Sanhedrim, or Council of
Elders.

And so that prophecy of Jacob was fully accomplished, Genesis 4^.10. The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet until
Shiloh come, meaning Christ. Sometimes their Governor had the title of a
Prince, sometimes of a King; they were now under a King, then under a Queen, as
Alexandra: Sometimes their Governor was both King and Priest, as was Hircanus
a little before our Savior came in the flesh; These changes were usually made,
with many mighty stirs and dismal battles.

There were semblably great changes in the ecclesiastical Sat, it seems they
had sundry Highpriests together sometimes, as Luke 3.2. Annas and Caiaphas;
sometimes the High Priest was but annual or but for a year in his office
whereas by the law there was to be but one High Priest, and he for term of
life: There were diverse different Sects of Religion risen up among them and
some of them strange ones, as Sadduces that denied the Resurrection, Angels.
etc. Pharisees, Essenes (what they were may be doubted.) They had put many
false glosses upon the law moral, as we may see, Mat. 5.21. etc. They stood
stiffely for the ceremonial law as a thing that was to be perpetual, as
appears by our Saviors telling them, that He came not to destroy it, but to
fulfill it, Mat. 5.17. by their stoning of Stephen upon that false accusation,
Act. 6.13, 14 15. Yea, the converted Jews were very tenacious of it, Act.
21.20. The false Apostles urged some part of it as circumcision, etc. upon the
Churches of the Gentiles, Act. 15.1. Insomuch as the Lord at length shakes
down Temple, Priests service, ceremonial government and all and almost the
whole Nation, and then was Christ made the desire of the Nations, etc. unto
this shaking of the Church, and the antiquating the old administration and
form of worship; does the Apostle apply this Text of Haggai in part. Heb.
12.26, 27. He has promised, saying, yet once more I shake not the earth only,
but also heaven: And this word, yet once more, signifies the removing of those
things that are shaken, as of things that are made (that is of the ceremaniall
Ordinances and Law) that those things that cannot be shaken may remain, that
is the Ordinances of Christ, as the Word and seals of the Word under the
Gospel.

A second instance we have in the planting the people of Israel in the land of
Canaan: In Egypt they were under great oppression, and it seems had no
public service of God, for when they desire leave of Pharaoh to go out of
the land, they told him they must serve the Lord, as he should command them,
Ex. 8.27. and they knew not how that must be, till they came thither where he
appointed them, Exodus 10.26.

The Lord therefore would have them out of Egypt into Canaan, but before that
he was forced first to shake Egypt terribly with many sore plagues, and at
last when it would not otherwise be, he tumbled Pharaoh and all his Army into
the midst of the Sea, he destroyed six hundred thousand Israelites in forty
years space in the Wilderness, and after that twenty or thirty Kingdoms of
the Canaanites, and then plants in his people, and sets up his Tabernacle and
Glory in the midst of them.

A third instance we have in the people of the Jews after the captivity of
Babylon; before, Religion was come to a low ebb, the land was full of
profaneness, idolatry, and contempt of God and his Word, 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 15,
16. Ezekiel. 22. Jer. 6.10. The Lord therefore does as a man uses to do with an
old house that is too bad to patch and repair, he pulls it down that he may
build it fairer from the ground: Thus did the Lord, he pulls down all the
Ecclesiastik and civil State too, destroys the Temple, Priests Sacrifices the
Princes and Nobles of the Land, carries the Kings one after another into
Babylon, suffers Nebuchadnezzar to put out the eyes of Zedekiah, having first
slain his Children before his sace, that that might be the last sight that
ever he might see, (2 Kin. 24. and 25. 2 Chronicles. 36. Jer. 39.) captivates the
people also, and beslaves them to the Chaldeans for the space of seventy years;
when those were over, wholly overthrowes the Babylonian Kingdom, and then
brings back their captivity, settles them again in the land of Judah, restores
his glory to them, makes them take rooting downward, and bring forth fruit
upward.

Let us look into the Christian Church under the new Testament, and there we
shall find predictions of such earthquakes; one is already past, another is to
come.

The Church (you know) was after our Saviors time almost 300. years,
continually molested with dreadful persecutions under the heathen Empire; at
length the Lord upon the humble supplications of his people, and the cries of
their blood ( Rev. 6.10.) was pleased to grant peace and liberty to his
servants; but before this could be done, there must be a great earthquake,
which makes a mighty confusion in all estates, as if heaven and earth were
mingled together; the Sun is darkened, the Moon is turned into blood, the
Stars fall, etc. which is interpreted afterward; the Kings of the Earth, the
chief Captains, the great men, etc. do call to rocks and mountains to fall
upon them, and hide them from the face of the Lamb (who now is like a Lion,)
Rev. 6.12, 13. etc. the meaning is, the heathen Emperors, when God stirred up
Constantine the great, who was the Churches first masculine child, to undertake
the quarrel of Christ and of his Church against them, and being overcome in
many dismal battles, were so amazed and confounded, together with their great
Captains and Commanders, as that diverse of them confessed Christ had overcome
them, as Galerius, Maximinus, Licinius; happy was he that could first make an
end of himself.

Maxentius a cruel enemy of Christ, after he had bin overcome in fight was
drowned, or did drown himself in Tyber; Dioclesian is said to have poisoned
himself, Maximinianus to have hanged himself, or to have been strangled by
Constantine's command, as was afterward Licinius. Maximinus having in a rage
slain many of his Idol-priests that stirred him up to war against the
Christians and revoked his decrees, being suddenly stricken with Gods hand, was
eaten away peece-meale, and so his eyes leaping out of his head, he breathed
out his cruel Ghost: Galerius was eaten up with vermin, and rotted above
ground: All of them extremely frighted with Christ's victories over them, in
fear and tormert (together with multitudes of their Soldiers) ended their
days. What was this but rocks and mountains fall upon us, and hide us from
the presence of the Lamb? After followed peace and liberty to the people of God.

These and many more are already past and gone; there is one earthquake to
come, that is the greatest that ever was in the world and shall be followed
with the most notable Reformation of the Church that ever was; I call it the
greatest that ever was, because the Text calls it so, Rev. 16.18. and it is very
probable Daniel means the same, Dan. 12.1. where he speaks of a time of
trouble that should be, such as never was since there was a Nation, even to
that same time.

We read of it first, Rev. 11.13. the Beast has long persecuted the Prophets,
at last (besides many former) he got an unexpected victory over them, triumphed
over them for three days and an half; but now in the midst of his jollity
and his whores also, spoken of, Rev. 18.7, 8. an earthquake comes upon them
both, ( Rev. 11.13.) and utterly ruins them (for this false out at the end of
the Prophets prophesying in sack cloth ( ver. 7.) and consequently, (...) Mead
at the end of the B^asts reign) and the tenth part of the City falls; by which
we may understand the City of Rome that now is, being but the tenth part of
that which it was, when it was in its glory; and in the earthquake (not in the
fall of the City, for the earthquake is to shake down the whole Kingdom of
the Beast throughout the world) in the earthquake (I say) were flaine of men
seven thousand, that is, thousands upon thousands, and so the second woe, made
up of Popi^h idolatry and Turkish cruelty, passes away, ver. 14.

Now immediately upon this the seventh Angel sounds a Jubilee, and then there
be great proclamations and acclamations in Heaven, that the Kingdoms of the
World (indefinitely set down, that is all the Kingdoms) are become Christ's,
Kingdoms: And whereas before the Devil, Dragon, Beast and his horns have
reigned, now Christ takes to himself his great power and reigns; for which
the whole Church (under the type of 24. Elders) praise him, though the Nations
be angry, as they ever are when Christ puts forth his just power, ver. 15, 16,
17, 18. He now gives rewards unto his servants the Prophets, etc. and destroys
them that destroyed the earth; that is, he ruins the wicked and idolatrous
generations of Antichrist, who wasted his Church before, ver. 18. His
Tabernacle is now opened in Heaven, and the Arc of his Testament seen, ver.
19. that is, Christ (represented by the Arc) is clearly manifested; before,
that wicked generation had forbidden men to read the Scriptures, had kept them
in unknown tongues, had involved the mysteries of Christ in Masses, and rude
heaps of other superstitions and ceremonies; but now he and all his
excellencies shall be fully manifested to the Nations.

The other place is, Rev. 16.17. etc. where Antichrist having by his emissaries
(that is, the unclean spirits like Frogs) drawn the Kings of the earth into A
militiae, or confoederation, subject to the divine Anath^ma.
Hormageddon, i. e. into a cursed and crafty war (for herein I assent to
Graserus) suddenly the Angel finding them in that state powrs out the seventh
Vial upon them, upon which follow thundrings, lightnings, and an earthquake,
such as was not since men were upon earth, so mighty an earthquake and so
great; it is called the greatest earthquake that ever was, happily in regard of
the sodainnesse and violence of it, or either else, in regard of the extent of
it, as being to shake all the world.

1. The effects are, the great City is divided into three parts, ver. 19.

2. The Cities of the Nations (or Gentiles) fall; should tread down the holy
City that is, the visible Church, Rev. 11.2. Peradventer these two effects of
the earthquake are now in fulfilling, ver. 19.

3. Unto great Babylon the cup of God's wrath is given, etc.

4. Yea, all parts of Antichrists monarchy shall fall. Object. every Island
fled away, and the mountains were not found, ver. 20. nothing so remote as the
Island, nothing so mighty as the mountains could stand.

And because this ruin of the Beasts Kingdom is one of the greatest things
that ever did, or ever shall fall out in the world, and shall have the
strangest consequents; therefore the Holy Ghost is pleased after a description
of the Beast and the Whore, chap. 17. that we may know who they are, the Beast
to be the Pope, and the Whore Rome; The Holy Ghost is pleased (I say) to set
down these things particularly, and at large: First, the destruction of the
Whore, chap. 18. then the destruction of the Beast himself, and all the Kings
his partakers, chap. 19. after which follows the binding up of Satan with its
consequents, chap. 20. and then the glorious restoration of the Church, both
of Jews and Gentiles, under the type of the new Jerusalem, in the two last
chapters.

In the next place, let us consider such grounds and reasons as the Scriptures
lead us unto, why the Lord in the course of his administration and providence,
does cause such great shakings of Nations before he does reform and refine his
Church, and we shall find these three in special.

First, Egypt, but that he might plague the oppressing Egyptians, and enlarge
his persecuted people of Israel? And why Babylon, but that he might destroy the
Babylonian tyrants and deliver captivated Judah? These things the Lord Intended
when he ruined the Dragons Kingdom, the persecrting heathen Empire; and which
he now intends, being about to destroy the Kingdom of Antichrist: take one
place for all, Jer. 50.33, 34. The Children of Israel and the Children of Judah
were oppressed together, and all that took them captives held them fast, they
refused to let them go; their Redeemer is strong, the Lord of Hosts is his
name; He will thoroughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the Land,
and disquiet the Inhabitants of Babylon. Mark here, Gods people were
oppressed, their enemies held them hard, as never minding to let them goo and
deliver them, (no more did the enemies of God's Church now) well, who can help
it? B. L. in his Epist. Ded. before his ans. to F^she^.
they have no such strong assistance to back them (for so one has written:)
Yes (says the Phophet) they have a strong Redeemer; what may his name be? the
Lord of Hosts is his name; what will he do for them? He will thoroughly plead
their cause and give rest unto them; how will he do that? by disquieting the
Inhabitants of Babylon; it is a (...), he will disquiet, that is, he will
destroy them: Observe it, wherefore would the Lord bring such a devastation
upon Babylon, but that he might redeem his people by oppressing their
oppressors?

That he may take away the impediments of his Churches restoration, and namely
these three.

That he may take away the scandal of great sins: Hosea 4.2, 3.
profanation of Gods Ordinances and Sabbaths persecutions of the godly, and
all kinds of licentiousness, open sins against the very letter of the Law; and
these lived in against the express doctrine which the committers of them know
and profess: Now for these sins the name of the Lord lies under much
pollution and dishonor; Heathers and Turks can pull Christians by the sleeve
and accuse them for them and wonder why they do things so contrary to their
profession: A man would certainly think that wicked men had a dispensation for
these sins, or that God himself did not much dislike them, and would never
punish them: Well, the Lord will not always suffer this reproach though he
forbear a long time; no (nor never did always in any Nation) he will make
blasphemers know at length that he will not hold them guiltless that take his
name in vain, and so for the rest. The Land shall mourn for these things at
last, Hos. 4.3. He will have it appear that he allows not his to commit such
sins; the Lord will have the scandal of sin taken away.

Now the scandal of great sins is to be removed one of these two ways,
either by the Delinquents penetent confession and reformation; or secondly, by
a special vindication.

1. Sometimes it is taken away by the offender himself, when he humbly
confesses his sin and reformes, (if he confess and not forsake, he does not
remove, but increase the scandal) for then he takes the blame from off the
profession and lays it upon himself.

I did indeed so and so transgress, I did blaspheme, commit adultery, etc. but
it was my corruption made me to do it and not my Religion, it is utterly
contrary to the doctrine I have received and do profess, which utterly
forbids such sins, and threatens eternal damnation to the sinner; I am
heartily sorry for my sin, do earnestly beg pardon for it of God the Father
through Christ, and by divine grace in him do fully purpose and will endeavor
a thorough Reformation: this now discharges the profession of all blame and
lays it upon the person.

But because this is seldom done and only by penetents thoroughly, therefore
there is another way of taking away scandal from Gods Name for the gross
sins of professors and that is by visiting, or vindicating the sin upon
the sinner.

Now this vindication is either humane or divine.

The first is humane. For God requires that those that are under him and over
others, should execute judgment for him upon their Subjects, for all open
sinfulness according to the nature and degrees of it; this he expects from the
Parent, Master, Magistrate respectively, and they greatly sin, and shall be
punished if they do it not.

Now because this humane vindication for the most part fails, therefore the
Lord himself does at length take the matter into his own hand; when he sees
judgment is turned backward, and justice stands a far off, truth lies in the
street, equity cannot enter, and he that refraines from evil makes himself a
prey, that it is lawful to be any thing but good (as we have seen in our
times) when he looks about him and sees that there is no man, and wonders that
there is no intercessor; that is, he wonders there is no body will appear to
execute judgment for him; then at length himself puts on righteousness as a
brest-plat, he puts on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and is clad
with zeal as with a cloak; according to their deeds, accordingly will he
repay fury to his adversaries (far and near) even to the Islands he will
repay recompense, Isa. 59.14, 15, 16, 17. and so he will take away the scandal
sin and sinners, permitters and committers altogether.

See an instance: The people of Israel had diverse times murmured and tempted
God; they do it afresh when the spies came home, and brought ill news of the
Land of Canaan, the Lord thereupon threatens to destroy them all; Moses
intercedes for them and prevails for the present; but withal the Lord says,
and binds it with an oath, that surely and as truly as He lived, He would fill
all the earth with his glory, and not one of those murmurers should see the
promised Land, Numb. 14.21, 22, 23. And so it came to pass, for they were all
rooted out in the Wilderness, they had made all the earth ring of his
dishonor in their murmuring, and he would make it resound his honor again in
his punishing of them.

Because Elye's sons transcendently sinned and he being their Parent and
Judge did not punish them as he ought, therefore the Lord threatens to bring
such a punishment upon him and his house, that whosoever should he are of it
both his ears should ^ingle 1 Samuel 3.11. and so he did, chap. 4. Both his
sons were slain in one day, himself perished miserably, afterward Saul
flew (though unjustly) 85. of his Posterity at one time, and Abiather was
afterward for taking part with Adonijah, cast out of the priesthood by
Solomon, and so his whole posterity brought to beggary; hereby was the word of
the Lord fulfilled, 1 Kin. 2.27.

As dear as David was to God, yet when by his murder and adultery he had
opened the mouths of God's enemies to blaspheme his Name though upon his
repentance the Lord did pardon him, yet he would not remit the temporal
punishment, but the child borne in adultery should dye, the sword should never
depart from his house, he would raise up evil against him out of his own
bowels, as he did in the rebellion of Absalom, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11, 14. And this I
take to be one special reason, why the Lord at last has destroyed all the
States and Kingdoms of the world that ever yet have been, because that whereas
they should have executed judgment for him, they have executed judgment
against him; whereas they should have been a terror to evil works, and for
the praise of them that do well, they have generally been a terror to good
works, and for the praise of them that do evil.

The second impidement of Reformation is great and enormous sinners;

1. The scoffers at Religion, the Prophets words shall become wind, Jer. 5.13.

They threaten the Prophets that threaten them; the Prophets tell them, they
shall dye by sword and famine, they say thus shall it be done unto them, ibid.
We will make them dye by sword and famine; our Savior calls these dogs that
bark at, and bite them that cast pearls to them. Such were those, Isa.
22.12.13. who when the Lord called to weeping and mourning, and behold there
was joy and gladness with them, killing of Oxen and slaying of Sheep; let us
eat and drink (say they, speaking most impiously and securely) for to morrow
we shall dye. The same Prophet tells us of a company that know not how to be
sinful enough, and denounces a w^e against them from the Lord, Isa. 5.18, 19.
though they be an idle generation, yet they will work like Cart-horses to
commit sin; they will draw iniquity to them with cords of vanity, and sin
as with Cart-ropes: How might one know them might some man say? why by this;
they say, let him make speed and hasten his work that we may see it, let the
council of the holy one of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it; as
much as if they had said, we would see what he will do, we would see his
threats executed, we will believe them when we see them; I, so did the men of
the old world (just of this temper and sped accordingly) The most desperate
Giant of them all, when he saw the waters to cover the tops of the highest
mountains, no doubt believed the flood; but then it was too late to believe
it: Blessed are they that believe, though they never saw. If Noah had been of
that mind also, he had perished with them. The like we have in the place cited
before, Amos 9.10. All the sinners of my people shall dye by the sword (note
they are called sinners (...), that is, in a high degree) who? Why those that
say the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us: They scorn the Prophets
comminations then, ver. 11. In that day, when they are taken off, God will
raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, meaning the Church; but he
will first knock them down: Multitudes of such were removed in the captivity
of Babylon, before the Lord restored his Church in Judah.

The second sort are the obstinate resisters of Gods spirit, For his spirit
shall not always so strive with men in vain, as we, see Genesis 6.3.) When the
Lord is forced to say of a people unto whom he has afforded all his Ordinances
for a long time, as he does of his Vineyard, which he had choicely planted and
dressed, etc. Isa. 5.4. What could I have done more to this people, then that I
have done; meaning in an ordinary way of means settled by himself (and God
uses not to save Nations (though persons sometimes) by a prerogative) why then
it must be expected he will deal with that people as he did with his
fruitless Vineyard break down the hedge about them with his own hand; let
the wild beasts rush and run in and depopulate all. This was one cause of
the captivity of Babylon. The Lord rose up early and sent his Prophets long
before plagues came, but they mocked his Messengers, despised his words, and
mis-used his Prophets, until the wrath of God rose against his people, until
there was no remedy; whilst men are without means, there is hope they might be
reformed; if they had means, but when as they have for a long time profaned
all means, their case grows hopeless, therefore now the Lord brought upon
them the King of the Chaldees who destroyed all, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16, 17. So,
because our Savior would have gathered to him the Jews by his word, as the
Hen her Chickens under her wings, and they would not, therefore their
habitation should be left unto them desolate, Mat. 23.37, 38.

Mat. 23 33, 34, etc.

A fourth sort of enormous transgressors, Babylon, 2 Kin. 25.19, 20, 21. 2 Chronicles. 36. And so the Scribes and Pharisees, and the whole Jewish state in the
last destruction of Jerusalem; and this is to be one maine effect of the
earthquake before the Churches future reformation; in a word, the Lord will
take away whatsoever in Church or Commonweal is unreconcilable unto his
Sons Scepter, even Kingdoms and all; see Dan. 2.34.35.44.45. In the days of
these Kings (speaking of the last times, and of the Kingdoms that issue out of
the feet of the Image, or the iron. Empire of the Romans, viz. the Kingdoms of
Europe) shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom that shall never be
destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall
break in pieces all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever, ver. 44.
this interpretation is sure, ver. 45. see for this also Rev. 19.17, 18 etc.



the Lord is there.



then their sin cannot he purged away with sacrifice and offering for ever,
as it said of Ely's house, 1 Samuel 3.14. Then though Noah, Daniel and Job should
pray for them, they should not prevail; for a man may sin himself past and
beyond mercy, so that though he should repent yet the external plague should
not be removed.

Secondly, Shemajah the Nehelamite, Jer. 29.32. that made the Lord take off the
old generation in the Wilderness.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, thousand murmurers had come into the Land of Promise, how would they
have hindered the advancement of Gods Kingdom and worship, they being so inured
to Idolatry, murmuring, etc. and so hardened therein? such would be like the
enemies of the Jews, Ezra 4.2. they would needs assist the Jews in building
the Temple, but they would have marred all the work; they would have made a
wise building, and as strange a worship would they have set up.





First, a convenient number of Saints already called; not all, Dan. 12.1. At
that time thy people shall be delivered, not all in general, but every one that
shall be found written in the book; implying that some of Daniels people the
Saints, are written in the book of life; that is of natural life for escape,
but not all; see also Isa. 4.3. God must have a number of these called ones;
first, to be the constant objects of his love and grace; secondly, to praise
and serve him; and thirdly, to be the pillar and ground of truth to support it
before the world; and then fourthly, (if I may use so lo a comparison) as
those that write of Bees, report the Bees still send out some of their old ones
with the new swarms to manage their work; so God will have a competent number
of called ones preserved to carry on his work of Reformation.

Secondly, all the Elect that are not yet called at lest, Pet. 3.9. The Lord is
long-suffering toward the world, so that he destroys it not, because he is
not willing that any should perish; (i. e.) not any of his own chosen should
perish but that all, meaning all they, should come to repentance.

Thirdly, the progenitors of the Elect to come; Mat. 24 2^ where speaking of
the destruction of Jerusalem) he says that except those days should be
shortened, no flesh should be saved, but all the Jews should have been
destroyed: Why were they not? (might some man say) they that escaped were as
bad as those that perished; why? says our Savior, for the Elects sake those
days shall be shortened, i. e. for the Elects sake that are to come of them (it
may be) seventeene hundred, or two thousand years after: And to the same sense
are those words, Isa, 65.8. As the new wine is found in the cluster, and one
says destroy it not, for a blessing is in at; that is, let it grow till the
vintage and there will be a blessing, viz. good wine in it; so will I do for
my servants sake, that I may not destroy them all; that is. I would destroy all
this sinful generation, were there not a blessing in them; namely, were it not
for mine elect servants sakes that are to proceed from them.

Fourthly, Paul's sake, Acts 27.24.44. that they might be of some use to his
person, and their deliverance some honor to his office. Reprobates thus saved
shall be as the Gibeonites, hewers of wood, and drawers of water to the people
of God; they shall do some baser drudgeries for them, study Arts and Sciences
for them, as the heathen Philosophers did; God taking from him that has not
and giving unto him that has, bestowing the use and benefit of wicked men's
gifts, not upon themselus but upon the godly.

The third Impediment of the Churches restoration taken away by these great
earthquakes, God is terrible out of his holy places, Psa. 68.35.) Well, that
which the Word cannot do, the sword shall; that which the water cannot wash
out, the fire will burn out. Unto this particular the Apostle applies this very
text in part, namely concerning the shaking of the Heavens, Heb, 12.26, 27. Yet
once more I shake not earth only, but also heaven, etc. An earthquake (as we
have heard) was appointed to shake down the ceremonial Ordinances; now if
this were necessary for the abolition of that divine worship, which had
sometimes been by Gods own holy institution, how much more shall that which
has been of humane invention (yea, the very fumes and fogs of the bottomless
pit) to Gods infinite displeasure and dishonor, be tumbled down with violence
and vengeance to hell, from whence it came? And therefore as the heathenish
idolatry fell with such a terrible earthquake as shook down both it and all its
supporters both Emperors and Empire; even so shall antichristian idolatry and
haeresie with Babylon their Mother, the Beast their Father, and all their
intoxicated and dementated defenders, be thrown like a Mil-stone into the
bottom of the sea, Rev. 18.21.

The third general Reason of these great Earthquakes before the Churches
restoration, is: that the Saints may be prepared and qualified for the right
use of such a state and condition of happiness and prosperity, and so made
capable thereof.

First, they are thereby made humble: for so the Lord humbles his etc. that he
may do them good in the latter end Deuteronomy. 8.16. The people of the Jew's before
the captivity were exceeding proud despised Gods Word spoken by his Prophets
etc. 2 Chronicles. Babylon, though the Lord would have had them, promising them in
so doing safety and blessing; many of them would needs into Egypt, and when
they came there would worship the Queen of heaven, the Sun. Moon and
Stars, though the Lord by Jeremi^h under great penalties expressly forbad both
the one and the other, Ier. 42, and 43. and 44. But after the Lord ^ad hammered
them thoroughly by 70. years captivity and hard bondage, how humble were they,
and tame as Lambs? now you may do any thing with them; now they come weeping
to seek the Lord, and exhorting one another to enter into a covenant with
their God, never to be forgotten, Ier. 50.4.5. and so they did, as we may see
at large. Nehem. 9, and 10. where they undertake some things that it is
probable they never did before as to live in Boothes in the feast of
Tabernacles; and though they were very poor, yet they charged themselves
deeply for the maintenance of the public worship of God.

Secondly, they are thereby made hungry after Christ, Isa. 4.1.2. one man left
for seven women, in that day (says the text) the branch of the Lord, that is
Christ, shall be beautiful and glorious; and the fruit of the earth, that is,
Christ again shall be excellent and comely to all that are escaped in Israel,
that is, that have escaped perishing in the public storm and earthquake.
Before, who cared for Christ? who believed the Prophets reports concerning him?
there was neither form nor beauty in him wherefore men should desire him; oh!
but now there is beauty and glory in him; formerly who regarded this Manna? men
slighted him before, and said as they of the Manna, what i^ this? or if they
reverenced him in their words, yet he did dwell powerfully but in a few hearts.
Oh! but now Christ is excellent meat to those that have escaped. This and the
former make a man or a people capable of blessings, James 4.6. Luke 1.52, 53.

Thirdly, Isa. 4.3, 4. He that is left is Zion, and he that remains in
Jerusalem shall be called holy, that is shall be holy, (for God calls things as
they be) even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem; that is,
every one that is left alive after the public calamity. How shall this be
done? When the Lord shall have washed away (says the text) the filth of the
daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem (that is, their
sins that defile like blood; or rather, when he shall have purged their
sheddings of innocent blood) out of the midst thereof by the spirit of
judgment and the spirit of burning.

The plain meaning is, that the public calamity should by the working of Gods
spirit there promised, be a means of purging away their sinfulness, and
making of them holy, and to fit them for the deliverances and mercies in the
verses following. Thus, Zeph. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. When the Lord has powered out his
indignation upon the rebellious Nations, he turns the remnant to him as a
people of a pure language, that they may all call upon his Name, and serve him
with one consent: Yea, he makes them bring to him acceptable Offerings delivers
them from their shameful Idolatries and proud hypocrisies. In like sort, Zec.
13.8, 9. God would cut off two third parts in all the Land, the other third
should be left alive, and he would bring that third part through the fire, and
would refine them as silver is refined, and try them as gold is tried. Now when
this is done, then (says the Lord) they shall call upon my name, and I will
hear them; I will say it is my people; and they shall say; the Lord is my God.
Thus we see that the Lord by these great Earthquakes makes his people humble,
hungry and holy, and so fit for restoration: God may now trust them, it is
certain now they will be thankful and obedient, of which there could be no
assurance before. And these are the fruits God expects from his Church in a
state of restoration and reformation.

It remains now that I should give some Signs and Indices whereby the
approaching of a public Earthquake may be discerned.

When a Nation or People do revive their Fore, in then distress, they
trespassed more against the Lord, as branded Ahaz. did, 2 Chronicles. 28 22. and as
such Nations as fall to idolatry and persecution ever use to do, Revel. 16.9,
11. This reviving of those great sins uses to be the very nicke and period
of time, when it has continued a space, that the Lord takes to bring an evil
upon a people. For now the number of the Saints that are to be kiled, grows to
be fulfilled, Rev. 6.11. now the grapes of the earth grow to be fully ripe, and
therefore shall now be cast in whole clusters into the wine press of Gods
wrath, Rev. 14.18, 19. Now wicked ones fill up the measure of their fathers,
Mat. 23.32.

The people of the Jews had been exceeding idolatrous and cruel in the time of
Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33. these sins had been intermitted and broken off in the
reign of Josiah. who had wrought a wonderful reformation; but were renewed
again by his Sons, and under their reigns Jer. 22.17. 2 Chro. 36. which
made the time of Jerusalem to come, i.e. to come suddenly; so that now she had
made her days to draw near, and was come even unto her years; that is, to
her years of punishment, for so speaks Ezekiel that lived at that very same
time, Ezekiel 22.3, 4. which immediately came upon them as we see 2 Chro. 26.17,
18. etc.

The Jews before our Saviors time had given over their cruel persecucions; we
read of no Prophets or holy men slain of them for diverse ages before; but in
our Saviors days they revived all the cruelty of their forefathers; they
pretended otherwise, that had they lived in their Father days, they would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets; and therefore they
built the Prophets costly Tombs (as their successors our popish Hierarchists
do make Images to the old Saints and Marty^s) but for themseives, they would
kill no Prophets that they would not; no, take heed of them: Oh ye Serpents
(says our Savior) ye generation of Vipers, how can you escape the damnation
of hell! you tell me you will kill no Prophets? Behold, I send unto you
Prophets and Wisemen, and Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill and crucify
and some of them ye shall scourge in your Synagogues and persecute them from
City to City; for all that they would kill no Prophets yet they could make a
shift among them to kill John the Baptist, Stephen. James, beside our Savior
Christ himself the Lord of all the Prophets: Therefore (says our Savior) All
the righteous blood shed upon the earth frrom Abel to Zachary shall be required
of the men of this generation, Mat. 23. from ver. 29. to the end. And so it
came to pass, for some 36. or 37. years after our Saviors Ascension, the
State of the Jews was utterly dissolved in a most terrible calamity, and so
remains to this day.

The great persecutions of the Christians, after they had surceased for a time,
were most voilently renewed above all that had been before in the reign of
Dioclesian, Maximinian, etc. a little before the fall and ruin of the heathen
Empire.

Thus the Antichristian Hierarchicall brood have in our time revived all their
forefathers idolatries, and persecutions also, to as great an hight of
extremity as possibly they could reach, or durst proceed: For it was not want
of malice (wherein they go beyond all their forefathers) that kept them from
blood (which they did also shed in part, and we see what they do now.)

But because they durst not; it is (I take it) agreeable to the word, it should
be so; besides, there was a fatal concurrence of subordinate causes to hinder
them therefore wonder not if you see an earthquake begin upon it.

loofe off with a mighty Army to hinder all trade and traffic, and to catch
up and kill now one Citizen, then another, but if he has once begirt it with a
strong siege, made many great breaches and threatens to kill man, woman and
child, if the King, to whom that City belongs, intend to save it, he must now
appear to their rescue: Even so the Lord can endure the enemies and
persecutors of his people for a long time to destroy row one, then another of
his Saints, (though they shall at last hear of him for it) but when once they
determine and endeavor to cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of
Israel may be no more in remembrance, now the Lord must of necessity, and will
eft-soon's appear, for if he should suffer all his Church and people to be
destroyed, what should he do to his great Name? Josh. 7.9. he must needs have
a people to bear up his Name before the world.

Does Pharaoh to all his other cruel persecutions add this, that he will
destroy all the male-children of Israel? (for that strikes at the root of the
Church) why, now have at Pharaoh, you shall hear of some mischief upon Egypt
ere it be long: Does Hamon get a cruel decree against the Jews, to destroy
them altogether upon one day, and so to cut off the neck of the whole Church,
as it were, at one blow, and that upon a pretense, that their laws differ from
all other Nations, and that they keep not the Kings laws, and that it was not
for the Kings profit to suffer them; (an ordinary accusation against the
Saints) Hester 3.8 9. Well, now beware Hamon; if we read forward we shall find
him hanged anon upon his own gallow's made for another, Hest. 7.10.

When Gog will needs come against the Land of Israel, then shall Gods fury come
up in his face, Ezekiel. 38. from the 18. ver. to the end: Surely in that day the
Lord will make a great shaking in the Land so that all Creatures shall shake at
his presence, the mountains shall be thrown down, and every wall shall fall to
the ground, he will call for a sword against him, throughout all his mountain;
every man's sword shall be against his brother, and he will plead against him in
pestilence, blood hailstones fire and brimstone etc. When Gog and his Armies
do compass about the Camp of the Saints and the beloved City, intending to
ruin all (for that I take to be the Emphasis of this word compass about (and
this by the way) is the last enemy that ever the Church of Christ shall
conflict withal here upon earth) then suddenly fire comes down from God out of
heaven and devoures them, Rev. 20.9.

The adversaries of Religion have now of late made desperate attempts upon the
whole Church, plotted the ruin of it every where, and had as they imagined a
complete victory, both here and elsewhere; they rode in triumph: The great
Whore began to sing and to say she was now a Queen again, was no widow and
should see no sorrow, etc. but whilst the meat was yet in their mouths, the
heavy wrath of God fell upon them. Lo, even in the midst of their triumph an
handwriting upon the wall, that tells them, God has numbered their Kingdom
and finished it: An earth quake takes them, and has already shaken thousands
of them down into the pit themselves had dug for others; and the earth at
this present does terribly tremble under their whole Kingdom.

When the Lord arises to the succor of his people upon their sufferings and
supplications: For the oppression of the poor and the sighing of the needy, I
will now arise says the Lord. I will set him in safety from him that puffs
at him, Psalm. 12.5. and these words are as pure and true as refined silver,
ver. 6. When the blood of the Saints cried, Rev. 6.10. and their prayers also,
Rev. 8.3, 4, 5, 6. instantly the Cens^r that brought up their prayers is filled
with fire, ^ed that cast down upon the earth, and immediately follow
thunderings, lightenings, and an earthquake f^ure Angels with Trumpets sound a
desiance against the World, and upon that follow four plagues that utterly
ruin the Roman Empire.

Now God is risen upon the prayers and tears of his people, groaning under the
intolerable oppressions of Hierarchy, Praelates, High Commission, etc. (who
Lorded it over their faith and consciences and tyrannized over their bodies and
estates) and crying unto him day and night for help. For I am confident there
was scarce ever the like crying of that nature in the world, as of late years
there has been in England; why should it not still be continued? The Lord
therefore being up will not sit down again till he have done his work, and
has made his enemies his own and his peoples footstool. And whereas the
enemies do consult with hell, digging deep and in the duke; (for Gods people
in these quarrels do not wrestle with flesh and blood only, but with
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses,) yea, and whereas they
do with force and fury, with fire and sword go about to propugne their
idolatries and persecutions, and to withstand the Lord coming with power for
the vindication of his inheritance: they in so doing. do nothing else but
accerse and draw down upon themselves, the more certain, utter, and
irrecoverable destruction; even as the Canaanites of old were hardened in their
hearts of the Lord to come against Israel in battle, that they might have no
favor, but be destroyed utterly, Jos. 11.^0. For the Lord will not be always
bearded, and outbraved by man, but will even strike through Kings in the day of
his wrath; he shall judge among the heathen; he shall fill the places with the
dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many Countries; he shall drink of
the brook in the way (like a chafed Conqueror pursuing his flying enemy unto
perdition) therefore shall he l^fe up his head Psalm. 110.5, 6, 7. When God
causes judgment to be heard from heaven, he makes the earth fear and be
still* when he arises to judgment to save all the meek of the earth sarely
the wrath of man shall praise him; the remainder of wrath shall he restrain,
Psa. 76.8, 9, 10. If the unjust Judge that neither feared God nor man, would
avenge the Widow because of her troublesome importunity (and our Savior bids
hearken what the unjust Judge says) how much more shall the Lord avenge his
own elect upon their desperate enemies, and that speedily, his people giving
him no rest, but crying day and night unto him, Luk 18.5 6 7, 8. Surely the
Lord will at last procure rest to himself from his peoples complaints, and
unto his people from their enemies tyrannies, in their enemies destruction.

The great Earthquake whereby the Kingdoms of the grand Antichrist. with his
whore of Babylon, and all their supporters, Jew's when our Savior Christ came
in the flesh, or with the Churches of the Gentiles when Antichrist came; our
Savior was both come and gone before the Jew's generally would know him for
the Messiah; and Antichrist was grown to his (...) to his full age and
stature, before the world took any notice of him till the Waldenses and
Albigenses, near 500. years ago, began a little to discern him. I much
suspect the last 26. years, ever since the troubles began in Bohemia, Anno
1618. I much more suspect the last seven or eight years, ever since the
stirs began in Scotland; but most of all these last four years, ever since,
that by the endeavors of this noble Parliament in England, the Prophets are
begun to be raised, as it were from the dead, the enemies to be mightily
opposed; their triumph over the Prophets here ended, their power also beginning
to be broken and ruined. Besides, since that time the storm, like a mighty
whirlewinde, has passed over into, and assailed, many other Nations, and the
fire does continue still there, and proceeds further and further, burning most
fiercely and ragingly.

That this grand earthquake is at hand, or else begun, appears; because the
Beast, Antichrist, who is to fall by it, is so well stricken in years, and so
near his end. The whole term of his life and reign, without the womb (for
the mystery of iniquity was framing this Embrio, even from the Apostles times,
2 These. 2.7.) is two and forty months; Reve. 13.5. or one thousand two hundred
and sixty days, that is one thousand two hundred and sixty years putting a
day for a year, as we find it in other instances, Numb. 14.34. Ezekiel. 4.6.
Dan. 9.24. Now, these years grow toward their full period and expiration; for
it is well near so much time since they began. This will be made appear by
these two indices.

First it is almost so long time since the Papal state became the seventh head
of the Roman Monarchy; Rev. 17.11. That we may understand this, we are to look
upon the text, Reve. 17.9, 10, 11. Here is the ^inde that has wisdom, the
seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman sits; and there are seven
Kings, five are fallen, and one is, the other is not yet come, and when he
comes he must continue a short space, and the beast that was and is not, even
he is the eighth, and is of the seventh, and goes into perdition.

The seven heads of the Roman Monarchy signify two things: first, seven hills
upon which the woman sits; that is, upon which the City was built (for the City
is called a woman, ver. 18.) and seven Kings.

The seven hills were famously celebrated by heathen writers, long before the
Apostle writ his Revelation, Their names were these, the Palatine, the
Capitoline, the Aventine, the Esquiline, the Quirinall, the Viminall, and the
Janicular hills.

The heads did also signify seven Kings; that is, seven several supreme
forms of Government that have been in Rome: which makes Daniel when he
describes the four Monarchies comparing them to four Beasts, say, that this
was diverse from all the rest, Dan. 7.8. The seven several regiments are these;
first, Kings; secondly, Tribunes; thirdly, Decemvirs; fourthly, Dictators;
fifthly, Consuls; sixthly, Emperors; (all these are enumerated by Tacitus in the
beginning of his History) seventhly, Popes.

Of these, five were fallen when the Apostle received the Revelation, that is,
Kings, Tribunes, Decemvirs Dictators, Consuls. One is; that is, the Emperor a
Soldier chosen for the most part by the Armies. And the other is not yet come.
He does not say the seventh, but the other; pointing no doubt at the Christian
Emperor, who did not differ from the heathen Emperor as a distinct form of
Government (for they were both Soldiers, and chosen by the Soldiers;) but in
the quality of his person; the one hating and persecuting the other loving and
protecting christian Religion. And when he comes he must continue a short
space. For the Empire after it came into the hands of the Christians, stood but
a short time in its strength a matter of seventy or eighty years, from about
the middle of the reign of Constantine the great (for till then he was
exercised with mighty wars against the heathen Emperors) unto the end of the
reign of Theodosius the great, from about An. 316. or 320. until 395.

It follows in the next verse, the beast that was and is not, even he is the
eighth, and is of the seven. The beast that was, viz, the Papal state was in
respect of the bulk of the Empire, whereof he is a horn. And is not; that is,
has not any present existence in the Apostles time, as the seventh head for
the time of that is not yet come. Even he is the eighth, and is of the seventh;
that is, he is the eighth, if you make the Christian Emperor one; but is
indeed the seventh; for there be but seven heads, and he is but the seventh
distinct form of Government, as was observed before.

Now here lies the argument. It is well toward the end of the 1260. years
since the Pope became the head of the Roman Kingdom: ergo, the earthquake
that must ruin him and his Kingdom draws near. To make this appear, we are
to know, there were (as some have observed) diverse degrees of the fall of that
vast body of the Roman Empire. One after the death of Julian the Apostate,
about 365. for then the barbarous Nations invaded, and made huge havocke in the
Provinces of the Empire. A second was about An. 410. when Rome it self was
sacked by Alaricus the Goth, and the Empire dismembered. A third about An. 455.
when ten Kings were risen up instead of the Empire.

Let me take the boldness to interpose one notable one (sometimes suggested
out of a learned manuscript) about An. 395. at the death of Theodosius the
great: The barbarous Nations had made many attempts before, but were from time
to time, especially by his valor, repelled; but upon his death they brake in
like a huge inundation, bare down the Empire before them, shivered it into an
hundred pieces, so as it never recovered any more.

This great earth quake was at least sixty years in doing its work for so
great a body, as the Empire could not by created humane means be ruined in a
short time. And it is very remarkable, both because it made so great a change
in the Kingdoms of Europe and Afric, planting them almost universally with
new Nations and names; and in specially, because that storm brought our fore
fathers into this land, settling here a new Nation and language. It is thirdly
also observable, because in it the sixth head of the Roman Monarchy the
Emperor, went off and the seventh the Pope came on; only the question is,
about which of these times and degrees of the Empire destruction.

Happily not so high as Julians death, for the Empire stood in good strength
after that for thirty years at least: Nor so low as 455. when it was quite
broken, and not long after lost its very name; but somewhere between, viz.
either about 410. when Rome it self, the head of the Empire was taken, or
rather about An. ^96. when the Empire first began to be ruined, that is, plus
minus about 400. years after Christ.

Even as the seventy years of the Jews captivity, are not to be computed from
the 11. of Zedekiah when the City and Temple were taken and burnt and the State
dissolved; for from that time there be not sixty years in all, till their
return under Cyrus; but they must be reckoned from the captivity of Jehojakim
ten or eleven years before; even so, very probably it is here.

Now if the Beasts reign began about 400. after Christ, then is there above
1240. gone of his 1260. years, so that the ruining earthquake must needs
approach. And a man may wonder that so much work should be done in so short a
time as seems to be remaining to it throughout Europe, yea, throughout the
world, but that the Text tells us it is the greatest earth quake that ever was.

Theodosius the great.

Not in strength,

It is not absurd to imagine that the sixth head and the seventh might be in
some degrees together: For first,

Besides, the Imperial and Papal head did not so thwart and cross one
another at first as afterward they did, so that it might be with them, as
Logicians say of contrary qualities, they may consist together in the same
subject, gradibus remissis, non intensis, they might both of them have their
power, and yet not entrench upon each other.

Popes at first meddled in a manner only with matters of the Church, as being
desirous to settle their ecclesiastical authority; and the Emperors on the
other side, almost wholly busied themselves about the civil State to govern
and defend the Empire.

And yet further (which may lessen the absurdity) before that, you should have
in the Roman government sometimes as it were, two heads at once; as Consuls, who
were for their year; and a Dictator, chosen it may be for three months or six
mouths upon some extraordinary exigences and necessities of the State, who was
for the time supreme, and namely, in matters of war, as the Consuls were
supreme for other civil affairs.

The earthquake whereby Antichrists Kingdom is to be ruined approaches, or is
already entered, as may apreare by this second Indice or evidence: Because it
is almost 1260. years since the ten Kings began and the Beast began with them,
as may appear, Rev. 17.12. The ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings,
which have received no Kingdom as yet, but received power as Kings one hour
with the Beast.

The ten Kings, are the many Kingdoms that sprang up out of the ruins of the
Empire, as the Kingdom of England, the Kingdom of France, the Kingdom of
Spain, etc.

These are called horns aptly, because Antichrist did with them as the Beast
does with his horn (so the Dragon, i. e. the heathen Empire had done before
with them whilst they were his horns, Rev. 12.3.) that is, propugne himself,
and oppugn his adversaries: For this has been Antichrists course all along,
to push down and gore even to death, for the most part, all those that opposed
his idolatries and haeresies, in all Nations, by these horns; that is by the
Kings and peoples of those Nations, who have given their power and strength to
the Beast, Rev. 17.13. and who do generally continue it to the Beast with one
mind and consent, making war for him against the Lamb almost all, and that
most desperately, unto this day.

Which have received no Kingdom as yet. For when the Apostle wrote, there were
no such Kings, in rerum natura, or existent in the world, as the King of
England. the King of France, etc. These Kingdoms then were horns of the
Dragon, i. e. Provinces of the Empire, and therefore in the description of the
Dragon Rev. 12.3. the Crowns are not said to be upon the horns, that is, upon
the Kingdoms, who had then no Kings of their own, but upon the heads, that
is, upon the imperial head at Rome; as for instance, this Land Britain, was
in the Apostles time a Province or Kingdom, but it had no King of its own and
so no Crown; that was upon the head of the Emperor at Rome, and he had
supreme power over this Islrnd; but whenas these Kingdames became the horns of
the Beast, they came also to have peculiar Kings of their own; England had and
has its King, France its King, etc. And therefore in the description of the
Beast the Crowns are not said to be upon the heads, but upon the horns; upon
his horns ten crowns, Revel. 13.1.

But received power as Kings one hour with the Beast (...) that is, the Kings
and the Beast began their reign together. Now the Kings and Kingdoms began to
arise about An. 400. after Christ, when the Empire began to be destroyed; happily
some of them a little before; for they had begun to break the Empire four or
five years before, and therefore might then begin to be called Kings (for God
looks at (and so are we to look at) realities.) The Histories indeed do not
speak much of them under the name and notion of Kings until after 400. or
410. but the Histories are very confused, and no wonder, for those were times
of most strange confusion.

The Beast is said to begin with them at one and the same hour, (...), or as
the word may be interpreted the first hour; the word in the Greek text that
signifies one (as all that have any smattering in that language know) signifies
also, first; and so it may be interpreted, that the Beast began to rise the
very first hour the Kings began to rise; rather then the first hour after
they were risen, for therein is a difference of many years, it being almost
sixty years from the first breaking of the Empire, before ten Kingdoms were
set up in it. That the word that is here translated one, is used also to
signify first, we may see in many instances, as in that for one, Luke 24.1.
(...), which is word for word one day of the Sabbaths or week; but is
generally rendered (and so the meaning is) the first day of the week the women
came to the Sepulcher. Now if the Kings and the Beast began their reign
together so long since, as about An. 400. plus minus; then is the earth quake
that is to ruin him, and them also if they persist in his service, (Dan. 2.44
45. Rev 19, 18, 19. etc.) near at hand.

Qu.

Ans. viz. 1. Blasphemy; for he is full of names of blasphemy, Rev. 17.3. by
which understand haeresie and Idolatry. 2. cruelty, for he is a
skarlet-coloured heast, and makes war with the Saints, ibid. and chapter 13.7.
But both these flow from an higher principle, which is (as I may say) proprium
quarti modi, and a more convertible character of the beast, and that is his
primacy or supremacy: This supremacy has in it two things that make it up; one
is a claiming of authority over the consciences of men, and so over their faith
and worship; secondly the extending of this power to all Churches in all
Nations.

I will not say that these two are the same thing, nor that they issue both
from one and the same root; but surely this I may say, they are near a kin
and have their roots not far asunder, because they are generally still found
in one and the self same person.

That both these meet in the grand Antichrist will appear.

First, he arrogates authority over the soul; so much I take to be intimated
in those words of Daniel speaking of him, Dan. 7.25 He shall speak great words
against the most high, and think to change times and laws; that he shall
arrogate power to himself to change Gods laws, as in coining and altering
Articles of Faith, apointing worship for God, etc. high words, great words
against God; so the Apostle, 2 These. 2.4. He as God sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God. How does he that? viz. by Lording it over the
consciences of Gods people as if he were God, and thereby he deprives Christ of
one of the principal Flowers of his Crown, which is to have dominion over the
Faith: see more for this. Rev. 13.5 6.15, 16.

Secondly, the great Antichrist is to extend this power, at least,
presumptively and intentionally where he cannot do it actually over all
Kindreds, Tongues and Nations, Rev. 13.7.

It is Antichristian to claim such authority, though but over one man, or one
Church; It is more Antichristian to claim such authority over many Churches,
as the Hierarchicall Bishop uses to do; it is yet more Antichristian to claim
this authority over whole Provinces as the Hierarchicall Archbishop uses to
do; it is yet still more Antichristian to claim it over many Provinces and
Kingdoms, as the Hierarchicall Patriarch uses to do; but yet all these do not
amount to the grand Antichrist, why? because there may be a greater; but now he
that claims such sovereignty over all the Churches of the world is the grand
Antichrist indeed, for there can be no greater.

Now, this the Pope does; yea, that he may be sure to challenge as large a
Dominion as Christ has, he does not only arrogate authority over all the
world, but also in heaven and hell where Christ has power, yea, even in
purgatory where Christ has no power.

He that shall but look upon the sentence condemnatory, of Pope Leo the tenth,
in his his Bull against Luther, will find this true; wherein he does not labor
to convince Luther of error, by solid demonstrations out of the Word of God,
but mainly because his doctrine was contrary to the decrees of Popes, etc. He
does also charge and command all Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Primates,
Archbishops, Bishops, and all other ecclesiastical orders downwards, even to
the begging Friars, and then all Kings, Electors of the Empire, Princes, Dukes,
and so on; and at last, all men throughout the Universal world (the very
voice, proper, and native language of the grand Antichrist) upon pain of the
great Excommunication, that they do not embrace Luther's doctrine, nor adhere
to, or favor his person.

Now the Popes have challenged this supremacy in some degrees, for above these
1240. years: Not to speak of their claiming the title of universal Bishop,
nor yet their assuming the title of Pontifex Maximus, the name of the chief
heathenish Priest among the Romans, which dignity many of the Emperors had
annexed to their imperial greatness, (which Gratian the Emperor first
renounced about An. 380. and the rest after him) they did about that time
plainly arrogate and usurp a judiciary power over the Churches: To omit their
authoritative excommunications, some whereof had been long before; they did
then claim this Prerogative, that appeals aught to be made to the Bishop of
Rome from all Churches, and he to give the last definitive sentence; yea, so
zealous were they about this that An. 418. and 419. three Popes Zosimus,
Boniface, Coelestine, did in the sixth Council of Carthage, in which St.
Augustine was present, in the Cause of one Appiarius, who had appealed out of
Affricke unto Rome (as many had done before) not only challenge the receiving
of Appellations from all Churches, but also forge a decree of the great
Council of Nice, which had been almost an hundred years before to support it.
This was by the Fathers of the Synod indeed then rejected, and the pretended
Canon found to be forged and spurious: Yet was this as a right, by the Popes
then challenged. I never think upon these things, but methinks I see the grand
Antichrist, as a great big Embryo, swelling in the womb, ready to come forth,
or rather, as a child lately borne lying in his cradle; so that it is probable,
if not more then probable, that between 390. and 420. Antichrist began.

Daniel speaking of these horns, Dan. 7.24.

He speaks as it was in his perception and observation, the little horn r^se
with the rest, but he did not nocdiscerne it, considered the horns as it were
with a prying eye, ver. 8. and as it was in the Virion, so it was in the
accomplishment indeed; he rose imperceptibly, because the world mistook what
manner of creature he should be.

No: we may rather suspect that Antichrist was up before the Kings, the Papacy
having such strange appearances of ^im, before any of the Kings sprang up; and
so some read those words, Rev. 17.12. they received power as Kings one hour
(not with the Beast) but after the Beast, (...), not (...).

The two Witnesses spoken of,

Before I give a direct answer,

First,

That the number of them should be the least sufficient number, as it were but
two; no more then might merely suffice to hold out Gods truth a little to the
world: so few, that though happily you might hear in a Country of some few that
rejected the common tenants as of Justification by Works, the propitiatory
sacrifice of the Mass etc. yet you should scarce learn how to find out one
of them; if they appeared, the Beast and his agents presently shaped them up;
therefore the woman and her children lived in the wilderness all Antichrists
reign, Reve. 12.6.14. and the Prophets Prophesied in sackcloath, Rev. 11.3.

Toward the end of Antichrists reign, the everlasting Gospel going forth
should bring a great harvest to God, Rev. 14.6.15.
and mightily increase the number of the witnesses.

viz. 1260. days or years; and therefore these witnesses cannot be unde^stood
o^ any two individual persons.

viz. put out of their direct way of witnessing, as suppose by Preaching,
Printing, etc. but not always as men, that is to be put to death, at least in
a judiciary way of proceeding; (for they are to be killed, but not buried.)
Rev. 11.9. The enemies have given over that way of persecuting the Prophets
generally, for a good space a matter of sixty or seventy years, you shall not
(I believe) find many examples within that space of Gods servants called
before tribunals accused for their doctrine and worship, formally Sentenced
unto death, and the sentence executed, which was the adversaries general way
of proceeding in former times; happily some few examples may be found, like a few
drops of rain falling after a great shoure. They have forborne this course,
not our of any love or compassion unto the people of God, but meetely because
they durst not, as has been said before; and also because they found by
proof, that this course praejudiced their cause, sanguis Martyrum semen
Ecclesiae: the blood of the Martyrs, being the seed of the Church. Not to
speak of this, that the Prophets hereby in the enemies, intention, were more
exposed to contempt, their bodies lying dead in the street, Rev. 11.8. like
despised broken ido^s in whom there was no pleasure.

These things being praemised I come to answer the Objection.

It is probable at least, that this last slaughter of the Prophets, and gone
though but lately. Because that of late years, there has been such a
slaughter of the Prophets, throughout almost all the Nations of Europe, and
such a term of Antichrists triumph.

In the year 1618. began the devastation of the Churches in Bohemia, the same
fire presently takes hold upon the Provinces thereof, Moravia, Silesia,
Lusatia; proceeds to Austria and Hungaria, flies over also to the Palatinate,
and so by degrees wastes all the Provinces of broad and wide Germany, killing
the Witnesses generally in them all.

An. 1621. the storm assayles the Churches of France, and though by certain
intervals and spaces between, overcomes them and the Witnesses in them. And
though by the Providence of God they have some, yet (I take it) but a very
precariall liberty, unto this very day.

Very lately the Witnesses have been overcome and slain in Polonia, so that a
very few years ago, the Gospel was preached publicly but only in two
places in all those vast Dominions.

Last of all, came in the slaughter of the Witnesses in our Churches of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and (as it is probable) was brought to its
period and perfection, when the three precious witnesses of Christ were so
outragiously sentenced, had their ears cut off, and were afterward most
unjustly and strangely exiled. The enemies then accounted themselves to have
obtained a complete victory, and so began their Song of triumph. For I doubt
not, but this fact of theirs was in the enemies sense, an universal signal to
all the Popish world that the day was theirs, and a perfect victory gotten;
every place was filled with their rejoycings.

Now, after that three days and an half; that is, just three years and an
half, in a manner from the slaughter of those three witnesses, were past; by
the means of this happy Parliament, as by a voice from heaven, the Prophets
begin to arise again as from the dead, and among them those three servants of
God, and an earthquake begins to shake the enemies in all these three
Kingdoms; and no doubt will proceed further.

Neither let any man despise this, for the Beasts triumph for three days and a
half: whenever it comes, is necessarily to be computed and aestimated, not
from the end of the slaughter in all the Churches, but from the slaughter that
shall be in that Church, wherein the Prophets shall be last slain, which very
probably was our Church. Neither can we imagine it to be otherwise, unless we
should surmise the slaughter of the Prophets to end in all the Churches at
once; which considering the work is to be done in so many several States and
Nations, is hardly possible. Besides, the Beast has insulted longer then three
years and an half over the Witnesses that were first slain in other
Churches; but the Text speaks of his general triumph, which could not be,
until he had overcome his adversaries in all the Churches generally: and the
Prophets resurrection is but yet, as it were in its very beginning; for they
still lie slain in most of the Churches.

The witnesses of some Churches have escaped; as of Holland,

They have been slain all over the greatest,



To which answer I will stick, Romans 11.7. that is, generally, but not
universally. It is no where said he shall kill all and singular that bear
witness to the truth; the text tells us, Exodus 9.6. that all the cattle of
Egypt dyed of the Murraine, but yet if we read on to the 20. verse, when the
plague of the Hail was threatened, we shall find the Egyptians that feared
the word of the Lord, driving their cattle into their houses; by which it
appears that all and singular of the cattle d^ed not of the Murraine, but the
cattle generally, or the cattle of all kinds. The Pharisees said, the world
was gone after our Savior, Ioh. 12.19. when as yet the hundred thousand part
of the world did not believe on him then; but the meaning is the people of the
Countries round about flocked after him: so here the Prophets were slain
generally, on for the most part, not universally.

The Prophets do yet Prophecy in sackcloath; ergo,

Whether this slaughter be past or to come,

A mistake concerning the two Witnesses, may peradventure make us look for the
earthquake that shall ruin the Beast's Kingdom as a thing a far off, when
yet our selves may be in the midst of it.

The fifth Vial is not powered, be upon the seat of the Beast, that is Rome,
whereby his Kingdom becomes full of darkness, that is, Rome is destroyed,
Rev. 16.10. therefore it is in vain to think upon the earthquake that is to
ruin the Beast's Kingdom, which comes not till the seventh Vial be powered
out.

For answer, Rome to be the seat of the Beast, and that darkness is often put
for affliction and misery; but I deny the darkning of the Beasts Kingdom there
spoken of to be the destruction of Rome; there be degrees of darkness and
misery inferior to destruction: Is not Rome darkened in her reputation, and so
the Beasts Kingdom? How many thousands, yea millions be there that deny her to
be the mistress of the Faith and the mother of all Churches? that account her
the mother of harlots? that contemn her decrees, etc? Is not she darkened in
her revennues, when as so many Nations have withdrawn their supplies from her,
which were formerly swallowed up in her as in a deep gulf?

If Rome be destroyed under the fifth Vial, this difficulty or absurdity will
follow; then have ye Babylon the great to destroy under the seventh Vial, Rev.
16.19. whereas Babylon the great in all other places of the book of the
Revelations, is constantly put for Rome.

The fixed Vial is not poured upon the river Euphrates, Kev. 16.12. etc.

I must here deprecate the offense of many worthy and earned men, if lassent
not to their expositions of that Vial. It shall suffice in a few words, to
give that which is to me more then probable the sense thereof. The river
Euphrates running through the midst of the world between the farthest west
and uttermost east, has been for many ages a kind of Land-marke, to separate
the western Nations from the eastern so that they have had little communion one
with another. Now this impedimentall River has been dried up ever since these
Navigations and Voyages have been found out into the Indies and other oriental
parts. Whereupon the Beast finding himself mortally wounded here in the west
has as it follows in the text by the unclean spirits his emissaries by which
I understand not only Jesuits and others that are Papists by profession, but
all Antichrists Agents though cloaked under the name of Protestants with
infinite, strange, and uncouth wiles, and wonders labored to involve not only
the Kings and Kingdoms of these parts of the world, but even of the east also
into Hormageddon that is a cursed war, as has been said before. This feat
the Frogs have most efficaciously wrought for him in these parts of the world
as every observing eye may abundantly see; and although the Papists do
frequently lie in their reports of the east, yet certain it is that they have
made many Countries and States there, one way or other more or less obnoxious
to the Pope, as either to submit and acknowledge him, as those of Japan etc.
are said to do: or to oppugn his enemies as the Persian to assail the Turk,
whilst they are accomplishing their designs here in the west; or at least by
way of Merchandise and traffic to be subservient to their supply; so that
notwithstanding any thing in these two Vials the earthquake may be at hand.
And let us beware, that mistakes about them, do not make us put the
earthquake further off then indeed it is to our own detriment and prejudice.

The Uses are of two sorts; some directing us what to do in respect of the
public, others concern our own particulars.

For the public, every one should assist the Lord in his place, in shaking
down the Kingdom of Antichrist and all his supporters.



True,

Now that we may assist the Lord in this work, three things are to be done.

We must shake the Kingdom of the Beast by the Word,

These doctrines and denunciations thus breathed out, will prove even a sword
of the Spirit (for so they are being put into man's spirit by the Holy Ghost) to
cut and kill, slash and slay the Antichristian generation, see Revel. 2.16. and
19.21. Yea, not only a sword to kill the enemy that stands near, but an arrow
also to kill the enemy that stands a far off, Psalm. 149.6, 7, 8, 9. an axe to
hew down, Hosea 6.5. Mat. 3.10. a wine cup of fury which they shall be forced
to drink, and then grow mad, spue and fall, and rise no more, Jer. 25.15,
16.27, 28. Lastly, this Word shall be a fire to burn them up, and they shall
be as wood to it, and it shall devour them, Jer. 5.14. For God will execute
upon them the judgments threatened: It shall be an hot even to the wicked and
proud, and they shall be as stubble, easily and utterly burnt, so it shall
leave them neither root nor branch, Mal. 4.1. This fiery weapon of the Word, is
one of those wherewith the poor sackcloath-Prophets have defended themselves
against Antichrist and his gentiles, all his long reign, and wherewith they
have offended them, Rev. 11.5. and therefore still proper to be used against
him the great wild Beast; for fire they say is the best weapon, and of most
excellent use against wild Beasts: Breathe out therefore this fire of the Word
into their faces; run with these flaming torches, and thrust them into the dry
thatch of Antichrists house that will set all on a light fire; it has done it
in a great measure already, the enemies feel the heat thereof to their great
pain, Rev. 16.2.9, 10, 11. They cast on all the cold water that hell can
afford them to quench it, as cruelties treacheries, but every thing proves oil
to increase the flame; this Word at last will prove unto them unquenchable fire
utterly to consume them.

Shake the Beasts Kingdom by prayer; David shook Saul and all his enemies
down by this means, see Psalm. 18.6.7, 8. compared with the title of the
Psalm, which David composed when the Lord had delivered him from the hand of
all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul; In my distress (says he) I called
upon the Lord, and cried unto my God, he heard my voice out of his holy temple,
and my cry came before him, even into his ears. Then the earth shook and
trembled, the foundations also of the hills moved and were shaken, because he
was wroth. God upon David's cry laid about him, and overthrew all his
adversaries; for the more the Saints pray, the more they accelerate plagues
upon their wicked enemies, which is often the means of the Saints deliverance.

By this the two Witnesses did shut the heavens against the Antichristian
brood, Rev. 11.6. And therefore our fight being with their armie's, we are to be
instant in prayer against them, that is a weapon they have no skill at; they
can blaspheme and curse, etc. but not pray. Moses and Eliah (to whom that text
alludes) by this weopon and the Word, overcame whole Nations alone. Moses did
but speak to God, spreading out his hands, and then as a God could tell
Pharaoh, that a plague would come, to morrow shall be such a plague or to
morrow shall such a plague be removed. Eliah could but pray to the Lord, that
it might not rain and then confidently tell Ahab, that there should be no
rain but according to his word. 1 King. 17.1.

Open therefore (O you servants of the Lord) the heavens by this Key; open Gods
Armory, and get from thence the best days for the Church, the help of God the
Father, the Mediation of the Son, the Spirit of strength, the assistance of
Angels, Seas, rivers, winds, etc. get from thence wisdom, courage,
stratagems, success; shut the heavens against the enemies that they may not
get one good look from thence; not so much as one arrow, but if they have any
plot in hand, get the heavens open for wisdom to discover it; if any
enterprise, get from thence power to defeat it; make it appear to the enemies
that Gods people have power with God.

Execute judgment for God, mercy and judgment to thy Family, as David Psa.
101. Do thy best that judgment that has been turned into Wormwood and
Hemlocke, may run down like a mighty stream, in public; and where thy hand
cannot reach a blow, or cast a stone at an idolater, blasphemer, persecutor,
etc. let thy heart at least do it. For if a man's consenting to, or approving
of an act of injustice may inguilt him, as I may say, in it; as it was with the
Jews, whose state was ruined for killing Christ and the Prophets, though most
part of them had never seen any of them, Mat. 23.37. why may not a man's
executing judgment, with his heart, when he can proceed no further, be
accepted, in respect of him, for an act of justice, by him that is pleased both
in good and evil actions, to accept the will for the deed?

This duty is principally incumbent upon the Magistrate, who is to execute the
judgment of the Lord, not arbitrarily as himself pleases; but according to
the rule of the Word, both for matter and manner.

for he that had said or sung Mass the last Lords day (and if he were a
Preacher had Preached for Popery) if he would but take the new Oath of
Supremacy and read the Service-Booke this Lordsday, was accounted a sufficient
reformist and admitted to the Ministry. So that of twenty thousand Prelates and
P^iests at least in England and Ireland, very few were cast out of their
places, and searce any of them (unless it were Boner) for any thing they had
done. Oh woeful! (I confess I think the State did then want due information
in that point. But this has been one thing that has undone the Church, viz.
those that have all along and do still infest the Church I mean the wicked and
superstitious Clergy being their natural, genuine and proper posterity. Let
not such a sin therefore lie any longer upon the State; out (therefore worthy
Senators) with all the generation of erroneous Teachers, Altar-worshippers etc,
and profane ones, that have made so many abhor the Offerings of the Lord. If
any Object, that the Church will then be destitute of Pastors. I answer: I know
no warrant at all that there is to put or keep such Wolves among Gods flock.
Secondly, that a thousand or two of goldly and able men well distributed, if
the other were out, might by Gods blessing do more good by far, then now do
all the Ministers in England.

Nay, I take it to be an absolute duty of them that have power to eject them,
(besides, what may be said otherwise) even by the equity and analogy of that
Text, Ezekiel. 44.10, 12, 13. The Levites that are gone away far from me, which
went astray from me after their idols, they shall even bear their iniquity;
because they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused the house of
Israel to fall into iniquity, therefore have I lifted up my hand against them,
says the Lord God ( i. e. I have sworn against them as most high
transgressors, and so will not reverse it) and they shall bear their
iniquity. And they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of a Priest
unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things in the most holy place: but
they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they have committed.

Besides punishments should be aggravated according to the aggravation of the
sin or sins. The most capital offender can but be put to death; but when
the guilt is transcendently heinous, it ought to be with such circumstances and
expressions, as may make it appear that the Judge or Magistrate has a do
sense of that heinousness, and would reach it in the punishment, if it were
possible. All Israel were to stone Achan, and to raise over him a great heap
of stones, Jos. 7.25, 26. Now if this be so, I wonder what punishment will be
found out suitable to the crimes of some malefactors now in question, who have
wickedly endeavored to seduce many whole Kingdoms quite to suppress and
extinguish true Religion in them (if not throughout the world) who have proudly
trampled upon all laws and estates, being undoubtedly, if all things were laid
together, of the greatest if not absolutely the greatest transgressors that
ever were since men were upon the earth.

For the Manner, the Word requires that judgment be executed with the spirit
of justice or judgment; of which the Text speaks Isa. 28.6. In hatred of
sin, love of God, Zeal for his glory, as Phenehas did; orherwise, if you
punish a Malefactor with death, who has deserved it instead of taking away an
old murder, you add a new and shall be punished accordingly, judgment ought to
return to justice, Psalm. 94.15.

We have two remarkable examples in the Scriptures worthy to be taken notice of
by all that are in authority, of two Kings that were both rewarded and punished
for the very same thing.

Baasha destroyed Nadab and the house of Jeroboam, Jehu destroyed Jehoram,
Jezabel and the whole house of Ahab; both of them had the Kingdom of Israel
for their pains; and yet for these very acts, both their Families and
Posterities were destroyed. Baasha because he killed him, viz. Nadab, 1 Kin.
16.7. and so I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, says
the Lord, Hos. 1.4. And so it came to pass, as may be seen in both their
Histories; What was the cause, was there equity in this? Yes: the thing done
was just, to punish these idolatrous Families; but the manner of doing it
utterly displeased God, because it was not done in the love of justice, etc.
and so in respect of God; but out of spleen and ambition to get the Kingdom:
That it was not done by either of them as an act of justice appeared, in that
they both continued in the sins of Jeroboam, which they seemed to punish, 1
Kin. 15.34. 2 Kin. 10.29. For that Magistrate or man that lives openly in the
sin he punishes in another, cannot do it as an act of justice, and so does
not please God; not to speak of this, that he that punishes one sin, as
suppose theft, because God would have it punished, and so does it as an act of
justice, will also for the very same reason punish another sin as much or
more odious to God, as blasphemy, swearing, idolatry, if his arm be strong
enough and long enough to reach the Offenders, which very thing may put (I
fear) some suspicion sometimes upon our public justice, in matter of theft.
etc. and makes it questionable, whether it be done out of right principles, as
because it is sin against God, and punishable by his Word, or only because
man is trespassed, or no; which if it be so the very laws herein ought to be
reformed.

I will not insist upon this that judgment ought to be executed roundly and
speedily (though protracting of it often takes off a great part of the edge of
justice:) but I urge the doing of it in the manner before spoken.

Give me leave for a conclusion of this point, to add these two Motives, for
ensorcing the duty.

This execution of judgment is one of the best means in the world to expiate
if I may so say, the old sins of a Nation; by prayer of faith for atonement,
represented by the elders killing of the Heyfer for the expiation of an
unknown murder, Deuteronomy. 21.4. so there must be execution of judgment upon the
slaughteters of the Saints. For if the blood of one man, and he a wicked man,
unjustly shed, will bring sin upon an whole Nation, till it be done away by
the blood of him that shed it, as we may see Numb. 35.33. How much more will
the blood of so many holy Martyrs cruelly slain for Christ's sake. ^nguilt our
Nation; no, assuredly God will cleanse the blood that he has not cleansed. Now
(right Honorable) because you cannot reach the old persecutors, do justice
upon their successors that have revived all their sins.

This is of special moment to stay a plague; Phinehas executed judgment and
the plague was stayed, Numb. 25. Psalm. 106.50. Search (says the Lord) and see
if you can find a man in Jerusalem that executes ^ndgement and I will spare it,
Jer. 5 10. Josh. 7.25, 26. Hate the evil, love the good, and execute judgment
in the ga^e; it may be the Lord will be good to the remnant of Joseph, Am^s
5.15. This does (as it were) make the gap up against Gods wrath: Let judgment
therefore run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream, Amos
5.24. If you would not have God execute judgment upon us all (for when men
fail to do it, God at last will do it) then do you execute judgment for
the Lord.

There be other Uses to be made of this doctrine, that concern nor selves,
that we may be fitted and prepared for such a storm and earth quake and find
mercy in it: as,

God having revealed and threatened it we trust believe it; (...)
I say believe it* I say again cordially believe it. This I count a point of
highest importance; the true and diligent use of all other means depending
thereupon. This faith will breed fear (for as faith in a promise will breed
confidence, so faith in a threatening will breed fear) and fear will put a man
upon the strong use of all means of prevention of a plague, or of provision
against it. The true reason why wicked men do not fear divine comminations,
and so why they forsake not sin, embrace not Christ, nor use other means of
escaping, is because they believe them not: For were they cordially persuaded
of the certainty of the threats of the Word they durst not continue in sin,
and affront Heaven as they do: And the reason why they believe not the threats
of the Word, is the Atheism of their hearts, making them deny Gods holiness,
justice, etc. to make a slight matter of sin and of the Word forbidding and
threatening sin; they will believe its threatenings when they see them, Isa.
5.19. as we heard before.

I had once thought to have passed by this point, because that whereas the
Prudent man has long ago foreseen the plague in sin de^erving in the Word
denouncing it, and otherwise; the Tool now begins to see it. But I revoked my
self, and now put it in the ^^ont of these duties, considering that the fools
faith coming by sight and sense, if there be no more added to it, never does
any good. N^ab believed upon hearing and feared things of which there was ^o
sight to be had as yet, and so using me^ns e^cap^d, Heb. 11.7. whereas the
unbeleeving world perished, Genesis ^. the like we may see in Lot his sons in
law and the Sodomites, Genesis 19. ^e^shazzer was so far from believing the
threats of the God of Israel against Babylon and his promises for delivering
his people by Cyrus our of the Babylomans hands; which promis^s he knew had
encouraged Cyrus, as that he did of purpose make an imp^o^s feast when his City
was besieged, in contempt of God profaned the Vessels brought from Jerusalem,
praised the Gods of silver and gold, wood and stone, above the true God of
Israel (as Daniel accuses him,) as one who could not save his own Temple and
Vessels out of his Grandfather Nebuchadnezzar's hands; but whilst he was in
the midst of his profane jollity, suddenly appears the handwriting upon
the wall against him, that put him into a desperate fear, that night was he
slain, his City taken, his Empire destroyed and ended.

Behold here the terrible effects of this Atheistical unbelief and contempt
of the denunciations of the Word. Believe we therefore the threats of the Word:
To speak the truth, this act of faith in believing threats goes before, and
that not only in nature, but in time also, the act of believing promises. He
that slights sin, will slight Christ; he that apprehends not the severity of
God against sin, set down in the prohibitions and commnations of the law,
will hardly ever, or not at all heartily embrace Christ set forth in the
promises of the Gospel.

Be upright in thy generation, and walk with God, Noah and so escaped the
flood, Genesis 6.9. and 7.1. Thou shall enter into the Arc (says God) for thee
have I seen righteous before me in this generation. When great storms were
coming upon the world, and all the four winds were ready to break out for
the ruin of all; the Lord gives special charge to the Angels that had the
command of the winds, that they do not let one puff or breath go out to do
the least hurt, till the servants of God were sealed in their foreheads, Rev.
7.1, 2, 3. etc. God remembers them when he makes up his Jewels, and will spare
them as a man spares his son that serves him, Mal 3.16, 17. Though the
tribulation be never so great, yet thy people shall be delivered, says the
Lord to Daniel, even every one that is found written in the Book, Dan. 12.1.
for God will ever preserve a holy Seed of Saints unto himself, Isa. 6.13.

A man must be a mourner in Ston, one that laments first his own sins and
truly endeavors to forsake them, hen the sins of others; the horrible
profaneness, licenciousnesse, blasphemies, idolatries, heresies of the the
times; Such an one was Lot, who vexed his righteous soul in seeing and hearing
of the sins of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.8. and when they perished he was
delivered. Thus the Lord causes one with a vvriters Inkehorne by his side, to
set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and cry for all the
abominations that are done in the midst of Jerusalem when he was about to
destroy it, Ezekiel 9.4. Because Josiahs heart melted when he heard of the severe
denunciat^ons of God's anger against the Land for the sins thereof; therefore
had he a special promise made him of being ga^hered to his fathers in peace,
before those judgments should be executed 2 Chronicles. 34.27 28.

Contest and contend for God,

Caleb f^llowed the Lord fully as it was in his heart, and stood against the
ten false Spies that brought up an ill report upon the land ^f promise, and
against all the people that took part with them; and therefore when six
hundred thousand of these Murmurers fell in the wilderness he only with
Joshuah escaped that storm and entered into the Lords inheritance, Numb.
14.24. Josh. 14.6, 7, 8 etc.

Memorable examples hereof we have in Eliah and Jeremy. In Eliahs days the
people of Israel forsook Gods Covenant, threw down his Al^ars, stoned his
Pro^h^s by heaps and hundreds: now, did this make him comply with them and
fall into the stream? No: he was therefore the more zealous for God, all full
or futy and zeal for God, 1 King. 19.10. Well, what became o^ this Eliah if we
do but read 2 K^n. 2. we shall find, that when Ahab was slain, and his Army
destroyed he was sent for up by a fiery hartot into heaven.

Jeremy was a man that stood for God in his time against all men, against the
Kings, Princes, Priests Prophets and people of Judah, they mightily opposed,
and maliciously persecuted him; he was even weary of his life; they reviled
slatidered him, whipped stocked, imprisoned him, laid him in fetters and almost
starved him; he was brought to that extremity, that sometimes he wished he had
in the Wilderness, a Cottage for way-fa^ring men, that he might never come
among them, that his head were a fountain of tears, that he might weep
abundantly for their pride, etc. Sometimes, that he had never been borne; he
cries out that he was deceived, and that God had deceived him; for when he was
sent to them armed with Gods commission, he thought every one would have
stooped to his Message, but he found all contrary; (God often makes use of his
Servants and Ministers to such pu^poses as they think not of) but yet he
constantly held it out for God to the end, as his History shows. What was the
issue? At last, when the City was taken, all the great Princes and Priests
shine, and the Nation captivated, the King of Babylons chief Captain takes
him out of prison, knockes off his fetters that the Jews had put upon him,
sets him at liberty, offers him his choice whether he would go to Babylon,
with promise of all kind usage there or stay in the Land of Judah, tells him
the whole I and was before him, gives him a reward and so dismisseth him. Now
who but Jeremy? how glad would Zedekiah the King have been, if but half this
kindness had been offered to him? Well, let us remember to practice this duty.

May not a godly man be taken away in a public calamity?

The maine thing the Lord aims at, body of the Church, an holy seed, Isa.
6.13. and he writes them that shall escape down in his book, Dan. 12.1. For
however the Church consists of individuals, yet this, or that, or many singular
persons may be taken away, and yet the Church be preserved.

Every Christian shall be preserved until he has finished the work the Lord
has given him to do; but when that is done, God may take him off from his
station in such a way as he may best glorisie God; yet so as generally there is
some mark of mercy upon him, as he is either taken away before, or in the
beginning of a storm, as Josiah was, and they, Isa. 57.1. Or Secondly, he
sometimes survives it, as Daniel did, who outlived the whole time of the
captivity, and long after, and that in much honor. Or thirdly, he is taken
away in an ordinary manner, as no doubt, many godly ones were during the
seventy years of the captivity of Babylon, Or fourthly, he is taken away in a
way of testimony, as Jeremy; who, as it is reported, was stoned by the Jews in
Egypt. And so the Disciples and Apostles of our Savior, who although they had
power over Scorpions, Lions, poison, du^ing the term of their Testimony; yet
at length were taken away, and did glorify God by violent deaths for their
Testimonies sakes. Unto this may be referred the sufferings and deaths of the
Saints, now under the merciless cruelties of the Cavalleeres for Religion's
sake. Or fifthly, in propugning the Cause of God, in a general combustion,
which when it is undertaken out of love to the Truth, it is an high honor to a
C^ristian to lose his life in the quarrel. Usually in such times, God puts
glory upon his Saints, and makes their deaths which are precious in his sight
to be honorable: But most of all, if they have been great mourners in Zion,
and contesters for him. And if he have further use of them, he does continue
them, yea, and sometimes strengthens their faith with confidence that it shall
be so, Psalm. 91. However, the godly are but taken out of this vale of tears,
and brought to eternal bliss in his Kingdom of glory.

Seek meekness, Zeph. 2.3. To which purpose it will be available to admit
into our tho^g^ts these considerations.

That God is the Author of the calamity; whatsoever evil is done God does it:
That stopped David's mouth, Psalm. 39.9. He has absolute sovereignty over men,
he is greater then man; why should we contend with him, for he gives no account
of his do^^gs, Job 33.12, 13. Would it not be a brave sight to see man sitting
upon the Bench as a Judge, and God summoned to stand at the Bar as a
Delinquent holding up his hand, and man to pass censure and sentence upon his
actions, out of his own shallow conceptions, and irregular affections?

That God's will is the rule of justice;



Ezra 9.13.

That sin it self is the worst of all plagues,

If the heart be thoroughly humbled for sin, Levit. 26.41. and David's example,
who meekly submitted to the cursing of Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.10 11, 12. he being
then in the very act of repentance for his great sins of murder and adultery,
which God was even then also actually visiting upon him in the unnatural
rebellion of Abselom, according as he had threatened, 2 Samuel 12.11. The man that
is thoroughly grieved for the idolatry, heresy, profaneness, and
luke-warmnesse of our times, will think any outward evil easier then those
sins, and will be contented to submit to sword, or any other plague, even to
the burying of a great part of the Nation under the earth, provided that they
may be removed.

Romans 8.28. A thing that we now come to show in the next point.

Great and notable restaurations of the Church use often to follow after great
ruins and desolations of States and Nations, Amos 9.10 11. After the Lord had
made a great destruction in the Nation among the sinners, as we see in the
verse before; In that day, that is, after that, says the Lord, I will raise up
the tabernacle of David, which is fallen, etc. see also Zeph. 3.8, 9, 10, 11
12. Zeph. 13.8 9.

It was so in the land of Canaan, after the storms of Egypt and the
Wilderness; and in Judah, after the captivity of Babylon, the Lord made his
people take rooting downwards, and bring forth fruit upwards; it will be so and
that more then ever, when the earthquake shall have shaken down Antichrists
Kingdom.



In the fruition and enjoyment of certain privileges,

The Privileges are of two sorts; Privative and Positive.

enter into the Church in any wise, any thing that defiles, Rev. 21.27.

She shall be purged from errors, Micah of mount Ephraim, Judge. 18.23.24. that
followed after the Danites, crying and complaining; they turned about, and
asked him what he ayled. Ye have taken away my gods (says he) which I made,
and my priest (which he himself had consecrated for a priest) who should have
blessed me, and do you ask me what I ayle? What have I more? I protest I had
as live you had taken away all that I have. So it is with the men of our
generation: from these things shall the Church then be freed.

God shall w^pe away all tears from the Saints eyes, and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, etc. Rev. 21.4. That must needs be meant
of the Church in this world, as appears by the cortext, Then shall the Lion
and the Lamb lie down and feed together, and the Tygar become tame the Child
shall play with the Aspe and Cockatrice. Isa. 11.6.7. and 65.25. Rev. 7.16.

There be two reasons of these privative privileges.

The earthquake going before, Dan. 2.34, 5.44. Rev. 19. from ver. 17. to the
end. God will purge out rebels. Ezekiel. 20.38. that at last none shall dare so
much as to speak for false worship, formal worship, etc. Then (and I doubt)
not till then, will all these Sects and Divisions have an end.

Satan shall then be bound and chained up, Rev. 20.2. He has been cast down
before, as Rev. 12.9. but never bound, nor shall be till Antichrist's fall. And
so this prevents that which might be objected: though the wicked be taken away
with the Earthquake, yet sin will revive again. Answ. No: Satan shall be
tied up from seducing that he cannot play such reakes in the world as before,
man's corruption wanting those bellows to blow it up which did forme^y inflame
it.

The positive privileges of that reformed State are diverse.

The first consists in the purity and plenty of the Ordinances of God and
means of grace, which that Church shall enjoy. Thus R^^. 11.19. After the
(...) the Beasts Kingdom the Taberra^^ or Temple of (...) in Heaven in the
Church, and the Arc of his (...). Chr^^^ represented by the Arc was before
kept hid, and the Temple shut, true preaching forbidden, men were not
acquainted with the natures and effects of Christ set forth by the Arc, as now
they shall be; the wood of the Arc a ^^pe of Christ's humane nature, the gold
^verlaying it wholly, a type of the divine to which the humane was
hypostatically united, the Tables of the law in the Arc setting forth the
fulfilling of the law in Christ, and in the Saints by union with him and power
from him; the Mercy-seat or cover of the Arc representing Christ's
righteousness covering the sin of man, and the Tables of testimony wherein
the curse was contained, so as no curse could be seen. This purity of the
means is intended in those expressions, Rev. 21. that Gods Tabernacle is with
men, ver. 3. new Jerusalem has the glory of God, ver. 10 11. no Temple therein
ver. 22. There is no need of any such fixed place as the old Temple was but
every where his people should have communion with him in his Ordinances, Joh.
4.21.23. they shall have no need of the Sun nor Moon, etc. ver. 23. meaning,
the spiritual light and glory shall far exceed all external; and chap.
22.1, 2. they shall enjoy a pure River of water of life, clear as crystal
proceeding out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb, the tree of life also with
his twelve manner of ^^^its, etc.

The second privilege consists in the multitudes of converts; the Church shall
wonder at her own fruitfulness, and ask who begat her those Children, seeing
she had lost so many, being life alone, that is, a Widow, without any earthly
protector, Isa. 49.18, 19, 20 21, etc. Yea, her children shall ask her more
room to dwell in, ibid. She is bidden to lengthen and enlarge the place of
her tent, etc. and promised that she, though a Widow, shall break out on the
right hand and on the left, and abound in Children, for her maker is her
husband, etc. Isa. 54.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The Children proceeding from the womb of
the Church, shall be like the dew of the morning lying thick upon the ground,
Psalm. 110.3. Christ's flock shall not then be a little flock compared with the
times which were before the Devil was bound.

In the excellency of the converts. Jerusalem has a light like unto a stone
most precious, even like a Jasper-stone, clear as Crystal, it is of pure
gold, Rev. 21.18. God is in it, dwells with his people, he and the Lamb are the
light of is, Rev. 21.3.22. in this and other respects it is named, the Lord is
there, Ez^k. 48.35. the people of it shall be all righteous, Isa. 60.21. What
an admirable Reformation was that which followed the storm in the Wilderness,
when all Israel, both the ten Tribes, and the two of Gad and Ruben, and the
half Tribe of Manasseh abhorred the thoughts of idolatry, Josh. 22. the Lord
God of Gods, the Lord God of Gods, he knows, and Israel he shall know (say the
two Tribes and an half to the ten, being accused of an intention to revolt
from God) if it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against the Lord (save
us not this day) that we have built us an Altar to turn from following the
Lord, etc. let the Lord himself require it, Josh. 22.22, 23. Much more shall
the Reformation be excellent in the last ages, wherein it is promised that
there shall be new heavens and new earth (new Church and new Commonwealth)
wherein righteousness shall dwell, 2 Pet. 3.13.

In the amplitude and extent of the Church, The Kingdoms of the world (that
is, all the Kingdoms of the world) shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and
of his Christ, Revel. 11.15. And so when the judgment has sat, and the
Beasts Kingdom is consumed to the end; then, and not before then, the
Kingdom, Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven,
(it seems to be spoken without all hyperbole) shall be given to the people of
the Saints of the most high, Dan. 7.26.27. When the stone; that is, the
Kingdom of Christ, has smitten the Image upon the feet, and broken them to
pieces, it self shall become a great Mountain and fill the whole earth, Dan.
2.35. Then shall all Nations rejoice in Christ, Psalm. 67.2, 3, 4. then a great
multitude (not of a few but) of all Nations, and Kindreds, and Peoples, and
Tongues, shall stand before the Throne, and before the Lamb, praising God,
Rav. 7.9. Nations shall be borne in a day, Isa. 66.8. All Nations shall serve
him. Dan. 7. ult.

In the excellency of the government, Christ shall then take to himself his
great power and reign, Rev. 11.17. and the Saints under him: The Saints of the
most high shall take the Kingdom and possess it for ever, even for ever and
ever, age after age for many ages, Dan. 7.18.27. they shall reign on the
earth, Rev. 5. to and 20.4.6. a thousand years. They shall then indeed be the
head, and the wicked the tail. Many tough and tedious disputes about
government, which exercise the Church now, may happily be of small use in that
Reformation.

It is to consist in the affluence and confluence, in Purple, with gold and
precious-stones, and pearls; but now the Church shall be like a bride adorned
for her husband, Rev. 21.2. Now her peace shall be as the Rivers, the Kings of
the earth shall bring their glory and honor to her, Rev. 21.24.26.

Wait for it and hasten it by faith and prayer, Mat. 13.58. see also. chap.
17.16, 17, 20. How it hindered the healing of the Lunatic! the old Israelites
for unbeleefe were debarred from entering into the Land of Promise, Heb. 3.19.
It hindered the building of the second Temple, for it is remarkable, that
whilst the Jews gave over the work upon the complaints of their adversaries,
and the inhibitions of the Persian Kings, unto whom they were then subject, it
never prospered; but when they hearkened to the Prophets Haggai and Zechary, and
believed the promises which they brought from God, they went on thoroughly, and
perfected the work; the Persian King Darius Nothus (though the adversaries
afresh complained) consenting, who also forbad their adversaries to hinder
them, upon their greatest poenalties; yea, commanded them with all possible
diligence to further the Jews in the work. God who has the hearts of Kings
in his hand, so framing that Kings heart that he entreated the Jews to pray
for his life, and the life of his Sons. He had lost one or two before, and
now feared he should lose the rest, Ezra 6. and this was almost six score
years after they had laid the first foundation; for in diverse Kings reigns
they were absolutely hindered, Ezra 4. and were at times, six and forty years
(as it seems) in building it, John 2.20.

I shall never see this Reformation.

Thou can not certainly tell;

Seeing thou will buy houses and lands, yea, the little ones may go in and see
that good land, etc.

Faith is the substance of things hoped for, Abraham, who rejoiced to see the
day of Christ so many hundred years before it came, John 8.56. and in the old
Saints, Hebr. 11.13.40. who believing in him to come were saved. Thou may by
the tastes of these clusters of Grapes, set before thee in the former
Privileges, discern what a good Land it is. Thou may by them as from off
the top of Mount Pisgah, behold it with thine eyes, and view the Land round
about: The believing praeapprehension of these things will give a sweet
fruition of them in measure before hand unto the godly.

Lastly, Jerusalem here on earth, yet shall thou certainly be a Sharer in that
Jerusalem which is eternal in the Heavens.

FINIS.
A passage or two pretermitted.
1 The western Roman Empire was the (...), or that which did let the appearing
of Antichrist, which when it was taken away then was the man of sin revealed,
2 These. 2.6, 7, 8. This belongs to the first Indice, spoken of in the fourth
Sign.

2. The two Witnesses include all those that did sustain the Cause of Christ
against Antichrist and his Gentiles; for the Text divides all within the
visible Church during Antichrist's reign, into two ranks and no more, viz. two
Witnesses or Prophets (the same are called worshippers) and Gentiles, Rev.
11.1, 2, 3.

3. The 1260. days of the Witnesses, and the 42. months of the Beast, begin
and end together: For else Christ should have none to be for him during some
part of Antichrist's reign. (For none are for him but the Witnesses) Besides,
the Church was to be all that time in the Wilderness, for which provision is
made, Rev. 12.6.14.

Errata.
Page 1. line 9. read ran. l. 10. r. houses, p. 2. l. 12. r. Ezra 3. p. 3. l.
7. r. hieroglyphicall. p. 6. l. 9. r. Tabernacle. p. 13. l. 9. r. penitent. p.
36. l. 19. r. (...) p. 41. l. 6. r. learned. Courteous Reader; if there be any
more verbal or literal mistakes (as I doubt there are many) pardon the
Printers oversight, and correct them with thy Pen.


