ISREAL'S PRAYER In time of TROUBLE, WITH Gods gracious Answer thereunto: OR An
Explication of the 14th Chapter of the Prophet HOSEA, In seven Sermons preached
upon so many days of solemn Humiliation, By EDWARD REYNOLDS, Minister of the
Word of God at Braunston in Northamptonshire, and a Member of the Assembly of
Divines.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the King's Head, 1645.

THE FIRST SERMON UPON HOSEA, CHAP. 14. VERSE. 1, 2. Preached in Margarets
Church at Westminster, before the honorable House of Commons now assembled in
Parliament; At the late Public and Solemn FAST, July 27. Anno Domini, 1642.
By EDWARD REYNOLDS, Minister of the Word of God at Braunston in
Northamptonshire, and a Member of the Assembly of Divines.

Published by Order of the said House. The second Edition, Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the King's Head, 1649.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IN obedience to your Commands, I here humble present to your view what you
were pleased with patience and readiness of affection lately to attend unto. I
considered, that though the Choiceness of the Auditory might require the
exactest preparation; yet both the condition of the Times, and the nature of
the Duty did call upon us to lay aside our Ornaments. And therefore I speak
with such plainness, as might commend the matter delivered rather to the
Conscience of a Penitent, then to the fancy of a delicate hearer. The King of
Nineveh was a King as well in his Sackcloth, as in his Robes: And the truth of
God is indeed fuller of Majesty when it is naked, then when adorned with the
dress of any humane contribution, which many times takes from it, but never
adds any value unto it.

I looked upon you in your double Relation, both Common as Christians, and
Special, as men entrusted with the managing of those arduous and most pressing
difficulties under which this distempered Kingdom is now groaning.

And for the quickening of those endeavors which belong to you in both those
Relations, I presented you both with the bottom of a Nations unhappiness,
which is sin; and with the top of their felicity, which is Gods free grace and
favor: That by your serious cares to purge out the one, and to procure the
other, you might, by Gods blessing on your Consultations, dispell that black
tempest which hangs over this Kingdom, and reduce the face of things unto
calmness and serenity again.

When the Children strugled together in the womb of Rebekah, she was thereupon
inquisitive, If it be, Why am I thus? Gen: 35, 22.
and she addressed her self to God for a resolution. Surely this Nation is
become like the womb of Rebekah, the children thereof struggling in their
mothers belly together, and when God has mercifully freed us from forain
Enemies, Brethren are become enemies to brethren, and by their enmities likely
to tear and torment the bowels of their mother, and to ruin themselves.

And what have we now to do, but to inquire the Cause of these sad co^motions,
Why are we thus? And surely the Cause is chiefly where the Disease is, within
our selves. We have been like the womb of Rebekah, a barren Nation, not
bringing forth fruits of so many mercies as God has filled us withal. So that
now it is no wonder, if God cause us to be in pain within our own Bowels, and
to feel the throws and struglings of a Traveling woman, Hos. 13.13.
ready to bring forth her own Confusion, a Benoni, or an Ichabod, a son of
Sorrow, and of Shame, to this hitherto so peaceable and flourishing a Kingdom.

All that we can comfort our selves with in these pangs and qualms of distemper
is, that there are some Jacobs amongst us. Genesis 32.24. Hos. 12.3, 4.
who instead of supplanting their brethren, will wrestle, and have power with
God. The people have often Petitioned, sometimes his sacred Majesty, sometimes
this Honorable House, which are his great Council, many overtures, and
endeavor of Accommodation have been tendered, Isa. 26.17, 18.
and yet we cry out in our pangs, and have, as it were, brought forth wind,
neither have we wrought any deliverance in the earth.

I have here therefore presented a new Petition, dictated and drawn up to our
hands by Gods own Spirit, unto which both King and Parliament, Peers and
Prophets and People, must al subscribe, and offer it with prostrate and
penitent hearts unto him who stands in the congregation of the mighty, Psalm.
82.1.
and judges amongst the gods, that he would take away all our iniquity, and
receive us into favor again, and accept of a Covenant of new obedience.

And this Petition God is pleased to anticipate with an answer of grace in the
consequent parts of the chapter whence the Text is taken, and that particularly
to every branch of the Petition. He will take away iniquity. His Anger shall
not punish, His Love shall heal our backslidings, the greatness of our sins
shall not hinder the freeness of his Grace. He will do us good, and give us
life, by the dew of his grace reviving us: and Glory clothing us like the Lilly
of the field, with the beauty of holiness: and stability, fixing us by his
grace, as the Cedars of Lebanon are fastened upon their Roots: and growth or
enlargement as the branches spread forth themselves, and continual vigor and
plenty, as the Olive tree, which is always green and fruitful, and glorious
comforts by the sweet savor of the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 2.14.
which like the spice trees of Lebanon shall diffuse a spiritual perfume upon
the names, and into the consciences of penitent converts.

He will prevent us with the blessings of Safety, as well as of Sanctity and
Comfort, we shall under his shadow find shelter and protection from all our
fears. Though like Corn, we be harrowed under the Clods, though like a lopped
vine we seem naked, and reduced to lowness, though like crushed grapes we lie
under heavy pressures: yet he will receive, and enlarge, and comfort us again,
and when we are in our own eyes as fatherless children, He will set his eyes
upon us as a Tutor and Guardian, He will hear and observe, and answer, and pity
us, enabling us to make good our Covenant by his grace, and causing the fruits
of his loving kindness to be found upon us. Thus God is pleased to borrow the
various perfection of other things to adumbrate the united and calumniated
mercies which he promises unto a converting and petitioning people.

You have the Petition sent you from God, and his Answer preventing you in all
the members of it with the blessings of goodness. I have nothing else to do,
but to beg of you, and of all this great people whom you represent, the
Subscription of your hearts and lives unto this Petition: and to beg of God
that he would graciously incline the hearts of this whole Kingdom, rather to
wrestle with him for a blessing, then to struggle and conflict amongst
themselves for a Curse. With which prayer I humbly conclude. Commending your
persons and your weighty affairs to his grace; and rest,

Your most humble Servant in Christ, ED: REYNOLDS.
From my Study in Braunston August the 8. 1642.
To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, Understanding that my Sermon, which was preached three years
since before the Honorable House of Commons, on the day of their solemn
Humiliation, was to be reprinted: I thought fit to peruse, transcribe, and
enlarge six other Sermons, in which I had, at mine own charge in the Country,
on the ensuing Fast days, briefly explained and applied that whole Chapter, (a
portion only whereof was in the first handled,) and to send them forth together
with it unto the public: Which I was the rather induced to do for these two
Reasons: 1. Because it has pleased God in his righteous and holy providence to
make me, by a long infirmity, unserviceable to his Church in the principal work
of the Ministry, the preaching of the Gospel (which is no small grief unto me.)
So that there remained no other means whereby my life might, in regard of my
function, be useful to the Church, and comfortable to my self, then by
inverting the words of the Psalmist, Psalm 45.1.
and as he made His Tongue as the Pen of a ready Writer, so to make my Pen the
Tongue of an unready Speaker. 2. I considered the seasonableness and
sutableness of these Meditations unto the condition of the sad and disconsolate
times wherein we live, very like those which our Prophet threatened the ten
Tribes withal throughout this whole Prophecy, unto which this last Chapter is a
kind of Use, and a most solemn Exhortation, pressing upon all wise and prudent
men such duties of Humiliation and Repentance, as might turn threats into
promises, and recover again the mercies which by their sins they had forfeited
and forsaken: Which being restored unto them according to their Petition, they
are here likewise further instructed in what manner to return unto God the
praises due to his great Name. And these two duties of Humiliation and
Thanksgiving are the most solemn duties which in these times of Judgments and
Mercies so variously interwoven together, the Lord does so frequently call us
unto.

Places of Scripture I have for brevity sake, for the most part, only quoted
and referred thee unto, without transcribing all the words, and have usually
put many parallel places together* because by that means they do not only
strengthen the doctrine whereunto they belong, but mutually give light unto one
another.

The Lord make us all in this our day so wise and prudent, as to understand the
righteous ways of our God toward us: That we may not stumble at them, Isai.
26.8*9.
but walk in them, and be taught by them to wait upon him in the way of his
judgments, and to fix the desires of our soul upon his Name as our great
Refuge, and upon his Righteousness as our great Business, till he shall be
pleased, by the dew of his Grace, to Revive us as the Corn* to make us grow as
the Vine, and to let the scent of all his Ordinances be over all our Land, as
the smell, and as the wine of Lebanon.

It will be an abundant return unto my poor and weak endeavors, if I may have
that room in thy prayers which the Apostle Paul desired to have in the prayers
of the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.19.
That utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly to preach
the mystery of the Gospel.

The Lord sanctify all the ways of his Providence toward us, that when we are
chastened, we may be taught, and may be greater gainers by the voice of his
Rod, Psalm. 94 12, Mic. 6 9.
then we are sufferers by the stripes.

The Contents.
Sermon I. Sect. 1. EPhraims blessings and judgments answerable to his name. 2.
When judgment purposed against obstinate sinners, mercy proclaimed to penitent.
3. How good and bad are alike involved in outward judgments. Judgments make no
difference but of penitent and impenitent. Penitent sinners, in all kinds of
trouble, have a refuge to some promise or other. 4. Conversion must be not
merely Philosophical, or Political, but Spiritual, and that full and constant.
5. Motives unto conversion, mercy and judgment, especially interwoven. 6. Great
preparation due in our addresses unto God. The rule, matter, principle, and
power of Prayer. How sin is taken away. 7. When God threatens judgments, we
must pray against sins. 8. Judgments may be removed in anger. Repentance makes
afflictions precious, as sin does corrupt blessings. 9. No affliction comes in
anger, but with respect to sin. 10. One sin generally unrepented of, may undo a
Kingdom; we must pray against all, and dye unto all. 11. Sense of sin. The
wrath of God beyond the fears of man. 12. Confession of sin full and free. Our
weakness can commit sin, none but Gods power can remove it. 13. What God
works in us, he also requires of us. Sin most dangerous in great men, to
themselves and the public. 14. How iniquity is to be taken out of the Land.
15. God the author of good, the orderer of evil. 16. From conversion to
salvation free grace works. 17. No work truly good, but as derived from God.
18. Patience in suffering evil, in doing duty. Humility the companion of Grace,
pride of emptiness. Continual dependence on God. Fidelity in services. The
misery of divisions. 19. In temporal judgments pray for spiritual mercies. No
helps can avail us against Gods anger, but his grace. 20. Carnal prayers
provoke God, when men make Religion serve turns. Piety the foundation of
Prosperity. 21. Judgments are then truly sanctified, when they make us more in
love with grace. Prayer the more heavenly, the more prevalent.

Sermon II. Sect. 1. SPiritual ends of Legal Ceremonies and Sacrifices. We
return nothing to God but words for mercies. 2. A renouncing carnal confidence
in the Assyrian, Horses, Idols. How the Church an Orphan. 3. Penitents not only
pray, but covenant. Circumcision a Covenant Circumcised in uncircumcision.
Gentiles converted are called Jews: Jews unconverted, Gentiles. Baptism how the
answer of a good conscience. The Covenant perpetual. 4. God binds himself to
us by promise, by oath: We are his by his Sovereign Interest, and our own
voluntary consent. 5. Fickleness of the heart in duty, and sluggishness to it.
6. Duties in combination strongest. 7. Enemies combine. Military oaths. How
Truth a Girdle, doctrinally, morally. 8. Wicked men, like Witches, in covenant
with the Devil, doing service for wages. 9. Prayer vain without obedience. Gods
Covenant to us, ours to him. 10. The material cause of a Covenant, our persons,
our services, in matters of necessity. Expediency praise. 11. The formal and
efficient cause. Knowledge, willingness, power of promise and performance. 12.
Danger of covenanting in the dark only, and 13. On the Rack. 14. When we
promise duty, we must pray for grace. The final cause. 15. The falseness and
perfidiousness of the heart^; how it is unstable as waters. 16. Gods
faithfulness and mercies: Our Baptism, Faith, Spirits, Hopes, are all
obligations to Fidelity.

Sermon III. Sect. 1. SAcrifices Propitiatory and Eucharistical. 2. Praises the
matter of a Covenant, a Staple commodity for commerce with Heaven. 3. Praises
the fruits of Repentance. 4. An Argument in prayer. God forces his glory out
of wicked men, but is glorified actively by the godly. 5. A principle of
obedience: difference between the obedience of fear and of love. 6. An
Instrument of glory to God. Praises of the heart and of the lips. Communion of
Sinners, Communion of Saints. 7. Converts report Gods mercies to others. No
true praises without Piety. Sins against mercy soonest ripe. 8. The more
greedy, the less thankeful. Gods greatness matter of praise. Things strongest,
when nearest their original. Other creatures guided by an external, Reasonable
by an internal knowledge. 9. Gods goodness matter of praise. Knowledge of God
notional and experimental. Praise the language of Heaven. Sacrifices were Gods
own. Love of Communion above self-love. 10. We are wide to receive, narrow to
acknowledge. The benefit of praises is our own. 11. Wherein the duties of
praising God stand. 12. Repentance careful of obedience. 13. This care wrought
by godly sorrow. Present sense. Holy jealousy. Love to Christ. Sons by
adoption and regeneration. 14. Repentance sets it self most against a man's
special sin. 15. By this sin God most dishonored. By this repentance sincerity
most evidenced.

Sermon IV. Sect. 1. REpentance removes carnal confidence. Naturally we affect
an absoluteness within our selves. 2. This failing, we trust in other
creatures. 3. When all fail, we go to God in ways of our own inventing.
Repentance the cure of all this. 4. Confederacies with Gods enemies dangerous.
Take heed of competition between our own interest and Gods. 5. The creature not
to be trusted in, it wants strength and wisdom. 6. Idols not to be trusted in,
they are lies. Grounds of confidence, all wanting in Idols. 7. God only to be
trusted absolutely in the way of his commands and providence. 8. The way to
mercy is to be fatherless: weakness in our selves makes us seek help above our
selves. 9. Sin healed by pardon, purging, deliverance, comfort. Why
backsliding pardoned by name. 10. Our conversion grounded on free grace. No
guilt too great for love to pardon. Gods anger will consist with his love. 11.
Conversion and healing go together. Sin a sickness and a wound. 12. The proper
passions of sickness agree to sin, viz. pain, weakness, consumption, deformity.
13. Sin a wound: the impotent, wilful, and desperate case of this patient. 14.
The mercy of the Physician. 15. Guilt cannot look on Majesty. Apprehensions of
mercy the grounds of prayer. 16. Sense of misery works estimation of mercy. 17.
Backsliding formally opposite to faith and repentance. Apostasy twofold. What
it is to speak against the Son of man, and against the Spirit. How a sin is
said not to be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come. Free love
respects not persons, nor free pardon, sins. 18. From beginning to end of
salvation, all is free grace. 19. In judgments Gods anger more to be noted then
our sufferings.

Sermon V. Sect. 1. BLessings as large to the penitent, as curses to the
impenitent, and answer all our wants. 2. God answers prayers, beyond the
petitions of the people. 3. We pray according to the knowledge and love we have
of our selves. God answers according to his knowledge and love. 4. God answers
prayer not only with respect to our wants, but his own honor. Gods ultimate end
in working our strongest argument in praying 5. Encouragement to prayer. Gods
shekel double to ours. 6. Prayer may be ambitious, and beg great things. 7.
Free love puts forth it self in various blessings. 8. Grace as dew of a
celestial original, fruit of a serene heaven. 9. Abundant, insensible,
insinuating, and searching, vegetating and quickening. Refreshing and
comforting. 10. Peace no blessing, except it come as dew from Heaven. 11. All
wants must be supplied from Heaven. Christ all beauties to his Church. The root
and stability of the Church, foundation doctrinall, personal. Righteousness
of Redemption stronger then of Creation. 12. Growth of the Church under the
Law, National; under the Gospel, Universal. Christ the Olive Tree, original
of grace to his Church. 13. Our refuge and shelter. Our power above
afflictions. 14. All Christ's graces fruits of Lebanon, the best of all others.
Creature-helps liers either by falsenesse or impotency. 15. Promises should
beget duties. God promises Beauty to his Church; we should labor to adorn
it. 16. He promises stability; we should be rooted in truth and grace: all our
gifts should serve the Temple. 17. He promises growth; we should grow our
selves, and endeavor the growth of others. Christ both the end and the
beinging of the Churches growth. 18. Compacture and unity in the Church,
necessary to the growth of it. Divisions hinder it. 19. In the body compacted,
there are several distinct members each to act in his own place, and joints
fastening members to the head, and to one another. A different measure of virtue
for several offices. A mutual supply and helpfulnesse on unto another. An
eternal faculty in each part to form and concoct the matter subministred unto
it. 20. He promises the fruitfulness of the Olive, which we should show
forth in works of grace and peace. 21. He promises the smell of Lebanon, the
ointment of the Gospel, the graces of which we should express. 22. He
promises protection and conversion; we should make him our shel^er, and from
his protection learn our duty of conversion. 23. He promises reviving out of
afflictions, profiting by them. We should not be discouraged by temptations,
but amended; they have many times mercy in them. 24. The virtues of Heathen,
grapes of Sodom; the graces of Christ ^rapes of Lebanon. What ever we present
unto God, must grow in Immanuels land.

Sermon VI Sect. 1. GOds promise enabling, is our confidence to engage. Idols
sorrows. Gods observing us, a note of care, counsel, honor, hearing prayers.
2. Sum, division. 3. Man's seal to Gods promise, only a confession; Gods seal
to man's covenant, a confirmation. 4. Man's covenant of obedience, has its
firmness in Gods promise of grace. Indissolvable dependence of all second
causes on the first. 5. In sins of men, God has an influence into them as
actions, a providence over them as sins. In gracious actions Gods influence
necessary both to the substance and goodness of them. 6. Of the concord
between Gods grace and man's will* Freewill natural, theological. Innate
pravi^y and corrupt force, which resists grace, the remainders whereof in the
regenerate. 7. The will of Gods precept, and of his purpose. 8. They who are
called externally only, resist and perish: they who eternally, are made willing
and obedient. 9. By an act of spiritual teaching. 10. By an act of effectual
enclining and determining the will, preventing, assisting subsequent grace. 11.
We may not trust in our own strength, but be ever jealous of our original
impotency unto good, our natural antipathy against it; and of the frequent
decays and abatements of the grace of God in us. 12. By prayer and faith get a
heart fixed upon God. 13. Great comfort that our conversion and obedience
depends on the power of God. This no ground of supine neglect of duties, for
grace so works in us, as that it disposes us unto working, the means being
decreed as well as the end. 14. Other men's wills are in Gods keeping. He the
author and orderer of our troubles. 15. Repentance breaks off sin, and makes
haste out of it. 16. God hears only penitents. Our persons accepted before
our prayers. A wicked man may pray a prayer of nature, not of faith. Two wills
in prayer, Ours, and Gods: when a wicked man prays for mercy, he prays
against Gods will: when for grace, against his own. 17. When we pray for
outward things, our aims must be spiritual. The way to have all our other
ends, is to make God our chief end. 18. Prayer the Key of obedience. The
principles of service, are the fruits of prayer. 19. Words Ammunition against
Arms; that way as prayer goes, God goes. 20. Sound conversion engages Gods
protection, and yields comfort in all conditions of life.

Sermon VII Sect. 1. THe seal of the Prophets Doctrine. Interrogation, denying,
wishing, demonstrating, awakening. 2. In spiritual things mental knowledge
seconded with practical wisdom. 3. The ways of the Lord, his providence, his
precepts. 4. Few men wise to salvation. 5. The weaker part more then the wiser.
The word a sweet savor to (...) singularity sinful; pious singularity
necessary. 6. (...) pondreth all Gods ways. Wisdom particular, gene^all. 7.
Wicked m^n shape their own end, and apply sinful means by a sinful wisdom
unto it. God only the last end of righteous men. 8. All wisdom is for
obtaining of good, avoiding of evil. The excellency of every thing in Beauty,
Use. 9. Wisdom of Angels conversant about the Word. Scripture the best
Counselor. The plenitude thereof. The pernicious influence of corrupt
doctrines upon the present state of the Church. 10. Twofold knowledge of
judgments and blessings. 11. The rectitude of Gods ways in their equity and
reason, ableness, their perfect harmony, their directnesse to their end, their
conformity to the will of God, their plainness and perspicuity. 12. We are apt
to pick quarrels at the Word. 13. Wicked men set up their wills against Gods,
and invent distinctions to reconcile Gods will to theirs. 14. Ministers may not
stamp Gods mark on doctrines of humane invention, nor superinduce any thing
upon the Scripture. People have a judgment of discretion to try the spirit.
15. Obedience the end of the Ministry. Ordinances not obeyed, ripen and
increase sin, and hasten judgments. 16. None but righteous men will obey the
Word. Every wicked man does in some thing or other gainsay the truth. 17. The
right ways of the Lord are unto wicked men matter of scandal, 18. They
stumble at the profoundnesse of the Word, as being above reason. 19. At the the
strictness of it, as being against their peruliar lust. 20. At To the
seraching power and simplicity of the Gospel. 21. At impossibility of
fulfilling the law, which is but accidental. To ergenerate men the Law is
Evangelically possible. Wicked men hardened willingly as well as judicially.
22. At the grace of the word by presumption, at the threatenings and judgments
of it by stubbornness. 23. Wicked men stumble at the word not only unto
scandal, but unto ruin.


The First SERMON UPON HOSEA, Chap. 14. Verse. 1, 2.
HOSEA 14.1, 2. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God, (...) have fallen by
thine iniquity.

Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, Take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously [or give good] so will we render the (...)
of our lips.


THe blessing of Ephraim was according to his Gen: 42.5^.
name, Fruitfulness. Sect. 1.
The fruitfulness of the Earth, a bough by a well, and the fruitfulness of the
womb, and of the breasts, Genesis 49.22.25. Deuteronomy. 2^.1^, 17. Contrary unto which
two blessings (...) in our Prophet two Judgments threatened against him for his
sins, chap. 13*15, 16. Though he be fruitful amongst his brethren, an East wind
shall come, the wind of the Lord shall come up from the Wilderness, and his
spring shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up, he shall spoil the
treasure of all pleasant vessels. Samaria shall become desolate, for she has
rebelled against her God: they shall fall by the Sword; their Infants shall be
dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up. And throughout
the Chap* 8.7.9, 2*6.16.10 18.11 6
whole Prophecy (if you read and observe it) you will find the Judgments of God
against Ephraim to be expressed by weeds, emptiness, barrenness, dryness of
roots, of fruits, of branches, of springs, and by a curse upon their Chapter 9.11 14
Children, as on the other side the blessing here in this Chapter renewed unto
Ephraim repenting, are all expressed by Metaphors of fruitfulness, ver. 5, 6, 7*

(...) two woeful Judgments, against the fruitfulness of their springs, and the
fruitfulness of their wombs, by the desolations of a bloody sword, our Prophet
takes occasion once more for all, to awaken and drive them to a timely
repentance, that so they may recover the blessing of their name, Ephraim may be
Ephraim again, a plentiful, a fruitful, a flourishing people. That Isa* 26.9*
(...), Plato apud A. Gel. li. 6 c. 14. famosos la rones in his locis ubi
grassati ^unt surca figendos compluribus placuit ut and conspectu deterreant^r
alii ab iisdem facinoribus. ff. de poenis. l. 28. sect. famosos. unde and in
Brutis and in rebus in a^imatis observata vindicta. vid. Pet. Erod. Dec^et. l.
2. Tit. 14. Zepper. de. legib. l. 1. c. 11. Pl. l. 29 c. 4. Plut* de fortun. To.
when Gods Judgments are in the earth, they would then at least set themselves
to learn righteousness, that they may wash their Psalm. 52.6. Luk 17.32. Act.
5.11. Luke 13.1.7. Jer. 3.8. Dan. 5.18.21. Number. 16.38.40.
feet in the blood of the wicked.

Of all Nations under Heaven this Land of ours has had the blessing of Ephraim
upon it, fruitfulness of the Earth, abunda^^e of plenty: fruitfulness of the
womb, abundance of people. But our misery is, that the abundance of our sins
has mightily outvied the abundance both of our plenty and of our people: sins
too too parallel to those of Ephraim, if you will but read this Prophet, and
compare the behaviors of this Nation with him. And this parity of sins has no
doubt called upon God for a parity of judgments. It is but a very little while
since the Lord seemed to call for a Northwind, as he does here for an
East Wind, two Armies there met, ready to look one another in the Face; but his
heart turned, his repentings were kindled, he would not give up Ephraim then.
He seems once more to be drawing of a Sword, and having in vain hewed us by his
Prophets, as he complains, chap. 6.5. to try whether hewing us by his Judgments
will work upon us. So that now, thou^^ I must read my Text, O Israel, yet I
must apply it, O England, Return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by
thine iniquity, Take with you words, etc.

The whole Context contains two general parts. An Invitation unto Repentance,
Verse. 1. And an Institution how to perform it, in the two verses following.

Before we come to the particulars of the Invitation, let us first briefly
observe, Sect. 2.
That in the midst of Judgments proposed against sinners that are obstinate,
God does reserve and proclaim Mercy unto sinners that are penitent. When a
Consumption is decreed, yet a Remnant i^ reserved to return, Isa. 10.22, 23.
The Lord will keep his Vineyard, when he will burn up the thorns and the briars
together. Isai. 27.3, 4. When a day of fierce anger is determined, the meek of
the earth are called upon to seek the Lord, Zeph. 2.3. When the Lord is coming
out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth for their iniquity, he
calls upon his people to hide themselves in their chambers, until the
indignation be overpast, Isai. 26.20, 21. The Angel which was sent to destroy
Sodom, had withal a Commission to deliver Lot, Genes. 19.15. God made full
provision for those who mourned for public abominations before he gave order
to destroy the rest, Ezekiel. 9.4, 6. Men in their wrath will many times rather
strike a friend then spare a foe: But Gods proceedings are without disorder, he
will rather spare his foes then strike his servants, as he showed himself
willing to have done in the case of Sodom, Genesis 18.26. Moses stood in the gap,
and diverted Judgments from Israel, Psa. 106.23. Yea God seeks for such, Ezekiel.
22.30. and complains when they cannot be found, Ezekiel. 13, 5. And if he deliver
others for them, certainly he will not destroy them for others. How ever it go
with the world and with wicked men, it shall go well with the righteous, there
shall be a Sanctuary for them when others stumble, and they shall pass through
the fire, when others are consumed by it, Isa. 3.10, 11. Isai. 8.14, 15, 16.
Zech. 13.8, 9.

Reasons hereof are, Gods Justice, he will not punish the righteous with the
wicked; he will have it appear that there is a difference between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not, Genesis 18.23 Mal. 3.18. Gods love unto
his people. He has a book of Remembrance written before him, for them that
fear him, and think upon his Name: And they shall be mine, says the Lord of
Hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels, and I will spare them as a man
spares his own son that serves him, Mal. 3.16, 17. Here is a climax and
gradation of arguments drawn from Love. In a great fire, and devouring trouble
(such as is threatened there, Chap. 4.1.) property alone is a ground of care, a
man would willingly save and secure that which is his own, and of any use unto
him; but if you add unto this preciousness, that increases the care. A man
will make hard shift to deliver a rich Cabinet of Jewels, though all his
ordinary goods and utensils should perish. But of all Jewels, those which come
out of the body are much more precious then those which only adorn it. Who
would not snatch rather his child then his casket or purse out of a flame?
Relation works not only upon the affection, but upon the bowels, Ier. 3^.20.
And lastly, the same excellency that the word jewel does add unto the word
mine; the same excellency does service add unto the word son. A man has much
conflict in himself to take off his heart from an undutiful son. Never a
worse son then Absalom, and yet how does David give a charge to the Commanders
to have him spared? How inquisitive after his safety? How passionately and
unseasonably mournful upon the news of his death? But if any child be more a
jewel then another, certainly it is a dutiful child, who has not only an
interest in our love by Nature, but by obedience. All these grounds of care and
protection for Gods people in trouble are here expressed, property, they are
mine; preciousness, they are jewels, treasures, ornaments unto me. Relation,
they are sons; usefulness, they are sons that serve, none could look on a thing
so many ways lovely with the same eye as upon a professed and provoking Enemy.

Lastly, Gods name and glory. He has spared his people even in the midst of
their provocations for his Names sake, Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27. Josh. 7.9. How much
more when they repent and seek his face? He will never let it be said, that any
seek the Lord in vain, Isa. 45.19.

Sect. 3.
But it may be objected, Does not Solomon say, that all things happen alike unto
all? and that no man can know love or hatred by that which is before him?
Eccles. 9.1, 2. And is it not certain and common, that in public desolations
good as well as bad do perish? Does not the Sword devour as well one as another?

It is true, God does not always difference his servants from wicked men by
temporal deliverances: Troubles commonly and promiscuously involve all sorts.
But there are these two things considerable in it.

1. That many times the good suffer with the bad, because they are together
corrupted with them, and when they join in the common provocations, no wonder
if they suffer in the common judgments, Revel. 18.4. Nay the sins of Gods
people do (especially in this case) more provoke him unto outward judgments,
then the sins of his professed enemies. Because they expose his name to the
more contempt, 2 Samuel 12.14. and are committed against the greater love, Amos
3.2. and he has future judgment for the wicked, and therefore usually
begins here at his own sanctuary, Ezekiel. 9.6. 1 Pet. 4.17.

2. When good men, who have preserved themselves from public sins, do yet fall
by public judgments, yet there is a great difference in this seeming equality,
the same affliction having like the Pillar that went before Israel, a light
side toward Gods people, and a dark side toward the Egyptians, God usually
recompencing the outward evils of his people with more plentiful evidences of
inward and spiritual joy. A good man may be in great darkness as well as a
wicked man, but in that case he has the name of God to stay himself upon,
which no wicked man in the world has, Isa. 50, 10. The metal and the dross go
both into the fire together, but the dross is consumed, the metal refined. So
is it with godly and wicked in their sufferings. Zach. 13, 9, Eccles. 8.12, 13.

This reproves the folly of those who in time of trouble rely upon vain things
which cannot help them, and continue their sins still. For Judgments make no
difference of any but penitent and impenitent, Sickness does not complement
with an honorable person, but uses him as coursely as the base. Death knocks
as well at a Princes palace as a poor man's cottage: wise men dye as well as
fools. Yea poison usually works more violently when tempered with wine, then
with some duller and baser material. In times of trouble usually the greater
the persons the closer the judgments. When Jerusalem was taken the Nobles were
slain, but the poor of the Land had vineyards and fields given them, Ier. 39.6,
10.

Therefore in troubles we should be more humbled for our sins then our
sufferings, because sin is the sting of suffering. That mercies should not win
us, that judgment should not awaken us: that the rod should speak, and we not
hear, Mic. 6.9. That the fire should burn, and we not feel, Isa. 42.25. That
desolation should be threatened, and we not instructed, Jer. 6.8. That the hand
of God should be lifted up, and we not see it, Isa. 26.11. That darkness should
be upon us, and we not give glory to God, Jer. 13.6. This is that should most
deject us, that in mercies we have been wanton, and in judgments senseless. Get
Repentance by an affliction, and then you may look on it as trafick, and not as
a trouble, like a Merchants voyage, which has pain in the way, but treasure in
the end. No afflictions can hurt him that is penitent. If thou escape, they
will make thee the more thankful; if not, they will bring thee the nearer and
the sooner unto God.

The way to be safe in times of trouble, is to get the blood of the Lamb upon
our doors. All troubles have their Commission and Instructions from God, what
to do, whither to go, whom to touch; whom to pass over. Be gold, and though the
fire come upon you, you shall keep your nature and purity still. Godliness,
says the Apostle, has the promises of this life; and amongst those one
special one is, that we shall not be tempted above what we are able, 1 Cor.
10.13. neither are there indeed any distresses against which there is not a
refuge and escape for penitent sinners unto some promise or other. Against
Captivity. When they be in the land of their Enemies I will not cast them away,
nor abhor them. Levit. 26.44. Against famine and pestilence. If I shut up
heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the locust to devour the Land,
or if I send pestilence among my people: If my people which are called by my
Name shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways: then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will
heal their Land. 2 Chronicles. 7.13.14. Against sickness, the Lord will strengthen
him upon the bed of languishing, and make all his bed in his sickness, Psa.
41.3. Against poverty. When the poor and needy seek water and there is none, I
the Lord will hear them, etc. Isa. 41.17. Psalm. 68.10. Against want of friends.
When my father and mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up, Psalm.
27.10. Psalm. 72.12. Against oppression and imprisonment. He executes judgment
for the oppressed, he loses the prisoners. Psalm. 146.7. Against whatsoever
plague or trouble. 1 King. 8.37.38, 39. He is the God of All consolation, how
disconsolate soever a man's condition is in any kind; there cannot but within
the compass of All consolation be some one or other remedy at hand to comfort
and relieve him, And so much by the way of the Invitation in genera^l.

In the Invitation we have the Matter of it, and the Motives to it. The Matter
is Conversion, without that, the Isa. 26.11.
hand which is lifted up in threatening, will fall down in punishing, and where
that is, God has a book of Remembrance for his Jewels, when his wrath burns
as an Oven against the stubble, Mal. 3.16.

But this Conversion then must have two conditions in it. 1. It must be Ad
Dominum, To the Lord; not merely philosophical to some low and general
dictates of Reason, such as Aristotle, or Plato, or Epictetus, or Plutarch, or
the like heathen Moralists could furnish us withal, without self-denial,
lowliness of spirit, or Romans 10.3 Heb. 11.6 Non sunt bona quae non de radi^e
bona procedunt* Ea ipsa opera quae dicuntur ante fidem quamvis videantur
hominibus l^u^abilia, ina^^^ sunt-ut magna vires and cur^us cele^^^mus praeter
viam. Aug. Enars* in P^al. 3^. vide de Spirit. and hi^. c. 20. 2^, 26. Co^tra
duas Epist. Pelag. l. 3. c. 7. ep. 106. de side and oper^bus. c. 14. contra
Julian* lib. 4. cap. 3
faith in Christ.

Not merely political, to credit, or profit, or secular ends Nih lad
ostenta^ionem, omnia ad conscientiam refert, P^. l. 1 epist. 22. Nil
ilopinionis causa, omnia conscientiae faciam. Senec. de vita beata. c 20
propter famam, non propter Conscientiam, as the Orator speaks, or as our
Prophet has it, for Corn and for wine: Hos. 7.16. as good be an empty vine, as
bring forth fruit only to our selves, Hos. 10.1.

But it must be spiritual, unto the Lord. If thou will return O Israel, says
the Lord, return unto me, Ier. 4.1. And not only Ad Dominum to the Lord, for
that may be done Ier. 3.10
falsely, and flatteringly, with a halting and divided heart. By the force of
Semi-perswasions, like that of Acts 26.23
Agrippa* and Ruth 1.14.
Orpha, complementing with God, and then forsaking him. By the force of
compulsory impressions, like that of Exodus 8.8. Exodus 9.^7, ^4.
Pharaoh and Psalm. 78.34, 37
Israel in the wilderness. Semisauciam hac arque hac vers^re voluntatem Aug.
confess. l. 8. c. 8. plerique ips^i^ paenitentiae agunt* Ambro. d^ paenit. l.
2. c. 9. (...) Clem. Alexi^. 2. strom. Irrisor est non paenitens qui adhuc agit
quod paeni^er, etc. Isidor. de summo ^ono. Magnamrem pu^a unum hominemagere,
praeter sapientem nemo unum agit. Caetera multifo^mes sunt. Senec. Ep 1^0.
Ambros. of^ic. lib. 2. c. 22.
Promises on the Rack, and pride when there was respite again, thawing in the
Sun, and freezing in the shade; melting in the ^urnace, and out of it returning
unto hardness again, like the Prophets Cake, burnt on the one side, and dough on
the other. But it must be,

Secondly, usque ad Dominum, so much the original word (...) imports. A Io^l
2.12. Act. 11. 23. Psalm. 57.7. Ephesians. 3.27. Psalm. 86.11. Heb. 13.9.
full, through constant, continued conversion, with a whole, a fixed, a rooted,
an united, an established heart, yiedling up the whole Conscience and
Conversation to be ruled by Gods will in all things.

The motives to this duty are two; First his Joel 2.12, 13. Isa. 55.6.7. ^er.
31.18. Hos. 3.5. Psalm. 130.4. Acts 2, 38. Matthew. 3.2. Isa. 64.^.
Mercy, he is yet thy God, Sect. 5.
no such argument for our turning unto God as his turning unto us. Adam looks
on him as a Judge and hides; the Prodigal looks on him as a father, and
returns. As the beam of the Sun shining on fire, does discourage the burning of
that: so the shining of Gods mercies on us, should dishearten, and extinguish
lust in us. This is the use we should make of mercy. Say not, he is my God,
therefore I may presume upon him, but he is mine, therefore I must return unto
him. Because he is God, I will be afraid to provoke him; and because he is
mine, I will be afraid to forfeit him. He is so great, I must not dare to
offend him; he is so precious I must not venture to lose him. His mercy is a
(...) Clem. Alex. Stro. l. 6.
Holy mercy, which knows to pardon sin, but not to protect it. It is a
Sanctuary for the penitent, not for the presumptuous.

Secondly, his judgment, and that expressed rather as our Act then his, Thou
have fallen, by thine iniquity. Qui beneficiis no^* intelligitur, vel plagis
intelligatur. Cypr. in Deme^^ia.
If mercies do not work upon Love, let Judgments work upon fear. Dan^ animum
ad loquendum libere ultimae miseriae.

Live. lib. 29.


Extremities are a warrant unto Importunities. Inops Sena^us Auxilii humani ad
Deos populum and v^ta ver it, justi cu^ conjugibus and libe^ls supplicatum ire,
and pacem expo^cere deu^. Live. l. 3. Cum stupe^ caelum and are^annus
nudipedalia denuncia^tur. Magistratus pu^pu ^as ponunt, fasces retro aver. tunt
p^ecem indigi^ant, hostiam instaurant, Vide Tentu^. adv. physicos c. 16. Clem.
Alex. stro. l. 6.6. page 45.3. Edit Heins. Sozom. l. 9. c. 6. Brisso. de
formul. l. 1.
Even heathen mariners in a storm will cry mightily upon God. When there is a
deluge coming, is it not time for Noah to fear, and to prepare an ark? Hebr.
11.7. what meanest thou O thou sleeper to Perdidisti (...) mala si nondu^
misera est didicisti. Sen. ad Helvid^ perdidistis utilitate^ calamitatis and
miser^imifacti estis and pessim permansistis. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 1. c. 33.
los^ the season, and benefit of Gods visitations* when there is a tempest over
the ship, heavy distresses, and distractions both at home and abroad, to be so
secure in thy wonted impenitency, as if thou had had no sins to procure these
judgments, or no sense to feel them? as if there were Isa. 28.15.
agreements, and sealed covenants between thee and the sword that it should not
touch thee? If thou be falling, is it not high time to consider thy ways? to
search and to judge thy self? to have thine eyes like the windows of Solomon's
Temple 1 King. 6.4.
Broad inwards, to find out thine own provocations, and as Psalm. 18.23* (...)
Plut. de seranumin, vindicta.
David speaks, to keep thy self from Thine own iniquity?

Thus when in one and the same time, Mercies, and judgments are intermixed,
then is the most solemn season to call upon men for repentance. If we Vide
Tertul. contra Ma^^ion. l. 2. c* 13.
felt nothing but fears, they might make us despair if nothing but mercies they
would make us secure. If the whole year were Summer, the sap of the earth would
be exhausted; if the whole were Winter, it would be quite buried. The hammer
breaks metal, and the fire melts it, and then you may cast it into any shape.
^udgements break, mercies melt, and then, if ever, the soul is fit to be cast
into Gods mould. There is no figure in all the Prophets more usual then this*
to interweave mercies and judgments, like those Elegancies which Vossius
Rhetor li. 5. ca. 12. sect. 7.
Rhetoricians call (...) to allure and to bring into a wilderness, Hos. 2.14.
And this of all other is the (...), as Vide Gorraei definit* medie. and Lau^eur.
Physicians call it, the Critical time of diseased people, wherein the chief
conjecture lies, whether they be mending or ending, according to the use which
they make of such interwoven mercies. Sect 6.


I have cursorily run over the first part of the Context, the Invitation unto
Repentance, as intending to make my abode on the second, which is the
Institution how to perform it. Therein we have, first a General instruction,
Take unto you words. Secondly, a particular form, what words they should take,
or a petition drawn to their hands, Take away all iniquity* etc.

Of the former of these I shall speak but a word. It imports the serious
pondering and choosing of requests to put up to God. Plutarch Apoph^hegm
The mother of Artaxe^xes in Plutarch was wont to say, that they who would
address themselves unto Princes, must use (...), silken words. Surely he that
would approach unto God, must consider, and look as well to his words as to his
feet. He is Josh. 23.19. John 4.22. Eccles. 5.1, 2. Genesis 35.2.3. 1 Samuel 16.5.
Isa. 1.15.61.
so holy and jealous of his worship, that he expects there should be
preparation in Our accesses unto him. Preparation of Our persons by Quantum a
praeceptis tantum ab auribus Dei long sumus. Tertul. de Orat. cap. 7. (...)
Homer. Illiad
purity of life, Job 11.^3. Preparation of Our Services, by choice of matter,
Job 9.1. Luke 15.17, 18. Preparation of Our (...) Sacerdos (...) fiat^um (...)
dicen^o su^sum cor^^. Cyprian de Oratione.
Hearts, by finding them out, Isa. 64.7.
stirring them up, 1 Samuel 7.27.
Psalm. 57.7.8.
fixing them, fetching them in, and Psalm.. 103.1. ^ ^hr^^ ^0.19
calling together all that is within us to prevail with God

The services which we thus prepare, must be Taken from him. They must not be
the issues of our own private and fleshly hearts. For nothing can go to God,
but that which comes from him; and this phrase seems to import these three
things. 1. We must attend unto his 1 Ioh. 5.14.
will, as the Rule of our prayers. 2. We must attend unto his precepts, and 2 Samuel 7.25.
promises, as the Matter of our prayers. 3. We must attend unto the Romans 8.36.
Zach. 2.1^. Job 37.19. vide Aug. Epist 105. Et Epist. 121, ca, 15.
Guidance of his Holy Spirit, as the life and principle of our prayers, without
which we know not what to ask.

And prayers thus Regulated are most seasonable, and sovereign duties in times
of Trouble. The key which opens a door of mercy, the sl^ce which keeps out
an Inundation of judgments. Jacob wrestled and obtained a blessing, Hos. 12.4.
Amos prayed, and removed a Curse, Amos 7.1.7. The woman of Canaan will not be
denied with a denial, Mat. 15.24, 27. The people of Israel will beg for
deliverance even then when God had positively told them, that he would deliver
them no more, Judge. 10.13, 15. Jonah will venture a prayer from the bottom of
the Sea, when a double death had seized upon him, the belly of the deep, and
the belly of the Whale, and that prayer of his did open the doors of the
Leviathan, as the expression is, Job 41.14. and made one of those deaths a
deliverance from the other.

O let the Lords remembrances give him no rest. Dei potentiam servi preces
impedi^^ant. Hi^^on. ad G^udentium.
There is a kind of omnipotency in prayer, as having an Interest and
prevalence with Gods omnipotency. Act. 16.25, 26.
It has loosed iron chains; It Act. 12.5.10.
has opened Iron gates: It has 1 Kin. 18.41. Fu^men de Caelo precibus suis
contra hostium machin^ mentum (...), suis pluvia Impe^ratacum siti laborarent.
Julius Capitoli^. in Antonino* vide Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2 Tert^l. Apolog c.
5.39.40. Et ad Scapulam. c. 4.
unlockt the windows of heaven: It has Ioh. 11.40.43
broken the bars of death. Satan has three titles given him in the Scripture,
setting forth his malignity against the Church of God. A Revel 12.3.
Dragon, to note his malice, a Genesis 3.1.
Serpent, to note his subtlety, and a 1 Pet. 5.8.
Lion to note his strength. But none of all these can stand before prayer. The
greatest malice, the malice of Haman, sinks under the Ester 4 16.
prayer of Esther; the deepest policy, the counsel of Achitophel, withers
before the 2 Samuel 15.31
prayer of Daivd: the hugest Army, an host of a thousand thousand Ethiopians
run away like Cowards before the 2 Chorn. 14.9, ^1, 12.
prayer of Asa.

How should this encourage us to treasure up our prayers? to besiege the throne
of Grace with armies of supplications? to refuse a denial? to break through a
repulse? He has Genesis 32.25.28.
blessed those whom he did cripple: he has Mat. 15.26.28.
answered those whom he did reproach: he has Judge. 10.13.16.
delivered those whom he did deny. And he is the Heb. 13.8^
same yesterday and to day. If he save in Job 5.19.
six and in seven troubles, should not we pray in six and seven Extremities?
Certainly in all the afflictions of the Church when prayers are strongest,
mercies are nearest.

And therefore let me humbly recommend to the Cares of this honorable Assembly
amongst all your other pressing affairs, the providing that those solemn
days, wherein the united prayers, of this whole Kingdom should with strongest
^mportunities stop the breaches, and stand in the gaps at which Judgments are
ready to rush in upon us* may with more obedience and solemnity be observed,
then indeed of late they are. It is true, here, and in other Cities, and
populous places, there is happily less cause to complain. But who can without
sorrow and shame behold in our Country towns, men so unapprehensive either of
their brethrens sufferings, or of their own sins and dangers, as to give God
quite over, to let him rest, that they themselves may work; to come in truth to
Iehorams resolution, Why should we wait upon God any longer? to grudge their
brethrens and their own souls and safeties one day in thirty, and to tell all
the world that indeed their days work is of more value with them then their
days worship, multitudes drudging and moyling in the earth, while their
brethren are mourning and besieging of heaven. I do but name it, and proceed,

The second part of the Institution was the particular form suggested unto them
according unto which their addresses unto God are to be regulated, which
consists of two parts, a prayer, and a promise. The prayer is for two
Benefits, the one Remove all of sin, the other Conferring of Good. In the
promise or Restipulation we have first their Covenant, wherein they promise two
things. 1. Thanksgiving for the hearing and answering of their prayers. 2. A
special care for the Amendment of their lives. Secondly, the Ground of their
Confidence so to pray, and of their Resolutions so to promise, Because in thee
the fatherless finds mercy. My meditations will be confined within the
first of these, The prayer of the Church in their fears and sufferings, wherein
I shall begin, in the Prophets order, with their prayer against sin, Take away
all iniquity.

The word signifies, 1. To expiate, and make atonement by a sacrifice. So the
escape Goat (which was a sign of Christ our Sacrifice as risen and living
again) is said to carry the sins of the People into the wilderness, Levit.
16.22. Thereby signifying Christ's taking our sins from us, John 1.29. Hebr.
9.28. 2. To forgive, which in the Court of mercy is the taking of sin away,
Psalm. 32.1.5. 3. To remove or take away by destroying. So it is used, Hosea.
1.6. Job 32.22. and is sometimes used to express Burning, 2 Samuel 5.21. Nahum
1.5. so sin is said to be destroyed, Romans 6.6. to be subdued, Mic. 7.19. to
be purged away with the spirit of Judgment and burning, Isa. 4.4. The meaning
then is, Take away all our sins from us, lay them upon Christ our Sacrifice,
for his Merit pardon them, by his Grace destroy and subdue them, that so the
root of Judgments being removed, they likewise may therewithal be removed
too. From hence the Observation which I shall insist upon is this:

When God threatens Judgments, we in our Conversion unto him should pray
against sins.. 7.
Our eye of sorrow should be more upon that which dishonors him, then upon
that which afflicts our selves; more upon that which is contrary to his Image,
then upon that which is contrary to his own nature: more upon that which
defiles, then upon that which paineth us. Exodus 10.17*
Pharaoh cares for nothing but the removal of death: Acts 8.24.
Simon Magus for nothing but to have perdition and the gall of bitterness kept
from him. But good men, like wise Physicians cure the disease at the root, as 2
King. 2.21.
Elisha did the waters by putting Salt into the Spring head. The Angel was
smiting the people with a plague, 2 Samuel 24.17, 25.
David betakes himself to the right remedy, I have sinned, I have done
wickedly; He goes not to the Physicians, but to the Altar to make atonement for
sin, and so the plague was stayed. Destruction was threatened against Israel
for their Calfe, their murmurings, their rebellions; Moses stands in the gap to
divert it, Psalm. 106.23. But how does he do it? surely by praying against
their sins. Exodus 32.31, 32.34.9. Numb. 14.19.
O this people have sinned a great sin, O that thou would forgive them! A
sick man was brought to Christ to be healed, Matt. 9.2. Christ overlookes the
disease, and begins at the sin, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven
thee; and this being forgiven, the malignitie of the disease was removed,
though the matter should have remained. This was the usual method of Psalm.
25.8.32.4, 5.38.3, 4.51.
David in his troubles, to throw over these Shebaes that had wrought his woe.
Blot out, wash thoroughly, cleanse, create, renew: he is far more importunate
for pardon and purging, then for ease and comfort. Complaining in trouble is
the work of a man, but ^am. 3.39, 40
repenting is the work of a Christian.

The Reasons of this point are these Three.

I If a Judgment should be removed, while sin remains, 8.
it is not removed in mercy, but in anger: for many times God gives over
punishing in displeasure, as a man throws away the rod when his scholar is
incorrigible. Why should you be smitten any more? you will revolt more and
more, Isa. 1.5. If men be settled on their lees, and will not be reclamed, there
cannot an heavier punishment light upon them, then to be Hos. 4.14. Psalm.
81.11, 12. Ezekiel. 24.13. Romans 1.24, 28. Rev. 22.11. Exaudit propitius, non
exaudit i^atus: and ru^sus non exaudit propitius, exaudit iratus.

-- non parcit propitius, parcit Iratus. Aug. contra Julian, lib. 5. cap. 4.
Parci sibi putat, cum excaecetur, and servetur ad ultimam opportunamque
vindictam. Aug. in. Psalm. 9. Ad u^ilitatem quosdam non exaudis, ad damnationem
quosdam exaudis. In Psalm. 21. Iratus dat Amanti quod male amat, in Psalm. 26.
Magna Ira est quando peccantibus non irascitur Deus. Hieron. Ep. 33. Et in
Psalm. 140. Indignantis Dei major haec plaga. Cypr. de Lapsis. O fervum illum
beatum cujus Emendationi Deus instat, cui dignatur irasci, etc. Tertul* de
patient. cap. 11.


without punishment, to be left to themselves, and the fury of their own wills,
speedily to work out their own perdition, that they own pleasures may become
their plagues, and the liberty of their own lusts, their forest bondage. God
may take away in wrath that which he sent in anger, Hos. 13.11. as one the
other side he may punish sin then when he forgiveth it, and may visit iniquity
with rods then when he will not utterly take away his loving kindness from a
people, Psalm. 99.8.89.32, 33.

II. If a judgment be removed, so long as sin remains it is gone cum animo
Revertendi, either the same or a worse is likely to succeed, for God will Romans
3.4.
overcome when he judges. Pharoahs stubbornness did not but increase his
plagues. God will not endure that the Exodus 9.17.
pride of man should outvie his Justice. If we do not take Christ's warning to
go and sin no more, we have great cause to fear his inference, that a worse
thing will come upon us, Joh. 5.14. If we do yet exalt our selves, God will
Jer. 2.9.
yet plead with us. If we will Levit. 26.18.21* 24* 28.
walk contrary unto him, he threatens to do the like unto us, and to punish
us seven times more for our sins. If we do not turn unto him that smites
us, then his Isa. 9.12.
anger in smiting shall not be turned away, but his hand shall be stretched out
still. God can bring clouds after rain, distresses in Ireland after
distractions in Scotland, and distractions in England after distresses in
Ireland, mischief upon mischief, and counsel against counsel, Manasse
against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasse, to vex, and weary out a sinful
people, till they pine away in their Calamities.

III. Sin being removed, though the affliction should not be removed, yet it is
sanctified and turned into good. Repentance like the Philosophers stone, can
turn Iron into Gold, can make Golden afflictions. So the trial of our faith,
that is, our affliction, is said to be more precious then Gold, 1 Pet. 1.7.
Whereas sin remaining is like Copres which will turn wine or milk into ink.
It converts the blessings of God into the provisions of lusts. Cankers learning
with pride, and wit with profaneness, and wealth with luxury; like Leaven
which turns a very Passover into pollutions. As the Athe. l. 3. c, 13.
Pearl, which is an Ornament to the woman which wares it, is a disease to the
fish which breeds it: as the same perfume which refreshes a Dove, is mortal
to a Vulture: as the same pillar and cloud was light to Israel, but dark to
Egypt: the same deep a path to Israel, but a grave to Egypt: so the same
blessings which by grace are converted into comforts, by sin are abused into
dishonorable services. Hag. 2.13.
Sweet powders can make leather an ornament, when the Sanies of a plague sore
will render a robe infectious. As it was said of Naaman, He was a great man, an
honorable man, a mighty man of war; 2 King 5.1.
But he was a Leaper: so what ever other ornaments a man has, sin stains
them with the foulest But, that can be brought to deprave the fairest
endowments. A learned man, a wealthy man, a wise man, an honorable man, But a
wicked man. This makes all those other good things tributary unto Satan.

And therefore as the Number. 31.22.
gold and silver of the Canaanites was to pass through the fire before it
could be used by Israel: so all other blessings bestowed on men must pass
through the spirit of Judgment and burning, through the purifying waters of
Repentance, before they can bring honor to the Author, or comfort to the
enjoyer of them. When Christ overcomes Satan, (...). Hom. Il 11 Qui se
didebant arma tradebant. Caesar de Bello Gallico, lib. 3.
he takes from him all his armor, and divides the spoils, Luke 11.21. How
does he divide the spoils? surely he makes use of that wit, wealth, power,
learning, wisdom, interests, which Satan used against Christ's Kingdom, as
instruments and or^^ments unto the Gospel. Venenum aliquando pro Remedio suit.
Sen de Benef. l. 2. c. 18.

Medici pedes and alas Cantharidis, cum sit ipsa morti^era, prodesse dicunt.
Plut. de audiend. Poetis.


As when a Magazine in war is taken, the General makes use of those arms
which were provided against him, for his own service.

And as sin does thus corrupt blessings, so on the other side Repentance does
sweeten Judgments, and can turn afflictions into matter of comfort. As
skarlet pulls out the teeth of a Serpent, so this takes away the sting of a
Judgment. As wine draws a nourishing virtue from the flesh of Vipers: as hot
birds can feed upon Iron, and purge their bodies with swallowing of stones; so
repentance, though it should not remove a Judgment, yet it can feed upon it,
and fetch meat out of the Eater, and out of the strong sweetness.

There are two Evils in Afflictions. Their thorn in the flesh, as they are
matter of pain, and their Isa. 8.21. 2 Chro. 28.22. Rev. 16.10.
snare to the Conscience, as they are matter of Temptation. As there are two
things in a chain or fetter, the heaviness whereby it loads, and the hardness
whereby it gauls. Now as a prisoner, though he cannot make his chain lighter
then it is, yet by lining it with wool or other soft things, he can prevent
the galling: so Repentance though it take not away the pain of Affliction from
the flesh, yet by meekning and humbling the soul, with silence and quietness
to Mic. 7.9. Levit. 26.41. Jer. 10.19.
bear the indignation of the Lord, and accept of the punishment of sin: it
removes the temptation and malignitie of it from the Conscience. And thus as
A. Gel. l. 5. c. 3.
Protagoras by his natural dexterity ordered the burden which he was to bear
with more ease and advantage: so Piety makes Judgments, by spiritual
prudence, more easy to be born, and the light yoke of Christ, as bladders in a
deep water, bears up the spirit of men from sinking, and lightneth every other
burden. And therefore as he in Plut. (...).
Plutarch said of the Scythians, that though they had no music nor Vines
amongst them, yet they had Gods: so what ever other things may be wanting to a
people, yet if God be their God, they are not destitute of any happiness.
Plut. de Sanitate tuend.
Yea as those Roses are usually sweetest which grow nearest unto stinking
weeds: so the comforts of Gods Spirit are strongest when a man is otherwise
perplexed with the greater difficulties. It was promised unto Josiah, that he
should die in peace, 2 Chronicles. 34.28. and yet we find that he was slain in
war, Chap. 35.24. His weeping and humiliation altered the very nature of
trouble, and made war to be peace unto him.

Now for the Use and Application of this point; This serves, first, Sect. 9.
to instruct us how to deprecate Calamities when God shakes his Rod over us.
There Vsque ad delictum hominis Deus tantum bonus, exinde Iudex and severus,
etc. Tertu. contra Marcion. l. 2. c. 11, 14.
is nothing in all the world that God is angry with but sin: for all other
things are his own works, in the goodness of which he wrested with singular
complacency and delight. Sin is that against which Gods arrows are directed;
and as the arrow sticks in the Butt unto which the mark is fastened: so the
judgments which are shot at sin, must needs light upon us unto whom sin
cleaves. The way then to divert the arrow is to remove the mark. It is true,
God does sometimes bring afflictions without respect to the provocations of
sin, upon his best servants. As if a man should shape out of a mass of gold
some excellent vessel, though the gold be never so pure, yet it must pass
through the fire and the hammer again. But it is certain too, that no
affliction comes in Anger but with respect to sin. And the Anger of God is
the bitterest thing in any Calamity.

Now for diversion of this, there is no way but to get sin removed. Take the
bark from a tree, and the sap can never find way to the boughs. Sin is the
Vehiculum which carries shame and sorrow to the soul. Take away that and a
Judgment has no Commission. You may find an Error in it, if you be not the
same men that you were when it issued forth, for God shootes no arrows to hurt
the body of his Son. It is true, Job complains that Gods arrows did stick
in him, Job 6.4. But these were not for Verberat and lacerat, non est saevitia,
certamen est. Senec. de Prove. c. 4. Tentationibus non vincitur fides, sed
probatur. Cypr. de Mort. Aug. de Cir. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 29, 30. l. 4. c. 3.
destruction, but for trial: as men shoot bullets against armor of proof, not
to hurt it, but to praise it. Job in this case was brought forth not as a
malefactor to suffer, but as a Champion to triumph. Let a man take what course
he can to keep off Gods judgments, and hide himself in the closest protection
that humane power or policy can contrive, so long as he keeps his sin with
him, Gods arrows will get through at one 1 King. 22.34.
joint or other. A naked man with Innocence, is better armed then Goliath in
brass or Iron.

We are apt in our distresses to howl, and repine, to gnaw our tongues, and
tear our flesh in the anguish of our sufferings. Like the silly Heart, which
runs mourning and bleeding, but never thinks of getting out the fatal dart
which sticks in his side. We look Isa. 8.21, 22.
upward to see whether help will drop into our mouths; and we look downward,
to see whether humane succors will avail us. But we look not inward, to
find out the 1 King^ 8.38
plague of our own hearts, that we may be rid of that. And till this be done,
sin does as naturally draw and suck judgments to it., as the Loadstone does
iron, or Turpentine fire. Indefatigable have been the pains of this High
Court, to make up the breaches that threaten us, and to heal the Land. Whence
comes it that our distractions remain unremoved? Certainly our leakes are not
stopped, our sins are not thrown away, we labor at the pump to get the
water out, but we do not take care to cure the passage at which it enters in:
we are old bottles still, and Mat. 9 17
God will not put new wine into old bottles. If men would spend their
murmurings and reproaches rather upon their sins then upon their physicians,
the work would be sooner done. When the Temple of God was to be new built,
and a public restitution of the face of things unto glory and splendour was in
agitation, the Hag. 1.6 Zach. 1.2
Prophets call upon Gods people in special then to repent. Impenitency puts
obstructions to Gods mercy, and to all noble enterprises. So long as our lives
are as bad as before, how can we expect that our condition should be better?
in that case mercies themselves become no mercies: as in the case of
Repentance, judgments would be no judgments. If we turn from our evil
ways, God has engaged himself by a solemn promise, that he will do us no
harm, Ier. 2^.6. Otherwise to busy our selves in outward Ceremonies of
Repentance, bodily fasting* and verbal praying, is indeed but to flatter God,
and, if we could, to deceive him: And God will answer such men not according to
the prayer of their lips, but according to the Idol of their hearts, Ezekiel.
14.4, 5:

Secondly, this teaches us how to pray against sin. Sect. 10.
It must be against all, and in all respects. In the Hebrew text there is a
kind of unusual transposi^ion of the words, (...) The word all is first. Me
thinks it does intimate an Intentnesse of the Church upon that point, to have,
if it were possible, all taken away at the very first. If there be one leak in
a ship, one gap in a wall, one gate in a City unprovided for; it is enough to
sink a ship, to drown a Country, to betray a City. One little boy thrust in
at a window, can unlock the door for all the rest of the thieves. It was but
one Jonah that raised a tempest, but one Achan that troubled a Camp, and one
sin generally unrepented of, were enough to undo a Kingdom. Do not say it is a
little one, and my soul shall live. Even the^ Arist. Rhe^. l. 1. Et polit.
lib. 5. cap. 8.
Philosopher tells us, that sometimes (...) are (...), the smallest errors
prove most dangerous. How little soever it be in its own nature, it becomes
heinous by thy allowance. It is as much treason to coin pence as twenty
shilling pieces, because the Royal authority is as much violated by the one as
the other.

This then we must first and principally remember, to set our selves against
all sin. In Confession none to be dissembled, in Supplication none to be
excepted, in Conversion none to be reserved: never give it over so long as any
is left. O Lord, yet it works, yet it lives, yet it tempts, yet it pains me.
Sin has not done accusing of me, let not thy mercy have done forgiving of
sin. Sin has not done rebelling in me, let not thy Grace have done subduing
of sin. When men kill Snakes or Vipers, so long as they see them pant, or offer
to thrust out a sting, they strike them still. Sin like the thief on the
Cross, when it is fast nailed and kept from its old tyranny, yet will, as
much as it can, revi^e, and spit out venom upon Christ. O therefore give it
not over, break the legs of it, crucify it clean through, till it be quite
dead. None can pray or turn unto God in truth, or hope to be delivered from
judgments in Mercy, so long as he holds fast any known sin. Can any man look
to receive benefit by the blood of Christ, who hugs the villain that shed it?
Is it not treason knowingly to harbor and entertain^ a Traitor? Whosoever
loves and holds fast sin, lies unto God in every prayer that he makes.

This serves to reprove and humble us for our hypocrisy and halvings with God
in our conversions from sin, and confessions of it; we are willing to pray
for the pardon of them all, we would have none hurt us: but when it comes to
parting, and taking all away, this we cannot away with. Some are fat, delicate,
golden sins, we would feign spare these, as 1 Samuel 15.9.
Saul did Agag, and hide them as Io^h. 7.^1.
Achan did his wedge. Mark. 6.20.
Herod heare^ John gladly in many things, but if he restrain him of his
Herodias, he must expect to be himself restrained. Acts 16.28
Agrippa will be almost a Christian, but altogether may chance bring a chain
with it. 2 Kings 10.30, 31
Iehu will down with Baal* and his Priests but he knows not how to part with
his Calves, lest he venture his Kingdom. Policy is ever entering Caveats
against piety. Thus men huck, and stand upon abatements with Christ in the
bargain of Salvation, not considering that the purchase of heaven, is like the
buying of the Sibyls Prophecy, the longer we stand off, the dearer every day
it will cost us; the more tears, the harder repentance, the deeper sorrow the
stronger cries. These men know not the price of a soul, nor the worth of a
Savior.

O if Christ should have served us so in dying for sin, as many of us do
serve him in turning from sin, what a condition had our souls been in? If he
had dyed for some sins, and not for others; if he had been unwilling to save
us to the uttermost, as we are to serve him to the uttermost; if he should
have stopped before he came to Consummatum est, and left any one drop of that
bitter Cup for us to drink after him, would it not have caused our belly to
swell, and our thigh to rot, and made us for ever incapable of any other mercy
then only a less damnation?

Well, (beloved,) Christ expects, that as he dyed for all sin, so we should
die to all: he will be counted 1 Timothy 1.15 Zeph. ^.5 1 Reg. 17.31 Nehem. 13.24
worthy of all acceptance, before he will bestow himself: he will not suffer
his Blood and his Mercy to mingle with sin, or to be a protection to it: he
cannot endure mingling of the holy seed with the profane: swearing by God, and
swearing by Malcham: Samaritan Services, to be for the Lord in one thing, and
for the world and flesh in another, one step straight, and another crooked; one
speech Ashdod, and another Canaan; to let our conversation be yea and nay, a
mungrill service; Alternae inter cupiditate^ nostram and p^nitentiam vices
sunt. Senec. de otio Sap. ca. 27. Maximum judicium malae mentis fluctuatio Ep.
120. Vir bonus (...) Arist. Ethic. l. 9. cap. 46. (...) lib. 1. cap. 10. (...)
lib. 8. cap. ^. (...), etc. Clem Alex. strom. lib. 4. Nulli servorum licet ex
his quae dominus impera^ quod placuerit assumere, quod displicuerit repudiare.
Salvia^. de provid. lib. 3.
In this I will do as you bid me, but in that I wll not; like the Jews that
would buy Christ's blood with money, but not take the money into the treasury;
they were fearful to defile their Chests, but not to defile their Consciences:
This Christ cannot away with. It is dangerous to say with the Luke 18.11.
Pharisee, This I am not, and that I am not; or with the Mar. 10.20.
young man, This and that I have done, and in the mean time to have one thing
lacking, to have one door locked up still to keep Christ and salvation from
us: whosoever keeps a covetous heart for the world, or a sensual heart for the
flesh, or a proud heart for the Devil, is unworthy of Heaven by his own
Election, and would not go in thither if the door were wide open: he would
not find there any fuel for these his lusts, any Nabal, or Cosbi, or
Diotrephes to converse withal. And surely, he that does any Qu uno
peccavitomnium ^eu^ est, peccans contra Charitatem in qua pendent omnis, Aug
Epist. 29. Si pauca simulacra circumferat in una Idololatria est, (...) the^sam
trahat, lovis tamen plaustrum est* Tertull. Vide Senec. de Bene^ic. lib. 4.
cap. 26, 27. lib. 5. cap. 15*
one wickedness with allowance, in Gods construction, is habitually guilty of
all, Iam. 2.10* Luke 16.10. Eze^. 18.10.13.

Therefore in this case as 1 Samuel 16.11.
Samuel said to Iesse, Are here all thy children? If any be left, we will not
sit down till he come. So we must conceive in our confessions and
abrenuntiations of sin, that Christ asks us, Are here all? If any be
reserved, I will not take possession till that be cast out: there must not an
hoof be left in Egypt, Exodus 10.26.
if God be to be served. Gods Law, as well as man's, disallows Inmates in the
same house: he will not endure a Psalm. 12.2. Iam. 1.8. Psalm. 119.10* 128.
divided heart: he is heir of all things, there lies no Writ of partition in
his Inheritance, his Title is so good that he will never yield to a
Composition, he will have all the heart or none.

4. We should therefore be exhorted (in time of trouble especially) to set
about this great work, to fall foul upon our sins, to complain against
them to God, as the Achans that trouble Israel, as the corrupters and betrayers
of our peace, Heb. 4.13 Genesis 17.1. 2 Cor. 2.17.
to set our selves in Gods eye, and not to dare to lie unto his holy Spirit, by
falsenesse or hypocrisy; as if we could reserve any one sin unmortified which
he should not know of. But being in his sight to whom all things are naked and
open, to deal in all sincerity, and to hate sin even as he hates it.

Sect. 11.
There are five notable duties which these three words, Omnem toll iniquitatem,
do lead us unto.

1. Sense of sin, as of an heavy burden, as the Prophet David calls it, Psalm.
38.5. Such sense our Savior requires in true penitents, Come unto me all ye
that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. To conceive them heavier then a
Millstone, Luke 17.2. Then the weight of a Mountain, Luke 23.30. O what
apprehension had S. Peter's converts of sin, when they felt the nails wherewith
they had crucified Christ, sticking fast in their own hearts, and piercing
their spirits with torment and horror? Acts 2.37. Oh what apprehensions had the
poor Iaylor of his sins, when he came as a prisoner before his own prisoners,
springing in with monstrous amazement, and consternation of spirit, beseeching
them to tell him, What he should do? Acts 16.23.30.

Consider it in its Nature: an universal bruise and sickness, like those
diseases which Physicians say are Corruption totius substantiae, from head to
foot, Isa. 1.5, 6. And who does not feel such an Universal languor to be an
heavy burden? for a man that must needs labor, to have weights hung at his
hands; that must needs walk, to have clogs fastened to his feet, how can he
choose but cry out with the Apostle, O wretched man that I am who shall deliver
me? Romans 7.24.

Consider it in the Curse that belongs unto it^ A Roll written within and
without with curses. Ezekiel. ^.1^.


Look outward, and behold a curse in the Creature, Vanity, Emptiness,
Vexation, Disappointment; every creature armed with a sting to revenge its
Makers quarrel.

Look inward, and behold a curse in the conscience, accusing, witnessing,
condemning, haling to the tribunal of vengeance; first defiling with the
allowance; and after terrifying with the remembrance of sin.

Look upward, and behold a curse in the heavens, the wrath of God revealed from
thence upon all unrighteousness. Romans 1.18.


Look downward, and behold a curse in the earth, Death ready to put a period
to all the pleasures of sin, and like a trap-doore to let down into Hell,
where nothing of sin will remain, but the worm and the fire.

Look into the Scripture, and see the curse there described: an everlasting
banishment from the glory of Gods presence: an everlasting destruction by the
glory of his power, 2 These. 1.9. The Lord showing the jealousy of his Justice,
the unsearchablenesse of his severity, the unconceiveablenesse of his strength,
the bottomless guilt and malignity of sin, in the everlasting destruction of
ungodly men, and in the everlasting Anima in corpore erit non vivendi causa sed
dolendi Aug. do Civ. Deili. 13. c. 2. Prima mors animam nolen^em pellit a
corpore, secunda nolentem retinet in corpore. Ibid. l 21. c. 3.
preserving of them to feel that destruction: Who knows the power of thy
anger, says Moses. Even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath Psalm. 90.11
. It is impossible for the most trembling consciences, or the most jealous
fears of a guilty heart, to look beyond the wrath of God, or to conceive more
of it then indeed it is. As in peace of conscience, the mercy of God is
revealed unto believers from faith to faith: so in anguish of conscience the
wrath of God is revealed from fear to fear.

A timorous man can fancy vast and terrible fears, fire, sword, tempests,
wracks, furnaces, scalding lead, boiling pitch, running bell, metal; and being
kept alive in all these to feel their torment: But these come far short of
the wrath of God, for first, there are bounds set to the hurting power of a
creature, the fire can burn, but it cannot drown; the Serpent can sting, but he
cannot tear in pieces. 2. The fears of the heart are bounded within those
narrow apprehensions which it self can frame of the hurts which may be done.
But the wrath of God proceeds from an Infinite Justice, and is executed by an
omnipotent and unbounded power, comprising all the terror of all other
Creatures, (as the Sun does all other light) eminently and excessively in it.
It burns, and drowns, and tears, and stings, and bruises, and consumes, and can
make nature feel much more then reason is able to comprehend.

O if we could lay these things seriously to heart (and yet these are but low
expressions, of that which cannot be expressed, and comes as short of the
truth it self as the picture of the Sun in a table, does of the greatness and
brightness of it in its own Orb) should we not find it necessary to cry out,
Take away all iniquity? this sickness out of my soul, this sword, this nail,
this poisoned arrow out of my heart, this Dagger of Ehud out of my belly, this
millstone, this mountain from off my back, these stings and terrors, these
flames and Furies out of my Conscience? Lord, my wounds stink, my lips quiver,
my knees tremble, my belly rots, I am feeble, and broken, and roar, and
languish; thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thy waves go over my head.

O if we had but a view of sin as it is in its native foulness, and did feel
but a touch of that fury that God is ready to power out upon it, this would
stain all the pride of man, and sour all the pleasures of sin, and make a man
as fearful to meddle with it, as a guilty woman with the bitter water which
caused the Curse. Most true was that which Luther spoke in this point. If a man
could perfectly see his own evils, the sight thereof would be a perfect hell
unto him: and this God will bring wicked men unto. Reprove them, and set their
sins in order before them. Psalm. 50.21. Make them take a view of their own
hearts and lives, fuller of sins then the Firmament of stars, or a furnace of
sparks. O Consider this you that forget me, says the Lord: lest I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

The second duty is Confession, for he that cries to have sin taken away,
Sect. 12.
acknowledges that it lies upon him. A full Confession not of many, but of All
sins, either actually committed, or habitually comprised in our body of sin.
Athenaeus. lib. 1.
As he in the Comoedian said, that he had invited two guests to dinner
Philocrates, and Philocrates, a single Man, but a double Eater: So in
examination of our selves we shall every one find sins enough in himself to
denominate him a double and a ^^eble sinner. A free Confession, not as
Pharaohs, extorted upon the wrack; nor as that of Judas, squeezed out with
anguish and horror, but ingenuous and penitent, arising from the purpose of a
pious heart, that comes like water out of a Spring, with a voluntary
freeness; not like water out of a Still, which is forced with fire.

The third duty is Weariness and detestation of all sin, for we call not to
have a thing removed till we be weary of it. Thus we are taught in the Psalm.
38.2. Ezekiel. 16.63. Ezekiel. 6.9.20 43. 1 Cor. 11.31. Isa. 30.22.
Scripture, to be ash^med, and confounded; to loath, and abhor, to judge and
condemn our selves; to throw sin away as a detestable thing, though it be a
golden or silver sin. A Spiritual Judgment looks on all sin as filthy and
Psalm. 14.3. 2 Cor. 7. Omnis (...) poenitet vex^ur secum. Aug. in Psalm. 34.
Arist. Rhet.
stinking; shows a man to himself as a vessel full of Dung, Scum,
Excrements, and makes him out of quiet till he be thoroughly purged. For Hatred
is (...), against the whole kind of that which we hate.

The fourth duty is an acknowledgement of our own Impotencie to remove sin
from our selves. Ephesians. 2 1.5. Psalm. 40.12. Romans 5.6, 7.6.24. 2 Cor. 3.5. Ier.
6.10. Romans 8.7.
We have no more power then a slave in chains has to get out of his bondage
till another ransom him; then a dead body in a grave, till Christ raise it.
Our Iniquity takes hold on us, and keeps us down, that we cannot hearken or be
subject to the will of God. If sin were not removed by a greater strength then
our own, it would most certainly sink us into Hell.

The last duty is an Imploring of Gods mercy and grace, that what we cannot
do our selves, he would be pleased to do for us. Facile est memen^o, quo qui^
velet, cedere possessio^e magne fortunae: facere and parare eam diffi^ile atque
arduum. L^v. 2.24. Corpora lent aug^scunt cito extinguuntur. Tacit. Vit. Agric.

A^bores Magna^ diu crescere, una hora extirpari. Q. Curt* lib. 7.


In works of Art it is hard to build, but easy to destroy. But in works of sin
though our weakness is able to commit them, yet none but Gods power is able to
demolish them. Luke 11.21. Ier. 2 22. Mrl. 3.3. 1 Ioh. 3.8.
None but Christ is strong enough to overcome the strong Man. His Person only
has strength enough to ^eare the Curse of sin: His Sacrifice only Merit
enough to make expiation for sin. His Grace only virtue enough to remove the
pollution of sin. Though we should take Nitre and much Soap, our sin would be
marked still; but he comes with Refiners Fire and with Fullers Soape, and can
wash out all. It was his only business of coming into the world, To destroy
the works of the Devil.

Now the things which we pray for in this Petition are these three. 1. For
Remission, that God would take away the condemnation of sin from us, by not
imputing the guilt thereof unto us, but would cause it to passover on Christ,
Isa. 5^.6. Romans 4.8.
on whom he has laid the Iniquity of his people. Such an expression the Holy
Ghost uses, (...) the Lord has caused thy sin to pass over from thee to
Christ, 2 Samuel 12.13. which being obtained, all other judgments are ipso facto
removed to, so far as they import proper and vindictive punishment.

H^b 9.4. Mich. 7.19.
Secondly, for Sanctification, That the virtue of Christ's death, and the grace
of his Spirit may subdue the power of sin, and cleanse and strengthen our
consciences against the commands of it, and temptations unto it.

Thirdly, for continued Renovation, that as in sanctification begun we have
power against all kinds of sin, so by the continual supplies of the holy
Spirit, we may have further power against all degrees and remainders of sin.
That Christ would purify our sin unto death, as our sin did him, and not give
over mortifying it, till his blood be revenged of it to the uttermost, and our
souls delivered from it to the uttermost.

Sect. 13.
I shall conclude the first part of the Petition with a short word of
Exhortation unto this Honorable Assembly. Ezekiel. 36.26. Ier 21.18. Ezekiel. 18.31.
Isa. 1.16. Heb. 8.1^.
Those things which God works in us, and bestows upon us by his Grace, he
also requires of us by his Command: Sometimes he promises to turn us,
sometimes he commands us to turn to him: Sometimes he bids us put away
sin, and sometimes he promises to take it away from us. Lex jubet, Gratia
juvat. Aug. Epist. 95. and Epist. 144. ct l. 3. contr. 2. Ep. pelag. ca. 7.
Petamus ut det, quod ut habeamus jubet. in Exodus quest. 55. de bono viduitatis,
cap. 17.
In the one showing us what is our duty, and in the other where is our help.
And as this latter consideration calls upon our Faith to pray: so the former
upon our obedience to work. I shall therefore (Right Honorable) humbly offer a
double Exhortation unto all of you.

First, that every one of you would seriously endeavor to take away all
iniquity from his own person. And unto this there lies upon you a double
Obligation; one with relation to the safety of your own souls, for whatever
other honor, wealth, wisdom, learning, interest a man has besides, if sin
have the predominancy, they are but Satan's Magazine, and that man his servant
to employ them against God that gave them: and the more mercies any man has
been trusted withal, the heavier judgment will be poured out upon the breach
of that trust: Better be a wooden vessel to hold Wine, then a silver vessel
to hold Excrements; better be a Beggar with the treasure of Gods grace, then a
Prince with the load of a man's own sins.

But there is a further tie upon you, with relation unto the success of that
Honorable employment whereunto you are called. Ita nati estis, Tacit. Annal.
lib. 4.
ut b^na malaque vestra ad Rempub. pertineant. God will be sanctified in all
those that draw ne^r unto him, as well in civil, as in sacred Administrations.
It is very hard for a person in whom sin rules, to be constantly faithful to
any public and honorable service. For Grace only establishes the heart,
Hebr. 13.9. Achitophel, a man of great wisdom falls from David: Jonah, a man of
great valor, falls from Solomon. And admit he be faithful, yet the sin of his
heart sends out a prohibition to the wisdom of his head, and the labor of his
hand: he that will be a fit vessel for his Masters uses; must first of all
purge himself. 2. Tim. 2.21. As we first cleanse a vess^ll before we use it.
When Joshua was to negotiate a public Reformation, and to administer a
public service, his filthy garment must be taken from him, and he must be
clothed with change of raiment, Zach. 3.4, 7. Let every one of you make his
public service one argument more then he had before, for his necessary
reformation, and let the piety of your lives bear witness to the integrity of
your honorable undertakings.

Sect. 14.
Secondly, As you must take away sin from your selves, so make it your
principal work to take away iniquity out of the Land; Liberty, Property,
Privileges are sacred and precious things, not to be in the least manner
betrayed, R. Akika in pirke Aboth.
yea in some sense we may look upon them, as the Jews upon their Mossora,
tanquam legis and pietatis sepem. As a fence and mound unto Religion it self.
Arbitrary government would quickly be tampering in sacred things, because
corruption in the Church is marvellously subservient and advantageous to
corruption in the State. But the most Orient Pearl of this Kingdom is our
Religion, and the bitterest enemies unto that, are our sins. These are the
snuffes that dim our Candlestick, and threaten the removal of it* these the
leaven that defile our Passeovers, and urge God to pass away and depart from
us; these the obstructions between his sacred Majesty and you, and between
both, and the happiness of the Kingdom. Think seriously what ways may be
most effectual to purge out this leaven out of the Land. The principal
sacrificing knife which kills and mortifies sin, is the Word of God, and the
knowledge of it. It would have been a great unhappiness to the Commonwealth
of Learning, Sueton in Calig cap. 34.
if Caligu^a (...) (as he endeavored) deprived the world of the writings of
Homer, Virgil, and Livy. But O! what an Egyptian calamity is it, to have in
this Sunshine of the Gospel, thousands of persons and families (as I doubt not
but upon inquiry it would appear) without the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles. A Christian soldier without his sword, a Christian builder without
his rule and square, a Christian calling without the instruments and balances
of the Sanctuary belonging to it. O therefore that every Parish had an
indowment ^it for a learned, laborious and worthy Pastor, and Pastors worthy of
such endowments, that provision were made that every family might have a Bible
in it, and (if by Law it might possibly be procured) the exercises of Religion
therewithal, this would be the surest Magazine to secure the happiness of a
Kingdom: that all reproachful titles, which the devil uses as scarcrows and
whi^lers to keep back company from pressing in upon Christ's Kingdom, were by
Law proscribed; That scandalous sins were by the awfulnesse and severity of
Discipline more blasted and brought to shame. That the Lords house were more
frequented, and his day more sanctified, and his Ordinances more reverenced,
and his Ministers, which teach the good knowledge of the Lord, more encouraged
then ever heretofore. In one word, that all the several fountains of the
Commonwealth were settled in a sound and flourishing constitution. That in
every place we might see Piety the Elm to every other Vine, the supporter to
every other profession. Learning adorned with Piety, and Law administered with
Piety, and Counsels managed with Piety, and Trade regulated with Piety, and
the Plow followed with Piety. That when Ministers fight against sin, with the
sword of Gods Word, you who are the Nobles and Gentry of the Land, would second
them, and frown upon it too; a frown of yours may sometimes do as much service
to Christ, as a Sermon of ours. And he cannot but take it very unkindly from
you, if you will not bestow your countenance on him who bestowed his blood on
you. That you would let the strictness of your lives, and the piety of your
examples put wickedness out of countenance and make it appear (as indeed it is)
a base and a sordid thing.

If we would thus sadly set our selves against the sins of the Land, no power,
no malice, no policies should stand between us and Gods mercies; Religion would
flourish, and peace would settle, and trade would revive, and the hearts of men
would be reunited, and the Church be as a City compacted, and this Nation
would continue to be as it has been, like the Garden of Eden, a mirror of
prosperity and happiness to other people; and God would prevent us in the
second part of our Petition, with the blessing of goodness; as soon as ever
iniquity were removed, he would do us good; which is the second thing here
directed to pray for, Receive us graciously.

In the original it is (...) Take good, to wit, to bestow upon us; Sect. 15.
so Taking is sometimes used for Giving: He received gifts for men, so in the
Psalm, Genesis 43.3^. Psalm. 68.19. Ephesians. 4.8.
he gave gifts to men, so in the Apostle: and it is not improbable that the
Prophet here secretly leads us to Christ the Mediator who first receives
gifts from his Father and then pours them forth upon his Church. Act. 2.23.

The meaning then is. Lord, when thou have pardoned weakened, mortified sin, go
on with thy mercy, and being in Christ graciously reconciled unto us, give
further evidence of thy Fatherly affection, by bestowing portions upon us. They
shall not be cast away upon unthankful persons we will render the Calves of
our lips, they shall not be bestowed upon those that need them not, or, that
know where else to provide themselves. It is true we have gone to the Assyrian,
we have taken our horses instead of our prayers, and gone about to find out
good; Psalm. 62.9.33.17.20.7. 1 Cor. 8.4.
we have been so foolish as to think that the Idols which have been beholden to
our hands for any shape that is in them, could be instead of hands, and of God
unto us, to help us in our need: but now we know that men of high degree are
but a lie, that horses are but a vanity, that an Idol is nothing, and therefore
can give nothing. That power belongs unto thee, none else can do it, That
mercy belongs unto thee, none else will do it, therefore since in thee only
the fatherless find mercy, be thou pleased to do us good.

We will consider the words, first, absolutely, as a single prayer by
themselves. Secondly, relatively, in their connection, and with respect to the
scope of the place.

From the former consideration, we observe, That all the good we have is from
God; he only must be sought unto for it; we have none in our selves, I know
that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good, Romans 7.18. we can neither
Genesis 6.5* 2 Cor. 3.5. Matthew. 12.34. Psalm. 14.3.
think, nor speak, nor do it.

And missing it in our selves, it is all in vain to seek for it in things
below our selves.

They can provide for our back and belly (and yet not that neither without God:
the root out of which the fruits of the earth do grow, is above in heaven, the
Genealogy of Corn, and Wine, is resolved into God. Hose. 2.22.) But if you go
to your Lands, or Houses, or Teasuries for physic for a sick soul, or a guilty
conscience, they will all return an Ignoramus to that enquiry, salvation does
not grow in the furrows of the field, neither are there in the earth to be
found any Mines or harvests of Grace or Comfort.

In God alone is the Psalm. 369
fountain of life, he that only Matt. 19.17^
is good, he only Psalm. 119.68^
does good; when we have wearied our selves with having recourse to second
causes, here at last, like the wandering Dove, we must arrive for rest: Many
will say, who will show us any good, Do thou lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us, Psalm. 4.6. From him alone comes every go O gift, Iam.
1.17. whether Temporal, it is his Prove. 10.2. Matthew. 4.4. 1 Timothy 4.5.
blessing that makes the creature able to comfort us: The woman touched the
hem of Christ's garment, but the virtue went not out of the garment, but out of
Christ* Luke 8.44. or whether Spiritual, sanctified 1 Ioh. 5.20* Phil. 2.13.
Ier. 32.3^. Romans 5.5.
faculties, sanctified Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10 Col. 2.11, 12.
habits, sanctified 2 Timothy 2.25. Phil. 2.13.
motions, glorious Ephesians. 1.5, 6* Ioh* 1.12.
relations, in Predestination, Adoption, and Christian Liberty: excellent 1
Cor. 12.6*
gifts, heavenly 2 Cor. 1.3. Rom 15.13.
comforts, all and Council. Milevit. can. 3, 4, 5. Council. Arausican. secund.
Aug. de great. and lib. Arb. ca. 21*
only from him. And that without change and alteration: he does not do good
one while, and evil another, but goodness is his proper and native operation;
he is not the author of sin, that entered by the devil; he is not the author of
death, that entered by sin; but Hos. 13.9.
our destruction is of our selves. And therefore though the Amos 3.6. Isa.
45.7. Vid. Tertul. c^n^. Marcion. li. 2. ca. 14.
Prophet say, Is there any evil in the City, which the Lord has not done? Yet,
he does it not but only as it is bonum justitiae, good in order to his glory:
For it is just with God, that they who run from the order of his Commands,
should fall under the order of his Providence, and doing willingly what he
forbids, should unwillingly suffer what he threatens.

In one word, God is the Author of All good, by his grace working it: the
Permitter of all evil, by his patience enduring it: the Orderer and disposer
of both, by his mercy rewarding the one, by his justice revenging the other,
and by his wisdom directing both to the ends of his eternal glory.

This serves to discover the free and ^^le working of Grace in our first
conversion, Sect. 16.
and the continued working of grace in our further sanctification: whatsoever
is good in us habitually, as Grace inhering, or actually, as Grace working, is
from him alone as the Author of it. For though it be certain, that when we will
and do, our selves are agents, yet it is still under and from him, Aug. de
great. and Il. arb. ca. 1.6 de great. Christi ca. 25. cont. 2. ep. Pel^g. li. 4.
c. 6. de perfect. justi^iae ca. 19.
Certum est nos facere cum faciamus, sed ille facit ut faciamus, as the great
champion of Grace speaks; by Grace we are that we are, we do what we do in
Gods service: Vessels have no wine, bags have no money in them, but what the
Merchant puts in: the bowls of the Candlesticks had no oil but that which
dropped from the Olive branches.

Other Aug. de clv. Dei. li. 12. c. 9. Field of the church. l. 1. c. ^.
things which seek no higher perfection then is to be found within the compass
of their own nature, may by the guidance and activity of the same nature,
attain thereunto: but man aspiring to a divine happiness, can never attain
thereunto but by a divine strength: Aug. li. de patientia. c. 18.
impossible it is for any man to enjoy God without God.

The truth of this point shows it in five gradations.

1. By Grace our 1 Cor. 2.12.14. Matt. 11* 27. Ier. 31.34. Vid. Aug. de great.
Christ. li 1. c. 13.14. and ep. 143.
minds are enlightened to know and believe him: for Spiritual things are
spiritually discerned.

2. By Grace our Ioh. 6.4^. Eze^. ^.2^. Ier. 32.35.
hearts are inclined to love and obey him, for spiritual things are
spiritually approved: He only by his Almighty and ineffable operation, works
in us, Aug. de great. Christi c. 24.
Et veras Revelationes, et bonas voluntates.

3. By Grace our Heb. 13.20. Romans 7.18. Phil. 2.^3.
lives are enabled to work what our hearts do love, without which, though we
should will, yet we cannot perform, no more then the knife which has a good
edge is able actually to cut, till moved by the hand.

4. By Grace our good works are carried on unto 1 These. 5.23. 1 Pe^. 5.10. Jude
vet. 24. Ioh. 17.15.
perfection. Adam wanting the Grace of perseverance, fell from innocence it
self: Vid^ Aug. Enchi^id c. ^2. de great. and lib. arb. c. 6. and 17. Peto u^
acciam, and cum accepero rursu^ peto. Hieron. ad C^esiphont*
It is not sufficient for us that he prevent and excite us to will, that he
cooperate and assist us to work: except he continually follow and supply us
with a residue of spirit to perfect and finish what we set about. All our works
are begun, continued, and ended in him.

Lastly, By Grace our perseverance is crowned: for our best Psalm. 143.2. Isa.
64.6.
works could not endure the trial of justice, if God should enter into
judgment with us; Grace enableth us to work, and Grace rewards us for
working; Grace begins Phil. 1.6. Heb. 12.2.
, and Grace finisheth both our faith and salvation. The work of holiness is
nothing but Grace, and the reward of holiness is nothing but Grace for Grace.

Secondly, this teaches us how to know Good from Evil in our selves; what we
look on as good, Sect. 17.
we must see how we have derived it from God; the more recourse we have had
unto God by prayer, and faith, and study of his will, in the procurement of it,
the more goodness we shall find in it. A thing done may be good in the
substance of the work, phil. 1.15.16.
and yet evil in the manner of doing it; as the substance of a vessel may be
silver, but the use sordid. Iehu his ^eal was rewarded as an act of Justice,
quoad substantiam operis, 2 King. 10.30. Hosea. 1.4.
and it was punished too as an act of policy, quoad m^dum, for the perverse
end. A thing which I see in the night may shine, and that shining proceed from
nothing but rottenness. We must not measure our selves by the matter of things
done: for there may be 1 Samuel 21.7. Mar. 6.2^. Act. 24.25. Isa. 58.3. Ma^th.
6.16. Mat. 23.2, 3.
Malum opus in bona materia. Doeg prays, and Herod hears, and Hypocrites fast,
and Pharisees preach: but when we would know the Rebus ad ima t^ndentibus in
Imo ponitur fundamentum; Ecclesia vero in Imo posita tendit in Coelum,
fundamentum ^^go nostrum ibi positum est. Aug. Enarrat. 1. in Psalm. 29.
goodness of our works, look to the fountain, whether they proceed from the
Father of lights by the spirit of love, and the grace of Christ, from humble,
penitent, filial, heavenly dispositions; nothing will carry the soul unto God,
but that which comes from him. Our Communion with the Father, and the Son,
is the trial and foundation of all our goodness.

Thirdly, Thi^ should exceedingly abase us in our own eyes, and stain all the
pride, and cast down all the Plumes of flesh and blood, when we seriously
consider that in us, as now Ier. 2.21.
degenerated from our original, there is no good to be found, our Isa. 1.22.
Ezekiel. 22.18^
wine become water, and our Silver dress, as our Savior says of the devil;
when he lies Ioh. 8.44.
he speaks de suo* of his own, so when we do evil, we work, de nostro, of our
own, and secundum hominem, as the Apostle speaks, According unto man, 1 Cor.
3.3. Lusts are g our own, our very Romans 2.24. Iam. 1.14.
members to that body of sin which the Col. ^.5. Ephesians. ^.22.
Apostle calls the old man, with which it is as impossible to do any good, as
for a Toad to spit Cordi^ls.

Men are apt to glory of their good hearts and intentions, only because they
cannot search them. Ier. 17.11. And being carnal themselves, to entertain none
but carnal notions of Gods service. But if they knew the purity and jealousy
of God, and their own impotency to answer so holy a will, they would lay their
hands upon their mouths, and with Job, abhor themselves, and with Isaiah, Job
42.5, 6. Isa. 6.5. Heb. 12.20. Josh. 24, 19.
bewail the uncleanness of their lips, and with Moses, fear and quake, as not
being able to endure the things that are commanded, and with Joshua,
acknowledge that they cannot serve God, because he is holy: they would then
remember that the Law of God is a Law of fire, Deuteronomy. 33.2. and the Tribunal of
God, a Tribunal of fire, Ezekiel. 1.27. that the pleading of God with sinners,
are in flames of fire, Isa. 66.15, 16. that the trial of all our works shall
be by fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. that the God before whom we must appear, is a
consuming fire, Hebr. 12.29. Go now and bring thy straw and stubble, thy
drowsy and sluggish devotion, thy fickle and flattering repentance, thy
formal and demure services into the fire, to the Law to measure them, to the
Judge to censure them; nay, now carry them to thine own conscience, and tell me
whether that will not pass the Fathers verdict upon them, Sordet in conspectu
Iudicis, Greg.
quod fulget in conspectu operantis, Sect. 18.
That which is fair in thine eye, is filthy in Gods.

Lastly, this serves for Exhortation unto these particular duties. First, unto
Patience and meekness under any evil that God may bring upon us, and that not
barely, because he does us good in other things, which was Jobs argument, Shall
we receive good from the Lord, and not evil? Job 2.10. But further, because
the very evils that come upon us, are oftentimes by him intended for good, as
Joseph told his brethren, Genesis 50.20. We are not angry with the Medicina etiam
invitis prodest. Sen. ep. 98 Quae per insuavit^tem medentur, emolumento
curationis offensam sui excusant, and presentem insuriam superventurae
utilitatis gratia commendant. Tertul. de penit. cap. 10.
Physician when he launceth, dieteth, and restrains us of our will; he
denies us our will, that we may have our will: a sick man is many times most
faithfully served, when he is crossed. I lop my trees, bruise my grapes, grind
my corn* to fit it to the ends whereunto it tends. Gods end is merciful when
his hand is heavy, as John's Roll was, Rev. ^ 9. Heb. 1^.11. ^a. 27.9.48* 10.
sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly, so troubles may be bitter to the
palate, but profitable to the Conscience: like hot spices that bite the tongue,
but comfort the stomach.

And as it dictateth patience in suffering evil, so in doing our duties, though
we Qu^squis volens d^tra^it sam^ meae, n^lens addit m^rcedi meae. August. cont.
literas Petiliani li. 3. cap. 7.
suffer contempt and reproaches for it. If we were to receive our rewards from
men, their frowns might discourage us: but when we have done Gods will, God
himself will be our reward, and make his promises a comfort unto us. Moses and
Aaron, though their whole employments were for the good of Israel, were yet
repayed with murmuring and discontent, and the people like children, qui cibum
sumunt, sed flentes (to use the similitude of the Orator in Aristotle) repined
at the food which their prayers obtained for them, Rhetor. l. 3. c. 4.
yet nothing dismayed them from their duty, Etiam post naufragium tentantur
Maria. The woman of Canaan prays on when she is denied, Sen* ep. 81^
and Jacob holds with his hands when his thigh is lamed: our first care must be
to be in our way, to be doing our duties, and then though as ( Solomon speaks)
we should meet a Lion in our way, we must not be dismayed; for Angels are
stronger then Lions, and he has given his Angels charge over u^, to bear us in
our ways, psalm. 91.11. Yea, Whilst we are with him, he himself is with us, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. so that the way of the Lord is the surest and safest walk that
any man can have, The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, Prove. 10.29.

Secondly, unto Humility: If thou be a Vessel of gold, and thy brother but of
wood, be not high minded, it is 1 Cor. 4.7. Romans 11.20. Ille discernit qui unde
discernaris impertit, poenam debitam removendo indebitam gratia^ largienda.
Aug. contr. 2. ep. Pelag. l. 2. ca. 7.
God that makes thee to differ, the more bounty God shows, the more humility
he requires. Those Opulentissima me^alla quorum in al^o latent venae. Se ^p.
23. Altissima flumina minimo sono labuntur. Q. Curt. l. 7.
Mines that are richest are deepest, those Stars that are highest seem
smallest, the goodliest buildings have the lowest foundations; the more God
honors men, the more they should humble themselves; the more the fruit, the
lower the branch on which it grows; pride is ever the companion of emptiness:
O how full was the Apostle, yet how Ephesians. 3.8. 1 Cor. 15.8. 1 Timothy 1.15. 2
Cor. 3.5. Romans 7.18*
low was his language of himself, least of Saints, last of Apostles, chief of
sinners, no sufficiency to think, no abilities to do, all that he is, he is by
grace; thus Humility teaches us in our Operations to draw strength from God,
not for our selves; in our graces to ascribe their goodness to God, and their
weakness to our selves.

Thirdly, unto dependence and continual recourse to God, as the fountain of
all good, to keep an open and an unobstructed passage between him and our
soul: say not, I have light enough in my house, Vide Aug. de great. and li.
arb. cap. 8.
I may now shut up my windows, for light within has dependence upon immediate
supplies from the Sun without, and so has grace upon continual supplies from
the Sun of righteousness; God teaches even the Husbandman to plow and thresh,
Isa. 28.26. In these things his direction is to be implored: Meddle not then
with great and high affairs, without recourse unto him. His name is Counselor,
and his testimonies are Counselors, let them be the rule and square of all
your debates. Isa. 9.6. Psalm. 119.24.
It is Live. lib 26. A Gel. l 7.1. Valor. Max. l. 1. c. 2.
recorded for the honor of Scipio, that he went first to the Capitol, and
then to the Senate. But you have more noble examples. 2 Samuel 15.26, 31. Isa.
47.3, 4, 15. 2 Chr. 20 6. Nehem. 2.3, 4.
David is put to flight, he flies and prays; Ezekiah is at a stand in all his
Counsels, he sends to the Prophet and prays; Iehosaphat is in great distress,
and knows not what in the world to do, but he prays; Nehemiah is sore
afraid, and has a Petition to make to the King, but first he makes one to God,
and prays; when ever the children are come to the birth, and there is no
strength to bring forth, all the world cannot furnish you with such another
Midwife as prayer, and recourse to God; it has delivered even graves of their
dead. Therefore let me beseech you, when ever you meet with such difficulties
as put you to a stand, that you know not what to advise or resolve upon, go to
your Closets, prostrate your selves at his Throne, whose honor it is to be
seen in the Mount, beg counsel of him in whom are hid all the Treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. Let it appear that you seek his face to direct you,
and his glory* as the supreme end and design of all your consultations, and
then any whether he be not a present help in trouble, and whether he will not
magnify the wisdom of his Counsel in the perplexity of yours.

Fourthly, unto fidelity, in the use of any good which God bestows upon u^,
for God gives not talents to men, barely to enrich men, but to employ them;
therefore as the Vessel has one passage to let the Wine into it self, and
another to pour it out into the Flaggo^, so we should not only fill our selves
by dependence upon God, but should supply our selves by love and service unto
our brethren.

Right Honorable, This Nation has put into your hands all that is outwardly
dear unto them, their persons, posterities, liberties, estates; In these sad
and woeful distractions, they look upon you as binders, and healers, and
standers in the gap, and repayrers of the wast-places; God has called you unto
an high and a great trust; and the sad distempers of the Church and State, the
distresses and desolations of Ireland, the doubts and fears, the shiverings
and convulsions of England, and in these two the interest of all the Protestant
Churches call upon you, like the man of Macedonia in Saint Paul's vision, Acts
16.9. Come and help us. Now in this great strait, when the children are come to
the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth, stir up the graces of God
in you, call together all that is within you to call upon his name, improve the
uttermost of your interests in him for the state of his Church, manage every
one of his gifts to the closing of those miserable breaches which threaten an
inundation of calamity upon us all; wisdom, and learning, and piety, and
prudence, are healing things: Remember (and O that God would put into the
hearts of this whole Kingdom, from the Throne to the Plow to remember) the
fate of a divided Kingdom from the mouth of truth it self; O that we would
all remember that misunderstandings, and jealousies, and divisions of heart are
an high evidence of Gods displeasure, and that through the wrath of the Lord of
Hosts, a Land is darkened, and as it were infatuated, when Manasse is against
Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasse, and every man eats the flesh of his
own Arm. Isa. 7.9.21. O let us all remember what it cost Shechem and
Abimelech, what it cost Benjamin, and the other Tribes, even the loss of
threescore and five thousand men: remember Priamus and his children will laugh,
Babylon will clap their hands and wag their head; no such time for Shishak the
Egyptian to trouble Jerusalem, as when Israel is divided. 2 Chronicles. 12.2. Let
it never be said of Gods own people, that they are fallen into the curse of
Midianites, and Ammorites, and Edomites, and Philistines to help forward the
destruction of one another. O that God would give this whole Nation hearts to
consider these things, that he would put a spirit of peace and resolved unity
into the minds of this whole people, to be true to their own happiness, and
by how much the greater are the subtilties of men to divide them, to be so much
the more firmly united in prayers to God, and in concord between themselves,
that they may not expose their persons, estates, posterities, and (which is
dearest of all) their Religion, to the crafty and bloody advantages of the
enemies of the Protestant Churches, who in humane view could have no way to
overthrow them, but by their own dissentions.

I have done with this point, and shall conclude all with a very few words of
the next, which is drawn from the scope and connection of the prayer suggested,
to the judgment threatened, It is this;

When temporal judgments are felt or feared, Sect. 19.
Gods people should pray for spiritual mercies; Humane sorrows cannot overcome
where the joy of the Lord is our strength. Thus the Lord seems to have taught
his Apostle, Bonus qui non tribuit quod volumus, ut tribuat quod malimus. Aug.
ep. 34.

Exdudiens Cardinem desiderii ejus, non curasti quod tune petebat, ut in
mesaceres quod semper pe^ebat. Conf. li. 5. c. 8.


he was under some pressing discomfort, the messenger of Satan sent to buffet
him, he prays for particular deliverance, and God answers him non ad
voluntatem sed ad utilitatem, implying a direction unto all such prayers, My
grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. When thou feel a thorn in thy
flesh, pray for grace in thy heart, the buffets of Satan, cannot hurt, where
the grace of God does suffice; so he directs in time of plague and famine, to
pray, and to seek his face, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. to look more after his favor than
our own ease; to be more solicitous for the recovering of his Love, than for
the removing of his Rod. This is a true character of a filial disposition. In
the way of thy judgments, even in that way, wherein wicked men fling thee off,
and give thee over, and quarrel with thee, and repine against thee, even in
the way of ^hy judgments do we wait for thee, and the desire of our soul is
more to thy Name, than to our own deliverance, Isa. 26.8. true Diciples follow
Christ, Joh. 6.29. Job 26.21.35.9, 10.
more for his Doctrine than his loaves, and are willing to choose rather
affliction than iniquity.

The grace and favor of God is life, Psalm. 30.5. better than life, Psalm. 63.3.
and therefore must needs be the most sovereign Antidote to preserve, and to
bear up the soul above all other discomforts, whereas if he be angry, no other
helps are able to relieve us. Brass and Iron can fence me against a Bullet or
a Sword, but if I were to be cast into a furnace of fire, it would help to
torment me, if into a pit of water, Heb. 12.29. Isa. 30 33.
it would help to sink me: Now our God is a consuming fire, and his breath a
stream of brimstone. Humane plasters can never cure the wounds which God
makes: where he is the Smiter, he must be the Healer too, Hos. 6.1. All the
Candles in a Country are not able to make day there, till the Sun come: and
all the contents of the world are not able to make comfort to the soul, till
the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings. In a Mine, if a damp
come, it is in vain to trust to your lights, they will burn blew, and dim,
and at last vanish, you must make haste to be drawn upward if you will be
safe. When God sharpneth an affliction with his displeasure, it is vain to
trust to worldly succors, your desires and affections must be on things above,
if you will be relieved. There is no remedy, no refuge from Gods anger, but to
Gods grace. Blood letting Calores ca^o ribus onerando deprimimus and sanguinis
fluxli desusa i^s^per venula revocamus. Tertul.
is a cure of bleeding, and a burn a cure against a burn; and running into Go^
is the way to escape him, as to close and get in (...) him that would strike
you, does avoid the blow. In a tempest at Sea, it is very dangerous to strike
to the shore, the safest way is to have Sea-roome, and to keep in the Main
still: there is no landing against any tempest of Gods judgments at any shore
of worldly or carnal policies, but the way is to keep with him still; if he be
with us in the Ship, the winds and the Sea will at last be rebuked.

This then should serve to humble us for our carnal prayers in times of
judgment, Sect. 20.
such as the hungry Raven, or the dry and gaping earth makes, when we assemble
our selves for Corn and Wine, for peace and safety, and be in the mean time
careless whether God receive us graciously or no. God much complains of it,
when he slew Israel, the ra^k made him rore, the rod made him flatter, but all
was to be rid of affliction: It was the prayer of nature for ease, not of the
Spirit for grace, for their heart was not right, Psalm. 78.34, 37. The like he
complains of after the Captivity: they fasted and prayed in the fifth month
(wherein the City and Temple had bin burned) and in the seventh month (wherein
Gedeliah had bin slain, Jer. 42.12.41.1.
and the remnant carried captive) but they did it not out of sincerity toward
God, but out of policy for themselves; and this he proves by their behavior
after their return. If you had indeed sought me, you would have remembered the
words of the Prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited before, and being returned,
would now have put them to practice. But Jerusalem inhabited after the
Captivity, is just like Jerusalem inhabited before the captivity; so that
from hence it appears, that all their weeping and separating was not for pious,
but politic reasons, Zach. 7.5, 6. And there is nothing under heaven more
hateful, or more reproachful unto God, than to make Religion serve turns, to
have piety lacquey and dance attendance, and be a drudge, and groom to private
ends, to make it a cloak to policy, a varnish to rotten wood, silver, dross
to a broken Potsheard.

O then when we weep and separate our selves, let us not think to mock God with
empty ceremonies of Repentance, let us not assemble our selves, only to flatter
away the rod from our back, and to get peace and security to our own persons,
and then let the favor of God, the power of his Grace, the comforts of his
Spirit be as unregarded as before: (as if we fasted and prayed only for our
backs and bellies, not for our Consciences or conversations) for be we well
assured, he who does not ask the things which he ought, shall not obtain the
things which he asks: such a prayer begs nothing but a denial.

We have now many fasts together, prayed for making up our breaches, for
reparing our ruins, for composing our distractions, for reducing this Kingdom
unto an happy constitution, for a right understanding between the King and his
great Council. These prayers we have not found yet return like Noah's Dove,
with an Olive branch, a gracious answer unto us again. What Is the reason?
Where Is the obstruction? Is not he a God that hears prayers? Is it not his
Title? Does he not glory in it? Certainly mercies stop not at God, but at us.
We are not straightened in him, but in our own bowels: If there come but a little
light into a room, the defect is not in the Sun, but in the narrowness of the
window; if a vessel fill but slowly, the fault is not any emptiness in the
Fountain, but the smallness of the pipe. If mercies ripen slowly, or stop at
any time in the way, it is not because they are unwilling to come to us, but
because we are unfit to enjoy them. Our prayers doubtless, in many of us, have
not been words taken from him, but from our own carnal dictates.

We would fain have things well in our Country, but have we hitherto looked
after our consciences? The destractions without us, have they driven us to
consider the distempers within, or to desire the things above? The unsetledness
of peace in the Kingdom, has it awakened us to secure our peace with God? We
would fain have better times, but have we yet labored for better hearts?
Semper dies mali in seculo, boni in Deo, Aug. in Psalm 33.
we would fain have a right understanding between the King and his great
Council, but have we yet sadly set about it, to have a more clear and sweet
Communion between us and our God? we long to see more good laws, but are we yet
come to the care of good lives? Every one cries out, Who will show us any good?
but how few think on the light of Gods countenance?

Hence, hence (Beloved) is the miscarriage of all our Prayers. If we would seek
gods Kingdom, we are promised other things by way of overplus and Accession, as
he that buyeth a Treasury of Jewels has the Cabinet into the Bargain. But when
we place our Kingdom in outward comforts, and let our daily bread shut out all
the other five petitions out of our prayers; no wonder if the promises of this
life, which are annexed unto Godliness, do not answer those prayers wherein
godliness is neglected. It were preposterous to begin the building of an house
at the Roof and not at the Foundation Piety is the foundation of prosperity. If
you would have your cheldrin like plants and like polished stones, your Garners
full, your Cattle plenteous, no complaining in your streets Psalm. 144.12.15.
Quidquid mihi praeter illum est; dulce non est, quicquid mihi vult dare Dominus
meus, auferat totum, and se mihi de^. Aug. Enarrat. 2. in Psalm. 26. Hic quod
vinum est non potest esse panis; quod tibi Lux est, non potest esse potus; Deus
(...) totum tibi ^rit. Manducabis Eum ne Esurias, bi^es Eum ne si^ias,
illuminaberis ab eo ne sis Cacus, fulcieris ab ^o, ne deficias. Ib. in Psalm. 36.
; If you would have the King happy, and the Church happy, and the State happy,
and peace and prosperity flourish again; Let our chief prayer be, Lord make us
a happy people by being our God. Give us thy self, thy grace, thy favor, give
us renewed hearts, and reformed lives; let not our sins confute, and outcry,
and belie our prayers, and pray them back again without an Answer: And when we
seek thee and thy Christ above all, we know that with him thou will freely give
us all other things. The spiritual good things which we beg, will either remove,
or shelter and defend us from the outward evil things which we suffer.

Secondly, this serves for an instruction unto us touching a sanctified use of
Gods judgments, or threatenings: when we learn obedience (as Christ did) by the
things which we suffer, Hebr. 5.8. when (...) are (...), that we are chastened
and taught together, Psalm. 94.12. when sufferings do quicken spiritual desires,
and the more troubles we find in our way, the more love we have to our Country:
when we can say, all this is come upon us, and yet we have not forgotten thee,
Sect. 21
Psalm. 44.17, 18. when we can serve God as well in plowing and breaking the
clods, as in treading out the Corn, Hos. 10.11. When with Jonah we can delight
in him even in the Whales belly, and suffer not our love of him to be quenched
with all the waters of the Sea. When we can truly say to him; Lord love me, and
then do what thou will unto me; let me feel thy r^d, rather then forfeit thine
affection: when we can look through the Anger of his chastisements unto the
Beauty of his Commands, and to the sweetness of his loving countenance, as by a
Rain bow we see the beautiful Image of the Suns-light in the middst of a dark
and waterish Cloud: when by how much the Flesh is the fuller of pain, by so
much prayers are fuller of spirit; by how much the heavier are our earthly
sufferings, by so much the stronger are our heavenly desires: when God
threatens punishments, and we pray for grace, this is a sanctified use of Gods
judgments. And this we should all be exhorted unto in the times of distraction,
to make it the principal argument of our prayers and study of our lives, to
obtain spiritual good things; and the less comfort we find in the world to be
the more importunate for the comforts of God, that by them we may encourage our
selves, as David did in his calamity at Ziglag, 1 Samuel 30.6. when the City
Shechem was beaten down to the ground, then the men and women fled to the
strong Tower and shut that upon them, Judge. 9.51. The name of the Lord is a
strong Tower, the Righteous fly to it and are safe, Prove. 18.18.

Herein we shall more honor God when we set him up in our hearts as our fear
and treasure, and mourn more toward him, then for the miseries we feel, and
suspire more after him, then all the outward contentment which we want.

Herein we shall more exercise Repentance, for it is worldly sorrow which
droopeth under the pain of the flesh, but godly sorrow is most of all affected
with the Anger of God.

Herein we shall more prevail with God, the more heavenly the matters of our
prayer are, the more prevalent they must needs be with an Heavenly Father; we
have five spiritual petitions unto one for bread; the more suitable our prayers
are to Gods will, the more easy access they will have to his ear. The Covenant
of grace turns precepts into promises, and the spirit of grace turns preceps
and promises into prayers. It is not Gods will that we should live without
afflictions, but our sanctification is Gods will, 1 These. 4.3. The more prayers
proceed from love, the more acceptable to the God of love; now prayer against
judgments proceeds from fear; but prayer for grace and favor proceeds from
love.

Lastly, hereby we shall more benefit our selves; Gods grace is much better
then our own ease; It gives us meekness to submit, It gives us strength to
bear, It gives us wisdom to benefit by our afflictions.

Gods favor is much better then our own ease, and is a recompense for
sufferings beyond all their evils. A man would be contented to be loaded with
gold, so he might have it for the bearing, though it be heavy, yet it is
precious, and Gods favor turns affliction into gold. If he gives quietness,
nothing can give trouble, Job 34.29. and if he keep back his grace and favor,
nothing can give peace; neither wealth, nor honors, nor pleasures, nor Crowns
nor all the world, with the fullness, or rather the emptiness thereof, nor can
do us any good at all. Any thing which will consist with the reign of lust,
with the guilt of sin, with the curse of the Law, with the wrath of God, with
horrors of conscience, and with the damnation of Hell, is too base to the called
the good of man. To do judgment, to ^^ve mercy, and walk humbly with God, this
is bonum hominis, the good of man, Mich. 6.8. to fear God, to keep his
Commandments, this is totum hominis, the whole end, and happiness of man,
Eccles. 12.13.

O then get Remission and Removal of sin, get this bonum hominis, the oil of
grace in your Lamps, the peace of God in your hearts, the streams of the Rivers
of God in your consciences, and then, though the earth be moved, and the
mountains shake, and the waters roar, what ever distractions, what ever
desolations happen, Impavidum ferient ruinae: thou shall find a Chamber in Gods
providence, a refuge in his promises, a Pavilion in the secret of his presence
to protect and to comfort thee above them all.

THE SECOND SERMON Upon HOSEAH. Chapter 14. Ver. 2.
Hos. 14.2.3. -- So will we render the Calves of our lips.

3 Asshur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say
to the work of our hands, ye are our gods, etc.


IN the whole Context we have before observed two general parts. Isreal's
prayer, and Isreal's promise. The Prayer we have handled, and do now proceed
unto the promise, wherein are two things to be considered. 1. The Covenant
self. 2. The ground upon which they make it, Gods mercy to the fatherless.
First then of the Covenant, wherein they promise two things, 1. Thanksgiving
for Gods hearing and Answering of their prayers. 2. A special care for
Amendment of their lives.

Pro (...) legisse videntur (...)
We will render the a Calves of our lips] The Apostle out of the Septuagint
reads it, The a fruit of our lips. Hebr. 13.15. It is the use of the Scripture
to describe spiritual duties by expressions drawn from Ceremonies and usages
under the Law, as Repentance is called washing, Isa. 1.16. and prayer, incense.
Psalm. 141.2. Rev. 5.8. and the Rev. 3.18.7.14. Psalm. 32.9. Exodus 28.2. Zach.
3.4. Psalm. 45.8.
rigteousness of Saints, fine linen (being an allusion to the garments of the
Priests) Rev. 19.8. and Vid. Reynolds Conference with Heart. cap. 8. Divis. 4.
and Aquin. in Heb. 13.10.

Ha^emus altar corpus viz. Christi. Hesych in Levit. li. 1. cap. 4.


Christ an Altar, whereby both our persons, and services are sanctified, and
accepted. Heb. 13.10. Romans 12.1. 1 Pet. 2.5. Isa. 56.7. Thus here, the
spiritual sacrifices of praise are called Calves, to show the end of all
sacrifices which were Vid. Tertul. contr. Iudaeos. cap. 5.6. and de oratione
cap. 1. Aug. de civ. Dei lib. 10. cap. 5. and Epist. 49.
ordained for the stirring up of spiritual affections, and praises unto God,
and also to intimate the vanity of Ceremonial without Real services. The beast
on the Altar was but a Carnal, but the faith of the heart, and the confession
of the mouth was a Reasonable sacrifice. No point more insisted on in the
Prophets then this. Isa. 1.15. Mich. 6.6, 7, 8. Amos 4.4, 5.5.2.1. Psalm
50.13.15.69.30, 31. etc. They had idolatrously dishonored God with their
Calves of Dan and Bethel, and they had carnally and superstitiously placed all
worship and holiness in the Calves of the Altar: but now they resolve to
worship God neither politickly, after humane inventions, nor perfunctorily,
with mere outward ceremonies, but spiritually, and from inward affections. For
the lips are moved by the heart.

Now Thanksgiving is further called the Calves or sacrifices of the lips, to
intimate, that after all Gods rich mercies upon us, in pardoning our sins, and
in multiplying his grace, and spiritual comforts upon us, we, like Beggars,
have nothing to return but the bare acknowledgments and praises of our lips,
words for wonders: And those words too his own gifts, we cannot render them to
him, before we have received them from him. Psalm. 116.12, 13. Matthew. 12.34. 1 Chronicles. 29.16.

Asshur shall not save us] Unto the general confession of sin intimated in
those words, Sect. 2.
Take away All Iniquity, here is added a particular detestation of their
special sins, with a Covenant to forsake them, lest waxing wanton with pardon
and grace, they should relapse into them again. The sum is to confess the
vanity of carnal confidence, betaking it self to the aid of men, to the
strength of horses, to the superstition of Idols for safety and deliverance.
All which they are now at last by their experience, and by their Repentance
taught to abandon, as things which indeed cannot, and therefore they are
resolved shall not save them.

By the Assyrian is here intimated All Humane succor procured by sinful
correspondence, by a Synecdoche of the part for the whole. But he is
particularly mentioned, 1. Because he was the chief Monarch of the world, to
show, that the greatest worldly succors are vain, when they are relied up on
without, or against God. 2. Because the Scripture takes notice often of it as
their particular sin, the sending unto, relying upon, and paying tribute unto
him for aid and assistance. Hos. 5.13.7, 11, 12. 2 Reg. 15.19, 20. 3. Because
instead of helping, he did greatly afflict them. Their flying to him was like a
birds flying into a snare, or a fishes avoiding the pole wherewith the water is
troubled, by swimming into the net. 2 Reg. 15.29. Hos. 13.4.

By Horses we are to understand the military preparations and provisions which
they made for themselves, both at home, and from Egypt, 2 Chro. 1.16. Isa.
31.1.

By the work of their Hands are meant their Idols which were beholding to their
hands for any shape or beauty that was in them. The same hands which formed
them, were afterward lifted up in worship unto them, Isa. 44.10.17.46.6, 7, 8.
Ier. 10.3.15.6.20. Act. 19.26. Time was when we said these are our Gods which
brought us up out of Egypt, Exodus 32.4. 1 Kings 12.28. but now we will not say
so any more, for how can a man be the maker of his Maker?

For in thee the fatherless finds mercy.] This is the ground of their
petition for pardon and grace, and of their promise of praises and Amendment,
Gods mercy in hearing the prayers, and in enabling the performances of his
people. It is a Metaphor drawn form orphans in their minority, who are 1
Destitute of wisdom and abilities to help themselves. 2 Exposed to violence
and injuries. Orphano trophi sunt qui pare tibus atque sunstantiis d^^tit^tos
minores sustentant and educant velut aff^^ctione pattern. Cod. de Episa, and
Cleric. l. 1* c. Tit. 3. ^eg. 32 and 35
3 Committed for that reason to the care of Tutors and Guardians to govern and
protect them. The Church here acknowledges her self an outcast, destitude of
all wisdom and strength within, of all succor and support from without, and
therefore betaketh her self solely unto Gods tuition, whose mercy can and
uses to help when all other help fails.

This is the last Link of that golden Chain of Repentance made up of these
gradations. 1 An humble Address unto God. 2 A penitent confession of sin. 3 An
earnest petition against it. 4 An imploring of grace and favor. 5 Thanksgiving
for so great benefits. 6 A Covenant of new obedience, and lastly, a confidence
and quiet repose in God.

Sect. 3.
Let us now consider what useful observations the words thus opened will afford
unto us. And one main point may be collected from the general scope of the
place. We see after they have petitioned for pardon and grace, they then
restipulate and undertake to perform duties of thankfulness and obedience.

True penitents in their conversion from sin, and humiliation for it, do not
only pray unto God for mercy, but do further Covenant to express the fruits
of those mercies in a thankful and obedient conversation. When first we are
admitted into the family and household of God, we enter into a Covenant.
Therefore Circumcision, whereby the children of the Jews were first sealed and
separated for God, is caled His Covenant, Genesis 17.13. because therein God did
covenant to own them, and they did in the figure covenant to mortify lust, and
to serve him, without which they were in his fight but uncircumcised still.
Visitabo super omne^ populos incircumcisos. Versio Chald. (...). Septuag.
I will punish says the Lord all those that are circumcised in uncircumcision
(so the original runs, Ier. 9.25.) and the Nations there mentioned with Judah,
who are said to be uncircumcised, did yet Herodot. l. 2. Ar^apanus apud Eusebius.
de praeparat. Evang. l. 9. c. 27. Orig. in Romans l. 2. cap. 2. Cyprian de
ratione Circumcis. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1. Pierii Hieroglyph. li. 6. Pe^er. in
Genesis 17.13. Valles. de Sacra philosophia.
use circumcision as the Learned have observed, but being out of covenant with
God it is accounted to them as uncircumcision, and so was that of the Jews too
when they did break Covenant with God. Romans 2.28.29. Act. 7.51. And as the
Gentiles being converted are called Jews, and said to be born in Sion, Gal.
6.16. 1 Cor. 12.2. Psalm. 87.4, 5^ So the Jews living impenitently are called
Cameron. de Eccles. pa. 34. Nec hoc novum Scripturis sigrate u^i translatione
nominum, ex comparatione criminum, etc. Tertul. contr. Judaeos c. 8. and cont.
Marcion. li. 3. c. 8. Deodati. Heinsius.
Gentiles, Cananites, Amorites, Hittites, Ethiopians, Sodomites. Ezekiel. 16.3.
Hos. 12.7. Amos 9.7. Isa. 1.10. In like manner Baptism among Christians is
called by the Apostle (...), which the Learned interpret the Answer or Covenant
of keeping a good conscience toward God. 1 Pet. 3.21. the word signifies a
Question or Interrogation, which some would have to be the consciences making
interpellation for it self to God; others to be as much as (...), the examining
of a man's self, like that before the Lords Supper, 1 Corinthians. 11.28. I rather
take it as an Allusion to the manner of John's Baptism, wherein the people
first confessed, and consequently renounced sin, and being taken into Christ's
service, or into that Kingdom of God which was at hand, did enquire after the
work which they were to do. And we find the same word in Luke, cap. 3.10.
which the Apostle Peter uses, (...), The people asked him saying, what shall
we do? whereby is intimated, An engaging of themselves by a solemn promise and
undertaking, to the practice of that Repentance unto which John baptized them.
Aug. lib. de fide and operibus c. 9. Tertul. ad martyrs, c. 2. and 3. and de
coron. Milit. ca. 3. and 13. de Habitu. mulieb. c. 2 de spectacul. ca. 24. and
lib. de Idolatria. Apol^ c. 38. Interrogatio legitima and Ecclesiastica.
Firmilian. apud Cyprian. ep. 75. and ib. ep. 70. and 76. Salvian. li^ 6. cod.
de Episcop. Audient. l. 34. Sect. 1. Vid. Danaeum in Aug. Enchirid. cap. 42.
and Brisson. L. Dominic. de spectac. Joseph. vicecomit. de Antiquit. Baptis.
li. 2. Gatak. of Lots. p. 319. Espen. in Tit. digres. 9. Verbis obligatio
contrahitur ex interrogatione and responsu. ff. de obligationibus and Action.
L. 1. Sect. 7. and de verborum obligat. L. 5. Sect. 1.
Whence arose that grave form of the Ancient Churches, wherein Questions were
proposed to the person baptized touching his faith, and Repentance, Renouncing
the world, the flesh, and the devil, with a solemn Answer and stipulation
obliging thereunto. Which custom seems to have been derived from the practice
used in the Apostles time, wherein profession of faith, unfeigned, and sincere
Repentance was made before Baptism. Act. 2.38.8.37.163.3.19.4. This is the
first dedicating of ou^ selves, and entering into a covenant with God, which we
may call in the Prophets expression, the subscribing, or giving a man's name to
God. Isa. 44.5.

Now the Covenant between us and God being perpetual, a De pacto Salis, vid.
Paul. Fagi. in Levit. 2. and Pererium in Genesis 19.16.17.26. Stuck. Antiquit.
Con. viv. l. 1. c. 30. Sal duraturae amicitiae symbolum. Pierius lib. 31.
Covenant of salt, Ier. 32.40. 2 Chronicles. 13.5. As we are to begin it in our
Baptism, so we are to continue it to our lives end, and upon all fit occasions
to repeat, and renew it for our further quickening and remembrancing unto
duties. So did David, Psalm. 119.106. so Jacob, Genesis 28.20, 21, 22. so Asa and
the people in his time, 2 Chronicles. 15.12.15. so Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.10.30.5.23.
so Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32. so Ezra, and Nehemiah, Ezra. 10.3. Nehem. 9.38.

. 4.
The Reasons enforcing this duty may be drawn from several considerations. 1.
From God in Christ, where two strong obligations occur, namely, the
consideration of his dealing with us, and of our Relation unto him. For the
former, He is pleased not only to enter into Covenant with us, but to bind
himself to the performance of what he promises. Though what ever he bestow
upon us in all matter of mere, and most free grace, wherein he is no debtor to
us at all, yet he is pleased to bind himself unto Acts of Grace. Men love to
have all their works of favor free, and to reserve to themselves a power of
alteration or revocation, as themselves shall please. But God is pleased that
his gifts should take upon them in some sense the Dignaris eis quibus omnia
debita dimittis, etiam pro^issionibus tuis debtor fieri. Aug. Conf. l. 5. c.
9. Non ei aliquid dedimus, and tenemus debitorem. Vnde debitorem? quia
promissor est. non dicimus Deo, Domine read quod accepisti, sed read quod
promisisti, Aug. in Psalm. 32. Cum promissum Dei redditur Iustitia Dei dicitur.
Iustitia enim Dei est quia redditum est quod promissu^ est, Ambros. in Romans ^.
Iustu^ est ut reddat quod debet. Debet autem quod pollicitus est. (...) hac est
Iustitia de qua praesumit Apostolus promissio D^i, Bern. de great. and lib.
Arbit. Licet Deus debi^um alicui det, non tamen est ipse debtor, quia ipse ad
alia non ordinatur, sed potius alia ad ipsum, and ideo justitia quandoque
dicitur in Deo Condecentia suae bonitatis, Aquin. part. 1. qu. 21. art. 1.
Nulla alia in Deo ^ustitia nisi ad se quasi ad alterum, ut sibi ipsi debitum
reddat secundum condecenc^a^ b^nitatis, and ^e^^ibidinem voluntatis suae,
Scotus 4. did. 46. qu. 1.
condition of Debts, and although he can owe nothing to the creature ( Romans
11.35. Job 22.3.35.7.8.) yet he is contented to be a debtor to his own promise,
and having at first in mercy made it, his truth is after engaged to the
performance of it. Mic. 7.20.

Again, His word is established in heaven, with him there is no variablenes,
nor shadow of change, his promises are not yea and nay, but in Christ Amen. 2
Cor. 1.20. if he speak a thing it shall not fa^le. Josh. 21.45. He spoke and
the world was made, His word alone is a foundation and bottom to the Being of
all his Creatures: And yet, notwithstanding the immutable certainty of his
promises, when they are first uttered, for our sakes he is pleased to bind
himself by further ties. Free mercy secured by a Covenant, and a Quid est Dei
very veracisque Iuratio nisi promissi confirmatio, and infidelium quaedam
increpatio? Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 32.
firm covenant secured by an Oath. Deat. 7.12. Luke 1.72, 73. Heb. 6.17, 18.
that we, who like Gedeon, are apt to call for sign upon sign, and to stagger
and be disheartened, if we have not double security from God, we whose
doubting calls for promise upon promise, as our Ignorance does for precept upon
precept, may by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible for God to lie,
have strong consolation. Now if God, whose gifts are free, bind himself to
bestow them by his promise: If God, whose promises are sure, bind himself to
perform them by his oath: How much more are we bound to tie our selves by
covenant unto God, to do those things which are our duty to do, unto the
doing whereof we have such infirm principles as are a mutable will, and an
unstedfast heart.

For the latter, our relation unto him, we are His, not only by a property
founded in his sovereign power and dominion over us, as our Maker, Lord, and
Savior. Psalm. 100.3. 1 Cor. 6.19.20. but by a property growing out of our own
voluntary consent, whereby we surrender, and yield, and give up our selves unto
God. Romans 6.19. 2 Cor. 8.5. we are not only his people, but his willing
people, by the intervention of our own consent. Emittere manum est cautionem
sive chirographum dare. ff. de probat. and praesumpt. I* 15. Iunge ergo manus,
and concipe foedus. Statius.

Heus ubi pacta fides, commissaque dextera dextrae. Ovid. Justitian. Institut.
de verbo^u^ obligat. Sect. 1. I. 3. ff. de obligat. and Action. Sect. 2.


Psalm. 110.3. We give him our hand (as the expression is, 2 Chronicles. 30.8.) which
is an allusion to the manner of Covenants or engagements. Prove. 6.1.17, 18.
Ezekiel. 17.18. We offer up our selves as a free oblation, Romans 15, 16. and are
thereupon called a kind of first fruits. Iam. 1.18. We are His, as the wife is
her Husbands. Hos. 2.19. Ezekiel. 16.8. Now such an interest as this ever
presupposes a contract. As in ancient forms of stipulation there was Asking
and Answering. Spondes? Spondeo. Promittis? Promitto. Dabis? Dabo. As in
contract of Marriage the mutual consent is asked and given, Genesis 24.58. so it
is here between God and the soul, the covenant is mutual, Genesis 17.2. He
promises mercy, to be our exceeding great reward, and we promise obedience,
to be his willing people, and usually according as is the proportion of
strength in our faith to believe Gods promises of mercy to us, such is also the
proportion of care in our obedience to perform our promises of duty unto him.

II. From our selves. Sect. 5.
And here Covenants are needful in two respects. 1. In regard of the falsenes,
and deceitfulnes of our corrupt hearts in all spiritual duties. The more
cunning a Sophister is to evade an argument, the more close and pressing we
frame it. The more vigilant a prisoner to make an escape, the stronger guard we
keep upon him. Our hearts are exceeding apt to be false with God. One while
they melt into promises and Resolutions of obedience, as Pharaoh, and Israel
did, Inversa occasion ebullire saniem quae latebat in ulcere, and excisam non
extirpatam arborem in sylvam pullulare videas densiorem. Bern. Sermon. 2. in
Assum. Mariae:
Psalm. 78.34.37. and presently forget, and harden again. Lots wife goes out of
Sodom for fear of the judgments, but quickly looks back again, out of love to
the place, or some other curiosity and distemper of mind. Saul relents toward
David, and quickly after persecutes him again. 1 Samuel 24.17.19. This is the
true picture of man's Heart, under a strong conviction, or in a pang of
devotion, or in time either of sickness, or some pressing affliction, on the
Rack, in the furnace, under the r^d, nothing then but vows of better obedience;
all which do oftentimes dry sudenly away like a morning dew, and whither away
like Ionahs gourd. Therefore both to accknowledge, and prevent this miserable
perfideousnesse of such Revolting Hearts; it is very needful to bind them
unto God with renewed Covenants, and since they are so apt with Jonah to run
away and start aside, to neglect Nineveh and to flee to Tarssish, necessary it
is to find them out and to bring them home, and as David did, Psalm. 57.7. to
fix and fasten them to their business, that they may not run away any more.

2. In regard of the natural sluggishnesse which is in us unto duty. We are
apt to faint and be weary when we meet with any unexpected difficulties in Gods
service, to esteem the wilderness as bad as Egypt, to sit down as Hagar did,
and cry, to think that half way to heaven is far enough, and Almost a
Christian, progress enough, that baking on one side will make the cake good
enough, that God will accept of bankrupt-payment, a noble in the pound, part of
our hearts and duties for all. Masora sepes legi: Decimae divitiis: vo^a
sanctimoniae; silentium sapientiae, Pirke Aboth.
We must sometimes venture to leap the hedge, for there is a Lion in the way.
Now to correct this Torpor, this Acedia, and (...), as the Apostles calls it. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. this pusilanimitie, and faint-heartednesse in Gods service, we
must bind them on our selves with renewed Covenants, and put to the more
strength because of the bluntness of the Iron. Eccles. 10.10. A Covenant does
as it were twist the cords of the Law, and double the precept upon the soul.
When it is only a precept, then God alone commands it, but when I have made it
a promise, then I command it and bind it upon my self. The more feeble our
hands and knees are, the more care we should have to bind and strengthen them,
that we may lift them up speedily, and keep them straight. Hebr. 12.12, 13. and
the way hereunto is to come to David's resolution, I have purposed that my mouth
shall not transgress. Psalm. 17.3. Empty velleities, wishings, and wouldings
will not keep weak faculties together. Broken bones must have strong bands to
close them fast again. A crazie piece of building, must be cramped with Iron
bars to keep it from tottering. So if we would indeed cleave to the Lord, we
must bring purposes of Heart, and strong resolutions to enable us thereunto.
Act. 11.23. Cleaving will call for swearing. Deuteronomy. 10.20. As it should be our
prayer, so also our purpose, to have hearts united to fear Gods Name. Psalm.
86.11. whence the phrases of preparing, fixing, confirming, establishing,
rooting, grounding, and other like, so frequently occurring in the Scripture. 2 Chronicles. 30.19 1 Chronicles. 29.18. Ephesians. 3.17. Heb. 13.9. Iam. 5.8.

III. From our Brethren, Sect. 6.
that by an holy Association and spiritual confederacy in heavenly
resolutions, every man's example may quicken his brother, and so duties be
performed with more vigor and fervencie, and return with the greater
blessings. If fire be in an whole pile of wood, every stick will burn the
brighter, the greenest wood that is will take fire in so general a flame. Men
usually have more courage in the body of an Army, where concurrent shoutings
and encouragements do as it were infuse mutual spirits into one another, then
when they are alone by themselves. David rejoiced in but recounting the
companies and armies of Gods people when they went up to Jerusalem in their
solemn feasts. Psalm. 84.7. And therefore most Covenants in Scripture were
general, and public, solemnly entered into by a great body of people, as that
of Asa, Josiah, and Nehemiah, the forwardness of every man whetting the face
of his neighbor. Prove. 27.17.

IV. From the multitudes, strength, vigilancie, malice, Sect. 7.
assiduous attempts of all our spiritual enemies, which call upon us for the
stronger and more united Resolutions. For common adversaries usually gain more
by our faintness, and divisions, then by their own strength (...). Dionys.
Halicarnass l. 10. (...). Polyb l 6. Vid. Veget de re Milit lib 2. Tertul. de
Corona mil. c. 11. L. 2. ff de his qui notan^ur infami^ ^ect. Miles and notas
Go^ho^tidi in L. 2. ff de Veteranis. Lipsu not a^ li. 15. Annal Tacit praemia
nunc alia atque alla emolumenta notemus Sacramentorum. Iuvenal. Satyr. 16.
Lips. de Milit. R^m. lib. 1. Dial. 6
. Therefore Soldiers use to take an oath of fidelity toward their Country,
and service. And Live lib 35. Appi^n. in Iberico and Lybico. Pol. b. li 3.
Tertul Apolog. c^. 8 Florus lib. 4.
Hannibals Father made him take a solemn oath to maintain perpetual Hostility
with Rome. Such an Vid. Tertul de Coron Milit. ca. 11.
Oath have all Christ's Soldiers taken, and do at the Lords Supper, and in
solemn humiliations, virtually renew the same, never to hold intelligence or
correspondence with any of his enemies.

The first thing in a Christian man's Armor mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians.
6.14. is the Cingere est militare, apud Plaut. omnes qui militant c^^ctisunt.
Servius in li 8 Enead unde Cingulum marti sacrum test^ Homero Iliad 2. Et stare
discinctum erat paenae mili atis genus ^ue^on in (...) v^d l. 2^.38 and 43. ff
de Testamento militis Suidae (...) un^^ dicitur Deus B^l^eum regum dissolvere.
Job 12.18 Vid Stuck. Antiq. co^viv li. 2 c 19 and Pined in Job 12.18. Tolet.
Annot 62. in Luc. 12.
Girdle, that which binds on all the other Armor (for so we read of girding on
Armor, Judge. 18.11. 1 King. 20.11.) and that there, is Truth. Which we may
understand either doctrinally, for steadfastness and stability of judgment in
the doctrine of Christ which we profess, not being carried about with every
wind of doctrine, but holding fast the form of sound words, knowing whom we
believe, and having certainty of the things wherein we have been instructed, (
Ephesians. 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.12, 13. Luke 1.4.) or else Morally and practically, for
steadfastness of Heart in the faithful discharge of those promises which we
have made unto God, (for so faithfulness is compared to a Girdle, Isa. 11.5.)
whereby we are preserved from shrinking and tergiversation, in times of trial,
and in our spiritual warfare. And this faithfulness the more it is in solemn
Covenants renewed, the stronger it must needs be, and the better able to bind
all our other Arms upon us. Christ's enemies will enter into Covenants, and
combinations against him, and his Church, Psalm. 2.1, 2.64.5, 6.83.5-8. Act.
23.12. Ier. 11.9. And our (...), Dion de Catilina, li. 37. Ita se ad Romanae
sedis obedientiam obligant Archi^piscopi, cum pallium acc^piunt. Decret. Greg.
de election. ca. significa and ad Confilii Tridentini doctrinam Jesuitae in
voto professionis. Hospin. Hist Jesuit fol. 57. and Hubaldus quidam apud
Augustinum juravit se nec matri n^c fratribus necessaria subministraturum. C.
22 quaest. 4. cap. Inter caetera. vid. Eusebius Hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 8.
own lusts within us, will many times draw from us oaths and obligations to the
fulfilling of them, and make them Vincula Iniquitatis, contrary to the nature
of an oath. 1 King. 19.2. Mar. 6.23. How much more careful should we be to bind
our selves unto God, that our Resolutions may be the stronger, and more united
against so many and confederate Enemies?

This point serves, Sect. 8.
1. for a ^ust reproof of those who are so far from entering into Covenant
with God, that indeed they make Covenants with Satan his greatest enemy, and do
in their conversations as it were abuse those promises, and blot out that
subscription, and te^r off that seal of solemn profession which they had so
often set unto the Covenant of obedience. Such as those in the Prophets time
who were at an agreement with hell and the grave. Isa. 28.15. Men are apt to
think that none but witches are in covenant with the devil, because such are
in the Scripture said to consult with familiar spirits. Deuteronomy. 18.11. But as
Samuel said to Saul, Rebellion is as witchcraft. 1 Samuel 15.23. Every stubborn
and presumptuous sinner has so much of witchcraft in him, as to hold a kind of
spiritual compact with the devil. We read of the Serpent and his seed, Genesis
3.15. of the Dragon and his soldiers, Rev. 12.7. of some sinners being of
A^terius esse non possunt ^isi diabol. quae D^i n^n sunt. Tert. de Idol^l. cap.
18. and de Habit* mulieb. c. 8. de cultu s^e min. cap. 5. Ne^^o i^ custra
host^um transit nisi projectu d^ mis, nisi d^sti^utis sig^ ^ and Sacramentis
principis sui, nisi pactus simul perire. Tertul. de spectac. ca. 24.
the devil, animated by his principles, and actuated by his will and commands,
1 Ioh. 3.8. 2 Timothy 2.26. Satan tempting, and sinners embracing and admitting
the temptation upon the inducements suggested, has in it the resemblance of a
covenant or compact. There are mutual agreements and promises as between
Master and Servant, one requiring work to be done, and the other expecting
wages to be paid for the doing of it. As in buying and selling one bargains to
have a commodity, and the other to have a price valuable for it. Thus we read
in some places of the service of sin, Ioh. 8.34. Romans 6.16. 2 Pet. 2.19. and in
others of the wages belonging unto that service. Heb. 11.25. 2 Pet. 2.15. Iud.
v. 11^ and elsewhere of the Covenant* bargain and sale for the mutual securing
of the service, and of the wages* 1 Reg. 21.^5. Wicked men sell themselves,
chaffer and grant away their time, and strength, and wit, and abilities, to be
at the will and disposal of Satan, for such profits, Mane p^ger ster^is,
surge, inquit avaritia, ^^a surge, negas, instat surge inquit; non qu^o, surge.
Pers. Satyr. 5.
pleasures, honors, advantages, as are laid in their way to allure them, and
thus do as it were with cords bind themselves unto sin. Prove. 5.22. Ahab bought
Naboths vineyard of the devil, and sold himself for the price in that
purchase. Balaam against the light of his own conscience, and the many
discoveries of Gods dislike, never gives over his endeavors of cursing Gods
people till he had drawn them into a snare by the Midianitish woman, and all to
this end, that he might at last overtake the wages of iniquity which he ran so
greedily after. Num^. 22.^5: ^1. Numb. 23.1.14.29. Numb. 31.16. Mic. 6.5. Rev.
1.14. 2 Pet. 2.15. Iesabel binds her self by an oath unto murder. 1 Kin. 19.2.
Judas makes a bargain for his Masters blood, and at once sels a soul, and a
Savior, for so base a price as thirty pieces of silver. Matthew. 26.15. Profane
Esau, make merchandise of his bir^hright, (whereunto belonged the inheritance,
or double portion, the princely power, and the office of priesthood, the
blessings, Vt Lysimachu^ se ob f^^g^dae p^t^m hostibus ^edit. Plutar. lib. de
tuenda sanitate.
the excellency, and the government. Genesis 49.4. 2 Chronicles. ^9.3.) all which he
parts with for one morsel of meat. Heb 12.16. being therein a type of all those
profane wretches, who deride the ways of godliness, and promises of
salvation, drowning themselves in sensual delights, and esteeming Heaven and
Hell, salvation and perdition but as the vain notions of melancholy men;
having no other God but their belly* or their gain. Phil. 3.19. 1 Timothy 6.5.

So much monstrous wickedness is there in the hearts of men, that they add
spurs and whips unto an horse which of himself r^sheth into the battle: when
the tide of their own lusts, the stream and current of their own headstrong
and impetuous affections do carry them too swiftly before, they yet hoise up
sail, and as it were spread open their hearts to the winds of tempt^tion,
precipitating, and urging on their natural lusts by voluntary engagements;
tying themselve yet faster to misery then Adam by his fall had ^^ed them, and
making themselves not by nature only, but by compact the children of wrath.
One makes beforehand a bargain for drunkenness, another contrives a meeting
for uncleanness, a third enters into a combination for robbery and cozenage; a
fourth makes an oath of revenge and malice, like Ananias and Saphira, they
agree together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord. Act. 5.9. Like Sampsons Foxes,
join together with firebrands to set the souls of one another on fire, as if
they had not title enough to Hell, except they bargained for it anew, and bound
themselves as it were by solemn obligations not to part with it again.

O that every presumptuous sinner who thus sels himself to do wickedly, would
s^riously consider those sad encumbrances that go along with this his purchase.
Those who would have estates to continue in such or such a succession as
themselves had preintended, have sometimes charged curses and execrations upon
those who should alienate, or go about to alter the property and condition of
them. These many times are causlesse curses, and do not come: But if any man
will needs make bargains with Satan, and be buying of the pleasures of sin, he
must know that there goes a curse from heaven along with such a purchase, which
will make it at the last but a (...), a sweet Bitter, like John's Roll which was
sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly; like Claudius his mushrome
pleasant, but Nemo venenum temperat selle and elleboro, sed conditis pulmentis,
and b^ne sa^oratis, and plurimum ^ulcibus id mali inj^cit. Tertul. de specta.
c. 27. Insusum del^ctabili cib^ bol^torum v^n^num. Tacit. Annal. li. 12.
poison, that will blast all the pleasures of sin, and turn all the wages of
iniquity in Vid. A Gell. lib. 3. ca. 9. Omni^ ^ll^ se^ sorti^, seu honesta, seu
sonora, seu canora, seu subtilia pro^nde habe ac si still cidia mellis de
^^batu^^u^o ventuato, nec ^anti gulam sacias voluptatis quanti peritu^um.
Tertul. Ibid.
Aurum tholosanum, into such gold as ever brought destruction to the owners of
it. It is said of Cm Seius, that he had a goodly horse which had all the
perfections that could be named for stature, feature, color, strength, limbs,
comeliness belonging to a horse, but withal this misery ever went along with
him, that whosoever became owner of him was sure to die an unhappy death. This
is the misery that always accompanies the bargain of sin, How pleasant, how
profitable, how advantageous soever it may seem to be unto flesh and blood, it
has always calamity in the end, it ever expires in a miserable death Honey is
very sweet, but it turns into the bitterest choler. The valley of Sodom was one
of the most delightful places in the world, but is now become a dead and a
standing lake. Let the life of a wicked man run on never so fluently, it has a
mare mortuum at the dead end of it. O then, when thou art making a Covenant
with sin, say to thy soul as Boaz said to his kinsman Ruth, 4.^, 5. At what
time thou buyest it, thou must have Ruth the Moabitesse with it. If thou will
have the pleasure^, the rewards, the wages of iniquity, thou must also have
the curse and damnation that is entaild upon it; and let thy soul answer which
he there does, No, I may not do it, I shall mar and spoil a better
Inheritance.

II. This may serve for an Instruction unto us touching the duties of solemn
Humiliation and Repentance, Sect. 9.
which is the scope of the Prophets direction in this place. We must not think
we have done enough when we have made general Acknowledgements and confessions
of sin, and begged pardon and grace from God; but we must withal further bind
our selves fast unto God by engagements of new obedience, as holy men in the
Scripture have done in their more solemn addresses unto God. Nehem. 9.38.
Psalm. 51.12, 13, 14, 15. for without amendment of life prayers are but howlings
and abominations. Hose. 7.14. Prove. 28.9. Quantum a praeceptis tantum ab
auribus Dei long sumus. Tertul. de orat. cap. 10.
No obedience, no audience. A beast will roar when he is beaten; but men when
God punishes should not only cry, but covenant.

Unto the performance whereof that we may the better apply our selves, Duorum
pluriumve in idem placitum consensus. Vlpian. L. 1. ff. de pactis unde mutua ex
f^le data and accepta oritur obligatio. Voluntatis est suscipere necessitatis
consummare. Paul. Leg 17. ff. Commodati.
let us a little consider the nature of a Religious Covenant. A Covenant is a
mutual stipulation, or a giving and receiving of faith between two parties,
whereby they do unanimously agree in one inviolable sentence or resolution.
Such a covenant there is between God and true believers, He giving himself as a
Reward unto them, and they giving themselves as servants unto him. He willing
and requiring the service, and they ^illing and consenting to the Reward; He
promising to be their God, and they to be His people. Heb. 8.10. A notable
expression of with joint and mutual stipulation we have, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Thou
have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to
keep his statutes and his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto
his voice: and the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people,
as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his Commandments.
And to make thee high above all Nations which he has made in praise, and in
name, and in honor: and that thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy
God as he has spoken. Where we have both the mutual expressions of intimate
relation one to another, and the mutual engagements unto universal obedience
on the one side, and unto high and precious benefits on the other, growing out
of that Relation. For because God is mine, I am bound to serve him: and because
I am his, He has bound himself to provide for me. We are not now to consider
that part of the Covenant which stands in Gods promise to be our God (which
in general imports thus much, Gods giving himself in Christ unto us, and
together with Christ, All other goods things. Benefits relative, in
justification from sin, and Adoption unto sons. Benefits Habitual, A new
nature by Regeneration, A new heart and life by sanctification. A quiet
conscience by peace and comfort. Benefits Temporal, in the promises of this
life. Benefits eternal, in the glory of the next. Thus is Christ made of God
unto us, wisdom, in our vocation, converting us unto faith in him. Righteousness
in our justification, reconciling us unto his Father. Sanctification in our
conformity unto him in grace, and Redemption from all evils or enemies which
might hate us here, and unto All Glory which may fill and everlastingly
satisfy us hereafter. 1 Cor. 1.30. But we are now to consider of the other
part of the Covenant which concerns our engagement unto God, wherein we
promise both our selves, and our abilities unto him, to be His people, and to
do him service.

The material cause of this Covenant is whatsoever may be promised unto God,
Sect. 10.
and that is first our persons, Secondly our service. Our persons. We are
thine. Isa. 63.19. Giving our own selves to the Lord. 2 Cor. 8.5. Servi pro
nullis haben^ur. L. 1. F. d^ Jure de liberandi and L. 32 de Regulis juris. Sunt
Res Domini, and quicquid acquirunt Domino ac^uirunt. Instit. lib. 1 Tit. 8 and.
Leg. 1 de ^is qui sui aut alieni Juris sunt. ff. Lib. 1 and lib. 41. c. 10.
Sect 1. Nihil suum habere possunt Instit. li. 2. T. 9 non debent saluti
dominorum suam anteponere. D. 1. Sect. 28. ff. de Sepatusconsulto Silaniano.
Xerxis servi exo^ta tempestate in mare desiliuni ut Demini sui salu^i
consulant. Heredot. lib. 8. Socrati cum multa multi pro suis facultatibus
efferrent. Aes^hines pauper Auditor, nihil inquit dignum te quod dare tibi
possim inve^io, and hoc uno much pauperem me esse sentio. Itaque dono tibi quod
unum habeo, Meipsum, He^ munus rogo quale^unqu^ est boni consulas, cogitesque
alios cum mulium tibi darent, plus sidi reliquisse* Seneca de Benef. li. 1.
cap. 8.
not esteeming our selves our own: but his that bough^ us. 1 Cor. 6.19. and
being willing that he which bought us, should have the property in us, and the
possession of us, and the dominion over us, and the liberty to do what he
pleases with us. Being contented to be lost to our selves, that we may be
found in him. Phil. 3.9. If sin or Satan call for our tongue, or heart, or
hand, or eye, to answer, these are not mine own, Christ has bought them, the
Lord has set them apart for himself. Psalm. 4.3. They are vessels for the
Masters use, 2 Timothy 2.21. I am but the steward of my self, and may not dispose
of my Masters goods without, much less against his own will and commands.

Our services, which are Sunt quadam quae etiam non volentes debemus: quada^
etiam quae nisi vo^erimus non debemus, sed postquam es Deo promillimu^
necessario ea reddere constringimur. Aug.
matters of necessity, matters of Expediencie, and matters of praise. All which
may be made the materials of a Covenant.

1 Matter of Duty and necessity. As David by an oath binds himself to keep
Gods righteous judgments. Psalm. 119.106. And the people in Nehemiah's time
enter into a curse and an oath to walk in Gods Law, and to observe and do all
his commandments. Nehem. 10.29.

2 Matter of circumstantiall expediency, which in Christian wisdom may be
conducent unto the main end of a man's life, or may fit him for any special
condition which God calls him unto. So the Rechabites promised their Father
Ionadab, and held that promise obligatory in the sight of God, not to drink
wine, nor to build houses, etc. Ier. 35.6, 7. because by that voluntary
hardship of life they should be the better fitted to bear that captivity
which was to come upon them. Or because thereby they should the better expres
the condition of strangers amongst Gods people, upon whose outward comforts
they would not seem too much to in^roach, that it might appear that they did
not incorporate with them for mere secular but for spiritual benefits. It was
lawful for Paul to have received wages and rewards for his work in the Gospel
as well of the Churches of Achaia, as of Macedonia, and others, as he proves,
1 Cor. 9.4.14. yet he seems upon the case of expediencie, that he might cut
off occasion from them that desired occasion, and might the better promote the
Gospel, to bind himself by an oath (for so much those words, The truth of
Christ is in me, Ambr, Aquin. E^asm. Calvin Beza, Piscator, Musc. Es^i^s, Cor.
^ Lipid Tirinus.
do import, as the Learned have observed) never to be burdensome in that kind
unto those Churches. 2 Cor. 11.7, 12. Lawful things, when inexpedient, and
gravaminous, may be forborne by the bond of a Covenant.

3. Matter of thanksgiving and praises unto God, in which case it was usual to
make and to pay vows. De hujusmodi votis vid. Gre^ Tholosan. de Repub. l* 13*
c 5 and syntag. jur^t lib. 24. c. 10. Se^arium in li. Judic c. 11. qu. 13
Pined. in Job 22, 27. Seld. of Tithes cap. 3. Brisson de formul. l. 1.
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? says David.
I will take the cup of salvation (as the use of the Jews was in their feasts
and sacrifices of thanksgiving, Luke 22.17.) I will pay my vows unto the Lord.
Whereby it appears that godly men when they prayed for mercies, did likewise by
v^ws and Covenants bind themselves to return tribute of praise in some
particular kind or other, upon the hearing of their prayers. Psalm. 116.12, 13,
14. Psalm. 123.2, 3. so Jacob did, Genesis 28.22. and so Iepthah, Judge. 11.30, 31.
and so Hanna, 1 Samuel 1.11, 27, 28. and so Hezekiah, Isa. 38.20. and so Jonah
cap. 1.9. so Zacheus to testify his thankfulness unto Christ for his
conversion, and to testify his through mortification of covetousness, which
had been his master^sin, did not only out of duty make restitution where he
had done wrong, but out of bounty did engage himself to give the half of his
goods to the poor. Luke 19.8.

The formal cause of a Covenant is the Plighting of our fidelity, and engaging
of our Truth unto God in that particular which is the matter of our Covenant.
Which is done two ways. Either by a simple promise and stipulation, as that of
Zacheus, or in a more solemn way by the Intervention of an oath, or curse, or
subscription, as that of Nehemiah, and the people there.

The efficient cause is the person entering into the Covenant. In whom these
things are to concur.

1 A clear knowledge, and deliberate weighing of the matter promised, because
L, 57. ff. de obligat. and Actionib. Nulla voluntas errantis est L. 20. ff. de
aqua and aquae L 116. de Reg. juris.
error, deception, or ignorance, are contrary to the formal notion of that
consent which in every Covenant is intrinsecall, and necessary thereunto. Non
vid^tur consentire qui errat.

2 A Votum voluntas est spontanea. Tholos. Syntag. juris, l, 24. cap. 10. Sect.
1. L. 219 de verborum sign^ficat.

Hostiae ab animo libenti expostulantur. Tert. ad Scap. c. 2.


free and willing concurrence. In omni pacto intercedit actio spontanea, and so
in every promise. Not but that Authority may impose oaths, and those as well
promissory, as Assertorie. Genes. 24.3. 1 Kings 2.42. Ezra 10.3.5. as Josiah
made a Covenant and caused the people to stand unto it. 2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32. But
that the matter of it, though imposed should be such in the nature of the
thing, as that it may be taken in Judgment, and Righteousness, that so the
person may not be hampered in any such hesitancie of conscience as will not
consist with a pious, spontaneous, and voluntary concurrence thereunto.

3 A power to make the promise, and bind ones self by it L. 5. de Con. Legibus
vide Tholos. Syntag. Juris lib. 21. c. 5.
. For a man may have power to make a promise, which is not finally obligatorie,
bu^ upon supposition; As a woman might for her own part vow, and by that vow
was bound up as to her self, but this bond was but conditional, as to efficacy
and influence upon the effect, to wit, Vide Rec^ium de Reg. juris Reg. 69.
Sect. 4
if her husband hear it, and held his peace, Number. 30.3.14.

4 A power, having made the promise, to perform it; and this depends upon the
nature of the thing; Which must be first possible, L. 185 ff. de Regulis Juris.
and L. 188. and de con^^tionibus institutio number. Leg. 6. and 20 de
con^itionibus and demonstr^t. L. 3 and 20 and de obliga^. and action. L. 1.
Sect. 9.
for Impossibilium nulla est obligatio. No man can bind himself to things
impossible Q^ae fact^ laedunt pi^tatem existim^tione^, verecundiam nostram, and
ut generaliter dixerim) contra bonos mores fiunt, nec f^cere nos p^sse
credendum est. Papinian L 14 15. ff. de condition. Institut. Pacta quae contra
bonos mores siunt nullam vim habere indubitati juris est. L 6. and 30. Cod. de
pactis. Generaliter novimus tu^pes stipulationes nullius esse momenti. L 26.
ff. de verbor. obligat. and de legatis and fidei commissi. Leg. 112. Sect. 3.4.
Impia promissio est quae scelere adimpletur: Iuramentum non est vincul^m
iniq^itatis. vid. Cause. 22. q^ 4. Praesta^e fa^co^ p^sse me fidem si scelere
ca^eat inter^un scelus e^t fide^. Senec. Hae demum impositae operae
intelliguntur q^ae sine turpitu^^^e p^aestari possunt. ff. de operis
libertorum. L. 38.
. And next lawful, in regard either of the necessity, or expediencie, or some
other allowablenesse in the thing. For Turpe est jure impossible, we can do
nothing but that which we can do rightfully. Sinful things are in construction
of Law impossible, and so can induce no Obligation. Filius familias vel servu^
sine pa^ris Dominive autoritate vot^ non obligantur. L. 2. Sect. 1. ff. de
pollicita^ionibus.
A servant can make no promise to the dishonor or disservice of his Master;
nor a child or Pupil contrary to the will of his Parent or Guardian: nor a
Christian to the dishonor or against the will of Christ whom he serves. In
every such sinful engagement there is intrinsecally dolus, error, deceptio,
the heart is blinded by the deceitfulness of lust, Ephesians. 4.18.22. Hebr. 3.13.
2 Pet. 1.9. 2 Cor. 11.3. And these things are destructive to the nature of such
an action as must ^e deliberate and spontaneous. Promises of this kind bind
to nothing but Repentance.

From these considerations we may learn what to judge of the promises which
many men make of doing service unto God. Sect. 12.


1 Some join in Covenants as the greatest part of that tumultuous concourse of
people, who made an uproar against the Apostle, were gathered together, They
knew not wherefore. Acts 19.32. do not understand the things they promise. As
if a man should set his hand and seal to an Obligation, and not know the
contents or condition of it. Such are all ignorant Christians, who have often
renewed their Covenant of new obedience and faith in Christ, and yet know not
what the faith of Christ is, or what is the purity, spiritualnesse, and
wideness of that Law which they have sworn unto. As the Apostle says of the
Jews, If they had known they would not have crucified the Lord of glory, we
may say of many of these, if they knew the purity and holiness of those things
which they have vowed to keep, they either would not have entered into Covenant
with God at all, or would be more conscientious and vigilant in their
observation of it. It is a sign of a man desperately careless, to run daily
into debt, and never so much as remember or consider what he owes. If there
were no other obligation to tie men unto the knowledge of Gods will, this alone
were sufficient, that they have undertaken to serve him, and therefore by their
own Covenants are bound to know him. For surely many men who have promised
repentance from dead works, if they did indeed consider what that Repentance
is, and unto what a strict and narrow way of walking it does confine them,
would go nigh, if they durst, to plead an Error in the Contract, and to
profess that they had not thought their Obligation had engaged them unto so
severe and rigid a service, Qui per delict^rum paenitentiam insti^uerat Domino
sansfacere, diabolo per aliam paenitentiae p^nitentiam sati^faciet, eritque
(...) magis perosu^ Deo quan^oaemulo ejus acceptus. Tertul. de paenitent. c. 5.
and so repent of their repentance. But in this case, Ignorance of what a man
ought to know, cannot void the Covenant which he is bound to make, and having
made, to keep; but his Covenant does exceedingly aggravate his ignorance.

2 Some make many fair promises of obedience, but it is on the Rack, and in
the furnace, or as Scholars under the Rod. O if I might but recover this
sickness, Sect. 13.
or be eased of this affliction, I would then be a new man, and redeem my
misspent time. And yet many of these, like Pharaoh when they have any respite,
find out ways to shift and elude their own promises, and like melted metal
taken out of the furnace, Dike of the deceitfulnes of the Heart, c. 20
return again unto their former hardness. So a good Divine observes of the
people of this Land in the time of the great sweat in King Edwards days (I
wish we could find even so much in these days of calamity which we are
fallen into) as long as the heat of the plague lasted, there was crying out
peccav^, Mercy good Lord, mercy, mercy. Then Lords, and Ladies, and people of
the best sort, cried out to the Ministers, for Gods sake tell us what shall we
do to avoid the wrath of God. Take these bags, pay so much to such an one whom
I deceived, so much restore unto another whom in bargaining I overreached,
give so much to the poor, so much to pious uses, etc. But after the sickness
was over, they were just the same men as they were before. Thus in time of
trouble men are apt to make many prayers, and Covenants, to cry unto God, Arise
and save us, Ier. 2.27. Deliver us this time, Judge. 10.15. they i^quire early
after God, and flatter him with their lips, and own him as their God, and Rock
of salvation, and presently start aside like a deceitful bow^. As Austin
notes, Quos vides petul^^ter and procaci^^r insul^are servis Christi sunt, in
it is plurimi qui illum interitum clademque non evasissent, nisi servos Christi
se esse finxissent. De civit. Dei. li. 1. ca. 1. Ejecta in naufragi^ dominorum
adhuc sunt, quia non eo animo ejiciuntur quod eas habere nolunt, sed ut
periculum effugiant. ff. lib. 41. L. 9. Sect. 8. and L. 44 Semisauci^m bac
atque bac jactare voluntatem. Aug. confess. l. 8. c. 8
that in times of calamity the very Heathen would flock unto the Christian
Churches to be safe amongst them. And when the Lord sent Lions amongst the
Samaritanes, then they sent to inquire after the manner of his worship. 2 King.
17.25, 26. Thus many men's Covenants are founded only in Terrors of
conscience. They throw out their sins as a Merchant at Sea his rich commodities
in a Tempest, but in a calm wish for them again. Neither do they throw away
the property over them, but only the dangerous p^ssession of them. This is not
a full, cheerful, and voluntary action, but only a languid and inconstant
velleitie. Contrary to that largeness of heart, and sixed disposition which
Christ's own people bring unto his service, as David and the Nobles of Israel
offered willingly and with joy unto the Lord. 1 Chronicles. 29.17.

3 Since a Covenant presupposes a power in him that makes it, both over his
own will, and over the matter, thing or Action which he promises, so far as to
be enabled to make the promise: And since we of our selves have neither will
nor deed, no sufficiency either to think or to perform: Romans 7.18. 2 Cor. 3.5.
Phil. 2.12. We hence learn in all the Covenants which we make, not to do it
in any confidence of our own strength, or upon any self dependence on our own
hearts, which are false and deceitful, and may after a confident undertaking,
use us as Peter's used him: But still to have our eyes on the aid and help of
Gods grace, to use our Covenants as means the better to stir up Gods graces in
us, and our prayers unto him for further supplies of it. As David, I will keep
thy statutes, but then, do not thou forsake me. Psalm. 119.8. Our promises of
duty must ever be supported by Gods promises of grace when we have undertaken
to serve him, we must remember to pray as Hezekiah did, Lord I am weak, do thou
undertake for me. Isa. 38.14. Our good works cannot come out of us, till God do
first of all work them in us. Isa. 26.12. He must perform his promises of
grace to us, before we can ours of service unto him. Nothing of ours can go to
heaven, except we first received it from heaven. We are able to do nothing but
in and by Christ which strengthens us, Joh. 15.5. Phil. 4.13. So that every
religious Covenant which we make has indeed a double obligation in it; An
obligation to the duty promised, that we may stir up our selves to perform it:
and an obligation unto prayer, and recourse to God that he would furnish us
with grace to perform it: As he that has bound himself to pay a debt and
has no money of his own to do it, is constrained to betake himself unto
supplications that he may procure the money of some other friend.

Lastly, the final cause of a Covenant is to induce an Obligation, where was
none before, or else to double and strengthen it where one was before, Quid tam
congruum fidei humanae quam ea quae inter eos placuerunt servare? Ulpian. L. 1
ff de pactis. Obligatio est Iuris vinculum quo necessitate astringimur alicujus
solvende (...). Instit. lib. 3. T. 14. Vid. Gregorium. Tholos. de Repub. lib. 8
cap. 8.
to be Vinculum conservandae fidei, a bond to preserve truth and fidelity.
Being subject unto many temptations, and having backsliding and revolting
hearts, apt, if they be not kept up to service, to draw back from it, therefore
we use our selves as men do cowardly Soldiers, set them there where they must
fight, and shall not be able to run away, or fall off from service.

III. This should serve to Humble us upon a twofold consideration. Sect. 15.


1 For the falsenesse and unstedfastnesse of our Hearts which want such
Covenants to bind them, and as it were fasten them to the Altar with cords: as
men put locks and fetters upon wild horses, whom otherwise no enclosure would
shut in. Our Hearts (as Jacob said of Reuben, Genesis 49.4.) are unstable as
waters. (...) Aristo^* de gener and corrupt. lib. 2. cap. 2. Hinc qui vitam
agunt mollem, remissam, voluptuariam, in hanc and illam partem flexilem
dicuntu^. (...), Chrysostom. Romans 13.14. and Suidae, (...) dicitur (...). Ejus a^mum
qui nunc luxu^^a and lasciva diffluit, ro^und^m, Terent. Heauton. Messallina
facilitate Adultererum in fastidium versa ad incognite^ libidines p^ost^ebat.
Tacit Annal* l. 11. Eruptiones lasciviarum Tert. Apol. ca^. 31. The Scripture
calls it weakness of Heart. Ezekiel. 16.30. and so the Philosopher, (...),
Ethic. lib. ^. c. 8.
Moist bodies (as water is) non continentur suis terminis, do not set bounds
to themselves, as solid and compacted bodies do, but shed all abroad, if left
to themselves; the way to keep them united and together is to put them into a
close vessel: so the heart of man can set it self no bounds, but falls all
asunder, and out of frame, (...), as the Apostles expression is, 1 Pet. 4.4.
instar Aquae diffluentis, Hebr. 2.1. if it be not fastened and bound together by
such strong Resolutions. Sometimes men either by the power of the word, or by
the sharpness of some affliction, are quickened and enflamed unto pious
purposes, like green wood which blazeth while the bellows are blowing; and now
they think they have their hearts sure, and shall continue them in a good
frame, to morrow shall be as this day. But presently like an Instrument in
change of weather, they are out of tune again, and like the Camelion* presently
change color, and as (...), etc. Homil. 13. ad popul. An^ioch.
Chrysostom says, the Preacher, of all workmen, seldom finds his work as he
left it. Nothing but the grace of God does balance and establish the heart,
and holy Covenants are an ordinance or means which he has pleased to sanctify
unto this purpose, that by them, as Instruments, Grace as the principal cause
might keep the Heart steadfast in duty. If then Isaiah bewail the uncleanness
of his lips, and Job suspect the uncleanness and wandering of his Eyes, what
reason have we to be humbled for this unstedfastnesse of our Hearts, from
whence the diffluence and looseness of every other faculty proceeds?

2 If we must bewail the falsenes of our Hearts that stand in need of
Covenants, how much more should we bewail their perfidiousnesse in the
violation of Covenants? That they take occasion, even by Restraint like a
Spumeus, and fervens and ab ob^ce saevior ^bit. Ovid. Senec. not. quaest. ^^.
6. ca^ 17.
River that is stopped in his course, to grow more unruly. Or as a man after an
Ag^e which took away his stomach, to return with stronger appetite unto sin
again. To crucify our sins, and in repentance to put them, as it were, to
shame, and then to take them down from the Cross again, and fetch them to
life, and repent of Repentance. To vow, and after vows to make inquiry, Prove.
20.25. This is a very ill requital unto Christ. He came from glory to suffer
for us, and here met with many discouragements, not only from enemies, but
from friends and Disciples, Judas betrays him, Peter denies him, his Disciples
sleep, his kinsfolks stand afar off; yet he does not look back from a Cross
to a Crown, and though he be tempted to come down from the Cross, yet he
stays it out, that he might love, and save us to the uttermost: but we no
sooner out of Egypt and Sodom, but we have hankering affections to return, at
the least to look backwards again. Engage our selves to be ruled by the Word
of the Lord (as the Jews did. Ier. 42.5, 6. and with them, Ier. 43.2. When we
know his Word cavil against it, and shrink away from our own resolutions. O
how should this humble us, and make us vile in our own eyes? God is exceeding
angry with the breach of but H^mane Covenants, Ier. 34. 18. Ezekiel. 17.18. How
much more with the breach of Holy Covennants between himself and us, and
threatens severely to revenge the quarrel of his Covenant. Levit. 26.25. and
so doubtless he now does, and will do still, except we take a penitent Revenge
upon our selves for it. And therefore,

Lastly, having entered into Covenant we should use double diligence in our
performance of it. Quickening and stirring up our selves thereunto.

1 By the consideration of the stability of his Covenant with us, even the sure
mercies of David* Isa. 54.8, 9.55.3. To break faith with a false person were a
fault, but to deceive him that never fails nor forsakes us, increases both the
guilt and the unkindnesse.

2 By consideration of his continued and renewed mercies. Vid. Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 113.
If he were a wilderness unto us, there might be some color to repent us of
our bargain, and to look out for a better service. But it is not only
unthankfulness, but folly to make a forfeiture of mercies, and to put God by
our breach of Covenant with him, to break his with us too. Ier. 2.5, 6, 7.31.
Numb. 14.34. Ion. 2.8.

3 By consideration of our Baptism and the tenor thereof, wherein we solemnly
promise to keep a good conscience, and to observe All things whatsoever Christ
commands us. 1 Pet. 3.21. Mat. 28.19, 20. From which engagement we cannot
recede without the note and infamy of greater perfidiousnesse In faederibus
eosdem ^micos atque inimico^ habere solent faederati, quod ex Cicerone and
Livio observavit. Brisson. de formul. li. 4. Quis miles ab infaederatis ne
dicam ab h^slibus reg^bus de^ativum and stipendum capt^t nisi plane deserior
and ^r^nsfuga? Tertul. de Praescript. cap. 12.
. To take Christ's pay, and do sin service, to be a subject unto Michael, and a
pensioner unto the Dragon, to wear the Liverie of one Master and do the work
of another, to be an Israelite in title, and a Samaritan in truth, this is
either to forget or to deride our Baptism. 2 Pet. 1.9. for therein we did as
it were s^bscribe our names, and list our selves in the Register of Sion; and
as it is an high honor to be enrolled in the genealogies of the Church, so is
a great dishonor to be expunged from thence, and to be written in the Earth,
and have our names with our bodies putrify into perpetual oblivion. Ierem.
17.13. Nehem. 7.64, 65.

4 Consider the seal and witnesses whereby this Covenant has been confirmed.
Bernard. sermon. 3. de Evangelio septem panum.
Sealed in our own consciences by the seal of faith, believing the Hol^nesse
of Gods ways, and the excellency of his Rewards, for he that believes has
set to his seal. Joh. 3.33. mutually attested by our spirits, feeling the
sweetness of duty, and by Vid. Bern. sermon. 1. in Anunciat. Mariae. and sermon 2
de tribus testimoniis. and ser. 2 in die Pentecost. sermon. 2. i^ sestiv. omnium
sanct. ser. 5. in dedicat. Eccl. sermon. de quatuor modis orandi ser. 8.23. and
85. in Cantic. de nature. and dignit. divini amoris. c. 11. vid. etiam Mich^lis
Medinae a Polog^a^ pro Joanne Fero adversus Dom. Soto criminationes ap^d Sixth.
senemsem. Biblioth. li. 6. Annot. 210.
Gods spirit, revealing the certainty of Reward. Romans 8.16. and this in the
presence of Angels and Saints, into whose communion we are admitted, 1 Corinthians. 11.10. Hebr. 12.22. so that we cannot depart from this Covenant,
without shaming our selves to God, to Angels, to men, and to our own
consciences. Yea the Font where we were baptized, and the Table where we have
sacramentally eaten and drank the body and blood of Christ, and the very seats
where we have sat attending unto his voice, like Joshua his stone, cap. 24.22,
27. will be witnesses against us if we deny our Covenant, though there be no
need of witnesses against those who have to do with the searcher of hearts, and
the Judge of consciences, that consuming fire whom no lead, no dross, no
reprobate silver, no false metal, can endure or deceive, no Ananias or Saphira
lie unto without their own undoing.

Lastly, let us consider the estate which these Covenants do refer unto, and
our Tenure whereunto these services are annexed, which is eternal life. After
we have had patience to keep our short Promises of doing Gods will, he will
perform his eternal promises, of giving himself unto us. And who would
forfeit an inheritance for not payment of a small homage or quitrent reserved
upon it? If we expect eternal life from him, there is great reason we should
dedicate a mortal life unto him. Let us not pay our service in dross, when we
expect our wages in gold.

THE THIRD SERMON.
HOSEAH 14. VER. 2.3. 2. So will we render the calves of our lips.

3. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say
any more to the works of our hands, ye are our Gods; for in thee the
fatherless finds mercy. Sect. 1



HAving handled the general doctrine of our entering into Covenant with God, I
shall now proceed unto the particulars which they here engage themselves unto,
whereof the first is a solemn Thanksgiving, We will render the calves of our
lips. Vid. Gul. Stuc. An^iq. Convival lib. 1. cap. 33. Wee^se exercit* Ceremon.
l. exercit. 13. quamvis alii al^ter distinguant. Cornel. A Lapid in Syn^p. c.
1. Levit Torniel. An. 2545. sect. 21. Pine l. in Io^. 1.5 Alex. Hales p. 3 qu.
55. and memb. 4. art. 8. sect. 3.
All the sacrifices of the Jews were of two sorts. Some were Ilasticall,
propitiatory, or expiatory, for pardon of sin, or impetration of favor: others
were Eucharisticall sacrifices of praise (as the peace offerings, Levit. 7.12.)
for mercies obtained, Psalm. 107.22. With relation unto these, the Church here,
having prayed for forgiveness of sin, and for the obtaining of blessings, does
hereupon, for the farther enforcement of those petitions, promise to offer the
peace offerings of praise, not in the naked and empty ceremony, but with the
spiritual life and substance, viz. the Calves of their lips, which are moved
by the inward principles of hearty sincerity and thanksgiving.

From hence we learn, that sound conversion and repentance enlarges the heart
in thankfulness toward God, and disposes it to offer up the sacrifice of
praise. And this duty here promised, comes in this place under several
considerations, for we may consider it.

I. Ut materiam pacti, as the matter of a Covenant or compact, Sect. 2.
which we promise to render unto God in acknowledgment of his great mercy in
answering the prayers which we put up unto him for pardon and grace. It is
observable that most of those Psalms wherein David omnes s^re Psalmos in
quibus Dei auxilium implorat, gratiatum action claudit. Mu^^ in Psalm. 10.16.
David imploreth help from God, are closed with thanksgiving unto him, as
Psalm. 7.17.13, 6.56, 12, 13, 57, 7, 10, etc. David thus by an holy craft
insinuating into Gods favor, and driving a trade between earth and heaven,
receiving and returning, importing one commodity, and transporting another,
letting God know that his mercies shall not be lost, that as he bestows the
comforts of them upon him, so he would return the praises of them unto heaven
again. Cives habent propinquam fructuosamqu^ provinciam quo facile excurrant,
ubi libentur negotium gerant: quos illa mercibus suppeditandis cum quaestu
compendioque dimittit, etc. Cicer in Verr. 3 Huiusmodi nobile Emporium erat
Tyros Phaeniciae urbs.

Ezekiel. 27.12.24. de quare^ione Lucanus, primi docuere carinis Far cavis orbis
commercia.


Those CounCountries that have rich and staple commodities to exchange and
return unto others, have usually th freest and fullest trafick and resort of
trade made unto them. Now there is no such rich return from earth to heaven as
praises; This is indeed the only tribute we can pay unto God, to value, and to
celebrate his goodness toward us. As in the flux and refluxe of the sea, the
water that in the one comes from the sea unto the shore, does in the other but
run back into it self again: so praises Gratiarum cess^t decursus, ubi recursus
non fuit. ^e^n. sermon. 1. in cap. Iejunii. Ad locum undeexeunt gratiae
revertantur^dem ser. 3. in vigili nativit* and
are as it were the return of mercies into themselves, or into that bosom and
fountain of Gods love from whence they flowed. And therefore the richer any
heart is in praises* the more speedy and copious are the returns of mercy unto
it; God has so ordered the creatures amongst themselves, that there is a kind
of natural confederacy, and mutual negotiation amongst them, each one
receiving and returning, deriving unto others, and drawing from others what
serves most for the conservation of them all, and every thing by various
interchanges and vicissitudes flowing back into the original from whence it
came: thereby teaching the souls of men to maintain the like spiritual
commerce and confederacy with heaven, to have all the passages between them
and it open and unobstructed, that the mercies which they receive from thence,
may not be kept under, and imprisoned in unthankfulness, but may have a free
way in daily praises to return to their fountain again. Thus Noah, after his
deliverance from the flood, built an Altar, on which to sacrifice the
sacrifices of thanksgiving, that a^ his family by the Ark was preserved from
perishing, so the memory of so great a mercy might in like manner by the Altar
be preserved too, Genesis 8.20. So Abraham after a weary journey being comforted
with Gods gracious appearing and manifestation of himself unto him, built an
Altar, and called on the Name of the Lord, Genesis 12.7. and after another journey
out of Egypt, was not forgetful to return unto that place again, Genesis 13.4.
Gods presence drawing forth his praises, as the return of the Sun in a spring
and summer, causes the earth to thrust forth her fruits and flowers, that they
may as it were meet, and do homage to the fountain of their beauty. If Hezekiah
may be delivered from death, Isa. 38.20. If David from guilt, Psalm. 51.14. they
promise to sing aloud of so great mercy, and to take others into the consort, I
will teach transgressors thy way, and we will sing upon the stringed
instruments. Guilt stops the mouth, and makes it speechless, Matthew. 22.12.
that it cannot answer for one of a thousand sins, nor acknowledge one of a
thousand mercies. When Jacob begged Gods blessing on him in his journey, he
vowed a vow of obedience and thankfulness to the Lord, seconding Gods promises
of mercy, with his promises of praise, and answering all the parts thereof, If
God will be with me, and keep me, I will be his, and he shall be mine. If he
single out me and my seed, to set us up as marks for his Angels to descend unto
with protection and mercy, and will indeed give this Land to us, and return me
unto my fathers house; then this stone which I have set up for a pillar and
monument, shall be Gods house, for me and my seed to praise him in; and
accordingly we find he built an Altar there, and changed the name of that
place, calling it the House of God, and God, the God of Bethel. And lastly, if
God indeed will not leave nor forsake me, but will give so rich a land as this
unto me, I will surely return a homage back, and of his own, I will give the
tenth unto him again. So punctual is this holy man to restipulate for each
distinct promise a distinct praise, and to take the quality of his vows from
the quality of Gods mercies, Genesis 28. v. 20.22. compared with v. 13.15. Genesis
35.6.7.14* 15. Lastly, Jonah out of the belly of Hell cries unto God, and
voweth a vow unto him, that he would sacrifice with the voice of thanksgiving,
and tell all ages, that salvation is of the Lord, Jonah 2.9. Thus we may
consider praises as the matter of the Churches Covenant.

II. Ut fructum poenitentiae, as a fruit of true repentance, and deliverance
from sin. Sect. 3.
When sin is taken away, when grace is obtained, then indeed is a man in a
right disposition to give praises unto God: When we are brought out of a
wilderness into Canaan, Deuteronomy 8.10. out of Babylon unto Sion, Jer. 30.18.19.
then says the Prophet, Out of them shall proceed thanksgiving, and the voice
of them that make merry, etc. When Israel had passed through the red Sea, and
saw the Egyptians dead on the shore, the great type of our deliverance from
sin, death, and Satan, then they sing that triumphant Song, Moses and the men
singing the Song, and Miriam and the women answering them, and repeating over
again the burden of the Song, Sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed
gloriously, the Horse and his rider has he thrown into the Sea, Exodus
15.1.20.21. When a poor soul has been with Jonah in the midst of the seas,
compassed with the floods, closed in with the depths, brought down to the
bottom of the mountains, wrapped about head and heart, and all over with the
weeds, and locked up with the bars of sin and death, when it has felt the
weight of a guilty conscience, and been terrified with the fearful expectation
of an approaching curse, lying as it were at the pits brinke, within the smoke
of hell, within the smell of that brimstone, and scorchings of that
unquenchable fire which is kindled for the devil and his angels: and is then by
a more bottomless and unsearchable mercy brought unto dry land, snatched as a
brand out of the fire, translated unto a glorious condition, from a Law to a
Gospel, from a cu^se to a Crown, from damnation to an inheritance, from a slave
to a Son, then, then only, never till then, is that soul in a fit
disposition to sing praises unto God, when God has forgiven all a man's
iniquities, and healed all the diseases of his soul, and redeemed his life from
destruction, or from hell (as the Chaldee renders it) and crowned him with
loving kindness and tender mercies, turning away his anger, and revealing
those mercies which are from everlasting Ab aeterno per praedestinationem in
aeternum per glorificationem, Be^nard sermon. 2. in Ascens. Dom.
in election unto everlasting in salvation, removing his sins from him as far
as the East is from the West; then a man will call upon his soul over and over
again, and summon every faculty within him, and invite every creature without
him to bless the Lord, and to ingeminate praises unto his holy name, Psalm.
103.1.4.20.22. And as David there begins the Psalm, with Bless the Lord O my
soul, and ends it with bless the Lord O my soul: so the Apostle making mention
of the like mercy of God unto him, and of the exceeding abundant grace of
Christ, in setting forth him who was a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious,
as a pattern unto all that should believe on him unto eternal life, begins
this meditation with praises, I thank Christ Jesus our Lord; and ends it with
praises, unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be
honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen. 1 Timothy 1.12.17. It is impossible that
soul should be truly thankful unto God, which has no apprehensions of him,
but as an enemy, ready to call in, or at the least to curse all those outward
benefits which in that little interim and respite of time between the curse
pronounced in the Law, and executed in death, he vouchsafes to bestow. Qualem
te paraveris Deo, talis oporter appareat tibi Deus. Bern. in Can^. sermon. 69.
And impenitent sinners can have no true notion of God but such. And therefore
all the verbal thanks which such men seem to render unto God for blessings,
are but like the music at a Funeral, or the Trumpet before a Judge, which
gives no comfortable sound to the mourning wife, or to the guilty prisoner.

III. Vt medium Impetrandi. As an Argument and motive to prevail with God in
prayer. For the Church here Prays for pardon, for grace, Sect. 4.
for healing, not only with an eye to its own benefit, but unto Gods honor.
Lord, when thou have heard and answered us, then we shall glorify thee. Psa.
50.15. I shall praise thee, says David, for then have heard me, and art become
my salvation. Psalm. 118.21. It is true, if God condemn us, he will therein
show forth his own glory, 2 These. 1.9. as he did upon Pharaoh. Rom 9.17. In
which sense the strong and terrible ones are said to glorify him, Isay. 25.3.
Because his power in their destruction is made the more conspicuous: But we
should not therein concur unto the glorifying of him. The grave cannot praise
him, they that go down into the pit cannot celebrate his name. Ps. 30.9, 88,
10, 11. The living, the living they shall praise thee. Isa. 38.19. This is a
frequent argument with David whereby to prevail for mercy, because else God
would lose the praise which by this means he should render to his name. Psalm.
6.4.5.118.17. etc. God indeed is All-sufficient to himself, and no goodness of
ours can extend unto him. Job 22.2, 35, 7. Deus suam gloriam quaerit non
propter se sed propter nos. Aquin. 22. qu. 32. art. 1. ad 1 m.
Yet as Parents delight to use the labor of their children in things which are
no way beneficial unto themselves: so God is pleased to use us as instruments
for setting forth his glory, though his glory stand in no need of us, though
we cannot add one Cubit thereunto. He has made all men August de nup.
in usu^ profundarum cogitationum suarum, unto the uses of his unsearchable
Counsels. He has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the
day of evil. Prove. 16.4. Yet he is pleased to esteem some men meet for uses,
which others are not, 2 Timothy 2.21. and to set apart some for himself* and for
those uses. iis and concupis. lib. 2. cap. 16. Omnia propter se ipsum fecit
Deus, omnia propter suos.

Bern. ser. 3. in die Pentecost.


Psalm. 4.3. Isay. 43.21. August de nup.
God by his wisdom orders, and draws the blind and brute motions of the
worst creatures unto his own honor, Est in malorum potestate peccare; ut autem
peccando hoc vel hoc illa malitia faciant, non est in illorum potestate, sed
Dei dividentis tenebras, and ordinantis eas, ut hinc etiam quod faciunt contra
voluntatem Dei, non impleatur nisi voluntas Dei Aug. de prae. Sanet. c. 16.
vid. etiam ep. 69 q. 6. ep. 120. c. 2 epist. 141. l. 2. qu. sup. Exodus qu. 18.
lib. 83. quaest. 27. de Civit. Dei. lib. 11. cap. 17.
as the huntsman does the rage of the dog to his pleasure, or the Mariner the
blowing of the wind unto his voyage, or the Artist the heat of the fire unto
his work; or the Phisician the bloudthirstinesse of the Leech unto a cure. But
godly men are fitted to bring actually glory unto him, to glorify him doingly.
1 Cor. 10.3^* 31. Ephe. 1.11, 12. And this is that which God chiefly takes
pleasure in.

Our Savior bids his disciples cast their net into the Sea, and when they had
drawn their net, he bids them bring of the fish which they had then caught, and
yet we find that there was a fire of coals, and fish laid thereon, and bread
provided on the land before. John 21.6, 9, 10. Thereby teaching us that he did
not use their industry for any need that he had of it, but because he would
honor them so far as to let them honor him with their obedience. And
therefore even then when God tells his people that he needed not their
services, yet he calls upon them for thanksgiving. Psalm. 50.9, 14.

This then is a strong argument to be used in prayer for pardon, for grace, for
any spiritual mercy. Lord, if I perish, I shall not praise thee, I shall not
be meet for my Masters uses. Thy glory will only be forced out of me with
blows, like fire out of a flint, or water out of a rock. But thou delightest
to see thy poor Servants operate toward thy glory, to see them not forced by
power but by love to show forth thy praises. And this we shall never do till
sin be pardoned. God can bring light out of light, as the light of the
Stars out of the light of the Sun, and he can bring light out of darkness, as
he did at first; but in the one case there is a meetnes for such an use, in the
other not. Now we are not meet Subjects for God to reap honor from, till sin
be pardoned, till grace be conferred. Then we shall give him the praise of his
mercy in pitying such grievous sinners, and the praise of his power and
wisdom in healing such mortal diseases, and the praise of his glorious and
free grace in sending Salvation to those that did not inquire after it, and the
praise of his patience in forbearing us so long, and waiting that he might be
gracious, and the praise of his wonderful providence in causing all things to
work together for our good: and the praise of his justice by taking part with
him against our own sins, and joining with his grace to revenge the blood of
Christ upon them. A potsheard is good enough to hold fire, but nothing but a
sound and pure vessel is meet to put wine or any rich depositumn into.

IV. Vt principium operandi, As a principle of Emendation of life, Sect. 5.
and of new Obedience. Lord take away iniquity and receive us into favor, then
will we be thankful unto thee, and that shall produce amendment of life; Ashur
shall not save us, neither will we ride upon horses, etc. A thankful
apprehension of the goodness of God in forgiving, giving, saving, honoring us,
is one of the principal foundations of sincere obedience. Then the Soul will
think nothing too good for God, that has showed himself so good unto it.
Jure gentium servi nostri sunt qui ex ancillis nostris nascuntur. Leg. 5. D. de
statu Hominis. and Leg. 28. de usuris and fructibus. Ibid.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits? says the Prophet
David. Psalm. 116.12. and a little after it follows, O Lord, truly I am thy
servant, I am thy servant, and the Son of thine Handmaide; that is, an
Home-borne servant, thine from my mothers womb. It is an allusion to those who
were borne of Servants in the House of their Masters, and so were in a
condition of Servants. Pa^tus sequitur vent^em. If the mother be an Handmaide,
the child is a Servant too, and so the Scripture calls them filios domus,
children of the house Genesis 14. 14, 15, 3, 17, 12. Lev. 22, 11. Ecclesi. 2.7.
His heart being enlarged in thankfulness, presently minded him of the deep
engagements that did bind him unto Service even from the womb. True filial
and Evangelicall obedience arises from faith and love. Faith shows us Gods
love to us, and thereby works in us a Reciprocal love unto him, We love him,
because he loved us first. 1 John 4.19. This is the only thing wherein a
Servant of God may answer him, and may de simili mutuam rependere vicem, as
Berna^d speaks, return back unto God what he gives unto him. Si mihi
irascatur Deus, number illi ego similiter redirascar? non utique sed pavebo, sed
contremiscam, sed veniam deprecabor. Ita si me arguat, non redarguetur a me,
sed ex me potius justifi. cabitur: nec si me judicabit, judicabo ego eum, sed
adorabo. Si dominatur, me oportet servire; Si imperat, me oportet parere; nunc
jam videas de amore quam aliter (...); N^mcum amat Deus non aliud vult qua^
^mari. Bern. sermon. 83* in Cantic.
If he be angry with me, I must not be angry again with him, but fear and
tremble, and beg for pardon. If he reprove me, I must not reprove but
justify him: If he judge me, I must not judge but adore him. But if he love
me, I must take the boldness to love him again, for therefore he loves that he
may be loved. And this love of ours unto Christ makes us ready to do every
thing which he requires of us, because we know that he has done much more for
us then he requires of us. The love of Christ says the Apostle, constrains
us, because we thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead, that
is either dead in and with him in regard of the guilt and punishment of sin, so
as to be freed from the damnation of it, or dead by way of conformity unto his
death, in dying unto sin, and crucifying the old man, so as to shake off the
power and strength of it. And the fruit of all, both his dying and our loving,
is this, That we should not live unto our selves, but unto him that dyed for us
and rose again. Thus love argues from the greater to the lesser, from the
greatness of his work for us to the smalnes of ours unto him; If he died to give
us life, then we must live to do him Service.

Quis coram Deo innocens invenitur qui vult fieri quod vetatur, si subtrahas
q^od timetur? Qui gehennas metuit, non peccare metuit sed ardere; ille autem
peccare me^uit, qui peccatum ipsum sicu^gehennas odit. Au. Ep. 144. Bernard ser
de Trip. ^^hae^.

Vere Chrstianus est qui plus amat dominum quam timet gehennam, ut etiamsi
dicat illi De^s* ute^e deliciis carnalibus sempiternis and quantum potes pecca,
nec morietis nec in gehennam mitteris, sed mecum tantummodo non eris;
exhorrescat et omnino non prece^; non jam ut in illud quod timebat non incidat,
sed ne illum que^ sic amat offend^t. Idem de Catechizand. Rudibus. c. 17. de
nature and great. c. 57. con^. 2 Et Pelag. l. 1* c. 9. and l. 2.69.


Fear produces only servile and unwilling performances, as those fruits
which grow in Winter, or in cold Countries, are sour, unsavory, and
unconcocted; but those which grow in Summer, or in hotter Countries, by the
warmth and influence of the Sun are sweet and wholesome: such is the difference
between those fruits of obedience which fear and which love produces. The
most formal principle of obedience is love, and the first beginings of love in
us unto God arise from his mercies unto us being thankfully remembered; and this
teaches the soul thus to argue, God has given deliverances unto me, and
should I break his Commandments? Ezra 13.14. Christ gave himself to redeem
me from all iniquity, and to make me in a special manner his own, therefore I
must be zealous of good works. Tit. 2.14. therefore I must show forth the
virtues of him that called me out of darkness into his mavelous Light. 1 Pet.
2.9. No more frequent, more copious common place in all the Scriptures then
this to call for obedience, and to aggravate disobedience by the consideration
of the great things that God has done for us. Deuteronomy. 13.20, 21, 11, 7, 8, 29,
32, 6, 7. Josh. 24.2, 14. 1 Samuel 12.24, Isay. 1, 2. Ier. 2.5, 6. Hos. 2.8. Mic.
6.3, 5. In the Per modum pigneris, licet non per modum mancipii. Leg. 2. Cod.
de postliminio Reversis, etc. nempe servi sunt quoad solvatur pretium
Redemptori. Si quis servum captum ab h^stibus Redemerit, protinus est
Redimentis. L. 12. sect. 7. F. de captivit.
Law a Ransomed man became the Servant of him that bought and delivered him:
and upon this argument the Apostle calls for obedience. Ye are not your own,
but you are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in
your spirits, which are Gods. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. We have but the use of our
selves, the property Fructu^rius nihil facere debet in perniciem proprietatis.
L. 13 sect. 4. F. de usu fructu.
is his, and we may do nothing to violate that.

V. Ut instrumentum divinae gloriae. As a means and instrument of publishing
Gods praises. There is an Emphasis in the word Lips. Sometimes it is a
diminutive word, taking away from the duty performed, as Matthew. 15.8. This
people honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. Sect. 6.
But here it is an Augmentative word, that enlarges the duty, and makes it
wider. I will sacrifice unto thee says Jonah, with the voice of thanksgiving,
Jonah 2.9. God regards not the sacrifice if this be not the use that is made
of it, to publish and celebrate the glory of his name. The outward ceremony is
nothing without the thankfulness of the heart and the thankfulness of the heart
is too little, except it have a voice to proclaim it abroad, that other may
learn to glorify and admire the works of the Lord too. It is not enough to
Sacrifice, not enough to sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving, except
withal we declare his works with rejoicing, psalm. 107.22. There is a private
thankfulness of the Soul within it self, when meditating on the goodness of
God, it does in secret return the tribute of an humble and obedient heart back
again unto him, which is to praise God on the Bed: and there is public
thanksgiving, when men tell of the wondrous works of God in the great
Congregation of his Saints, Psalm. 149.1.5. Psalm. 26.7.12. Now here the Church
promises this public thanksgiving, it shall not be the thankfulness of the
heart only, but of the lips too. As it is noted of the thankful Leper, that
with a loud voice he glorified God, Luke 17.15. The living, the living shall
praise thee, says Hezekiah; but how should they do it? The fathers to the
children shall make known thy truth, Isay 38.19. There are some affections and
motions of the heart that do stop the mouth, Plu^^rch. de capiend ex Hos^ibus
utilitate. Arist. Probl^m. sect. 27.
are of a cold stupefactive, and constringent nature, as the sap stays and
hides it self in the root while it is winter. Such is fear and extremity of
grief. Come says the Prophet, Let us enter into our defenced cities, and let
us be silent there, for the Lord our God has put us to silence, Jer. 8.14.
Isai. 10.14. Other affections open the mouth, are of an expansive and dilating
nature, know not how to be straightened or suppressed, and of all these, joy, and
sense of Gods mercy, can least contain it self in the compass of our narrow
breast, but will spread and communicate it self to others. A godly Heart is in
this like unto those flowers which shut when the Sun sets, when the night
comes, and open again when the Sun returns and shines upon them. If God
withdraw his favor, and send a night of affliction, they shut up themselves,
and their thoughts in silence; but if he shine again, and shed abroad the light
and sense of his love upon them, then their heart and mouth is wide open
toward heaven in lifting up praises unto him. Hannah prayed silently so long
as she was in bitterness of soul, and of a sorrowful spirit, 1 Samuel 1.1^, 15.
but as soon as God answered her prayers, and filled her heart with joy in him,
presently her mouth was enlarged into a Song of thanksgiving* Chap. 2.1.

There is no phrase more usual in the Psalms, then to sing forth praises unto
God, and it is not used without a special Emphasis. For it is one thing to
praise, and another to Sing praises, Psalm. 146.2. This is, to publish, to
declare, to speak of, abundantly to utter the memory of Gods great goodness,
Apud poetas Clarissimos lauds Deorum inter Regalia convivia c^neb^ntur.
Quintil. lib. 1. cap. 10. nec aliter very Dei liudes in conviviis
Christianorum. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 39. Cyprian lib. 2. Epist. 2.
that one generation may derive praises unto another, as the Expressions are,
Psa. 145.4.7. And therefore we find in the most solemn thanksgivings, that the
people of God were wont in great companies, and with musical instruments to
sound forth the praises of God, and to cause their joy to be heard afar off,
Neh. 12.27, 31, 43. Isai. 12.4, 5, 6. Ier. 31.7. This then is the force of the
expression, Lord when thou have taken away iniquity, and extended thy grace and
favor to us, we will not only have thankful hearts, every man to praise thee
by himself; but we will have thankful lips to show forth thy praise, we will
stir up and encourage one another, we will tell our children, that the
generations to come may know the mercy of our God.

This is a great part of the Communion of Saints to join together in Gods
praises. There is a Communion of Sinners, wherein they combine together to
dishonor God, and encourage one another in evil, Psalm. 64.5. Psalm. 83.5.8.
Prove. 1.10 11. Eve was no sooner caught her self, but she became a kind of
Serpent, to deceive and to catch her husband. A Tempter has no sooner made a
Sinner, but that Sinner will become a Tempter. As therefore Gods Enemies hold
communion to dishonor him: so great reason there is that his servants should
hold Communion to praise him, and to animate and hearten one another unto duty,
as men that draw at an anchor, and Soldiers that set upon a service, use to do
with mutual encouragements, Isai. 2.3. Zach. 8.21. Mal. 3.16. The Holy Oil for
the Sanctuary was made of many spices compounded by the art of the Perfumer,
Exodus 30.23, 24.25. to note unto us that those duties are sweetest which are made
up in a Communion of Saints, each one contributing his influence and
furtherance unto them. As in winds and rivers where many meet in one they are
strongest; and in Chains and Jewels where many links and stones are joined in
one, they are richest. All good is diffusive, like Leven in a lump, like sap in
a root; it will find the way from the heart to every faculty of soul and body,
and from thence to the ears and hearts of others. Every living creature was
made with the seed of life in it, to preserve it self by multiplying, Genesis
1.1.11.12. And of all seeds that of the Spirit, and the Word (1 Ioh. 3.9. 1
Pet. 1.23.) is most vigorous, and in nothing so much as in glorifying God, when
the joy of the Lord, which is our strength, does put it self forth to derive
the praises of his Name, and to call in others to the celebration of them.

From all which we learn, 1. By what means (amongst many others) to try the
truth of our conversion; namely, Sect. 7.
by the life and workings of true Thankfulness unto God for pardon of sin, and
accepting into favor. Certainly when a man is converted himself, his heart
will be enlarged, and his mouth will be filled with the praises of the Lord; he
will acquaint others what a good God he is turned unto. If he have found Christ
himself, as Andrew and Philip, and the woman of Samaria did, he will presently
report it to others* and invite them to come and see, Ioh. 1.41.46. Ioh. 4.29.
If Zacheus be converted, he receives Christ joyfully, Luke 19.6. If Matthew be
converted, he entertains him with a feast, Luke 5.29. If Cornelus be instructed
in the knowledge of him, he will call his kinsfolk and friends to partake of
such a banquet, Acts 10.24. If David be converted himself, he will endeavor
that other sinners may be converted too, Psa. 51.13. and will show them what
the Lord has done for his soul. The turning of a sinner from evil to good, is
like the turning of a Bell from one side to another, you cannot turn it, but it
will make a sound, and report its own motion. He that has not a mouth open to
report the glory of Gods mercy to his soul, and to strengthen and edify his
brethren, may justly question the truth of his own conversion. In Aarons
garments (which were types of holiness) there were to be golden Bells and
Pomegranates, which (if we may make any allegorical application of it)
intimates unto us, That as a Holy life is fruitful and active in the duties
of spiritual obedience, so it is loud and vocal in sounding forth the praises
of God, and thereby endeavoring to edify the Church. Gedeons Lamps and
Pitchers were accompanied with Trumpets; when God is pleased to put any light
of grace into these earthen vessels of ou^s, we should have mouths full of
thankfulness to return unto him the glory of his goodness.

And as that repentance is unsound which is not accompanied with thankfulness,
so that thankfulness is but empty and hypocritical, Quintil. Insti. ^i. 10
cap. 3. A. Gelli. l. 1. c. 15. (...). Aeschy^us apud Plut. de And. Poetis.

Dicta sactis desicientibus erubescunt. Tertul. de pat^ia cap. 1.


which does not spring-out of sound repentance; we use to say that the words of
Fools are in labris nata, borne in their lips: but the words of wise men are E
sulc^pectoris, drawn up out of an inward judgment. The Calves of the lips are
no better then the Calves of the Stall in Gods account, if they have not an
heart in them. Without this the promise here mad to God would be no other then
that with which nurses deceive their little children, when they promise them a
gay golden new nothing. Praise in the mouth without repentance in the heart, is
like a Sea-weed that grows without a root. Like the pouring of Balm and Spices
upon a dead body, which can never thoroughly secure it from putrefaction. Like a
perfume about one sick of the plague, whose sweet smell carries infection along
with it. (...). Clem. Alex. S^^om. l. 7. Deum colit, quisquis imitatus est.
Senec. Epist. 95. Vid. Chrysostom. Hom. 25. in Math. (...).
It is not the mentioning of mercies, but the improving of them unto piety,
which expresses our thankfulness unto God. Gods sets every blessing upon our
score, and expects an answer and return suitable. He compares Corazin and
Bethsaida with Tire and Sidon; and if their lives be as bad as these, their
punishment shall be much heavier, because the mercies they enjoyed were much
greater. The not using of mercies is the being unthankful for them. And it is
an heavy account which men must give for abused mercies, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Amos
2.9.13. Luke 13* 7. Heb. 6.7. Sins against mercy and under mercy, are the first
ripe fru^^; when the Sun shines hottest, the fruits ripen fastest, Amos 8.1.2.
Ier. 1.11.12. God does not bear so long with the provocations of a Church, as
of those that are not a people; the sins of the Amorites were longer in
ripening, then the sins of Israel. When judgment is abroad, it will begin at
the House of God.

II. We should be so much the more earnestly pressed unto this, Sect. 8^
by how much it is the greater evidence of our conversion unto God, and by how
much more apt we are to call for mercies when we want them, then with the Leper
to return praises when we do enjoy them. Ten cried to be healed, but there was
but one that returned glory to God. Vessels will sound when they are empty,
fill them and they are presently dumb. When we want mer^cies, then with Pharaoh
we cry out for pardon, for peace, for supplies, for deliverances; but when
prayers are answered, and our turn served, how few remember the method which
God prescribes, Call on me in the day of trouble, I will hear thee, and th^n
shall glorify me. Psalm. 50.15. yea how many like Swine trample on the meat
that feeds them, and tread under foot the mercies that preserve them? How many
are so greedily intent upon the things they desire, that they cannot see nor
value the things they enjoy. Omni^ festinatio caeca est. It is noted even of
good King Hezekiah, that he did not render according to the benefits which he
had received, Seneca de Benefic. li 3. c. 3. Live. lib. 22.
2 Chronicles. 32.25. Therefore we should be exhorted in our prayers for pardon and
grace, to do as the Church here does, to promise the Sacrifices of
Thankfulness and obediene, not as a price to purchase mercy (for our good
extends not unto God, Psalm. 16.2) but as a tie and obligation upon our selves,
to acknowledge and return the praise of mercy to him that gives it. And this
the Apostle exhorts us unto, that our requests should be made known unto God,
not only with prayer and supplication, but with Thankesgiving, Phil. 4.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.18. 1 Timothy 2.1. which we find to have been his own practice. Ephesians.
3, 14.20.21. We should keep a Catalogue of Gods mercies to quicken us unto
duty, as well as a Catalogue of our own sins to make us cry for mercy. And
unto this duty of Thanksgiving we may be excited,

I. By the consideration of Gods greatness. Great is the Lord, and therefore
greatly to be praised, Psalm. 145.3. The praises of God should be according to
his Name, Ps. 48.10. Ps. 96.8. All things were made for no other end, but to
return glory to him that made them. Because al things are of him, therefore all
must be to him, To. 11.36 And this the very Figure of the world teaches us.
For a Circular line ends where it began, and returns back into its original
point, Vid. Field of the Church. li. 1. cap. 1. Plutarch. lib. de E. Qui curat
esse nisi propter te. pro nihilo est, and nihil est. Qui vult esse sibi and non
tibi nihil esse incipit inter omnia Bern. sermon. 20 in Cant Eo quisque pessimus
quo optimus, si hoc ipsum quod est optimus adscrib^t sibi. sermon. 84 in Cantic.
by that means strengthening and preserving it self. For things are usually
strongest when nearest their original, and the more remote from that, the
weaker they grow. As a tree is strongest at the root, and a branch or bough
next the trunk or stock, and the further out it grows from thence, the smaller
and we^ker it grows too; and the further it is from the original of its being,
the nearer it is unto not. Being. So all creatures are hereby taught both for
preservation of that being they have, and for supply of what perfections they
want, and in both, for the setting forth of the greatness of their Maker, (out
of whose infinite Being all finite beings are sustained and perfected) to run
back unto God, for whose sake they are, and have been created. Rivers come from
the Sea, and therefore run back into the Sea again; The trees receive sap from
the earth, and within a while pay it back in those leaves that fall down to the
earth again. Now as God has made all creatures thus to show forth the glory of
his greatness, so he will have them do it by these Principles, and in that manner
of working which he has planted in them. Inanimate and mere natural
crea^ures are bid to praise the Lord, Psalm. 148.8.9. but this ^hey do blindly
and ignorantly, like the arrow which flies toward the mark, but understands
not its own motion, being directed thither by an understanding without and
above it self. And thus when every thing by the natural weight and inclination
of its own form moves to the place where it may be preserved, or draws to it
those further degrees of perfection, whereby it may be improved, and have more
of being communicated to it, it may truly be said to praise the Lord, in that
it obeys the Law which he planted in it, and is by his wise providence
carried back toward him, to derive its conservation and perfection from the
same fountain from whence its Being did proceed. But now reasonable creatures
being by God enriched with Internal knowledge, and that knowledge in his
Church exceedingly raised by his manifestation of himself as their utte^most
blessedness in the Word unto them, He therefore requires that we should work
actively, and with intention of the End for which he made us, guiding all our
aims and inclinations toward his glory by that internal knowledge of his
Excellency which he has implanted in us, and revealed to us. And indeed all
other creatures are in this sense said to glorify God, because the infinite
power, wisdom, goodness, and perfection of God which are in their beings and
workings so notably relucent, do become the object of reasonable creatures, to
contemplate upon, and by that means draw forth admiration and adoration of him.

II. By the consideration of Gods goodness. He deserves it at our hands. Sect.
9.
He gives more to us then we are able to render unto him. The Sun shines on the
Moon with his own glorious light, the Moon ret^rns but a (...) spotted light
upon the world. We can return nothing unto God, but that which is his own, 1
Chro. 29.16. and it goes not with that purity from us as it came unto us, We
cannot send forth a thought round about us, but it w^ll return with a report
of mercy, and that mercy calls for a return of praise. Magna est gratia quae
tribuiturhominib^s vehemen -- ter egentibus, and in rebus magnis and
difficilibus and cum quis beneficiu^ alicui dat aut solus, aut primus vid.
Arist. Rhet. lib. 2 c. 7 itaque in hujusmodi benefactores admissa gravius
vindicantur. L 1. de obsequiis parentibus and pationis prae^^a^t* D. and L. 28.
de poenis. sect. 8.
But above all, the goodness of God mentioned in the text, Taking away
iniquity, and receiving graciously, this calls for the Calv^s of the lips to be
offered, as in the new Moons, with Trumpets and solemnity, Number* 10.10. The
beams of the Sun the more directly they fall on the body of the Moon, do fill
it with the more abundant light: so the more copious and notable Gods mercies
are unto us, the more enlarged should our praises be unto him. Therefore true
Penitents that have more tasted of mercy, are more obliged unto thanksgiving,
Psalm. 147.20. Excellent speech is not comely in the mouth of fools, Prove. 17.7.
But Praise is comely for the upright, Psalm. 33.1. For as God is most dishonored
by the sins of holy men when they are committed against light, and break
forth into scandal, as a Pretiosam vestem exigua quaevis macula turpius
decolorat. Nobis ad immundiciam minima quaevis inobedientia sufficit, etc.
Bernard. ^er. de triplici custodia.
spot in silk is a greater blemish then in Sackcloth, 2 Samuel 12.14. So is he
most honored by the confession and praises of holy men, because they know more
of his glory and goodness then others, and can report greater things of him.
Wicked men speak of God by hearsay, and by notion only, but holy men by Est
locus ubi vere quiescens and quietus cernitur Deus, lo^cus omnino non judicis*
non magistri; sed spousi -sed heu rara hora and parva mora. Bern. ser. 23. in
Cant. Men's ineffabili ve^bi illecta dulcedine quodammodo se ^^bi suratur, imo
rapitur atque elabitur a scipsa ut verbo fruatur -- dulce commercium, sed breve
momentum and experimentum rarum. Ibid. sermon. 85. vid. etiam sermon. 83* (...)
sermon. 1.3.31.
intimate Experience, as the Queen of Sheha knew more of Solomon's wisdom from
his mouth, then from his fame. He that sees but the outward Court and buildings
of a Palace, can say it is a glorious place: but he that like the Ambassadors
of the King of Babylen in Hezekiah his time, shall be admitted to see the house
of precious things, and all the Treasures of the Palace, can speak much more
honorably of it. Every one might see and admire the stones of the Temple
without, who were not admitted to view the Gold, and curious workmanship
within. The more intimate Communion a man has with God as a Redeemer, the more
glorious and abundant praises can he render unto him. Besides Illa domus
l^etiti^e est, ista militiae. Illa domus laudis, ista orationis. Bern. sermon. 2.
in dedicat* Eccle.
Praise is the language of Heaven; the whole Happiness of the Saints there is
to enjoy God, and their whole busin^sse is to praise him. And they who are to
live in another Country, will be more solicitous to learn the language, and
foreacquaint themselves with the manners and usages of that country, than they
who have no hopes nor assurance of coming thither. As they who have hope to be
like Christ in glory, will purify themselves, that they may in the mean time
be like him in grace, 1 John 3.2, 3. So they that have hope to praise him for
ever in heaven, will study the Song of Moses and of the Lamb before they come
thither. And indeed none can praise God but they that can abase and deny
themselves; wicked men in all duties serve and seek themselves. But the very
formality of praise is to seek God, and to make him the End of our so doing.
The Apostle exhorts us to offer our selves a living sacrifice, Romans 12.1. that
is to say, to separate our selves for God, and for his uses. The sacrifice we
know was Gods, for his sake it was burnt and broken, and destroyed. We must be
such Sacrifices, deny our selves, be lost to our selves; not serve, nor seek,
nor aim at our selves: but resolve to esteem nothing dear in comparison of
Gods honor, and to be willing any way whether by life or by death that he may
be magnified in us, Acts. 21.13. Phil. 1.20. Love of Communion in natural
creatures is stronger then self-love; Stones will move upward, fire downward,
to preserve the universe from a vacuity, and to keep the compages of nature
together. How much more is, and ought the love of God himself in the new
creature to be stronger then self-love whereby it seeks and serves it self?
And without this, all other services are but Ananias hi^ lie, lies to the holy
Ghost, keeping to our selves what we would seem to bestow upon him. Lifting up
the eyes, beating the breast, spreading the hands, bending the knee, hanging
down the head, levelling the countenance, sighing, sobbing, fasting, howling,
all, nothing else but mocking of God. And we may say of such men, as the
Emperor of him that sold the glasses for pearl (though in a sadder sense)
Imposturam faciunt and patientur. They deceive God, and fail in his precepts,
and they shall be themselves deceived, and fail in their own expectation. For
the hope of the wicked shall perish.

III. By a double consideration of our selves. I. Of our natural Torpor and
sluggishnesse unto this duty. As the dead Sea drinks in the River Jordan,
Sect. 10.
and is never the sweeter, and the ocean all other Rivers, and is never the
fresher. So we are apt to receive daily mercies from God, and still remain
unsensible of them, unthankful for them. Gods mercies to us are like the dew
on all the ground, our thanks to him like the dew on the fleece We are like
Fishermens wheels, wide at that end which lets in the Fish, but narrow at the
other end, so that they cannot get out again. Greedy to get mercy; ^enacious
to hold it, but unthankful in acknowledging or right using of it. The rain
comes down from heaven in showers, it goes up but in mists. We sow in our land
one measure, and receive ten; yea Isaac received an hundred fold, Genesis 26. 12.
But God sowes ten, it may be an hundred mercies amongst us, when we scarce
return the praise and the fruit of one. Our hearts in this case are like the
windows of the Temple, 1 King. 6.4. wide inward to let in mercies, but narrow
outward to let forth praises. Now as Solomon says, if the iron be blunt, we
must put too the more strength; and as Husbandmen use where the nature of land
is more defective, to supply it with the more importunate labor; so having
hearts so earthly for the performance of so heavenly a duty, we should use the
more holy violence upon them; and as the Widow did extort justice from an
unjust Judge by her continual coming, Luke 18.5. we should press and urge,
and with ingeminated importunity charge this duty upon our selves, as the
Psalmist does, O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men, Psalm. 107.8, 15, 21, 31. II. Of our
own benefit. For indeed all the benefit which arises out of this duty,
redounds to us, and none to God. His glory is infinite, and eternally the same,
Ipse sibi omnia. Tertull. contra Prax^am cap. 5.
there is nor can be no accession unto that by all our praises. When a Glass
reflecteth the brightness of the Sun, there is but an acknowledgement of what
was, not any addition of what was not. When an excellent Orator makes a
Panegyricall Oration in praise of some honorable Person, he does not infuse
any dram of worth into the person, but only sets forth and declares that
which is unto others. A curious Picture praises a beautiful face, not by
adding beauty to it, but by representing that which was in it before. The
window which lets in light into an house, does not benefit the light, but the
house into which the light shines. So our praising of God does serve to
quicken, comfort, and refresh our selves, who have interest in so good a God:
or to edify and encourage our brethren, that they may be ambitious to serve so
honorable a Master: but they add no luster or glory to God at all.

Now lastly, for the right performance of this Duty. Sect. 11.
It is founded on the due apprehensions of Gods Being Good and of his Doing
Good, Psa. 119.68. Or on his excellency in himself, and his goodness unto us.
In the former respect it stands in adoring and extolling the great Name of
God, ascribing in our hearts and mouths all blessedness unto him,
acknowledging his infinite Majesty in himself, and his Sovereignty over us his
poor creatures, Exodus 15.11. Mic. 7.18. and so covering our faces, and
abhorring our selves in his sight, Isaiah 6. Ioh 42.5.6. not daring to question
any of his deep, absolu^e, and most unsearchable Counsels; but because all
things are of him, to acknowledge that all things ough^ to be for and to him,
and are to be reduced to the Ends of his glory, by the counsel of his own
Difficultatem quae^^ionis cur alius sic alius vero sic m^r^uus est, velu^ non
solven ^o sol^it Apostolus^ Et hujus profunditati^ horrotem usque abh^^per^uxi^
ut dic^^et, etiam c^jus vult mis^r^^^r, and que ^ vult obdu^at. August. contra
2. Epist. Pelag. l. 2. c. 7. and l. ^. c. 6. Cur in diversa cau^^idem ju^^icium
nisi hoc vo lo? d^ Dono pe^sev. c. 8. de pecca^* meritis and remissi. l. 2.
cap. 5.
will, Romans 9.20.21. Romans 11.33.36. Matthew. 11.25, 26. Psalm. 135.5, 6. Job 9.12.
Ephesians. 1.11. In the latter respect, as he is the God in whom we live and m^^e,
and have our being, and hope for our blessedness: So it imports, first a
glorying and rejoicing in him as our alone felicity, Psalm. 33.1. Habac. 3.18.
Phil. 4.4. Secondly, a choosing and preferring him above all other good things,
making him our end and aim, in life, in death, in doing, in suffering Romans 4
7.8. Thirdly, a thankful acknowledgement of all his mercies, as most
beneficial unto us, and most gratuitous and free in regard of him, 2 Samuel
7.18. Lam. 3.22.23. Lastly, a constant endeavor of a holy life, so to bring
forth frui^, to do the will of God, and to finish his work which he has set
us, so to order our conversation aright before him, as that he may have
ascribed unto him the glory of his authority over the consciences of men, and
of the power of his Love shed abroad in their hearts, and that all that
Justinius Martyr de se faretur, se conspecta Christiano rum in morte Const^ntia
col legiss^ veram esse quae apud ipsos v geret pietatem. Apolog. 1. Illa ipsa
obstinatio qua^ exprobratis magist^a est. Quis enim non contemplatione ej^s
concutitur ad requirendum. quid in^us in ^esit? Quis non ubi requisivit accedit
^ubi accessit, pati exoptar, Tertul. Apolog. c. ult.
see our conversation may say, doubtless, the God whom these men serve after
so holy a manner, for whom they despise all outward and sinful pleasures, is a
holy and blessed God, infinitely able to comfort, satisfy, and reward all
those that so conscionably and constantly give up themselves unto him, John
15.8. and 17.4. Psalm. 50.23. Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7. Mat. 5.16. 2 Cor. 9.13. 1 Pet. 2.1^.

The second particular in their Covenant is, amendmen of life, Sect. 12.
and a more special care against those sins of carnal confidence, and
spiritual adultery, whereby they had formerly dishonored and provoked God.
From whence there are two observations which offer themselves.

1. That true repentance and sound conversion, as it makes a man thankful for
the pardon of sin past, so it makes him careful against the practice of sin
for the time to come, especially those particular sins, whereby he had
formerly most dishonored God, and defiled his own conscience. This doctrine
consists of two parts, which we will consider asunder.

And first of this care and purpose of amendment in general. When the poor
Converts who had been guilty of the most precious and innocent blood that ever
was shed, began to be convinced of that horrible sin, and found those nails
wherewith they had fastened the Lord of glory to a Cross, pricking and piercing
of their own hearts, with what bleeding and relenting affections did they
mourn over him? with what earnest importunities did they inquire after the way
of salvation wherein they might serve and enjoy him? never were their hands
more cruel in shedding that blood, then their hearts were now sollicitous to
be bathed in it, to be cleansed by it, Acts 2.37. The poor Prodigal who is
the Emblem of a penitent sinner, when he came to himself again, or
bethought himself, Oportebat quidem si fieri posset revivere me (ut ita loqu^r)
denuo quod male vi^i sed faciam recogitando q^ reoperando non possum. Bern.
Sermon. de Cant. Ezekiae.
as the phrase is, 1 King. 8.47. (for we do never depart from God, but we do
withal forsake and lose our selves, and are transported with a spiritual
madness from our right minds) immediately grew to a resolution of arising out
of that base and brutish condition and of going home to his Father, and by that
means to his wit and senses again. So when by John's preaching of repentance,
men were turned to the Wisdom of the just, (for all unrighteousness is folly
and madness) and were prepared for the Lord, we immediately find what a
special care they had to be informed in the ways of duty, earnestly inquiring
after that new course of obedience which they were now to walk, Luke 3.10.12,
14. All true penitents are of the mind of these in the Text, we will not say
any more, and what have I to do any more with Idols? ver. 8. as Ezra in his
penitent prayer, Should we now again break thy Commandments? Chap. 9.13.
When Christ rose from the dead, he died no more: and when we repent of sin,
it must be with a repentance that must never any more be repented of, Romans
6.9, 12. 2 Cor. 7.10. The time past of our life must suffice us to have wrought
the will of the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 4.3.

This care arises from the nature of true repentance, which has two names
usually given it; (...), a change of the mind; the heart is framed to have
other and truer notions of sin, of grace, of heaven, of hell, of conscience,
of salvation then it it had before; for the mind of wicked men being defiled,
they can frame to themselves none but impure apprehensions of spiritual
things, as a yellow eye sees every thing yellow, and a bitter palate tastes
every thing bitter. 2. (...), a change of the cares, and endeavors of life.
That whereas before a man made provision for the flesh, and his study and care
was how to satisfy the lusts of his own heart, Romans 13.14. what he should
eat, what he should drink, wherewith he should be clothed: Now his care is
how he may be saved, how he may honor and enjoy God, Acts 2.37. and 16.30.
Consilium futuri ex pretcrito veni^. S^nec. ^p. 83.
The first question in Repentance is, What have I done? Ier. 8.6. and the next
question is, What shall I do? Acts 9.6. And this care repentance works,

1. By a godly sorrow for sin past. Sect. 13.
It brings into a man's remembrance the history of his former life, makes him
with heaviness of spirit recount the guilt of so many innumerable sins
wherewith he had bound himself as with chains of darkness; the loss of so
much precious time misspent in the service of such a Master as had no other
wages to give but shame and death. The horrible indignities thereby offered to
the ^ajestie and Justice of God, the odious contempt of his holy Will and
sovereign Authority; the daring neglect of his threatenings, and undervaluing
of his rewards; the high provocation of his jealousy and displeasure; the base
corrivalty and contesting of filthy lusts with the grace of the Gospel, and
the precious blood of the Son of God: the gainsaying, and wrestling, and
stubborn antipathie of a carnal heart to the pure motions of the Spirit, and
Word of Christ: the presumptuous repulses of him that stands at the door and
knocks, waiting that he may be gracious: the long turning of his back, and
thrusting away from him the word of Reconciliation, wherein Christ by his
Ambassadors had so often beseeched him to be reconciled unto God: The
remembrance of these things makes a man look with selfe-abhorrency upon
himself, and full detestation upon his former courses. And he now no longer
considers the Silver or the Gold, the profit or the pleasure of his wonted
lusts, (...).

Achaeus Eretrieus. apud Athenaeum lib. 6 cap. ^0.


though they be never so delectable or desirable in the eye of flesh; he looks
upon them as accursed things to be thrown away, as the Converts did upon their
costly and curious Books, Acts 19.19. Isa. 30.22, 31, 7. Sin is like a plaited
picture; on the one side of it to the impenitent appears nothing but the
beauty of pleasure whereby it bewitcheth and allureth them; on the other side
to the penitent appears nothing but the horrid and ugly face of guilt and
shame whereby it amazeth and confounds them; Thus the remembrance of sin
past (which they are very careful to keep always in their sight, Psalm. 51.3.)
does by godly sorrow work special care of amendment of life for the time to
come, 2 Chronicles. 6.37, 38. Psalm. 119.59. Ezec. 16.61, 63.20.43.

2. By a present sense of the weight and burden of remaining corruptions,
which work, and move, and put forth what strength they can to resist the grace
of God in us. As the time past wherein sin reigned, so the present burden of
sin besetting us, is esteemed sufficient, and makes a man careful not to
load himself wilfully with more, being ready to sinck, and forced to cry out
under the pain of those which he unwillingly lies under already. (...).
Clearch. apud Athen. lib. 14. cap. 1.
A very glutton when he is in a fit of the gout or stone, will forbear those
meats which feed so painful diseases. A penitent sinner is continually in
pain under the body of sin, and therefore dares not feed so dangerous and
tormenting a disease. Conflictus miserabilis. Aug. de nupt. and concupis. l. 2.
c. 1. Quo quis pejus se habet, minus se^^it. Senec. Epist. 52.
The more spiritual any man is, the more painful and burdensome is
corruption to him, Romans 7.22. For sin to the new man is as sickness to the
natural man. The more exquisite and delicate the natural senses are, the more
are they sensible and affected with that which offends nature. Contraries
cannot be together without combat. The spirit will lust against the flesh,
and not suffer a man to fulfill the lusts of it, Gal. 5 16, 17. the seed of God
will keep down the strength of sin, 1 John 3.9.

3. By an holy jealousy, (...). Arist. ^^bet. l. 2. c. 5.

Sollicitus incipit ambulare cum deo suo, and ex omni par^e scru^aturne vel in
levis^^ma re tremendae illius Majestatis offendatur aspectus -- Sic ardens and
lucens nondum in domo se esse confidat, ubi sine omni timore vento^um accensum
lumen soleat deportari, sed memi^e^it se esse sub dio, and utraque ma^u sludeat
operire quod portat, etc. Bernat. ser. 3. in vigil. nativ.


and godly fear of the falsenesse and backsliding of our corrupt heart, lest
like Lots wise it should look back toward Sodom, and like Israel have a mind
hankering after the flesh pots of Egypt, the wonted profits and pleasures of
forsaken lusts. A godly heart prizeth the love of God, and the feelings of
spiritual comfort from thence arising above all other things, and is afraid to
lose them. It has felt the burnings of sin, the stingings of these fiery
Serpents, and has often been forced to befoole it self, and to beshrew its
own ignorance, and with Ephraim to smite upon the thigh. And the burnt child
dreads the fire, and dares not meddle any more with it; Considers the
heaviness of Gods frown, the rigor of his Law, the weakness and fickleness
of the heart of man, the difficulty of finding Christ out when he has
withdrawn himself, and of recovering light and peace again, when the soul
has wilfully brought it self under a cloud; and therefore will not venture to
harden it self against God. Thus godly fear keeps men from sin, Job 31.23.
Psalm. 119.120. Prove. 28.14. Eccles. 9.2. Ier. 32 40. Phil. 2.12. Psalm. 4.4.

4. By a love to Christ, and a sweet recounting of the mercies of God in him.
The less a man loves sin, the more he shall love Christ. Now repentance
works an hatred of sin, and thereupon a love of Christ, which love is ever
operative, and putting forth it self toward holiness of life. As the Love of
God in Christ toward us works forgiveness of sin: so our reciprocal
love, wrought by the feeling and comfort of that forgiveness, works in us an
hatred of sin. A direct love begets a Reflect love, as the heat wrought in
the earth strikes back a heat up into the air again. The woman in the Gospel
having much forgiven her, loved much, Luke 7.47. We love him because he loved
us first; and love will not suffer a man to wrong the thing which he loves.
What man ever threw away Jewels or money when he might have kept them? except
when the predominant love of something better made these things comparatively
hateful, Luke 14.26. What woman could be persuaded to throw away her sucking
child from her breast unto Swine or Dogs to devour it? Our love to Christ, and
his Law, will not suffer us to cast him off, or to throw his Law behind our
backs. New obedience is over joined unto pardon of sin and repentance for it,
by the method of Gods Decrees, by the order and chain of Salvation, and
arises out of the internal character and disposition of a child of God. We
are not Sons only by Adoption, appointed to a new inheritance; but we are
Sons by Regeneration also, partakers of a new nature, designed unto a new life,
joined unto a new head, descended from a new Adam, unto whom therefore we are
in the power of his Resurrection, and in the fellowship of his sufferings to be
made conformable, Phil. 3.10. And the Apostle has many excellent and weighty
arguments to enforce this upon us, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. If then ye be risen with
Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ is sitting on the right
hand of God. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth.
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God; when Christ who is
our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. 1. Our
fellowship with Christ; we are risen with him; what he did corporally for us,
he does the same spiritually in us. As a Savior and Mediator, he died and
rose alone; But as a Head and second Adam, he never did anything but his
mystical Body and seed were so taken into the fellowship of it, as to be made
conformable unto it. Therefore if he rose as a Savior to justify us, we must
as members be therein fashioned unto him, and rise spiritually by
heavenly-mindednesse, and a new life to glorify him. 2. We must have our
affections in Heaven, because Christ is there. The heart ever turns toward its
treasure; where the body is, thither will the Eagles resort. 3. He is there in
glory at Gods right hand; and grace should move to glory as a piece of earth to
the whole. And he is there in our business, making intercession in our
behalf, providing a place for us, sending down gifts unto us. And the Client
cannot but have his heart on his own business, when the Advocate is actually
stirring about it. 4. We are dead with Christ, as to the life of sin. And a
dead man takes no thought or care for the things of that life from whence he is
departed. A man naturally dead looks not after food, or raiment, or land, or
money, or labor, etc. And a man dead to sin, takes no more care how to
provide for it. 5. In Christ we have a new life, therefore we should have new
inclinations suitable unto it, and new provisions laid in for it. A child in the
womb is nourished by the navill; being born, it is nourished by the mouth. A
natural man feeds on worldly things by sense, a spiritual man on heavenly
things by faith and conscience. We can have nothing from the first Adam which
is not mortal and mortiferous. Nothing from the second which is not vital and
eternal. Whatever the one gives us, shrinks, and withers into death; whatever
the other, springs and proceeds unto immortal life. Our life therefore being
new, the affections which serve it, and wait upon it, must be new likewise. 6.
This life is our own, not so any thing in the world besides. I can purchase in
the world only to me and mine Heirs for ever; but spiritual purchases are to
my self for ever. And every man's affections are naturally most fixed upon that
which is most his own. 7. It is an hidden life, the best of it is yet unseen, 1
John 3.2. and though the Cabinet which is seen be rich, yet the Jewel which is
hidden in it is much richer. And as there is a sinful curiosity in lust, to
look after the hidden things of iniquity, and to hanker after forbidden
pleasures: so there is a spiritual curiosity or ambition in grace, to aspire
toward hidden treasures, to press forward toward things that are before us,
to be clothed upon with our house that is from heaven. As Absalom being
brought from banishment, longed to see the face of his father, 2 Samuel 14.32:
Non quiesco nisi osculetur me osculo oris sui. Gratias de osculo pedum, gratias
and de manus; sed si cura est illi ulla de me, osculetur me osculo oris sui.
Non sum ingrata, sed A^o, accepi f^t^^r metitis potiora, sed pro^sus infe^io^a
votis; desideri^ f^ro^, n^n ratione, etc Be^n^rd. ser. 9. in Cant.
So the soul being delivered out of the land of darkness, never thinks it
sees enough of light. When God did most intimately reveal himself unto Moses,
Moses did most earnestly beseech him to show him his glory, Exodus 33.11, 18.
The more sweetness we find in the first fruits, in so much of Christ as is
revealed to us, the more strong are our affections to the whole Harvest, to
that abundance of him which is hidden from us. A few clusters of Grapes and
bunches of Figs, will inflame the desire of enjoying that Canaan which
abounds with them. 8. It is hidden with Christ, so hidden as that we know
where it is. Testimonium credibile nimis gusta^ae sapientiae est esu^^es ipsa
tam vehemens. sermon. 2. de duabus mensis. Non extundit desider^um Sanctum foelix
inventio ^ed extendi^, etc. ser. 84. in Cant. Vide si^ Claudii Espeneaei
libellum de Languore spirit. cap. 3. and 4. Sect. 14.
Hidden, so that the enemy cannot reach it, but not hidden from the faith of
the child. 9. It is hidden in God. It is life in the fountain, Psalm. 36.9.
And every thing is perfectest in its original and fountain. And this is such
a fountain of life as has in it fullness without satiety, and purity without
defilement, and perpetuity without decay, and Al-sufficiency without defect.
Lastly, It is but hidden, it is not lost; hidden like seed in the ground; when
Christ the Son of righteousness shall appear, this life of ours in him will
spring up and appear glorious.

Now next let us consider this Care of Repentance against a man's own more
particular and special sins. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon
horses etc. Israel had been guilty of very many provocations, but when they
come to covenant with God, and to renew their repentance, their thoughts and
cares are most set against their carnal confidence, and spiritual Adultery.
Their most unfeigned detestations, their most serious Resolutions were against
these their most proper sins. True Repentance works indeed a general
hatred of every false way, Psalm. 119.128. and suffers not a man to allow
himself in the smallest sin. Yet as the Dog in hunting of the Dear,
though he drive the whole Herd before him, yet fixes his eye and sent upon
some one particular which is singled out by the dart of the huntsman: (...).
Arist. Rhet. lib. 2.
so though sound conversion do work an universal hatred of all sin, because
it is sin, (for Hatred is ever against the whole kind of a thing) Though
every member of the old man be mortified, and every grace of the new man shaped
and fashioned in us: yet the severest exercise of that Hatred is against the
sins whereunto the conscience has been more enslaved, and by which the name
of God has been more dishonered. A man that has many wounds, if there be any
of them more deep, dangerous, or nearer any vital part then the other, though
he will tend the cure of them all, yet his chiefest care shall be toward that.
As the King of Syria gave command to his Army to single out the King of Israel
in the battle, 1 King. 22.31: so does Repentance lay its batteries most against
the highest and strongest and most reigning sin of the heart; and by how much
the more a man prized it before, by so much the more does he detest it now.
They counted no silver nor gold too good to frame their Idols of before; their
eare-rings shall go to make them a Calfe, Exodus 22.3. but when they repent,
nothing can be too base to compare them, or to cast them unto, Isay 2: 20.30:
22.

The Humane nature is the same in all men, yet some faculties are more vigorous
in some, and others in other; some witty, others strong, some beautiful,
others proper, some a quick eye, others a ready tongue; some for learned,
others for mechanical professions; as some grounds take better to some kind of
grain then to others: so in the new man, though all the graces of Christ are in
some degree and proportion shaped in every Regenerate person, yet one excels in
one grace, another in another. Abraham in faith, Job in patience, Moses in
meekness, David in meditation, Solomon in wisdom, Phineas in zeal, Mary
Magdalene in love, Paul in labor etc. And so is it in the old man too. Though
by nature we have all the members of original corruption, yet these put
themselves forth in actual vigor differently. One man is more possessed by a
proud devil, another by an unclean one, Ahaz superstitious, Balaam ambitious,
Cain envious, Corah stubborn, Esau profane, Ismael a mocker, the young man a
worldling. According to different complexions and tempers of body (by which
Habitual lust is excited and called forth into act) or according to
differences of education, In eodem prato Bos herbam quaerit, c^nis leporem,
Ciconia Lace^tu^. Senec. Ep. 108.
countries, Multae gentes ob sp^cialia* quaedam peccata infames; unde illud,
(...) Suid. in (...). Baeotii, Pharselii, Thessali, ob voracitatem. vid.
Athenae. l. 10, Isauti and Arabes ob la. trocinia. Dion. l. 55. Ammia^. Marcel.
l. 14. Theodos. Cod. de fer^is l 10. etc. Plin. l. 6. c. 28. S^r^bo lib. 16.
Diode^. Sicul. l. 3. Qui m^ncipia vendunt, nationem cujusque in venditione
pronunciare debent -- Praesumptum etenim est quosdam servos malos videri, quia
and natione sunt quae magis infamis est. Leg. 31. sect. 21. D. de Aedilitio
Edicto. Athena^um lingua^a Civitas. Tertul. de Anima. c. 3* Hinc Adagia.
Cretensi me^dacior* Paeno persidior, Scytha asperior, Sibarita fastuosior,
Miletiis effaeminatior, etc. Vid. Erasm. in inito Chiliad. and Alex. ab Alex.
genial* l. 4. cap. 13. Arist. Rhet. lib. 6. cap. 7. Live. lib. 45.
callings, converse, and interests in the world, so men are differently
assaulted with distinct kinds of sin, and most men have their peccatum in
deliciis, which they may more properly call Their own, Psalm. 18.23. And as
this sin is usually the special bar and obstacle that keeps men from
Christ, as we see in the example of the young man, Mark. 10.22. and of the
Jews, John 5.44, 12.42.43. So when Christ has broken this obstacle, and
gotten the throne in a man's heart, then the chei^e work of Repentance is to
keep this sin from gathering strength again; for as they say of some kind
of Serpents that being cut in pieces, the parts will wriggle toward one
another, and close and get life again: so of all sins a man is in most
danger of the Reviving of his own proper corruption, as being like the nettle,
whose roots are so crooked, are so catching to the ground, that it is a work
of much care to keep the ground clean of them after they are weeded out*

And therefore repentance sets it self particularly against that sin as a
special argument of sincerity. I was upright, says David, before him, and
kept my self from mine iniquity. Psalm. 18.23. And he that it begotten of God,
says the Apostle, keeps himself, 1 John 5.18. which he does certainly with
most vigilancie there where he is in most danger of being assaulted. See in
David, He had in that great and scandalous fall of his, stained his conscience
with impure lust, with the guilt of blood, and that not out of ignorance or
common infirmity, or sudden passion and surprizall of some hasty
temptation, (which might happily h^ve consisted with uprightnes,) but
seriously, and deliberately, using many cunning arts, and carnal shifts of
sinful wisdom to color and daub it over: And lastly by this means had
given a great blow to the holy name of God, and caused his enemies to
blaspheme, (as Nathan tells him, Sam. 1^.14.) Therefore in his Penitential
Psalm, these four things he principally insists upon, A clean heart, pardon
of bloud-guiltinesse, Truth in the inward parts, and occasion to teach
transgressors the way of God, that they may be converted, Psalm 51.6, 7, ^0,
13, 14. See it in Zacheus. Worldliness and defrauding had been his sin, a
Restitution and Liberality are the evidences of his repentance in special for
that sin, Luke 19.8. So Mary Magdalen, Her sin, han been uncleanness, Her
eyes vessels and factors for adultery, Her hair a Net platted and spread to
catch sinners. She remembered her wanton kisses, her provoking perfumes; and now
in her conversion where her sin had been most prevalent, there her sorrow
was most penitent, and her repentance most vigilant; her eyes vessels of
tears, her kisses humbled, or rather advanced unto the feet of Christ; her
hair a towell to wipe off those tears which she judged too unclean for so
holy feet to be washed withal; Her Ointment poured out upon a new lover, who
had anointed her with his grace, Luke 7.37.38. The sin of the Iaylor against
Paul and Silas, was cruelty, Acts 16.24. and the first fruit of his repentance
was courtesy to them; He brought them out of a dungeon into his own house;
from the stocks, to his table; became an Host in stead of a Iaylor, a
Chyrurgian in stead of a Tormentor, and washed their stripes, verse. 30.33.34.
This was Daniels method of working repentance in Nebuchadnezzar, persuading a
proud oppressing Tyrant unto justice and mercy, Dan. 4.27. and Paul unto Felix,
preaching before a Quod quadrupsum ^eddat Zacheus, vide^u^ quibusdam potius
exabundantia pi^t^tis quam ex vi legi^fecisse. Lex enim quadr^pli p^^num in una
tantum su^^i specie statuit, Exodus 2^* 1.4 Vide Mal^onat, and Lu^am. Brugens.
S^n^ quod an edictu^ praetoris, attinet, videtur tantum in duplum teneri, l. 1.
P. de Pu^lican^s. At non fr^ter ejus c^gnomen^o Felix pari modera^ione age^at,
(...) Iudaeae impositus, and cuncti malefacta sibi impune ratus, ^anta
potentia, ub nixo sacit. Annal. l. 12 Antonius Felix per omnem ae yitiam ac
li^idin^m jus Regium servili ingenio exercu^^ D^usilla Cleopatrae and An^o^ii
nepte in motrimonium accepta. Tacit., Hist. l. 5. vide Joseph. antiq. l. 20. c.
5^ Liberti ejus potestatem (...) adepti stup^is exilio, caede, proscriptionibus
omnia saedabant* ^x quibus Feli^em legionibus Iudaeae praefecit. Sext. Aur.
uictor. in Claudio.
corrupt and lascivious Judge, of Righteousness, Temperance, and judgment to
come, Acts 24.25. And to the learned and superstitious * Philosophers, in a
learned discovery, and making known unto them their unknown God. Acts 17.23. So
John the Preacher of Repentance laid his axe to the root of every tree, to the
radical and prevailing lust in every order of men; to extortion in the
Publican, and to covetousness in the people, to violence in the Soldiers, to
carnal confidence in the Pharisees, Matthew. 3.7. Luke 3.9.14. and so Christ to
the young man, One thing thou want, Mark. 10.21. and to the woman of
Samaria, Go call thy husband, John 4.16. when indeed he was an Adulterer and
not an Husband.

The reason of this care of Repentance, is; 1. Because in godly Sorrow this
Sin has lien most heavy upon the conscience. Hereby God has been most of
all despised and dishonored; our consciences most wasted and defiled: our
hearts most hardened; our affections most bewitched and entangled. It has been
a Master sin, that has been able to command, and to draw in many other
servile lus^s to wait upon it. Many wounds even after they have been healed,
will against c^ange of weather affect the part wherein they were, with pain
and akeing; and therefore men usually are more tender of that part, keep it
warmer, fence it with Furs and Seare^cloathes; as the Apostle says, that on
our dishonorable parts we bestow the more abundant honor; so on such an
infirm and tender part, we bestow the more abundant care; and the like do we
in those wounds of the Soul, which are aptest to bleed afresh.

2. Hereby (as was said before) we testify our uprightness. When we will not
spare our beloved sin, nor roll it under our tongue, nor hide it in our tent,
when we will not muffle nor disguise our selves like Tamar, nor hide amongst
the bushes and trees like Adam, or in the belly of the Ship with Jonah, nor
spare any wedge of Gold with Achan, or any delicate Agag, any fatling sins
with Saul; but with David will show that we hate every false way, by throwing
the first stone at our first sin, that which lay nearest and closest in our
bosoms, which the Scripture calls Cutting off the right hand, and plucking out
the right eye. As Cranmer put that hand first into the fire which had before
subscribed to save his life. The story of the Turkish Emperou^ is commonly
known, who being reported so to dote on one of his Concubines, as for love of
her, to neglect the affairs of his Kingdom, caused her to be brought forth in
great pomp, and cut off her head before his Bashaws, to assure them that
nothing was so dear unto him, but that he could willingly p^rt from it to
attend the public welfare. This was an act of Cruelty in him; but the like is
an act of penitency in us, when we can Sacrifice the dearest affections
wherewith we served sin, Let Christ kill our Agag, though delicately
apparalled, and divide the richest of all our spo^les. If we be learned, we
shall direct all our studies unto the fear of God, Eccles. 12.12.13. If Rich,
we shall lay up a foundation of good wo^kes against the time to come, and
consecrate our merchand^ze as holy to the Lord, 1 Timothy 6.18. Isai. 23.16. If
Wise, if Honorable, if Powerf^ll, if adorned with any endowment, our business
will be with Be^al^el and Alohiah, to adorn the Gospel with them all, from
our Gold, to our Goats hair, to lay al out upon the Sanctuary; to make those
members and abilities which had been Satan's armor, and weapons of
unrighteousness to be now weapons of holiness, and dedicated unto Christ Romans
6.1^. This is the holy revenge which godly sorrow takes upon sin, 2 Cor. 7.11.

If many men who profess repentance and think they are already long ago
converted unto God, would ex^mine the truth of their conversion by this
Touchstone, it would minister matter of much humiliation and fear unto them,
when their ow^^ heart would reply against them as Samuel against Saul, Have
thou indeed, as thou professest, done the work of the Lord in destroying
Amaleck, What then means the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the
Oxen in mine ears? what mean these worldly and covetous practices? these
Lascivious or Revengefull speeches? these earthly, sensual, or ambitious
lusts? are these Agags spared and kept delicately, and can thou please thy
self in the thoughts of a sound repentance? Did Paul fear that God wou^d
humble him for those that had not repented amongst the Corinthians, by this
argument, because he should find envyings, strifes, and debates amongst them?
2 Cor. 12.20.21, And will thou presume of thy repentance, and not be humbled
when thou find the same things in thy self? Have thou never yet proclaimed
defiance ^o thy beloved sin? made it the mark of thy greatest sorrows, of
thy strongest prayers and complaints unto God? Have thou never stirred up (...)
an holy indignation and revenge against it? and above all things taken off thy
thoughts from the meditation and love of it? and found pleasure in the Holy
severity of Gods Book and the ministry thereof against it? made no covenant
with thine eye, put no knife to thy throat, set no door before thy lips, made
no friends of unrighteous Mammon: do thou still retain hankering affections
after thy wonted delights, as Lots wife after Sodom? and are the flesh pots of
Egypt desirable in thy thoughts still? Be not high-minded, but fear. There is
no greater argument of an unsound Repentance then indulgent thoughts, and
reserved delight and complacency in a master sin. The devil will diligently
observe and hastily catch one kind glance of this nature, (as Benhadads
servants did, 1 Kings 20.33.) and make use of it to do us mischief. David had
been free from some of his greatest troubles, if he had not relented toward
Absalom, and called him home from banishment. He no sooner kissed Absalom, but
Absalom courted and kissed the people to steal their hearts away from him. As
there are in points of faith, fundamental articles, so there are in points of
practice fundamental duties. And amongst them none more primarie, and
essential unto true Christians then self-denial, Matthew. 16.24. and this is
one special part and branch of self-denial to keep our selves from our own
iniquity; and to say to our most costly and darling lusts Get ye hence. Ashur
away, Idols away, I will rather be fatherless, then rely upon such Helpers.

THE FOURH SERMON.
HOSEAH 14. VER. 3.4. 3. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon
Horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our
gods; for in thee the fatherless finds mercy.

4. I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely; for mine anger
is turned away from him.


THere remains the second point formerly mentioned, from the Promise or
Covenant which Israel here makes, which I will briefly touch, and so proceed
unto the fourth verse; and that is this:

That true Repentance and Conversion takes off the Heart from all carnal
confidence, either in domestical preparations of our own, We will not ride
upon Horses: or in foreign aid from any confederates, especially enemies of
God and his Church, though otherwise never so potent; Asshur shall not save us:
Or lastly, in any superstitious, and corrupt worship, which sends us to God the
wrong way, We will not say any more to the work of our hands ye are our gods,
and causes the Soul in all conditions, be they never so desperate, so
desolate, so incurable, to rely only upon God. It is very much in the nature
of man fallen, to affect an absoluteness, and a selfe-sufficiency, to seek the
good that he desires within himself, and to derive from himself the strength
whereby he would repel any evil which he fears. Su^ potestate delectar^,
velat Bonum s^um s^^i ipsi ^ssent a superiore communi omnium beati^ico bono, ad
propri^ defluxerunt, etc. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 2. c. 1. Cunt causa mise^iae
malorum Angelorum quaeritur, e^ ^erito (...) quod ab illo qui Sum est aversi
adsei^so^ con versi sunt qui non Sum sunt, and Ibid. c. 6. lib, de vera
Relig. c. 13. de Genes. ad Lit. lib. 11. cap. 14. and 23. Aquin part. 1. q. 63.
art. 3. ^t seems that there was no other way for Angels to sin, but by Re^le^
of their understanding upon themselves* when being held with admiration of
their own sublimity and honor, the memory of their subordination to God, and
their dependency on him, was drowned in this conceit, whereupon their
adoration, love, and imitation of God could not choose but be also interrupted
Hooker l. 1 sect 4.
This staying within it self, Reflecting upon its own power and wisdom, and
by consequence affecting an independency upon any Superior virtue in being and
working, making it self the first Cause, and the last End of its own motions;
is by Divines conceived to have been the first sin by which the creature fell
from God, and it was the first Temptation by which Satan prevailed, to draw man
from God too. For since next unto God every Reasonable created Being is nearest
unto it self, we cannot conceive how it should turn from God, and not in the
next step turn unto it self, and by consequence, whatsoever it was in a
regular dependence to have derived from God, being fallen from him, it does by
an irregular dependence seek for from it self. Hence it is that men of power
are apt to deifie their own strength, and to frame opinions of absoluteness
to themselves, and to deride the thoughts of any power above them, as Pharaoh,
Exodus 5.2. and Goliath, ^ Sam. 17.8, 10, 44. and Nebuchadnezzer, Dan. 3.15. and
Senacherib, 2 King. 18.33, 34, 35. Isa. 10, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14. And men of
wisdom, to deifie their own reason, and to deride any thing that is above or
against their own conceptions, as Tyrus, Ezekiel. 38.2, 6. and the Pharisees,
Luke 16.14. John 7.48, 49, 52. Acts 4.11. Isa. 49.7. and 53.3. and the
Philosophers, Acts 17.18, 32, 1 Cor. 1.22.23. And men of Morality and virtue,
to deifie their own righteousness, to rely on their own merits and
performances, and to deride righteousness imputed and precarious, as the
Jews, Romans 10.^. and Paul before his conversion, Romans 7.9. Phil. 3.6, 9. so
natural is it for a sinful creature, who seeks only himself, and makes
himself the last End, to seek only unto himself, and to make himself the
first Cause and mover toward that End.

But because God will not give his glory to another, nor suffer any creature to
incroach upon his Prerogative, or to sit down in his Throne, he has
therefore always blasted the policies and attempts of such as aspired unto
such an Absoluteness and Independencie, making them know in the end that they
are but men. Psalm. 9.19, 20. and that the most High rules over all: And that
it is an Enterprise more full of folly then it is of pride for any creature to
work its own safety and felicity out of it self. And as men usually are most
vigilant upon their immediate interests, and most jealous and active against
all encroachments thereupon: so we shall ever find that God does single out no
men to be so notable monuments of his Justice and their own ruin and folly, as
those who have vied with him in the points of power, wisdom, and other divine
Prerogatives, aspiring unto that absoluteness, selfe-sufficiency,
selfe-interest, and independencie which belongs only unto him. And as he
has by the destruction of Pharaoh, Senacherib, Herod, and diverse others,
taught us the madness of this ambition; so does he by our own daily
preservation teach us the same. For if God have appointed that we should go
out of our selves unto thing below for a vital subsistence, to bread for food,
to house for harbor, to clothes for warmth, etc. Much more has he appointed
that we should go out of our selves for a blessed and happy subsistence, by
how much the more is required unto blessedness then unto life, and by how much
the greater is our Impotencie unto the greatest and highest end.

Sect. 2.
Yet so desperate is the Aversion of sinful man from God, that when he is
convinced of his Impotency, and driven off from selfe-dependence, and reduced
unto such extremities as should in reason lead him back unto God, yet when he
has no horses of his own to ride upon, no means of hi^ own to escape evil,
yet still he will betake himself unto creatures like himself, though they be
enemies unto God, and enemies unto him too for Gods sake, (for so was the
Assyrian unto Israel) yet If Ephraim see his sickness, and Judah his wound,
Ephraim will to the Assyrian and King Iareb for help, Hos. 5, 13. If he must
beg, he will do it rather of an enemy, then a God, yea, though he dissuade
him from it, and threaten him for it. Ahaz would not believe though a sign
were offered him, nor be persuaded to trust in God to deliver him from Rezin
and Pekah, though he promise him to do it, but under pretense of not tempting
God in the use of means, will weary God with his provocation, and rob God to
pay the Assyrian, who was not an help but a distress unto him. 2 King. 16.5,
8.17, 18. 2 Chronicles. 28.20, 21. Isay 7.8.13. Isa. 30.5

Well, God is many times pleased to way-lay humane Counsels, even in this case
too, Sect. 3.
and so to strip them, not only of their own provisions, but of their
foreign succors and supplies, as that they have no refuge left* but unto
him. Their Horses fail them, their Assyrian fails them, Fiden^iam pariunt
(...). vi de Arist. Rhet* l. 2. c. 5.
Hos. 7 11, 12. and 8.9, 10. Their Hope has nothing either sub ratione Boni,
as really Good to Comfort them at home: or sub ratione Auxilii, as matter of
Help and aid to support them from abroad. They are brought as Israel into a
Wilderness, where they are constrained to go to God, because they have no
second causes to help them. And yet even here, wicked men will make a shift to
keep off from God, when they have nothing in the world to turn unto. This is
the formal and intimate malignity of sin, to decline God, and to be
impatient of him, in his own way. If wicked men be necessitated to implore
help from God, they will invent ways of their own to do it: If Horses fail,
and Asshur fail, Ex arbitrio, non ex Imperio. Tertul, contr. Psychic. cap. 13.
v. de de praescript. ca. 6
and Israel must go to God whether he will or no, it shall not be to the God
that made him, but to a god of his own making; and when they have most need of
their glory, they will change it into that which cannot profit, Jer. 2.11. So
foolish was Jeroboam, as by two Calves at Dan and Bethel, to think his
Kingdom should be established, and by that means rooted out his own family,
and at last ruined the Kingdom, 1 King. 12.28, 29.14, 10, 15, 29. 2 King.
17.21, 23. Hos. 8.4, 5. and 10.5, 8, 18. So foolish was Ahaz as to seek help
of those gods which were the ruin of him and of all Israel, 2 Chronicles. 28.23.
Such a strong antipathy and averseness there is in the soul of natural men
unto God, as that when they are in distress they go to him last of all; they
never think of him, so long as their own strength and their foreign
confederacies hold out; and when at last they are driven to him, they know not
how to hold communion with him in his own way, but frame carnal and
superstitious ways of worship to themselves, and so in their very seeking unto
him do provoke him to forsake them; and the very things whereon they lean, go
up into their hand to pierce it, Isa. 15.2. Isa. 16.12. 1 King. 18.26.

Now then the proper work of true Repentance being to turn a man the right
way unto God, ^t takes a man off from all this carnal and superstitious
confidence, and directs the soul in the greatest difficulties to cast it
self with comfort and confidence upon God alone. So it is prophesied of the
Remnant of Gods people, that is, the penitent part of them, (for the remnant
are those that came up with weeping and supplication, seeking the Lord their
God, and asking the way to Sion, with their faces thither-ward, Jer. 31 7, 9.
and 50.4 5.) that they should no more again stay themselves upon him that
smote them, but should stay upon the Lord, the holy One of Israel in truth, and
should return unto the Mighty God, Isa. 10.20, 21. They resolve the Lord shall
save them, and not the Assyrian. So say the godly in the Psalmist, An Horse is
a vain thing for safety, neither shall he deliver any by his great strength,
etc. Our soul waits for the Lord, he is our help and shield, Psalm. 33.17,
20. They will not say any more, We will fly upon Horses, we will ride upon the
swift, Isa. 30.16. Lastly, At that day (says the Prophet speaking of the
penitent remnant and gleanings of Jacob) shall a man look to his Maker, and
his eyes shall have respect to the holy One of Israel, and he shall not look
to the Altars the work of his hands, neither shall respect that which his
fingers have made, the groves or the images, Isa. 17.7, 8. And again, Truly in
vain is salvation hoped for from the Hills, and from the multitude of
Mountains, that is, from the Idols (whom they had set up and worshipped in
high places.) Truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel, Jer. 3.23.
They will not say any more to the work of their hands ye are our gods.

Se^^. 5.
So then, the plain duties of the Text are these, 1. To trust in God who is
All-sufficient to help, who is Jehovah, the fountain of Being, and can give
Being to any promise, to any mercy which he intends for his people; can not
only Work, but Command; not only Command, but Create deliverance, and fetch
it out of darkness and desolation; He has everlasting strength; there is no
time, no case, no condition, wherein his Help is not at hand, when ever he
shall command it, Isa. 26.4.

2. We must not trust in any Creature. 1. Not in Asshur, in any confederacy or
combination with Gods enemies, be they otherwise never so potent. Iehoshaphat
did so, and his Ships were broken, 2 Chronicles. 20.35, 37. Ahaz did so, and his
people were distressed, 2 Chronicles. 28.21. It is impossible for Gods enemies to be
cordial to Gods people, so long as they continue cordial to their God. There
is such an irreconcilable Enmity between the seed of the woman, and the seed
of the Serpent, that it is incredible to suppose that the enemies of the Church
will do any thing which may p^r se, tend to the good of it, or that any End
and design by them pursued can be severed from their own malignant interest.
Let white be mingled with any color which is not it self, and it loses of its
own beauty. It is not possible for Gods people to join with any that are his
enemies, and not to lose of their own purity thereby. He must be as wise, and
as potent as God, that can use the ^age of Gods enemies, and convert it when he
has done, to the good of Gods Church, and the glory of Gods Name, and be able
at pleasure to restrain and call it in again. We must ever take heed of this
dangerous competition between our own interests and Gods, to be so tender and
intent upon that, as to hazard and shake this. Jeroboam did so, but it was
fatal to him, and to all Israel. The End of Iudahs combining with the
Assyrian, was that they might rejoice against Rezin and Remaliahs son: but
the consequent of it which they never intended, was, that the Assyrian came
over all the channels, and over all the banks, and overflowed, and went over,
and reached to the very neck, and if it had not been Immanuels land, would
have endangered the drowning of it, Isa. 8.6, 7, 8. If Israel for his own ends
join with Ashur, it will hardly be possible for him in so doing, though
against his own will, not to promote the Ends of Ashur against God Church, and
against himself too. And yet the Prophet would not have in that case Gods
people to be dismayed, or to say, a Confedera^ie, a Confederacy; but to
sanctify the Lord himself, and make him their fear and their dread, who will
certainly be a Sanctuary unto them, and will bind up his Testimony, and seal
the Law amongst his Disciples, when others shall stumble and fall, and be
broken, and be snared and be taken. If we preserve Immanuels right in us, and
ours in him, all confederacies against us shall be broken, all counsels shall
come to naught.

Sect. 5.
2. Not in Horses, or in any other Humane preparations and provisions of our
own. Some trust in Charets, and some in Horses, but we (says David) will
remember the Name of the Lord our God, Psalm 20.7. That Name c^n do more with a
sling and a stone, then Goliath with all his armor, 1 Samuel 17.4^. It is a
strong tower for protection and safety to all that fly unto it, Pro. 18.10.
Whereas Horses though they be prepared against the day of battle, yet safety
comes only from the Lord, Prove. 21.31. Horses are flesh and not spirit, and
their Riders are men, and not God; and cursed are they that make flesh their
arm, and depart from the Lord, Isa. 31.1, 2, 3. Ier. 17.5. No, not in variety
of means and ways of Help, which seems to be intimated in the word R^ding,
from one confederate unto another: if Asshur fail, I will post to Egypt; if
one friend or counsel fail, I will make haste to another; a sin very
frequently charged upon Israel, Hos. 7.11. Isa. 20.5. Isa. 57.10. Ier. 2.36,
37. These are not to be trusted in, 1. because of the intrinsecaell weakness
and defect of ability in the creature to help, Every man is a liar, either by
imposture, and so in purpose; or by impotency, and so in the event, deceiving
those that rely upon him, Psalm. 62.9.

2. Because of ignorance and defect of wisdom in us to apply that strength
which is in the creature unto the best advantage. None but an Artificer can
turn and govern the natural efficacy of fire, wind, water, unto the works
of art. (...). An^t. apud Eusebius. de praepat Evang. lib. 13.
The wisdom whereby we should direct created virtues unto humane Ends is not
in or of our selves, but it comes from God, James. 1.5. Isai. 28.26, 29. Exod^
36.1, 2. Eccles. 7.24. and 9.1, 11.

3. Nor in Idols,. 7.
not in corrupting the worship of God. In Idololatria mendacium, cum tota
substantia ejus mendax sit. Tert. de Idololat. ca. 1. unde Idolatrae dicuntur
(...). Cle. Alex. in Protreptic.
Idols are lies, and teachers of lies, and promisers of lies to all that trust
in them, Ier. 10.8, 14, 15, 16. Habac. 2.18. Rev. 22.15. an Idol is just (...)
Nihilitates, nomen generaliter nihil sonat, quod apt idolis tribuitur. Mercer.
nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8.4. and that which is nothing, can do nothing
for those that rely upon it. What ever thing a man trusts in, in time of
trouble, must needs have these things in it to ground that confidence upon.

First, a Knowledge of him and his wants; therefore we are bid to trust in Gods
providence over us for all outward good things, because he knows that we have
need of them, Mat. 5.32.

Secondly, a loving and merciful disposition to help him. A man may sometimes
receive help from such as love him not, out of policy and in pursuance of
other Ends and intends: but he cannot confidently rely upon any aid which is
not first founded in love. I ever suspect and fear the gifts and succors
which proceed form an (...) Sophoc. in Aja. (...). Plut. Apop.
Enemy; they will have their own Ends only, even then when they seem to
tender and serve me; therefore David singleth our Gods mercy as the object of
his Trust, Psalm. 52.8.

Thirdly, a manifestation of that love in some promise or other, ingageing unto
assistance. For how can I with assurance, and without hesitancy expect help
there where I never received any promise of it? here was the ground of David's,
Iehoshaphats, Daniels trust in God, the word and promise which he had passed
unto them, 1 Chronicles. 17.25, 27. Psalm. 119.42. 2 Chronicles. 20.7, 8. Dan. 9.2, 3.

Fourthly, Truth and fidelity in the care to make these promises good; this is
that which makes us so confidently trust in Gods promises, because we know they
are all Yea and Amen, that it is impossible for God to lie, or deceive, or for
any to seek his face in vain, 2 Cor. 1.20. Josh. 21.45. Hebr. 6.18. Isai.
45.19.

Fifthly, Power to give Being, and put into act whatsoever is thus promised.
That which a man leanes upon, must have strength to bear the weight which is
laid upon it. This is the great ground of our trusting in God at all times,
even then when all other helps fail, because he is I Am, that can create and
give a being to every thing which he has promised, because power belongs
unto him, and in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, and nothing is too
hard, no help too great for him who made heaven and earth, and can command all
the Creatures which he made to serve those whom he is pleased to help. Psalm.
62.8, 11. Exodus 3.14. Isay. 26.4. Genesis 18.14. Ier. 32.17. Psalm. 121.2. Romans
4.19, 21. Matthew. 8.2. Now whosoever seeks for any of these grounds of trust in
Idols, shall be sure to fail of them. Knowledge they have none. Isay. 44.9.
and therefore love they have none; for how can that love any thing which knows
nothing? Truth they have none, neither of being in themselves, nor of promise
to those that trust in them; the very formality of an Idol is to be a lie, to
stand for that which it is not, and to present that which it is most unlike,
Isay 44.20.40.18. Ier. 10.14, 15, 16. and power they have none either to hear,
or save, Isay. 45.20.46.7.41.23.24.28, 29. And therefore that repentance which
shakes off confidence in Idols, does not only convert a man unto God, but
unto himself; is it not only an impious, but a sottish thing, and below the
reason of a man, first to make a thing, and then to worship it, to expect
safety from that which did receive being from himself, Isay. 46.7, 8. These
are the three great props of carnal confidence, foreign interests,
domestical treasures, superstitious devotions; when men please themselves in
the children of strangers, and have their land full of silver and gold, and
treasures, full of horses and Charets, and full of Idols: hoard up provisions
and preparations of their own, comply with the enemies of God abroad, and
corrupt the worship of God at home. Isay 2.6, 7, 8. These are the things for
which God threatens terribly to shake the earth, and to bring down, and to
make low the loftines of man, if he do not, (as Ephraim here by long and sad
experience, does) penitently renounce and abjure them all.

And now this is matter for which all of us may be humbled. Sect. 7.
There is no sin more usual amongst men then carnal confidence, to lean on
our own wisdom, or wealth, or power, or supplies from others, to deifie
Counsels, and Armies, or Horses, and treasures, and to let our hearts rise or
fall, sink or bear up within us, according as the creature is helpefull or
useless, nearer or farther from us; As if God were not a God afar off, as
well as near at hand. This we may justly fear, God has, and still will visit
us for, because we do not sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself in our hearts,
to make him our fear and our defense, and that he will blow upon all such
counsels, and preparations, as carnal confidence does deifie.

Therefore we must be exhorted to take off our hopes and fears from second
causes, not to glory in an arm of flesh, or to droope when that fails us; not
to say in our prosperity, our mountain is so strong that we shall not be
shaken, nor in our sufferings, that our wound is incurable, or our grave so
deep that we shall never be raised again. But to make the Name of the Lord
our strong tower; for they who know thy name will trust in thee, and for
direction herein we must learn to trust in God,

First, Absolutely and for himself, because he only is Absolute and of
himself. Other things as they have their being, so have they their working and
power of doing good or evil only from him, Matthew. 4.4, John. 19.11. Nihil Rex
majus minari male parentibus potest, qua^ ut abeat e Regno. Senec. Epist. 80.
Tua me non satiant nisi tecum. Be^n, soliloq. Ubi been erit sine illo? aut ubi
male esse poterit cum illo? Bern ser. 1. de Adven Dei. Ditior Christi paupertas
cunctis. Id. ser. 4. in Vig nata. Bonum mihi Domine in Camino habere te mecum
quam esse si^e te vel in coelo. Idem.
And therefore till he take himself away, though he take all other things away
from us, we have matter of encouragement and rejoicing in the Lord still, as
David and Habakuk resolve, 1 Samuel 30.6. Habac. 3.17, 18. All the world cannot
take away any promise from any servant of God, and there is more of Reality in
the least promise of God, then in the greatest performance of the creature.

Secondly, to trust him Nolite sperarare in iniquitate noli^e peccare in spe.
Be^n. ser. (...) Ad^ent. In vii^ custodiet, nunquid in p^aecipitiis? Be^n ser.
14. in Ps^. Qui habit.
in the way of his Commandments, not in any precipices or presumptions of our
own. Trust in him and do good, Psalm. 37.3. First fear him, and then trust in
him; he is a Help and shield only unto such, Psalm. 115.11. It is high
insolence for any man to lean upon God without his leave, and he allows none
to do it but such as fear him, and obey the voice of his servants, Isay.
50.10.

Thirdly, to trust him in the Vid. Aug. de^ Opere Mona. and qu^n Genesis lib. 1.
qu. ^6.
way of his providence, and the use of such means as he has sanctified and
appointed. Though m^n lives not by bread alone, but by the word of blessing
which proceeds out of the mouth of God: yet that word is by God annexed to
Bread, and not to Stones; and that man should not trust God, but mock and tempt
him, who should expect to have stones turned into bread. If God has provided
stairs, it is not faith but fury, not confidence but madness, to go down by
a precipice; where God prescribes means, and affords secondary helps, we must
obey his order, and implore his blessing in the use of them. This was Nehemiah
his way, He prayed to God, and he petitioned the King, Neh. 2.4. This was
Esters way, A Fast to call upon God, and a Feast to obtain favor with the
King, Ester 4.16.5.4. This was Jacobs way, A Supplication to God, and a present
to his Brother, Genes. 32.9, 13. This was David's way against Goliath, the Name
of the Lord his trust, and yet a Sling and a stone his Weapon, 1 Samuel 17.45,
49. This was Gedeons way against the Midianites, His Sword must go along with
the Sword of the Lord, not as an addition of strength, but as a testimony of
obedience, Judge. 7.18. Prayer is called sometimes a lifting up of the voice,
sometimes a lifting up of the hands, to teach us, That when we pray to God, we
must as well have a Dii prohibebunt haec, sed non propter me de coelo
descendent. Vobis dent mentem o^ort^t ut prohibeatis. Li^^l 9. (...). Plut,
(...). (...) Instit. L^c^nic.
hand to work, as a tongue to beg. In a word, we must use second causes in
Obedience to Gods order, not in confidence of their Help; The Creature must be
the object of our diligence, but God only the object of our trust.

Now lastly, from the ground of the Churches prayer and promise, we learn,
Patrem mise ricordiarum patrem esse necesse est etiam mise^orum. B^rn. se^. 1.
in ^^st. om^i^ S^n. Vites arbo^ibus applicitae inferiotes prius apprehendendo
ramos in cacumina evadunt. Quin^il. lib. 1. Hedera dicta quod Haereat. Festus.
That the way unto mercy is to be in our selves fatherless. The poor says
David, commits himself unto thee, thou art the helper of the fatherless. 8.
Psalm. 10.14.146.9. When Iehoshaphat knew not what to do, then was a sit time
to direct his eye unto God. 2 Chronicles. 20.19. When the stones of Sion are in the
dust, then is the sit time for God to favor her. Psalm. 102.13. When Israel
was under heavy bondage, and had not I^seph as a tender father (as he is
called, Genesis 41.43.) to provide for them, then God remembered that he was their
father, and Isra^l his first borne. Exodus 4.22. nothing will make us seek for
Help above our selves, but the apprehension of weakness within our selves.
Those Creatures that are weakest, nature has put an aptitude and inclination
in them to depend upon those that are stronger. The Vine, the Ivy, the Hopp,
the Wood-binde, are taught by nature to clasp and cling and wind about
stronger trees. The greater sense we have of our own vileness, the fitter
disposition are we in to rely on God. I will leave in the midst of thee an
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. Zeph.
3.12. Isay 14.32. When a man is proud within, and has any thing of his own to
lean upon, he will hardly tell how to trust in God. Prove. 3.5.28.25. Israel
never thought of returning to her first husband, till her way was hedged up
with thorns, and no means left to enjoy her former Lovers. Hose. 2.6, 7. When
the enemy should have shut up and intercepted all her passages to Dan and
Bethel, to Egypt and Assyria, that she has neither friends, nor Idols to fly
to, then she would think of returning to her first Husband, namely, to God
again.

Now from hence we learn, First, the condition of the Church in this world,
which is to be as an Orphan, destitute of all succor and favor, as an
outcast whom no man looks after. Ier. 30.17. Paul thought low thoughts of
the world, and the world thought as basely of him. The world says he, is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world. Gal. 6.14. Before conversion, the
world is an Egypt unto us, a place of Bondage. After Conversion, It is a
Wilderness unto us, a place of Emptiness and Temptations.

Secondly, the Backwardness of man toward grace; we go not to God till we
are brought to extremities, and all other Helps fail us. The poor Prodigal
never thought of looking after a Father, till he found himself in a
fatherless condition, and utterly destitute of all relief, Luke 15.17, 18.

Thirdly, the right disposition and preparation unto mercy, which is to be an
Orphan, destitute of all selfe-confidence, and broken off from all other
comforts. When the poor and needy, seeks water, and there is none, I the
Lord will help him, Isai. 41.17. God will repent for his people when he sees
that their power is gone, Deuteronomy. 32.36. when there is dignus vindice nodus, an
extremity fit for divine power to interpose. Christ is set forth as a
Physician, which supposes sickness; as a fountain, which supposes
uncleanesse; as meat, which supposes emptiness; as clothing, which
supposes nakedness. He never finds us till we are lost sheep; when we have
lost all, then we are fit to follow him, and not before.

Fourthly, The Roots of true Repentance. Nos pupilli, Tu misericors. The sense
of want and emptiness in our selves, the apprehension of favor and mercy in
God. Conviction of sin in us, and of righteousness in him, John 16.9, 10. Of
crookedness in us, and of glory in him. Isay. 40.4, 5.

Hereby room is made for the entertainment of mercy; where sin abouds, grace
will more abound, and the more the soul finds it self exceeding miserable,
the more will the mercy of God appear exceeding merciful, Romans 5.20. and
hereby God shows his wisdom in the seasonable dispencing of mercy then when
we are in greatest extremity: As fire is hottest in the coldest weather. God
delights to be seen in the mount, at the grave, to have his way in the sea,
and his paths in the deep waters. Mercies are never so sweet as when they are
seasonable, and never so seasonable as in the very turning and critical point,
when misery weighs down, and nothing but mercy turns the scale.

This teaches us how to fit our selves for the mercy of God, Mendici cum ^leem
osynam petunt, non preciosa^ vestes ostendunt, sed seminuda membra, au ulcera
si habuerint ut ^ltius ad misericordiam videntis animus inclinetur. Bern. ser.
4. de Advent.
namely to find our selves destitute of all inward or outward comfort, and to
seek for ^tonely there. Beggars do not put on Scarlet but rags, to prevail
with men for relief: As Benhadad servants put on Ropes when they would beg
mercy of the King of Israel. In a shipwreck a man will not load him with money,
chains, treasure, rich apparel; but commit himself to the Sea naked, and
esteem it mercy enough, to have Tabulam post naufragium, one poor plank to
carry him to the shore. It is not exaltation enough unto Joseph except he be
taken out of a prison unto honor.

Secondly, we should not be broken with diffidence or distrust in times of
trouble, but remember it is the condition of the Church to be an Orph^n. It is
the way whereby Moses became to be the son of Pharaohs daughter; when his own
Parents durst not own him, the mercy of a Prince found him out to advance him;
and when he was nearest unto perishing, he was nearest unto honor

Leg* 19. Cod. de Sacros. Ecclesiis, and Leg. 46. (od. de Episcopis and Cler
sect 1.3. Vid Tholos. Syntag Juris. ^i 15. cap. 28.
In the civil Law we find provision made for such as were cast out, and
exposed to the wide world, some Hospitals to entertain them, some liberties to
comfort and compensate their trouble. And a like care we find in Christ; The
Jews had no sooner cast the man that was borne blind out, whose Parents durst
not be seen in his cause for fear of the like usage, but the mercy of Christ
presently found him, and bestowed comfort upon him, John 9.35. This is the true
David homines in angustia consti^utos and oppressos aere alieno in su^m ^u^elam
suscipiens, Typus Christi ^st publicanos et peccatores recipientis. Gloss.
Philolog. Sacr. lib. 2. page 424. Parentum amor magis in e^ quorum miseretur
inclinat. Senec. Epist. 66.
David unto whom all helpless persons, that are in distress, in debt, in
bitterness of soul, may resort and find entertainment, 1 Samuel 22.2.

Lastly, we should learn to behave our selves as Pupils under such a Guardian,
to be sensible of our infancy, minority, Tu^el^ae vis est and potestas in
capite libero ad tuendum cum qui propter, ae^atem suam sponte se defendere
nequit. D. de Tutelis. L. 1.
disability to order or direct our own ways, and so deny our selves, and not
lean on our own wisdom; to be sensible how this condition exposes us to the
injuries of strangers, (for because we are called out of the world, therefore
the world hates us,) and so to be vigilant over our ways, and not trust our
selves alone in the hands of temptation, nor wander from our Guardian, but
always to yield unto his wisdom and guidance: Lastly, to comfort our selves
in this, that while we are in our minority, we are under the mercy of a father,
A mercy of Conservation by his providence, giving us all good things richly to
enjoy, even all things necessary unto life and godliness: A mercy of
protection, defending us by his power from all evil: A mercy of Education and
instruction, teaching us by his Word and Spirit: A mercy of Communion many
ways familiarly conversing with us, and manifesting himself unto us: A mercy
of guidance and government by the laws of his family: A mercy of discipline
sitting us by fatherly chastisements for those further honors and employments
he will advance us unto; and when our minority is over, and we once are come to
a perfect, man, we shall then be actually admitted unto that inheritance
immortal, invisible, and that fades not away, which the same mercy at first
purchased, and now prepares and reserveth for us. Now it follows, Verse. 4.
I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely, for mine anger is
turned away from him.

In the former words we have considered both Isreal's Petition in time of
trouble, Sect. 9.
and the Promise and Covenant which thereupon they bind themselves in. In
these and the consequent words unto the end of the 8. verse, we have the
gracious answer of God to both, promising ^oth in his free love to grant their
petition, and by his fr^e grace to enable them unto the performance of the
Covenant which they had made.

The Petition consisted of two parts. 1. That God would take away all iniquity.
2 That he would do them good, or receive them graciously. To both these God
gives them a full and a gracious answer. 1. That he will take away all
iniquity by Healing their backsliding. 2 That he would do them good, and
heap all manner of bl^ssings upon them, which are expressed by the various
metaphors of fruitfulness; opposite to the contrary expr^ssions of judgment
in former parts of the prophecy.

I will heal their back sliding.] This is one of the names by which God is
pleased to make himsele known unto his people, I am the Lord that heals
thee, Exodus 15.26. and, return O Backsliding children, and I will heal your
backslidings, Jer. 3.22.

Now God Heals sin four manner of ways.

First, By a gracious Pardon, burying, covering, not imputing them unto us. So
it seems to be expounded, Psalm. 103.3. and that which is called Healing in one
place, is called forgiveness in another, if we compare Mat. 13.15. with Mark
4.12.

Secondly, by a spiritual and effectual Reformation, purging the conscience
from dead works, making it strong and able to serve God in new obedience; for
that which Health is to the body, Holiness is to the soul. Therefore the Sun
of righteousness is said to a^ise with Healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. whereby
we are to understand the gracious influence of the Holy Spirit conveying the
virtue of the blood of Christ unto the conscience, even as the beams of the
Sun do the heat and influence thereof unto the earth, thereby calling out
the herbs and flowers, and healing those deformities which winter had brought
upon it.

Thirdly, by removing and withdrawing of judgments, which the sins of a
people had brought like wounds or sicknesses upon them. So Healing is opposed
to smiting and wounding, Deuteronomy. 32.39. Job 5.18. Hos. 6.1, 2. Ier. 33.5, 6.

Fourthly, by comforting against the anguish and distress which sin is apt
to bring upon the conscience. For as in Physic there are Purgatives to cleanse
away corrupt humors, so there are Cordials likewise to strengthen and refresh
weak and dejected Patients; and this is one of Christ's principal works to
bind and heal the broken in heart, to restore comforts unto mourners, to set
at liberty them that are bruised, and to have mercy upon those whose bones are
vexed, Psalm. 147, 3. Isai. 57.18, 19. Luke 4.18. Psalm. 6.2, 3. I am not willing
to shut any of these out of the meaning of the Text.

First, because it is an answer to that rayer, Take away All iniquity. The All
that is in it, The Guilt, the stain, the power, the punishment, the anguish,
whatever evil it is apt to bring upon the conscience, Let it not do us any
hurt at all.

Secondly, because Gods works are perfect; where he forgives sin, he removes
it, where he convinces of righteousness, unto pardon of sin, he convinces
also of judgment, unto the casting out of the prince of this world, and
brings forth that judgment unto victory, Matthew. 12.20.

Their Back-sliding] Their prayer was against All iniquity, and God in his
answer thereunto singleth out one kind of iniquity, but one of the greatest,
by name. And that first, to teach them and us, when we pray against sin, not
to content our selves with generalities, but to bewail our great and special
sins by name, those specially that have been most comprehensive, and the
Seminaries of many others.

Secondly, to comfort them; for if God pardon by name the greatest sin, then
surely none of the rest will stand in the way of his mercy; if he pardon the
Talents, we need not doubt but he will pardon the pence too. Paul was guilty of
many other sins, but when he will magnify the grace of Christ, he makes
mention of his great sins, A blasphemer, a persecutor, injurious; and
comforts himself in the mercy which he had obtained against them, 1 Timothy 1.13.

Vt aqu^ prius cal^^ict^, dein in pu^^u^ demissma, sit ^^igidissi^^. C^s^u. in
Athenaeum. lib. 3. c. 35. and Plutarch. Symposiac. l. 6. q. 4.
Thirdly, to intimate the great guilt of Apastacie and rebellion against God.
After we have known him and tasted of his mercy, and given up our selves unto
his service, and come out of Egypt and Sodom, then to look back again, and
to be false in his Covenant, this God looks on, not as a single sin, but as
a compound of all sins. When a man turns from God, he does as it were resume
and take home upon his conscience All the sins of his life again.

Fourthly, to proportion his answer to their repentance. They confess their
Apostasy, they had been in Covenant with God, they confess he was their first
husband, Hos. 2 7. and they forsook him, and sought to Horses, to Men, to
Idols, to vanity and lies: this is the sin they chiefly bewail: and therefore
this is the sin which God chiefly singles out to pardon and to heal them of.
This is the great goodness of God toward those that pray in sincerity, Aug.
Confess. lib. 5. cap. 8.
that he fits his mercy ad Cardinem desiderii, answers them in the maine of
their desires, lets it be unto them even as they will.

I will love them freely.] This is set down as the fountain of that
Remission, Sect. 10.
Sanctification and Comfort which is here promised. It comes not from our
Conversion unto God, but from Gods free love and grace unto us. And this is
added, first to Humble them, Si vera sit gratia, id est, Gratuita, nihil
invenit in homine cui merito debeatur, etc.

Aug. lib. de patie^t. ca. 20. vid. cont. Julian. lib. 6. cap. 19. de peccato
orig. cap. 24. de Great. ^t lib. Arbit. cap. 5. de nature. et great. cap. 4. de
corr^pt. et gra. cap. 10. Epist. 105. et 106. et alibi passi^. Temere in t^li
negotio vel prius aliquid tribuis tibi vel plus. et magis amat, et ante,
Bernard, sermon. 69. in Can. Ex se sumit materiam et velut quoddam seminarium
miserendi-miserendi causam et originem sumit ex proprio: Judicandi vel
ulciscendi magis ex nost^o: Idem sermon. 5. i^ natali Dom


that they should not ascribe any thing to themselves, their Repentance, their
prayers, their covenants and promises, as if these had been the means to
procure mercy for them, or as if there were any objective grounds of lovelines
in them to stir up the love of God toward them. It is not for their sake
that he does it, but for his own, The Lord sets his love upon them because he
loved them. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be
it known unto you. Ezekiel. 36.22.32. He will have mercy because he will have
mercy. Romans 9.15.

Secondly, To support them, above the guilt of their greatest sins. Men think
nothing more easy while they live in sin, and are not affected with the
weight and heinousness of it, then to believe mercy and pardon. But when the
soul in conversion unto God, feels the heavy burden of some great sins,
when it considers its rebellion, and Apostacy, and backesliding from God, It
will then be very apt to think God will not forgive nor heal so great
wickedness as this; There is a natural Novatianisme in the timorous
conscience of convinced sinners, to doubt and question pardon for sins of
Apostacy and falling after repentance. Therefore in this case God takes a
penitent off from the consideration of himself by his own thoughts, unto the
height and excellency of his Thoughts who knows how to pardon abundantly,
Isay. 55.7, 8, 9. Ier. 29.11. Ezekiel. 37.3. Nothing is too hard for love
especially free-love, that has no foundation or inducement from without it
self.

And because we read before Hos. 8.5. That Gods Anger was kindled against
them, therefore he here adds that this also should be turned away from them.
Aristot. Rhet. lib 2* cap. 2.
Anger will consist with love; we find God Angry with Moses, and Aaron, and
Miriam, and Asa; and he does sometimes visit with rodds and scourges, where he
does not u^terly take away his loveing kindness from a people. Psalm.
89.32.33. A man may be angry with his wife, or child, or friend, whom he yet
dearly loves. And God is said to be thus Angry with his people, when the
effects of displeasure are discovered toward them. Now upon their Repentance
and Conversion, God promises not only to love them freely, but to clear up
his Countenance toward them, to make them by the Removal of Judgments to see
and know the ftuits of his free love and bounty unto them. When David called
Absalom home from banishment, this was an effect of love; but when he said, let
him not see my face, this was the continuation of Anger; but at last when he
admitted him into his presence and kissed him, here that Anger was turned away
from him too. 2 Samuel 14.21.24.33.

Sect. 11.
These words then contain Gods merciful answer to the first part of Isreal's
prayer for the Taking away of all Iniquity which had been the fountain of
those sad Judgments under which they languished and pined away. Wherein there
are two parts, 1. The Ground of Gods answer, His free love. 2. A double fruit
of that love. 1. In Healing their Backsliding, In removing his Anger and heavy
Judgments from them. We will briefly handle them in the order of the Text.

I will Heal their Backsliding.] When Gods people do return unto him, and
pray against sin, then God out of his free love does heal them of it. First,
he teaches them what to ask, and then he tells them what he will give. Thus
we find Conversion and Healing joined together, Isai. 6.10. They shall return
even to the Lord, and he shall be entreated of them, and shall heal them,
Isai. 19.22. Return, Backsliding children, I will Heal your Backslidings, Ier.
3.22. (...) Homer* Iliad* ^. Quae in praese^^ Tiberius civiliter habuit, sed in
animo revolvente iras, etiamsi impe^us offensionis languer^t, memoria valebat.
Tacit. Annal. l. 4. Non enim Tiberium quamvis triennio post caedem Sejani, quae
cae^eros mollire solent, Tempus, preces, Satias mitigabant, quin ince^^a and
abolita pro gravissimis and recentibus puniret. Anal* lib. 6. vid. Aristot.
Ethic. lib, 4* cap. 11.
Men if they be injured and provoked by those whom they have in their power to
undo, though they return, and cry peccavi, and are ready to ask
forgiveness, yet many times out of pride and revenge, will take their time and
opportunity to repay the wrong. But God does not so; His Pardons, as all his
other Gifts, are without exprobrat^on; as soon as ever his servants come back
unto him with tears and confession, he looks not upon them with scorn, but
with joy; his mercy makes more haste to embrace them, then their repentance to
return unto him, Luke 15.20. then out comes the wine, the oil, the balm, the
cordials; then the wounds of a Savior do as it were bleed afresh to drop in
mercy into the sores of such a Penitent. O though he be not a dutiful, not a
pleasant child; yet he is a child; though I spoke against him, yet I remember
him still, my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him,
Jer. 31.20. The Lord greatly complains of the inclination of his people to
backsliding, and yet he cannot find in his heart to destroy them, but
expresses a kind of Gravi^ quaedam inter virtutes videtur orta con^emio
Siquidem veritas et justitia mise^um a^^tigebant; pax and misericordia
judicabant magis esse parcendum, etc. vid. Bern* sermon. 1. in Annunci.
Conflict between Justice and Mercy; and at last resolves, I am God and not
man; I can as well heal their backsliding by my Love, as revenge it by my
justice; therefore I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, but I will
cause them to walk after the Lord, Hos. 11.7.10. Yea, so merciful he is, that
even upon an hypocritical conversion, when his people did but flatter and lie
unto him, and their heart was not right toward him, nor they steadfast in his
covenant, yet the Text says, he being full of compassion forgave their
iniquity (not as to the justification of their persons, for that is never
without faith unfeigned, but so far as to the mitigation of their punishment,
that he destroyed them not, nor stirred up all his wrath against them, Psalm.
78.34.35.) for so that place is to be expounded, as appears by the like
parallel place, Ezekiel. 20 17. Nevertheless, mine eye spared them from
destroying them, neither did I make an end of them in the wilderness.

Now the Metaphorical word both here, and so often elsewhere used in this
argument, leads us to look upon sinners as Patients, and upon God as a
Physician. By which two considerations we shall find the exceeding mercy of
God in the pardon and purging away of sin set forth unto us.

Healing then is a Relative word, and leads us first to the consideration of a
Patient who is to be healed, and that is here a grievous sinner fallen into a
Relapse. Healing is of two sorts. The healing of a sicnesse by a Physician; the
healing of a wound by a Chirurgian. And Sin is both a sickness, and a wound.
The whole head sick, the whole Heart faint, from the soale of the foot, even
unto the Head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds and bruises, and
putrefying sores Isai. 1.5.6. A sickness that wants healing, a wound that
wants binding, Ezekiel. 34.4. A sick sinner that wants a Physician to call to
repentance, Matthew. 9.12, 13. A wounded sinner, that wants a Samaritan (so the
Jews called Christ John 8.48.) to bind up and pour in wine and oil, Luek
10.34.

Diseases are of several sorts, but those of all other most dangerous that are
in the vital parts, as all the diseases of sin are, and from thence spread
themselves over the whole man. Ignorance, pride, carnal principles, corrupt
judgment, diseases of the Head. Hardness, stubbornness, Atheism, Rebellion,
diseases of the Heart: Lust, a dart in the Liver; Corrupt communication the
effect of putrified lungs: Gluttony and drunkenness the swellings and dropsies
of the belly: despair and horror the grief of the bowels: Apostacy a
Recidivation or Relapse into all. An Ear that cannot hear God speak, Ier.
6.10. An Eye quite dawbed up, that cannot see him strike, Ier. 44.18. Isai.
26.11. A palate out of taste, that cannot savor nor relish heavenly things,
Romans 8.5. Lips poisoned, Romans 3.13. A Tongue set on fire, Iam. 3.6. Flesh
consumed, bones sticking out, sore vexed and broken to pieces Job 33.21. Psalm.
6.2. and 51.8. Some diseases are dull, others acute; some ^^upifying, others
tormenting. Sin is All. A stupifying palsy, that takes away feeling Ephesians
4.19. A pl^gu^ in the Heart, which sets all on fire. 1 King. 8.38. Hos. 7.4.

Sect. 12.
Let us consider a little the proper passions and effects of most diseases, and
see how they suite to sin.

First, Pain and distemper. This, first or last is in All sin; for it begets
in wicked and impenitent men the Peccatum quod inultum videtur, habet
ped^ssequam poenamsuam ut nemo de admisso nisi amaritudine doleat. Aug. de
Continent. cap. 6.

Memoria Testi^, Ratio Index, Timor carnifex. Be^nerd. ser. de villico in
qui^a^i*


pain of guilt, horror, trembling of heart, anguish of conscience, fear of
wrath, expectation of judgment, and fiery indignation, as in Cain, Pharaoh,
Ahab, Felix, and diverse others, Genesis 4.13.14. Exodus 9.27.28. 1 King. 21.27.
Acts 24.25. Isai. 33.14. Hebr. 2.15. Romans 8 15. Hebr. 10.27. And in Penitent
men it begets Omne malum aut Timo^e aut Pudo^e natura suffudit. Tertul, Apol.
cap. 1.

Perturbatio animi respic^^ntis peccata sua. respectione perhorrescentis:
horrore e^ubeseenti^: c^^bescentia. cor^i^entis* Aug. in Psalm. 30. Con. 1. c.
Morbus est (...). Galen. Habitus corporis contra n^turam qui usum ejus ad id
^ac^^ deteriorem, cujus causa natura nobis ejus corporis sanitatem dedit. Leg.
1. sect. 7. D. de Aedilitio Edict.


the pain of shame, and sorrow, and inquietude o^ spirit, a wound in the
spirit, a prick in the very heart, Romans 6.21. Ezekiel. 16.61. 2 Cor. 7.10. Prove.
18.14. Acts 2.37. Penitency and Pain are words of one derivation, and are very
near of kin unto one another. Never was any wound cured without pain, never
any sin healed without sorrow.

Secondly, c weakness and Indisposednesse to the Actions of life. Sin is
like an unruly spleen, or a greedy wenne in the body that sucks all
nourishment, and converts all supplies into its own growth, and so exhausts the
strength and vigor of the soul, making it unfit and unable to do any good. When
ever it sets about any duty, till sin be cured, it goes about it like an arm
out of joint, which when you would move it one way, (...). Arist. Eth. l^. c.
ult.
does fall back another. It faints, and flaggs, and is not able to put sorth
any skill, or any delight unto any good duty. Naturally men are Reprobate or
void of Judgment unto any good work. Tit. 1.16. Godliness is a mystery* a
spiritual skill and trade; there is learning, and use, and experience, and
much exercise required to be handsome and dextrous about it. Tim. 3.16. Phil.
4.11. Heb. 5.13-14. To be sinners and to be without strength, in the Apostles
phrase, is all one. Romans 5.6.8. And look how much flesh there is in any man, so
much disability is there to perform any thing that is good. Romans 7.18.
Therefore the hands of sinners are said to hang down, and their knees to be
feeble, and their feet to be lame, that cannot make straight paths till they
be healed. Heb. 12.12, 13. If they at any time upon natural dictates, or some
sudden strong conviction, or pang of fear, or stirrings of conscience, do
offer at any good work, to pray, to repent, to believe, to obey, they bungle
at it, and are out of their element; They are wise to do evil, but ^o do
good they have no knowledge: They presently grow weary of any essaies and
offers at well doing, and cannot hold out or persevere in them.

Thirdly, Decay and consumption. Sin wastes and wears out the vigor of soul
and body, feeds upon all our time, and strength, and exhausts it in the
services of lust. Tabificae mentis perturba^iones, Cic. Tu^cul. quaest.
Sickness is a chargeable thing, a consumption at once to the Person and to the
Estate. The poor woman in the Gospel which had an issue of blood, spent all
that she had on Physicians, and was never the better: Luke 8.43. So poor
sinners empty all the powers of soul, of body, of time, of estate, every
thing within their reach, upon their lusts, and are as unsatisfied at last as
at the first, Eccles. 1.8. Like a Silke-worme which works out his bowels into
such a mass wherein himself is buried. It wearieth them out, and sucketh away
the Radical strength in the service of it, (...), Aristot. Ethic. l. 3. cap.
ult. (...). Polit. lib. 2.

Naturalia desideria sinita sunt; ex fals^ opinione nascentia, ubi desinant non
habent, etc* Sen. Ep. 16. ex libidine orta sine Termino sunt. Epist. 39.


and yet never gives them over, but as Pharaohs taskmasters exacted the brick
when they had taken away the straw; so lust does consume and weaken natural
strength, in the obedience of it: and yet when nature is exhausted, the
strength of lust is as great, and the Commands as tyrannous as ever before. Isa
57.10. Ier. 2.25. We are to distinguish between the vital force of the
faculties, and the Activity of lust which sets them on work; that decays and
hastens to death, but sin retains its strength and vigor still; nothing
kills that but the blood of Christ; and the decay of nature arises out of the
strength of sin; the more any man in any lust whatsoever, makes himself a
servant of sin, and the more busy and active he is in that service: the more
will it eat into him and consume him, as the hotter the fever is, the sooner
is the body wasted and dried up by it.

Fourthly, Deformity. Sickness withers the beauty of the body, makes it of
a glorious a ghastly and loathsome spectacle. Come to the comliest person
living after a long and pining sickness, and you will not find the man in his
own shape; a wan countenance, a shriveled flesh, a lean visage, a hollow and
standing eye, a trembling hand, a stammering tongue, abowed back, a feeble
knee a swelled belly: nothing left but the ^^akes of the hedge, and a few
finewes to hold them together. Behold here the picture of a sinner, Infl^tus
and Tum^ns animus in vitio est. Sapientis animus nunquam turgescit, nunqua^
^ume^. Cic. Tuscul. quaest, l. 3.

Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. Horat. ^^ ep. 2, O curvae in terras
Animae et Coelestium inane^. Pers. Vt Corpora verberibus, ita saevitia,
libidine, malis consul is animus di^^ceratur. Tacit* Anal, l. 6.


swelled with pride, pined with envy, bowed with earthlines wasted and eaten
up with lust, made as stinking and unsavory as a dead Carcass. Psalm. 14.3.
Ezekiel. 16.4. When thou see an unmercifull man, that has no compassion left in
him, think thou saw Judas or King Iehoram, whose sore disease made his
bowels fall out. 2. Chron. 21.19. When thou see a worldly man whose heart is
glued to earthly things, think upon the poor woman who was bowed together and
could not lift up her self. Luke 13.11. When thou see an Hypocrite walking
crooked and unevenly in the ways of God, think upon Mephibosheth or Asa, lame,
halting, diseased in their feet. When thou see a proud ambitious man, think
upon Herod eaten up with vermin. O if the diseases of the soul could come
forth and show themselves in the body, and work such deformity there (where it
would not do the thousandth part so much hurt) as they do within: if a man
could in the glass of the word see the ugliness of the one, as plainly as in
a material glass the foulness of the other, how would this make him cry
out, my head, my head: my bowels, my bowels: my leanness, my leanness:
unclean, unclean? No man thinks any shape ugly enough to represent a devil by;
yet take him in his naturals, and he was a most glorious Creature: it is sin
that turns him into a Serpent or Dragon. There is something of the monster in
every sin; the belly or the feet set in the place of the head or heart;
sensual and worldly lusts set up above Reason, and corrupt Reason above Grace.

Now because the sickness here spoken of is a falling sickness, Sect. 13.
and that the worst kind of Fall not forward in our way or race, as every good
man sometimes falls, where a man has the help of his knees and hands to break
the blow, to prevent or lessen the hurt, and to make him to rise again; but
old Elies fall, a falling backward, where a man can put forth no part to save
the whole, and so does more dangerously break and bruise himself thereby:
Cecidimus super acervum lapidum and in luto: unde non solum inquinati sed
graviter vulnerati et quassati sumus Bernard. ser. 1. in Coena dom. Cecidimus
in carcerem luto pari^er et l^pidibus plenum, captivi inquinati, conquassati.
Idem, ser. 2. in octav. Paschae.
Therefore as it is a sickness which requires curing, so it is a wound which
requires healing and binding. The Ancients compare it to falling into a pit
full of dirt and s^ones: where a man does not only defile, but miserably
break and bruise himself. There is contritio, solutio continui, suppuratio,
sanies etc. All the evils of a dangerous and mortal wound.

Add to all this, That in this diseased and wounded condition, 1 A man has no
power to heal or to help himself, but in that respect he must cry out with
them in the prophet, My wound is incurable and refuses to be healed, Jer.
15.18.

Secondly, he has no desire, no will, Libens aegrotat qui medico non credit
nec morbum declinat. Arist. Ethic. lib. 3. O fortes quibus medicus opus non
est: sortitudo ista non sanitatis est sed insaniae nam and phrene^icis nihil
fortius. Sed quanto majores vires, tanto mors vicinior. Aug. in Ps. 58.
no thought to enquire or send after a Physician who may heal him: but is well
contented rather to continue as he is, then to be put to the pain and trouble
of a cure, and pleases himself in the goodness of his own condition, Rev.
3.17* Matthew. 9.12.

Thirdly, He is in the hands of his cruel enemy, who takes no pity on him, but
by flattery and tyranny, and new temptations, continually cherishes the
disease, 2 Timothy 2.26.

Fourthly, when the true Physician comes, he shuts the door against him,
refuses his counsel, rejects his receipts, quarrels with his medicines;
they are too bitter, or too strong and purging; or too sharp and searching; he
will not be healed at all except it may be his own way, Prove. 1.24, 25. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Ezekiel. 24.13. Matthew. 23.37. Ier. 13.11. Thus we have taken a view
of the Patient, Sick, weak, pained, consumed, deformed, wounded, and sore
bruised: without power or help at home, without friends abroad: no sense of
danger, no desire of change: patient of his disease, impatient of his cure: but
one means in the world to help him, and he unable to procure it; and being
offered to him, unwilling to entertain it; who can expect after all this, but
to hear the knell ring, and to see the grave opened for such a sick person as
this?

Now let us take a view of the Physician. Surely an ordinary one would be so
far from visiting such a Patient, Sect. 14.
that in so desperate a condition as this, he would quite forsake him: As their
use is to leave their Patients when they lie a dying. Here then observe the
singular goodness of this physician.

First, though other Physicians judge of the disease when it is brought unto
them, yet the Patient first feels it and complains of it himself; but this
Physician gives the Patient the very feeling of his disease, and is feign to
take notice of that as well as to minister the cure. He went on frowardly in
the way of his heart, says the Lord, and pleased himself in his own ill
condition, I have seen his way, and will heal him, Isay. 57, 17.18.

Secondly, other Patients send for the Physician, and use many entreaties to be
visited and undertaken by him. Here the Physician comes unsent for, and
intreates the sick person to be healed. The world is undone by falling off from
God, and yet God is the first that begins the reconciliation; and the stick of
it is ^n the world, and not in him: and therefore there is a great Emphasis in
the Apostles expression, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself,
not himself unto the world; He entreats us to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.19.20. He
is found of them that sought him not, Isai. 65.1. and his office is not only
to save, but to seek that which was lost.

Thirdly, other Physicians are well used, and entertained with respect and
honor: but our Patient here neglects and misuseth his Physician, falls from
him, betakes himself unto Mountebanks and Physicians of no value; yet he
insists on his mercy, and comes when he is forsaken, when he is repelled. I
have spread out my hands all the day unto a Rebellious people, Isai. 65.2.

Fourthly, other Physicians have usually ample and honorable rewards for the
attendance they give; but this Physician comes only out of love, Medicos
civitate donavit Julius Caesar. Sueton. in Julio, cap. 42. Vis morborum pretia
medentibus; Fo^i Tabes Pecuniam advocatis fert.

Tacit. Annal. lib. 11.


heales freely, nay is bountiful to his Patient, does not only heal him, but
bestows gifts upon him gives the visit, gives the physic, sends the ministers
and servants who watch and keep the Patient.

Lastly, other Physicians prescribe a bitter potion for the sick person to
take; this Physician drinks of the bitterest himself; others prescribe the
sore to be launced, this Physician is wounded and smitten himself: others order
the Patient to bleed, here the physician bleeds himself: yea he is not only
the Physician but the Physic, and gives himself, his own flesh, his own
blood, for a purgative, a cordial, a plaster to the soul of his Patient; Dies
himself, that his Patient may live, and by his stripes we are healed, Isai.
53.5.

We should from all this learn, First, to admire the unsearchable Riches of
the mercy of our God, Sect. 15.
who is pleased in our misery to prevent us with goodness, and when we neither
felt our disease, nor desired a remedy, is pleased to convince us of our
sins, Thou have fallen by thine iniquity; To invite us to repentance, O
Israel return unto the Lord thy God: To put words into our mouth, and to draw
our petition for us, Take with you words, and say unto him, take away all
iniquity, etc. To furnish us with arguments, we are fatherless, thou art
merciful: To encourage us with promises, I will heal, I will love; To give us
his Ministers to proclaim, and his Spirit to apply these mercies unto us. If
he did not convince us that iniquity would be a downfall and a ruin unto us,
Pol me occidistis amici, Non servastis alt Horat. Molestus est somnium jucundum
vi. denti qui excitat. Sen. ep. 102.
Ezekiel. 18.30. we should hold it fast, and be pleased with our disease, like a
mad man that quarrels with his cure, and had rather continue mad then be
healed, Ioh. 3.19, 20, 21.

If being convinced, he did not invite us to repentance, we should run away
from him as Adam did. No man loves to be in the company of an Enemy, much less
when that enemy is a Judge. They have turned their back unto me, and not their
face, Jer. 2.27, Adam will hide himself from the presence of the Lord, Genesis
3.8. and Cain will go out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 4.16. Guilt
cannot look upon Majesty; stubble dares not come near the fire; If we be in
our sins we cannot stand before God, Ezra 9.15.

If being invited, he did not put words into our mouths, we should not know
what to say unto him. We know not wherewith to come before the Lord, or to bow
before the high God, if he do not show us what is good. Mic. 6.6, 8. Where God
is the Judge (who cannot be mocked or deceived, who knows all things; and if
our heart condemn us, he is greater then our heart, and where ever we hide,
can find us out, and make our sin to find us too. Gal. 6.7. 1 John 3.20.
Number. 32.23.) where I say this God is the Judge, there guilt stops the mouth,
and makes the sinner speechless. Matthew. 22.12. Romans 3.19. Nay the best of us
know not what to pray as we ought, except the Spirit be pleased to help our
infirmities. Romans 8.26. When we are taught what to say, If God do not withdraw
his anger, we shall never be able to reason with him. Job. 9.13, 14. Withdraw
thine hand from me, let not thy dread make me afraid, then I will answer, then
I will speak. Job. 13.21, 22. If he do not reveal mercy, if he do not
promise love or healing; if he do not make it appear that he is a God that
hears prayers, flesh will not dare to come near unto him. 2. Sam. 7.27. We
can never pray, till we can cry Abba father; we can never call unto him but in
the multitude of his mercies. As the earth is shut and bound up by frost and
cold, and puts not forth her precious fruits till the warmth and heat of the
Summer call them out: Oration de conscientia procedit. Si cons^ientia erubescit,
erubescat oration. Si spiritus reus apud ^e sit, erubescit conscientia. Tertul.
exhort. Castit. c. 10.
so the heart under the cold affections of fear and guilt, under the dark
apprehensions of wrath and judgment, is so contracted that it knows not to
draw near to God; but when mercy shines, when the love of God is shed abroad
in it, then also is the heart it self shed abroad and enlarged to power out
it self unto God. Even when distressed sinners pray, their prayer proceeds from
apprehensions of mercy; for prayer is the child of faith. Romans 10.14. Ia^*
5.15. and the object of faith is mercy.

Secondly, Sect. 16.
The way to prize this mercy is to grow acquainted with our own sickness; to
see our face in the glass of the law: to consider how odious it renders us to
God: how desperately miserable in our selves. The deeper the sense of misery,
the higher the estimation of mercy. When the Apostle looked on himself as the
chief of sinners* then he accounted it a saying worthy of all Acceptance that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. 1. Tim. 1.15. Till we be
sick and weary, we shall not look after a Physician to heal and ease us.
Matthew. 9.12.11, 28. till we be pricked in our hearts, we shall not be hasty to
enquire after the means of Salvation. Acts 2.37. Though the proclamation of
pardon be made to All, that will, Revel. 22.17. Yet none are willing till they
be brought to extreamities: as men cast not their goods into the sea, till they
see they must perish themselves if they do not. Some men must be bound before
they can be cured. All that God does to us in conversion, he does most freely:
but a gift is not a gift till it be received. Romans 5.17. John 1.12 and we
naturally refuse and reject Christ when he is offered. Isay. 53.3. John 1.11.
because he is not offered but upon these terms, that we deny our selves, and
take up a Cross, and follow him. Therefore we must be wrought upon by some
terror or other. 2 Cor. 5.11. When we find the wrath of God abiding upon us,
and our souls shut under it as in a prison, John 3.36. Gal. 3.22. and the fire
of it working and boiling like poison in our consciences, then we shall value
mercy, and cry for it as the Prophet does, Heal me O Lord, and I shall be
healed, Save me, and I shall be saved, for thou art my praise. Jer. 17.14.
Things necessary are never valued to their uttermost but in extremities. When
there is a great famine in Samaria, an Asses head (which at another time is
thrown out for carrion) will be more worth, then in a plentiful season the
whole body of an Ox. Nay hunger shall in such a case overvote nature, and
devour the very tender love of a mother; the life of a child shall not be so
dear to the heart as his flesh to the belly of a pined parent, 2 King. 6, 25,
28. As soon as a man finds a shipwreck, a famine, a hell in his soul, till
Christ save, feed, deliver it, immediately Christ will be the desire of that
soul, and nothing in Heaven or earth valued in comparison of him. Then that
which was esteemed the foolishness of preaching before, shall be counted the
power of God, and the wisdom of God; then every one of Christ's ordinances
(which are the waters of the Temple, for the healing of the Sea, that is, of
many people, Ezekiel. 47.8. and the Leaves of the Tree of Life, which are for the
healing of the Nations, Revel. 22.2. and the streams of that Fountain which
is opened in Israel for sin and for uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. and the wings of
the Sun of righteousness, whereby he conveyeth healing to his Church, Mal.
3:2.) shall be esteemed, as indeed they are, the Riches, the Glory, the
Treasure, the feast, the physic, the salvation of such a soul, Romans 11.12.
Ephesians. 3.8. 2 Cor. 3.8.11. 2 Cor. 4.6.7. Isai. 25.6. Revel. 19.9. Luke 4.18.
Hebr. 2.3. James 1.21. John 12.50. Acts 28.28. And a man will wait on them
with as much diligence and attention, as ever the impotent people did at the
poole of Bethesda, when the Angel stirred the water; and endure the healing
severity of them, not only with patience, but with love and thankfulness;
suffer reason to be captivated, Will to be crossed, high imaginations to be cast
down, every thought to be subdued, conscience to be searched, heart to be
purged, lust to be cut off and mortified; in all things will such a sick soul
be contented to be dieted, restrained and ordered by the Counsel of this
heavenly Physician.

It is here next to be noted that God promises to heal their Backslidings.
Sect. 17.
The word imports a departing from God, or a turning away again. It is quite
contrary in the formal nature of it unto faith and Repentance, and implies
that which the Apostle calls a Repenting of Repentance. Venire ad Christum,
quid est aliud q^am credendo convert? Aug. de great. et l. arbit. ca. 5.
Transfugas arboribus suspendunt. Tacit. de morib. Germ. Transfug^s ubicunque
inventi ^uerint quasi hosts interficere licet. l. 3. S. 6. ad leg. C^rnel. de
Sicariis. D. et l. 38. D. de paenis S. 1, et l. 19. l. 38. D. de captivis et
postliminio. et l. 3. de Re militari. S. 11. l. 7.
2 Cor. 7.10. By faith we come to Christ, John 6.37. and cleave to him, and lay
hold upon him. Heb. 6.18. Isay. 5^.2.6. but by this we depart, and draw back
from him, and let him go. Heb. 10.38.39. By the one we prize Christ as
infinitely precious, and his ways as holy and good. Phil. 3.8. 2 Pet. 1 4. by
the other we vilify and set them at naught, stumble at them, as ways that do
not profit. Matthew. 21.42. Acts 4.11. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Job. 21.14.15. For, a man
having approved of Gods ways, and entered into covenant with him, after this to
go from his word, and fling up his bargain, and start aside like a deceitful
bow: of all other dispositions of the Soul this is one of the worst, to deal
with our sins as Israel did with their servants. Ier. 34.10, 11. dismiss
them and then take them again. It is the sad fruit of an evil and unbeleeving
heart. Heb. 3.12. a And God threatens such persons to lead them forth with
the workers of iniquity. Psalm. 125.5. as cattle are led to slaughter, or
malefactors to execution. And yet we here see God promises Healing unto such
sinners.

For understanding whereof we are to know that there is a Twofold Apostasy. The
one out of Impotency of Affection, and prevalency of lust, drawing the heart to
look toward the old pleasures thereof again, and it is a Recidivatton or
Relapse into a former sinful condition out of forgetfulness and falsness of
heart, for want of the fear of God to balance the conscience, and to fix and
unite the heart unto him. Which was the frequent sin of Israel, to make many
promises and Covenants unto God, and to break them as fast. Judge. 2.18.19.
Psalm. 106.7, 8, 9.12, 13. And this Eorum qui peccant antequam deum noverint,
antequam miso^ationes ejus experti sunt, antequ^m portaverint jugum suave, et
onus leve, prinsqua^ devotionis gratiam et consolationes acceperint Spiritus
sancti; little inquam copiosa Redemptio est: at eorum qui post conversionem suam
peccatis implicantur ingratiacceptae gratiae, et post missam manum ad aratrum
retro recipient tepidi et carnales sacti-Eorun utique per paucos invenias, qui
post haec redeant in gradum pristinum, - nec tamen si quis hujusmodi est,
desperamus de eo, tantum ut Resurge^e velit cito. Quanto. n. diutius permanebit
tanto evadet difficilius. Bernard. sermon. 3. in Vigil. vid. ser. 35. in Cant.
Aug. de civ. dei. lib. 16. cap. 30. Isid. Pelut l. 1. ep. 13.
falling from our first love, growing cold and slack in duty, breaking our
engagements unto God, and returning again to folly, though it be like a Relapse
after a disease, exceeding dangerous, yet God is sometimes pleased to forgive
and heal it.

The other kind of Apostasy, is proud and malicious, when after the Taste of the
good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, men set themselves to
hate, oppose, persecute Godliness, to do despite to the spirit of grace, to
fling off the holy strictness of Christ's yoke, to swel against the searching
power of his word, to trample upon the blood of the Covenant, and when they
know the spiritualness and holiness of Gods ways, the innocence and piety of
his servants, do yet notwithstanding set themselves against them for that
reason though under other pretenses,) This is not a weak but a wilful, and (if
I may so speak) a strong and a stubborn Aposta^y. A sin which wholly hardneth
the heart against Repentance, and by consequence is incurable. Vid. Bezae
Annotat. in ^ Joan. 5.16.
To speak against the Son of man, that is against the doctrine, Disciples,
ways, servants of Christ, looking on him only as a man, the leader of a Sect,
as master of a new way (which was Paul's notion of Christ and Christian Religion
when he persecuted it, and for which cause he found mercy, for had he done that
knowingly which he did ignorantly, it had been a sin incapable of mercy. Acts
26.9. 1 Timothy 1.13.) thus to sin, Vid. Isidor. Pelut. lib. 1. Ep. 59.
is a blasphemy that may be pardoned: but to speak against the Spirit, that
is, to oppose and persecute the doctrine, worship, ways, servants of Christ,
knowing them and acknowledging in them a spiritual Holiness, and eo nomine to
do it, so that the formal motive of malice against them, is the power and
luster of that spirit which appears in them; and the formal principle of it,
neither ignorance, nor self ends, but very wilfulness, and Immediate malignity;
Woe be to that man whose natural enmity and antipathie against Godliness do
ever swel to so great and daring an height. It shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, nor in the world to come. Matthew. 12.32.

That is, say some, neither in the time of life, nor in the point or moment of
death which translates them unto the world to come. Beza, Calvin, Car^hwrig^t,
against the Rhemists. Chemnit. Deodati.
Others, not in this life by Justification, nor in the world to come by
consummate Redemption, and public judiciary absolution in the last day, which
is therefore called the Day of Redemption, in which men are said to find mercy
of the Lord, Ephesians. 4.30. 2 Timothy 1.18. For that which is here done in the
Conscience by the ministry of the Word, and efficacy of the Spirit, shall be
then publicly and judicially pronounced by Christ's own mouth before Angels and
men, 2 Cor. 5.10. Others: Shall not be forgiven, that is, Chrysostom. and
Theophylact. Broughton Explicat. of the Revel. cap. 21. page 301.302.
shall be plagued and punished both in this life, and in that to come. Give me
leave to add what I have conceived of the meaning of this place, though no way
condemning the Expositions of so great and learned men: I take it, By This
world we may understand the Church which then was of the Jews, or the present
age which our Savior Christ then lived in. It is not, I think, insolent in the
Scripture, for the words Age, or World, to be sometimes restrained to the
Church. Now, as Israel was God's Firstborn, and the first fruits of his
increase, Exodus 4.22. Ierem. 31.9. Ier. 2.3. So the Church of Israel is called
the Church of the Firstborn, Hebr. 12.23. and the first Tabernacle, and a
worldly Sanctuary. Hebr. 9.1.8. and Jerusalem that now is, Gal. 4.25. And then
by the World to come, we are to understand the Christian Church afterward to
be planted; for so frequently in Scripture is the Evangelical Church called the
World to come, and the last days, and the ends of the world, and the things
thereunto belonging, Things to come, which had been hidden from former ages,
and generations, and were by the ministry of the Apostles made known unto the
Church in their time, which the Prophets and righte^us men of the former ages
did not see nor attain unto. Thus it is said, In these last days God has
spoken to us by his Son, Heb. 1.1. And, Unto Angels he did not put in
subjection the world to come, Heb. 2.5. and, Christ was made an high Priest of
good things to come, Heb. 9.11. and, The Law had a shadow of good things to
come, Heb. 10.1. and the times of the Gospel are called Ages to come, Ephesians.
2.7. and the ends of the world, 1 Cor. 10.11. Thus legal and Evangelical
dispensations are usually distinguished by the names of Times past, and the
last days or times to come, Hebr. 1.1. Ephesians. 3.9, 10. Colos. 1.25, 26. The
one an Earthly and Temporary, the other an Heavenly and abiding administration,
and so the Septuagint render the Original word (...) Isa. 9.5. Everlasting
Father, which is one of the Names of Christ, by (...), The Father of the world
to come.

The meaning then of the place seems to be this: That sins of high and
desperate presumption, committed maliciously against known light, and against
the evidence of Gods Spirit, as they had no Sacrifice or expiation allowed for
them in the former world, or state of the Jewish Church, but they who in that
manner despised Moses and his Law, though delivered but by Angels, died without
mercy, Numb* 15.27, 30, 31. Hebr. 2.2, 3, 3. so in the World to come, or in the
Evangelicall Church, (though grace should therein be more abundantly discovered
and administered unto men) yet the same Law should continue still, as we find it
did, Hebr. 2.2, 3, 4, 5. Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. Hebr. 10.26, 27, 28. neither the open
enemies of Christ in the one, nor the false professors of Christ in the other,
committing this sin, should be capable of pardon.

This doctrine of Apostasy or Backsliding, is worthy of a more large
explication: but having handled it formerly on Hebr. 3.12. I shall add but two
words more.

First, that we should beware above all other sins, of this, of falling in soul
as old Eli did in body, backward, and so hazarding our salvation; if once we
have shaken hands with sin, never take acquaintance with it any more, but say
as Israel here, What have I to do any more with Idols? The Church should be
like Mount Sion, that cannot be moved. It is a sad and sick temper of a Church
to toss from one side to another, and then especially when she should be
healed, to be carried about with every wind.

Secondly, We should not be so terrified by any sin, which our soul mourns and
labors under, and our heart turns from, as thereby to be withheld from going
to the Physician for pardon and healing. Had he not great power and mercy, did
he not love freely, without respect of persons, and pardon freely without
respect of sins, we might then be afraid of going to him: but when he
extends forgiveness to all kinds, iniquity, transgression, sin, Exodus 34.6.
and has actually pardoned the greatest sinners, Manasses, Mary Madalen, Paul,
Publicans, harlots, backsliders; we should though not presume hereupon to turn
Gods mercy into poison, and his grace into wantonness (for mercy it self will
not save those sinners that hold fast sin, and will not forsake it) yet take
heed of despairing, or entertaining low thoughts of the love and mercy of God;
for such examples as these are set forth for the encouragement of all that
shall ever believe unto eternal life, 1 Timothy 1.16. And the thoughts and ways
which God has to pardon sin are above our thoughts and ways, whereby we look
on them in their guilt and greatness, many times, as unpardonable: and
therefore are fit matter for our faith, even against sense, to believe, and
rely upon, Isa. 55.57, 58.

Now follows the Fountain of this Mercy. I will leve them freely. Sect. 18.
Cum quis propter nullam aliam causam donat, quam ut libertatem and
munificentiam exerceat, Hae^ proprie Donatio appellatur. Julian. D. de
Dona^ionib. lib. 1.
] Gods love is a most free and bountiful love, having no motive or foundation
but within it self, and his free love and grace is the ground of all his other
mercies to his people; he shows mercy on whom and because he will show
mercy. From the beginning to the end of our salvation, nothing is primarily
active but free grace. Freely loved, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. Freely chosen, Ephesians. 1.
ver. 5, 6. Christ the gift of free love, John 3.16. His obedience freely
ascepted for us, and bestowed upon us, Romans 5.15, 18. Justification free, Romans
3.24. Adoption free, Ephesians. 1.5. Faith and repentance free, Phil. 1.29. 2 Timothy
2.25. Good works free, Ephesians. 2.10. Salvation free, Titus 3.5. Acts 15.1. Thus
the Foundation of all mercies is free love. We do not first give to God, that
he may render to us again. We turn, we pray, we covenant, we repent, we are
holy, we are healed, only because he loves us: and he loves us, not because he
sees any thing lovely or amiable in us, but because he will show the
absoluteness of his own will, and the unsearchableness of his own Counsel
toward us We are not originally denominated Good by any thing which flows
from us, or is done by us: but by that which is bestowed upon us. Our goodness
is not the motive of his love, but his love the Fountain of our goodness. None
indeed are healed and saved, but those that repent and return; but repentance
is only a condtion, and that freely given by God, disposing the subject for
salvation; not a Cause moving or procuring God to save us. It is necessary as
the means to the end, not as the cause to the effect. That which looks least
free of any other act of God, His rewarding of obedience, is all and only
mercy. When we sow in righteousness, we must reap in mercy, Hos. 10.12. When he
renders according to our works, it is because of his mercy, Psalm. 62.12.

This is the solid bottom and foundation of all Christian comforts, that God
loves freely Were his love to us to be measured by our fruitfulness or
carriages toward him, each hour and moment might stagger our hope; but he is
therefore pleased to have it all of Grace, that the promise might be sure, Romans
4.16. This comforts us against the guilt of the greatest sins; for love and
free grace can pardon what it will. This comforts us against the accusations of
Satan drawn from our own unworthiness. It Is true, I am unworthy, and Satan
cannot show me unto my self more vile, then without his accusations I will
acknowledge my self to be: but that love that gave Christ freely, does give in
him more worthiness then there is or can be unworthiness in me. This comforts
us in the assured hope of Glory, because when he loves he loves to the end, and
nothing can separate from his love. This comforts us in all afflictions, that
the free love of God, who has predestined us thereunto, will wisely order it
all unto the good of his servants, Romans 8.29. Hebr. 12.6.

Our duty therefore it is, First, to labor for assurance of this free love. It
will assist us in all duties; it will arm us against all Temptations: It will
Answer all Objections that can be made against the souls peace: It will sustain
us in all conditions, which the saddest of times can bring us unto. If God be
for us who can be against us? Though thousands be against us to hate us, yet
none shall be against us to hurt us.

Secondly, if God love us freely, we should love him thankfully, 1 Ioh. 4.19.
and let love be the salt to season all our sacrifices. For as no benefit is
saving unto us which does not proceed from love in him, so no duty is pleasing
unto him which does not proceed from love in us, 1 John 5.3.

Thirdly, plead this free love and grace in prayer; when we beg pardon,
nothing is too great for love to forgive: When we beg grace and holiness,
nothing is too good for love to grant. There is not any one thing which faith
can manage unto more spiritual advantages, then the free grace and love of God
in Christ.

Fourthly, yet we must so magnify the love of God, as that we turn not free
grace into wantonness. There is a corrupt generation of men, who under
pretense of exalting grace, do put disgrace upon the Law of God, by taking away
the mandatory power thereof from those that are under grace, a doctrine most
extremely contrary to the nature of this love. For Gods love to us works love
in us to him; and our love to him is this, that we keep his Commandments; and
to keep a Commandment is to confirm and to subject my conscience with
willingness and delight unto the rule and preceptive power of that
commandment. Take away the obligation of the Law upon conscience as a rule of
life, and you take away from our love to God the very matter about which the
obedience thereof should be conversant. It is no diminution to love that a man
is bound to obedience (nay it cannot be called obedience if I be not bound unto
it) but herein the excellency of our love to God is commended that whereas
other men are so bound by the Law that they fret at it, and swell against it,
and would be glad to be exempted from it, they Sub lege est qui timore
supplicii quod lex minatur, non amore justitiae se sentit abstinere ab opere
peccati; nondum liber nec alienus a voluntate peccandi. In ipsa enim voluntate
reus est, qua mallet si fieri posset non esse quod timeat, ut libere faciat
quod occulte desiderat. August. de not. and great. cap. 57. Et infra. Omnia
fiunt facilia charitati, cap. 69, non est Terribile sed Suave mandatum. De
Great. Christi, lib. 1. cap. 13. Suave fit quod non delectabat. De peccat.
merit. and Remis. lib. 2. cap. 17. Contr. 2. Epist. Pelag* lib. 1. cap. 9. lib.
3. cap. 4. de doctr. Christi, lib. 1. cap. 15. de spiritu and lit. cap. 3.
who love God, and know his love to them, delight to be thus bound, and find
infinitely more sweetness in the strict rule of Gods holy Law, then any wicked
man can do in that presumptuous liberty wherein he allows himself to shake
off and break the cords of it.

. 19.
Now lastly, when we return with sound repentance unto God, then God is pleased
to give more then ordinary tastes of the sweetness of his love, by removing
judgments, which are the fruits of his Anger, from us. This point falls in
with what was handled before on the second verse. Therefore I shall conclude
with these two notes:

First, that in all judgments God will have us look on them as fruits of his
anger, and take more notice in them of his displeasure than our own
sufferings. When wrath is gone out, the sword drawn, thousands and ten
thousands slain in our Coasts; Israel given to the spoil, and Jacob unto
robbers; a land set on fire with civil flames, and none able to quench them; A
Kingdom divided within it self; A Church which was sometimes the Asylum for
other exild and afflicted Christians to fly for shelter unto, miserably torn
by the foolish and unnatural divisions of brethren, and dangerously threatened
by the policy and power of the common enemy who studies how to improve these
divisions, to the ruin of those that foment them; our work is to make this
conclusion, Our God is angry; a God that loves freely, that is infinite in
mercy and pity, who does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of
men; This should be our greatest Affliction; and the removal of this anger by
an universal Reformation and conversion unto him our greatest business. And I
do verily believe that England must never think of outliving or breaking
through this anger of God, this critical judgment that is upon it, so as to
return to that cold and formal complexion, that Laodicean temper that she was
in before, till she have so publicly and generally repented of all those
civil disorders which removed the bounds, and brought dissipation upon public
justice: and of all those Ecclesiastical disorders whch let in corruptions in
doctrine, superstions in worship, abuses in Government, discountenancing of the
power of godliness in the most zealous Professors of it, as that our
Reformation may be as conspicuous as our disorders have been, and it may
appear to all the world that God has washed away the filth and purged the
blood of England from the midst thereof by the Spirit of Judgment, and by the
Spirit of burning.

Secondly, That Gods love is the true ground of removing Judgments in mercy
from a people. Let all Humane counsels be never so deep, and armies never so
active, and cares never so vigilant, and Instruments never so unanimous, if
Gods love come not in, nothing of all these can do a Nation any good at all.
Those that are most interested in Gods love, shall certainly be most secured
against his Judgments. Hither our eyes, our prayers, our thoughts must be
directed. Lord, love us, delight in us; choose us for thy self, and then
though Counsels, and treasures, and armies, and men, and horses, and all
second causes fail us; though Satan rage, and hell threaten, and the
foundations of the earth be shaken; though neither the Vine, nor the Olive, nor
the fig tree, nor the field, nor the pastures, nor the herds, nor the stay
yield any supplies, yet we will rejoice in the Lord, and glory in the God of
our Salvation; sin shall be healed, anger shall be removed, nothing shall be
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
HOSEA Chap. 14. ver. 5.6, 7. 5. I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall
grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his re^ts as Lebanon.

6. His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, and
his smell as Lebanon.

7. They that dwell under his shadow, shall return. They shall revive as the
Corn, and grow as the Vine; the sent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon,
etc.


IN these verses is contained ^ods answer unto the second part of Isreal's
petition,. 1.
wherein they desired him to do them good, or to receive them graciously; And
here God promises them several singular blessings set forth by several
metaphor^ and similitudes, all answering to the name of Ephraim, and the
ancient promises made unto him, Deu. 33.13, 17. etc. opposite to the many
contrary courses threatened in the former parts of the Prophecy under metaphors
of a contary importance. Here is the dew of grace, contrary to the morning
cloud and the earthly dew that passes away, Cap. 13.3. Lillies, Olives, Vines,
Spices, contrary to the Judgments of Nettles, Thorns, Thistles, chap. 9,
16.10.8. Spreading roots contrary unto dry roots, chap. 9.16. A fruitful vine,
bringing forth excellent wine, contrary to an empty Vine bringing fruit only to
it self, that is, so sour and usavory, as is not worth the gathering, chap.
10.1. Corn growing, instead of corn taken quite away, chap. 2.9. instead of
no staulk, no bud, no meal, chap. 8.7. Fruit promised in stead of no fruit
threatened, chap. 9.16. Wine promised in opposition to the failing of wine,
Chap. 9.2.2.9. Sweet wine opposite to sour drink, Chap. 4.18. Safe dwelling
in stead of no dwelling, Chap. 9.3. Branches growing and spreading, instead of
branches consumed, Chap. 11.6. Green trees instead of Dry springs, Chap. 13.15.
And all these fruits the fruits as of Lebanon, which was of all other parts of
that Country the most fertile Mountain, full of various kinds of the most
excellent Trees, Cedars, Cypress, Olive, and diverse others, affording rich
gummes and balsomes: full also of all kinds of the most medicinal and
aromatic herbs, sending forth a most fragrant odor, whereby all harmfull and
venomous Creatures were driven from harboring there: And in the Valleys of that
Mountain were most rich grounds for Pasture, Adricomius, in N^p^alim. 64.
Brocard. Hieron. in loc.
Corn, and Vineyards, as the Learned in their descriptions of the holy Land
have observed.

The Original of all these blessings is the heavenly dew of Gods grace and
favor (alluding to that abundance of dew which fell on that Mouniaine,)
descending upon the Church, as upon a garden bringing forth Lillies, as upon a
Forest, strengthening the Cedars, as upon a Vineyard, spreading abroad the
branches,, as upon an Olive yard, making the trees thereof green and fruitful,
and as on a rich field, receiving the Corn. Here is spiritual beauty, the
beauty of the Lilly, exceeding that of Solomon in all his glory; spiritual
stabilitie, the roots of the Cedars, and other goodly trees in that mountain;
spiritual odors, and spices of Lebanon; spiritual fruitfulness and that of
all sorts and kinds for the comfort of life. The fruit of the field, bread to
strengthen, the fruit of the Olive trees, oil to refresh, the fruit of the
Vineyard, wine to make glad the heart of man, Psalm. 104.15.

We esteem him a very rich man, and most excellently accommodated, who has
gardens for pleasure, and fields for corn and pasture, and woods for fuel,
for structure, (...). A^^enaeus. lib. 1. cap. 23 Vid l. 4. ss. de Censibus.
for defense for beauty and delight: and Vineyards for wine and oil, and all
other conveniences both for the necessities and delights of a plentiful life.
Thus is the church here set forth unto us as such a wealthy man, furnished with
the unsearchable riches of Christ, with all kind of blessings both for
sanctity and safety; as the Apostle praises God the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ viz. Election to eternal life, adoption to the condition of sons, and
to a glorious inheritance, redemption from misery unto blessedness, remission
of sins, knowledge of his will, holiness and unblameablenesse of life, and
the seal of the Holy Spirit of Promise, as we find them particularly
enumerated. Ephe. 1.3, 13.

. 2.
The words thus opened, do first afford us one general Observation, in that
God singleth out so many excellent good things by name in relation to that
general petition, Do us good, That God many times answers prayer abundantly
beyond the petitions of his people. They prayed at large only for good, leaving
it (as it becomes us who know not always what is good for our selves) to his
holy will and wisdom in what manner and measure to do good unto them: And he
answers them in particular with all kind of good things. As in the former
petition they prayed in general for the forgiveness of sin, and God in
particular promises the healing of their Rebellions, which was the greatest of
their sins. God many times answers the prayers of his people, as he did the
seed of Isaac, Genesis 26.12. with an hundred fold increase. As Gods word never
returns empty unto him, so the prayers of his servants never return empty unto
them; and usually the c^op of prayer is greater then the seed out of which it
grew, as the putting in of a little water into a Pumpe makes way to the drawing
out of a great deal more. Isaac and Rebecca had lived twenty years together
without any children, and he grew now in years, for he was forty years old
before he married; hereupon he solemnly prays to God in behalf of his Wife,
because she was barren, and God gave him more then it is probable he
expected, for he gave him two Sons at a birth, Genesis 25.21, 22. As the cloud
which rises out of the earth many times in thin and insensible vapors,
falls down in great and abundant showers: so our prayers which ascend weak
and narrow, return with a full and enlarged answer. God deals in this point
with his children, as Joseph did with his brethren in Egypt; he did not only
put corn into their Sacks, but returned the money which they brought to
purchase it, Genesis 42.25. So he dealt with Solomon, he did not only give him
wisdom and gifts of government, which he asked, but further gave him both
riches and honor, which he asked not, 1 King. 3.13. The people of Israel when
they were distressed by the Ammonites, besought the Lord for help; he turns
back their prayers, and sends them to their Idols to help them; they humble
themselves, and put away their Idols, and pray again, and the highest pitch
that their petitions mounted unto was Lord, We have sinned, do unto us
whatsoever seems good unto thee, only deliver us we pray thee this day,
Judge. 10.15. and God did answer this prayer beyond the c^^tents of it; he did
not only deliver them from the Enemy, and so save them, but subdued the Enemy
under them, and delivered him into their hands; he did not only give them the
relief they desired, but a glorious victory beyond their desires, Judge. 11.22.
God deals with his servants ar the Prophet did with the woman of Shunem, when
he bid her ask what she needed, and tell him what she would have him do for
the kindness she had done to him, and she found not any thing to request at
his hands, he sends for her again, and makes her a free promise of that which
she most wanted and desired, and tells her that God would give her a son, 2
Kings 4.16. So many times God is pleased to give his servants such things as
they forget to ask, or gives them the things which they ask, in a fuller
measure then their own desires durst to propose them. David in his troubles
asked life of God, and would have esteemed it a great mercy only to have been
delivered from the fear of his Enemies: and God does not only answer him
according to the desire of his heart in that particular, and above it too, for
he gave him length of days for ever and ever; but further settled the Crown
upon his head, and added honor and majesty unto his life, Psalm. 21.2, 3, 4, 5.

And the Reasons hereof are principally two.

. 3.
1 We beg of God according to the sense and knowledge which we have of our own
wants, and according to the measure of that Love which we bear unto our
selves. The greater our love is to our selves, the more active and importunate
will our petitions be for such good things as we need: But God answers prayers
according to his knowledge of us, and according to the Love which he bears
unto us. Now God knows what things we want much better then we do our selves,
and he loves our souls much better then we love them our selves, and therefore
he gives us more and better things then our own prayers know how to ask of him.
A little child will beg none but trifles and mean things of his father,
because he has not understanding to look higher, or to value things that are
more excellent; but his father knowing better what is good for him, bestows on
him education, trains him unto learning and virtue, that he may be fit to
manage and enjoy that inheritance which he provides for him: so, we know not
what to ask as we ought, Rem. 8.26. and when we do know, our spirits are much
straightened, we have but a finite and narrow love unto our selves. But Gods
knowledge is infinite, and his love is infinite, and according unto these are
the distributions of his mercy. Even the Apostle himself when he was in
affliction, and buffetted by the messenger of Satan, and vexed with a thorn in
his flesh, besought the Lord for nothing but that it might depart from him; but
God had a far better answer in store to the Apostles prayer, and purposed to
do more for him then he desired, namely to give him a sufficiency of grace to
support him, and to magnify his strength in the infirmity of his servant, 2
Cor. 12.9. When the Prophet had encouraged men to seek the Lord, and to turn
unto him, and that upon this assurance, that he will not only hear petitions
for mercy and forgiveness, but will multiply to pardon, that is, will pardon
more sins then we can confess (for with him there is not only mercy, but
Plenteous redemption, Psalm. 130.7.) he further strengthens our faith and
encourages our obedience unto this duty, by the consideration of the thoughts
of God, to wit, his thoughts of love, mercy, and peace toward us; My thoughts
are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways says the Lord; for as
the heavens are higher then the earth, so are w^ ways higher then your ways,
and my thoughts then your thoughts. Esa. 55.7.8.9. He can pardon beyond our
petitions, because his thoughts of mercy toward us are beyond our
apprehensions. See the like place Ier. 29.10, 11, 12.

. 4.
2 God answers prayers not always with respect to the narrow compass of our
weak desires, but with respect to his own honor, and to the declaration of
his own greatness: for he promises to bear us that we may glorify him.
Psalm 50.15. Therefore he is pleased to exceed our petitions, and to do for us
abundantly above what we ask or think, that our hearts may be more abundantly
enlarged, and our mouths wide opened in rendering honor unto him. When
Perillus a favorite of Alexander, (...). Plutarch. Apoph^heg.
begged of him a portion for his daughters, the King appointed that fifty
Talents should be given unto him, and he answered that ten would be sufficient;
the King replied that ten were enough for Perillus to ask, but not enough for
Alexander to grant: So God is pleased many times to give more then we ask, that
we may look upon it not only as an Act of mercy, but as an act of honor; and
to teach us in all our prayers to move God as well by his glory as by his
mercy: So Moses did, when he prays for pardon unto Israel, lest Gods Name
should be blasphemed, Numb. 14.15, 16, 17. So Joshua did when Israel turned
their backs before their enemies, what will thou do unto thy great Name? Josh.
7.9. So Solomon in his prayer at the dedication of the Temple, Hear thou in
heaven thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calls to
thee for, that all the people (...) the earth may know thy Name, 1 Kings 8.43.
So David in his for Israel, and for the performance of Gods promise to the seed
of David, Do as thou have said, let it even be established, that thy Name may
be magnified for ever. 1 Chronicles. 17.23, 24. So Asa, O Lord thou art our God,
let not man prevail against thee, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. So Iehosaphat, Art not thou
God in heaven? and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the Heathen? and in
thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand
t^ne? etc. 2 Chronicles. 20.6. So Hezekiah when he spread the blasphemies of
Sennacherib before the Lord, O Lord our God, save us from his hand, that all
the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the Lord, even thou only:
Isa. 37.20. So the Church of God in the time of distress, Help us O God of our
salvation, for the glory of thy Name, and deliver and purge away our sins for
thy Names sake; wherefore should the Heathen say, where is their God? Psalm.
79.9, 10. As every creature of God was made for his glory, Prove. 16.4. Romans
11.36. so every Attribute of God does work and put forth it self for his
glory. If he show mercy, it is to show the riches of his glory, Romans 9.23. Ephesians.
1.11, 12. If he execute justice, it is to make his power known, Romans 9.17.22. 2
These. 1.9. When he puts forth his power, and does terrible things, it is to
make his Name known, Isa. ^4.1, 2, 3. If he engage his truth, and make his
promises Yea and Amen, it is for his own glory, and that his Name may be
magnified in doing what he has said, 2 Cor. 1.20. 2 Samuel 7.25, 26. ^xod. 3.14,
15. Exodus 12.41. Josh. 11.45. Whenever therefore we pray unto God, and
therein implore his mercy on us, his justice on his enemies, his truth to be
fulfilled, his power, wisdom, or any other Attribute to be manifested toward
his people, the highest and most prevailing medium we can use, is the glory of
his own Name* Gods ultimate end in working must needs be our strongest argument
in praying, because therein it appears that we seek his interest in our
petitions as well, and above our own.

This serves first to encourage us unto prayer, because God does not only
hear and answer prayers, Sect. 5.
which is a sufficient motive unto his servants to call upon him, O thou that
hear prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come, Psalm. 65.2.66.20.86.5, 6,
7.102.17. but because he oftentimes exceeds the modesty, the ignorance, the
fearfulness of our Requests, by giving unto us more then we ask. When poor
men make requests unto us, we usually answer them as the Echo does the voice,
the answer cuts off half the petition. The Hypocrite in the Apostle ( Iam.
2.15, 16.) when he saw a brother or sister naked or destitute of daily food,
would bid him be warmed or filled, but in the mean time give him nothing that
was needful; and so did rather mock then answer their requests. We shall
seldom find amongst men Iaels cu^tesie, Judge. 5.25. giving milk to those that
ask water, except it be as hers was, (...), munus cum hamo, an entangling
benefit, Seneca.
the better to introduce a mischief: there are not many Naamans among us, that
when you beg of them one Talent, will force you to take two, 2 Kings 5.23, But
Gods answer to our prayers is like a multiplying glass, which renders the
request much greater in the answer then it was in the prayer. As when we cast a
stone into the water, though (...) be but little in it self, yet the circles
which come from it spread wider and wider till it fill the whole pond: so our
petitions though very weak as they come from us* and craving but some one or
other good thing, yet finding way to the fountain of life, and unsearchable
treasure of mercy which is in Christ, are usually answered with many and more
spreading benefits. Spiritu^ noster. clariorem s^num reddit cum illum Tula^er
longi canali^ angust as tractum pa^en^iore novissime exi^u essundit. Seneca
Epist. 108.
The Trumpet exceedingly streng^hneth the voice which passes through it; it
goes in at a narrow passage, and the voice is but a silent breath as it comes
from the mouth; but it goes out wider, with a doubled and multiplied vigor: So
our prayers usually go up narrow to God, but they come down with enlarged
answers from him again; As the root is but of one color, when the flower
which grows out of it is beautified with variety.

Now this should be a great encouragement unto us to call upon God with
sincerity of heart, because he multiplyeth to pardon, because we know not the
numbers of his salvation, Psalm. 71.15. we cannot count the sum of his
thoughts toward us, Psalm. 139.17, 18. If there were any man so wealthy, that
it were all one with him to give pounds or pence, and who usually when he were
asked silver, would give gold, every indigent and necessitous person would wait
upon this man's mercy. Now, it is as easy with God to give Talents as
farthings, as easy to over answer prayers as to answer them at all. It is as
easy to the Sun ^o fill a vaste Palace as a little closet with light; as
easy to the Se^ to fill a channel as a bucket with water. He can satisfy
with goodness, and answer with wonderful and terrible things, Psalm. 65.4.5.
Oh who would not make requests unto such a God, whose usual answer unto prayer
is, Be it unto thee as thou will? Matthew. 15.28. Nay, who answers us beyond our
own wills and thoughts, Ephesians. 3.20. and measures forth mercy by the greatness
of his own grace, and not the narrowness of our desires. The Hier. in Ezekiel.
49. Pagnin in Thesaur. W^se^^s de m^nsur. Heb li. 1. ca 1 Sect. 6.7. B^z in
Matt. 17.14. Iun. in Genesis 23. Masius in Josh. 7. Ainsworth on Genesis 20. Se^ar in
Josh. 7. q^. 5.
shekell belonging to the sanctuary was as many learned men think, in weight
double to the common shekell which was used in civil matters: To note unto us,
that as God expects from us double the care in things belonging unto him above
what we use in the things of the world, so he usually measures back double
unto us again; good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over
into our bosoms. When the man sick of the palsy was carried unto Christ to
be healed, Christ did beyond the expectation of those that brought him, for he
not only cured him of his disease, but of his sin, gave him not only health
of body, but peace of conscience; first, Be of good cheer, thy sins be
forgiven thee; and then, Arise, take up thy bed, and go to thy house: Matthew.
9.2.6. The Thief on the Cross besought Christ to remember him, when he came
into his kingdom, but Christ answers him far beyond his petition, assuring
him that the same very day he should be with him in Paradise, Luke 23.42, 43.
The poor man at the gate of the Temple begged for nothing of Peter and John but
a small alms, but they gave him an answer to his request far more worth then
any other alms could be, namely, such an alms as caused him to stand in need of
alms no longer, restored him in the name of Christ unto sound strength, that he
walked, and leaped, and praised God: Act. 3.6. Si non secundum volunta^^m,
tamen ad u^ilitatem. (...). Acrotatus apud Plutarch Laconic Apoph^heg. Sect. 6.
In like manner does God answer the prayers of his people, not always it may
be in the kind, and to the express will of him that asks, but for the
let^er, and consequently more to his will then himself expressed.

Secondly, This should encourage us in prayer to beg for an answer, not
according to the defect and narrowness of our ow^ low conceptions, but
according to the fullness of Gods own abundant mercies. It would not please one
of us if a beggar should ask of us gold, or jewels, silk, or dainties; we
would esteem such a petitioner fuller of pride and impudence, then of want.
But God delights to have his people beg great things of him, to implore the
performance of exceeding great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1. ^. to p^^y for
a share in the unsearchable riches of Christ, to know things which pass
knowledge, and to be filled with the ^ulnesse of God, Ephesians. 3.8, 18, 16* to
ask things which eye has not seen, nor e^re heard, nor has entered into the
heart of man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. to ask not as beggars only for an Alms,
but as children for an inheritance, Romans 8.15, 17, ^3. Gal. 4.6, 7. not to ask
some thing, or a few things, but in every thing to let our requests be made
known unto God, Phil. 4.6. because with Christ he gives us freely all things,
Romans 8.3^. even all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.^7. As Alexander the Great
was well pleased with Anaxarchus the Philosopher when he desired an hundred
talents of his Treasurer. Plutarch.
He does well, s^ith he, in asking it, and understands his friend aright, who
has one both able and willing to give him so great a gift. God allows his
children a spiritual and heavenly ambition to covet earnestly the best gifts,
1 Cor. 12.31. to aspire unto a kingdom, and accordingly to put up great and
honorable requests unto him. To think what great things Christ has purchased,
what great things God has promised and proposed to us, and to regulate our
prayers more by the merits and riches of Christ, and by the greatness of Gods
mercies, then by those apprehensions which we cannot but have of our own
unworthiness.

Sect. 7.
Now next from the particulars of the Text, thoguh many particular observations
might be raised, yet I shall reduce them unto one general, which may
comprehend the particulars; namely, That whom God loves and pardons, upon them
he powers forth the benediction of his grace and spirit, as the dew of heaven
to quicken them unto an holy and fruitful conversation. The general promises
nakedly set down before, I will heal, I will love, are here further amplified
by many excellent metaphors, and elegant figures, which are nine in number,
multiplied into so many particulars, partly because of the difficulty of the
promise to be believed, which is therefore severally inculcated and
represented: Partly because of the dejectedness of the people under the
variety of their former sufferings, who are therefore by variety of mercies to
be raised up and revived* and partly to represent the perfection and
compleatnesse of the blessings intended, which should be of all sorts, and to
all purposes; and the foundation of all the rest is this, that God promises to
be as the dew unto Israel: For Ephraim having been cursed with much drouth and
barrenness; now when God blesses him again, he promises to be unto him as
dew is to the weary and thirsty ground, which so refreshes it that the fruits
thereof do grow and flourish again. Lillies, flowers, trees, vines, corn are
very apt (especially in such hot Countries as Judea) without much refrewing dew
and showers from heaven, to dry up and wither away: so would Ephraim have been
quite consumed by the heavy wrath of God, if he should not with the supplies
of his grace and holy spirit, and with his heavenly refreshments and loving
countenance revive them again.

Dew in the natural signification of it, imports a comforting, refreshing,
encouraging, and calling forth the fruits of the earth, as being of a gentle
insinuating virtue, which leasurely soaketh into the ground; and in that sense
is mentioned as a blessing, Genesis 28.39. In the mystical and spiritual sense
of it, it signifies Christ, Psalm. 72.6. who by his holy word and heavenly
grace dropping down and distilling upon the souls of men, Chrysostom in Psalm.
51.7.
Deuteronomy. 32.2. Job 29.22, 23. by his princely favor and loving countenance,
which is as a cloud of the latter rain, Prove. 16.15.19, 12. by his heavenly
righteousness, and most spiritual efficacy, Isa. 26.19.45.8. does to quicken,
vegitate and revive the hearts of men, that they like dew from the womb of the
morning are borne in great abundance unto him, as multitudes of men, and
believers use to be expressed in the Scripture by drops of dew, Psalm. 110.3.
Mich. 5.7. In one word, That which dew is to the fields, g^rdens, vineyards,
flowers, fruits of the earth, after an hot and a scorching day, That the
favor, word, grace, loving countenance, and holy Spirit of Christ will be to
the drooping and afflicted consciences of his people.

From this metaphor then we learn,

1. That we are naturally, dry, barren, fruitless, and utterly unable to do
any good, to bring forth any fruit unto God, like an heathy and parched l^nd,
subject to the scorching terrors of the wrath of God, and to his burning
indignation. So Christ compares Jerusalem unto a dry withered tree, fitted unto
judgment, Luke 23.31. And he assures us that out of him we can do nothing,
John 15.4.5. In us of our selves there dwells n^ good thing, Romans 7.18. we
are not of our selves as of our selves sufficient unto any thing. 2 Cor. 3.5.
He is the Sun that heals us, Mal. 4.2. he the rain that disposes us, Psalm.
72.6. he the root that deriveth life and nourishment upon us, Revel. 22.16. As
natural, so much more spiritual fruitfulness, has its ultimate resolution
into him, who alone is the father of the rain, and begets the drops of dew,
Hos. 2.21.22. Job. 38.28.

2. That the grace of God is like dew to the barren and parched hearts of men
to make them fruitful.. 8.
And there are many things wherein the proportion and resemblance stands.

First, None can give it but God, It comes from above, it is of a celestial
original, the nativity thereof is from the womb of the morning. Are there any
amongst the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain, or can the heavens
give showers? Art not thou he O Lord our God? for thou have made all these
things, Ier. 14.22. And the like we may say in a more strict and peculiar
sense of regeneration, That it is a spiritual and heavenly birth; It is not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. There
is no concurrence or active assistance of the flesh, or of any natural
abilities unto a birth which is merely spiritual, Ioh. 1.13. Ioh. 3* 5, 6.
Iam. 1.17, 18. Therefore Christ was pleased to go up into heaven, before he
shed forth his holy Spirit in abundance on the Church, Ita docet ut quod
quisque didicerit, non tantum cognoscendo videat sed etiam volendo appe^a^,
ag^nd^que pe^s^ciat. Aug de Great. Christi. cap. 14.

Trahitur miris modi ut velit ab illo qui novit intus in ipsis hominum (...)
bus operari, non ut homines, quod fieri non potest, nolentes credant, sed ut
vo^^ e^ ex nolentibus fiant, cont. 2. Ep^st. Pelag. lib 1. cap. 19.

Interna, occul^a; mirabil^s, in eff^bilis potestas, de gr^t. Christ. cap 14.
Occultissima efficacissim^ potestas cont. 2. Ep. Pelag li. 1 c. ^0.

omnipotentissima pot^stas, de corrept and great. cap. 14. Modo mirabili and
ineffabili agers, de praed^stinat. sanct. cap. 10. idque indeclinabiliter atque
insupera^^iliter de corrept. and great. cap 1^. I^tus a patre audiunt a^que
discunt, qui credunt. de praedest. sanct. cap 8 vocatio Al^a and se^^^ta,
Epist^ 107. Bernard. Sermon. Parv. Sermon. 66.


Ioh. 7.39. Ioh. 16.7. Act. 1.4.5. to teach us, first, that our conversion and
sanctification comes from above, by a divine teaching, by a spiritu^ll
conviction, by a supernatural and omnipotent traction, by an heavenly calling,
by the will of him who alone can give a will unto us. No voice can be heard by
those that are dead, but the voice of the Son of man, Ioh. 6.44.45. Ioh.
16.8, 9, 10, 11. Heb. 3.1. Iam. 1.18. P^il ^, 1^. Ioh. 5.25. Heb. 12.25. and
withal to acquaint us whither the affections and conversations of men thus
sanctified should tend, namely, unto heaven, as every thing works toward its
original, and every part inclines unto the whole, Col. 3.1, 2. P^il. 3.^0.
With allusion unto this metaphor of dew or rain, the holy Spirit is said to be
powered out upon the Churches, Act. 2.17. Tit. 3.6. and the word of grace is
frequently compared unto rain. As it is the seed, by which we are enabled to
be fruitful, Math. 13.19. so it is the r^ine which softne^h the heart, that
it may be the better wrought upon by that seminall virtue, Esaias 55.10, 11. Heb.
6.7. whereas false teachers are called clouds without water, Iud. v. 12. They
have no fructifying virtue in them. None can give grace but God; It is heavenly
in its nature, therefore it is so in its original; It stays not for man, Mic.
5, 7. It depends not on the wills, concurrencies, preparations, or dispositions
which arise out of us, but it wholly preventeth us; we are made active by it,
but we are not Pedissequa non praevia volunt^s, A^g. Epist, 106. gratia dei
praeveni dicimus hominum voluntates, Epi. 107. ut velimus sine nobis operatur
cum autem vol^mus, nobiscum cooperatur. Aug. de great. and lib. arb^^r. cap. 7.
at all antecedently active in fitting or dispos^ing our selves for it.

Secondly, It is the fruit of a Aristot Meteorolog* lib. ^ cap. 10. Plin. lib.
2. cap. 60. l. 18. cap. 29.
Serene, clear and quiet heaven; for dew never falls either in scorching or
in tempestuous weather as Philosophers have observed, In like manner, the
grace, favor and blessings of God are the fruits of his reconciled affection
toward us: Upon the wicked he raineth storm and tempest, he showreh down on
them the fury of his wrath, and shows himself dark cloudy, gloomy, terrible
unto them, Psa. 11.6. Psalm. 83.15. Job. 20.23. ^ah. 1.3.8. But unto those that
fear his name he opens a clear and a gracious countenance, and being
reconciled unto them, sheddeth abroad his love into their hearts and his peace
into their consciences, like Gedeons dew on the fleece and on the ground, as a
special evidence of his grace; and therefore the Psalmist compares the love
and peace that is amongst brethren unto dew, Psalm. 133.3. which ever falls
from a calm, serene and quiet sky.

Thirdly, It is abundant and innumerable;. 9.
who can number the drops of dew on the ground, or the hairs of little rain?
(for so they are called in the original (...) because of their smalnesse and
number, Deuteronomy. 32.2.) so Husshai expresses the multitudes of all Israel, 2 Samuel
17.12. we will light upon him as the dew falls upon the ground; And the
multitudes of believers are said to be born unto Christ by his sending forth
the rod of his strength, as dew from the womb of the morning Psalm. 110.3. as
we find Historically verified, Acts 2.41. Act. 5.14.16. Act. 6.7. Acts 9.31,
42. Act. 19.20. Such is the grace and favor of God unto his people after their
conversion; unsearchable, it cannot be comprehended, or measured, nor brought
under any number or account, Psalm. 71.15. Psalm. 139.17.18. Christ is compared
unto Manna, he was the bread that came down from heaven, Ioh. 6.50, 51. and
Manna came in mighty abundance, so that there was enough for every one to
gather, Exodus 16.16. It had dew under it, and dew over it, as we may conjecture
by comparing Exodus 16.14. with Number. 11.9. whereunto the holy Ghost seems to
allude when he speaks of the hidden Manna, Lud. Capel. S^i. cileg page 132.133.
Rev. 2.17. (though that may likewise refer unto the pot of Manna which was
kept in the Tabernacle, Exodus 16 32, 33. Heb. 9.4. As our life is said to be
hid with Christ, now he is in Heaven, Col. 3.3.) By this dew coming along with
Manna* is intimated, That the mercies of God in Christ, his daily mercies,
(which are said with allusion, I suppose, unto this Manna, to be renewed every
morning, Lam. 3.23.) and his hidden mercies, to wit, the inward comforts of his
grace and spirit, are all Innumerable and past finding out. We may say of his
mercies, as the Psalmist of his Commandments, I have found an end of all
perfection, but these are exceeding broad, more then eye has seen, or ear
heard, or the heart it self is able to comprehend, 1 Cor. 2 9

Fourthly, It is silent, slow, insensible, while it is falling you cannot say,
here it is: it deceives the eye, and is too subtle for that to see it: it
deceives the ear, and is too silent for that to hear it: it deceives the
face, and is too thin and spiritual for that to feel it. You see it when it is
come, but you cannot observe how it comes. In this manner was God pleased to
fill the world with the knowledge of his Gospel, and with the grace of his
Spirit, by quiet, small, contemptible, and as it were, by insensible means:
The kingdom of God came not with Observation, Luke 17 20.21. that is, with any
visible notable splendour, or external pomp (as the Jews expected the Messiah
to come) but it came with spiritual efficacy, and with internal power upon
the consciences of men, and spread it self over the world by the Ministry of a
very few despised instruments; with respect unto which manner of working the
spirit is compared unto wind, which we hear and feel, but know not whence it
comes, nor whither it goes John 3.8. The operations of grace are secret, and
silent upon the conscience; you shall find mighty changes wrought, and shall
not tell how they were wrought. The same man coming into the Church, one hour,
a swine, a dog, a lion, and going out the next hour in all visible respects
the same, but invisibly changed into a Lamb.

Fifthly, It is of a soft and benign nature, which gently insinuates and
works it self into the ground, and by degrees moisteneth and mollifieth it,
that it may be fitted unto the seed which is cast into it. In like manner the
spirit, the grace, the word of God is of a searching, insinuating, softning
quality; it sinks into the heart, and works it self into the conscience and
from thence makes way for it self into the whole man, mind, thoughts,
affections, words, actions, fitting them all unto the holy seed that is put
into them: as the earth being softened and mingled with the dew, is the more
easily drawn up into those varieties of herbs and fruits that are fed by it.

Sixthly, It is of a vegerating and quickening nature, it causes things to grow
and revive again; therefore the Prophet calls it the dew of herbs, Esaias. 26.19.
which are thereby refreshed, and recover life and beauty; even so the word and
spirit of grace distilling upon the soul, as small rain upon tender herbs,
and as showers on the grass, cause it to live the life of God, and to bring
forth the fruits of holiness and obedience, Esaias 55.10, 11. Those parts of the
world which are under either perpetual frosts, or perpetual scortchings, are
barren and fruitless, the earth being closed up, and the sap thereof dried
away by such distempers. Such is the condition of a soul under wrath, that
has no apprehensions of God but in frost or fire; for who can stand before his
cold? Psalm. 147.17. Who can dwell with everlasting burnings? Esaias 33.14. Fear
contracteth and binds up the powers of the soul; it is the greatest
indisposer of all other unto regular action. But when the soul can apprehend
God as love, find healing in his wings, and reviving in his ordnances, this
love is of an opening and expansive quality, calling forth the heart unto duty,
love within as it were hastening to meet and close with love without* the love
of obedience in us, with the love of favor and grace in God. I shut and bar
my door against an Enemy whom I fear, and look upon as armed to hurt me; but
I open wide my doors, my bosom, unto a friend whom I love, and look upon as
furnished with counsel, and comfort, and benefits to revive me. There is a
kind of mutual love between dew and the earth; dew loves the earth with a love
of benefice^ce, doing it good, and earth loves dew with a love of
concupiscence, earnestly desiring it, and opening unto it. Such is the love
between Christ and the soul when he appears as dew unto it. He visites the
soul with a love of mercy, reviving it, and the soul puts forth it self
toward him in a love of duty earnestly coveting as well to serve as to enjoy
him.

Lastly, it is of a refreshing and comforting nature, tempering the heat of
those hotter Countries, and so causing the face of things to flourish with
beauty and delight. So God promises to be unto his people in their troubles as
a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest, Esaias 18.4. The spiritual joy and
heavenly comfort which the peace and grace of God ministers to the consciences
of believers, Romans 15.13, 5.1. Phil. 4.4. 1 Pet. 1.8. is said to make the bones
flourrish like an herb, Esaias 66.14. (As on the other side a broken spirit is
said to dry up the bones, Prove. 17.^2.) Their soul says the Prophet, shall be
as a watered garden, they shall sorrow no more; I will turn their mourning
into joy and will comfort them, Ier. 31^12, 13.

. 10.
By all which we should learn, first, as to be sensible of our own personal
and spiritual dryness, barrenness, emptiness of fruit and peace, hard
hearts, withered consciences, guilty spirits, under our own particular sins:
So in regard of the whole land to take notice of that tempest of wrath, which
like an East wind out of the wilderness dries up our springs, and spoileth
our treasures, as the Prophet complains, Hos. 13.15.16. and to be humbled into
penitent resolutions, as the Church here is. If God who was wont to be as dew
to our Nation, who made it heretofore like a Paradise, and a watered garden, be
now as a Tempest, as a consuming fire unto it, turning things upside down,
burning up the Inhabitants of the Earth, causing our land to mourn, and our joy
to wither, (as the Prophet speaks, Joel 1.12.) this is an evident sign, that
the Earth is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, Isa. 24.4, 5. Therefore as
our sins have turned our dew into blood, so our repentance must turn our
blood into dew again. If ever we look to have a happy peace, we must make it
with God: Men can give peace only to our bodies, our fields, our houses, our
purses, (nor that neither without his overruling power and providence, who
alone mannageth all the counsels and resolutions of men) but he alone can give
peace to our consciences by the assurance of his love, which is better then
life. And if there should be peace in a Nation, made up only by humane
prudence and correspondencies, without public repentance, and through
Reformation in Church, in State, in Families, in Persons, in judgment, in
manners; it would be but like those short interims between the Egyptian
plagues, Exodus 8.15.9.34. A respiting only, not a removing of our affliction;
like the shining of the Sun on Sodom before the fire and brimstone fell upon
it, Genesis 19.23, 24. We all cry and call for Peace, and while any thing is left
would gladly pay dear, very dear to recover it again. But there is no sure and
lasting purchase of it, but by unfeigned Repentance and turning unto God; this
is able to give peace in the midst of war. In the midst of storm and tempest
Christ is sufficient security to the tossed ship, Matthew. 8.24, 27. This man is
the peace even when the Assyrian is in the Land, Mic. 5.5. Whereas impenitency,
even when we have recovered an outward peace, leaves us still in the midst of
most potent Enemies, God, Christ, Angels, Scripture, Creatures, Conscience,
Sins, Curses, all our Enemies. The Apostle tells us that Lusts war against
the soul, 1 Pet. 8.11. There is a strong emphasis in the word, soul, which is
more worth then all the world, nothing to be taken in exchange for it. Matthew.
16.26. So long as we have our lusts unconquered, we are under the wofullest
war in the world, which does not spoil us of our blood, our money, our
corn, our cattle, our houses, our children, but of the salvation of Immortal
souls. Time will repair the ruins of other wars, but eternity it self will
not deliver that poor soul which is lost, and fallen in the Wars of lust.

Therefore if you would have peace as a mercy, get it from God, let it be a dew
from Heaven upon your conversion unto him. A Kings favor is said to be as dew
on the grass, Prove. 9.12. and as a cloud of the latter rain, Prove. 16.15. And
it would with all joyfulnesse be so apprehended, if by that means the blessing
of peace were bestowed upon these distressed Kingdoms. How much more
comfortable would it be to have it as a gift from God unto a repenting Nation?
For God can give peace in anger, as well as he does war. A ship at Sea may be
distressed by a calm, as well as broken by a tempest. The cattle which we
mean to kill, we do first prefer unto some fat pasture: And sometimes God
gives over punishing, not in mercy but in fury; leaving men to go on quietly
in their own hearts lusts, that they who are filthy may be filthy still, Psalm.
81.12. Hos. 4.14.17. Esaias 1.5. Ezekiel. 24.13. God was exceeding angry with Israel
when he gave them their hearts desire, and sent them Quails, Number. 11.32.33.
Many men get their wills from Gods anger by murmuring, as others do theirs
from his mercy by prayer; but then there comes a curse along with it. Now
therefore when our own sword does devour us, when our Land is through the wrath
of the Lord of hoasts so darkened; that the people thereof are as fuel of the
fire: no man sparing his brother, every man eating the flesh of his own arm
(it is the sad character which the Prophet gives of a Civil War, Esaias 9.19,
20.) Let us take heed of Gods complaint, In vain have I smitten your Children,
they receive no correction, Ier. 2.30. Let us make it our business to recover
God. It is he that causes Wars to cease in the earth, Psalm. 46.10. And it is
he who powers out upon men the strength of battle, and gives them over to
the spoylers, Esaias 42.24* 25. A sinful Nation gains nothing by any humane
Treaties, policies, counsels, contributions, till by repentance they secure
their interest in God, and make him on their side. God being prevailed with by
Moses in behalf of Israel after the horrible provocation of the Golden Calfe,
sends a message to them, I will send an Angel before thee and will drive out
the Canaanite, And presently it follows, when the people heard these evil
tidings they mourned, Exodus 33.2, 3, 4. What were these evil tidings, To have
an Angel to protect and lead them? to have their enemies vanquished? to have
possession of a land flowing with milk and honey? was there any thing
lamentable in all this? yes. To have all this and much more, and not to have
God and his presence, was heavy tidings unto Gods people. And therefore Moses
never gave God over till he promised them his own presence again, with which he
chose rather to stay in a wilderness, then* without it to go into the land of
Canaan. If thy presence go not along, carry us not up hence, Exodus 33.13, 14,
15.

Secondly, we should from hence learn, Sect. 11.
whatever our spiritual wants are, to look up to heaven for a supply of them.
Neither gardens, nor woods, nor vineyards, nor fields, nor flowers, nor trees,
nor corn, nor spices will flourish or revive without the Dew and concurrence
of heavenly grace. Christ alone is all in all unto his Church; though the
instruments be earthly, yet the virtue which gives success unto them, comes
from heaven.

1. The beauty of the Lillies, or as the Prophet David calls it, the beauty of
holiness arises from the Dew of the morning, Psalm. 110.3. He is the ornament,
the attire, the comeliness of his Spouse. For his people to forget him, is for
a maid to forget her ornaments, or a spouse her attire, Ier. 2.32. The perfect
beauty of the Church, is that comeliness of his which he communicates unto
her, Ezekiel. 16.14. Of our selves we are wretched, miserable, poor, naked,; our
gold, our riches, our white raiment, we must buy of him, Revel. 3.18. He is the
Lord our righteousness, whom therefore we are said to put on, Romans 1^.14. He
has made us Kings and Priests unto our God, Rev. 5.10. and being such, he has
provided beautiful Robes for us, as once he appointed for the Priests, Exodus
28.2. Revel. 4.4.6.11.7.9. Vide Gul. Stuc. Co^vival. lib. 2 cap. 26.
This spiritual beauty of holiness in Christ's Church, is sometimes compared
to the marriage ornaments of a Queen, Psalm. 45 14. Revel. 18.7, 8.21.2.
Sometimes to the choice flowers of a garden, Roses and Lillies, Cant. 2.1.2.
Sometimes to a most glorious and goodly Structure, Et quae divisa bea^os.

Efficient, coll^cta tenet, Clau.


Rev. 21.11.23. Sometimes to the shining forth of the Moon, and the
brightness of the Sun, Cant. 6.10. Revel. 12.1. All the united excellences
of the creatures are too low to adumbrate and figure the glories of the Church.

2. The root and stability of the Church is in and from him; he is the root of
David, Revel. 5.5. Except he dwell in us, we cannot be rooted nor grounded,
Ephesians. 3.17. All our strength and sufficiency is from him, Phil. 4.13. Ephesians. 6.10.
1. Pet. 5.10. The graft is supported by another root, and not by its own. This
is the reason of the stability of the Church, because it is founded upon a
Rock, Matthew. 16.18. not upon Peter, (...). Isid. (...) lib. 1. Epist ^35. Vt
ae^isic^r^tu^ Ecclesia super Petram quis sactus est Petra Paulum audi dicentem,
Petra autem erat Christus, Aug. in Psalm. 60. Super hanc Petram quam confessu^
es, super hanc Petram qu^m cognovisti dicens, Tu es, Christus Filius Dei vivi,
aed sicabo Ecclesiam meam. De verbis Dom. Sermon. 13 Quid ^st super hanc Petram?
Super hanc fidem: Super id quod dict^m est, Tu es Christus fi^ius Dei. Tract.
10. in Epist. 1. Ioann. Felix fidei petra, Petri ore o^sessa tu es Christus
filius Dei. Hilar. de ^rin. l b. 2. Super hanc cons^ssio^is Petram Ecclesiae
aedificatio est. lib. 6 (...). Chrisost. in loc. vid. Reynold, Conferrence with
Heart. cap. 2 divis. 1. Causaub. exercitat. ad An^^l Eccl^s. 15. c. 12 and 13.
Sixth. Senen. l. 6, Annot. 68 69.
but upon him whom Peter confessed; upon the Apostles only Doctrinally, but
upon Christ personally, as the chief corner stone, elect and precious, in whom
whosoever believes shall not be confounded, or by failing in his confidence,
be any ways disapointed and put to shame, Ephesians. 2.20, 21. 1 Pet. 2.6. This is
the difference between Istam eratiam non habuit homo primus qua vellet nunquam
esse malus; sed sane habuit in qu^ s^ pe^manare v^llet nun^uam malus esset. Sed
deseruit, and desertus est^^^ Haec prima est gratia quae data est primo Adam.
Sed haec potentior est in secund. Adam. Prima sit, ut habeat Homo justitiam si
velit. Secunda sit etiam ut velit, and tantum vel^t, tantoque ardore diligat,
ut camis voluntatem ^^n^raria concupiscentem voluntate spiritus vincat, etc.
Aug. de corrept, and great. cap. 11. and 12.
the righteousness of Creation and the righteousness of Redemtpion; the state
of the world in Adam, and the state of the Church in Christ. Adam had his
righteousness in his own keeping, and therefore when the power of hell set
upon him, he tell from his steadfastness; there was no promise given unto him
that the gates of Hell should not prevail against him, being of an earthly
constitution he had corruptibility, mutability, infirmity belonging unto him
out of the principles of his being. But Christ the second Adam is the Lord from
Heaven, over whom death has no claim, nor power; and the righteousness and
stability of the Church is founded and has its original in him. The powers of
darkness must be able to evacuate the virtue of his Sacrifice, to stop Gods
ears unto his intercession, to repel and keep back the supplies and
influences of his spirit, to keep or recover profession against his ejectment;
in one word to kill him again, and to thrust him away from the right hand of
the Majesty on high, before ever they can blow down or overturne his Church.
As Plato compared a man, so may we the Church, unto a tree inverted, with the
root above and the branches below. And the root of this tree does not only
serve to give life to the branches while they abide in it, but to hold them
fast that none can be able to cut them off, Ioh. 10.28, 29.

Sect. 12.
3, The growth and spreading abroad the branches of the Church, is from him
whose name is the branch, Esaias 11.1. Zach. 3.8. Unto him are all the ends of
the Earth given for a possession, and all the Kingdoms of the world are to be
the Lords, and his Christ's. In regard of his first dispensation toward Israel,
Gods first born, so the Land of Canaan is peculiarly called Immanuels Land,
Esaias 8.8. But in regard of his latter dispensation, when he sent the rod of his
strength out of Sion, and went forth Conquering and to conquer, and gave
commission to preach the Gospel unto every creature; So the whole world is now
under the Gospel become Immanuels Land, and he is King of all the Earth, Psalm.
47.7. King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16. Gentiles come in to the
light of his Church, and Kings to the brightness of her rising, and the Nation
and Kingdom that will not serve her shall perish, etc. Esaias 60.3.12. Now every
Country is Canaan, and every Christian Church the Israel of God, and every
regenerate person borne in Sion, and every spiritual worshipper the
Circumcision; now Christ is crucified in Gala^ia, and a Passover eaten in
Corinth, and M^nna fed on in Pergamus, and an Altar set up in Egypt, and
Gentiles Sacrificed, and stones made children unto Abraham, and Temples unto
God, See Ioh. 4.21. Mal. 1.11. Zeph. 2.11. Gal. 6.16. Esaias 44.5. Esaias 14.1.
Zach. 8.23. Romans 2.29. Psalm. 87.4, 5. Phil. 3.3. Col. 2.11. Gal. 3.1. 1 Cor.
5.7, 8. Revel. 2.17. Esaias 19.19, 21.23. Romans 15.16. Luke 3.8. Ephesians 2.11. In
Christ's former dispensation the Church was only National, amongst the Jews,
but in his latter dispensation, it is Oecumenicall, and universal, over all
the world; a spreading tree, under the shadow of the branches whereof shall
dwell the foul of every wing, Ezekiel. 17.23.

4. The Graces of the holy spirit wherewith the Church is anointed, are Origo
fontium and fluminum more, virtutum and scientiarum Christus. Si quis callet
i^gento, si quis nitet Eloquio, si quis moribus placet, inde est, Bernard. in
Cant. Se^m. 13.
from him. He is the Olive tree which emptieth the golden oil out of himself,
Zach. 4.^2. Of his fullness we all receive grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16. with the
same spirit are we anointed, animated by the same life, regenerated to the same
nature, renewed unto the same image, reserved unto the same inheritance,
dignified in some respect with the same Offices, made Priests to offer
spiritual Sacrifices, and Kings to subdue spiritual enemies, and Prophets to
receive teaching from God, and to have a duplicate of his law written in our
hearts, 2 Cor. 1.21. Ioh. 14.19. 1 Cor. 15.48, 49. Romans 8.17. 1 Pet. 2 5.
Rev^l. 1.6. Ioh. 6.45. Ier. 31.33.

5. The sweet perfume and scent or smell of Lebanon, which arises out of holy
duties, the grace which droppeth from the lips of his people, the spiritual
incense which arises out of their prayers, the sweet savor of the Gospel
which spreads it self abroad in the ministry of his word, and in the lives
of his servants, they have all their original in him, and from his heavenly
dew. (...), Chrysostom. Sermon. 27. in Genesis vid. Lud. Capell. Spi. cileg. page 97,
98. Weemse exercit. C^rem. lib. 1. p. 62, 63.
Of our selves, without him, as we are altogether stinking and unclean, Psalm.
14 3. Prove. 13.5. so we defile every holy thing which we meddle with, Hag. 2*
13, 14. Prove. 28.9. Esaias 1.11.15. insomuch that God is said, as it were, to
stop his nose that he may not smell them, Amos 5.21. they are all of them as
they come from us, gall and wormwood, and bitter clusters, Deuteronomy. 29.18.32, 32.
But when the spirit of Christ blows upon us, and his grace is poured into our
hearts and lips, then the spices flow out, Cant. 4.16. Then prayer goes up like
incense and sweet odours, Revel. 5.8. then instead of corrupt, rotten,
contagious communication, our discourses tend to edifying, and minister grace
to the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. then the Savor of the knowledge of Christ,
manifested it self in the mouths and lives of his servants in every place
where they come, 2 Cor. 12.4.

6. The shadow and refreshment,. 14.
the refuge and shelter of the Church against storm and tempest, against rain
and heat, against all trouble and persecution, is from him alone. He is the
only defense and covering that is over the Assemblies and glory of Sion, Esaias.
4.5. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, unto which the righteous fly and
are safe, Prove. 18.10. So the Lord promises when his people should be exiles
from his Temple, and scattered out of their own land, that he would himself
be a little Sanctuary unto them in the Countries where they should come, De
Domo sua nemo extrahi debat aut in jus vocari, quia domus ^utssimum cuique
R^fugium atque receptaculum. De in jus vocando. P. leg. 18. and. 21.
Ezekiel. 11.16. He is a dwelling place unto his Church in all conditions, Psalm.
90.1.91.1, 2, a strength to the needy, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from
the heat, an hiding place from the wind, a covert from the Tempest, a Chamber
wherein to retire when indignation is kindled, Esaias 25.4.26.20.32.2. Every
History of Gods power, every Promise of his love, every Observation and
experience of his providence, every comfort in his word, the knowledge which we
have of his name by faith, and the knowledge which we have of it by experience,
are so many arguments to trust in him, and so many hiding places to fly unto
him, against any trouble. What time I am afraid I will trust in thee,. Psa.
56.3. Why art thou cast down O my soul? still trust in God, Psalm. 42.5, 11.
He has delivered, he does deliver, he will deliver, 2 Cor. 1.10. Many times
the children of God are reduced to such extremities, that they have nothing to
encourage themselves withal but their interest in him; nothing to fly unto
for hope but his Great name made known unto them by faith in his promises, and
by experience of his goodness, power and providence. This was David's case at
Ziklag, 1 Samuel 30.6. and Isreal's at the red Sea, Exodus 14.10, 13. and Ionahs in
the belly of the fish, Ion. 2.4, 7. and Paul's in the shipwreck, Acts 27.20, 25.
God is never so much glorified by the faith of his servants, as when they can
hold up their trust in him against sight, and sense; and when reason says thou
art undone, for all help sails thee, can answer in faith, I am not undone, for
he said, I will never fail thee nor forsake thee.

7. The power which the Church has to rise up above her pressures, to outgrow
her troubles, to revive after lopping, and harrowing, to make use of
Medicamenta quaedam prius affligunt ut sanent, and ipsa collyria nisi s^nsum
videndi prius claudant, prodesse non possunt. Aug* qu. in Matthew. qu. 14. Quo
terreri deberet, illo ipso recreatur -- contumeliam tenet curationis pignus,
etc* Scult. cap. 42. Observat. in Matthew. de mullere Syrophae^issa. Plures
efficim^a quoti^es metimu^, Tertul. Apol. cap. ult.
affliction as a means to flourish again, all this is from him. That in
trouble we are not overwhelmed, but can say with the Apostle, As (...). etc.
Chrysostom. de Tribus put^is, Ser 2. in Psalm. 50.
dying, and behold we live; as chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things, like the corn which dies and is quickened again, like
the vine that is lopped and spreads again, all this is from him who is the
Resurrection and the life, Ioh. 11.25. who was that grain of wheat which dying,
and being cast into the ground, did bring forth much fruit, Ioh. 12.24. the
branch which grew out of the roots of Iesse, when that goodly family was sunk
so low as from David the King, unto Joseph the Carpenter.

Lastly, 14.
as God is the Author of all these blessings unto his people, so when he
bestows them he does it in perfection; the fruits which this dew produces,
are the fruits of Lebanon, the choycest and most excellent of any another. If
he plant a Vineyard, it shall be in a very fruitful hill, and with the
choycest plants, Esaias 5.1, 2. a noble Vine, a right seed, Ier. 2.21. When in
any kind of straights we have recourse to the Creature for supply, either we
find it like our Saviors fig tree, without fruit, or like our Prophets vine,
as good as empty, the fruits thereof not worth the gathering, Hos. 10.1. Grapes
of gall and bitter clusters; full of vanity, windiness, vexation,
disappointment; friends fail either in their love, or in their power; people
cry Hosanna to day and Crucifige to morrow. Men of low degree are vanity, and
men of high degree a lie. Counsels clash, or are puzzled with intricacies, and
unhappy obstacles, like the wheels in Ezekiels Vision, that seem hampered in
one another. Armies like Ruben, unstable as waters, that flow now, and anon
ebb, and sink away again. Treasures like the Mountains out of which they
were first dug, barren, and fruitless, better fuel to feed our sins,
then water to quench our flames; matter of prey to the wicked, more then of
help to the miserable. In one word, take any creature-helps in the world, and
there will be something, nay very much of defect in them. All being, but by
Gods, is mixed with not-being; and as every man, so every creature else which
is nothing but creature, is a Lier, like Jobs brook, or friends which he
compares thereunto, that vanishes into nothing when there is most need of it,
Job. 6.17, 21. A Lier, either by way of perfidiousnesse, which promises and
then deceives; or by way of impotency, which undertaketh and then miscarries.
But when ever God promises and undertaketh to bless any man or any people, he
carries on his work to perfection; his blessings are all milk and honey, dew
and fatness, wine and oil, the fruits of Lebanon, full of sweetness and
maturity: He perfits that which he begins concerning his servants, Psalm. 138.8.
Phil* 1.6. There does not one thing fail of all the good he speaks concerning
his people, they all come to pass and not one fails, Josh. 23.14. The riches
which are gotten by humane lusts and sinful resolutions, do come along with
many and piercing sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. but when God blesses a man with
riches, he takes away all the sorrow from it, Prove. 10.22 The gifts of God are
all of them like his works, very good, Genesis 1.31. and bring after a Sabbath, a
rest, and peace into the soul with them.

Thirdly,. 15.
We should from hence learn to show forth the fruits of this heavenly dew, in
those several expressions which the Prophet her uses, drawn from the
consideration of a garden, forest, fruitful field, heavenly Paradise, which
is a similitude frequently used by the holy spirit, to note the beauty,
sweetness, fruit, comfort, shelter, protection, which the Church of Christ
affords to the members of it, Esaias 35.1, 2.58, 11. Cant. 4.12, 6.16, ^. as on
the other side the wicked are compared unto a dry desert, and barren
wilderness, Esaias 35.6, 7.41.18. Ier. 17.6. For these things as they are
promises in regard of God, and so matter of comfort, so are they duties in
regard of us, and so matter of obedience.

First, He promises, Tantum est storis Lillii dignitas ut H^merus omnes flores
v^caverit (...). Iul. Pallux. vid. Plin. lib. 21. chap. 1.
that his people shall grow as the Lilly, which is the most beautiful of all
flowers, Mat. 6.28, 29. That they shall be gloriously clothed like a Kings
daughter, with the garments of praise, and the spirt of holiness, Esaias 62.3.
set forth by various metaphors of broidred work, and fine linen, and silk, and
ornaments, and bracelets, and chains, and jewels, and crowns, Ezekiel. 16.8, 13.

And as it is his promise, so it ought to be our duty and endeavor to adorn
the Gospel of Christ, to be in his garden as a Lilly, and not as a Nettle or
bramble; to walk as becomes godliness; to let our light shine before men,
that they may be won to admire the amiablenesse of the Lords Tabernacle, and
glorify God in the hour of their visitation; to be as lights in the midst of
a crooked generation, Phil. 2.15. or as Lillies amongst briars, Cant. 2.2. to
make it appear that spiritual wisdom causes the face to shine, Eccles.
8.1. That holiness is indeed a most beautiful thing, which commends us to
the eyes of God and Angels; a robe worn by Christ the King of Saints, and by
which we are made like unto him who is the fairest of ten thousand and
altogether lovely; we should take heed of any thing whereby our holy
profession may be blemished, and the name of God defiled by our means: of
such Levity, as is inconsistent with the Majesty of holiness; of such morosity
as is inconsistent with the meekness of holiness; of such drooping as is
inconsistent with the joy of holiness; of such stiffenesse and sowrenesse as
is inconsistent with the lenity of holiness. In one word, we should labor by
the innocence, purity, elegancy, fragrancy, fruitfulness; by the winning
ingenuity, the mild and humble condescension, the prudent insinuation, the
meek, quiet and graceful managaing of an holy life, to show forth the praises
of him that has called us, and to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men,
who like Black-Moores despise beauty, like dogs bark at the shining of the
Moon, and speak evil of the things they know not.

. 16.
Secondly, He promises that his Church should cast forth her roots as Lebanon:
Though she should have the beauty of the Lilly, yet she should be freed from
the infirmity of it, an aptness to fade and wither, beautiful to day, and to
morrow cast into the Oven. Plin. lib 16. cap. 40. Theoph^ast. Hist. Plant. l. 3.
But she should have stability like the Cedar, which is one of the strongest of
trees, and least subject to put refaction, and therefore the Church is compared
to it, Ezekiel. 17.22, 23. and the Temple is said to be built of it, 1 King. 6.15,
16. To signify the strength and duration of the Church, against which the
gates of Hell should not prevail: (And we may by the way observe, that most of
the things here mentioned by our Prophet, are also noted to have been in the
Temple, or in the services thereof; Lillies, 1 Kings 7.19, 22, 26. Olive trees,
1 King. 6.23, 32, 33. Spices for incense, Weat and Oil for meat Offerings,
Wine for drink Offerings.) God furnishes his people with these blessings which
may be most properly dedicated unto him. (...). Hom. Iliad. ^. Spolia in
Templis suspendere antiqui moris erat. Cic de. not. deor. lib. 2. Live. lib. 10.
Virgil. Aenead. 7.
Teaching us as often as we receive any gifts from God, presently to inquire
what relation they have to his Temple, how his name may be honored, how his
Church may be served, how his Gospel may be furthered, how his people may be
edified and comforted by them, how all our enjoyments may be divided as spoils
unto Christ. The power of great men, Esaias 60.3. the swords of mighty men, 1 Samuel 18.17.25.28. Judge. 7.^8. the wisdom of learned men, 1 King. 3.9.28. the
cunning of Craftsmen, Exodus 28.3.31.6. the wealth of rich men, Esaias 23.18.
Prove. 3.9. Psalm. 45.12. Esaias. 60.69. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Abraham gave of the
spoils to Melchisedec, Heb. 7.4. and Israel of all their wealth to the
Tabernacle, Exodus 35.21. and David and his people of their Treasure to the
Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29.2.

And as it is his promise, That the Church should thus take root, 2 King.
19.30. Ier. 17.8. So we should account it our duty, to be firm, stable,
constant unmovable in the Truth, and in the work of the Lord, as an house built
upon a rock. To stand fast and be rooted in the truth, that we may hold the
profession thereof without wavering, not being carried about with every wind
of doctrine, but knowing whom and what we have believed, 1 Cor. 16.13. Ephesians.
4.14. Col. 2.7. Heb. 10.23. to stand fast and be rooted in the Love of God,
that we may be strengthened with might in his service, and may with purpose of
heart cleave unto him, being established by his grace, Ephesians. 3.17. Col. 1.11.
Heb. 12.28.13, 9. P. de Adquirendo rerum ^ominio l. 7. 13. and Arborum fu^^im
caesarum, l 3. 3. Cod. de R^^ vindicatione, l. 11.
In the Civil Law, till a tree has taken root, it does not belong to the
soil on which it is planted. It is not enough to be in the Church, except like
the Cedar of Lebanon, we cast forth our roots, and are so planted that we
flourish in the Courts of our God, and bring fruit in our old age, Psalm. 92.12,
13, 14.

Thirdly, He promised that the Church should spread forth her branches,. 17.
and fill the earth, and grow into a great compass and extent, and should send
forth her boughs unto the Sea and her branches unto the River, Psa. 80.9, 10,
11. Dan. 2.35. That his Church should be a universal Church over the whole
world; that as the whole world in regard of sin lies in mischief, 1 Ioh,
5.19. so the whole world should have Christ for its propitiation, through
faith, 1 Ioh. 2.2. Totus in maligno propter zizania, A^g. Epist. 48.
Christus propitiatio propter Triticum. By one spirit we All are baptized into
one Body, 1 Cor. 12.13. and that one Body made up of all the Churches of the
Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. even of all Nations, kindreds, people, tongues, Revel.
7.9. no difference of persons, neither Greek nor Jew, neither Circumcision, nor
Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ All, and in All,
Col. 3.11. no difference of places: All that in every place call upon the name
of Lord Jesus both theirs and ours, 1 Cor. 1.2. no difference of Times, Christ
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13.8.

And as this is his promise, so we should endeavor:

1. To grow our selves in knowledge and grace, to let our profiting appear
unto all men, to abound in the work of the Lord, to let our graces from the
heart, like leven from the middle of the lump, spread abroad, and find their
way to all the parts and powers of soul and body, that the whole man may be
filled with the fullness of God, and grow up unto the measure of the stature of
the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.15, 16. Phil. 3.12, 13. 2 Pet. 3.18. Heb. 6.1.

2. To labor and endeavor the growth and progress of the Gospel in others.
This is the nature of grace, to manifest it self, and by that means to allure
and gather others to its own quality. It is set forth in Scripture by the names
of light which shines abroad, of ointment and perfume which cannot be hid, of
leaven, and salt, which deriveth its own nature and relish upon a whole lump.
Therefore the holy Ghost was given in Tongues, fiery tongues, and a rushing
wind, all which have a quality of selfe-manifestation, and notifying
themselves unto others. There is an excellent place to this purpose in the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in
all things which is the Head, even Christ. From whom the whole Body fitly
joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according to
the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the
Body unto the edifiing of it self in love: Where the Apostle shows the
manner of spiritual increase in the mystical Body of Christ by the proportion
of the growth of members in the natural Body.

And first, there must be a fellowship between the Head and Members, which in
the mystical Body is here twofold, (...), and (...); Growing into him, and
receiving from him. Looking in this work of growth, upon Christ; first, as the
end of that growth unto which it drives; secondly, as the fountain from whence
it proceeds. That by growing we may have a more intimate and strong communion
with him; by that virtue which we receive from him. So here are two necessary
requisites unto this duty of endeavoring the increase of the Body; to have
Christ for our end unto which we work, and for our fountain out of which we
derive our ability of working. Every true member of Christ is intent and
vigilent upon the interest and honor of Christ, and it belongs unto the honor
of Christ to have a perfect body. Vid. C^meron. de Eccles. p. 84.85, 86.
The Church is hi^ fullness; he esteems himself maimed and incomplete, if
that should be finally deficient in any thing requisite to the integrall
perfection of it; and hence it is that every true Christian puts forth the
uttermost of his endeavors in his place to carry on the increase of his
Masters Body: As every true-hearted Soldier that loves his General, is
exceeding desirous and to his power endeavors that every company and Regiment
under his Generals command may be in all the offices and members of it
complete. Again, every member of Christ being unto him united, does from him
receive of his fullness grace for grace, and so works unto the same ends as
the head does: And as the water which first rises out of the fountain, does
not stand still there where it began, but goes forward till it grow into a
great River; so those who are joined unto Christ as a Fountain, do by reason
of that vital Communion which they have with the Fountain, carry on the growth
of the whole Body; and the more vigorous the life of Christ is in any part, the
more actively does that part work toward the edification of the whole.

2. Here is further required a fellowship and mutual Communion of the members
of the Body within and amongst themselves:. 18.
unto which is first presupposed the Organicall and harmonious Constitution and
compacture of the Body into one, out of which arises the form and beauty, the
strength and firmness, the order and fitness that is in it unto those works
that are proper to it, intimated in those two words (...), and (...) fitly
joined together and compacted. (...), Greg. Nazian. Orat. 1.
It is a metaphor drawn from Carpenters and other Artificers, who by several
joints do so coaptate and fit the parts of their work unto one another, Nulla
multitudinis potentia nisi consentientis, id est, unum sentientis, Aug. de ve^a
Relig. cap. 25.
that being put together and fastened, there may one whole structure or body
grow out of them; and in that body this accurate fitness and intimatenesse of
the parts with one another, produces an excellent strength, a beautiful
order, and a ready serviceablenesse of each part to the other, and of all to
the whole. So Jerusalem is said to be a City compacted within it self, Psa.
122.3. as the Ark (a Type of the Church) had the ribs and planks, and parts
thereof so closely fastened into one another, that no water might get in to
drown it: And in the Tabernacle all the Curtains thereof were to be coupled
together into one another, Exodus 26.3. Christ is all for unity, and joining
things into one, Two natures united in one person, two parties reconciled by
one Mediat^r, Two people concorporated into one Church, one family, one father,
one seed, one head, one faith, one hope, one love, one worship, one body, one
spirit, one end and common salvation. Christ is not, loves not, to be divided:
This is a fundamental requisite unto the growth of the Body, Possessionem
Bonita^is tanto latius quanto concordius individua socioru^ p^ssidet charitas.
-- Et tanto eam reperiet ampliore^, quanto amplius ibi potuerit amare
consertem, Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 15. c. 5.
the preservation of its unity. The building must be fitly framed together, if
you would have it grow into an holy Temple to the Lord, Ephesians. 2.21. Col. 2.19.
when there was most unity, there was greatest increase in the Church; when they
were All of one accord, of one heart, and one soul, then the Lord added to the
Church daily such as should be saved, Act. 2.46, 47. They that cause divisions
and dissentions, do not serve the Lord Jesus, and therefore they cannot but
hinder the progress of his Gospel, Romans 16.17, 18. As in the natural, so in
the mystical body, solutio continui tends to the paining and grieving of
that spirit by which the Body lives, Ephesians. 4.30, 31. and by consequence hinders
the growth of it. Our growth is by the Apostle distributed into growth in
knowledge, and growth in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. and divisions in the Church are of
themselves great hindrances unto both these; unto knowledge, because the most
usual breaches in the Church arise out of diversities of opinion publicly
asserted and insisted on by the authors and followers of them. And though
accidentally, where truth is embraced, it is held with more care, and searched
into with more accuratenesse, because of the errors that oppose it (as the fire
is hottest in the coldest weather;) yet corrupt doctrine being of the nature of
a weed, or canker, to spread, and eat further and further, it must needs
consequently hinder the spreading, and in that kind, the growth of knowledge.
Nor does it less hinder the growth of grace; for while the people of God are
all of one heart and of one way, then all their Communion runs into this one
design of mutually edifying, comforting, supporting, encouraging one another
in their holy faith; but when they are divided and broken into faction by
different judgments, if there be not a greater abundance of humility, and
spiritual wisdom, the spirits of men run out into heates and passions, and
into perverse disputes, and mere notinall contentions, which have ever been
diminutions unto the power of godliness, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. When there are
schisms in the body, the members will not have care one of another, 1 Cor.
12.25. Greatly therefore even for this one cause are the sad and dangerous
divisions of these times to be lamented, Non tulit Caelius ass^nti^n^^m sed
exclamavit, Dic aliquid contra ut Duo simus, Senec. de Ira 3. lib. c. 8.
when men make use of civil troubles, to disturb, yea, to tear asunder the
unity of the Church, when they set up as in the times of the Donatists, Altar
against Altar, and church against Church, and make secessions from the common
body, and then one from another, to the infinite content and advantage of the
common Enemies of our Religion, and hazard of it. It were a blessed thing if
we were in a condition capable of the Apostles exhortation, To speak all the
same thing, to be perfectly joined in the same mind and in the sam^ judgment,
to be of one mind, and to live in peace, 1 Cor. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.11. But if
that cannot be attained unto, let us yet all learn the Apostles other lesson,
Vnitas interior and unanimitas ipsam cuoque multiplicitatem colligat and
constringit charitatis glutino, and vinculo pacis, Barnard. in Septuagesima
Sermon. 2.
wherein we are otherwise minded, to depend upon God for revealing his will
unto us, and whereunio we have attained to walk by the same rule, to mind the
same thing, to remember that every difference in opinion does not, ought not to
dissipate or dissolve the unity of Gods church. Even in Corinth where the
people were divided into several parties yet they continued one Church, 1 Cor.
11.18.

The body thus constituted, and compacted for the increase thereof.

. 19.
1. Here are members severally distinct from one another; some principal,
others ministerial, all concurring differently unto service of the whole. If
the heart should be in the head, or the liver in the shoulder, if there should
be any unnatural dislocation of the vital or nutritive parts, the body could
not grow, but perish. The way for the church to prosper and flourish, (...), etc
Plutarch. de Tranquillit.
is for every member to keep in his own rank and order, to remember his own
measure, to act in his own sphere, to manage his particular condition and
relations with spiritual wisdom and humility; the eye to do the work of an
eye, the hand of an hand. Say not as Absalom, If I were a Judge, I would do
Justice, 2 Samuel 15.4. But consider what state God has set thee in, and in that
walk with God, and adorn the profession of the Gospel, Romans 12.3. 1 Cor.
12.8.11.29, 30. 2 Cor. 10.13, 14. Ephesians. 4.7. Remember Vzzah, Vt Ilus Palladium
ex incendio eripiens dum a^ deret Templum Minervae, lumi nibus privatus est,
Plutarch. Parallel.
it was a good work he did, but because he did it out of order having no call,
God smote him for his error, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. There are excellent works which
being done without the call of God, do not edify but disturb the body, Romans
10.15. Heb. 5.4. every man must walk in the church as God has distributed and
called, and every man must in the calling wherein he was called, abide with
God, 1 Cor. 7.17, 20, 24.

2. Here are joints and ligaments so fastening these members together that each
one may be serviceable to the increase of the whole, 1 Col. 2.19. There are
bands which join the body to the head, without which it can neither grow nor
live, namely, the Spirit of Christ, and faith in him, 1 Cor. 6.17. Romans 8.9.
Ephesians, 3.17. and there are Bands which join the parts of the Body unto one
another; as namely, the same holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. which Spirit of grace
stirs up every member to seek the growth and benefit of the whole, 1 Cor.
12.25, 26. The same sincere love and truth which each member bears unto all
the rest, this is called a bond of perfectness, Col. 3.14. and the bond of
peace, Ephesians. 4.3. Now love is a most communicative grace, it will plant, and
water, and feed, and spend it self for the good of the whole, it will deny it
self to serve the body (as Christ did,) Gal. 5.13.

3. Here is a measure belonging unto every part; some are in one office, others
in another, some have one gift, others another, and all this for the perfecting
of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.4, 11. one is able to Teach, another to
Comfort, a third to Convince, a fourth to Exhort, a fifth to Counsel, and
every one of these are to be directed unto the edification and growth of the
w^ole, Romans 12.3, 8. Ephesians. 4.7. The Apostle says, that we are fellow Citizens
with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19. Now as amongst fellow Citizens there uses to be an
intercourse of mutual negotiation, Vid. Aristot. Ethic. l. 5. c. 8.
one man has one Commodity, and another another, and these they usually bartar
withal: So amongst the Saints one man is eminent in one grace, another in
another, and according to their mutual indigencies or abilities, they do
interchangeably minister to one another toward the growth of the whole. And
this is that which is here further requisite to the increase of the Body, called

4. (...)* The supply of service and the supply of nour^shment which one part
affords unto another, and so to the whole. This is principally from the Head to
the members, called by the Apostle, The supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
Phil, 1.19. Of whose fullness we receive grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16. into
whose image we are transformed from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. but it is
proportionably between the members amongst themselves; for as several
particular ingredients make up one cordial, and several instruments concur
to the perf^cting of one (...), or consummate work, and the beauty of every
thing arises out of the variety, and order, and mutual serviceablenesse that
the parts thereof have unto one another: So is it in the Church too, which
Christ has so tempered together, that they might all stand mutually in need of
one another. Therefore we find the Saints in Scripture communicating to one
another their experiences, temptations, deliverances, comforts, for their
mutual edification, Psalm. 34.^, 6. Ioh. 1.41, 45. Ioh. 4.^9. 2 Cor. 1.4, 6.
Phil. 1.12, 13, 14. Col. 2.1, 2. And Gods dealings with Saints in particular
are therefore registered in the Scripture, Specialiter pr^nunciata generalite
s^p^unt. Cum Deus Israelitas admone^ d^sciplin^ vel objurgat, utique ad omnes
bab^t. Te tul. de Spect^c. cap. 3.
both that we might learn that way of building up one another, and that by
their examples we might support our faith, and through patience and experience
of the Scripture have hope, because what has been done unto one, is in the
like condition applicable unto every other, Iam. 5.10, 11, 17. Rom* 15.4. 1
Cor. 10, 6. Heb. 13.5.

5. After all this there is (...), an effectual working, a vis (...), or a vis
(...), a faculty to form, and to concoct the matter, which has been
subministred, unto life and nourishment: which is the work of faith, and of the
Spirit of Christ, whereby the soul of a Believer, being sensible of want,
desirous of supply, and pressing forward unto perfection, does sweetly close
with whatsoever the measure of any other part has communicated unto it,
conver^ing it into growth and nourishment to it self, which the Apostle calls
the mixing of the word with faith, Hebr. 4.2. Now

Sect. 20.
Fourthly, He promises, that the beauty of his Church shall be as the Olive
tree; that as she should have the glory of the Lilly, the strength and
extension of the Cedar, so this spreading should not be a vain ostentation, but
should have joined with it the flourishing and fruitfulness of the Olive: Now
the honor of the Olive tree stands in two things; Perpetual greenness, and
most profitable fruit, which serves both for light to cause the Lamp to burn,
Exodus 27.20. and for nourishment to be eaten, Levit. 6.15, 16. in the one
respect it is an emblem of peace, it makes the face shine, Psalm. 104.15. and
in the other it is an emblem of grace, and spiritual gifts, 1 Ioh. 2.20.
These are the two most excellent benefits which God promises unto his people.
He will speak peace unto them, Psalm. 85.8. Isa. 32.17. and he will give them
grace and glory, Psalm. 84.11.

And as he promises, so should we practice these things, and learn to
beautify the Gospel of Christ, first, with our good works, as the fruits of
his grace, Ioh. 15.8. Secondly, with our spiritual joy and comfort, as the
fruits of his peace; That others seeing the light and shining forth of a
serene, calm, and peaceable conscience in our conversation, may thereby be
brought in love with the ways of God. These two do mutually cherish and
increase one another. The more conscience we make of fruitfulness, the more
way do we make for peace; when the waters of lust are sunk, the Dove will
quickly bring an Olive branch in: and the more the peace of God rules in the
heart, the more will it strengthen the conscience and care of obedience, out of
these considerations: first, out of thankfulness for so great a blessing:
secondly, out of fear to forfeit it: thirdly, out of wisdom to improve and
encre^se it.

Fifthly, Sect. 21.
He promises that his Church shall be as the smell of Lebanon, (...) etc.
Herm^pput apud Athenaeum, lib. 1. ca. 23.
and that the sent of it shall be as the wine of Lebanon, as elsewhere we find
her compared to a garden of spices, Cant. 4.12, 14. she shall be filled with
the sweet savor of the Gospel of Christ. Thanks be unto God, (says the
Apostle) which always causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the
savor of his knowledge by us in every place, for we are unto God a sweet
savor of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14, 15. where there are two Metaphors, one of a
sweet ointment, the other of a triumph. The Name of Christ is compared to an
ointment, Cant. 1.3. and preaching of the Gospel* which is making m^nifest the
savor of this ointment, is called the bearing of Christ's Name, Act. 9.15.
Now, this sweet savor is annexed unto a Triumphall solemnity, because in all
times of public joy, Convivia, Ludi^^ Pocula crebro, unguenta, coronae, serta
parentur, Lucret* lib. 4. Aderant ung^enta, corona, incendib^ntur odores, Cic.
Tuse, qu. l. 5. vid. Anthenaeu^, l. 15. c 11, 1^.
they were wont to anoint themselves with sweet oil, which is therefore called,
Ol^um laetitiae, the oil of gladness, Psalm. 45.7, 8. Isa. 61.3. (For in times
of mourning they did abstain from sweet ointments, 2 Samuel 14.2. Dan. 10.2, 3.)
The Gospel therefore being a message of great joy, Luke 2.10. a leading of
captivity captive, and the means whereby Christ rides forth gloriously
conquering and to conquer, Psalm. 45.3, 4. Psalm. 110.2. Revel. 6.2. therefore
they who brought these good tidings, are said to be as a sweet savor, whose
lips drop sweet smelling myrrh, Cant. 5.1^. and whose Doctrine is compared to
the powders of the Merchant, Cant. 3.6. and the time of the Gospel is called an
accepted time, a day of salvation, 2 Corinthians. 6.2. that is, a time of singular
joy and solemnity, a continual* Easter, or festival, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. and
herewithall he promises likewise, That his people should offer up spiritual
incense and services unto him in prayers, thanksgivings, alms and good works,
Ezekiel. 20.41.

And as he promises, so we should practice these things; our care should be to
let our lips and lives breathe forth nothing but grace and edification, Col.
4.6. To be frequent in the spiritual Sacrifices of prayer, thanksgiving and
good works, which may be as an odor of a sweet savor in the nostrils of God,
Phil. 4.18. Revel. 8.4. To labor to leave behind us a good name; not out of
vain glory, or an empty ambitious affectation of honor, but out of the
conscience of an holy life, which makes the name smell better then sweet
ointment, Eccles. 7.1.

Sixthly, He promises, Sect. 22.
That they who dwell under his shadow shall return: Which words admit of a
double sense, and so infer a double promise and a double du^y: first, we may
by an Hysteron Proteron understand the words thus, when Israel have repented
and are brought home to God again, they shall then have security, defense,
protection, refreshment under the comforts of his grace against all the
violence of temptation, as a spreading tree does afford a sweet shade unto the
weary Traveller; and shelter him from the injuries of the heat, Job 7.2. Isa.
4.6. Mich. 4.4. Zach. 3.10. Whereby is signified the secure, quiet, and
comfortable condition of Gods people under the protection of his providen^e and
promises.

And as he promises such a condition, so should we in all troubles not trust
in an arm of flesh, or betake our selves to mere humane wisdom, and carnal
counsels, which are too thin shelters against Gods displeasure, or the
Enemies of the Church: But we must fly unto him to hide us, we must find
spiritual refreshment in his ordinances, promises and providence, get his wing
to cover us, and his presence to be a little sanctuary unto us, and the joy of
the Lord to be our strength; Psalm. 57.2. Psalm. 91.1. Isa. 26.20. Nehem. 8.10.
When the Lord comes out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the la^d for
their iniquity; when flood, and fire, storm and tempest, the fury of anger,
the strength of battle, are powered out upon a people; when a destroying Angel
is sent abroad with a Commission to kill and sl^y, Ezekiel. 9.5, 6. when death the
King of Terrors, rides up and down in triumph, stripping men of treasures,
lands, friends, honors, pleasures, making them an house in darkness, where
Master and Servant, Princes and Prisoners are all alike: to have then an Ark
with Noah* a Z^ar with Lot, a Gosh^n in Egypt, to have one arm of this Olive
tree spread over us, to have one promise out of Gods word, one sentence from
the mouth of Christ promising Paradise unto us, is infinitely of more value to
a languishi^g spirit, then all the Diadems of the earth, or the peculiar
treasure of Princes.

2. If we take the words in the order as they lie, Then the mercy here promised
is, that when God shall restore and repair his Church, they who dwell under
the comforts of it, should return and be converted to the knowledge and
obedience which should be there taught them: when the branch of the Lord is
beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth excellent and comely, then
he that remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy, Isa. 4.^, 3. then every
vessel in Judah and Jerusalem shall be inscribed, Holiness unto the Lord:
Zach. 14.20, 21. then the heart of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the
tongue of the slammerers shall speak plainly. Isa. 3^.2, ^, 4.

And this should be the endeavor of every one who lives under the shade of
this tree, under the purity of Gods Ordinances, under the pious government,
and constitution of such a Church, or family as is here described (especially
in such times when on the one side the world is so much loosned, and estranged
from us; and on the other side Reformation in the Church is so much desired, to
convert and turn unto the Lord. All endeavors of Reformation in a Church are
miserably defective, when they come short of this end (which is the ultimate
reason of them all) namely, the repentance, and conversion of those that dwell
und^^ the shadow of it. When God promises to give unto his Church the glory of
Lebanon, and the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, the consequence of this
beauty and Reformation in the Church is, The eyes of the blind shall be
opened, the cares of the deaf shall be unstopped, the lame shall leap, the
dumb shall sing, the parched ground shall be a poole, the thir^^ie land springs
of water. Isa. 35.2, 7. The Woolf, the Leopard, the Lion, the Bear, the Aspe,
the Cocatrice, shall be so turned from the fierceness and malignity of their
natures, that they shall not hurt nor destroy in all the holy Mountain, but a
little child shall lead them all: Isa. 11.6, 9. It is a great happi^esse and
advantage to live under the shad^ of a godly government; many men have reason to
bless God* all their days, that they were in their childhood trained up in
such a Sch^ole where Piety was taught them as well as Learning, where they had
means as well of Conversion, as of Institution; That they lived in such a
Family where the Master of it was of Ioshuahs mind, I and my house will serve
the Lord: Josh. 24.15. Salvation comes to a whole house when the governor
thereof is converted: Luke 19.9. Act. 16.33, 34. I shall never look upon a
Church as Reformed to purpose, till I find Reformation work conversion, till
piety and charity, and justice, and mercy, and truth, and humility, and
gentleness, and goodness, and kindness, and meekness, and singleness of
heart, and zeal for godliness, and mutual edification, and the life and power
of Religion are more conspicuous, then before. When the very head-stone was
brought forth, and the last work in the building of the Temple ^as finished,
yet the people must then cry, Grace, grace unto it: Zach. 4.7. intimating that
Reformation is never indeed consummate till the blessing of God make it
effectual unto those uses for which it was by him appointed. Church
Reformation should be like Paul's Epistles, which always close in duties of
obedience.

Sect. 23.
Seventhly, he promises, That they shall revive as the corn, and grow as the
vine: in which two exp^essions are set forth two excellent and wholesome
consequents of Affliction. 1. The Corn, though it dye first, Semina non nisi
corrup^a and dissoluta saecundius surgunt. om^ia pe^cund servantur; omnia de
inter (...) r^fo^m^^tu^. Tertul. Apol. cap. 48.
and suffer much from frost, hail, snow, tempest, yet when the Spring comes, it
revives and breaks through it all; so God promises to his Church in the
saddest condition, a Reviving again, and that it shall be brought forth into
the Light, Ezekiel. 37.12. Mic. 7.9. 2. The Vine when it is pruned and lopped,
will not only Revive and spread again, but will bring forth the more fruit,
and cast forth the more fragrant smell: so God promises unto his people not
only a reviving out of their afflictions (in which respect happily it was that
Christ was buried in a Garden, to note that death it self does not destroy our
bodies, but only sow them; the dew of Herbs will revive them again, 1 Cor.
15.42, 44.) bu^ further a profiting by afflictions, that we may say with David,
it was good for as; when we find it bring forth the peaceable fruits of
Righteousness after we have been exercised therein.

And as he promises these things, so we should learn to turn these promises
into prayer and into practice Nemo agonis praeside^ suggillaverit quod homines
vi^lentiae objectet, ^njuriae^um actiones extra s^udium: Sed quantum livores
illi, and cruores and vibice^ negotiantur intendit; corona^ scilicet, and
gloriam, and dotem, Privilegia publica, stipendia civica, imagines, statuas,
and qualem potest praestate seculum de fama aeternitatem, de memoria
Resurrectionem. Pyctes ipse non queritur, dolerese non vult; corona pre^it
vulnera, palma sanguinem obscurat: plus victoriarum est quam injuriar^m. Hunc
tu laesum existimabis quem vides laetum? Tertul. Scorpi ac. cap. 6.
; when we seem in our own eyes cast out of Gods sight, yet we must not cast him
out of our sight, but as Jonah in the Whales belly, and as Daniel in Babylon,
pray toward his holy Temple still. The Vid. Chrysostom. Ser. 38. in Genesis 16.3.
woman of Canaan would not be thrust of with a seeming rejection, nor utterly
despond under a grievous Tentation, but by a singular acumen and spiritual
sagacitie discerned matter of argument in that which looked like a denial,
Math. 15.27. Soap and Fullers Earth at the first putting on, seem to stain
and to foul clothes, when the use and end is to purify them. And Gods frowns
and delays may seem to be the denials of prayer, when happily his end is to
make the granting of them the more comfortable. Therefore in all troubles we
must not g^ve over looking toward God, but say with Job, though he slay me, I
will trust in him.

And after all afflictions we must learn to express the fruit of them, to come
out of them Refined, as silver out of the fire; to have thereby our faith
strengthened, our hope confirmed, our love inflamed, our fruit and obedience
increased, our sin taken away, and our iniquities purged, Esaias 27.9. To be
Chastened and taught, Psalm. 84.12. to be chastned and converted, Ier. 38.18.
If we have run away from our duties, and been cast into a Whales belly for
it, when we are delivered, let us be sure to look better to our resolutions
afterward: after all that is come upon us for our sins, take heed of
breaking his Commandments again, Ezra 9.13, 14. As Jobs riches after his, so
we should endeavor that our graces after our afflictions may be doubled upon
us, and that the sent of our holy example, may like spices bruised, or the
grapes of Lebanon crushed in the Wine Press, give a more fragrant smell in the
nostrils of God and man, as the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed.

Lastly, he promises that all these should be fruits of Lebanon,. 24.
of the best and perfectest kind. There are many evidences of the goodness of
God even in the lives of Pagan men; we read of Abimelechs forbearance to sin
against God, Genesis 20.4, 6. and of his and Ephrons singular kindness to
Abraham, Genesis 20.14, 15. Genesis 23.10, 11, 15. No argument more common then this
of the virtues, the temperance, prudence, justice, mercy, patience, fidelity,
friendships, affability, magnanimity of many heathen men: insommch that some
have presumed so far as to make them ex cong^uo Vide Vegam. de Ius^i^. lib.
6. cap. 18.19.20. Andrad. Orthodox. Explicat. l. 3. Maldonat. in ^ohan. 5.6.
Sixth. Senens. bibliothec. l. 6. annot. 51. collium de Animabus P^gan. l. 1.
cap. 11, and 10. Bann. in secundam secundae qu. 2. a^t. 8. Greg. Valent. To. 3.
disput. 1. Qu. 2. punct. 1. and 4. Erasm. Praefat. in Qu. Tusc. Cic. Aug.
contra Julian* Pelag. l. 4 c. 3.
meritorious, or dispositive to salvation. But all these are but wild grapes,
bitter clusters, the fruits of an empty Vine, not worth the gathering in order
to salvation: But the graces which God bestows upon his Church, are of a more
spiritual and perfect nature, proceeding from faith in Christ, from love of
God, from a conscience cleansed from dead works, from an intention to glorify
God, and adorn the Gospel, from a new nature and from the spirit of Christ,
conforming his servants unto himself. They are not grapes of Sodom, but grapes
of Lebanon.

And as he thus blesses us, in the like manner should we serve him, not offer
unto him the re^use, the halt, and blind, and maimed, for Sacrifice, not give
unto him of that which cost us nothing, but go to Lebanon for all our
Sacrifices, covet earnestly the best gifts, press forward and labor to
perfect holiness in the fear of God. Give unto him our Lillies, the beauties
of our minority; and our Cedars, the strength of our youth; and our olives, and
grapes, and corn, and wine; whatever gifts he has bestowed on us, use them
unto his service and honor again; nor content our selves with the form of
godliness, with the morality of virtues, with the outside of duties, with the
seeds and beginnings of holiness, (he has none, who thinks he has enough)
but strive who shall out-runne one another unto Christ, as Peter and John did
toward his Sepulcher. It was an high pitch which Moses aimed at, when he said,
I beseech thee show me thy glory, Exodus 33.18. Nothing would satisfy him but
fullness and satiety it self. Be sure that all your graces come from Sion, and
from Lebanon, Reproba pecunia non liberat solventem, l. ^4 1. P. de
Pignoratitia action.
that they grow in Immanuels Land; till Christ own them, God will not accept
them. Moral virtues, and outward duties, grapes of Sodom, may commend us unto
men; nothing but inward, spiritual, and rooted graces, the grapes of Lebanon,
will commend us unto God. To do only the outward works of duty without the
inward principle, is at best but to make our selves like those mixed Beasts,
Elephants and Camels in the Leg. 2. P. ad Leg. Aquil. Senec. de benefic. lib.
7. cap. 19.
Civil Law, operam praestant, natura fera est, which though they do the work
of tame beasts, yet have the nature of wild ones. Vide Aug. de Civit. dei lib.
^. cap. 19. and lib. 19. cap. 4. and cap. 25. Retract l. 1. cap. 3. de Trin^
lib. 14. cap 1. de nup. and concupis. lib. 1. c. 3. contra Julian. Pelag. l. 4.
c. 3. Ad Simplician. l. 1. qu. 2. contra ^. Ep* Pelag. lib* 3. cap. de side and
ope^ibus, c. 7. Epist. 105. 10^, 110 Prosper. contra collat. c. 13. Greg*
Arimin. 1. did. 1. q. 3. art. 2.
Moral virtue without spiritual piety does not commend any man unto God: for
we are not accepted unto him, but in Christ, and we are not in Christ but by
the holy Spirit.

THE SIXTH SERMON
HOSEA Chap. 14. ver. 8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any mor with
Idols? I have heard him, and observed him, I am like a green firre-tree, from
me is thy fruit found.


1.
THe Conversion of Israel unto God in their trouble, was accompanied with a
Petition and a Covenant. A Petition imploring mercy and grace from God, and a
Covenant promising thanksgivings and obedience unto him. And God is pleased in
his Answer to have a distinct respect unto both these; for whereas they
petition first for pardon, that God would take away all iniquity, he promises
to heal their backslidings and to love them freely; and whereas they pray for
blessings, receive us into favor, do us good, God likewise makes promises of
that in great variety, expressed by the several metaphors of fertility,
answering to the name and blessings promised formerly unto Ephraim. And all
this we have handled out of the four preceding verses.

Now in this 8th verse, God is pleased not only graciously to accept, but
further to put to his seal, and to confirm the Covenant which they make,
promising that by the assistance of his spirit they should be enabled to do
what they had undertaken. This is the greatest ground of confidence that we
can have to bind our selves in holy Covenants unto God, even the promise of
his strength and assistance enabling us to keep Covenant with him. Therefore
when David had said, I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous Judgments, it follows a little after, Accept I beseech thee the
free will offerings of my mouth O Lord, and teach me thy judgments, Psalm.
119.106, 108. David was confident that God would not only accept his Covenant,
but teach him how to keep it, and that made him the more confident to bind
himself by it.

In the Original, the words are only thus, Ephraim, What have I to do any
more with Idols? which therefore some would have to be the words of God spoken
unto Ephraim. But there is nothing more usual in Scripture then an ellipsis of
the verb; and we find this very verb omitted, and yet necessary to be
supplied, Esaias 5.9. and in this place the Chaldee paraphrast, and from him the
best interpreters, Solom. Glassius Grammar. Sacr. page 3^ c. 654.
with our Translators, have supplied it thus, Ephraim shall say: and so it is
Gods confirmation of the promise which penitent Ephraim had made, and his
undertaking for him, that he should indeed be enabled to perform his Covenant.

What have I to do any more wi^h Idols? Gloss. Rhetori. Sacra. Tract. 2. cap.
5.
] It is Interrogatio cum Indignatione, an Interrogation not only importing a
negative, I will not any more have to do with them, but also a vehement
detestation of them, and indignation against them, as that of David to Abishai,
2 Samuel 16.10. and that of Elisha to Iehoram, 2 Reg. 3.13. and that of the
Devil to Christ, Matthew. 8.29.

With Idols.] The Original word signifies likewise sorrows and grief of
mind, a fit word to express their sin and repentance. What have we to do
with these Idols and sorrows any more? They can produce no good, they can hear
no prayers, they can work no deliverance, they can bring nothing but evil and
anguish to us, and therefore we will not follow or seek unto them any more.
Here then is a solemn detestation as of all their other sins, so of that
especially which had most dishonored God, most wounded their own consciences,
and procured most sorrow unto themselves, with Gods confirmation of it.

Then next, follow several promises of special mercies: 1. Of hearing and
answering their prayers; I have heard or answered him, or as others render it,
I will bear him. 2. Of fatherly care and providence over them. I have observed
him, or fixed mine eyes upon him. I have strictly considered his condition,
that I might proportion my mercies thereunto. It is a symbol, first, of
vigilant care and most intent and sollicitous inspection and providence. The
eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy,
to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine, Psalm.
13.18, 19. Secondly, of direction and counsel, I will instruct thee, and teach
thee in the way that thou shall go. I will guide or counsel thee with mine
eye, Psalm. 32.8. Thirdly, of honor and exaltation: He withdraws not his eyes
from the righteous, but with Kings are they on the throne; yea, he does
establish them for ever, and they are exalted, Job 36.7. Lastly, it is an
expression of hearing prayers; God is said to have his eye open unto the
supplication of his servants to hearken unto them in all that they call upon
him for, 1 King. 8.52. and the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his
ear open unto their cry* Psalm. 34.15. The Church had before professed her
self to be an Orphan, that stood in need of tuition and protection: and here
God promises to cast his eye, and to place his affection upon her, to look to
her, to be her Tutor and guardian, to govern her with his special providence
and wisdom, to take notice of her wants, and supply them; to take notice of
her desires and fulfill them; to take notice of her condition, and accordingly
in all respects to provide for her. 3. Of refreshment from the heat and
violence of temptations or any kind of afflictions, by the Metaphor of a fur
tree which being ever green, and casting forth a large shade, does afford much
comfort and reviving to the weary travellour, 4. Because the firre-tree though
comfortable in regard of the shade, is yet unfruitful; therefore he further
promises to be a root of blessings, and all kind of spiritual graces unto
them, From me is thy fruit found; that is, from me is, or shall be thy fruit,
as Mal. 2.6* 1 Pet. 2.22. Zeph. 3.13. though the word found may here seem to
imply and direct unto, an inquiry after the foundation and original of the
fruit here mentioned. Though all thy fruit of good works and new obedience may
seem to proceed from thy self and to be thine own, yet if thou be careful
to inquire after the root of them, Certum est nos velle cum volumus; sed ille
facit ut velimus. Certum est nos facere cum facimus, sed ille facit ut
faciamus. Aug.
thou will find, that they come from us, though they grow upon thee, and that
thou bring them forth only by the help, supply and vigor of my grace
bestowed on thee: Thou do them, but the power and strength whereby thou do
them proceeds from me.

These words then are the sum of Gods answer, which he makes unto the
Covenant of his people. Sect. 2.
They return the calves of their lips, Ipse sacit ut illi faciant quae
praecepit: illi non faciunt ut ipse faciat quod promisit. de praedestin. sanct.
cap. 10.
God hears and accepts them: They renounce carnal confidenec, in men, in
horses, in Idols; and when they look off, and turn away from these, then God
looks upon them with a fatherly eye of care, providence, council, and
protection, I have observed him. They will not say any more to the work of
their hands, ye are our God^, nor any longer make lies their refuge; and God
enables them to do as they have said and affords comfort and refreshment unto
them as the shade of a firre-tree unto a weary travellor. Lastly they believe
and acknowledge that when they are fatherless and destitute of all help, there
is mercy in God to comfort and provide for them; and this God makes good too.
Mercy of protection; I am as a green firre-tree; and mercy of bounty and
benediction; from me is thy fruit found; by the one defending them against
their fears, by the other enabling them unto their duties. Thus God does
enlarge and proportion his mercy to the uttermost extent of Isreal's prayer or
promise, and when they have no help or comfort out of him, he himself becomes
All in All unto them, making a thorough compensation for every thing which they
part with for his sake, and causing them to find in him alone all that
comfort, and satisfaction to their desires, which in vain they sought for in
other things.

The parts are these two generals: First, Gods promise enabling Israel to
perform theirs: Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols?
Secondly, Gods special regard to their prayers, I have heard him; To their
persons, and observed him: illustrated by two Metaphors, the one importing
protection and defense. I am as a green firee-tree; the other, grace and
benediction; from me is thy fruit found.

Ephraim shall say] This is Gods speech and promise, 3
setting to his seal and gracious ratification to the Covenant that Israel
made, ver. 2.3. without the which it would have been null and evanid: for as
man by believing, sets to his seal to the truth of God, Ioh. 3.33. so God by
assisting sets to his seal to the purpose of man: but with this great
difference; man's seal is but a subscription and confession of that which was
firm before; for all Gods promises are Yea and Amen, and faith does not put
certainty into the promise of God, Romans 3.3.4. 2 Timothy 2.13. but into the heart
of man concerning the promises, Romans 4.16, 2 Timothy 1.12. But Gods seal is a
confirmation and making efficacious the promise of man, which otherwise would
vanish into a lie; all our sufficiency is from him, we can neither will, nor
do any thing further then we receive from him both to will and to do. Pharaoh
made promise after promise, and brake them as fast, Exodus 8.8.28.9.28. Israel
makes ptomises one while, and quickly starts aside like a deceitful bow, as
Ice which melts in the day, and hardens again in the night, Psalm. 78.34, 38.
Ier. 34.15.16. to day they will, and to morrow they will not again; they
repent to day, and to morrow they repent of their repenting; like the sluggard
in his bed, that puts out his arm to rise, and then pulls it in again. So
unstable and impotent is man in all his resolutions, till God say Amen to what
he purposes and establishes the heart by his own grace, Heb. 13.9. When the
waters stood as a wall on the right hand and on the left of Israel as they
passed through the red Sea, this was a work of Gods own power; for water is
unstable and cannot keep together by its own strength, nor be contained within
any bounds of its own. So great a work is it to see the mutable wills and
resolutions of men kept close to any pious and holy purposes.

The point we learn from hen^ is this, 4
That our conversion and amendment of life is not sufficiently provided for by
any band, obligation, or Covenant of our own, whereby we solemnly promise and
undertake it, except God be pleased by his free grace to establish and enable
the heart unto the performance of it: or thus, A penitent man's conversion and
Covenant of new obedience has its firmness in the promise and free grace of
God. Israel here in the confidence of Gods mercy prays for pardon and
blessings; and in the confidence of his grace, makes promise of Reformation
and amendment of life; but all this is but like a written instrument or
indenture, which is invalid and of no effect, till the parties concerned have
mutually sealed and set to their hands. Till God be pleased to promise us that
we shall do that, which we have promised unto him, and do as it were make
our own Covenants for us, all will prove too weak and vanishing to continue.
The grace of God unto the purposes of men is like grain to colors died, or
like oil to colors in a Table or Picture, which makes them hold fresh and not
fade away.

There is a necessary and indissolvable dependence of all second causes upon
the first, without whose influence and concurrence they neither live, nor move,
nor have, or continue in their Being, Acts 17.28. Heb. 1.3. He who is first of
causes and last of ends, does use and direct the necessary, voluntary,
contingent motions and activities of all second causes unto whatsoever ends he
himself is pleased to preordaine. And this the natural and necessary
concatenation of things does require that that which is the absolutest,
supremest, first, and most independent will, wisdom, and power of all others,
should govern, order and direct all other wills, powers, and wisdoms, that
are subordinate to, and inferior under it, unto whatsoever uses and purposes
he who has the absolute Dominion and Sovereignty over all, is pleased to
appoint. It cannot be other then a mavelous diminution unto the greatness of
God, and a too low esteem of the absoluteness of that Majesty which belongs
unto him, to make any Counsels, Decrees, Purposes of his to receive their
ultimate form and stamp from the previous and intercurrent causalities or
conditions of the creature. This I have always looked on as the principal
cause of those dangerous errors concerning grace, free will, and the decrees of
God, wherewith the Churches of Christ have been so miserably in the former
ages, and in this of ours, exercised by the subtlety of Satan, and by the pride
of corrupt minded men; namely, the too low and narrow thoughts and conceptions
which men have framed to themselves of God, Vid. Aug. Encl irid. ad Laurent. c.
95.96.97.98.
the not acquiescing in his Sovereign Dominion and absolute Power of disposing
all things which he made, unto whatsoever uses himself pleases: into which I
am sure the holy Scripture does resolve all, Matthew. 11. 25.26. Romans
9.18.21.11.33, 36. Ephesians. 1.5.9.11. Psalm. 135.6.

Even in the sinful actions of men, Sect. 5.
Gods influence and providence has a particular hand. As actions, his
influence; as sinful, his providence. His influence to the natural motion and
substance of the action, though not to the wickedness of it; for this stands
not in Being or perfection (else the fountain of Being and perfection must
needs be the first cause of it) but in defect and privation of perfection. As
when a hand draws a line by a crooked rule, the line is from the hand, but
the crookedness of it is from the rule: or, as when a man goes lamely, the
motion as motion is from the natural faculty, but the lamenesse of the motion
is from the defect and vitiousnesse of the faculty. A swearer could not speak
an oath, nor a murderer reach out his hand to strike a blow, but by the force
of those natural faculties which in and from God, have all their Being and
working. But that these natural motions are by profanesse or malice directed
unto ends morally wicked, this proceeds from the vitiosity and defect which
is in the second cause making use of Gods gifts unto his own dishonor. 2. The
Providence of God has a notable hand in the guiding, ordering, and disposing
of these actions as sinful unto the ends of his own glory in the declaration
of his Power, Wisdom, and Justice, unto which the sins of wicked men are
perforce carried on, contrary to those ends which they themselves in sinning
did propose unto themselves Vid. Aug. de (...) lib. 11. cap. 17. and lib. 14.
c^p. 26. q^. s^pe^ Exodus ^^. 2. qu^st. 18. de peccat. O^ig. l* 1. c. 34. and
^^. Epist. 59. in solut. q. 6. contra ^ulian. Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 3. and 4. de
great. and lib. Arbit. cap. 20.21. Epist. 120. and 141. Vt medici faedoru^
animaliu^ fell aut coagulo utuntur ad mo^bos sanandos, Vid Plut. de sera
numinis vindicta. Quid tum elaboratam and distorium quam est ille Discobo los
Myronis? Si quis tamen ut parum rectum improbet opus no^ne ab intellectu artis
ab. (...) Quin^^l lib. 2. Instit. cap. 13. ^* Plutarch. Sympos. lib. 5. c. 1.
. As an Artificer uses the force of natural causes unto artificial effects:
as an Huntsman uses the natural enmity of the Dog against the Fox or Wolf,
unto the preservation of the Lambs which otherwise would be destroyed: though
the dog himself by nature is as great an enemy to the Lamb, as the Fox. As
the Pharisees were as great enemies to Religion as the Sadduces; yet Paul
wisely made use of their emnity amongst themselves for his own preservation and
deliverance from them both. Nothing more usual then for God to manage and
direct the sins of men to the bringing about of his own purposes and
Counsels. Genesis 50.20. 1 Samuel 2.25. 1 King. 2.26.27. 2 Samuel 12.11. compared with
2 Samuel 16.22. Esaias 10.5.6, 7. Act. 4.28. Psalm. 76.10. But now unto gracious
actions, which belong not at all unto nature as nature, Vide Field of the
Church* l. 2. cap. ^. Aug, de Civ. Dei l. 12. cap. 9.
but only as inspired and actuated with spiritual and heavenly principles, a
more singular and notable influence of God is required, not only to the
substance of the action, but more especially to the rectitude and goodness of
it; for we have no sufficiency of our selves, not so much as unto the first
offers and beginnings of good in our thoughts, 2 Cor. 3.5. when we are bid to
work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, it must be in dependence
on the power, and in confidence of the aid of God, for it is he that works
in us both to will and to do, Phil. ^.11.12.13. when we Covenant to turn unto
God, we must withal pray unto him to turn us, Lam. 5.21. Ier. 31. God
commands us to turn our selves, and to make us a new heart and a new spirit,
that we may live, Ezekiel. 18.30.31 32. but withal, he tells us that it is he
who gives us one heart, and one way and a new spirit, that we may walk in his
Statutes, Ezekiel. 11.19.20 Ier. ^2.39. He gives us posse, velle, agere,
proficere; the power to make us able, the heart to make us willing, the Act to
walk, the proficiency to improve, the perseverance to finish and perfect
holiness. David cannot run in the way of Gods Commandments till he enlarge
his heart, Psalm. 119.32. nothing can find the way to heaven, but that which
comes first from heaven, Ioh. 2.13. we cannot give unto God any thing but of
his own. Who am I, says David, and what is my people that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee and of thine
own have we given thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.

For the further understanding of this point, and of the sweet concord and
concurrence between the will of man converted, Sect. 6.
and the effectual grace of God converting, we shall set down these few
propositions:

Vid. Calvin* in Ezekiel. 1^.^.19.20, and Aug. contr. 2. Epist. Pelag. lib. 1.
cap. 2. and lib. 2. cap. 5.
1. That there is in man by nature a power or faculty which we call Free will,
whereunto belongs such an indifferency and indeterminacy in the manner of
working, that whether a man will a thing, or ^ill it, choose it, or turn from
it, he does in neither move contrary to his own natural principles of
working. A stone moving downward, does move naturally; upward, contrary to its
nature, and so violently. But which way so ever the will moves, it moves
according to the condition of its created being, wherein it was so made, as
when it chose one part of a contradiction, it retained an inward and
fundamental habitude unto the other, like those gates which are so made as
that they open both ways. So that as the tongue which was wont to swear or
blaspheme, when it is converted, does by the force of the same faculty of
speaking, being newly sanctified, utter holy and gracious speeches: so the
will, which being corrupted did choose evil and only evil, being sanctified
does use the same manner of operation in choosing that which is good: the
created nature of it remaining still one and the same, but being now guided and
sanctified by different principles. Gibeuf. de libert. Great. l. 1. Melior est
cum tolus haer^t atque constringi^ur incommu^abili Bono, quam cum inde vel ad
scipsum relaxatur, Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 1. c. 2^. Libe^o arbitrio male
u^ens Homo and seperdidit and ipsum* Sicut enim qui se occidit, ut^que vivendo
se occidit, sed se occidendo non vivit, nec s^ipsum potest resuscitare cum
^^ciderit: Ita cum libero peccaretu^ arbitrio, victore peccato amissum est and
liberum arbitrium, Aug. Enchirid. c. 30. and Epist. 107.
This we speak only with respect to the natural manner of its working; for
if we speak of liberty in a moral or theological sense, so it is certain,
that the more the will of man does observe the right order of its proper
objects, and last end, the more free and noble it is, the very highest
perfection of free will standing in an immutable adherency unto God as the
ultimate end of the creature, and all ability of receding or falling from him
being the deficiency and not the perfection of Free Will.) And therefore the
more the will of man does cast off and reject God, the more base, servile, and
captive it grows. In which sense we affirm against the Papists, that by
nature man since the fall of Adam, has no Free Will or natural power to
believe and convert unto God, or to prepare himself thereunto.

2. In man fallen, and being thereby universally in all his faculties levened
with vicious and malignant principles, there is a native privitie and corrupt
force, which puts forth it self in resisting all those powerful workings
of the word and spirit of grace, that oppose themselves against the body of
sin, and move the will unto holy resolutions: for the wisdom of the flesh
cannot be subject unto the Law of God, Romans 8.7. The flesh will lust against
the spirit, as being contrary thereunto, Gal. 5.17. an uncircumcisied heart
will always resist the holy spirit, Act. 7.51. there is such a natural
antipathy between the purity of the word and the impurity of the will of man,
that he naturally refuses to hear, and snuffeth at it, and pulls away the
shoulder, and hardneth the heart, and stops the ear, and shuts the eyes,
and sets up strong holds, and high reasonings against the ways of God, and
is never so well as when he can get off all sight and thoughts of God, and be
as it were without God in the world, Ier. 5.3.6.10.17.23.19.15. Mal. 1.13. 2 Chronicles. 36.16.

3. According to the degrees and remainders of this natural corruption, so
far forth as it is unmortified and unsubdued by the power of grace, this
original force does proportionably put forth it self in withstanding and
warring against the Spirit of God even in the regenerate themselves: Habitat in
eis, and mentem Resistentem repugnantemque sollicitat ut ipse conflictusetiamsi
non sit damnabilis quia non perficit iniquitatem, sit miserabilis tamen quia
non habet pacem. Aug. de ^upt. and concupisc* lib. 2. cap. 2. contra Julian.
Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 7.
A notable example whereof we have in Asa, of whom it is said, that he was
wroth with Hanani the Seer, and put him in a Prisonhouse, and was in a rage
with him, when he reproved him for his carnal confidence, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. and
the Apostle does in many words both state, and bewail the warring of the Law
of his members against the law of his mind, so that when he did with the one
serve the law of God, he did with the other serve the law of sin, and was
unable to do the thing which he would and the evil which he would not, he
did do by the strength of sin that dwelled in him, ^ Romans 7.14, 15. Sect. 7.


4. We are to distingish of the will of God, Aquin. Part. 1. qu. 19. art. 11.
which is set forth in Scripture two manner of ways; There is voluntas signi,
or that will of God whereby he requires us to work, and which he has appointed
to be observed by us. His will signified in precepts and prohibitions. This is
the will of God, says the Apostle, even your sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. So
we are said to prove, to try, to do Gods will, or that which is pleasing in
his sight, Matthew. 7.21. Romans 12.2. Ioh. 8.29. and there is voluntas
benepla^iti, the will of his purpose and counsel, according unto which he
himself in his own secret and unsearchable good pleasure is pleased to work;
for he works all things after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11.
whatsoever the Lord pleases that he does in heaven and earth, Psalm. 135.6. And
no second causes can do any thing else, though they never so proudly break the
order of Gods revealed will, but what his hand and Counsel had before
determined, Acts 4.28. The will of Gods precept and command is every day
violated, resisted, and broken through by wicked men unto their own
destruction: How often would I, and ye would not? Matthew. 23.37. Ierem. 13.11.
But the will of Gods Counsel and purpose cannot be resisted or withstood by
all the powers of the world; the Counsel of the Lord must stand; and Multa
siunt a malis contra voluntatem Dei, sed tantae est ille sapientiae tantae que
virtutis, ut in ^os exitus sive sines quo^ bones and Iustos ipse prescivit
tendant omnia quae voluntati ejus videntur adversa, Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 22.
c 1. Alii obediunt, alii ligantur; nemo Leges omnipotentis evadit de Agone
Christiano. c 7. Vid. Bradwardin. de Causa Dei, lib. 1. cap. 32. and Hug. de
Sanct Victor. Sum. Sentent. Tract. 1. cap. 13. and de Sacrament. lib 1. part.
2. cap. 19, 20 and part. 3. cap. 5, 6, 13, 14, 15. Anselm. lib. 1 cur Deus
Homo, c. 15. Lumbard. lib. 1. did. 17.
those very agents that work purposely to disappoint and subvert it, do by
those very workings of theirs brings it to pass: and when by their own
intentions they are enemies to it, by Gods wonderful ordering and directing,
they are executioners of it, Romans 9.19. Psalm 33.11.115.2. Proverbs 19.21.
Esaias 46.10. Joshua 24.9, 10.

5. According unto this distinction of Gods will, we are to distinguish of his
Call. Some are called voluntate signi, by the will of his precept, when they
have the will of God made known unto them, and are thereby persuaded unto the
obedience of it in the ministry of the Gospel: in which sense our Savior
says, many are called, but few chosen, Matthew. 20.16. and unto those who
refused to come unto him that they might have life, he yet says, These things
I say that you might be saved, Ioh. 5.34, 40. Others are called voluntate
beneplaciti, ordained first unto eternal life by the free love and grace of
God, and then thereunto brought by the execution of that his decree and purpose
in the powerful calling and translating of them from darkness unto light. And
this is to be called (...) Vocatio alta and secreta qua sit ut legi atque
doctrinae accommodemus assensum, Aug. Epi. 107. vocatio qu^ sit credens: de
praedestinat. Sanct. c. 16, 17.
according unto purpose, Romans 8.28. namely, the purpose and counsel of showing
mercy to whom he will show mercy, Romans 9.18.

6. They who are called, only as the Hen calls her chicken, with the mere
outward Call or voice of Christ in the Evangelicall Ministry, may and do
resist this Call, and so perish. Corazin and Bethsaida and Capernaum, were
outwardly called by the most powerful Ministerial means that ever the world
enjoyed, both in Doctrine and Miracles: and yet our Savior tells them that they
shall be in a worse condition in the day of Judgment then Tire, Sidon, or
Sodom, Matthew. 11.21, 24. So the Prophet complains, Who has believed our
report, or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed, Esaias 53.1. which the
Evangelist applies unto the argument of conversion, John 12.37, 40. for so the
hand or arm of the Lord is said to be with his Ministers, when by their
Ministry men do turn to the Lord, Act. 11.21. And the same Prophet again,
or Christ in him complains, All the day long have I stretched forth my hands
unto a disobedient and gainesaying people: Esaias 65. 2. Romans 10.21. So
disobedient and gain saying, that we find them resolve sometimes point blank
contrary to the Call of God, Ier. 44.16, 27. Ier. 18.11.12. Ier. 2.25. Matthew.
23.27.

7. They who are called inwardly and spiritually, Sect. 8.
with an heavenly Call, Illud nescio quomodo dicitur, frustra deum misereri
nisi nos velimus. Si enim Deus miseretur, etiam volumus; ad eandem quippe
misericordiam pertinet ut velimus, Aug. ad Simplician. lib. 1. qu. 2. Haec
gratia quae occulte humanis cordibus divina largitate tribuitur, a nullo ^uro
cord respuitur. Ideo quippe tribuitur, ut cordis duritia primitus auseratur,
de praedestinat. Sanct. cap. 8. and contr. 2 Epist. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 20.
vocatione alta and secundum propositum, with such a Call as pursues the
Counsel and purpose of God for their salvation, though they do resist quoad
pugnam, and corruption in them does strive to bear up against the grace of
Christ, yet they do not resist finally and quoad eventum, unto the repelling
or defeating of the operation of Gods effectual grace: but they are thereby
framed to embrace, approve, and submit unto that Call, God himself working a
good will in them, captivating their thoughts unto the obedience of Christ, and
working in them that which is pleasing in his own sight, Phil. 2.13. 2 Cor.
10.5. Heb. 13.21.

And this is done by a double Act.

. 9.
1. An act of spiritual teaching, and irradiating the mind and judgment with
heavenly light, called by the Prophet the writing of the law in the heart, and
putting it into the inward parts, Ier. 31.33. 2 Cor. 3.3. and by our Savior,
The Fathers Teaching, Job. 6.45. and the holy Spirits convincing of sin,
righteousness and judgment, John 16.8, 11. and by the Apostle, a
demonstration of the spirit and power, 1 Cor. 2.4. A spiritual revelation of
wisdom out of the word unto the conscience, Ephesians. 1.17. For though we are to
condemn fanatic revelations besides the word, and without it: yet we must
accknowledge spiritual revelation, or manifestation of the divine light and
power of the word by the holy Spirit in the minds of men converted: for the
word of God being a spiritual Object, does unto the salvificall knowledge of
it require such a spiritual quality in the faculty which must know it, as may
be able to pass a right judgment upon it; for spiritual things are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. It is true, that hypocrites and other
wicked men may have very much notionall and intellectual knowledge of the
Scriptures, Cibus in som^is simillimus est (...) vigilantium, quo tamen
do^m^^ntes non (...), Aug. Confess. lib. 3. cap. 6.

Sol non omnes quibus lucet etiam accendit. Sic sapicatia multos quos docet non
continuo etiam acc^ndit. Aliud est multas divitias scire, aliud possidere: nec
notitia d^vitem sacit, s^d poss^ssio. Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 23.


and those holy things therein revealed, Heb. 6.4. 2 Pet. 2.21. But none of
that knowledge amounts unto that which is called the Teaching of God, and a
spiritual demonstration: for the mysteries of the Gospel were unto this end
revealed, that by them we might be brought unto the obedience of Christ; and
therefore the knowledge of them is never proportioned or commensurate to the
object, till the mind be thereby made conformed unto Christ, till the
conceptions which are framed in us touching God, and sin, and grace, and
heaven, and eternal things, be suitable to those which were in the mind of
Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. Evangelicall truths are not fitted unto mere
intellectual, but unto practical judgment. It is such a knowledge of Christ
as may fill us with the fullness of God, Ephe. 3.18.19. A knowledge that must
work communion with Christ, and conformity unto him, Phil. 3.10. A knowledge
that must produce a good conversation, Iam. 3.13. (...), B^sil. de martyr
manante.

Hominis sapientia pietas est. Aug. Enchirid cap. 2. de doctr. Christiana, lib.
2. cap. 6.7. and lib. 1. cap. 35.


He that says he knows him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a lier,
and the truth is not in him, 1 Ioh. 2.3, 4. We do not know Christ till we
know him as our chiefest good, as our choycest treasure, as our unsearchable
riches, as Elect, and precious, and desirable, and altogether lovely, and the
fairest of ten thousand, and worthy of all acceptance, in comparison of whom
all the world besides is as dung. The knowledge of Christ is not seeing only,
but seeing and tasting, Psalm. 34.8. Psalm. 119.103. And therefore they who in
one sense are said to have known God, (...). A^^tor. Et^ic. l. 3. c. 7.
Romans 1.21. are yet in the same place, verse 28. said not to have God in their
knowledge. It is an excellent speech of the Philosopher, That such as every man
is in himself, such is the end that he works unto, and such notions he has of
that good which is his end. And therefore it is impossible that a wicked frame
of heart can ever look upon any supernatuall object as his last end, or as
principally desirable. If I should see a man choose a small trifle before a
rich jewel, however he should profess to know the excellency and to value
the richness of that jewel; yet I should conclude that he did not indeed
understand the worth of it a right. And therefore unto the perfect and proper
knowledge of supernatural things, there is required a special work of the
grace and spirit of Christ opening the heart, and working it to a spiritual
constitution proportionable to such kind of truths about which it is
conversant. The Scripture every where attributes this work unto God, Deum
scire nemo potest nisi Deo docente: sine Deo non cognoscitur Deus. Irenaeus l.
4. c. 14. A deo discendum est quid de Deo mulligendum sit, quia non nisi se
Authore cognoscitur, Hill. de Trin. l. 5.
and his Spirit; It is he that gives a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and
ears to hear, Deuteronomy. 29.4. It is he that gives an heart to know him, Ier.
24.7. It is he that manifests himself unto those that love him, Ioh. 14.21.
It is he that reveals unto us by his Spirit the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.
It is he that gives us an understanding, 1 Ioh. 5.20. and that opens the
understanding to understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. Act. 16.14. It is he
that teaches us to call Christ our Lord, Matthew. 16.17. 1 Cor. 12.3. for the
voice of carnal and corrupt Reason is, we will not have this man to reign over
us, Luke 19.14. Every man naturally frames and shapeth his notions of
doctrinall matters unto the manner of his conscience and conversation,
embracing that which is consonant, and rejecting that which is dissonant
thereunto, Mic. 2.11. Esaias. 30.10, 11. To the unclean every thing is unclean,
because the very mind and conscience of such men is defiled, Tit. 1.15. This
then is the first work in effectual calling, the opening of the eye of the
mind rightly to conceive of the things of God, of the guilt of sin, of the
heaviness of wrath, of the peril of perishing, of the weight and moment of
damnation and salvation, of the things that concern its everlasting peace, of
the righteousness of Christ, of the beauties of holiness, of the exceeding
abundant weight of glory, of the comforts of the holy Spirit, and the
unspeakable and glorious joy shed forth into the heart by believing. These
truths the heart is so convinced of, as seriously to ponder them, and to fix
its deepest and saddest considerations upon them.

2. An act of spiritual inclining and effectual determining the will of man
to embrace the ultimate dictate of a mind thus enlightened,. 10.
and to make a most free, spontaneous, and joyful choice of supernatural good
things thus rightly apprehended, upon a clear and deliberate consideration of
their excellency above all other things, Phil. 3.8. This Act of choosing the
Lord for our portion and chiefest good, and of cleaving unto him, we find
often mentioned in the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 30.19. Josh. 24.22. Psalm. 84.10. Heb.
11.25. Act. 11.23. Psalm. 119.30, 31, 173. for when the soul of a man is so
thoroughly by Gods teaching convinced of the danger and misery of sin, wherein
so long as a man continues, he lives only to dishonor God, and to undo
himself: of the benefit of righteousness in Christ, whereby he is reconciled
unto God, and adopted unto a glorious inheritance: and of the beauty of
Holiness, whereby he is conformed unto Christ his Head, and fitted for the
Inheritance: Operatur Deus in ^ordibus quid aliud qua voluntatem? Aug. Ep. 107.
C^rtum est nos velle cum volumus, sed ipse facit ut velimus praebendo vires
efficacissimas voluntati. De great. and lib. arbit. cap. 16.
These previous Acts of heavenly teaching, are always seconded with effectual
operations upon the will, suitable unto themselves: for the liberty of the will
does not stand in a peremptory indifferency unto any object whatsoever (else
there should be no liberty in heaven) this is a defect and imperfection, not
any matter of power or fredome; misera vis est valere ad nocendum. But the
liberty of will stands in this, that being a reasonable appetite, it is apt
to be led one way or another, to choose one thing or another, according to the
dictates of reason, and servato ordine sinis, with subjection to that which it
made appear to be the supreme end and happiness of the soul; for every
faculty is naturally subservient to the ultimate good of that nature whereof it
is a faculty, and should monstrously exorbitate from its use and end, if it
should put forth it self to the destruction, or refuse to close with that
which is the happiness of the soul unto which it pertaines. As soon as ever
therefore the Spirit of grace does by such a spiritual and practical
demonstration as has been described, set forth God in Christ as the supreme
and most unquestionable end and happiness of the soul, there are consequently
suitable impressions upon the will, determining it unto operations conform
unto such a beautiful and glorious object, and enlarging it to run unto this
Center, to renounce all other things and to cleave only unto this.

And these Acts upon the will are,

1. By preventing Grace, it is bended and excited unto heavenly appetitions,
and unto the choice of such spiritual good things, the sovereign excellencies
whereof have been so sweetly represented. Good is the object of the will; we
cannot will evil under the notion of evil: and amongst good things, that
which is by the practical judgment resolved to be best, and that by the
teaching of God himself (who neither is deceived, nor can deceive) is the
object of the wills election: and thus God by his exciting grace works in us
ipsum velle, that every Act whereby we choose Christ, and subscribe our name in
the role of his soldiers and servants, answering the Call of God by a most
cheerful consent thereunto.

2. By assisting and cooperating Grace Cooperando perficit quod operando
incipit; ut velimus sine nobis operatur cum volumus nobiscum cooperatur, Aug.
de great. and lib. Arbitr. c. 17. Enchirid. cap 32. de not. and great. cap. 31.
contr. 2. Epist. Pelag. lib. 2. cap. ult. Non mihi sufficit quod semel donavit
nisi semper donaverit. Peto ut accipiam, and cum accepero, rursus peto, etc.
Hier. Epist.
, it is further enabled to put forth this good will into deed, and so to work
toward its salvation, Esaias 26.12. 1 Cor. 15.10.

Lastly, by subsequent Grace, it is carried on toward perfection, to finish
what was begun, and so to proceed from the beginning of faith in vocation to
the end of faith in salvation, the Spirit of Christ working in us, as he
himself did work for us unto a consummatum est, saving to the uttermost those
that come unto God by him, Phil. 1.6. 1 Pet. 9.10. Heb. 13.21. Ephesians. 4.13. Heb.
7.25.

And by this means the native obstinacy of the will both in and after
conversion is subdued, so that it neither does nor can overcome the grace of
God working effectually with his word: First, because of the purpose of God, to
show mercy where he will show mercy, which can in no wise be resisted.
Secondly, because of the power of God, in the effectual applying of that mercy
unto the souls of men with admirable sweetness, with undeniable evidence,
with ineffable persuasion, with omnipotent and invincible energie, which no
hardness of heart is able to refuse, because the proper operation of it is to
take away that hardness which would refuse it, and that by an act of equal
power with that whereby Christ was raised from the dead, which all the world
was not able to hinder or prevent, Ephesians. 1.19. Col. 2.12. 1 Pet. 1.5. Thus we
see, though we desire, and endeavor, and purpose, and covenant conversion and
amendment of life; yet the whole progress of conversion, our promises, our
covenants, our abilities, our sufficiencies to make good any thing, do all
receive their stability from the grace of God.

. 11.
From whence we learn: First, Not to put confidence in our own studies, vows,
purposes, promises of new obedience: Every man is a liar; no sooner left unto
himself, but he becomes a miserable spectacle of weakness and mutability.
Vide Aug. de correp. and great. cap. 11.
Even Adam in innocence when he was to be supported and persevere by his own
strength, though he had no sin or inward corruption to betray him, how
suddenly was he thrown down from his excellency by Satan with a poor and
slender temptation? how strangely did a creature of so high and noble a
constitution exchange God himself for the fruit of a tree, believe a Serpent
before a Maker, and was so miserably cheated as to suppose that by casting away
Gods Image, he should become the more like him? Who could have thought that
David a man after Gods own heart, with one miscarrying glance of his eye
should have been plunged into such a gulf of sin and misery as he fell into?
that so spiritual and heavenly a soul should be so suddenly overcome with so
sensual a temptation? that so merciful and righteous a man should so greatly
wrong a faithful servant as he did Vriah, and then make the innocent blood of
him whom he wronged, a mantle to palliate and to cover the wrong, Vt
Bellerophon literas in scipsum scriptas serebat. Hom. Ili. 2. and Plut. de
Curiositate.
and make use of his fidelity to convey the letters and instructions for his
own ruin? Who could have thought that Lot, so soon after he had been
delivered from fire and brimstone, and vexed with the filthy conversation of
the Sodomites, should be himself inflamed with unnatural, incestuous lust?
who could have suspected, that Peter who had his name from a Rock, should be so
soon shaken like a Reed, and after so solemn a protestation not to forsake
Christ though all else should, to be driven with the voice of a Maid from his
steadfastness, and with oaths and curses be the first that denied him? Surely
every man in his best estate is altogether vanity.

Therefore it behooves us to be always humbled in the sight of our selves, and
to be jealous 1. Of our original impotency unto the doing of any good, unto
the forbearing of any evil, unto the repelling of any temptation by our own
power: In his own might shall no man be strong, 1 Samuel 2.9. To be a sinner
and to be without strength, are terms equivolent in the Apostle, Romans 5.6, 8.
Nay, even where there is a will to do good, there is a defect of power to
perform it, Romans 7.18. our strength is not in our selves, but in the Lord and
in the power of his might, and in the working of his Spirit in our inner man,
Ephesians. 6.10.3.19. Phil. 4.13. If but a good thought arise in our mind, or a good
desire and motion be stirring in our heart, or a good word drop from our lips,
we have great cause to take notice of the grace of God that offered it to us,
and wrought it in us, and to admire how any of the fruit of Paradise could grow
in so heathy a wilderness.

2. Of our natural antipathy and reluctance unto holy duties; our aptness to
draw back toward perdition; to refuse and thrust away the offers and motions
of grace; our rebellion which arises from the law of the members against the
law of the mind; the continual droppings of a corrupt heart upon any of the
tender buds and sproutings of piety that are wrought within us, our aptness to
be weary of the yoke, and to shake off the burden of Christ from our
shoulders, Esaias 43.22. our natural levity and inconstancy of spirit in any
holy resolutions, (...), vide ^thenaeum, l 7. c* 19 Tertul. de P^^l. c. 3.
(...) (...)* A^ist E^h. l. 8. (...)* li^ 9 cap. 4 Hoc hab^m int^r cae^tera b^ai
mo^es, placent sibi and p^rmanent, Levis est malitia, saepe mutatur Senec.
Epist. 47. Maximum indicium est malae mentis, fluctuatio, Epist. 120.
continuing but as a morning dew, which presently is dried up, beginning in the
spirit and ending in the flesh, having interchangeable fits of the one and the
other, like the Polypus, now of one color, and anon of another; now hot with
zeal, and anon cold with security; now following Moses with Songs of
Thanksgiving for Deliverance out of Egypt, and quickly after thrusting Moses
away, and in heart returning unto Egypt again. Such a discomposednesse and
natural instability there is in the spirit of man, that like strings in an
instrument, it is apt to be altered with every change of weather, nay while you
are playing on it, you must ever and anon be new turning it; like water
heated, which is always offering to reduce it self to its own coldness. No
longer Sun, no longer light; no longer Christ, no longer grace: If his back be
at any time upon us, our back will immediately be turned from him, like those
forgetful Creatures in Seneca, who even while they are eating, if they happen
to look aside from their meat, immediately lose the thoughts of it, and go
about seeeking for more.

3. Of the manifold decays and abatements of the grace of God in us, our
aptness to leave our first Love, Revel. 2.4. How did Hezekiah fall into an
impolitick vainglory L^g^ Imperiali interdicta vini, olei, liquaminis
exportatio, ne Barbari gustu illecti promptius invaderent sines Romanorum, Leg.
1. Cod. quae res exportari non deb^at. Et apud Chinese, exteri in leca Regni
Interiora non admittuntur, tantum in oris ma^^timis conceditur commercium.
Boterus in Catalog. Imperiorum.
, in showing all his Treasures unto the Ambassadors of a foreign Prince,
thereby kindling a desire in him to be master of so rich a Land, as soon as
God left him unto himself? 2 King. 20.12, 13. How quickly without continual
husbandry will a Garden or Vineyard be wasted and overgrown with weeds? How
easily is a ship when it is at the very shore, carried with a storm back into
the Sea again? How quickly will a curious watch if it lie open, gather dust
into the wheels and be out of order? Though therefore thou have found
sweetness in Religion, joy in the holy Spirit, comfort, yea heaven in good
duties, power against corruptions, strength against temptations, triumph over
afflictons, assurance of Gods favor, vigor, life, and great enlargement of
heart in the ways of godliness; yet for all this be not high-minded, but
fear. Remember the flower that is wide open in the morning when the Sun
shines upon it, may be shut up in the evening, before night come. If the Sun
had not stood still, Joshua had not taken vengeance on the enemy, Josh. 10.13.
and if the Sun of righteousness do not constantly shine upon us and supply
us, we shall not be able to pursue and carry on any victorious affections.
While God opens his hand thou art filled, but if he withdraw his face, thou will be troubled again, Psalm. 104.28, 29. Therefore take heed of resting on
thine own wisdom or strength. Thou may after all this grieve the Spirit of
God, and cause him to depart and hide himself from thee: thou may fall from
thy steadfastness, and lose thy wonted comforts; thou may have a dead wi^ter
upon the face of thy conscience, and be brought to such a sad and disconsolate
condition, as to conclude that God has cast thee out of his sight, that he
has forgotten to be gracious, and has shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure* to roar out for anguish of spirit as one whose bones are broken;
thy soul may draw nigh to the grave, and thy life to the destroyers, and thou
may find it a woeful and almost insuperable difficulty to recover thy life
and thy strength again. It was so with Job, Chap. 10.16, 17. Chap. 13.26.27.28.
Chap. 16.9, 13. Chap. 30.15, 31. It was so with David, Psalm. 51.8* Psalm. 77.2,
3, 4. It was so with Heman, Psalm. 88. and diverse others. See Job 33.19.22.
Psalm. 1^^.3, 11. Isa 54.6, 11. Ion. 2.3, 4. Therefore we should still remember
in a calm to provide for a storm; to stir up the graces of God continually
in our selves that they be not quenched, 2 Timothy 1.6. So to rejoice in the Lord,
as withal to work out our salvation with fear and tr^mbling, Psalm 2.11. Phil.
2.12, 13. never to let the grace of God puff us up, or make us forgetful of
our own weakness; but as the Apostle s^ith of himself in regard of Gods grace,
When I am weak, then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12.10. so to say of our selves in
regard of our own natural corruption, when I am strong, then I am weak.

Secondly, This must not so humble us as to deject and dismay us, Sect. 12.
or make us give over the hope of holding out to the end, when our nature is so
weak, our enemies so strong, our temptations so many: but we must withal be
quickened by these considerations, with prayer to implore, and with faith to
rely on and draw strength from the word, and grace of God, to have always the
window of the soul open toward the Sun of righteousness, whereby the
supplies of his grace to prevent, exci^e, assist, follow, establish us, and
carry on every good thing which he has begun for us, may be continually
admitted. This is one of the most necessary duties for a Christian, to hold
constant and fixed purposes in godliness: the Scripture frequently calls upon
us for them, that with purpose of heart we would cleave unto God, Act. 11.23.
That we would continue in the grace of God, Act. 13.43. that we would be
rooted and grounded in love, Ephesians. 3.17. that we would hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering Hebr. 10.23. that we would be steadfast
and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. that
we would look to our selves that we may not lose the things which we have
wrought, 2 Ioh. ver. 8. that we would hold fast and keep the works of Christ
unto the end, Revel. 2.25, 26. and it is that which godly men are most
earnestly solicitous about, and do strive unto with greatest importunity: I
have purposed that my mouth shall not transgress, Psalm. 17.3. Unite my heart
to fear thy name, Psalm. 86.11. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I
will sing and give praise. Psalm. ^7.7. Therefore in this case it is necessary
for us to draw nigh unto God, who only can ratify all our pious resolutions,
who gives power to the faint, and to them that have no power increases
strength, Isa. 40.29. who only c^n settle and stablish the ^earts of men, 1
Pet. 5.10. The conscience of our duty the sense of our frailty, the power,
malice, and cunning of our Enemies, the obligation of our Covenant, should
direct the sou^e perpetually unto God for the supply of his grace, that that
may in all our weaknesses be sufficient for us, and hold us up that we may be
safe, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 119.117. and may never through infirmity
or unstablenesse of spirit violate our own resolutions.

Thirdly, This is matter of great comfort unto the godly, Sect. 13.
that in the midst of so many temptations, snares, impediments, amongst which
we walk, not only the s^fetie of our souls, and security of our eternal
salvation; but even our present condition in this life, our conversion, our
obedience, all our pious purposes of heart, all the progress we make in an
holy conversation, do not depend upon the weakness and uncertainty of an
humane will, but upon the infallible truth, the constant p^omise, the immutable
purpose, the invincible power, the free love the abs^lute grate, the omnipotent
wisdom and working of God, who does whatsoever he pleases both in heaven and
earth, and works all things by the counsel of his own will, I the Lord
change not, therefore you sons of Jacob are not consumed, Mal. 3.6. We poor
and weak men change with every wind strong to day, and weak to morrow: fixed
and resolute to day, sh^ken and staggering to morrow: running forward to day,
and revolting as fast to morrow: no hold to be taken of our promises, no trust
to be given to our Covenants. Like Peter on the water, we walk one step and we
sink another. All our comfort is this, our strength and standing is not founded
in our selves, but in the rock whereon we are built, and in the power of God,
by which we are kept through faith unto salvation, out of whose hands none are
able to pluck us; our very actions are wrought in us, and carried on unto
their end by the power of Christ, who has mercy, wisdom, and strength enough
to rescue us, as from the power of hell and death, so from the danger of our
own fickle and froward hearts. To see a man when he is half a mile from his
enemy draw a sword to encounter him, or take up a stone to hit him, would be
but a ridiculous spectacle: for what could he do with such weapons by his own
strength at such a distance? But if he mount a canon, and point that level
against the enemy, this we do not wonder at, though the distance be so great:
because though the action be originally his, yet the effect of it proceeds
from the force of the materials and instruments which he uses, to wit, the
powder, the bullet, the fire, the canon. It seemed absurd in the eye of the
enemy for little David with a Shepherds bag and a sling to go against Goliath
an armed Giant: and it produced in his proud heart much disdain and
insultation, 1 Samuel 17.41, 42, 43. But when we hear David mention the name of
God, in the strength and confidence whereof he came against so proud an enemy,
this makes us conclude weak David strong enough to encounter with great
Goliath. It is not our own strength, but the love of God which is the foundation
of our triumph over all enemies, Romans 8.38, 39.

But some will then say, then we may be secure; If Gods grace and power be our
alone strength, Doctrina is^ius mod. opta ^ata est ad securitatem omnis
Religionis pes^en and pernicum hominibus inge^erandam, etc. Remonstr. in
Scripti D^gma^icis circa a^tic. 5. page 299. Nos autem dicimus hum nam
voluntatem sic divinitus adjuvari ad faciedam Iustitiam ut accipiat Spiritum
Sanctum quo fiat in animo ejus d^lecttio dilectioque summi illius and
incommutabilis Bo^^ -- Cum id praestiteri^ Grati^ ut moreremur ^eccato, quid
aliud faciemus si vivemus in eo nisi ut Gratiae simus Ingrati? neq^e enim qui
laudat b^n^ficium medicinae, prodesse morbos d^cit, etc. Quos p^aese^vit ut
praedest ma^et praed^st^n^ vit ut vocaret, vocavit ut just^fiacaret
just^ficavi^ ut glorificaret, Aug. de Spi^itu and liter. cap. 3.5.6* 30.
then let us commit our selves and our salvation unto him, and in the mean
time give over all thoughts and care of it our selves, and live as we list; no
act of ours can frustrate the counsel or the love of God. To this we answer
with the Apostle, God forbid. Though the enemies of Free Grace do thus argue,
yet they who indeed have the grace of God in their hearts, have better learned
Christ: For it is against the formal nature of the grace and Spirit of Christ
to suffer those in whom it dwells to give over themselves unto security and
neglect of God: for grace is a vital and active principle, and does so work in
us, as that it does withal dispose and direct us unto working to. The
property of grace is to fight against, and to kill sin, as being most
extremely contrary unto it; and therefore it is a most irrational w^y of
arguing to argue from the being of grace to the life of sin. How shall we
that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? Romans 6.2. If we be dead to
sin this is argument enough in the Apostles judgment, why we should set our
affections on things above, Col. 3.2, 3. The grace of God does not only serve
to bring salvation, but to teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live soberly, righteously and godly, in this present world, T^t. 2.11, 2. He
who has decreed salvation as the end, has decreed also all the antecedent
means unto that end to be used in a manner suitable to the condition of
reasonable and voluntary agents: unto whom it belongs, having their minds by
grace illightned, and their wills by grace prevented, to cooperate with the
same grace in the further pursuance of their salvation. And if at any time
corruption should in Gods children abuse his grace and efficacy unto such
presump^uous resolutions, they would quickly rue so unreasonable and carnal a
way of arguing, by the woeful sense of Gods displeasure in withdrawing the
comforts of his grace from them, which would make them ever after take heed how
they turned the grace of God into w^ntonnesse any more. Certainly, the more the
servants of God are assured of his assistance, the more careful they are in
using it unto his own service. Who more sure of the grace of God then the
Apostle Paul, who gloried of it as that that made him what he was, By the grace
of God I am that I am; who knew that Gods grace was sufficient for him; and
that nothing could separate him from the love of Christ; who knew whom he had
believed, and that the grace of the Lord was exceeding abundant toward him?
and yet who more tender and fearful of sin? who more set against corruption?
more abundant in duty? more pressing unto p^rfection, then he? This is the
nature of grace to ammate and actuate the faculties of the soul in Gods
service, to ratify our Covenants, and to enable us to perform them.

Fourthly, Sect. 14.
As it is singular comfort to the servants of God, That their own wills and
purposes are in Gods keeping, and so they cannot ruin themselves: so is it
also, That all other men's wills and r^solutions are in Gods keeping too, so
that they shall not be able to purpose or resolve on any evil against the
Church, without leave from him. So then first, when the rage and passions of
men break out, Tribe divided against Tribe, brother against brother, father
against child, head against body; when the band of Unity which was wont to
knit together this flourishing Kingdom, is broken like the Prophets staff,
and therewithal the Beauty of the Nation miserably withered and deca^ed (for
these two go still together, Beauty and Bands, Zach. 11.10, 14.) we must look
on all this as Gods own work. It was he that sent an evil spirit between
Abimelech and the men of Shechem for the mutual punishment of the sins of
one another, Judge. 9.23. It was he who turned the he^rts of the Egyptians to
hate his people, and to deal subtly with them, Psalm. 105.25. He sent the
Assyrian against his people, giving them a charge to take the spoil and the
prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets, Isa. ^0.16.6. He
appointed the sword of the King of Babylon, by his overruling direction to go
against Judah, and not against the Ammonites, Ezekiel. 21.19.22. He by the secret
command of his providence marked some for safety, and gave commission to kill
and slay others, Ezekiel. 9.^, 5. It is he who gives Jacob for a spoil, and
Israel to the robbers, and powers out upon them the strength of battle, Isa.
42.24, 25. If there be evil in a City, in a Kingdom, the Lord has done it,
Amos 3.6. Isa. 45.7. This cons^^eration is very useful both to humble us, when
we consider that God has a controversy against the Land, and that it is he
whom we have to do withal in these sad commotions that are in the Kingdoms*
and to quiet and silence us, that we may not dare murmurre at the course of his
wise and righteous proceedings with us: and to d^rect us with prayer, faith,
and patience, to implore, and in his good time to expect such an issue and
close, as we are sure shall be for his own glory, and for the manifestation of
his mercy toward his people, and his Justice toward all that are implacable
enemies unto Sion.

2. In the troubles of the Church this is matter of singular comfort, that
however enemies may say, This and that we will do, hither and thither we will
go; though they may combine together and be mutually confederate, Psalm. 83.2,
5. and gird themselves, and take counsel, and speak the word, yet in all this
God has the casting voice. There is little heed to be given unto what Ephraim
says, except God say the same: without him whatsoever is counseled, shall
come to naught; whatsoever is decreed or spoken, shall not stand, Es. 8.9, 10.
We have a lively Hypotyposis or description of the swift, confident and furious
march of the great Host of Senacharib toward Jerusalem, with the great
terrors and consternation of the Inhabitants in every place where they came,
weeping, flying, removing their habitations, Esaias 10.28, 29, 30, 31. and when
he is advanced unto Nob, from which place the City Jerusalem might be seen, he
there shook his hand against Ierusalam, threatening what he would do unto it.
And then when the waters were come to the very neck, and the Assirian was in
the hight of pride and fury, God sent forth a prohibition against all their
resolutions, and that huge Army which was for pride and number, like the thick
Trees of Lebanon, were suddenly cut down by a mighty one, to wit, by the Angel
of the Lord, verse. 33.34. compared with Ezekiel. 31.3, 10. Esaias 17.12, 13,
14.37.36. therefore,

3. Our greatst business is to apply our selves to God, who alone is the Lord
that heals us, who alone can join the two sticks of Ephraim and Judah, and
make them one, Exodus 15.26. Ezekiel. 27.19. that he would still the raging of the
Sea, and command a calm again. He can say, Ephraim shall say thus and thus;
he has the hearts of Kings, and consequently of all other men in his hands,
Prove. 21.1. and he can turn them as rivers of water, which way soever he will,
as men by art can derive waters and divert them from one course to another (as
they did in the Siege of Babylon, Herodot. lib. 1. Xenophon. Cyropaed. lib. 7.
Salianus. Anno mundi 3515. 5 and 3516 22. Sir W. Raleigh, lib* 3. cap. 3. 5.
as Historians tell us, whereunto the Scripture seems to refer, Esaias 43.15,
16. Esaias 44.23, 28. Ier. 50, 23. Ier. 51.36.) he can sway, alter, divert,
overruled the purposes of men as it pleases him, reconciling Lambs and Lions
unto one another, Esaias 11.6. making Israel, Egypt, and Assyria agree together,
Esaias 19.24, 25. he can say to Balaam Bless, when his mind was to Curse, Josh.
24.10. he can turn the wrath of Laban into a covenant of kindness with Jacob,
Genesis 31.24, 44. and when Esa^ had advantage to execute his threats against his
brother, he can then turn resolutions of cruelty into kisses, Genesis 33.4. and
when Saul has compassed David and his men round about, and is most likely to
take them, he can even then take him off by a necessary diversion, 1 Samuel
23.26, 27, 28. This is the comfort of Gods people, That what ever men say,
except God say it too, it shall come all to nothing. He can restrain the wrath
of men whenever it pleases him, and he will do it, when it has proceeded
so far as to glorify his power, and to make way for the more notable
manifestation of his goodness to his people, Psalm. 76.10. And thus far of
Gods answer to the Covenant of Ephraim. They promised to renounce Idols, and
here God promises that they should renounce them.

. 15.
Now there are two things more to be observed from this expression, What have I
to do any more with Idols? 1. That in true Conversion God makes our special
sin to be the object of our greatest detestation: which point has been
opened before. 2. From those words any more, That the nature of true repentance
is To break sin off, as the expression is, Dan. 4.27. and not to suffer a man
to continue any longer in it, Romans 6.1, ^. It makes a man esteem the time past
sufficient to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 4.2, 3. and is
exceeding thrifty of the time to come, so to redeem it as that God may have
all: does not linger, nor delay, nor make objections, or stick at
inconveniences, or raise doubts whether it be seasonable to go out of Egypt
and Sodom or no: Is not at the sluggards language modo and modo, Non erat
omnino quod responderem v^ritate convictus, nisi tantum verba lenta and
somnolenta, modo, cece modo, sin^ paululum. Sed modo and modo non habebant
modum, Aug. confess* lib. 8. c. 5. Da mihi castitatem and continentiam, sed
noli modo; timebam ne me ci^o exaudires, and cito sanares, Ibid. cap. 7.
a little more sleep, a little more slumber: nor at Agrippas language almost
thou perswadest me: nor at Felix his language, when I have a convenient season
I will send for thee: but immediately resolves with Paul not to confer with
flesh and blood, Gal. 1.16. and makes haste to fly from the wrath to come,
while it is yet to come, before it overtake us, Luke 3.7. does not make anxious
or cavilling questions, What shall I do for the hundred talents? How shall I
maintain my life, my credit, my family? how shall I keep my friends? how shall
I preserve mine Interests, or support mine estate? but ventures the loss of
all for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, Matthew. 13.46. Phil. 3.7, 8.
is contented to part with a skie-full of Stars for one Sun of
Righteousness. The Converts that return to Christ, come like Dromedaries,
like Doves, like Ships; no wings, no sails can carry them fast enough from
their former courses unto him, Esa. 60.6, 7, 8, 9. Abraham is up betimes in the
morning though it be to the sacrificing of a Son, Genesis 22.3. David makes haste,
and delays not when he is to keep Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.60. when
Christ called his Diciples, immediately they left their nets, their Ship, their
Father, and followed him, Matthew. 4.20, 22. This is the mighty power of
Repentance; It does not give dilatory answers, It does not say to Christ, go
away now, and come to morrow, then I will hear thee; I am not yet old enough,
or rich enough, I have not gotten yet pleasure, or honor, or profit, or
perferment enough by my sins; but presently it hears and entertaines him. I
have sinned enough already to condemn, to shame, to slay me; I have spent time
and strength enough already upon it, for such miserable wages as shame and
death come to; Therefore I will never any more have to do with it. This is the
sweet and most ingenuous voice of Repentance; The thing which I see not, Teach
me, and if I have done iniquity, I will do no more, Job 34.32. There is no
sin more contrary to repentance then Apostacy: for godly sorrow works
Repentance unto salvation which the soul never finds reason to repent of, 2
Cor. 7.10, 11* Let us therefore take heed of an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God, Heb. 3.12. and of drawing back unto perdition,
Heb. 10.39. of dismissing our sins, as the Jews did their servants, Ier.
34.16. and calling them back again: for Satan usually returns with seven more
wicked spirits, and makes the last state of such a man worse then the first,
Luke 11.26. Ground which has been a long time laid down from tillage unto
pasture, if afterward it be new broken, will bring a much greater crop of
corn, then it did formerly when it was a common field. And so the heart which
has been taken off from sin, if it return to it again, will be much more
fruitful then before. As lean bodies have many times the strongest appe^i^e,
so lust when it has been kept lean, returns with greater hunger unto those
objects that seed it. A stream which has been stopped, will run more
violently being once opened again. Therefore in Repentance we must shake
hands with sin for ever, and resolve never more to tamper with it.

Now in that the Lord says,. 16. Solenne erat eos quibus p^^ae manus non erant
sacris arceri, Briston. de sormul. lib. 1. (...), Hom. Iliad. 3. Etiam impiae
initiationes arcent profan^s, Tertul. Apol. Quantum a praeceptis tantum ab
^^^ibus Dei long su^^u^, Tertul.
I have heard him and observed him: we learn hence: First, That God hears
and answers the prayers only of penitents. When a man resolves I will have no
more to do with sin, then, not till then, does his prayer find way to God.
Impenitencie clogs the wing of devotion, and stops its passage unto Heaven. The
person must be accepted before the petition: Christ Jesus is the Priest that
offers, and the Altar which sanctifies all our services, 1 Pet. 2.5. Esaias
56.7. And Christ will not be their Advocate in Heaven, who refuse to have him
their King on earth. The Scripture is in no point more express then in this.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66.18.
Prayer is a pouring out of the heart; if iniquity be harbored there, prayer is
obstructed, and if it do break out, it will have the sent and savor of that
iniquity upon it. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord,
Prove. 15.8. both because it is impure in it self, and has no Altar to
sanctify it. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his
prayer shall be an abomination, Prove. 28.9. Great reason that God should refuse
to hear him who refuses to hear God; that he who will not let God beseech
him (as he does in his word, 2 Cor. 5.20.) should not be allowed to beseech
God, Prove. 1.24.28. Esaias 1.15. His ear is not heavy that it cannot hear, but
iniquity separates between us and him, and hides his face that he will not
hear, Esaias. 59.1, 2. Ezekiel. 8.18. God hears not sinners, Ioh. 9.31. the
prevalency of prayer is this that it is the prayer of a righteous man, Iam.
5.16. And indeed no wicked man can pray in the true and proper notion of
prayer. It is true, there is a kind of prayer of nature, when men cry in their
distresses unto the God and Author of nature, for such good things as nature
feels the want of, which God in the way of his general providence and Common
mercies is sometimes pleased to answer sutably to the natural desires of those
that ask them. But the prayer of faith (which is the true notion of prayer,
Romans 10.14. Iam. 1.15.) goes not to God as the Author of nature, but as the God
of grace, and the Father of Christ, and does not put up mere natural, but
spiritual requests unto him as to an heavenly Father, which requests proceed
from the spirit of grace and supplication, teaching us to pray as we ought,
Zach. 12.10. Romans 8.26, 27. Gal. 4.6. So that they who have not the spirit of
Christ enabling them to cry Abba Father, Gemendi and interpellandi inspirans
affectu^, Aug. Ep. 105. Inspiranes deside^ium etiam adhuc incognitae tantae
rei, quam per patientiam expectamus, Ep. 121. c. 15.
are not able to pray a prayer of faith. Prayer has two wills concuring in it
when ever it is right, Our will put forth in desires, and Gods will respected
as the rule of those desires: for we are not allowed to desire what we will
our selves of God, but we must ask according to his will, 1 Ioh. 5.14. Now
whenever impenitent sinners pray for spiritual things, they do ever pray
contrary to one of these Two wills: when they pray for mercy and pardon, they
pray against Gods will, for that which God will not give: for mercy is proposed
to, and provided for those that forsake sin, Prove. 28.13. he who choseth to
hold fast sin, does by his own election forsake mercy: for the goodness of
God leads to repentance, Romans 2.4. Gods mercy is a holy mercy, Interdum obnixe
petimus, quod recusaremus si quis ofserret -- multa videri volumus velle, sed
nolumus -- Saepe aliud volumus, aliud optamus, Et verum ne Di^s quidem dicimus,
Sen. Epist. 95.
It will pardon sin forsaken, but it will not protect sin retained. Again,
when they pray for grace, they pray aganst their own will, for that which they
themselves would not have: It is impossible that a man should formally will the
holding fast and continuing in sin (as every impenitent man does) and with
the same will should truly desire the receiving of grace, which is destructive
to the continuance of sin: and if a wicked man do truly will the grace of God
when he prays for it, why does he refuse the same grace, when he hears it in
the Ministry of the Word offered unto him? If God offer it, and he desire it,
how comes it not to be received? Certainly there is not any thing in the
corrupt heart of man by nature which can willingly close with any sanctifying
grace of the Spirit of Christ. Self-denial is a concomitant in all Acts of
grace, and selfe-seeking in all acts of lust; and therefore where there is
nothing but lust, there can be no real volition of grace which is so contrary
unto it.

This teaches us to have penitent resolutions, and spiriturll aims in all our
prayers,. 17.
if we would have them prevail at the throne of grace. We are now under the
heavy calamity of a Civil war: And very desirous we are it should be
removed; we suffer and languish, and fret, and pine away, and we complain
every where of want, and violence. But who set themselves to cry mightily to
God, and call upon their soul as the Mariners upon Jonah, O thou sleeper,
what meanest thou, arise, call upon God? Happily we go so far, we pray too,
and yet receive no answer, because we ask amiss, Iam. 4.1, 2, 3. we are
troubled that our lusts are abridged of their fuel, or that our nature is
deprived of her necessaries, and for these things we pray. But till our
troubles bring us to seek God more then our selves; make more sensible of his
wrath then of our own wants; more displeased at what offends him, then at what
pincheth and oppresses our selves; we cannot promise our selves an answer of
peace. The Mariners cried, and the Tempest continued still, Jonah was to be
cast over; so long as there was a fugitive from God in the Ship, the storm
would not cease. Never can we promise our selves any comfortable fruit of our
prayers, till the aim of them is spiritual, that God may be honored, that his
Church may be cleansed and reformed, that our lives may be amended, that
whatsoever forsakes God in us may be cast away. Till Gods whole work be
performed upon Mount Sion and upon Jerusalem, we cannot promise our selves that
he will call in his Commission and Charge to take the spoil and the prey, Esaias
10.12. And therefore our greatest wisdom is to consider what God calls for,
to make it our prayer, and endeavors, that his will and counsel may be
fulfilled; the more we make God our end, the sooner we shall recover our peace
again.

Secondly, We learn,. 18.
that our performance of duty, does depend much upon Gods hearing and answering
of Prayer. Ephraim will have no more to do with Idols, because God has heard
him. Prayer is the key of Obedience, and the introduction unto duty. The
principles of duties are, wisdom to know and order them; will to desire and
intend them; strength to perform and persevere in the doing of them: And all
these are the product of Prayer. If any want wisdom, let him ask it of God,
Iam. 1.5. so Solomon did, 1 Kings 3.9. and who am I, and what is my people
says David, that we should be able to offer so willingly? for all things
come of thee. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. and the Apostle prays for the Ephesians that God
would grant them to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inward man,
Ephe. 3.16. the Principles of duty are the fruits of Prayer, and therefore the
performance of duty does much depend on the hearing, and answering of prayer.

. 19.
Thirdly, we learn from Gods observing, or having a careful and vigilant eye
upon Ephraim, that when we renounce all carnal and sinful confidence, and
cast our selves wholly upon God, engaging his eye of favor and providence unto
us, this will be a most sufficient protection against all the cruelties of men.
One would think when we hear a sword threatened, dashing of Infants, ripping of
women, the Prophet should have called on them to take unto them weapons to make
resistance (and certainly the use of means in such cases is necessary; the
sword of the Lord does not exclude the sword of Gedeon.) One would think, Take
to you words, were but a poor preparation against a destroying enemy: yet this
is all that the Prophet insists on; when the Assyrian comes against you, do you
Take with you words; your lips shall be able to defend more then his Armies can
annoy. Words uttered from a penitent heart in time of trouble unto God, are
stronger then all the preparations of flesh and blood, because that way as
prayer and Repentance go, that way God goes too. Amalek fights, and Moses
speaks unto God in the behalf of Israel, and the lifting up of his hands
prevails more then all the strength of Israel besides, Exodus 17.11, 12. One
man of God that knows how to manage the cause of Israel with him, is the
Chariots and horsemen of Israel, 2 Samuel 2.12. What huge Armies did Asa and
Iehoshaphat vanquish by the power of Prayer? 2 Chronicles. 14.11.20.23, 25. Till God
forbid prayer, as he did to Jeremy. 7.16.11.14. and take of the hearts of his
servants from crying unto him in behalf of a people, we have reason to hope
that he will at last think thoughts of mercy toward them. Exodus 32.10, 14. and
in the mean time, when they are reduced to the condition of fatherless
children, he will be a Guardian unto them; his eye of providence and tuition
will observe them, and take care of them; He is the Father of the fatherless,
and Judge of the widow, even God in his holy habitation, Psalm. 68.3.

Now in that he says, I am a green firre-tree, It is a promise made in
opposition to all the vain succors which they relied on before,. 20.
intimating that instead of them he would be their defense and shelter, that
they should not need to hide themselves under such narrow refuges. Whatsoever
humane wisdom, wealth, power, or other outward means men have to defend
themselves withal, yet they shall never find any true and solid protection
but in and from God after sound conversion unto him. The firre-tree Pliny
says, casts not its leaves, and so yields a perpetual shade both in winter
and in summer. To note that sound conversion yields comfort in all conditions
of life. Though the earth be removed and the mountains carried into the midst
of the Sea, etc. Psalm. 46.2, 3. Habac. 3.16, 17, 18. However it be, God is good
to Israel, and it shall go well with the righteous; he will be for a sanctuary
to his people that they need not be afraid, Esaias 8.12, 13, 14. If you would
have your hearts above all the troubles of the world, get under this
firre-tree, cast you selves under this protection, get into the Chamber of Gods
providence and promises, and then though the troubles of the world may strip
you of all outward comforts, yet God will be all unto you.

Lastly, in that he says, From me is thy fruit found: We learn, that though
good works be Ours when they are done by us, yet they come from God who
enableth us to do them; we bear them, but God works and produces them in
us: The duty is ours, but the efficacy and blessing is his. This falls in
with what has been handled in the first Doctrine; and therefore I shall say no
more of it.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
HOSEA Chap. 14. ver. 9. 9. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things?
Prudent, and he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the
just shall walk in them: but the transgressors shall fall therein.


THese words are a most patheticall close, and as it were a Seal which the
Prophet sets to all the Doctrine of his whole book,. 1.
and to the course of his Ministry; implying, first, A strong asseveration of
the truth of all those things which he had in the name of God delivered unto
them. Secondly, An elegant and forcible excitation of the people unto a sad and
serious pondering of them, laying to heart the sins therein charged, the duties
therein required, the judgments therein threatened, the blessings therein
promised. And withal thirdly, a tacit complaint of the paucity of those who
were wise unto salvation, and of the desperate use which wicked men make of the
word of God, and the Ministry of his Grace; namely, to stumble at it, and to
turn it unto themselves into an occasion of ruin.

Who is wise, and he shall understand? etc.] The interrogation is first a
secret exprobration of folly unto his hearers, or the greatest part of them:
for so this kind of interrogation does frequently in Scripture intimate either
a negation, or at least the rareness and difficulty of the thing spoken of: as
Who has known the mind of the Lord? Vid. Gl^ss^i Rhetor. Sacr. Tract. 2. cap.
5
1 Cor. 2.16. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Romans 8.33.
These are negatives. Who knows the power of thine anger? Psalm. 90.11. Who
amongst you will give ear to this? Esaias 42.23. Who has believed our report?
or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Esaias 53.1. These are Restrictives.
Who? that is, few or none are such. Secondly, An earnest wish and desire of the
Prophet. O that men were wise to understand these things and lay them to heart!
as, Who shall deliver me from this body of death? that is, O that I were
delivered! Romans 7.24. Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.7. that is, O that any
could do it. Thirdly, A strong affirmation or demonstration wherein true
wisdom does indeed consist; and what men that are truly wise, will do, when
the ways of God are by the Ministry of his servants set forth before them;
namely, ponder and consider the great weight and consequence of them, as Ier.
9.12, 13. Who is the wise man that may understand this? namely, as it
follows, for what the Land perishes, and is burnt up like a wilderness that
none passes through? And the Lord says, because they have forsaken my Law,
which I set before them, etc. This is the Character of a wise man, to resolve
the judgments that are upon a people, into their proper original, and not to
allege non causam pro causa. Fourthly, a vehement awakening and quickening of
the people unto this duty of sad attendance on the words which he had spoken
unto them, as Exodus 32.26. Who is on the Lords side? Let him come unto me. and
2 Kings 9.32. Who is on my side? who? So it is, as if the Prophet should have
said, there are none of you who have been my hearers, but would willingly
retain the reputation of wise and understanding men, and would esteem it a high
indignity to be recorded unto all Ages for fools and madd men. Well, I have
preached amongst you many years together (sixty are the fewest that we can
well compute, some say seventy, others above eighty) but alas, what
entertainment has mine Embassage received? what operation or success has it
had amongst you? (...) there not the Calves still standing at Dan and Bethel?
do not carnal policies prevail still against the express will of God? O if
there be any wise, any prudent men amongst you, (and O that all Gods people
were such) let them, now at length in the close of my Ministry toward them,
show their wisdom, by giving heed to what I have declared from the Lord, that
they may learn to walk in Gods righteous ways, and may not stumble and perish
by them.

Here are two words used to express the wisdom which God requires in those
who would fruitfully hear his word;. 2. Duae sunt parts Rationis secundam
Philosophum, una (...), altera (...), qua ^a^iocinamur and deliberamus in
ordine ad mores. Vide Arist Ethic. lib. 6. ca. 2. and cap. 8.
the one importing a mental knowledge of the things, and the other a
practical and prudentiall judgment in pondering them, and in discerning the
great moment and consequence of them unto our eternal weal or woe. So the
Apostle prays for the Colossians, That they might be filled with the knowledge
of Gods will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9. In mere
notionall things which are only to be known for themselves, and are not further
reducible unto use and practice, it is sufficient that a man knows them. But
in such things the knowledge whereof is ever in order unto a further end, there
is required besides (...), Arist. (...) 7* cap. 11.
the knowledge it self, a faculty of wisdom and judgment to apply and manage
that knowledge respectively to that end, and for the advancement of it. Now we
know that Theological learning is all of it practical, and has an
intrinseall respect and order unto (...), Justin Martyr. Apol 2. Qui Chris^iani
nominis (...) non agit, Christianus non esse videtur. Salvian. de Gubern. Dei
lib. 4.
worship and obedience: therefore it is called the knowledge of the truth which
is after godliness, Tit. 1.1. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom, and a good understanding have all they that do his Commandments*
Psalm. 111.10. keep his judgments and do them, for this is your wisdom and
understanding, Deuteronomy. 4.6. therefore, besides the bare knowledge of truth, there
is required wisdom, and spiritual understanding to direct that knowledge unto
those holy uses and saving ends for which it was intended.

The doubling of the sentence is the augmenting of the sense, to note, that it
is the supreme and most excellent act of wisdom and prudence so to know the
word and the ways of God, as with a practical judgment to ponder them in
order to salvation.

By the ways of the Lord we are to understand 1. The ways of his judgments,
Sect. 3.
and of his wonderful providence toward men: which however to the proud and
contentious spirit of the wicked they may seem perverse and inordinate, and
are to the eye of all men Iud^cia Dei plerunque occulta, nunquam Injusta, Aug.
Sermon. 88* de Tempore. (...), Clem. (...). vid Tertul. contra. M^rcion: lib. 2.
cap* 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
unsearchable: are yet by spiritual wisdom acknowledged to be most righteous
and holy, to have no crookedness or disorder in them, but to be carried on in
an even and strait way unto the ends whereunto his holy counsel does direct
them. His works are perfect, and all his ways are Judgment, Deuteronomy. 32.4. When
Jeremy had a mind to plead with the Lord concerning his Judgments, yet he
premiseth this as a matter unquestionable That God was righteous in them all,
Ier. 12.2.

2. The ways of his will, word, and worship; so the word is often taken in
Scripture to signify the Doctrine which men teach, as Math. 22.16. Act. 13.10.
Act. 18.25.22.4. and damnable heresies are called pernicious ways, in
opposition to the way of truth, 2. Pet. 2.2. and the rites or rules of corrupt
worship are called by the Prophet the way of Beersheba, Amos 8.14. And these
ways of God are likewise very strait, which carry men on in a sure line unto a
happy end, Psalm. 19.8. whereas wicked ways have crookedness and perverseness
in them, Psalm. 125.5. and this way seems here chiefly to be meant because it
follows, The Just will walk in them, that is, they will so ponder and judge
of the righteous ways of God in his word, as to make choice of them for their
way of happiness wherein they intend to walk, as the Psalmist speaks, I have
chosen the way of thy truth, Psalm. 119.30. Psalm. 25.12. Whereas wicked men
being offended at the purity of divine truth, do stumble and fall into
perdition as the Chaldee Paraphrast expresses this place.

The words are a powerful and patheticall stirring up of the people of Israel,
unto the consideration and obedience of the doctrines taught by the Prophet in
his whole Prophecy. The arguments which he uses, are drawn, first, from the
character of the persons: Who is wise, he shall understand, etc* Secondly, from
the nature of the doctrine taught: for the ways of the Lord are right.
Thirdly, from a double use and fruit of it made by different sorts of men. To
the Just, It is a way of happiness, they will walk: To the wicked, it is an
occasion of stumbling, They will fall therein.

Touching the persons, we observe two things; the one intimated, their paucity,
the other expressed, their prudence.

From the former consideration we may note, That there are few men who are wise
unto salvation, Sect. 4.
and who do seriously attend and manage the ministry of the word unto that
end. If there be any kind of accidental Lenocinium to allure the fancies, or
curiosities, or customary attendances of men on the ordinances: elegancy in the
speaker, novelty and quaintness in the matter, Credit or advantage in the
duty; upon such inducements many will wait on the word; some to hear a sweet
song, Ezekiel. 33.32. others to hear some new Doctrine, Act. 17.19* some for
Loves; to promote their secular advantages, Ioh. 6.26. having one and the self
same reason of following Christ which the Gadarens had when they entreated him
to depart from their coasts. Rari sunt qui philosophantur. Ulpian. P. de
Excusationibus Leg. 5. Rari quippe Boni, numero vix sunt To^idem quot Thebarum
portae vel divitis ostia Nil^. Iuvenal. Sat. 13
But very few there are who do it propter se, and with respect to the primary
use and intention of it. Our Prophet seems to do, as the Philosopher did; who
lighted a candle at noone to find out a wise man indeed, to (...) to and fro
through the streets, and in the broad places, to find a man that seeks the
truth, as the Lord commanded the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 5.1. How does the most
elegant of all the Prophets complain, Who has believed our Report? Isa. 53.1.
Isa. 49.4. How does the most learned of the Apostles complain, that the
preaching of the Gospel was esteemed foolishnes, 1. Cor. 1.23. Noah was a
Preacher of righteousness to a whole world of men, and yet but eight persons
saved from the flood, and some of them rather for the families sake then their
own, 1. Pet. 3.20 Paul preached to an whole Academy at Athens, and but a very
few converted, Act. 17.34. some disputed, and others mocked, but few believed
the things which they were not able to gainsay. Hezekiah sent messengers into
all Israel to invite them unto the true worship of God at Jerusalem; but they
were mocked and laughed to scorn, and a remnant only humbled themselves, and
came to Jerusalem, 2. Chron. 30.10, 11. (whereunto the Prophet seems to
allude, Isai 17.6.24.13.) Though a gun be discharged at a whole flight of
birds, there are but few killed. Though the net be spread over the whole pond,
but a few fishes are taken; many thrust their heads into the mud, and the net
passes over them* and so most hearers do busy their heads with their own
sensual or wordly thoughts, and so escape the power of the word. In the
richest Mine that is, there is much more earth and dross dug out then pure
metal. Christ's flock in every place is but a little flock, Luke 12.32. Few
chosen, Math. 20.16. few saved, Luke 13.23. few that find the narrow way,
which leads unto life, Math. 7.13, 14. The basest creatures are usually the
most numerous, as flies, and vermin: (...). Arist. de Generat. Anima lib. 4.
cap. 4. Unum pa^io, sed. Leonem. vid. a Gell. l. 13 c. 7. Gesner. de quad^uped*
in Elephanto. and Leone. C.
those that are more noble, are more rare too. The people of the God of Abraham
are in the Scripture-stile Princes and Nobles, Psalm. 47.9. Act. 17.11. 1. Pet.
2.9. and how few are such kind of men in comparison of the vulgar sort? They
are ^ndeed many in themselves, Heb. 2.10. Revel. 7.9. but very few and thin
being compared with the rest of the world.

We must therefore learn not to be offended or discouraged by the paucity of
sincere professors, Sect. 5.
no more then we are in a civil State by the paucity of wise Counselors and
Politicians in comparison of the vulgar people. It is no strange thing at all
in any societies of men to see the weaker part more then the wiser. If but few
attend the right ways of the Lord, and walk in them, remember it is a work
of wisdom, and such wisdom as comes from above, and has no seeds or
principles in corrupt nature out of which it might be drawn: nay against which
all the vigor of carnal reason does exalt it self; so that the Pudet doctes
homines ex discipulis Platonis fieri discipulos Christi etc. vid Aug. de civit.
Dei l. 10. c. 29. and l. 13. c. 16. and Ep. 10*
more natural wisdom men have, the more in danger they are to despise and
undervalue the ways of God, as being better able to reason and to cavil
against them, Math. 11.25. Act. 4.11. John 7.48. 1. Cor. 20.28.2.8. 2. Cor.
10.5, 6. Therefore first in the ministry of the word we must continue our
labor, though Israel be not gathered, Esaias 49.4, 5. We must stretch out our
hands, though it be to a disobediint and gain saying people, Esaias 65.2. whether
they will hear, or whether they will forbear, we must speak unto them, be they
never so rebellious, Ezekiel. 2.7. and the reason is, because the word is never in
vain, but it does ever prosper in the work whereunto. God sends it, Esaias
55.1^. If men be righteous, they walk; if wicked, they stumble (...). Clem.
Alex. in prot^ephe.
, and in both there is a sweet savor unto God, 2. Cor. 2.15. Gods work is
accomplished, his glory promoted, the power of his Gospel commended in the one
and the other Vultures unguento sugantur and scarabei rosa Plin, and Aelian.
(...). Clem. Paedag l. 2. c. 8 (...). Plutarch. Quod Stoici doceant absurdiora
poetis. (...). Nissen. Hom. 3. in* Cantic. (...). Plutarch. in conjugalib.
praecept.
: as the virtue of a sweet savor is seen as well by the Antipathy which one
creature has unto it, as by the Refreshment which another receives from it:
the strength of a rock, as by holding up the house that is built upon it, so by
breaking in pieces the ship that does dash against it: the force of the fire,
as well by consuming the dross, as by refining the gold: the power of the
water, as well in sinking the ship that leakes, as in supporting the ship that
is sound. The pillar of the cloud was as wonderful in the darkness which it
cast upon the Egyptians, as in the light which it gave unto the Israelites,
Exodus 14.20. The power of the Angel as great in striking terror into the
soldiers, as in speaking comfort unto the woman, Math. 28.4, 5. Secondly, In
attendance on the Word, we must resolve rather to walk with the wise though
few, then to follow a multitude to do evil, and to stumble with the wicked,
though they be many: rather enter the Arc with a few, then venture the flood
with a world of sinners: rather go three or four out of Sodom, then be
burnt for company: We must not affect an Humorous singularity in differing
unnecessarily from good men, being one for Paul against Apollo, another for
Apollo against Cephas: but we must ever affect an holy and pious singularity in
walking contrary unto evil men, in shining as lights in the midst of a crooked
and perverse Nation, Phil. 2.15. for the Righteous is more excellent then his
neighbor, Prove. 12.26. Though there be but few in the way, there will be many
in the end of the journey: As the Tribes and Families went up divided toward
Jerusalem, but when they were come thither, they appeared every one of them
before God in Sion, Psalm. 8.4.7.

Secondly, Sect. 6.
In that the Prophet calls upon his hearers to attend unto his doctrine by
this argument because it will be an evidence of their prudence and wisdom, we
learn, That true and solid Wisdom does draw the heart to know aright, namely,
to consider and ponder the judgments, blessings, ways, and word of God in
order to the chief ends, and accordingly to direct all their conversation: for
in Gods account that knowledge which does not edify, is no knowledge at all,
1. Cor. 8.2. None are his wise men, which are not wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy
3.15. who do not draw their wisdom from his Word, and from his commandments,
Psalm. 19.7.119.98, 99. Ier. 8.9.

There is a Ethic. lib. 6. cap. 7.
twofold wisdom, as the Philosopher distinguishes, (...) and (...): wisdom
in some (...). Philemon apud Athenaeum. lib. 7. cap. 11. and Live* lib. 39.
particulars, as we esteem every man who is excellent in his profession, to
be a wise man eousque, so far as concerns the managing of that profession:
as when a man knows all the necessary Principles and maxims of that way
wherein he is, the right ends thereof, and the proper conclusions deducible
from those principles, and derigible unto those ends. And next, wisdom in
general and in perfection, which is of those principles, ends, and conclusions
which are universally and most transcendently necessary unto a man's cheifest
and most general good: and this the (...), Ethi. l. 6. c. 7. (...). Arist.
Metaphysic. l. 2. cap. 2. (...), Rhetoric. lib. 1. cap. 37.
Philosopher calls the knowledge of the most excellent and honorable things,
or of the last end, and chief good of man. Now the end by how much the more
supreme, perpetual, and ultimate it is, by so much the more it has of
excellency and goodness in it, as bearing thereby most exact proportion and
convenience to the soul of man Vide Field of the Church. lib 1. c. 1.
; for the soul being immortal it self, can have no final satisfaction from
any good which is mortal and perishable: and being withal so large and
unlimited, as that the reasonings and desires thereof extend unto the whole
latitude of goodness, being not restrained unto this or that kind,, but
capable of desiring and judging of all the different degrees of goodness which
are in all the whole variety of things, it can therefore never finally
acquiesce in any but the most universal and comprehensive goodness, in the
nearer or more remote participation whereof consists the different goodness
of all other things.

Sect. 7.
This supreme and absolute goodness can indeed be but one, all other things
being good by the participation of that. There is none good but ^ne, that is
God, Math. 19.17. But because there are Two sorts of men in the world,
righteous and wicked, the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent:
therefore consequently there are Two sorts of ends which these men do
differenly pursue. The end of wicked men is a happiness which they out of
their own corrupt judgments do shape unto themselves, and unto which they do
finally carry all the motions of their souls, called in Scripture the
pleasures of sin, and the wages of iniquity, Hebr. 11.25. 2 Pet. 2.15. that
thing whatsoever it is, for obtaining whereof men do direct all their other
endeavors, as profit, pleasure, and honor or power; and there are mediums
exactly proportionable unto these ends; namely, the lusts of the flesh, the
lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1 Ioh. 2.16. And there is a wisdom
consonant unto these ends and means, and fit to direct and manage these lusts
unto the a^taining of those ends; which therefore the Apostle calls the
wisdom of the flesh or corrupt nature, Romans 8.7. and St James, a wisdom
earthly, sensual, and divelish, James 3.15. earthly, managing the lusts of the
eyes unto the ends of gain; sensual, managing the lusts of the flesh unto
ends of pleasure; and divellish, managing the pride of life unto ends of power.
But such wisdom as this, God esteems very foolishness; My people are
foolish, sottish children, they have no understanding: Why? They are wise to do
evil, but to do good they have no knowledge: Ier. 4.22. Wisdom is only unto
that which is good; he is the wisest man who is simple and ignor^nt in the
trade of evil, Romans 16.19. If any man amongst you seems to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool that he may be wise: 1 Corinthians. 3.18.

On the other side, the true and ultimate end of righteous men, is Almighty
Fecisti nos ad te, and inquietu^ est Cor nostrum donec requi^scat in ^e. Aug
Confess. li. 1. ca. 1. Omnis mihi copi^ quae Deus meus non est, Egestas est,
lib. 13. cap. 8. vid. de Trinit. lib. 8* c. 3. de Civit. Dei, li. 12 c. 1.
God as most glorious in himself, and most good unto us; or the seeking of his
glory, that he may be honored by us: and of our own salvation, that we may
be glorified by him. The fruition of him as the highest and first in genere
very, and the greatest and last in genere boni, the chiefest object for the
mind to rest in by knowledge, and the heart by love: this must needs be the
best of all ends, both in regard of the Beatitud^ haec du^ requirit, fru^tionem
incommutabilis Boni, and certitudinem aeternae fruitionis, vid. Aug de Civ. Dei
lib. 11. cap. 13.
excellency of it, as being infinitely and most absolutely good: and in regard
of eternity, so that the soul having once the possession of it, can never be
to seek of that happiness which flows from it, Ioh. 6.27, 28. The proper
means for the obtaining of this end, is the knowledge of God in Christ, as in
his Word he has revealed himself, to be known, worshipped, and obeyed; for
there only does he teach us the way unto himself: and true wisdom is the
pursuing of this means in order unto that end. For though many approaches may
be made toward God by the search and contemplation of the creature, yet in his
word he has showed us a more full and excellent way, which only can make us
wise unto salvation through faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15. Prove. 9.10.
Eccles. 12.12, 13. Ier. 9.23, 24.

All the thoughts and wisdom of men is spent upon one of these two heads,
Sect. 8.
either the obtaining of the good which we want: or the avoiding and declining
the evil which we fear. And by how much the more excellent and difficult the
good is which we want; and by how much the more pernicious and imminent the
evil is which we fear, by so much greater is the wisdom which in both these
procures the end at which we aim. Now then what are the most excellent good
things which we want? Vid. Aristot. de iis quae Bon^ sunt, and quae Meliora and
majora, Rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 6.7.
food is common to us with other creatures. Raiment, houses, lands,
possessions, common to us with the worst men: take the most admired perfections
which are not heavenly, and we may find very wicked men excel in them. All
men will confess the soul to be more excellent then the body; and therefore
the good of that to be more excellent then of the other: and the chief good of
it to be that which does most advance it toward the fountain of goodness,
where is fullness of perfection, and perpetuity of fruition. The excellency of
every thing stands in two things. The perfection of beauty wherein it was
made, and the perfection of use for which it was made. The beauty of man,
especially in his soul, consists in this, that he was made like to God, after
his Image, Genesis 1.26, 27. and his end and use in this, that he was made for
God, first to serve him, and after to enjoy him; for the Lord has set apart
him that is godly for himself, Psalm. 4.3. This people have I formed for my
self, they shall show forth my praise, Isa. 43.21. Therefore to recove^ the
Image of God, which is in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, Col^s.
3.10. Ep^es. ^.24. to work to the service and glory of God, Ioh. 1^.8. to
aspire and to enjoy the possession and fruition of God, Exodus 33.18. Phil.
1.23. must needs be man's greatest good; and by consequence, to attend on the
means hereof, must needs be his greatest wisdom.

What is the most pernicious and destructive evil which a man is in danger of?
not the loss of any outward good things whatsoever, for they are all in their
nature perishable; we enjoy them upon these conditions to part with them again;
no wisdom can keep them; Meat for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God
shall destroy both it and them: 1 Cor. 6.13. Not the suffering of any outward
troubles, which the best of men have suffered, and triumphed over; But the
greatest loss is the loss of a precious soul, which is more worth then all
the world, Matthew. 16.26. and the greatest suffering is the wrath of God upon
the conscience, Psalm. 90.11. Isa. 33.14. Heb. 10.31. Matthew. 10.28. Therefore to
avoid this danger, and to snatch this darling from the paw of the Lion, is of
all other the greatest wisdom. It is wisdom to deliver a City, Eccles. 9.15.
much more to deliver a soul, Sect. 9.
Prove. 11.30. Angelical, Seraphicall knowledge without this, is all worth
nothing, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.

Therefore we should learn to show our selves wise indeed by attendance on Gods
Word. If the most glorious creatures for wisdom and knowledge that ever God
made, the blessed Videntur ipsi Ang^li ex Scriptis Evangelicis, and ministerio
Apostolico plurima didicisse, Vid. Chrysostom. Hom 1. in Johan* Gregor. Nis^en.
Hom. 8. in Cantic. Theophylact. and Occumen. in Ephesians. 3. alios apud Sext. Senens
li 6. Annot. 165.182. and ^99.
Angels were employed in publishing the Law of God, Act. 7.53. Gal. 3.19. and
did with great admiration look into the mysteries of the Gospel, and stoop
down with their faces toward the mercy Seat, 1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.10. Exodus
37.9. it cannot but be also our chiefest wisdom to hide the world in our
hearts, and to make it our companion, and Councellor (as David did, Psalm.
119.24.) We esteem him the wisest man who follows the best and safest Vide
Greg. ^holos^n de Repub li. 24.
Counsel, and that which will most preserve and promote his interest, his
honor, and his conscience. Herein was Rehoboams weakness, that by passionate
and temeratious Counsels he suffered his honor to be stained, his interest to
be weakened, and his conscience to be defiled with resolutions of violence and
injustice. Now, there is no counsel to that of Gods Word. It illightneth the
eyes, it makes wise the simple, Psalm. 19.7, 8. It is able to make a man wise
(...). Plutar. de occulte vivendo.
for himself, and unto salvation, which no other counsel can do, 2 Timothy 3.15,
16. there is no case that can be put, though of never so great intricacie and
perplexity, no doubt so difficult, no temptation so knotty and involved, no
condition whereinto a man can be brought so desperate, no employment so dark
and uncouth, no service so arduous, or full of discouragements, in all which so
far as respects conscience and salvation, there are not most clear and
satisfactory expedients to be drawn out of Gods Word if a man have his
judgment and senses after a spiritual manner exercised in the searching of
it. That we are so often at a stand how to state such a question, how to
satisfy such a scruple, how to clear and expedite such a difficulty, how to
repel such a Temptation, how to manage such an action, how to order our ways
with an even and composed spirit in the various conditions where into we are
cast in this world, does not arise from any defect in the word of God, which is
perfect and able to furnish us unto every good work, but only from our own
ignorance and unacquaintance with it, who know not how to draw the general
rule, and to apply it to our own particular cases: and this cannot but be
matter of great humiliation unto us in these sad and distracted times, when
besides our civil breaches, which threaten desolation to the State, there
should be so many and wide divisions in the Church; That after so long
enjoyment of the Word of God, the Scripture should be to so many men as a
sealed book, and they like the Egyptians, have the dark side of this glorious
pillar toward them still; that men should be tossed to and fro l^ke children,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, and suffer themselves to be
bewitched, devoured, brought into bondage, spoiled, led away captive,
unskilful in the word of righteousness, unable to discern good and evil, to
prove and try the spirits whether they be of God, always learning, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth; Sunt qu^edam falsae opiniones quae
ulcus non gignunt: Sunt etiam errores venenati, qui anim^m depascu^tur, vid.
Plutarch, de superstit.
and this not only in matters problematicall, or circumstantiall, wherein
learned and godly men may differ from one another, and yet sti^l the peace and
unity of the Church be preserved (for things of this nature ought not to be
occasions of schism, or secessions from one another) but in matters which
concern life and godliness, touching the power of Gods law, the nature of
free grace, the subjection or ^he conscience unto moral precepts, confession
of sin in prayer unto God, and begging pardon of it: the differencing of true
Christian liberty from loose, profane and wanton licentiousness, and a
liberty to vent and publish what perverse things s^ever men please; the very
being of Churches, of Ministers, of Ordinances in the world; the necessity of
humiliation and solemn repentance in times of public Judgments; the
tolerating of all kind of Religions in Christian Commonwealths; the mortality
of the reasonable soul, and other the like pernicious and perverse doctrines of
men of corrupt minds (the Devils Emissaries,) purposely by him stirred up to
hinder and puzzle the Reformation of the Church; These things I say cannot but
be matter of humiliation unto all that fear God, and love the prosperity of
Sion; and occasions the more earnestly to excite them unto this wisdom in the
Text, to hear what God the Lord says, and to lay his righteous ways so to
heart, as to walk steadfastly in them, and never to stumble at them, or fall
from them.

Now there are two things which I take it, Sect. 10.
the Prophet in this close of his Prophecy seems principally to aim at;
namely, the judgments, and the blessings of God. His righteous ways in his
threatenings against impenitent, and in his promises made unto penitent sinners.
These are the things which wise and prudent men will consider in times of
trouble.

For Judgments; there is a twofold knowledge of them: the one natural by
sense, the other spiritual by faith. By the former way wicked men do
abundantly know the afflictions which they suffer, even unto vexation and
anguish of spirit. They f^et themselves, Isa. 8.21. they are gray headed, with
very trouble and sorrow, Hos. 7.^. they gnaw their tongues for pain, Revel.
16.10. they pine away in their iniquities, Levit. 26.39. they are m^d in their
calamities, have trembling hearts, fa^ling of eyes, and sorrow of mind, etc.
Deuteronomy. 28.34.65. and yet for all this they are said in the Scripture, when they
burn, when they consume, when they are devoured, not to know any of this, or to
lay it to heart* Isa. 42.25. Hos. 7.9. Ier. 12.11. and the reason is, because
they knew it not by faith, nor in a spiritual manner in order unto God. They
did not see his name, nor hear his rod, nor consi^er his hand and counsel in
it, or measu^e his Judgments by his word, nor look on them as the fruits of
sin, leading to repentance, and teaching righteousness: nor as the arguments
of Go^s displeasure, humbling us under his holy hand, and guiding u^ to seek
his face, and to recover our peace with him. This is the spiritual and prudent
way of knowing judgments, Mic. 6.9. Isa. 26.8, 9. Isa. 27.9. Levit. 26.40, 41,
42. Scire est per causam scire* true wisdom looks on things in their Causes:
Resolves Judgments into the causes of them, our sins to be bewailed, Gods
wrath to be averted; makes this observation upon them, Now I find by
experience, that God is a God of truth: often have I heard Judgments threatened
against sin, and now I see that Gods threatenings are not empty wind, but
that all his words have truth and substance in them. The first part of wisdom
is, to see Judgments in the word before they come, and to hide from them: (for
as faith in regard of promises is the substance of things hoped for, and sees
a being in them while they are yet but to come; so is it in regard of
threatenings the substance of things feared, and can see a being in Judgments
before they are felt.) The next part of wisdom is, to see God in Judgments,
in the rods when they are actually come, and to know them in order unto him.
And that knowledge stands in two things; first to resolve them into him as
their Author, for nothing can hurt us without a commission from God* Job.
19.11. Satan spoils Job of his children, the Sabeans and Chalde^ns of his
goods, but he looks above all these, unto God, acknowledging his goodness in
giving, his power in taking away, and blesses his name, Job. 1.21. Joseph
looks from the malice of his brethren, unto the providence of God; He sent me
before you to preserve life, Genesis 45.5. If the Whale swallow Jonah, God
prepares him, Jonah 1.^7. and if he vomit him up again, God speaks unto him,
chap. 2.10. Perdidistis utilitatem calamitatis and miserrimi facti estu, and
pessimi permansistis. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. ^. c. 13.
Secondly, to direct them unto him as the end; to be taught by them to seek
the Lord, and wait on him in the way of his judgments; to be more penitent for
sin, more fearful, and watchful against it, to study and practice the
skill of suffering as Christians, according to the will of God, that he may be
glorified, Psa. 94.12. Psa. 119.67.71. Zach. 13.9. l^ Isay 26.9. Heb. 12.11.
Deuteronomy. 8.16.1. Pet. 4.16.19.

So likewise for Blessings; there is a double knowledge of them: one sensual
by the flesh, the other spiritual in the conscience. The former is but a
brutish and Epicurean feeding on them without fear, as Israel upon quails in
the wilderness; as Swine which feed on the fruit that falls down, but never look
up to the tree whereon it grew; to use blessings as Adam did the forbidden
fruit, being drawn by the beauty of them to forget God: as our Prophet
complains, Hos. 13.6. But spiritual knowledge of Blessings is to taste and see
the goodness of the Lord in them; To look up to him as the Author of them,
acknowledging that it is he who gives us power to get wealth, and any other
good thing, Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. Psalm. 127.1. Prove. 10.22. and to be drawn by them
unto him as their End, to the adoring of his bounty, to the admiration of his
goodness, to more cheerfulness and stronger engagements unto his service, to
say with Jacob, He gives me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, therefore he
shall be my God, Genesis 28.20. He gives me all things richly to enjoy; therefore
I will trust in him, 1 Timothy 6.17. Catalogues of mercy should beget resolutions
of obedience, Josh. 24.2, 14.

. 11.
Thirdly, we have here a singular commendation of the Doctrine which the Prophet
had delivered unto the people of God; namely, that it was altogether Right, and
the way which God required them to walk in, whatever Judgment carnal and
corrupt minds might pass upon it. Now the Doctrine of Gods Judgments,
Precepts, and Pro^mises, is said to be Right diverse ways.

1. In regard of their Equity and Reasonableness* There is nothing more
profoundly and exactly rational then true religion; and therefore conversion
is called by our Savior Elenchus est syllogismus cum contradictione
c^nclusionis. Arist. Elench. l. ^ c. 1. El (...) est certa argum^ntatione
disputantem vincere. Steph. ex Platone.
conviction. There is a power in the word of God to stop the mouths and
dispell the cavillations of all contradictors; so that they shall not be able to
resist, or speak against the truth that is taught, Ioh. 16, 8. Tit. 1.9.10.
Act. 6.10. Mat. 22.34. and the Apostle calls his Ministry, Demonstratio est
Syllogismus Scient^ficus. A^ist. poster. Analyt. lib. 1. c. ^
a Declaration and a manifestation of the truth of God unto the consciences of
men, 1 Cor. 2.4. 2 Cor. 4.2. and Apollos is said mightily to have convinced the
Jews, showing or demonstrating by the Scripture that Jesus was Christ, Act.
18.28. therefore the Apostle calls the devoting of our selves unto God, a
Reasonable Service, Romans 12.1. and those that obey not the Word, are called
unreasonable or absurd men, that have not wisdom to discern the truth and
equity of the ways of God, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. What can be more reasonable, then
that he who made all things for himself, should be served by the Creatures
which he made? That we should live unto him who gave us our being? That the
suprea^ will should be obeyed, the infallible truth believed, that he who can
destroy, should be feared, that he who does reward should be loved and trusted
in* That absolute Justice should vindicate it self against presumptuous
disobedience, and absolute goodness extend mercy unto whom it pleases? It is
no marvel that the holy Spirit does brand wicked men throughout the Scripture
with the disgraceful title of Fools, Nullum scelus rationem habet. Live. lib.
28.
because they reject that which is the supreme rule of wisdom and has the
greatest perfection and exactness of reason in it, Ier. 8.9.

2. In regard of their consonancy and (...). etc. Just. Mart. dialog* cum
Tryphon. Quod de suo codice Iustinianus, verius de sacro codice affirmatur,
contrarium aliqu^d in hoc codice pos^tum, nullum sibi locum vindicabit etc.
Cod. de ve^^re Iure enucleando. l. 2. Sect. 15 and l. 3. Sect. 15.
Harmony within themselves; as that which is right and strait has all its
parts equal and agreeing one unto another: so all the parts of Divine Doctrine
are exactly suitable and conform to each other. The promises of God are not
yea and nay, but yea and Amen, 2. Cor, 1, 19, 20. However, there ^ay be seeming
repugnances to a carnal and captious eye (which may seem of purpose allowed
for the exercise of our diligence in searching, and humility in adoring the
profoundnesse and perfection of the word) yet the Scriptures have no obliquity
in them at all, but all the parts thereof do most intimately consent with one
another, as being written by the Spirit of truth who cannot lie, nor deceive,
who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

3. In regard of their Directnesse unto that End for which they were revealed
unto men, being the strait road unto eternal life, able to build us up and to
give us an inheritance, Act. 20.32. In which respect the word is called the
word of life, Act. 5.20. and the Gospel of Salvation, Ephesians. 1.13. yea, Salvation
it self, Ioh. 4.22. Ioh. 12.50. Act. 28.28. as being the way to it, and the
instrument of it, 2. Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. Iam. 1.21.

4. In regard of their Conformity to the holy nature and will of God, which is
the Non id^irco just voluit quia futurum justum suit quod voluit, sed quod
voluit, id^irco justum suit quia ipse voluit -- secundum came justum est quod
justum est, etc. Hug. de Sacrament. lib, 1. part. 4. cap. 1.
original rule of all Rectitude and Perfection. Law is nothing but the will of
the Lawgiver, revealed with ^n intention to bind those that are under it, and
for the ordering of whom it was revealed. That will being in God most holy and
perfect, the Law or Word which is but the patefaction of it, must needs be holy
and perfect too; therefore it is called the acceptable and perfect will of God,
Romans 12.2. Col. 1.9. It is also called a Word of truth, importing a conformity
between the mind and will of the speaker and the word which is spoken by him;
in which respect it is said to be Holy, Just, and Good, Romans 7.14.

5. In regard of the Smoothness, Plainness, Perspicuousnesse of them, in the
which men may walk surely, easily, without danger of wandering, stumbling, or
miscarriage; as a man is out of dan^ger of missing a way, if it be strait and
direct with out any turnings: and in no gre^^ danger of falling in it, if it be
plain and smooth, and no stumbling block left in it. Now such is the word of
God to those who make it their way, a strait way, which looks directly
forward, Psalm. 5.8. Heb. 12.13. An even and smooth way, which has no offense
or stumbling block in it, Psalm. 26.12. Psalm. 119.165. It is true, there are
(...), hard things to exercise the study and diligence, the faith and prayers
of the profoundest Scholars; waters where in an Elephant may swim: but yet as
nature has made things of greatest necessity to be most obvious and Common, as
air, water, bread and the like; whereas things of greater rarity, as gemms and
jewels, are matters of honor and ornament, not of daily use: so the wisdom
of God has so tempered the Scriptures, as that from thence the wisest Solomon
may fetch jewels for ornament, and the poorest Lazarus bread for life; but
these things which are of common necessity, as matters of Faith, Love, Worship,
Obedience, which are universally requisite unto the common salvation, (as the
Apostle expresses it, Jude ver. 3. Tit. 1.4.) are so In iis quae Aperte in
Scripturis posita sunt inveniuntur illa omnia qua continent fiaem, m^resque
vivendi. Aug. de doct. Christian. lib. 2. c. 9. and Ep 3. ad Volusian. and
contr. Ep. Petilian. cap* 5. Vid. Theodoret. Sermon. 8. de Martyrib.
perspicuously set down in the holy Scriptures, that every one who has the
spirit of Christ, has therewithal a judgment to discern so much of Gods will
as shall suffice to make him believe in Chirst for righteousness, and by
worship and obedience to serve him unto salvation. The way of Holiness is so
plain, that simple men are made wise enough to find it out, and wayfaring men,
though fools, do not err therein, Psalm. 19.7. ^say 32.4. Esaias 35.8. Matthew.
11* 25.

. 12.
From all which we learn, First, to take heed of picking quarrels at any word of
God, or presuming to pass any bold and carnal censure of ours upon his
righteous ways. When God does set his Word in the power and workings of it
upon the spirit of any wicked man, making his conscience to hear it as the
voice of God, it usually works one of these two effects: either it subdues
the soul to the obedience of it by convincing, judging, and manifesting the
secrets of his heart, so that he falls down on his face and worshippeth God,
1 Cor. 14, 25. Or else it does by accident excite and enrage the natural love
which is in every man to his lusts, stirring up all the proud arts and
reasonings which the forge of a corrupt heart can shape in defense of those
lusts against the sword of the spirit which would cut them off; as that which
hinders the course of a river, does accidentally enrage the force of it, and
cause it to swell and over run the banks; and from hence arises gainsaying
and contradiction against the word of grace, and the ways of God as unequal
and unreasonable, too strict, too severe, too hard to be observed, Ezekiel. 18.25.
snuffing at it, Mal. 1.13. gathering odious Consequences from it, Romans 3.8.
Replying against it, Romans 9.19, 20. casting reproaches upon it, Ier. ^0.8, 9.
enviously swelling at it, Act. 13.45. There are few sins more dangerous then
this of picking quarrels at Gods word, and taking up weapons against it. It
will prove a burdensome stone to those that burden themselves with it, Zach.
12.3. Math. 21.44. Ut vernula illa apud Senecam quae cu^ caeca esset, cubiculum
esse tenebrosum querebatur (...). Plutarch, d^ Animi Tra^quillita^e.
Therefore when ever our crooked and corrupt Reason does offer to except
against the ways of God as unequal, we must presently conclude as God does,
Ezekiel. 18* 25. that the inequality is in us, and not in them. When a Lame man
stumbleth in a plain path, the fault is not in the way, but in the foot: nor
is the potion but the palate too blame, when a feverish distemper makes that
seem bitter which indeed was sweet. He that removes in a Boat from the
shore, in the judgment of sense sees the houses or trees on the shore to
totter and move, whereas the motion is in the Boat, and not in them. Unclean
and corrupt hearts, have unclean notions of the purest things, and conceive of
God as if he were such a one as themselves, Psalm. 50.21.

. 13.
Secondly, it should teach us to come to Gods Word always as to a Rule, by
which we are to measure our selves, and take heed of wresting and wrying that
to the corrupt fancies of our own evil hearts, as the Apostle says some men
do to their own destruction, Cesset voluntas propria^ and non erit Infernus,
etc. vid. Bernard, Sermon. 3. de Resurrect.
2. Pet. 3.16. Act. 13.1^. Every wicked man does, though not formally and
explicitly, yet really and in truth, set up his own will against Gods,
resolving to do what pleases himself, and not that which may please God, and
consequently follows that reason and council which waits upon his own
will, and not that Word which revealleth Gods. Yet because he that will serve
himself, would feign deceive himself too (that so he may do it with less
regret of conscience) and would feign seem Gods servant, but be his own;
therefore corrupt Reason sets it self on work to (...) Clem. Alex. Strom. lib.
7. (...). Ibid. (...) Ibid. (...) etc. Justin. Martyr. Ep. ad Zenam.
Simplicitatem sermonis Ecclesiastici id volunt signifi^are quod ipsi sen^iunt.
Hieron ep. vid. Aug. de do^^. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 10. Scripturas tenent ad
speciem, non ad salutem. de Baptism. contr. Donat. lib. 3. cap. ult. ^as
secundum suum sensum legunt. de Great. Christ. lib. 1. c. 41. Sequitur
voluptatem no^ quam audit, ^ed quam attulit, and vitia sua cum coepit putare
s^milia praeceptis, indulget illis non ^i^ide nec obscure; Luxu^iatur etiam
inop^^^o capi^e. Sen. de vita Beata cap. 13. Nondum haec negligentia deum
v^nerat, nec interpretando sibi quisqu^ jus jurandum and leges ap^as saciebat,
sed suos potius mo^es ad ea accommodabat. Live. lib. 3.
excogitate such distinctions and evasions, as may serve to reconcile Gods word
and a man's own lust together. Lust says, steal; God says no, thou shall not
steal; carnal Reason, the advocate of Lust, comes in and distinguishes: I
may not steal from a neighbor, but I may weaken an enemy, or pay my self the
stipend that belongs to my service, if others do not; and under this evasion,
most innocent men may be made a prey to violent Soldiers, who use the name of
public interest to palliate their own greediness. Certainly, it is a high
presumption to tamper with the word of Truth, and make it bear false witness
in favor of our own sins; and God will bring it to a trial at last whose
will shall stand, his, or ours.

Lastly, 14.
this serves as an excellent boundary both to the ministration of the
Preacher, and to the faith of the hearer, in the dispensing of the Word; first,
To us in our ministry, that we deliver nothing unto the people but the Right
ways of the Lord (...) etc. Ba. in Ps. 14. (...). Naz Orat. 1. Qui ^rumento
orenam immiscuit, quasi de corrupto agi potest, l 26. ad Leg. Aquil P. 20 Aurum
accepisti, aurum reddo; nolo mihi pro aliis alia subjicias. nolo pro auto aut
impudenter plumbu^, aut s^audulenter aeramenta suppo^as; nolo auri speciem sed
naturam plane, Vincent. Lirin. Lege Cornelia cavetur ut qui (...) aurum vi^ii
quid add^derit, qui argenteos nummos adulterinos flaverit, sals^ crimine
ten^atur. l 9 P. Leg. Cornel. de falsis. Qui tabulam legis res^^^rit vel quid
inde immutaverit, Lege Iulia peculatus tenetur, l. 8. P. ad leg. Iul peculat.
, without any Commixtures or contemperations of our own. Mixtures are useful
only for these Two purposes, either to slaken and abate something that is
excessive, or to supply something that is deficient* and to collect a virtue
and efficacy out of many things, each one of which alone would have been
ineffectuall: and so all Heterogeneous mixtures do plainly intimate either a
vitiousnesse to be corrected, or a weakness to be supplied, in every one of
the simples which are by humane wisdom tempered together in order unto some
effect to be wrought by them. Now it were great wickedness to charge any one
of these upon the pure and perfect Word of God; and by consequence, to use
deceit and insincerity by adulterating of it, either by such glosses as
diminish and take away from the force of it, as the Pharisees did in their
carnal interpretations (consuted by our Savior, Matthew. 5.21, 27, 38, 43.) or
by such Superinducements of humane Traditions as argue any defect, Instrumentum
rem principalem sequitur, vid. Locati conducti, P. Leg. 19. Sect. 2.
as they also did use, Matthew. 15.2, 9. Humane Arts and Learning are of
excellent use as Instruments in the managing and searching, and as means and
witnesses in the explication of holy Writ, In Itinere non debet extrui
aedificium, l 9. P. si Servitut vindicetur.
when piously and prudently directed unto those uses. But to stamp any thing
of but an humane Original with a divine character, and obtrude it upon the
consciences of men, (as the Papists do their unwritten traditions) to bind
unto obedience; Nequis vela Regia aut Titulum audeat alienis rebus imponere,
Cod. l. 2. Tit. 16. Qui rem depositam in usus suos invito Domin^ converterit,
furti Reus est, Leg. 3. Cod Depositi velcontra.
to take any dead child of ours (as the Harlot did, 1 Kings 3.20.) and lay it
in the bosom of the Scripture, and father it upon God; to build any structure
of ours in the road to heaven, and stop up the way; is one of the highest and
most daring presumptions that the pride of man can aspire unto: to erect a
throne in the consciences of his fellow creatures, and to counterfeit the great
Seal of Heaven for the countenancing of his own forgeries; is a sin most
severely provided against by God, with special prohibitions and threatenings,
Deuteronomy. 12.32. Deuteronomy. 18.20. Ier. 26.2. Prove. 30.6. This therefore must be the
great care of the Ministers of the Gosple, to show their fidelity in delivering
only the Counsel of God unto his people, Acts 20.27. to be as the Two golden
pipes which received oil from the Olive branches, and then emptied it into the
gold, Zach. 4 12. First, to receive from the Lord, and then to deliver to the
people, Ezekiel. 2.7. Esaias 21.10. Ezekiel. 3.4. 1 Cor. 11.23. 1 Pet. 4.11. Secondly,
The people are hereby taught, first, To examine the doctrines of men by the
rule and standard of the Word, and to measure them there, that so they may not
be seduced by the craftiness of deceivers, and may be the more confirmed and
comforted by the doctrine of sincere teachers; for though the Judgment of
Interpretation belong principally to the Ministers of the Word, yet God has
given unto all Belevers a Judgment of discretion, to try the spirits, Vid
Davenant. de Indice and norma fidei. Chap. 25.31.
and to search the Scriptures, whether the things which they hear be so or no,
1 Ioh. 4.1. Act. 17.11. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. for no man is to pin his own soul and
salvation by a blind obedience upon the words of a man who may mislead him;
nay not upon the words of an Angel, Isid. Pelut. lib. 3. Ep. 165.
if it were possible for an Angel to deceive, Gal. 1.8. 1 Kings 13.18, 21. but
only and immediately upon the Scripture, except when the blind lead the blind,
the leader only should fall into the ditch, and the other go to heaven for his
blind obedience in following his guides toward hell: whereas our Savior tells
us both shall fall, though but one be the leader, Matthew. 15.14. Matthew. 23.15.
Secondly, Having proved all things, to hold fast that which is good, with all
readiness to receive the righteous ways of God, and submit unto them, how
mean soever the Instrument be in our eyes, how contrary soever his message be
to our wills and lusts. When God does manifest his Spirit and Word in the
mouths of his Ministers, we are not to consider the vessel, but the Treasure,
and to receive it as from Christ, who to the end of the world in the
dispensation of his Ordinances, speaks from heaven unto the Church, 1 Thessalonians.
2.13. ^ Cor. 5.20. Heb. 12.25. Matthew. 28.20.

Fourthly, In that it is said, That the Just w^ll walk in them, 15.
we may observe Two things. 1. That Obedience, and walking in the right ways
of the Lord, is the end of the ministry, That the Saints might be perfected,
that the body of Christ might be edified, that men might grow up into Christ
in all things, Ephesians. 4.11.15, that their eyes might be opened, and they turned
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26.16, 17,
18. The Prophet concludes that he has labored in vain if Israel be not
gathered, Esaias 49.4, 5. Without this the Law is vain, the pen of the Scribe in
vain, Ier. 8.8. better not know the way of Righteousness, then having known
it, to turn from the holy Commandment which was delivered unto us, 2. Pet.
2.21. We should esteem it a great misery to be without Preaching, without
Ordinances, and so indeed it is; of all famine, that of the Word of the Lord is
the most dreadful; better be with Gods presence in a wilderness, then in
Canaan without him, Exodus 33.15. better bread of affliction, and water of
affliction, then a famine of hearing the word, to have our teachers removed,
Amos 8.11. Esaias 30.20. this is mischief upon mischief, when the Law perishes
from the Priest, Nihil est aliud Scientia nostra quam culpa, qui ad hoc
tantummodo Legem novimus ut majore offensione peccemus, Salvian. lib. 4.
and there is no Vision, Ezekiel. 7.26. and yet it is much better be in this
case, without a Teaching Priest, and without the Law, then to enjoy them, and
not to walk answerably unto them; where the Word is not a savor of life, it is
a savor of death unto death, exceedingly multiplying the damnation of those
that do despise it, 2 Cor. 2.15. Matt. 11.22, 24. First, it does ripen those
sins that it finds, making them much more sinful then in other men,
Criminosior culpa, ubi status honestior. -- Qui Christiani dicimur, si simile
aliquid Barbarorum impuritatibus facimus, gravius erramus; a^rocius enim sub
sancti nominis professione peccamus: ubi sublimior est praerogativa, major est
culpa. Salvian. lib. 4. possunt nostra and Barbarorum vitia esse paria, sed in
his tamen vitiis necesse est peccata nostra esse graviora -- Nunquid dici de
^unnis potest, ^cce quales sunt qui Christiani esse dicuutur? nuuquid de
Saxonibus and Francis, Ecce quid sa^iunt* qui se asserunt Christi esse
cul^^^es? Nunquid propter (...) ^ex Satr^ Sancta (...)? -- Evangelia legunt,
and Impuditi sunt; Apostolos audi^^t, and incbriantur* Christum sequuntur, and
Rapiunt, etc. Ibid.
because committed against greater light and more mercy. One and the same sin
in an Heathen is not so heinous and hateful as in a Christian. Those trees on
which the Sun constantly shines, have their fruit grow riper and greater then
those which grow in a shady and cold place. The rain will hasten the growth as
weell of weeds as of corn, and make them ranker then in a dry and barren
ground, Ioh. 9.41. Ioh. 15.22.24. Secondly, it does superadde many more and
greater; for the greatest sins of all are those which are committed against
light and grace; Sins against the Law and Prophets, greater then those which
are committed against the glimmerings of nature, Ezekiel. 2.5.3.6, 7. and sins
against Christ and the Gospel, greater then those against the Law, Heb.
2.2.10.28, 29. Such are, unbelief, Impenitency, Apostasy, despising of
salvation, preferring death and sin before Christ and mercy; judging our
selves unworthy of eternal life, etc. Thirdly, it does by these means both
hasten and multiply judgments. The sins of the Church are much sooner ripe
for the fickle then the sins of Amorites; they are near unto cursing, Heb.
6.8. Summer fruits, sooner shaken off then others, Amos. 8.1. Ier. 1.11, 12.
Christ comes quickly to remove his Candlestick from the abusers of it, Rev.
2.5. The Word is a rich mercy in it self, but nothing makes it effectually and
in the event a mercy unto us but our walking in it.

16.
2. We learn from hence: That we never make the Scriptures our Rule to live and
walk according unto them, till we be first justified, and made righteous: Our
obedience to the Rule of the Law written in the Scriptures, proceeds from
those suitable impressions of holiness wrought in the soul by the Spirit of
Regeneration, which is called the writing of the Law in our hearts, Ier. 31.33.
2 Cor. 3.3. or the casting of the soul into the mould of the Word, as the
phrase of the Apostle seems to import, Romans 6.7. we are never fit to receive
Gods Truth in the love and obedience of it till we repent and be renewed. If
God (says the Apostle) will give repentance for the acknowledging of the
truth, 2 Timothy 25. The wise in heart, that is, those that are truly godly, (for
none but such are the Scriptures wise men) these will receive Commandments,
but a prating fool will fall, Prove. 10.8. where by prating I understand
cavilling, contradicting, taking exceptions, making objections against the
Commandment, and so falling and stumbling at it, according to that of the
Apostle, Iam. 1.19, 20, 21. Let every man be swift to hear, that is, ready to
learn the will of God, and to receive the Commandment; but slow to speak, slow
to wrath, that is, careful that he suffer no pride and passion to rise up and
speak against the things which are taught, according as Job says, Teach me,
and I will hold my peace, Job 6.24. for the only reason why men fret and swell,
and speak against the truth of God, is this, because they will not work
righteousness: The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God;
therefore men are contentious, because they love not to obey the truth, Romans
2.8. disobedience is the mother of gainsaying, Romans 10.21. when we once resolve
to lay apart all filthiness, then we will receive the Word with meekness,
and not before; none hear Gods Words, but they who are of God, Ioh. 8.47. none
hear the voice of Christ, but the sheep of Christ, Ioh. 10.4, 5. Christ
preached is the power of God, and the wisdom of God; but it is only to them
that are called; to others a stumbling block, and foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.24. We
speak wisdom, says the Apostle, but it is amongst them that are perfect, 1
Cor. 2.6. He that is subject unto one Prince, does not greatly care to study
the Laws of another; or if he do, it is in order to curiosity and not unto
duty. So long as men resolve of Christ, we will not have this man to reign over
us, so long either they study not his Word at all, or it is in order to some
carnal and corrupt ends, and not either to obedience or salvation.

Hereby we may try our spiritual estate, whether we be just men or no; if we
make Gods Word our Way, our Rule, our Delight, laying it up in our hearts, and
laboring to be rich in it, that we may walk with more exactness. It was an
ill sign of love to Christ the Master of the Feast, when men chose rather to
tend their cattle and grounds, then to wait on him, Luke 14.18. An ill sign
of valuing his doctrine, when the loss of their Swine made the Gardarens weary
of his company, Luke 8.37. There was much work to do in the house, when Mary
neglected it all, and sat at his feet to hear his Doctrine, and yet was
commended by him for it: He was better pleased to see her hunger after the
Feast that he brought, then solicitous to provide a Feast for him: more
delighted in her love to his Doctrine, then her Sisters care for his
entertainment, Luke 10.41, 42. This is one of the surest Characters of a Godly
man, that he makes the Word in all things his Rule and Counselor, laboring
continually to get more acquaintance with God, and his holy Will thereby, Prove.
10.14. Col. 3.16. John 15.7. It is H^s Way; and every man endeavors to be
skillful in the way which he is to travel. It is his Tool and instrument;
every Workman must have that in a readiness, to measure, and carry on all the
parts of his work: It is his Wisdom Turpe est patricio, and nobili, and
causas oranii, jus in quo versare^ur ignorare. Pompon. P. de o^igine Ju^is leg.
2. 43. Itaque in medicum imperite secantem competit Actio. l. 7. P. ad Leg.
Aquil. 8 quia Imperitia culpae adnumeratur. Instir. lib. 4. de Leg. Aquil.. 7.
and l. 132. P. de Regulis Juris.
; every one would be esteemed a wise man in that which is his proper function
and profession: It is the mystery and Trade unto which he is bound; and every
man would have the reputation of skill in his own Trade: It is his Charter,
the grant of all the Privileges and Immunities which belong unto him; and
every Citizen would willingly know the Privileges which he has a right in. It
is the Testament and Will of Christ, wherein are given unto us exceeding great
and precious Promises; and what Heir or child would be ignorant of the last
Will of his Father? Lastly, it is the Law of Christ's Kingdom, and it Iuris
ignorantia cuique noces. l. 9. P. de Juris and facti ^gnor. Arist. Ethic. lib.
3. cap. 7. Greg. Tholos. syntag. Jur. l. 30. c. 10.
concerns every Subject to know the Duties, the Rewards, the Punishments that
belong unto him in that relation.

Fifthly, in that he says, That the Transgressors shall fall therein, Sect.
17.
we learn, That the Holy and right ways of the Lord in the ministry of his
word set forth unto us, are unto wicked men turned into matter of falling; and
that two manner of ways. 1. By way of Scandal they are offended at it: And 2.
by way of Ruin, they are destroyed by it.

1. By way of Scandal, they are offended at it. So it is prophesied of Christ;
that as he should be for a Sanctuary unto his people; so to others who would
not trust in him, but betake themselves to their own counsels, he should be
for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offense, for a ginne and for a
snare, Esaias 8.14. for the fall and the rising again of many in Israel, and for
a signs to be spoken against, Luke 2.34, 35. So he says of himself, for
Judgment am I come into this world, that they which see not, might see; and
that they which see might be made blind, Ioh. 9.39. And Bonae res neminem
scandalizant nisi malam men^em. Tertul. de veland. virg. cap. 3.
this offense which wicked men take take at Christ; is from the purity and
holiness of his word, which they cannot submit unto; A stone of stumbling he
is, and a rock of offense, to them which stumble at the word, being
disobedient, 1 Pet. 2.8. 2 Cor. 2 14, 15. Thus Christ preached was a Sanctuary
to Sergius Paulus the Deputy, and a stumbling block to Elymas the Sorcerer: a
Sanctuary to Dionysius and Damaris, and a stumbling block to the wits and
Philosophers of Athens: A Sanctuary to the Gentiles that begged the preaching of
the Gospel, and a stumbling block to the Jews that contradicted and blasphemed,
Act. 13.42, 45. the former primarily and per se; for salvation was the purpose
of his coming, there was sin enough to condemn the world before: I came
not, says he, to judge the world, but to save the world, (Joh. 12.47.) The
other Vid. Irenaeum lib. 5. cap. 27.
occasionally, not by any intrinsecall evil quality in the word, which is
holy, just, good, and deals with all meekness and beseechings, even toward
obstinate sinners (...). Athanas. de synod. Arim. and Seleuc.
; but by reason of the pride and stubbornness of these men who dash against it:
as that wholesome meat which ministers strength to a sound man, does but feed
the disease of another that sits at the same table with him: the same light
which is a pleasure to a strong eye, is a pain to a weak one: the same sweet
smells that delight the brain, do afflict the matrix when it is distempered;
and none of this by the infusion of malignant qualities, but only by an
occasional working upon and exciting of those which were there before.

And there are many things in the word of God, at which the corrupt hearts of
wicked men are apt to stumble and be offended: As first the (...). Justin.
Exposit. fidei*
profoundnesse and depth of it, as containing great mysteries above the
discovery or search of created Reason. Such is the pride and wantonness of
sinful wit, that it knows not how to believe what it cannot comprehend, and
must have all Doctrines tried at her bar, and measured by her balance; as if
a man should attempt to weigh out the earth in a pair of scales, or to empty
the waters of the Sea with a bucket. As soon as Paul mentioned the
Resurrection, presently the Athenian Wits mocked his Doctrine, Sect. 18.
Act. 17.32. and it was a great stumbling block to Nicodemus to hear that a
man must be borne again, Joh. 3.4. Sarah has much ado to believe beyond
reason, Genesis 18.12. and Muses himself was a little staggerd by this
temptation, Numb. 11.22, 21. A very hard thing it is for busy and inquisitive
Reason to rest in an (...) in the depth of the wisdom and counsel of God,
and to adore the unsearchablenesse of his Judgments, (...). Plutarch de sera
numinis vindict^. Non omnium quae a majoribus constituta sunt Ratio reddi
potest, and ideo Rations corumque constitu^ntur, inquiri non op^rcet. P. lib.
1. T. 4. Leg. 20, 21.
though even Humane Laws tell us that Reason of Law is not always to be
inquired into. Vid. Hooker. lib. 5.3.

Matter omnium Hareticorum superbia. Aug. de Genesis contr. Manichaeo^. lib. 2 cap.
8.


The first great Heresies against the highest mysteries of Christian Religion,
the Trinity, the two natures of Christ, the Hypostaticall union, the deity of
the Holy spirit, had their first rise among the Graecians, who were then the
masters of wit and Learning, and esteemed the rest of the world Barbarous; and
the old exception which they were wont to take at the Doctrine of Christianity
was the foolishness of it, as the Apostle notes, 1 Cor. 1.23.

Secondly, Sect. 19.
the sanctity and strictness of it, as it is contrary to the carnal wills and
affections of men: for as corruption does deifie Reason in the way of wisdom,
not willingly allowing any mysteries above the scrutiny and comprehension of
it; so does it deifie will in a way of Liberty and power, and does not love to
have any authority set over that which may pinch or restrain it. As Joshua
said to Israel, ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, Josh. 24.19.
we may say of the Law, we cannot submit to the Law because it is an Holy Law;
the carnal mind is not, cannot be, subject to the Law of God, Romans 8.17. Heat
and Cold will ever be offensive unto one another, and such are flesh and
spirit, Gal. 5.17. Therefore ordinarily the arguments against the ways of God,
have been drawn from politic or carnal interests. Jeroboam will not
worship at Jerusalem, for fear least Israel revolt to the house of David, 1
Kings 12.27. Amos must not prophecy against the Idolatry of Israel, for the
Land is not able to bear all his words, Amos 7.10. The Jews conclude Christ
must not be let alone, lest the Romans come and take away their place and
Nation, Romans 11.48. Demetrius and the Craftsmen will by no means have Diana
spoken against, because by making shrines for her they got their wealth, Act.
19.24, 25. See Perkin^ his works, ^om. 1. page 356.362. Bol tons discourse of
true happiness. Sandersons sermon. on 1 Kin. 21.29. Dan. Dikes deceit of the
heart cap. 6, 7, 8. Downham of Christian warfare, part. 4. li. 1. cap. 13.. 3.
and lib. 2.11.
Corruption will close with Religion a great way, and hear gladly, and do
many things willingly, and part with much to escape damnation; but there is a
particular point of rigor and strictness in every unregenerate man's case,
which when it is set on close upon him, causes him to stumble, and to be
offended, and to break the treaty. The Hypocrites in the Prophet will give
rams, and rivers of oil, and the first borne of their body for the sin of
their soul: but to do justly, to love mercy, to walk humbly with God, to do
away the treasures of wickedness, the scant measure, the bag of deceitful
weights, violence, lies, circumvention, the statutes of Omri, or the Counsels
of the house of Ahab; durus sermo, this is intolerable: they will rather
venture smiting and desolation then be held to so severe terms, Mich. 6.6,
16. The young man will come to Christ, yea run to him, and kneel, and desire
instruction touching the way to eternal life, and walk with much care in
observation of the Commandments; but if he must part with all, and in stead of
great possessions, take up a Cross and follow Christ, Vid. Basil. H^mil. in
ditescentes, s^atim ab initio.
and fare as he fared, durus sermo, this is indeed a hard saying; he that came
running, went away grieving and displeased, and upon this one point does he
and Christ part, Mark. 10.17.22. Herod will hear John gladly, and do many
things, and observe and reverence him as a just and holy man; but in the case
of Herodias he must be excused; upon this issue does he and Salvation shake
hands, Mark. 6.20, 27. This is the difference between Hypocritical and
sincere conversion; that goes far, and parts with much, and proceeds to
almost; but when it comes to the very turning point, and ultimate act of
Regeneration, he then plays the part of an unwise son, and stays in the
place of the breaking forth of children, Hos. 13.13. as a foolish Merchant, who
in a rich bargain of a thousand pound breaks upon a difference of twenty
shillings: but the other is contented to part with all, to suffer the l^sse of
All, Fides famem non time^. Hier. Perquam durum est, sed i^al^x scripta est.

Vlpian P. Qui and a quibus mamunissi Liberi non s^unt. l. 12.. 1.


to carry on the Treaty to a full and final conclusion, to have All the Armor
of the strong man taken from him, that Christ may divide the spoils, Luke
11.22. Psalm. 119.128. to do the hardest duties if they be commanded, Genesis
22.3.

Thirdly, the searching, convincing, and penetrating quality which is in the
Word, is a great matter of offense unto wicked men, Sect. 20.
when it cuts them to the heart, as Stephens Sermon did his hearers, Act. 7.54.
Light is of a discovering and manifesting property, Ephesians. 5.13. and for that
reason, is hated by every one that does evil, John 3.20. for though the
pleasure of sin unto a wicked man be sweet, yet there is bitterness in the
root and bottom of it; he who loves to enjoy the pleasure, cannot endure to
hear of the guilt. Now the work of the Word is to take men in their own
heart, Ezekiel. 14.5. to make manifest to a man the secrets of his own heart, 1
Cor. 14.25. to pierce like arrows the hearts of Gods enemies, Psalm. 45.5. to
divide asunder the soul and spirits, the joints and marrow, and to be a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Hebrews 4.12. Esaias 49.2.
This Act of discovery cannot but exceedingly gaul the spirits of wicked men; it
is like the voice of God unto Adam in Paradise, Adam, where art thou? or like
the voice of Ahijah to the wife of Jeroboam, 1 King. 14.6. I am sent unto thee
with heavy tidings.

Fourthly, the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel is likewise matter of
offense to these men, 2 Cor. 10.10. and that partly upon the preceding reason;
for the more plain the Word is, the more immediate access it has unto the
conscience, and operation upon it. So much as is merely humane elegancy,
finenesse of wit, and delicacy of expression, does oftentimes stop at fancy,
and take that up, as the body of Asahel caused the passers by to stand still
and gaze, 2 Samuel 2.23. And wickked men can be contented to admit the Word any
whither, so they can keep it out of their conscience, which is the only proper
subject of it, 2 Cor. 4.2. When I hear men magnify quaint and polite
discourses in the ministry of the word, and speak against Sermons that are
plain and wholesome, I look upon it not so much as an Act of pride (though the
wisdom of the flesh is very apt to scorn the simplicity of the Gospel) but
indeed as an act of fear and cowardice; because where all other external
trimmings and dresses are wanting to tickle the fancy, there the Word has the
more downright and sad operation upon the conscience, and must consequently the
more startle and terrify.

Fifthly, the great difficulty and indeed impossibility of obeying it in the
strictness and rigor of it, is another ground of scandal, that God in his
Word should command men to do that which indeed cannot be done; this was
matter of astonishment to the Disciples themselves, when our Savior told them
that it was easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a
Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God, Mark. 10.25. Censores divinitatis
dicentes sic non debuit Deus, and sic magis debuit -- consultio res sibimet
videntur Deo, Tertul. in Marcion, lib. 2. cap. 2.
This was the cavil of the disputant in the Apostle against the counsels of
God, Why does he yet find fault? if he harden whom he will, why does he
complain of our hardness, which it is impossible for us to prevent, because
none can resist his will? Romans 9.1. Now to this scandal we answer; first, That
the Law of God was Non suit Impossible quando praeceptum est, sed stulti^ia
peccantis Impossible sibi s^cit. Gul. Paris. de vitiis and pecca^* cap. 10.
Neque ^^im suo vit^o non implebatur Lex, sed vitio prudentiae carnis, Aug. de
^pir. and lit. cap. 19.
not originally, nor is it intrinsecally or in the nature of the thing
impossible, but accidentally and by reason of natural corruption which is
enmity against it; a burden may be very portable in it self, which he who is
a creeple is not able to bear; the defect is not in the Law, but in us, Romans
8.3. Secondly, that of this Nec latuit praeceptorem praecepti pondus hominum
excedere vires: Sed judicavit utile ex hoc ipso suae illos Insufficientiae
admoneri -- Ergo mandando Impossibilia non praevarica^ores homines fecit sed
humiles, ut omne os obstruatur, and subditus fiat om^is mundus Deo, quia ex
operibus leg^ non justifi^abitur emnis caro coram illo: accipientes quippe
mandatum, and sentientes defectum, clamabimus in Caelu^ and mis^rebitur nostri
Deus, Bernard. Ser. 50. in Cantic.
Impossibility there may be made a most excellent use, that being convinced of
impotency in our selves, we may have recourse to the perfect obedience and
righteousness of Christ, to pardon all our violations of it, Gal. 3.21, 24.
Thirdly, being regenerated and endued with the spirit of Christ, the Law
becomes Lex data, ut gratia quaereretur, gratia data ut Lex impleretur, Aug. de
sp. and lit. c. 19. Omnia fiant Charitati facilia, De not. and great. cap. 69.
de great. Christ. cap. 9. de great. and lib. arb. cap. 15.
Evangelically possible unto us again, yea, not only possibly, but sweet and
easy, Romans 7.22. 1 Ioh. 5.2. Ma. 11.30. Though impossible to the purpose of
Justification and legal Covenant, which requires perfection of obedience
under pain of the Curse, Gal. 3.10. in which sense it is a yoke which cannot
be born, Act. 15.10. A Commandment which cannot be endured, Heb. 12.20. yet
possible to the purpose of acceptance of our services done in the obedience of
it, The spiritual part of them being presented by the intercession, and the
carnal defects covered by the righteousness of Christ, in whom the father is
always well pleased. Fourthly, if any wicked man presume to harden himself in
the practice of sins, under this pretense that it is impossible for him to
avoid them, because God hardneth whom he will, Though the Apostolical
increpation be Answer sufficient, Who art thou that replyest against God? yet
he must further know, that he is not only hardened judicially by the sentence
of God, but most Cor lapideum non significat nisi durissimam voluntatem and
adversus Deum inflexibil^m, Aug. de great. and lib. ^rb. c. 14.
willingly also by his own stubborn love of sin, and giving himself over
unto greediness in sinning, and thereby does actively bring upon himself
those indispositions unto duty, so that the Law being impossible to be
performed by him is indeed no other then he would himself have it to be, as
bearing an active enmity and antipathy unto it.

22.
Sixthly, The mercy and Free Grace of God in the promises, is unto wicked men an
occasion of stumbling while they turn it into lasciviousness, and continue in
sin that grace may abound, Romans 6.1. Iud. ver. 4. and venture to make work
for the blood of Christ, not being led by the goodness of God unto repentance,
but hardening themselves in impenitency because God is good, Romans 2.4. There is
not any thing at which wicked men do more ordinarily stumble then at mercy, as
gluttons surfeit most upon the greatest dainties, venturing upon this ground to
go on in sin, because they cannot out-sinne mercy; and to put off repentance
from day to day, because they are still under the offers of mercy; making mercy
not a sanctuary unto which to fly from sin, but a sanctuary to protect and
countenance sin; and so by profane and desperate presumption turning the very
mercy of God into a Fructum ex eo quis consequi non debet quod impugnat.
Gotoftid.

Nemo sit Liber in fraudem sisci. Marcian. P. Qui and a quibus manumiss^, l. 11.


judgment, and savor of death unto themselves, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Number. 15.30.
pretending liberty from sin that they may continue in it, and abuse God by
his own gifts.

Lastly, the threatenings of God set forth in his Word, and executed in his
judgments upon wicked men, are great occasions of stumbling unto them, when
they are not thereby with Manasses humbled under Gods mighty hand, but with
Pharaoh hardened the more in their stubbornness against him. There is such
desperate wickedness in the hearts of some men that they can even sit down and
rest in the resolutions of perishing, resolving to enjoy the pleasures of sin
while they may, To morrow we shall dye, Vide quae de Sardanapalo, Nino,
Bacchida, Xanthia, aliis, congessit Athenaeus, lib 8. cap 3. and. lib. 12. c. 7.
therefore in the mean time let us eat and drink, 1 Cor. 5.32. This evil is
of the Lord, why should we wait for the Lord any longer? 2 Kings 6.33. There
are three men in the Scripture that have a special brand or mark of ignominy
set upon them, Cain, Dathan, and Ahaz. The Lord set a mark upon Cain; Genesis
4.15. This is that Dathan, and this is that Ahaz, Number. 26.9. 2. Chron. 28.22.
and if we examine the reasons, we shall find that the sin of stubbornness
had a special hand in it. Contumacia cumulat poenam, l. 4. P. de paenis.
Cains Offering was not accepted; upon this he grew wroth and sullen, and
stubborn against Gods gentle warning, and slew his brother. Dathan and his
Companions sent for by Moses, return a proud and stubborn answer, we will not
come up, we will not come up. Ahaz greatly distressed by the King of Syria, by
the Edomites, by the Philistimes, by the Assyrian, and in the midst of all this
distress stubborn still and trespassing more against the Lord. It is one of
the saddest symptoms in the World for a man or a Nation not to be humbled
under the correcting hand of God, but like an anvile to grow harder under
blows; and a most sure argument that God will not give over, but go on to
multiply his judgments still, for he will overcome when he judges, and
therefore will judge till he overcome. In Musical Notes there are but eight
degrees, and then the same returns again; and Philosophers when they
distinguish degrees in qualities, do usually make the eighth degree to be the
highest: but in the wrath of God against those who impenitently and stubbornly
stand out against his judgments, we shall find no fewer then eight and
twenty degrees threatened by God himself, I will punish seven times more, and
yet seven times more, and again, seven time more, and once more, seven times
more for your sins, Levit. 26.18, 21, 24, 28. thus wicked men do not only
stumble at the Word by way of scandal, but also --

2. By way of Ruin, 23.
because they are sure in the conclusion to be destroyed by it; for the rock
stands still, the ship only is broken that dasheth against it. Gods Word is and
will be too hard for the pride of men, the more they resist it, the mightier
will it appear in their condemnation. The weak corn which yields to the wind,
(...). vt Plut. Sympos. lib. 4. qu 2.
is not harmed by it; but the proud Oak which resists it, is many times broken
in pieces. The soul which submits to the Word, is saved by it; the soul which
rebels against it, is sure to perish. Therefore since the Word comes not to any
man in vain, but returns glory to God either in his conversion or in his
hardening: It greatly concerns every man to come unto it, with meek, penitent,
docile, tractable, believing, obedient resolutions, and to consider how vain
and desperate a thing it is for a Potsherd to strive with a rod of Iron; for
the pride and wrath of man to give a challenge to the justice and power of God;
for briars and thorns to set themselves in battle against fire. As our God is
a consuming fire himself, so his law is a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. and his word
in the mouths of his Ministers a fire, Ier. 5.14.23.29. If we be gold, it will
purge us; if thorns, it will devour and feed upon us. This is the condemnation
(says our Savior,) That light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather then light, Job. 3.19. There was damnation in the world before while it
lay in darkness and in mischief, and knew not whither it went: but not so
heavy damnation as that which grows out of light. When Physic, which should
remove the disease, does cooperate with it, then death comes with the more
pain and the more speed. The stronger the conviction of sin is, the deeper
will be the wrath against it, if it be not by repentance avoided. No surfeit
more dangerous then that of bread, no judgment more terrible then that which
grows out of mercy known and despised; The word which I have spoken (says
Christ) the same shall judge you at the last day, Ioh. 12.48. Every principle
of truth which is by the Word begotten in the hearts of disobedient sinners,
and is held down, and suppressed by unrighteousness, lies there like fire
raked up under ashes, which at that great day will kindle into an unquenchable
flame. The word can bring much of Hell upon the spirit of impenitent sinners
here: It can hew, and cut, and pierce, and burn, and torment, and root out, and
pull down, and destroy, and strike with trembling and amazement the proudest
and securest sinners, Hos. 6.5. Act. 7.54. Heb. 4.12. Esaias 49.2. Psalm. 45.5.
Revel. 11.5, 10. Ier. 1.10. 2 Cor. 10.4. Act. 24.25. we need no messenger from
the dead to tell us of the torments there: All the Rhetorique in Hell cannot
set forth Hell more to the life then Moses and the Prophets have done already,
Luke 16.31. But O what a Hell will it be at last, when the Word which warned us
of it, shall throw us into it! when every offer of mercy which we have
refused, and every threatening of wrath which we have despised, shall accompany
us unto the tribunal of Christ, to testify against us; and into the fire of
Hell, to upbraid us with our own perdition! O the doleful condition of
impenitent sinners! If they have not the Word, they perish for the want: and if
they have it, they perish doubly for the contempt of it. O that men would
conside^ the terror of the Lord, and be persuaded! and that they would learn
so much wisdom as not to arm the very mercy of God against themselves. A
bridge is made to give us a safe passage over a dangerous river; but he who
stumbles on the bridge, is in danger to fall into the river. The Word is given
as a means to carry us over Hell unto Heaven; but he who stumbles and quarrels
at this means, shall fall in thither, from whence otherwise he had been
delivered by it.

FINIS.

