Master Rigb'ys SPEECH IN Answer to the Lord FINCH, of that he delivered before
the House of Commons, in behalf of himself.

With a CONSPIRACY DISCOVERED: OR, The Report of a COMMITTEE to the House of
Commons in Parliament, of the Examination of diverse of the Conspiratars, and
others in the late Treason, June the 17th. 1641.

1. Concerning the Tower.

2. Wherein the French are concerned in this Conspiracy.

3. Of provoking the Army against the Parliament by false Reports.

Printed in the year, 1641.

Master RIGBIES answer TO THE LORD KEEPERS SPEECH, in the House of COMMONS,
1640.
Mr Speaker.
MY Judgment prompts me to sit still, and to be silent, yet the duty I owe to
my King, my Country, and my Conscience, moves me to stand up and speak. Master
Speaker, had not this Siren had so sweet a tongue, surely he could never have
effected so much mischief to this Kingdom: you know Sir, optimorum putrefactio
pessima, the best things putrified, become the worst; and as it is so in the
natural, so it is in the body politic; and what is to be done then, Mr Spea.
we all know, Ense recidendum est, the Sword (Justice) must strike, ne pars
sincera trahatur: M. Speaker, it is not the voice, non vox, sed votum, not the
tongue, but the heart and actions, that are to be inspected, for does not our
Savior Christ say it? Show me thy faith by thy works, O man: Now Master
Speaker, has not this Kingdom seen, (seen say I) nay felt, and smarted under
the cruelty of this man's injustice? so malicious, as to record it in every
Court of Westminst, as if he had not been contented too with the inflam^^^ of
us all, unless he entail it to all posterity, Why shall I believe words now?
Cum factum videam: Shall we be so weak men, that when we have been injured and
abused, will be gained again with fair words and complements? Or like little
children, that when we have been beaten and whipped, be pleased again with sweet
meats? O^^o, there be some Birds that in the Summer of a Parliament, will sing
sweetly, who in the Winter of Persecution, will, for their prey, ravenously fly
at all, upon our goods, nay seize upon our persons, and has it not been by
this man, so by some in this Assembly.

Master Speaker, it has been objected unto us, that in Judgment we should
think of mercy, and be you merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful; Now
God grant that we may be so, and that our hearts and judgments may be rightly
rectified, to know truly what is mercy, I say, to know what is mercy, for there
is the point, Master Speaker: I have heard of foolish pity, foolish pity, do
we not all know the effects of it? and I have met with this Epithet to mercy,
crudelis misericordia, and in some kind I think there may be a cruel mercy; I
am sure that the Spirit of God says, be ye not pitiful in Judgment; nay, it
says, be not pitiful of the poor in Judgment: if not of the poor, then a
fortiori, not of the rich, there is the Emphasis, we see, by the set and solemn
appointments of our Courts of Justice, what provision the wisdom of our
Ancestors has made for the preservation, honor, and esteem of Justice;
witness those frequent Terms, Sessions, and Assizes, and in what pomp and
state the Judges in the circuits by the Sheriffs, knights, and Justices, and
all the Country are attended often times for the hanging of a poor thief, for the
stealing of a hogg or a sheep, nay in some cases, for the stealing of a penny,
and justly or in terrorem and now shall not some of them be hanged, that have
robbed us of all our propriety, and sh ered at once all our sheep, and all we
have away, and would have made us all indeed a poor Beliasarius to have begged
for a halfe-penny, when they would not have left us one penny as we could have
called our own.

Let us therefore, M. Speaker, not be so pitiful, as that we become remiss,
not so pitiful in judgment as to have no judgment, but set the deplorable
estate of Great Britiaine now before us, and consider how our most gracious
Sovereign has been abused, and both his Majesty and all his subjects ini^red
by these wicked instruments, for which my humble motion is, that to these
particulars we become not so merciful, as to the general (the whole Kingdom)
we may grow merciless.

Fiat Iustitia.
FINIS.
A CONSPIRACY DISCOVERED: OR, The Report of the Coramittee to the House of
COMMONS in PARLIAMENT, of the Examination of diverse of the Conspiraters and
others in the late Treason, June the 17th, 1641.
Mr. FYNES made Report to the House of COMMONS of three Heads.

1. Concerning the Tower.

2. Wherein the French are concerned in the conspiracy.

3. Of provoking the Army against the Parliament by false Reports.

Captain Billingsleyes Examination was reported by Mr. Hambden, who says, he
had no hand in the Conspiracy, only that Sir John Suckling invited him to the
employment in the Army.

Also, one Nuts Examination reported, who deposed that the Earl of Straffords
escape was practiced.

Then the Lieutenant of the Towers Examination was reported, who says clearly,
that the Earl of Strafford endeavored an escape, promising 20000 l. to marry
his Son to his Daughter, and to have made her one of the greatest Marriages in
the Kingdom.

Concerning the Army, Lieutenant Colonel Ballads' Examination was reported by
Sir Philip Stapleton, which shows, that Captain Chidley had brought downto the
Army many instructions.

And that Colonel Goring should be Lieutenant General of the Army, and the
Prince, and the Lord of Newcastle to meet them in Nottingamshire, with one
thousand Horse.

All which propositions came from Master Henry Iermin, and were dispersed by
Sergeant Major Wallis and Captain Chidley.

Sergeant Major Wallis upon his Examination, says, that the French would
assist them, and the Clergy would at their own charge, send 1000 horse.

Colonel Goring upon his Examination, says, he was tied up by an Oath of
secrecy, and therefore durst not answer to all the Interrogatories, which Oath
he says was given him by Mr. Piercy in his Chamber at White Hall, in presence
of Mr. Wilmos, Colonel Ashburnham, Captain Pollard, and others, who said,
they had all of them taken this Oath, and that he was the last of the company
that was to take it.

Mistress Plumwell, says that a French man, a ^^^ver to the Queen, brought
Arms to her house, and desired her to keep them, for that the house of Commons
had made an order, that no Papists should have Arms in their custody, and then
fetched them back again, about the time the Earl of Straffords escape was
practiced.

There was also a report of a Letter from Mr. Iermin to Mr. Mountague, which
was intercepted, wherein he writ, that he hoped that the horse Leeches would be
starved for want of food.

Also, of another Letter from Mr. Mountague to Master Iermin, which showed,
they expected the Lord of Strafford shortly with them.

Also, Mr. Bland upon his Examination, says, that Mr. Iermin much endevaoured
to get Portsmouth into his hands.

And that there was two Letters from one Roberts a Priest to the Bishop of
Chalcedon, in recommendation of two English Priests.

FINIS.

