Loyalty Recommended:

IN A SERMON Preached before the Worshipful Society OF MERCHANTS ADVENTURERS.

AT St. Stephen's Church in BRISTOL, November, 10th. 1683.

BY JOHN RAINSTORP, M. A. And of the City Free School.

LONDON: Printed by J. Wallis, for Joanna Brom, at the Gun in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.

TO THE Master; Wardens; Assistants; and the Commonalty of the Worshipful
Society of Merchants Adventurers in Bristol.
Gentlemen,
IT IS notoriously storyed of Demosthenes, That being to make an Oration before
King Philip, he stumbled in the very threshold*

Not that I put you in the Scale with the King; or my self with the Orator: but
that which so much disheartened him, animates me, (viz.) Your Greatness. As on
the one hand I have not run out of the Pulpit into the Sea, pretending
Directions, (or any thing like them) toward Navigation; but only that which is
always necessary, true stanch Loyalty, and that which holds (at least
analogically) among all creatures.

So on the other I heartily desire your favorable Patronage to this honest
design, of spreading Loyalty as far as the Name of Piety may reach.

I must Confess self-interest prompts this desire; for thus I shall be secure
from the value of those Censures, which (like a fog) may arise from the lower
and ever prejudicial sort of People: but this, I hope, may be as voluntary in
You, such eminent instances of Loyalty, as advantageous to me, who pressed the
Necessity of a Plus Ultra.

I avoid Tediousness, being in few words*

Honored Gentlemen, Your Faithful Obedient Servant, John Rainstorp.

A SERMON On
2 SAMUEL XV. 21. And Ittai answered the King, and said, As the Lord lives, and
as my Lord the King lives, surely in what place my Lord the King shall be,
whether in death, or life, even there also will thy Servant be.


WHat News is this so strongly rumored? What Tidings has reached our Ears from
Jerusalem?

Absolon would fain be King.

But may not this be unworthily put upon him by men of envious and malevolent
Spirits? May not this be a politic way for these to insinuate into David's
favor, by raising clouds of jealousies, where there is no occasion of fear?
May not this in probability raise them much higher, if they can have but
Absolon's Neck for their Footstool?

No: you will imagine him to be a person of honor, and therefore to be
credited in his expressions, Oh that I were made Judge in the Land? Verse. 4


And what should hinder? was he not a man of beauty, and without blemish? so we
are told. 2 Samuel xiv. 25.
Was he not a man of universally just inclination? so he himself tells us in
this Chapter. Was he Verse. 4.
not a man of mavelous courtesy to impart kisses to the very scum of his
adorers? Crafty salutes, and popular pretenses of justice!

But let our thoughts be kind beyond his merits, and suppose him a man without
exceptions: it is great for any one, but what claim or title to the Crown? David
was still living: were he once fallen, the way to the Throne might be clear,
and the Trumpet might proclaim Absoloms Triumphant introduction to Monarchy.

But the Kings Life puts a very great obstruction in the way, and hinders the
young man from mounting the region of his itching Ambition.

Some course therefore must be thought of to remove these unpleasant rubbs.
This as usually, was endeavored by calumniating the Government, there is no
man deputed of the King to hear thee. He is grown careless in the methods Verse.
3.
of Juistce, and taken off from these things of noble concernments by things of
much inferior moment. Josephus adds that he told the people (...). (i. e.) That
his Father had evil Councillors.

But if I were King, my mouth should be ready to pronounce, as soon as yours
could demand Justice.

So base and fawning are the spirits of those that would raise themselves on
the stumps of Popularity.

And by this means he stole the hearts of the men of Israel: (Men of
simplicity) says the holy Ghost. Verse. 11.


That which pleases the Eye, or Ear draws the Rabble: and smooth speech is
more regarded then wholesome Laws.

And now commenceth sorrow and confusion. David thinks himself no longer safe
in Jerusalem (for fear will not suffer any to be secure) he commands his
Guards, and retinue to make ready, and so takes his farewell of the City. But
finding a stranger, his goodness was willing to dismiss him, and free him from
the ill consequence of Rebellion, to which himself is exposed, Return and take
back thy Brethren, mercy and truth be with thee. And Ittai Answered the King,
etc.

Before I come to the substance of the words, I am willing to take notice of
the Author of them, Ittai a stranger: A very eminent one.

The great design of strangers, is to view the pleasantness of another Land,
the temper and manners of the people, the Laws and Government of a country;
and after the diversion of a different climate, to return back to their own
native air and soil.

Or to dispatch some business of great weight, which without traveling might
admit of neglect or controversy: and those grand importances by this means are
often settled, which by reason of remoteness of place, and distance of persons
have lain confused.

Or else to spy the condition of a country what Posture it is in. What places
are least fortified, and lie most open to the enemy; what heart the country is
in for provisions, and how the wills of the inhabitants are inclined to Peace
or War. This we find surmised by Joseph to his Brethren. Ye are spies and to
see the nakedness Genesis xlii. 9.
of the Land ye are come. And to what purpose else is Absalom recorded, to have
sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel? Verse. 1^.


But for strangers to move out of their own sphere, and concern themselves with
state affairs, things which belong unto the King is very rare: accounting it
needless for them to interest themselves, as doubtful of success; or
unprofitable supposing it, but certainly dangerous, if a disaffected faction
should prevail.

But our great Hero stumbles at none of these difficulties; he consults not
the security of his own Person. He is so far from counting David's Retinue
unnecessary, that he forces himself as a voluntary supply. He alleges not
the hazard of losing his estate, but boldly vindicateth the necessity of
supporting the King's.

He tells not this or that Peer, or this or that City, that he will stand by
them with his Life and Fortune; but assures the King of his sturdy resolution,
though danger opens 'its mouth in the blackest and largest dimensions.

How worthy such a Daring and Loyal Champion against the degenerating Imps of
Rebellion, that the King should enrich him with great riches, and make his
Fathers house free in Israel?

And so I take leave of the person, and come to the substance of the words. As
the Lord lives, etc. From which words I lay before you these two Propositions.

First, That Kings may be in danger.

Secondly, It Is the duty of all Subjects to stand by them.

First, Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci Descendunt Reges, i.
e. that few Kings dye a natural Death, so says the Satyrist. It had been
Juvenal.
happy if that observation had not lived beyond the Age wherein 'twas
conceived, at least that it might have been confined to the practice of
Heathens; or that the damnable Doctrine of King-Killing had not been dispersed,
as well as the Jews themselves; but this is rather to be wished, than expected;
the Contagion is ran too far over Christendom, scorning to be shut up.

Men have villanously ran at the breasts and throats of Princes, and with no
less metal struck of Nobles, then that proud Roman did the heads of lofty
Poppyes.

This unhappy Kingdom has not had the least share of Experiance. 48 has been
late and dismal enough; but as if that had been a trifle, as bloody malice
has been since repeated, and drove on with greater fury: the Son must be split
by pretenses of Friendship: then let him prophecy who smote him. Then dogedly
condemned to necessity, or sell a birthright for fresh supplies: then suddenly
sent to Heaven without so much as the pretense of an High Court of Justice:
Such a thirst after more martyrs blood, as if what had been spilt already might
not worthily create more Fasts in the Church of England; then there are
Festivals in the Church of Rome.

The thing is too plain being matter of fact; let us inquire into the Reason,
why the persons of Kings should be so miserably exposed. Then the Methods which
evil men use to compass worse designs: as for the end of them, it is so obvious
and so manifest to all of our Eyes, that I shall pass it. The reasons are.

First, their Dignity and this raises Envy.

It had pleased God Almighty, for the harmony of the universe, to make several
orders and distinctions of men, as he has vouchsafed to some more eminent
parts and larger endowments, than to others: whence it comes to pass that some
are better qualified for the managing of peculiar provinces: the hand that is
expert at the spade is by no means fit to sway the Scepter. Nor the back which
is clad with the coursest weeds to be enwrapped with Princely Robes.

When Persians crowned their Slaves, 'twas but a mock solemnity to their
ensuing slaughter, and when such have got the crown by force, it has been as
far from the intention of nature, as the birth of monsters, which usually go
out of the world in as little esteem as they came in.

Not that God has by any means allotted an equality in the World, but
according to the model of Heaven (Where he is Sole Monarch) he has appointed a
subordinate Government upon Earth, and though inferior to his, he has commanded
that to be obeyed in the height, and made obedience a necessary part of men's
Religion.

This name (we know) the Rebel uses as a refuge (I will not call it a
Sanctuary) of all his underhand wiles and stratagems: Ask him what makes him
forsake the Church, he can tell you nothing but Religion: ask him what makes
him rail against, and murder Archbishops, and devote other Orders to a
wretched doom: it is the same Religion.

Ask him what makes him to take up Arms against his lawful King, and appoint
the Meeting fields as a seat of that War, which the Gospel has forbid: it is
the same Religion. In a word, ask him what makes him libel, encourage and
contrive a general desolation: it is the same Religion, never is Religion so
racked and tormented, as when General of the Rebels Army.

But this is only noise: that which sticks in their maws, is the dignity of
Superiors: God's dispensations seem too ragged for them, and therefore they
would file them off: they think themselves (let Heaven measure as it will) men
of as great knowledge and deserts, and as fit for badges of honor as others:
but if Providence be ignorant and partial, they will be wise and just to
themselves, and carve themselves out according to the value of their own
merits. And by this means comes Kings to lie obnoxious to the envy, and
sometimes the mercy of those Caytiffs that would strive to invade Heaven, were
it not out of their reach, and fly at his face by whom Kings Reign.

Secondly, Authority, and this raises stubbornness. This, Heaven has not only
stamped upon their dignity, but engraven it so deep that no tract of time is
able to wear it out. His Vicegerents he makes not only great but formidable,
not only to be gazed on, and admired for their glory, but to be revered and
dreaded for their power.

As the laws and badges of honor in other Kingdoms, were not for a mere show,
but the Terror of Malefactors, so among us they are no less significant.

This law binds every Subject to duty, and upon the failure the Ensigns of
Power are to appear, and compel the unwilling Sons of disobedinece.

But this is very distastful to embitter'd spirits; they are loath to truckle
under that Authority which God has erected, and fondly think that their many
headed monster, a Commonwealth, would be best, because most suitable to their
humors.

For the carrying on of this, what voices have been scrued up to the highest
note? what stratagems have been kept awake? How many Ambassadors from Hell have
taken their journey into this World, and compassed the Earth to and fro? What
horrid lies have filled the Air with a pestilential breath? How many doses of
perjury swallowed without nauseating a conscientious Stomach? how many volumes
of Paper wrackt into a promise of promoting Rebellion? How many draughts of
poison gluk'd in beyond the retrivement of an antidote? How many fireballs
hurled, never to be extinguished I suppose but by the blood of the engineer?
Thus it has pleased the Devil to dictate: thus it has pleased his own
Children to hearken. Our Saviors Question concerning the baptism of St. John
may here be well proposed: Is the Kings Authority from Heaven or by man? Does
God or the shout of the Rabble make a King? Does he act by the appointment of
God, or the suffrages of the scum of the people? That the Civil Authothority is
derived from the People, has been long since exploded by all good men; and
lately as a brat of Hell condemned to flames by the judgment of an University.

If the former be true, as is the Opinion of one Oxon.
that I am sure is no friend to the Church of England, in these words: The
Power of the Magistrate does Mar. Reh. Transp. 2 P.
most certainly issue from the Divine Authority, the obedience to that Power is
by Divine Command.

And in another place.

The dispute concerning the Magistrate's Power ought to be superfluous, for
that is certainly founded upon his Commission from God, and for the most part
sufficiently fortified with all human advantages.

If this be true; why do not men actively obey? especially where Religion is
not invaded? proved by more learned pens then mine. Pretenses of passive
obedience are sinful where active may be paid Salva conscientia. This is the
Judgment of one who was a great Prelate of our Church. Bp. Sanderson.


But yet instead of this they cant and swagger, they conspire and bluster, they
take counsel against the Lord and against his anointed, resolved to break their
bands in sunder and to cast away their cords from them.

Bands as necessary as the Ligatures of nature shall be counted useless, and
cords, though of a man, very unpleasant. Instead of this they Chequer the Law
with the blackest odiums. The Law, the true garrisons of the Kingdom, they
would demolish, by rendering its Execution unjustifiable and Heathenish, and all
that shall be concerned for its interest enemies to the people of the Lord.

By this means the Chuff Phanatick wrests himself into the affections of
unintelligent unthinking Fops. And heightens anti-Monarchical Principles: but
if this fails, then, as the King observes, in his Declaration, they resolved to
betake themselves to Arms, to overturn the Government they could not undermine.

Thirdly, their Clemency and this raises* Contempt.

That which should not only secure them, but make them objects of the most
endeared affections, is seconded with scorn, and that which proceeds from pure
love and tenderness interpreted to be the effect of fear, and cowardice. This
is founded upon the disingenuity of men's tempers, not any defect in the
Government, the Cordial is still excellent in its own nature, but the foulness
of the Stomach that receives it renders it distastful and nauseous.

I will indeed agree with the Philosopher in this, that Nullum Clementia ex
omnibus magis quam Regem Sen de Clem.
aut Principem decet, (i. e.) Clemency becomes none more than a King or Prince;
as much as liberality does a rich man. This is a very great Jewel in his Crown,
and while that is supported by virtue of his goodness, it shines illustriously:
but when men shall strike at a countenance because pleasant, and trample a
Prince for his condescension. I am of the mind of the same Author, that Omnibus
ignoscere crudelitas. (i. e.) It Is Cruelty to Pardon all.

There is a time indeed, and in some cases, when Clemency may be necessary (so
far I will be an Advocate for wicked men) when there are hopes that its ends
may be attained, and stubborn men won to fair Conformity, when as Seneca
observes, verecundiam peccandi facit ipsa clementia regentis: but when men upon
those gentle methods grow rampant and incorrigible, and drive on Rebellion with
the rankest forces of impudence, it is time to assume a severe countenance, and
give the Law the swinge of its power. And this is assented to by an Enemy both
to Kingly and Episcopal Government. If this gracious temper (says he) be Mar.
Rehear. Tran.
inconsistent with the nature and ends of Government, it behooves them (meaning
Princes) to beware, and by rougher methods to provide for their own and the
Peoples security.

Gentleness has then the same effect with Poison: it does swell men up to such
a Prodigious bulk, that they are not able to contain themselves from bitter
calumnies against the sweetest of all Governments.

You see how this works with loyal breasts: those that were good are made
better by it: those that would otherwise never have flinched or receded from
their duties, are however heightened by a Princes favor, and apprehend a
necessity of becoming more public, and exemplary in their Loyalty.

But the Schismatic soon forgets all kindnesses, Acts of Oblivion, or
Toleration will not oblige him; if the King will not grant him every thing,
'twere as good he had denied him every thing, and this was the Ruin of the
late King. He had granted too much, and because he would not be as endless in
concessions, as they in their audacious demands, they murdered him.

Vbi discrimen inter malos and bonos sublatum est, confusio sequitur, and
vitiorum eruptio. (i. e.) Where there is no distinction made between good and
bad, confusion follows, and the breaking out of all vices.

This in probability was the effect of Augustuss mildness: being inclinable to
pardon Sina, who designed to slay him while he was Sacrificing; after some
deliberations within himself, he is brought in thus observing, Ego sum
nobilibus adolescentulis expositum caput, in quod mucrones acuant (i. e.) I am
the man whom my young Nobles designed to murder. Such is the baseness of
Rebellious spirits which ought by the Kings mercy as by a load stone to be
drawn closer to his embraces, that they fly at his face, and upon the least
suggestion of a Traitor, they will rather hazard a halter in opposition to the
Government, then stir one inch for the preservation of their Sovereign.

Now the means which disaffected misecrants are used to work by, are reduceable
to two heads.

First, by infusing into easy men dislike against the present Government, and
so not only alienating the affections of men from it, but putting them into an
hostile posture against it.

To compass a civil War or what is worse a sudden and general massacre, England
may defy all Kingdoms in the world to come near it: To propagate those black
platforms, how fruitful has it been in lies, subornations, and infidel Juries;
nothing has been stuck at by our through paced Religionists, whose consciences
have been made stalking horses unto villainy, and their Souls Panders of rapine
and murder.

All Sectaryes, however different from each other, join unanimously in
vilifying the higher powers, and making them appear in what colors they are
pleased to bestow upon them.

And those are always the coursest: the King shall be represented not Great,
but Monstrous; an unweildly, unconcerned, tame Governor; but when they feel
the fangs of the Law, their note is changed; and then Arbitrary Power, and
Persecution are buzzed into the Ears of the people. And when the stream of
passion flows, they do not stop there: they load his Royal and undoubtedly
Lawful Successors with Popery, to make a Bill of Exclusion slip down the more
palatably, as if Inheritance were founded in Religion: they criminate his Privy
Council with weakness and perfidiousness: they arraign his Judges, and condemn
all higher or lower Stations that are undaunted in their Loyalty; but chiefly
those that are entrusted with the choicest share of Government.

Against these they swell and blow up their nostrils; they fasten upon them
either a hat from Rome, or a purse from France; And insinuate to those that
live only on present sense, that their All lies at stake, and that they are
dealt with as Slaves use to be sold into bondage.

Thus when the Grecian Shaftshury contrived to take off a Noble Peer, one much
honester (I think) then himself; he first made the people believe that he was
bribed to betray the Army to the Trojans.

When by these cob-web textures they have persuaded the credulous to believe,
that which they never did themselves, it may be very rational for those of an
ordinary capacity, to ask what may be done in this so sad and desperate a
calamity: and they will soon be answered, if they have any kindness for
themselves and Families, which is natural; if they have any regard to the
settlement of a better Government which is moral; if they have any love for
Godly ministry, which is Divine; if they will lend their helping hands, (i. e.)
Arm themselves for Rebellion, they doubt not of a through Reformation.

Secondly, Reformation, to set up such a puppet of Reformation as this, it was
clearly proved that one of the Regieides which was hanged, since the Kings
restoration, was sent from New England hither for the promoting of that bloody
Civil War, farther explained thus, That he was sent hence to Ireland, for the
driving on the design to extirpate Monarchy. The strongest poison cannot want a
leaf of Gold for a Cover, nor the grandest wickedness a florid pretense of
piety.

To seek God in Prayer, is a fine cue for the strikeing off the Head of his
Anointed. Joab's Kiss and his Sword were at no great distance from one another.

You see (says the Rebel) how men sweat and groan under the heavy weight of
state Pressures: for absenting themselves from their Parish Churches: there
were indeed strong endeavors used to free us from our yoke, and deliver us
from the cramping severity of a penal Act made by Queen Elizabeth; if we come
to Church we are pestered with Superstitions and Ceremonies. And there were
ways thought of to suppress them, but obviated by the Patriots of Episcopacy:
if the restless labors of good, that is, disaffected men, had taken effect,
quam tu urbem? etc. What a glorious Metropolis should we have had? what
prosperous Kingdoms? what an admirable face of Government in the Church? Our
Commonwealth might have been the envy of the treacherous Batavians, and our
Church a pattern to the plantation at Geneva, or the rigid'st discipline of New
England.

Could we have but one that desires it for King, we have his Royal word for it,
that he would do every one Justice.

No complaining in our streets: those that had too just occasion, would have
had their mouths sealed up to a perpetual silence. No warping men of religious
tempers, such a Religion is naturally so: no corruption of Courts with bribery,
nay perhaps not such a thing to be heard of amongst us.

We would govern you quietly by the Sword, secure your rights and possessions
from the invasion of others; give your Consciences liberty of managing your
souls, at your own rate; and give your painful teachers the fattest
encouragements for their undertakings.

And by these means they render the Present Government hateful and
insupportable, and put ignorant Dolts on madding for (they know not what kind
of) alteration. But however some may ripen themselves for the fatal Tree, by
acting contrary to their knowledge, and others of great ignorance, and facile
belief, been persuaded into the Lawfulness of Insurrection, yet the obligation
of Loyalty never cease.

2 Prop. It Is the duty of all subjects to stand by their Prince in case of
danger. Many are willing in the time of his peace and prosperity: but flinch at
the approaches of peril: But standing the burnt, as it is the mark, so it is the
duty of every true subject.

First, upon a principle of Justice. It has been thought fit not only in ours,
but other Kingdoms, that Life-guards should be instituted for the preservation
of their persons: although in ours they were first voted useless; indeed they are
for their bloody purposes: and afterward were to be smartly attacqued, witness
the confession of him who Tyburn stopped in his carreir. But however it was but
just in those who would have stripped him, to have offered their own persons as a
Guard for his security.

Under whose Umbrage do they themselves shelter themselves? By whose careful
inspection do they sit every man under his own Vine, and his own Fig Tree? Of
whom may it be said, under his shadow we live? Is it not of the King?

Is it meet then, that we should receive the full, and comfortable influence of
his Protection, without paying the least Tribute of our Assistance? Is it just
that he should be bound with an Oath at his Coronation (frequently hinted by
those that do not understand the words) and is it not as just, that Subjects
should be obliged by an Oath of Fidelity? Bare words are but a slender
security. What has the King to trust to in case of Purbeck Invasions? What
has he indeed to trust to in case of Domestic Assaults, and violence to his
Person, when even those that gave their words for his Defense, shall be as
forward in their Actions for his Misohief and Ruin?

Can the dull Earth reflect those beams upon the Sun, which she has received
from his benign influence? Can Rivers return their grateful Streams to the Sea,
whence they are derived? Can small obedient Creatures draw their stings as so
many swords to dispatch those Droans, that shall intrude on the Territories of
their Monarch?

A foul shame to all Professors of disloyalty, to be outdone in points of
justice by these small Insects, and the most senseless parts of the Creation.

2. Upon a Principle of honor. And here the moral Question; whether it be in
the person honoring, or the person honored, may be answ^^'d affirmatively in
both.

It Is so in the Subject that industriously hazards all to put his Prince out of
the reach of danger.

Were the truth of this scrupled, I might produce many instances of those whose
Memory lives for ever, for standing between Death and their King.

And we our selves alas! are too sensible what a Blow England received at the
dismal Stroke given to our late Sovereign, what a black brand of Infamy was
affixed on that score, how odious an English Man sounded in other Countries,
honored with no greater Title, then that of a Devil.

In standing by our King, we stand by our selves, and in honoring Him, we are
the most forward consulters of our own Glory. Our Schismatics vilifying of
him, have caused him to Fez and Ma*
be lessened abroad, and this was intimated (as I am informed) by an Heathen
Ambassador.

(...), Isoc.
(...). (i. e.) The Power of the Persians we know grew to such an height, not
by the wisdom of the men, but by the great observance of their Kings.

Nothing can add more to his Renown abroad, then the strong experiments of our
united duties at home; by which we at once render him truly Glorious, our
selves famously formidable, and our Posterity settled upon the Foundation of a
Perpetual Monarchy. Idem


(...). (i. e.) It is manifest that those that obey their Kings, constantly
have the greatest Strength.

Whosoever then should endeavor to Eclipse the Splendour of the Crown, would
find themselves under a greater Cloud, and (as it is reported of those that
fight with Spirits) would find every blow that they offer to Majesty, to be
irresistibly thrown on their own heads.

3. Upon a Principle of Conscience. Every part of the Moral Law binds the
Conscience; standing by the King in times of danger, must be a part of that, or
else the Honor enjoined in the Fifth Commandment, men make no better than a
piece of painted Pageantry. And this the Rebel does not value: he will easily
adventure the violation of the Divine Law, if he can escape the scourge of the
humane.

What Security then has the Prince from factious spirits? The greatest is an
Oath, because this does immediately bind the Conscience.

If now Conscience be the knowledge of a thing, to be good or bad in order to a
regular Practice: (I can collect no more from Dr. Hammand's small Treatise of
it) what kind of Conscience must those men have, that have sworn not only not
to Act, but not to Conceal any Treasonable Design against the King, have yet
been prodigal of their Labors in the most direful expeditions, Conspiring the
Murder of their King, and a general (...). others timely hearing and
concealing the Debates, as if the Ear was not as guilty as the Hand, they are
alike in the Oath, they render Traitors as liable to Temporal, as they are
Ambitious of Eternal Punishment. Oh injured name of Protestant Religion; the
greatest Profess^rs of which, make a ^rock of (...) are moved by humor,
thinking themselves bound to pursue the bent of their inclinations, or fancy;
pleasing themselves with that which in irrational Creatures supplies the place
of reason, or passion: being transported with groundless jealousies, drawing
false Conclusions, from false Premises, viz. The Great King would sell us and
bring in Popery; therefore it is lawful to Murder him: or the instigation of
Satan putting them on to resolute courses of Lying, Swearing, Reviling,
Damning, or shedding of innocent blood: they couch all under the Name of
Conscience, which (if regular) must have the most lively tendency to the
preservation of Government.

4. Upon the Principle of Profit. This I shall not long insist on, because too
sordid for a principle of Humanity, much more of Christianity.

This has made some so cold, when the King has been besieged with dangers,
that they would not stir so much as their Tongues in his Vindication: willing
with one sort of Vermin to fall on their Legs; if the Government stand, they
know themselves secure: if not they hope they shall be so for the sake of
disloyalty.

This has made others hot and fiery for the unhinging of the Government; men
that think they have not honor enough for their merits, and so cry down the
King as unequal in his distributions: or some that have been turned out of
Offices compendiously sweet, because they knew not how to behave themselves in
them: or other Roysters that have lavished the share they had in the last
Crown, and Church Lands: or a fourth sort Nonsensical Ninnyes, that have been
at great Expense in standing by their unhappy Post, and have little other
livelihood than the promises of those that have a just Title to nothing.

But in courageously appearing for our Lord under God, there is real profit,
and such as all good men like.

A profit mixed with a good conscience: a profit unacquainted with new England
over witting, a profit without balderdashing Ware and Religion together; a
profit without a sigh at the end of a lie to bind it.

When the King is free from danger such a profit do good industrious men
usually find: preserved on the Sea from unwelcome Pirates, this in particular
concerns this Honorable Society: in the Ports of lading, from abuses and
outrages, secured in the times of War from fears, and dreadful apprehensions,
by his Majesty's ships, those stout and impregnable bulwarks. On the Land from
rude and uncivil incursions, by depending on the Wisdom and Power of our
Sovereign.

App.
Who then would not enter the List with Ittai? Who would not be with the King
in Life to rescue him from those Sons of Hell that lie in Ambush for him?

But if in Death (a Natural one God long avert, a Violent one Ever) who would
repine to answer the same summons with Him? But who would not rather choose (if
it must be so) to be thrust out with him, then to lead a Slavish Life,
inferior to the Mercies of Death?

Let us leave the disposal and event of things to Him that turns the Dyal of
the World at his own pleasure. But withal wish that the observation of the
Roman may be true, (viz.) That Cor. Tac.
Kings are never firmer in their Throne, then after a Rebellion.

Let us pay all due reverence to that dignity which Heaven has fastened on the
Crown: let us return all submission and obedience to that Authority which God
has let down from the throne of Heaven to the King's; let us embrace his
clemency that had rather rule with a Scepter of Gold, then dash in pieces with
a rod of Iron.

Let us abominate the principles and practices of all those that are past
amendment, as is plain by this unparalled Conspiracy: a parcel of (I want
words) the spawn of Fire and Brimstone, not to be prevailed on by dignity, or
compelled by Authority, nor melted by clemency: speaking evil of the one,
resisting the other, and shamefully undervaluing the third. Let us inform the
people of those devilish and sinful means they use to bring the Palace to a
Dunghill; those swarms of lies which have fled abroad, and they suck in as
truths unawares; and what a blessed reformation is like to ensue. Such a one as
would turn Churches into stables, and the revenues for a maintenance for
themselves, and better natured Creatures, their Horses.

But if Justice has not quite forsaken the Earth if principles of Honor sway:
if conscience has not lost its forcible power.

If respect of private Interest (which of right ought to be least, but with
some is most powerful) will attract us; every thing will add speedy wings to
our Loyalty, teach us to cleave closely to our King in his greatest
extremities; expressing our selves to him in the words of Ruth. Where thou
dyest Ruth i. 17.
will I dye, naught but Death shall part thee and me. And when the Guards of
Rebellious Angels, would make him a man of sorrow, to cry out with no less
fervency then when he was anointed with oil of gladness, God Save the King.
Amen.


