Mellificium Musarum: THE MARROW OF THE MUSES.

OR, AN EPITOME OF DIVINE POETRY.

Distilled into Pious Ejaculations, and Solemn Soliloquies.

By JEREMIAH RICH.

Junii 19. 1650.

Imprimatur,

JOSEPH CARYL.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for JOHN STEPHENSON, and are to be sold at his shop
on Ludgate hill, at the sign of the Sun, 1650.

modern bookplate GEO. CHALMERS ESQUIRE. F.R.S.S.A.
SPERO

To the Honorable, and most Excellently well accomplished, the great Patron of
Piety, Example of Valor, and chief Asylum of Learning and Ingenuity;
NATHANIEL RICH, Esquire. Governor of Deal, Sandowne, and Walmer Castles, Major
General of the South-Easterne Parts of ENGLAND, and a Member of the Right
Honorable the House of Parliament, my Noble Colonel, etc.
THese Poems, being on their ma^ch, have rankt themselves under the Conduct of
Your Honors Patronage, which is able to screene them from the Irradiation of
Envy, or the malevolent effects of folly. My first Works devoted to the Noble
Countess of Warwick, had the happiness to kiss your hand, which happiness
gives me a new boldness to present this Epitome of divine Poetry, to your
gracious protection, that flying through the World under the shadow of your
Honors wings, many may read it over, having the glory to be dressed in your
Honors Livery.

I could produce prolixer Arguments to make an Apology for the Poem: indeed I
cannot surrender the account of my study more properly to any then to your
Honor, to whose Command all my actual employments are daily devoted: let this
one Reason silence, and supercede the plurality of a longer Prologue. It is
requisite I should sometimes wait on your Honor with my Pen, as well as
always with my Sword.

As for the Offering it is too mean for so magnificent a favor, your
acceptance.

Yet the mightiest Monarchs, amidst their highest triumphs have been sometimes
pleased with trifles, and the stateliest Cedars shade the shortest shrubs.

But your affable and indulgent Cander being beyond compare, I shall with that
great Artist Timanthus, shadow those lineaments my imbecility cannot draw

Your Honors goodness is far above your greatness the knowledge of which,
forced me in all humility to tender my winged Pegasus at your Honors feet,
and rest,

Your Honors most humble and faithful Soldier and Servant, to Command.
Jeremiah Rich.

To the Reader.
ME thinks it is long to morn, sure Phoebus should have braved the Air an
hour ago: It cannot be much longer sure ere darkness be down, and the
sable cloud be puffed away, that once was set round to rain: Oh that the
Curtains of Heaven were drawn, that the Day Star would usher Sol from his
blushing bed of Roses, that glorious Aurora would open his golden Gates, and
let in the winged Chariot of the Day.

Sure it cannot be long: say Reader, art thou ready? I have beat up a
Travallee here, that you may stand to your Guard against you be relieved; and
like the early Bell man, I have given you a midnight Verse, that your wakefull
eyes may welcome in the Morn: Peruse it gentle Reader, not as men wear powder
on their heads, but as the Women that wear their buskes in their bosoms; use
it not as a Glass to make your selves trim, but as a watch to see the
shortness of time: here be eight things (in this short Manuell) that offer
themselves to thy view, namely these; the evil of envy, the fullness of folly,
the continuance of labor, the inconstancy of love, the prosperity of the
wicked; yet the poverty of the world, the vileness of some things, and the
vanity of all things: Peruse it not as some do the Rhimes of Homer, which turn
to the end ere they know the beginning, and pass by the leaf before they
understand a line: Art thou hurryed to horror? It may be I have writ that
here that may barricado up the way; peradventure thou art almost lost, and
something here may whisper thee the way to Heaven, and love may bear thee on
his unseen wings, and lift thee to Elysium; perhaps it is the last of my
labors, read it before thou rend it, and if the lines deserve any love, though
the Stationer has the profit, let me have thy prayers, take thy self the
utility, and let Heaven have the glory.

Thine, JEREMIAH RICH.

Ad amicum charissimum Dominum RICH, in elucubratissima Poemata.
QVis novus hic nostris hospes accesserit aris?
Aeonidum and tactas mente veavit aquat
Miramur Calamum Richi charissime, dives
Nomine, at ingenio ditior ipse tuo.
Cuncta prophanorum sileant hinc Carmina vatum,
Exemploque tuo metra sacrata canent.
Delphica qui sacro pandis laquea iasocco
Grandiloquoque feris Sydera summa stila.
E. P.

To his Friend the Author.
Tam Mart, quam Mercurio.
It Is strange, yet true, that in a twinning breast
The God of War and Eloquence should rest.
Here Ajax and Ulysses strive again,
As once for Arm^s, so now for heart and brain.
For he is no Soldier that can down right hit,
Only by strength, and not take aim by wit.
Nor is that Oratory which does steep
The tongue alone, and leave the heart asleep.
Let the old Stagerite or Galen tell,
In which the principality does dwell:
Both excellent, and both maintain their part,
The brain pumps forth that which was sprung in heart.
I know not which rules thee: but to us, far
Nobler then Mercury is the god of war:
Yet while his Oaten Pipe, or Phoebus Lire
Sound with the Trump, we seem to cool in fire.
D. L. C.

To his ingenious Friend Mr. Jer. Rich, on his excellent Poems.
What Guest approaches our Altars here, to bring
A Verse to bless the Helliconian spring:
We all (dear Rich) admire thy quill; now Fame
Shall with her loudest blast proclaim thy Name
Unto the World, that Ingenuity
May speak, if there be one so Rich as thee.
Let Poets Rhyme no more, but in thy praise,
And sing by thy example holy Lays:
While thou with sweetest Rhetoric charm'st our ears,
We dream we hear the music of the Spears.
J. Steevens:

To my Worthy Friend, Mr. JEREMIAH RICH, on his Poem.
What strange Poetic fury does inspire
Thy towering fancy with such Promethea^ fire
Able to illuminate the world, and constrain
The Muses to do homage to thy brain?
Admired Rich, since every Verse of thine
Centers in Heaven, and grows thence divine.
L. F.

Ad Amicum Charissimum Dom. RICH, in Mellificium Musarum.
QVis furor Aetheriis accendit Corda favillis?
Quis novus arrepsit per tua Metra Calor?
Ecce tibi Cunctis Musarum turba Camaenis,
Assurgunt famulis officiosa Choris.
Sed mage Melpomene dominatrix Carminae gestit,
Singultu miscens gaudia vana pio,
Peccati quae monstra domat, dum murmr masto,
Emollit mentem lacrimulasque ciet.
Quam been Davidicis calefiunt Pectora ulnis!
Et resonant magnum Carmina celsa Polum!
Dum geminos t^ Rich refers virtutibus axes,
Et Caelum spirant, and tua corda solum:
Nempe simul Terrae mulces sermonibus aures,
Et saltat Cytherae Caelica turba tua.
L. M.

To his dear Friend Ier. Rich, on his Mellificium Musarum.
NEstor was aged when he undertook
The Trojan Wars, thou young and writ this Book;
His age both wit and eloquence required,
Thou young in years, yet have to that aspired:
It Is strange, sure all the Muses do agree
In one, in spite of fate to honor thee.
Oh, that our Iron age could be refined
To purest gold, that thou reward might find
To thy desert; but worth shall make thy Name
Ride through the world upon the wings of Fame.
JOHN AVIS.

The Entertainment.
Was it a Dream? or is the world bereaven
Of all her glory? what has the lamps of heaven
Left mortals in a maze? and are the skies
Orecast? will Phoebus blind our darkened eyes?
Are Mars and Juno come to play their parts
Again on earth, and shoot their fiery darts?
The worlds great fabric sure will fall in sunder,
Being rockt so often with great cracks of thunder
In dreadful war: Rise Phoeb, and come away,
Why have thou robbed us of so fair a day?
Our Tapours burn but dim, our musick's shrill,
The Poet here may blunt his idle quill
In writing Tragedies, time changed our stage
And turned our golden to an Iron age.
O Lord of glory, bear my dulled Muse
Through this sad Poem, and do thou infuse
Love in my Lines, and pleasure in my pain,
That all my labor may not be in vain.
Guide me as thou did David's hand, when he
Writ to the world his divine Poetry.
Lift me on Eagles wings that I may fly
Aloft, and conquer death before I die.
Turn Poetry to piety; crown this story
With grace, and crown my grace with endless glory,
Where everlasting joy did dwell before
All ages, and shall be when time shall be no more.
J. RICH.

The evil of Envy. In the Example of Caine and Abell, Genesis 4.8.
I.
Go palt faced wrinkled envy, fly away,
thou came too soon:
Go take thy horrid darkness and display
about the Moon;
Let not thy shadows dim our dawning day,
or fairest Noone;
Because thy tempted Father fell,
What did thou well,
To eclipse so fair a morn: but born and then rebel?
II.
How soon this bloody Tragedy began
upon our stage,
The day grows dark before the morning Sun
has three hours age:
O cursed Caine, what has thy treachery done
thy boiling rage,
Because thy sacrifice of sin did smell:
what? did thou well,
To kill thy brother too: but born and then rebel?
III.
The night grows horribls, both Sun and Moon
are shadowed over,
The boystrous whirlewinde now even at high noone
begins to roar:
Now sin has played her part, ah me! how soon
death's at the door,
Because thou lost thy sacrifice, Oh tell!
what? did thou well,
To lose high glory too: but born and then rebel?
IV.
What glory did thou gain to be so sly
in that foul deed?
Caust thou not live unless thy Brother dye?
or must he bleed
Because thou art not blessed? hark! vengeante cries
against thy seed:
Thy ears were shut when humble Abell fell:
but did thou well,
To shut up Heaven to: but born and then rebel?
V.
Thus blinded worldings are you all befooled
in your false aim,
To think the fire of envy may be cooled
in furies flame:
What honor can you boast of, if you should
win endless Fame?
This flattring blast may blow thee into Hell:
ah! do thou well,
To sell thy heaven for hate: but born and then rebel?
The first SOLILOQUIE.
IF love be the School of Arts, the Model of Virtue, the Glory of Learning,
the Palace of Pleasure, the Whetstone of Memory, the Castle of Delight, the
Map of Honor, the Wonder of the World, the Mystery of Mortallity, and the
Type of Eternity: Then surely Envy must needs be the Child of Ignorance, the
person of idleness, the follower of foolishness, the bringer of sadness; it
is a pit of poison, a cup of corruption, a part of division, a piece of
delusion, a hell of horror, a sink of sin, a sea of shame, a line of
absurdity, and a blot of deformity: It is attended with contention, with
distraction, with delusion, with peevishness, with palenesse, with falsenesse,
with faintness, with inconstancy, with infidelity; it shuts man's glory up in
darkness, and makes his memory dye in forgetfulness; it does eclipse the
clearest morn, and writes deformity upon the fairest brow: He that is a Child
of envy is a burden to the earth, and an offense to heaven; he lives
unregarded, and dies unlamented; he is borne to extremity, and banished out of
glory.

What my son! and what, the son of my womb! and what, the son of my vows!
Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroys Kings.
Prove, 31.2.3.
I.
DRaw near, brave Lovers, you that use to light
your blazing Torch in Cupids flame,
That for a wanton Mistress dare to sight
in face of death, to purchase Fame.
And thou that sweetest Rhetoric can indite,
To make a timorous Virgin tame;
Come hither if you please
To purchase ease,
View but Loves vanity, twill cure your disease.
II.
Were she more fairer then the blushing morn,
Sweet as the Arabian spice:
N^y were she Virtuous too, and nobly borne,
and pure as high Paradise:
These rarities will leave thee soon forlorn,
and Love well vanish in a trice:
But Gallants if you please
To purchase ease,
View but Loves vanity, twill cure loves disease.
III.
See how victorious Sampson conquered lies,
rocked in his Loves deluding arms;
How gallantly she sings him lullabies,
and drownes his thoughts in Loves dull Charms!
Poor soul he knows not what conspiracies
his Foes did hold against him in swarms:
Ah! had he but addressed
Him to the breast
Of heaven, he might have slept in glorious rest.
IV.
Where is thy strength and daring valor now?
Thy skill and rare agillity?
Thy warlike arm that made whole Armies bow?
what? rocked upon a Ladies knee?
Wake sluggard, wake; or have thou past a vow,
to live in infidelity?
Ah fool! go be possessed
In Abraham's breast:
So may thou rest indeed in loves eternal rest.
V.
There may thou flumber in eternal Joys,
whose rarity so far excells
Base earth: that all her treasures are but toys,
whose Alter smokes with fuming smells:
There are no plots, no murders, no annoyes,
but there the highest glory dwells:
If love thou needst wilt try,
Go, go, and lie
In thy sweet Saviors arms, ravish a while and die.
VI.
There is the most resplendent purest love:
alas what constant love is here?
The amorous sweet embraces dwell above,
in Titans golden Hemisphere,
Which time, nor fortunes wheel, can never remove,
Thou art his Darling, he thy Dear:
If love thou needs wilt try,
Go, go, and lie
In thy sweet Saviors arms, ravish a while and die.
The second SOLILOQUIE.
Inconstancy of Earth are all extreme in love, orescorcht in Envy, or led by
Folly, or invelloped in Vanity, are drowned in sensuality; the strong man
boasts of his strength, the Soldier of his valor, the Scholar of his
learning, the Germane gloryes that he can drink Wine, the Usurer sacrifices
to the god of gold, the Prodigal to his pleasure, and the Lover to his Lady,
and of all the rest the last is the most deluded, making his life laborious
while he is tired with such unacquainted passions: Her frowns or smiles give
him an earnest of life or death; he spends his years in disquietnesse, his
months in frowardness, the day in fancies, the night in dreams; he tyres
his passion, corrupts his invention, deludes his affection, disturbes his rest,
cracks his brain, wearies his bed, and breaken his sleep, he makes earth his
heaven, pleasure his paradise, beauty his felicity, and prosperity his glory:
Poor soul he knows not that bravery is a vanity, that beauty is a vision,
and love a delusion; that as Sirens can inchant, so Ladies can allure; that
extremity attends prodigallity, and the greatest temptations the strongest
affections, that the comliest blossom is the soonest blasted, and the sweetest
Rose the quickliest withered: That poison lies by the sweetest herb, and
death is mingled in the fairest bait.

The deluded Lover stands in his own light, he puts out his own eyes, he
stoppes his own ears, he is clothed in darkness, he wanders in
blindness, lives in lasciviousnes, and dies in forgetfullnesse, while these
poor rarities fan him with silken wings of mildest air breathed from a
whispering wind.

Look back fond Lover, thou sure have dreamed, all past is but delusion, thy
sordid affections deserve not the name of love, it is but a morrall blaze, a
piece of humane glory, a glaunce of beauties bravery, a spark of Cupids
candle, a flame of Vuicans forge, a flash of Natures fire, hot in a minute, and
cold in a moment.

But Oh Divine Love! how much art thou abused? How strongly neglected, who art
chiefly to be beloved?

Thou indeed art a bed of Roses, a mountain of Spices, a Garden of sweetness,
a Type of blessedness, a Messenger of fulness, a Mirror of faithfulness;
with thee there is no respect of persons, nor no regard of places, thou mindest
not vanity, nor art deceived by folly: Thou strivest not for honor, thou
look not after gain, thou thirstest not for revenge, but hopest all things,
believes all things, indureth all things: Thou fillest the soul with virtue,
with valor, humility, fidelity, love, peace, joy, patience, and perseverance;
thou art he that preserves earth, that guides the Heavens; and lest the
Universe should return to its first Chaos, thou rulest the unruly Elements,
thou turnest the spheres, and command the wandering Planets in their several
Orbs: And when thou smilest upon the soul, thou make earth resemble heaven,
deformity become purity, and dust immortallity; how fair and how lovely art
thou, oh Love, for delights?

ARe they Ministers of Christ? I speak as a fooole. I am more: in labors more
abundant: in stripes above measure: in prisons more frequent: in deaths often: Of
the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten
with rods, once was I stoned: thrice I suffered shipwreck: a night and a day I
have been in the deep. In journeying often, in perils of waters, in perils of
robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in
perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in
perils amongst false brethren, in weariness and painfulness, in watchings
often, in hunger and thirst, infasting often, in cold and nakedness, 2
Corinthians, chap. 11. verse. 24.25.26.27.
The SOUL. ANd does the pallas of immortal glory
Stand by deaths darkened throne? Is this story
True, that many a fiery dart
Is shot to wound the tired travelers heart;
And yet before he comes into the arms
Of love, must conquer death, and hells alarms,
Enduring many a storm: oh where is he
That shall arrive at immort allitie?

CHRIST. What Is he that questions heaven, or his power,
And ties eternity to a short lived hour
By words that darken knowledge? Can thou tell
His thoughts of love, say wortall do thou well?
Is mine arm shortened, or do thou fear
Mine ear is heavy that it cannot hear?
Or is my truth decayed? Do I require
Fond man, that thou alone should travel through the fire,
Except I go before, whose power can tame
The scorching furnace, and the fiery flame:
Have not I power to save, that locked up hell,
And conquered death? Say mortal do than well?
Is man more righteous then his maker? why
Do thou then mourn, dry up thy watery eye,
And read thy way to heaven in this story,
Go on, i will crown thee with a crown of glory.

SOUL. But ah I am entangled in this vale of tears,
While I sit down in sorrow, numerous fearet
Beset me round, such rubs lie in my way,
I look for deaths embassage every day,
In which my heart is faint, my fears are full,
My faith is feeble, and my senses dull;
And Satan triumphs, for no power at all
Is in fond man, since his rebellious fall:
How hard a task, how short a time have we,
And who can wander to eternitio?
It is enough, oh Lord, thou know that I
Am vanity; let me lie down and dye.

CHRIST What mean these murm'rings that do pierce mine cares?
Why (faithless sonle) art thou so full of fears?
Heaven is not gained at every idle breath
Love attends labor, life is gained by death:
This is a debt, eternity will not pass:
Thy glory (earth) is like the withering grass;
Thy soul is too impure, till thou do pay
That debt. [soul] how will mine eyes endure this day?
My soul that once was glorious sin has stained;
My hands are fettered and my feet are chained.
How black has horror made my darkened face!
Can Heaven love me now? can he embrace
Me in his Royal arms? can he endure
A soul that is so deformed, that is so impure?
It is enough, O Lord, thou know that I
Am vanity; let me lie down and dye:
Alas! the least temptation throws me down.

CHRIST. Yet (soul) press forward, thou shall have a Crown
Of endless Royalty set on thy head,
In a victorious Orb. [Soule] It Is true, the dead
That dye in thee, are happy, they are blessed
Indeed: they slumber in eternal rest.
But I that have not strength enough to strive,
Through my disasters; how shall I arrive
At my desired haven, when I read,
It Is such a difficult way? [Christ] why I will lead
Thee through the sea of sorrow, till the Cup
Of wrath is passed ore, I Will bear thee up
In ever lasting arms; do but endeavor
To conquer death, and thou shall live for ever:
As pleasure, so is torment transitory:
Strive, and i will crown thee with a crown of glory.

The third SOLILOQUIE.
YOu traiterous thoughts, assault my sense no more; oh mine eyes; whither do
you wander? to what great step of pleasure, to what great pitch of honor, to
what illustrate sphere, to what celestial orb are you hurried in a
distracted dream, while all your golden imaginations vanish into air.

What is the silver Mine? what is the golden Ore? what is the worlds dignity?
what is beauties rarity? what is the pride of pleasure? what is a blast of
honor; the first is vexation, the second delusion, the third a distraction,
the fourth brings the worldling to a fools paradise, and he that has the
last is but a glorious slave.

Me thinks as when the Giants warred against heaven, and with their imperious
looks threatened the Palace of Olimpick Jove, till from his golden sphere he
lasht their folly, and puffed out their bravery, by hurling against their
mountains hasty thunderbolts from his angry arm: even so the worlds Peacocks
children of transgression, sons of Rebellion, the pride of nature, and the
scorn of art, befooled in folly, besotted in security, sin in dispite of
heaven, till with his angry breath he sweepes them from the world, laying
their glory grovelling in the silent grave.

Poor heaven borne soul, no wind blows fair for thee, but all thy life is
a continued ill: thou art borne in a tempest, and art hurryed through a storm,
while thou wandrest through this vale of tears, and while thou saylest through
this red sea of sorrow; so have I seen a weatherbeaten vessel torn by the
fury of the surges, tossed from wave to wave, by the confused mellody of
threatening scas, roaring winds, fiery flashes, horrid thunder, and the
darkened air, continually in restless motion, sometimes by an angry billow
flung up to heaven, and in a moment plunging down again, seems to be
swallowed in the furious Ocean; as if nature to set forth the rarity of union,
who would show to man the harmony of confused elements.

Art thou a child of heaven? thou shall be then a son of sorrow, think not
too much to suffer, if thou make account to Reign, if thou will have a
Crown of Royalty, be patient in suffering adversity. The way to heaven is
through a fiery Lake, thy treasure shall be torment, thy wealth shall be want,
thy portion poverty, thy beauty deformity. Thy adoption fore-runs thy
extremity, and thy conversion is a Prologue to a following Tragedy.

The World indeed is full of deceit, nor will she favor any but her own, and
on them she confers pleasures, and profits, honor, preferment, beauty, glory,
wealth, and case. She sets them on her idle knee, and charms the Worldling to
a glorious slumber.

While the godly sits all day, despised, disgraced, afflicted, tormented; with
his watery eyes bent on the Earth, and his silent groans piercing heaven: the
unfrequented places are his delight, and the melancholliest passions are his
best music: In which the poor soul mutters to himself these, or the like
speeches.


SOUL. Ah me! how am I hurried to and fro in the valley of this shadow of
death? how am I tossed from misery to adversity, from trouble to torment, from
temptation to affliction? my life is almost spent: and what will the Lord do
with me? if he do with me what he please, if he throw me into hell, I will
lay my hand upon my mouth, and be silent for ever: for I have been unthankful,
unholy, unfruitful, unprofitable, discourtious, disloyal, ungratious,
rebellious.

But will the Lord be angry for ever? and has he forgotten to be gracious,
or is his loving kindness quite decayed? My Lord Jesus Christ he is gone to
Heaven, where he is crowned in Majesty and glory, and every day he takes one or
another after him. And here he leaves me to feed on Wormwood, and drink the
poison of Aspes. Alas, poor soul, what find thou? what know thou? what
see thou, in this vain world? is not her beauty momentany, and all her glory
transitory? Why was I borne to be an object of cruelty, a Map of misery, the
mockery of Art, the scorn of nature? or being borne, why died I not in my sad
mothers arms?

Well soul, lament no more, wait but a while and thy sorrow shall be converted
into joy, thy mourning into praising, thy emptiness into fulness, thy low
poverty into high dignity, thy short suffering of the worlds hate to the
embraces of eternal love, thy time to eternity, thy misery into glory. Alas!
the joy of the wicked is as the thorns in the fire, the bubble in the water,
the flowers in the earth, the Clouds in the Air: they blaze and consume, they
flourish and fade, they vanish and fly away: but thou for a few angry frowns
shall have everlasting joys, for earths indignity, shall wear the Robes of
Royalty, and for a moments heaviness, shall be crowned in eternal happiness:
Though here thou walk sadly, and drivest on heavily, piercing the air with
thy sighs, and watering thy cheeks with thy tears; mourning and weeping for
the absence of thy beloved, when he has withdrawn himself and is gone. Yet
hold up thy head with joy, for thy redemption draws near.

Thou shall meet him in Elisium, and arm in arm walk through the hallowed
Courts, and change a thousand kisses: can thou not tarry a little time? can
thou not persevere a minute? can thou not suffer a moment? can thou not
watch one hour? would it not be worth thy pains, if after all thy troubles
on earth, to arive at heaven? there the poor Pilgrimme may rest his tired
limbs in the sweet lullabies of ever blessed eternity; where there is joy
without sorrow, health without sickness, wealth without want, fullness without
famine, love without labor, life without death.


Arise my Love, my Dove, my fair one, and come away. Canticles 2. verse. 13.
The AUTHOR. I.
Go tired Mariner, go hoyst up sail,
The weather will no more be contrary;
The wind blows prosperous with a pleasant Gale,
The angry air ne more will vary,
The heavens are fair, thy journey cannot fail:
Up weather-heaten Voyager, why do tarry?
Where safer? O! where safer can thou be,
Then in so sweet an arm? soul this is he,
Whose power uncurls the wav's, and calms the furious sea.

CHRIST. II.
Rise Phoeb, and come away, the headstrong day
Rides in his glorious Orb, the night is gone,
The slowers appear, the little Lambs do play,
And glittering Sol does kiss the torrid zone,
The careless wandering flocks are gone astray,
Upon the hills, and love is lest alone:
Come lie in my soft bosom, where no fear
Can break thy dream: why do thou flumber here?
Awake my purest Love, arise my fairest Dear.
III.
Rise Phoeb', and come away; this Sunshine morn
We Will travel through the fairest teritories,
Where in some flowery Garden I Will adorn
Thy brow with love: I Will tell thee what those glories
Are, that crown eternity, I will not scorn
To tell my sufferings and my passion stories:
Let me infold thee in my loving arms,
If thou will rest secure from numerous harms:
Arise my fairest dear, love strikes his loud alarms.
IV.
Rise Phoeb', and come away: how sweet a smell
Comes from the Arabian hills! my pretty Love,
The little birds warble their music well,
And yonder sits the Lark and turtle dove:
Come, let us go walk, and we will parallel
Love with eternal glory: in you Grove
We Will take the subtle Fox, nor will we spare,
To hunt the light foot Dear, or timorous Hare:
Come then my love, my dove, arise my fairest fair.
V.
Rise, Phoeb' and come away: thy blinded eye
Is lul'd to ruin in dislumbring dream:
Why art thou rockt in such a lullaby,
And drowned in various wanton streams?
Come let us travel to eternity,
And languish in the purest sweet extremes:
Wherefore, my dear, so greedy do thou crowd
To danger? why to darkness do thou shroud,
And leave thy love alone, wrapped in a sable Cloud.
VI.
Rise Phoeb', and come away: thy short Reposes
Are flattring slumbers: leave thy slippry hold
Of sordid earth, come on a bed of Roses;
I Will knit thy hair in knots of fringed gold;
We Will pusse the flying day in entercloses
Of dearest love, with glory uncontrolled:
I Will teach thee how to surfeit in the fire
Of loves immortal flames, while some desire,
To spe^a their time in prais; thou rather shall admire.
VII.
Rise Phoeb', and come away: we will make great Jove*
To stop his fiery horses swift carere,
Whose nostrills vomit flames: we will mount above,
And hold the Reins of Titans hemisphare, sgrove,
And guide his Chariot wheels through pleasures
And view the hallowea walks. Come, come my dear,
Lets wander to Elysium, whose bright ray
Out-shines great Phoebus in his new born day,
Or the most fairest noon, rise Phoeb' and come away.

The fourth SOLILOQUIE.
AH! Lord, thou command us to seek thy face, that we may shun death, and
yet thou say none can see thy face and live: Ah! let me live, that I may
know thee; or die, that I may see thee. It is the happiness of those glorious
Angels that they continually behold thee, and therefore they incompasse thine
Altar, with sweet Odours, unspeakeable Rhaptures, and high Hallelujah's; but
we, poor mortals, pressed down with sin, with guilt, with flesh, with fear,
cannot worthily praise thee.

Ah me! why do I seek thee, If thou be no where absent? why do I not
find thee, if thou be every where present? sure to the eye of darkness,
thou wrappest thy self in thick darkness, and thou art discovered to the eye
that is enlightened, thou art seen in thy power to sinners, in thy terror to
Satan, in thy Son to thy Saints; thou art seen in thy judgment to them
that are against thee, in thy Justice to them that fly from thee, in thy
Sacraments to them that seek thee, in thy Laws to them that love thee, and in
thy Love to them that know thee.

Whence proceeds this thy condiscention, and thine infinite humiliation, that
thou did leave thy Throne in Heaven to live in the form of a servant on
earth? Why did thou change thy Crown of Royalty, for a Crown of Indignity?
Why should aninfinite Creator love a finite Creature, and Heaven stoop to
Hell?

Alas, oh Lord Jesus, here was no Royal Throne for thy Majesty, no Glorious
Temple to entertain thee, here was no winged Cherubins to bear thee, no
Armies of Angels to stand before thee, no sweet faced object to delight thine
eyes, no musical Raptures to salute thine ears, no costly odours to annoint
thy feet, nor spangled Canopy to spread over thy head; but sin and shame,
guilt and fear, hell and horror, blackness and darkness, extremity,
poverty, impurity, deformity; and can thou love so poor a thing as man, oh
thou that inhabitest in Heaven, in light inaccessible, in glory
incomprehensible, who can with a frown overturne thine enemies fame, and by
their ruin purchase thy self glory, and if the World should totally revolt
from thee, and set her self against thee? Could thou not command a sudden
clap of thunder to spurn her from her Poles, shake her from her Center, crack
her Axeltrees, and break her Chariot wheels? Could thou not let loose the
Elements that the Heavens should be hid in blackness, and the Sun should
be clothed in darkness, that the Waters should drown the earth, and the
fire should devour the air, or with an angry breath could thou not puff
them all away, that earth, and air, and water, and fire should vanish, and the
world should be no more, and in the room thereof create in a moment to perfect
thy praises, ten thousand several Orbs?

Why then (oh man) art thou so much deluded? Why is Heaven and his sweet
invitations so much disregarded? sure there be four days in which thou will
call thy self fool for neglecting so great salvation: And they be these.

The day of public calamity.

The day of private extremity.

The day of death.

The day of doom.

First in the day of public calamity, if the world should be governed in
blackness and darkeneste: If natures fabric should be smitten, if the powers
of the world should be shaken, if the waters should be loosed, if the fire
should be kindled, if the air should be infected, if the earth should be
poisoned, if the sword should begin to range again, and thou should see
thousands of mangled bodies about the streets; if the trumpets should sound the
alarm of war again, and the drums beat doleful funerals for the soldiers,
if whisling bullets and fiery grenades should fall like hail on the earth,
and roar like the thunderclaps in heaven, if every man's sword should be set
against his fellow, if the earth should be paved with dead men's bones, and the
channels run down with blood, if this flourishing Kingdom should be made a
burnt offering, and her people lie beeding like a new slain sacrifice; where
then could thou find a chamber to hide thee in, but in thy beloveds arms,
and under the shadow of his mighty wings: when the Lord comes to make
inquisition for blood, and his fury shall break out in fiery flames to lick up
the sinners of the world; then will Jesus Christ be as a shadowed grove in a
thundering storm, as a cooling rock in a scorching day, and a fountain of
water in a weary land, when the worldling shall loose his anchor of hope and
suffer shipwreck, thou shall safely be set a shore.

If the famine should run after the sword, and the stoutest heart should grow
faint, and the fairest face should begin to wax pale because of pining hunger.

If the pestilence should follow famine, if terror should walk in darkness,
and the arrows of the Almighty fly at noone day; if a thousand should fall on
thy right hand, and ten thousand on thy left hand, and thou beginnest to fear
because of the evil that is come upon the world; who then can protect thee
that judgments may not touch thee, but Jesus Christ? Tell me then, has he
not cause to be beloved, would he not be worthy to be desired?

Secondly, in the day of private extremity, when thine eyes shall be opened,
and thy heart shall be awaked, when thy mind shall be troubled and thy
conscience tormented, when sin and all its terror shall come to make thy
life intolerable, when the remembrance of thy pollutions shall be bitter to
thy soul; when thine eyes shall be a flood of tears, thy tears a sea of
sorrow, thy sorrow a clog upon thy spirit, thy spirit a trouble to thy mind,
thy mind a torment to thy heart, thy heart an enemy to thy life, thy life a
burden to thy days, when thy conscience shall gnaw thee like a ravenous
Vulture, and guilt and fear shall sting thee worse then an Addar, when thou
shall sit down in sorrow all the day feeding on wormwood, and drinking the
poison of Aspes; how will thou be ready to tear thy self in pieces, when thou
shall feel a little of the weight of sin, which made thy Savior groan? when
thy heart shall be affrighted, and thy mind shall be amazed, when Hell is
discovered, and the Heavens are darkened: then would not that glorious arm
that now invites thee, be welcome to thee? nay, would he not be worth a
thousand worlds, that shall ease the anguish of thy soul in such an hour?

Thirdly, at the day of death, thy beloved will be desired, when the Sun, and
the light, and the Moon, and the Stars, shall be darkened; and the clouds
return after the Reign; when thy joints shall tremble, and thy knees knock
together; when thy courage shall be faintness, thy beauty shall be p^lenesse,
and thy rest shall be weariness^, when thy memory shall fail thee, when thine
eyes shall deceive thee, when death shall shake th^e, thy riches slye from
thee, and the Mourners stand about thee; when sin, and fear, and g^^^^, and
horror, and death, and terror, shall conduct thee through the gates of
mortality, and launch thee forth into the Gulf of eternity; when all about
thee seem to dance around thee in the dance of death: then sinner see in all
thy invento^y, what will thou prize none but Jesus Christ? and welcome Jesus
Christ to the sinner in such a day.

Fourthly, at the day of Judgment, thy Savior will be welcome, when at the
sound of the trumpet, and the shout of the Arch Angel, the sleeper shall be
awaked, the world shall be started, the living shall be changed, the graves
shall be opened, the dead shall be raised, when the heaven shall be covered in
thick darkness, when the Sea shall boil up in such mighty waves, as shall
seem to drown the world, when thou shall see the earth surrounded by fire,
and the heavens sweltring in flames; when thou shall behold the great Judge of
the world sitting upon his glorious throne, borne by winged Cherubins,
surrounded by Armies of Angels, before whom shall stand millions of naked
mortals to receive their eternal doom: then a smile from the Judge on the
throne will revive ^^^e at the last, and thou will hold up thy head with joy;
then that arm that now invites thee, will be able to crown thee in
immortallity. These are the four days in which thou will repent thy neglect
of the proffers of Love.

And now Reader, may thou shut the Book, and stand amazed, an hours
contemplation upon the thoughts of eternity may well take room. Ah, that Jesus
Christ should come from the bosom of his Father, from the company of his
Angels, from the pleasure of his Paradise, from his Chair of dignity, from his
Crown of glory, to put on mortality, to suffer indignity, to live in poverty,
to endure extremity, to be a man of sorrow all his days, to be buffeted,
scourged, persecuted, tormented, reviled, reproached, despised, disgraced,
disparaged, and abused from his cradle to his Cross, and then wander through
the shadow of death, and hells dark groves, from his Cross to his Crown!
How soon (when the Heir of heaven was smitten) was natures Fabric shaken?
how soon (when the Sun of glory was extinguished) was the Sun of Heaven
eclipsed? What means the Heavens to frown, the Earth to quake, the Soldiers
to tremble, the Temple to rend, the Graves to open, the Dead to arise? Why must
Heaven be feign to suffer, and natures Fabric be out of order? Was all this
for man? Alas! and what is man? A little mouldring dust, a piece of moving
earth, a mask of mortallity, an inch of eternity, whose life is but labor,
whose wisdom is but folly, whose grace is but impurity, whose comeliness
deformity, whose substance is sin, whose glory is his shame.

Say Reader, did thou ever see Royalty woo Indignity, Honor look on
Lowness, Highness sue to Baseness? Did thou ever see a King serve a Slave,
Gentility woo Poverty, and Beauty love Deformity? Then Reader recollect thy
wandering thoughts, and before thou passest to the other page pay here the
tribute of a tear.

How has the Prince of darkness besotted blinded mortals? How is man (poor
man) befooled? How does he sell his Corn for Chafe, his Silver for Dross,
his Treasure for Torment, his Paradise for Pleasure, his Glory for Honor, his
Heaven for Earth, his Earth for Hell? How does he set his heart on vanity, and
slights the richest rarity? God calls once and twice, and the carnal heart
hears not: he comes with all the purest expressions, and sweetest
invitations, with all the words of Art, and the allurements of love, yet
blinded man regards not, but wallowes in impurity, and slumbers in a lethargy,
till he perishes to eternity.

Ah Lord, thou dwell in that light inaccessible, and brightness
incomprehensible, that no eye can see, and not be struck blind; thy glorious
Palace stands in eternity, and thy sparkling Throne is situate in
immortallity, in the midst of brightness in such a circle of glory, that no
mortal can behold unless he drop down and dye.

Dominion and fear are with thee, and of thy Government there shall be no
end: What gain is it to thee if we be Righteous, and wherein art thou
damaged, if we be polluted? If the world should revolt from the Prince of
darkness, and veil her Crown to thy Supreamacy: If all Nations should be
willing to be swayed by the Scepter, and bow before thy immortal Throne, this
cannot add to the greatness of thy Majesty; nor if the disobedience of thy
Children, the frowns of thy Foes, the envy of thy Enemies, the subtilty of
Satan, the wickedness of the World, the help of Hell, were against thee set
in battle Ray, they could not darken thy Dignity, they could not eclipse thy
Glory.

Yet albeit thou could gain honor by our destruction, yet thou delightest
in our conversion: and therefore thou offerest thy Word, thy Gospel, thy
Sacrament, thy self and thy son; thou give us Reprovements, Allurements,
Precepts, and Promises, Comfort, and Counsel, Direction, Dehortation: But we
poor mortals are too unkind to reward thy love with disdain, thy courtesy
with distoyalty; but what shall we say? Shall we that are but dust direct
Eternity in his unsearcheable actions? Thou command us to seek thee: Alas,
we cannot find thee: Thou bidst us apply our selves to know thee; Alas, we
never saw thee: Thou bidst us be fruitful, and we be unprofitable; thou
command us to be cleansed, and we be polluted; when our eyes should be
enlightened, then our hearts are most darkened; when we should be most washed,
then are we most defiled; and when thou call us to thee, even then we fly
from thee. We lost our dignity when our Father Adam lest his glory; he
breaking his League with Heaven left us (his poor children) nothing but our
mother, Earth, who rocks us a while upon her idle knee of ignorance, and then
lays us to lullaby in eternal darkness. Yet though we have lost a Subjects
loyalty, thou have not lost thy kingly dignity; thou still retainest thy
prerogative Royal; yea Lord, thou still have power to command, though we
(poor we) have no ability to obey. Oh that thou would, instead of commanding
us, compel us! Oh thou that bidst us follow thee, draw us, and we shall run
after thee! Oh thou that command us to seek thee, show thy self that we
may find thee: so, though the world lies drowned in a sea of vanity, yet we
that follow thee shall live holily, and dye happily: forasmuch as our
happiness is wrapped up in heaven, and dwells in the light of thy glory.

Now will I sing a Song to my welbeloved, touching his Vineyard: my welbeloved
has a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill. And he fenced it, and gathered out
the stones thereof, and planted it with the choycest Vine, and built a Tower in
the midst of it and also made a Winepresse therein: and he looked it should
bring forth Grapes, and it brought forth wild Grapes. Isa. 5. v. 1, 2. I.
NO more,
Deluded England, fool thy self no more,
But go implore
The heavens to open thy dim and slumbring eyes:
No more,
Let blind delusion keep thee shadowed ore,
And make thee soar
Too high in wanton pleasures rarities:
Ah sin! thou often do mix our sweets with sour;
Thou make a Judgment in a short lived hour,
To blast the purest herb, and crop the fairest flower
II.
Away,
Deluded England, with thy works away;
A newborn Ray
Begins to dawne, and glorify the air:
Away,
Thou art discovered poor: can miry clay
find power to pay
Peace offerings? no, thou art more foul then fair:
The fig tree brought forth leaves; but we know who
Did blast her: is this all that thou can do?
Go vail thy Crown in dust, lest thou be'st withred too.
III.
Sit down
Ye glorious stars, go, in the dust sit down,
Whose glory shone,
Sometimes like Phoebus with his glittering train:
Sit down
In silent sorrow, go and quench the frown
Of heaven, thy Crown
Being veiled, then shall thou wear the Crown again:
Why are we thus befooled and do not cry,
To be transplanted? Ah Reader! thou and I,
Whose brach is withred here, may soon lie down and die
IV.
How soon,
Oh flou^ishing England! did thou swell? how soon
Thy fairest noone
Was darkened over, and turned a glimmering day!
How soon
Thou did grow glorious, prodigal, and boon!
As the pale Moon,
In her black throne bids Phoebus fly away:
Oh it thou will have justice to reprieve thee;
If still thou would have mercy to relieve thee.
Trust not thy hollow self, thy self will but deceive thee.
V.
Arise,
Oh then! and open thy unregenerate eyes;
How fair a prize
Is there laid up in everlasting glory:
Arise,
And be adorned in virtues rarities,
whose glory lies
Drawn in the Records of this following story:
But if thy actions shall be still but vain,
Led by the folly of a light haird brain,
Thou will be trampled down, and withered ore again.
VI.
Then shine,
For fear thy glimmering torch her light resign,
And thou decline
From thy first glory to a darkened shade;
Then shine,
Like Phoebus in the Equinoctial line,
With fire divine,
Least thou art blasted and thy flower does sade,
So shall thou flowrish in the enlarged store
Of wealth and Peace, thy temples arched over,
In a victorious Orb, and war shall be no more.
The fifth SOLILOQUIE.
A Gloomy Cloud may black the fairest Morn, till Phoebus arises in his midday
Majesty, and with his glory cleares the darkened Air, when times black Daughter
Night have wrapped her mantle about the virge of day, and drowned the World in a
forgotten dream; all things seem alike to all, the withered Weed, the purest
Herb, the comliest Blossom, and the fairest flower: But when the day star
appears, ushering in the morn, and blushing Sol arises as from a bed of
Roses, whose burning Horses chafe up the Olympic hill, and with their fiery
fetlocks draw up the Golden Chariot of the day, the World lies then discovered.

Even thus the Gospel of our Lord Jesus having unmantled his glory from
behind a darkened cloud, shining in full Majesty, discovers the errors of our
lower World; but because time will be too short to serve our turn, and we
shall tire the Readers eyes with too large a Soliloquie: we shall therefore
look upon but the latter part of our subject: And first by the Vine we can
only understand the Church of God, and then our subject will lie as a
stumbling block in the Readers way; this seems to be strange (say some) that
the Church of God should be a fruitless Vine: No, this Vine bears pleasant
fruit, yet there are many worthless Branches that sprout among them bearing
great show, but little substance; but when the wise Husbandman shall loppe them
off, the Branches that remain shall sprout higher, the fruit shall be the
sweeter, and the Vine shall flourish the more.

And first we shall endeavor to discover eight sorts of Branches that will
be cut from the Vine: And they be these.

1. The Adulterer. 2. The Drunkard. 3. The Robber. 4. The Liar. 5. The
Sabboth-breaker. 6. The Swearer. 7. The Usurer. 8. The Hypocrite.
First the Adulterer is a barren branch and shall be cut off. Thou Adulterer
whose blood boyles in thy veins, and thy marrow is burnt in thy bones, who art
scorched in fire, and sweltred in flames, who swimmest in vanity, and art
drowned in a forgotten Dream; thy Morning is risen, and thy Sun has aspired
to the top of Nooneday; thou seem to ride upon the wings of Time, commanding
Pleasure as if she were thy Captive; Come we will take a short survey of thy
life, which if the Scripture deceives us not, is but the way to death.

For at the window of my house I looked through my casement, and beheld among
the simple ones, I discerned among the youth, a young man void of understanding,
passing through the street near her corner, and he went the way to her
house, in the twilight in the evening, in the black and dark night: and
behold, there met him a woman, with the attire of an Harlot, and subtle of
heart. (She is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in her house: Now is she
without, now in the streets, and lies in wait at every corner.) So she caught
him: and kissed him, and with an impudent face, said unto him, I have peace
offerings with me: this day have I paid my vows. Therefore came I forth to
meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee. I have decked my
bed with coverings of Tapestry, with carved works, with fine linen of Egypt.
I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cynamen. Come, let us take our
fill of love until the morning, let us solace our selves with loves. For the
good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey. Proverbs 7. verse. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. But what is she end of all this? if
we look on the end of the chapter, we shall see the end of the Adulterer: Her
house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death, verse 27. Thou
do not dream thou shall be blasted; I tell thee, ere long thou shall be lopt
off, and flung into eternity: I grant thou have aspired to the top of thy
Olympic Palace; but thou shall shortly fall: thy life has been (at best) but
a Tragicomedy, and thou have acted the fools part with pleasure: but I tell
thee, death ere long shall strike the Epilogue, and thou shall go away.

Secondly, the Drunkard is a barren Branch.

Woe to the crown of pride to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty
is a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat valleys of them that are
overcome with Wine. Isaiah 28. verse. 1. Thou Drunkard that carowsest care away,
and on thy Ale-bench, blasphemest the God of Heaven, that take no felicity
but in swinish company, and know no other happiness, but the color of the
wine; thou burdenest the earth, thou inflamest the fire, thou infectest the
air, thou art as a flower drowned with the dew of Heaven, and bowest thy glory
to the earth: go drunkard, take thy fill of Wine until the morning: but I
tell thee, the hour is coming, when (it may be) the hand of Heaven shall
write thy doom upon the plaster of the wall, Daniell 5.25, 26. ere long thou
may Read MEAN MEAN TEKEL UPHARSIN: God has numbered thy days and finished
them, and being found too light, thy glory is departed from thee: then shall
thy loins be loosed, thy countenance changed, and thy false heart affrighted:
thou that drinkest iniquity like water, I tell thee, ere long thou shall wash
thy self away; thy fruit is already withered, and thou shall be lopt from the
Vine.

Thirdly, the Robber is a barren Branch, Leviticus 19. verse. 11.

Thou that by the Art of Leger-de-maine adoptest every man's goods thine own, I
know thou would have joy without sorrow, wealth without want, fruit without
faith, and life without death: but remember, the pitcher at last comes broken
home. There is a way seems right in the eyes of man, but the end thereof is
the path of death. Proverbs 14. verse. 12.

What though thou have wheeled off fairly once, or twice, or thrice? yet thou
shall shortly fall: Agememnon after all his 10 years wars at Troy, was slain
in one night among his friends at Greece. The valiant Hector, whose temples
were so often archt in a victorious Orb, while he was quitting his Country
with gallantry, and affronting his enemies in the height of bravery, received
(in a moment) the Embassage of death: and upon the ground measured out his
grave. The mighty Achilles, whose arm seemed a Postilion of death, was slain
at last by a little winged Arrow, and sent to his long home.

Tell me, thou that can draw thy sword, and bid defiance (upon the high way)
to truth and fidelity, where lies thy brother Caine, or Akan, or Judas, or
Ahab? does not their glory grovill in the ground? or are they not sweltring in
eternal flames? It may be thou have endured many a blast: but there may come a
blast ere long that may puff thee quite away. Thou that art acquainted with
the Law so well, that thou can sometimes confute the Reverend Judges, and yet
performest never a tittle thereof; believe me, thou can not plead with
death: he will come with a Habeas corpus, and remove thee to eternity:
Forasmuch as thou art found unfruitful in the Vineyard, thou shall be cut from
the Vine, and have thy portion in that lake of terror, where time shall be no
more.

Fourthly, the liar is a barren Branch. Leviticus 19. verse. 11.

Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness of God
endures continually. Thy tongue devises mischiefs: like a sharp rasor
working deceitfully. Thou love evil more then good: and lying rather then to
speak righteousness. Selah. Thou love all devouring words, O thou
deceitful tongue. God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee
away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the Land
of the living. Psalm 52 verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Thou that so often do call the
God of heaven (who is truth it self) to witness to a lie: tell me thou sordid
piece of earth? can thou blind the eyes of heaven? or can thou draw a
curtain before the face of the most high? does not his eye see thee? does not
his ear hear thee? does not his heart ponder thy ways? tell me? is he
excluded any where, that can be comprehended no where? if thou go to heaven,
he is there; if down to hell, he is there; if thou take the wings of the
morning, and fly to the uttermost parts of the earth, from thence the hand of
God shall find thee out. Come thou liar, Read the story of Ananias and
Sapphira, Acts 5. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10. The tree withers soon
away that is perished at the Root, and thou shall shortly fall, who art rotten
at the heart: Alas, thou art nothing but a walking shadow, a gilded piece of
air, whose wealth is but poverty, whose bravery but vanity, whose truth
infidelity, and thou shall ere long be ^hut out of eternity. Revelation 22.
verse. 15. thy present tense ere long shall be made a preterimper^ectense; and it
shall shortly be said of thee, he was, and is not; yet a little while, and thou
shall be no more, but shall fade as the withering grass, and wither as the
dying flower.

Fifthly, the Sabbath breaker is a barren Branch.

Ye shall keep my Sabbath therefore, for it is holy unto you: every one that
breaks it shall be cut off from among his people: for whosoever does any
work therein, that soul shall surely be put to death. Six days may work be
done, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord: whosoever
does any work therein shall surely be put to death. Wherefore the Children of
Israel shall keep the Sabbath to observe the Sabbath throughout their
generations, for a perpetual memory. It is a Covenant between me and the
Children of Israe^ for ever: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth,
and on the seventh day he rested and was refreshed. Exodus 31. verse. 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. Come thou profane Sabbath breaker, thou find fault of the
shortness of thy time: I tell thee ere long thy time shall be cut away; the
candle thou now do waste in pleasure, thou will hereafter beg to spend in
prayer: what (thou wretch) if thy God had required six days in the week to
sanctify his name, and celebrate his praise? how would thou have done, that
if thou can not give him one in seven? Go sordid earth, imbalme thy self in
tears; thou know not what felicity the godly take in this days progress,
while they travel through the celestial Groves, and while they wander
through the fair Elysium walks; aspiring beyond the reach of this unworthy
earth, to change their hourly intercourse of love with Heaven, whose service
is perfect freedom, redemption from slavery, and a path way to glory: every
days progress sends thee nearer to eternity, and thou make but a few
Sabbath days journey toward Heaven: why tell me? whither do thou wander?
Is it because there is no God in Israel, that thou servest the god of Ekron? or
because thou have dined on earth, will thou now go sup in hell? away blind
man, thou runnest to thy ruin: retire a while to thy forgotten self, and
reckon how fast thy winged hours fly away.

Ah Lord! thy Sabbaths in former ages have been celebrated to thy praise, when
thy people spoke often one to another to thy glory, when the morning stars
sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy; thy Saints in former
ages (upon thy holy day) have met to offer up their perfumed oblations, and
daily sacrifices to thee who dwell between the Cherubins: but now the beauty
of Israel is gone from the high places; Oh how are the mighty fallen! tell me
thou wretch that say, when will the Sabbath be over, that we may sell our
Corn, and Wine, and Oil, that we may put on our gallant apparel, and heap
up bags of gold? what gain is in riches, what beauty in bravery, what profit
in pleasure, what glory in honor? thy riches are but poverty, thy beauty
deformity, thy pleasure a penalty, thine honor slavery; therefore fool thy
self no more, by omitting thy duty, and robbing heaven of his glory, lest thou
be struck with leaprosie like Miriam, lest thou be swallowed up like
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, lest thou art consumed with fire like the sons of
Aron, lest thou have a shower of stones like Akan, or art shot with an arrow
from heaven like Julian, lest thou be lopt from the Vine, and cut from the
earth, and shut out of Heaven, and flung into Hell, lest thy possession be made
a desolation, and thy memory perish from the earth for want of a memory.

Sixthly, the swearer is a barren Branch.

Ye shall not swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou profane the name of
thy God: I am the Lord. Levit. 19. verse. 12. Thou profane Wretch, that with
thy breath infectest the air, and with thy body burdenest the earth, and with
thy heart do blaspheme heaven, what became of the profane Rabshekah, or the
blasphemous Senacherib, that with their tongues sounded such thunderclaps in
fearful Israells ears? but when their lips upbraided the God of Heaven, how
soon did he bow their proud imperious necks, and laid their glory grovelling in
the ground: thou black mouthed swearer, that with a flash of Oaths do exalt
thy self to Heaven; I tell thee ere long thou shall be spurned down to Hell:
thy life seems yet a merry Comedy, but thou know not how soon thou shall
speak the last scene, which being done, thou shall exit, to the attiring
room of earth, and undresse thee in the silent grave: thou foul mouthed
swearer thou feign would be accounted a Christian, yet live more deboyster
then the Heathen. Come if thou art a Christian, try thy Copy by thy Saviors
President, and see how thou obeyest his command.

But I say unto you, swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is Gods
throne: nor by earth, for it is his footstool: nether by Jerusalem, for it is
she City of the great King. Neither shall thou swear by thy head; because thou
can not make one hair white, or black. But let your communication be Yea,
yea: Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil. Matthew 5.
verse. 34, 35, 36, 37. Poor man, thou art so far from dishonouring thy God by
this, that by thy Ruin he will purchase himself glory: as the Traveller that
spits against the wind, has it blown in his face; so thou that with thy
breath blasphemest heaven, blowest but the fire of Hell, which shall torment
thee to eternity: thou that do waste thy time in trifles, and thy days in a
dream, thou art at the best but a piece of perjury, and a flash of vanity,
that walk by the light of thine own fire, and the sparks thou have
kindled. This is the portion thou shall have from the hand of Heaven, thou
shall lie down in sorrow.

Seventhly, the covetous man is a barren Branch, and shall be cut from the Vine.

What Is he that so prophanes all purity, and scorns the power that others do
adore; that curses his Tapour for burning so fast, his provision for spending
too soon, his hours for flying too swift, and his purse for filling too slow?
Thou grovelling worldling, that Viper-like, do tear thy Mothers womb, and
off rest sacrifice to the god of gold, that art as pollitick as Achitophell, as
proud as painted Jezebell, as churlish as Naball, as swift as Asahell; had
thou the policy of Ulysses, the strength of Hercules, the beauty of Adonis,
the wealth of great Nilus, or the gold of rich Tagus: thou art but a house of
clay, and thy foundation is in the Dust. Nevertheless man being in honor
abides not: he is like the beasts that perish. Psalm 49. verse 12.

The time is coming when delicates shall not be delightful, life shall not be
desirable, pleasure shall be painful, Riches unprofitable, death unavoydable,
and eternity most terrible: when thou shall find evidences enough for earth,
but no assurance for Heaven: then it may be thou would give ten thousand
pounds for a share in Jesus Christ, but Jesus Christ makes no such bargain.
Dives had not been in Hell, if his money would have purchased heaven: but then
thy Riches shall take to themselves wings and fly away: thou know not how
soon thou may come to thy journeyes end; when thou shall be deposed from
thy glory like Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4 30. or slain in the midst of thy gold and
mirth, like drunken Belshazzer, or lie in the cold like poor Lazarus, or be
kicked into Hell like rich Dives; go view the Monuments of thy Fathers: where
lies the Crown of Shyhon, King of the Amorices, and Ogge the King of Bashan?
Where be the Perizites, the Jebusites, or the Children of the East, or Zeba,
or Zelmunna? Where is the Tower of Babylon, the (sometimes) glorious Caanan,
the wavering Egyptians, the warlick Philistines? Do not they sleep in the
dust? Thou know not how soon thou may be gathered to thy Fathers.

The Earth in the Spring time puts on her mantle of green to entertain her
Lover Phoebus; but when the golden Chariot of the Sun is fled to the
Southern World, the Earth puts on her mourning withered weed, the Moon
shines fairly for some certain nights; but when time has turned her from her
silver throne; she resignes her glory to the following day: The blazing candle
for a time shines clear, but having past the age of a short lived hour, it
glimmers a while and dies; the glorious Lilly that is dressed in such bravery, is
in a day disroabed of its glory, and turned to withered Hay; there is no such
thing as a continuance here, though thou flour^^^ (...) green Bay Tree, yet
thou shall perish like a withered weed.

For evil doers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they
shall inherit the Earth. For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be:
yea thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. Ps. 37. v.
9.10. Eighthly, the hypocrite is a barren branch.

Go march among thy fellows painted earth, and then sometimes retreat, and
yet march on again, thou look indeed to Heaven, but thou travellest to
Hell: Go on, yet know false Absolon, it is not thy beauty that can save thee;
no, Judas, it is not a dissembling kiss shall secure thee; no, Simon Magus,
it is not thy money shall redeem thee, thou art as various as the winds, as
dissembling as the seas, as deceitful as the grave, as dark as hell, as vile
as villainy, as graceless as impurity, and as black as horror can see it self
in the blackest glass: Thou washest thy hands indeed, but thy heart is
defiled, thou trimmest thy body, but thy soul is deformed, honey indeed is in
thy lips, but thy tongue is poisoned; well, fool thy self no more, though
thou do blind the World, thou can not hide thy self from Heaven. Psalm.
94.8.9.10. He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the
eye, shall he not see? Oh ye fools when will ye be wise? He that teaches
man knowledge, shall he not know? Though thou have the speech of Jacob, thou
have the hands of Esau, thou have the devotion of Abel, but the dissimulation
of Achitophel, the mantle of Elias, but the hypocrisy of Judas, thou have
fidelity in thy words, but impurity in thy deeds, a heaven in thy mouth, but a
hell in thy heart, and though thou do prosper while blinded man adores thee,
yet thou shall perish when God shall come to judge thee: It is not thy smooth
language, nor thy Syrean tongue can take in Heavens ears; no, it is not a
painted face, nor a garment of gold that dazeleth Christ's eyes, that did delude
the young man, that Solomon entitles fool, Prove. 7 verse. 8. It Is thy heart that
God pondereth and as the Sun of Heaven will show, thee the foulness of the
house; so the Son of glory with his all descerning eye, will soon discover
the blackness of the heart, though to the world thou seem a piece of
purity, a flash of fidelity a gloriou star, a glittring sphere; yet to Heavens
eye thou will appear but an Heir of Hell, a child of darkness, a servant
of sin, a son of shame; and thou that have so often deluded others in thy
life, shall deceive thy self at thy death, and thy departing soul shall but
exchange misery for mortallity, though (by thy actions) the deluded world shall
think thou art transported into glory.

And shall our story have a period here? And shall we veil our subject with
a blanck? Shall we present to the Reader the black and dark night, and draw a
Curtain before the shining day? Shall we discover the barren branches that
are in the Vineyard, and wrap a black cloud about the lofty flourisht Vine? No,
though many have the mark of the Beast, yet some are loyal to the Lamb,
though there be thousands do bow their knees to Baall: Yet there is a remnant
do humble their hearts to heaven, though there be a seed of falling Adam, yet
there is a generation of faithful Abraham, though many are not Israelits, yet
all are not Sodomites; among the thousands that shall perish, there is a
remnant that shall flourish, whose united beauty shall make one glorious body:
And this is she that looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear
as the Sun, terrible as an Army with Banners, Cantie. 6. verse. 10. whose
heroicke heads look higher then this inferior World, who are not drowned in
the dirt of earth, but watered with the dew of Heaven, who are not branches of
infamy, but clusters laid up to inherit glory: And indeed believer^ you have
done well while you have made so fair a choice, though you suffer here a
little pain, hereafter you shall have endless pleasure, though ye have had a
time of heaviness, ye shall have hereafter eternal happiness, though ye
have had tokens of infamy, ye shall be adorned with Robes of glory, though
you have been acquainted with the terror of the Cross, ye shall be
required with the glory of the Crown: Alas, how momentany are the pleasures of
the World? What is here to be desired? Nay, rather what is there not here
that may well be quickly loathed? Is it honor? That is but a blast that will
deceive thee: Is it dignity? That is but a dream that will delude thee: Is it
beauty? That is but a shadow that will inslave thee; Is it credit? That is but
flattery that will befoole thee: Is it wealth? That will take wings and quickly
fly from thee.

Come then let us get up early in the Vineyards: Let us see if the Vine
flourish, if the tender Grapes appear, or the Pomgranats bud forth. Can. 2. I
am sure if the hand that planted you did not protect you, your fruit would be
blasted, and your blossom would be withered: How soon would your honor
turn to disgrace, your credit to shame, your beauty into vanity, your
affection to delusion, your wind of wealth to a weathercock of woe, your full
sea of plenty to an ebbing tide of poverty? Did not the Vine flourish? How
soon would you poor branches perish? Did not the head find power to stand,
how soon would you the weaker members fall?

I think the World can better subsist without the Sun, then you without a
Savior; if the Sun were gone, would not the forsaken Universe put on a
mantle of mourning? Would not the World return to her first confused Chaos?
Would not all our Chariot wheels drive on heavily? Would not our actions
prosper slowly? The Philosophers say we are beholding to the Sun for all
secondary causes: and Divines affirm we are engaged to our Savior for his
secret cares, while you bring forth the fruits of the spirit, which is not
Rebellion, but Humiliation, not expressions, but Actions, not Chafe, but
Wheat, not Pibbles, but Pearls, not Leaves, but Fruit, not Dross, but Gold:
I mean Unity, Fidelity, Meekness, long suffering, Patience, and
Perseverance; ye shall have a shield to save you, a chamber to hide you, an
arm to protect you, a Fountain to cool you, and a Rock to overshaddow
shadow you, and a Pillar of fire to guide you while you travel through the
valley of the shadow of death, and while you are sailing through the red sea of
sorrow.

In that day, sing ye unto her: A Vineyard of red Wine. I the Lord do keep
it; I will water it every morning, lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and
day. Isa. 27. v. 2, 3. Thus were you not protected alas, how soon would you
be destroyed? How weak would be your strength? How strong your weakness?
How soon would your persons be abused, your sense deceived, your wills
corrupted, your apprehensions deluded, your constancy contemned, and your
fidelity befooled?

But now had I a quill snatched from the lofty Eagles wings, or were my ink
distilled from Gold; had I the Curiosity of Cleo, the Learning of Plato, the
Poetry of Apollo, the Eloquence of Cicero, or the Love of Queen Dido: I should
rather darken their Dignity, then illustrate their Royalty.

I think Readers I must deceive you all, and ^hut the Book, and make an end
of my subject; For he that will speak of the worth of a Picture must himself
be a Painter; so he that will discourse of the Saints dignity, must himself
be wrapped first in the Palace of high glory; this only may suffice, they
shall have wealth without want, pu^ity without perjury, health without
sickness, wisdom without folly, life without mortallity, there shall they
have eternity for time, glory for indignity, a Crown for a Cross, and a
Kingdom with a Crown: But since the heart is too narrow to conceive it, it is
unlawful for the tongue to utter it, 2 Cor. 12. ver. 4.

Thus are we forced to draw a Curtain about our subject and hide our glorious
scene, and because we dare not speak of such a price, silence shall now be
the Epilogue of the Play.

How lovely looked the Son of Glory in our terestiall sphere, earth was too
unworthy to be possessed of such a glorious guest, how powerful was that
tongue, that with a short command could dispossess the devil, and make his
enemies in a moment drop down and dye, that could give feet to the lame, eyes
to the blind, health to the sick, salvation to sinners, and life to death? How
did his lips out pass the sweet lipt orator, while in sundry places he
poured forth the sweetest words that Art or Love could frame, enough to melt
the beholders hearts and charm the hearers ears? How full of sweetness is
that bosom that was wounded with a spear; I think Love lay there entombed,
having power enough to bring the lost soul to seek for sanctuary in his
circled arms: how full of comeliness was that face that so often was hit with
the blows of scorn, and flurts of disdain? that head, the fountain of
knowledge, that was crowned with the thorns, had power enough, by wisdom, to
control the world. How full of Majesty were those fair eyes that so often
were drowned in silent tears?

Had the ungrateful world no better entertainment for so Royal a babe, but
must mantle him in a Manger, and from his Cradle hurry him to his Cross. Ah
man! how obdurate was thy heart to him that was as kind as heaven: well may
thou cast dust on thy head since thou art so foul in thy heart: go, weep thy
self away: go, go, be sad all mortals; let your down east eyes present a
silent sorrow; let your days be as dark as the silent grave, as when the
eclipsed Sun leaves the world in a mist, or the angry air covers heavens
glory in a sable Cloud: let every mortal mourn, and be like a monument cut out
of marble.

But is it so, that Jesus Christ is the Vine, and that so many of the branches
shall be cut off? then our subject sounds an alarm in the ears of all
mortals, and bids the Inhabitants of the world look about them: Is it so that
none but the ingrafted Members shall stand, and the others fall? then this tells
us that your condition is not so good as you imagine: If those that seem to be
Members shall be cut away, what shall be done to them that are enemies to the
body? if some of the branches shall fall that grow on the Vine, what shall
become of them that come not near the Vineyard?

How has the Prince of darkness besotted all Mortals? how is poor man
befooled? perhaps thou measurest by another man, and thou art higher by the
head and shoulders; and thou think God must love thee, because of thy
person: King Saul was higher then all his brethren, yet little David was
advanced to the Crown, and he was flung from the Throne. Perhaps thou art a
Scholar, and for thy wisdom and learning thou think God must love thee,
and thou must needs be a branch in the Vine: I tell thee thy wit is but like a
sharp Rasor; when God shall come, and set thy wit to gnaw on thy accused
Conscience: Oh the anguish of thy soul! in that day there is no such torment
as a sharp with will inflict upon it self.

Perhaps thou art a rich man, and thou think God must needs love thee
because of thy Riches, and ingraft thee in the Vine: no, I tell thee, Jesus
Christ can pass by all the Kings Courts, and the Princes Palaces, and enter in
the house of poor Martha, and be a companion for Lazarus that had nothing to
entertain him: If Christ had been taken with gold, he could have planted his
Vineyard among the Indies where his Temple might have been all dawbed with gold.

Perhaps thou art beautiful, and thou think Heaven must love thee because
thou art lovely: Believe me, that will wither away when sickness with her afly
hand shall sweep off thy color, thou shall resemble earth: though thou art
like Jezebell, death will pluck thy feathers, and thou shall be banished to the
Grave, and call the worm thy sister and thy Brother.

Therefore if thou have any excellency in thee, or parts, it is but cumbred
stuff, and the harder it is to pull thee into heaven; God must be feign to
take more pains with thee, then with a poor creature that has nothing to
boast of: every external part thou have is but a block to lie in thy way, and
thou must leave them behind thee, or thou will never crowd through the
straight Gate.

Thy table that's a snare to thee, while sometimes thou eatest more then does
thee good.

Thy gold, that's a snare to thee, while thou set thy heart upon it, and
forgettest Heaven.

Thy portly body, thou may boast of it well enough, it may be it is all thou
art like to enjoy; make much of it, and much good may it do thee. Thy wisdom
is but a puff of pride: and the more learning thou have, the more mad thou art.

Therefore since there is no ability in man to gain immortallity; let this
summon in the great and mighty men of the world; let them sit under the shadow
of the Vine, and eat his pleasant fruit. Objection. But it may be said, this
seems to be false you talk all this while; we see no glory in the Vineyard,
nor taste no sweetness in the Vine: wherein is his fruit so pleasant?

Answer, I will tell you in four particulars.

First, his fruit of humiliation, that is pleasant fruit, this will adorn thee
with such amorons graces, that thou shall pass by the flurts of the World with
a gallant scorn, yet knowing sin to be the Author of thy shame, thou shall
often inbalme thy self in tears.

Secondly, his fruits of meekness, that is pleasant fruit; thy crooked nature
now (it may be) admits of no second but thy sword, thou art now but a word and
a blow, thy heart is like a tinder box, the least spark of envy will burn to
a mighty flame; but then thou shall stand as a marble pillar immovable; the
envy of thine enemies shall not trouble thee; the frowns of thy friends shall
not startle thee; the principalities of hell shall not have power to shake thee;
the worlds disdain shall be thy dignity, their infamy thy glory, their hate
shall inflame thy fire of love, and their reproaches shall fill thy mouth with
praises: nor will thou regard the most grievous pain, while thou art running
to so glorious a prize.

Thirdly, this fruit of love is very pleasant fruit: all the mountains of
misery thou suffer when they are drowned in the Sea of love, will appear
but like Attomes in the Air, when love shall cover thee under the shadow of
his wings, when thou shall see how dear thou art in heavens eyes, that he did
not only give Ethiopia but his own life to the Father for thee: what would
thou not endure for the love of such a Savior? does he suffer hell to pursue
thee? it is because thou should press forward to heaven, which is set
before thee: is thy journey tedious in the beginning? it is because thou
should long to be at thy journeys end: and will thou not run when thy Race is
only to life, and thy companion love? and will thou not despise any worldly
loss, when thou shall be treble sharer in eternal glory, and inherit immortal
gain?

Fourthly, his fruits of patience, and perseverance are pleasant fruit: now a
few discouragements will daunt thee, then thou shall be willing to undergo a
thousand dangers every day: now if thou receivest not what thou did ask,
thou art ready to give over asking: if God opens not at the first, thou art
ready to give over knocking: and if thou find not what thou did seek, thou
art soon persuaded to give over seeking: But then thou shall wait with as much
patience as the poor watchman that stands upon the Tower, expecting the
dawning of the day, till the panting horses of time have finished their journey,
and ended their tired task: then shall thou receive the fruit of thy faith, and
Heaven shall crown thy labors of love with undisturbed rest.

Awake then, Oh North wind, and come thou South: let the Inhabitants draw
near, let them come into our garden, let them taste the fruit of Faith, let
them be drunk with the Wine of love.

Eat, O friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly. O beloved! Canticles 5. verse
1. Come take his fruit of Justification, that justice may not condemn thee:
take his fruit of Redemption, that hell may not devour thee: take his fruit of
sanctification, that sin may not deceive thee: take his fruit of
glorification, that happiness may crown thee.

Art thou hungry? He is food to suffice thee: Art thou thirsty? He is water
to refresh thee: Art thou naked? He is a garment to cloth thee: Art thou
cold? He is a fire to warm thee: Art thou scorched with heat? He is a Rock
to shelter thee, Art thou in sickness? He is a Doctor to heal thee: Art
thou alone? He is a friend will not forsake thee: Art thou in danger? His arm
shall protect thee: Does the plague walk in darkness? He is a chamber to
hide thee, does the arrows of the Almighty fly at noone day? his wings shall
overshadow thee; Art thou poor? He has laid up treasure to enrich thee: Art
thou disgraced? He will Crown thee with a Crown of Glory.

And now Reader may thou imbalme the Book in tears, if thou considerest
the misery of man, and how the World does lie befooled: What horrid Earthquake
is this that shakes the foundation of our troubled World? What black cloud has
overspread our Universe, and begins to murmr in our whispering air,
eclipsing the light of Divinity, extinguishing the Lamps of purity, and
endeavoring to darken the son of glory, making poor ignorant mortals g^ope
all their lives time in the dark, and yet shall never find the door? How
happy are those priety babes (who with a little flood of tears, be waileing
the misery of mortallity) dye in their slumbring Nurses armees? Sure it were
happy for the wicked, if they measured but a short lived hour between the
Womb and the Grave, for not being found in the Vneyard, they shall have no
share in the Vine, and bearing no fruit as the Corn, they shall be burned
with the Chafe: But thou for a few evils on earth shall be rewarded in
Heaven; thou shall set thy foot upon the Adder, and tread upon the young Lion;
for thou shall be hid in the secret places of the Almighty, and under the
shadow of the wings of the most high; thou shall be free from the dominion of
sin, and thou shall conquer Satan, thou shall overcome Principalities and
Powers, and thou shall gain by life and death: And he whose undiscovered
actions are too deep for our dim eyes, shall bear thee on his wings through
deaths dark Groves, and lift thee to life eternal, while the wicked that now
does flourish like a green Bay, shall perish ere long like a blown off
blossom, and he that is a shining flash, shall wither like a dying Flower.

All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass. 1
Pet. 1. v. 24.
Man. STay Phoebus, stay: Oh wherefore do thou run
So fast? the shades will come too soon:
Hold in, hold in thy horses, their nostrills boil
In flames; Oh let them rest a while!
Stop thy bright Chariot wheels, and guild the day
In glorious pride: why do thou haste away,
Into the western world? stay gentle Phoebus, stay.

Phoebus. Jove lend me a breath of thunder, that my flashes
May mingle terror with my lashes:
My pampred horses linger out the day:
I surfeit with too long delay.
Fond man thou fear to die, and often do groan
To live, and blamest only time alone:
Come guide my winged hours, and hurl me from my throne.

Man. Why was I borne? or being borne, Oh why
Did I not weep one hour and die?
Ah me!
What torments do attend us while we see
The Sun? how short a time have we!
Phoebus, although thy Chariot makes away
So fast, and will admit of no delay:
Yet lend more hours to the year, or minutes to the day

Death. Drive on dull Phoebus, drive away! my bow
Is bent: and thou do fly too slow:
Drive on again, or by my unknown power,
I Will blast the glory of this flower.
Time. Stay death, thou caust not strike the blow til I
Shall say amen [Death] Yes Phoebus if thou hie
Thee not away, this Lamp shall soon drop down and die.

Time. Black monarch of the shades, curb in thy heels
Awhile; attend my Chariot wheels,
Death. I cannot, for thy beams are too too high:
The shades adorn my black browd eye:
I Will cut this flower away and then retire
To the dark groves. [Time] wherefore do thou desire
To eclipse so bright a star, and quench so fair a fire.

Death. Thy glass exceeds her hour, it has too long
To run: thou do me too much wrong:
I Will strike the blow [Time.] Cut not this flower away,
For as I am the god of day,
And son to high borne Jove who taught me how
To guide my wandering Orb, I Will make thee bow
Thy Pride, when next thou furrowest up our brow.

Time. Poor man thy time is short indeed: alas,
There Is but a little in thy Glass:
But yet thou shall not dye awhit, before
It Is out, nor live a minute more:
My fiery horse are hot, and wondrous proud;
I can scarce rule the Reins, but must go shroud
My head, and leave thee wrapped within a sable cloud.

The sixth SOLILOQUIE.
COme huffling galla^ts of the times, draw near, lay down your sallow Garlands
by you, and the thing you call honor, and let your eyes behold our subject,
let it pull down your imperious necks, and strike your top sails: let it give
to virtue constancy, to profaneness penitency, to the proud man humility: But
gallants you are not sad, me thinks, you look too well, as if you should live
eternally on earth, or had an everlasting inheritance in Heaven, as if you
could command the horses of Time, or stop the golden Chariot of the day: what
comeliness is in your spots of complexion? what righteousness in your choices^
Recreation? what goodness is in the great man's gallantry? what beauty in the
proud man's bravery? what glory in the Covetous man's gold? o^ what great ratity
in the spend thrifts prodigality how wavering are your words? how deluding are
your deeds? how disloyal is your love? how inconstant is your care? how weak
are your desires to Heaven? how strong do you dote upon the earth? how poor
is your evidence of immortality? yet how richly do you flourish in the garb
of worlds glory? And yet poor man, what art thou? but a walking shadow, a
piece of movi^g earth, a gliding flash, a blasted flower, an inch of mortality
that art traveling to eternity, whose wisdom is but folly, whose strength is
inability, whose grace is impurity, whose comeliness deformity, whose substance
is sin, whose glory is thy shame: take man in his best time, and he is but a
piece of vanity: look on him in a full Sea of plenty, or an ebbing tide of
poverty, in the bloome of age, or the blossom of youth, and this piece of
earth is but a debtor to Heaven, and this handful of dust has but a handful
of days, in which he is as restless as the Sun, as various as the Moon, as
wavering as the winds, as unconstant as the Clouds, as dissembling as the
Seas, as foul as earth, as flashy as the fire, and as fickle as the Air; and
having acted his part upon this transitory stage, death strikes the Epilogue,
and the play is done; and notwithstanding all his dignity, he must lie down
and dye: For all flesh is grass, and the glory of man but as the flower of
grass.

Ladies (for in your Ivory hands my Book may sometimes be:) here is a glass
for you, not to represent your beauty, but to discover your frailty, not to
show you how to deck your heads, but to tell you how to adorn your hearts, not
to learn ye how in curiosity to set your imbroydred hairs, but in true
penitency how to drown your wanton eyes: What mean's your clothes perfumed
with so many savours, your Apothecaries shop of sundry salves, your new sangled
braveries you boxes of beauties, your wavering affections, your wanton
Recreations? look in your glass, see if pride be not inthroned on your
majestic brows, and if your bravery be set off with any thing else but
vanity: it is only vanity and nothing else but vanity which dances upon your
plumes, as your feathers fan the air: What will you do when death shall
summon you to eternity, when sickness with her ashy hand shall sweep the
color from your cheeks? when your stripped off bravery shall discover your
deformity, and you shall resemble earth; when you shall lay down your
ornaments of beauty by you, when the dismal Ew, and the flattring Ivy shall
grow about your graves, and Time shall pusse away the remembrance of your glory.

Ladies, did I but know the scope of your desire, as your singing Master knows
your skill in an air; I could teach your eyes to weep faster then he your
fingers to play, and fit you as well with a sight, as the Musition with a Song;
but being a stranger to your Sex, I forbear, only thus much, be as virtuous
as fair, that you may be the glory of our days, and that your names may
flourish in after Ages. Instead of love and loves delusion, go spend some
hours in divine contemplation; instead of the Poetry of Ovid, read the Piety
of David; instead of the falsenesse of beauteous Absolon, follow the
faithfulness of blessed Abraham; instead of the love of Philasten, read the
life of Francis Spira; behold the ruins of Edonezedick King of Jerusalem, of
Korah, Dathan, and Ahiram, of Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, of Hoham
King of Hebron, of acursed Miriam, and Apostate Julian; these had all the glory
of nature, and were famous in the World, yet were they lost in a confused
Chaos; shun therefore their pride, that ye be not ruined with their plague;
let your love be without disloyalty, your faithfulness without formallity,
your fashions without foolery, and your beauty without bravery; so shall your
names flourish by the Poets pen, and live till time shall be no more; so shall
ye be adored for your goodness, more then honored for your greatness, and
famed for your grace, more then feared for your glory; so shall your inward
excellency exceed your outward bravery, and your perfumed rarities smell
sweeter then your Conserves of Roses.

Come hither deluded Lover, that find no felicity but in thy Mistress
company; and have placed thy joys in thy fair Mistrefle eyes; that like
foolish Paris, bowest to the Shrine of Venus, whose happiness and life lies in
thy Ladies love; remember the Peacock has fair Feathers, but foul feet, the
Be has Honey by her toil, but a sting in her tail; the finest Rose may have
pricks at the stalk, and the fairest Apple may be rotten at the Core: Nay,
though thy Lady may be civil, worthy, and virtuous; yet time may make her
lascivious, wanton, and various; the fairest Blossom may be the soonest
blasted, and the sweetest Flower the quickliest withered; the blustering Winds
may swell the mightiest waves, and a glorious Morn may turn a gloomy day.

The Philosophers say the life of man is nothing but opinion: Alas, thou do
but dream fond Lover: here are no hallowed Groves, no fair Elysium walks,
no Palaces of pleasure, no high borne Imps of honor, no heads archt in
Royalty, no beauties decked in glory: But wanton Cupids moral blaze, which is
as a shining flash, or a seeming fire, hot in a minute, and cold in a moment,
which will blast thee if thou behold it, and burn thee if thou come too near
(...) will come when thou shall dread that which thou do now adore, and loath
the thing thou now do love; e're long the stoutest heart shall be faint, and
the fairest face begin to wax pale; then pleasantness shall turn
peevishness, and kindness to coldness; plenty shall be poverty, and beauty
deformity: then shall thou behold the rottenness of youth when thou come to
the ripeness of age, and see the uncertainty of life, when thou receivest the
summons of death: For all flesh is grass, and the glory of man but as the
flower of grass.

And thou fond muckworme, that servest the gods of gold, what need thou
labor for an Inheritance in earth? Thou have too surely earth already, go
labor for an Inheritance fool that will not fail thee, lest either thy
Riches fly from thee, or thy Money perish with thee, lest the rot take thy
heart as the rust may eat thy gold, lest thy possession be made a desolation,
and instead of having a Treasure in Heaven, thou purchase with thy Coin an
eternal Tomb in Hell.

And likewise thou young man, thy morning is but now risen (and it promises to
be a Sunneshine day) and thou do not dream, that all flesh is grass, and
the glory of man but as the flower of grass; yet flatter not thy self too
fairly, though thou were not strangled in thy Nativity, yet thou may be
cut off in thy maturity, though thou were not blown away in the fondness of
thy youth, yet thou may be cut off in the fulness of thine age; therefore
let this rectify thy reason, and purge thy pollution; let it raise thy love,
and humble thy heart; thou know thou shall dye, but thou can not tell
when, thou art sure thou shall fall, but thou do not know where: Well, walk
so on earth that death may conduct thee into Heaven; expect Death every where,
but fear it no where, for when thy present tense shall be made a
preterimperfect tense, as thou have lived holily, so shall thou dye happily,
and reign in immortal blessedness in the Palace of high glory.

Tell me, thou old man (I think thou art acquainted well with our subject,
that all flesh is grass, and the glory of man but as the flower of grass)
what pleasure had thou in those things whereof thou art now ashamed? With
much pain thou have past thy pilgrimage, and worn thy wearied days: thy life
has been but a longer prologue to an eternal Tragedy.

Go look on the Monuments of the old World, old man, and see how those mighty
sons of Annak sleep in earth? How death has given them their qu^^cus est: In
the house of darkness there is no striving for dignities, nor purchasing of
places: An Army of Soldiers that are there cannot march in Battle Ray not in
their Warlick Triumphs thunder about their Tombs: The greatest Merchant when
he takes that house he loses all; the richest Usurer that was worth thousands
here, if you go to him there he has not a penny in his pocket; but is as
poor as he was sometimes proud: The wisest Lawyer, and the eloquentest
Orator, when they come there give over their practice, and will plead no more;
the Lord is there but a Companion for his Lacky, and the Judge on the Bench
sleeps safe with the Prisoner at the Bar.

How doleful (me thinks) is the alarm of yonder passing Bell, ushering
Deaths Language in every ear: If it goes for an unprepared sinner, the sound
thereof strikes terror, the night grows horrible, and every object shows his
black actions.

Oh the Conscience of the lost sinner, now how is he hurryed? Now for an hour
of life, but it will not be: Let the sinner see in all his Inventory what will
he prize, or what can give one hour of ease? None but Jesus Christ; Alas, but
he has no share in him: Unhappy soul, how have thou spent thy time, and
worn out thy precious days?

Was it in love, thou have spent thy life? Oh had thou been acquainted with
Heaven, how might thou have been swallowed in the Sea of love? Tell me who
made the earth so full of variety, the Sun so glorious, the Moon so
beauteous? Who made the glittering Stars that aspire the Olympic Hill, that
the lower Orbs might be relieved by the spangled spheres, when the Sun has
done the day? Say sinner must not he that gives beauty to deformity, be
himself much more lovely?

Or what? was it profit thou have labored for? what greater profit then to be
a Prince? or what higher happiness then holiness? what greater riches then
righteousness? or what higher gain then to wear an immortal Crown?

Or was it pleasure thou have sought after? I think the pleasure of the world
is pain: remember how often thou have called thy self Fool, when thou have
been retired alone; when thy fancy has been wearied in folly, and thy
Recreation has gone beyond thy Reason? deluded soul! what pleasure is like
that which dwells in Paradise? in those blessed Groves which cannot be described
by the pen of the Writer, nor expressed by the tongue of an Orator; whose glory
(had any but the Art to paint forth in the language of love) twould leave the
writer in a Maze, or strike the Reader dead!

But now poor soul, in seeking the things that are but momentany, thou have
lost thy self eternally: who now can intercede before the immortal throne,
that the sinner may be saved? none but Jesus Christ, and alas, the soul is not
acquainted with him: unhappy soul! thou art now struck silent, go, drown thy
closed eyes in Tears; lie down in dust, forgotten earth, for thou shall rise
no more, till the Axeltrees of the world shall begin to flame, and time shall
break his Chariot wheels, till the Heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the world shall swelter in flames; then thou among the rest of those
dreadful Comets appointed for horror, shall fry for ever in this unquenchable
fiery Chaos.

But here is good news now for thee that art prepared to dye; thou poor soul,
that stand upon thy watch tower, expecting the dawning of the day; thou
say my Love, he dwells in Heaven, that has Captivated my heart with the
glory of his Graces, before whom I offer up my hourly oblations, with silent
tears from these my weeping eyes: but sure he regards me not, but leaves me
here as a monument of misery, or an object of the worlds soorne: remember poor
soul, All flesh is grass, and grass you know has no long continuance on the
ground; believe me thou shall shortly go: thou may hear thy beloved almost
every day, telling thee thy time is but short, and thou shall ere long be
transpo^ted to eternity: thou may hear his sweet voice to charm thine
ears, though thou can not see his face to wound thy heart: thou receivest
Love Letters from him, but yet thou can not see him; for this wall of flesh
does stand between, but ere long it shall be taken down, that you may enter
together in Communion, and talk of the time of trouble, that you may inherit
eternal joys, while your eyes shoot equal flames that you may ravish in the
sweetest embraces, and lose your selves in love.

And further by these my son, be admonished: of making many books there is
no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh. Let us hear the
conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this
is the whole duty of man. Eccles. 12. verse. 12, 13.
I.
ALas, and is this all? come, spur away
My Muse, and let us have done before the day
Be down, let us leave the Helliconian springs,
And sacred Delphice, let our untuned stringe
Be screwed up higher yet, until our ears
Can counterfeit the Music of the spheres:
Then drown your selves no more (this glorious prize
Is given free, the purchase cannot rise
From floods of flowing tears) no more my wearied eyes.
II.
But does the Crown of high immortal glory
Arch his victorious brows, that keeps this story
True. Yea and his undefiled soul shall shine
Like Stars of the first magnitude: divine,
And glorious ornaments, he shall wear,
And sit inthroned above the hemisphere
In a garb of purest gold; this is the same
That Heaven Will honor, and his honored name
Shall live, and rise up higher then the trump of fame.
III.
Fool that I was, because the verse was soon
Read over, I thought 'twas easily done;
But thou O Lord, that made this little span
Of earth; must recollect poor uncollected man
Keep thy commands? O Lord, Is it not more
Then all the World can do? am I before Them all?
Oh drown these unregenerate eyes that shine
Too clear, that I may offer to thy shrine
A shower of tears, for every drop of blood of thine.
IV.
Oh I am lost! how shall poor I aspire
Thine Altar, Without diviner fire?
Whose hallowed smoke may make a sacred fume
Before thy throne; Ah how dare I presume
To come? Thou shall have power from above:
I Will be thy Lord, and thou shall be my Love;
Only confess thy sins, and I Will adorn
Thy brow with beauty; teach thee how to scorn
The World, and make thee fairer then the fairest morn.
V.
Well then my honored Lord, I Will come and try,
To tread the path of immortality:
Oh that my wandering eyes could see the way!
That I might travel to it every day:
Where once arrived, our lips shall strike up loves
Alarmes, in the blessed hallowed Groves.
Do soul, shun death, for earth is transitory.
True Lord: But shall I (if I keep this story)
Live? I Will give thee life, wrapped in immortal glory.
VI.
Too soon I wandered in an unknown way,
Till I was almost lost, had not the day
Star rise, to guide my wandering Orb, for all
My power, I had stooped to the imperial thrall
Of some temptation which had cried aloud
To Heaven, and left me in a sable Cloud:
I knew not then to whom I could repair,
To have one hour of ease, but now my care
Being past, I Will put a period to a well-tuned air.
The last SOLILOQUIE, Or, The Authors Farewell.
THE day breaks glorious in our darkened Orb, it is an illustrious morn,
clear up my glimmering eyes; Ah me! now I see how much I was abused: I wondered
(indeed) the way to Heaven should be so hard, and that such extremity should
lie in the path to immortality: alas, I was befooled; it is not care can
conquer a kingdom, nor industry win the Crown of glory; it is not
heaviness that works holiness, nor holiness that merits happiness; nor can
the price of labor purchase the Palace of Love. I wonder not now why the
skillful Astronomer has been misguided by his star, and why the fancies of the
Learned Poets have been befooled: alas, can ingenuity merit eternity? no, it is
love, it is love, that unlocks the gate of glory!

Poor man, where is thy power now, that with thy triangle heart invelopest the
water, buildest Castles in the air, backest the winds, devourest the earth,
and sometimes dare Heaven; yet when thou come to try thy force, a feather
will scarce wag at thy fury? alas, though thou crawlest, thou can not climb,
though by thy fear thou may rule on earth, yet without Faith thou shall not
Reign in Heaven; though by thy policy thou may comprehend all things, yet
by thy power thou can command nothing.

Hence let your winged battlements grapple, go veil your transitory glory,
let your dignity lie down and dye, let him that has the most rarity study
humility, and be like a monument cut out of marble; let the Astrologer put no
confidence in Astronomy, nor the Naturalist study curiosity; let the learning
of the Law be turned to the language of love; and yet let the sweet lipt Orator
lay down his Rhetoric and plead no more: it is not the language of learning,
nor a life of labor, nor ingenuity, nor sidelity, nor greatness, nor
gallantry, nor profit, nor pleasure, nor glory, nor honor; it is not a garment
of gold, nor a lofty look, nor the charming tongue, nor the enchanting eye,
nor the fairest face, nor the heroic heart, nor the conquering arm, that can
win heaven; no, these do but chain thee to the world, and hinders the soul
from climbing up the Ladded to his Joy.

I should rather look for heat in painted fire, then think to find ability in
the creature: I should rather believe the wind comes but to fan us with a
gentle gale, when Eolus unlocks his blustering Gates, and rocks the world in a
tempestuous storm; or that the Clouds do but shade us from the flaming
Chariot of the Sun, when by their thundering noises they seem to crack the
Axeltrees of the World, and by their dismal darkness banish out the day; or
that the Sea (when he furrows up his brow, and calls the dancing billows up
aloft) does weep to hear the ruined Mariner complain.

Hence let the tongues of profane Papists be silent, and sing no more their
idle Lays, lest while they trust to the memory of their Saints they lose the
merit of their Savior, and seeking Saint Peter's Key to open the gate, they
stand with the foolish Virgins knocking at the door. It is not penning many
books, it is not praying with many beads, it is not a new slain Sacrifice,
nor the blood of Bulls, nor the fat of Rams, nor a thousand Rivers of Oil, nor
the Hypocrites humility, nor the worldlings beauty decked in glory, that can
save from the day of wrath: (Reader) I Will tell you why, because they are
nothing; all the Consonants in the Alphabet can spell nothing without a Vowell:
ten thousand Ciphers stand for nothing without a Figure: all the Nations of the
earth are but as the drop of the Bucket, and the small dust of the Balance,
(not only vanity) but lighter then vanity; till God unite the sinner to his
Son, and makes him something, he is nothing, but then God the Father calls him
something, and by calling him so, he makes him so: But before the power of the
Prince, the pen of the Poet, the valor of the Soldier, the skill of an Orator
is nothing, they themselves are nothing, the best of them are but Ciphers, and
though one Cipher is bigger then another, yet they all stand for nothing.

Much study indeed is a weariness to the flesh: but to keep thy Commands, that
is impossible for flesh and spirit. (Ah Lord!) the glory of nature may work
the one, but the gifts of Grace must do the other; the power of earth may
practice the first, but the Prince of heaven must perform the last.

Keep thy Commands! There is not a sentence so hard among all the learned
Synods of the world: it strikes dead at once all the faculties of the soul;
the poor creature here does stand amazed! Alas, it is as hard for the poor
soul to do this as for the earth to ascend to the stars, and wander with the
Spheres; and therefore like St. John, the soul weeps sore when he sees there
is none found worthy in the world. But soul retire thy self from tears,
advance thy slumbring eyes; though thou art not worthy that dwell on earth,
yet there is a Lamb found worthy that does inherit Heaven: nay, he is not
only worthy, but willing; he every day approaches the Altars, and mingles
his blood with thy sacrifices, and sweetens thy prayers with his perfumes, when
they ascend before the immortal Throne. Sinner, thou have a Savior who is
able to do the work, if thou can but find a will.

Oh Love! how transcendent are thy Laws! I feign would pry into thy glorious
precepts, yet dare not, lest I am too soon lost, and drown my self in
pleasure, and never heard of ravishings; least a glance of immortality do
strike me blind, and I surfeit with excess of joy, and die.

With showers of tears O drown my wanton eyes: thou say I am nothing, (Ah
Lord) and now I see I am nothing: let my down-cast eyes present a silent
sorrow; and let my heart resemble the dusky evening air, when the Sun has
done the day: or as poor Luna, in her eclipsed hour, descends her silver
throne, and having lost bright Sol, resignes her glory to the spangled train
of wandering stars, mourning for the absence of his Chariot wheels. And since I
am nothing, humble this heart that would too soon be high, and like the
wavering Plumes, swell with every breath of praise.

It is not reading the Bible will save me from Hell; nor writing a Book will
send me to Heaven: as some gifts of Grace cannot secure me, so all the gifts of
nature will not have power to save me; I may die for all the first, and be
damned notwithstanding the last. Then if love be better then labor, and
utility goes before ingenuity; if the lowest faith be better then the highest
fancy, and a dram of grace be heavier then a tun of gold; what need I go round
about to Heaven, when there is a nearer way? no, I have done, this is the last
of my labors; now I will trouble the world no more with a Poem from my Pen;
the way to Heaven is by low contrition, not high speculation; by private
prayers, not by public praises, and by the truth of fear, not by the trump of
fame.

Feet, find me out the way; I have none to direct me now but the Counsel of a
troubled heart: yet I will try: Shine fair some glittering star, you that
enlighten your darkened journey with your borrowed glory, and in your blessed
Orbs, continually behold the day: say gentle guides, how lies my journey to
the immortal hill? lead me and I will follow you. And O God hide all my faults
in thy love, and show me how to creep through the strait gate, upon my tender
joints and bended knees in this my youthful age: show me my inability, that I
may admire thy Majesty, and though by others I should be thought something, yet
to my self let me appear nothing, that thou may be all in all.

FINIS.

