Christian soldier, in armor and bearing sword and shield, receiving a laurel
wreath or crown from a hand emerging from the clouds (Consolation), with the
Flesh and the Devil on either side and the World beneath his feet Consolation

The Christian Soldier.

ye Devil Resisted.

the Flesh mortified

y^ World Crucified.

O Crocodilian World whose Shining gloss
Is gilded Emptyness, and painted dross:
Thy Fawns, or frowns I matter not, not I;
Crucify the I must Thy Sister Flesh must die.
And Soul destroying Devil whose malice it is,
T'accuse the Brethren that seek to bliss:
Thy Roaring rage is naught; Stand off or I
Will make thee the Worlds Captain, captively.


POEMS SACRED AND SATYRICALL, viz. Prayers Paradise. The World. The Flesh. The
Jesuit. The Devil. Man's Misery. Sins Infirmity. Sins Impudence. The
Penitent Sinner. The Soules-sea-fight. The single and Married-life. Tears
Triumph. Mercies Miracle. Faith. Hope. Charity. Midnights Meditation Virtues
Pyramid. Chastity and Lust. The Divine Dream. The Divine Echo Deaths
Masqueing-Night.


By NATHANAEL RICHARDS.

Printed at London by T. Pain, for H. Blunden at the Castle in Cornehill. 1641.

THE AVTHOR.
N o man so high but er'e he die may fall,
All Flesh is frail, all subject unto thrall,
There Is no content on Earth, none certain bred,
Healthful to day we live; to morrow dead.
Art, nor Promotion, meuds not each Man's state,
Nor are the Greatest, truly fortunate.
Advanc'ments but a Breath, delight a Toy,
Each glittering Pomp each soule-seducing joy
Like Hell-bred poison, works the souls annoy.
Reject all lewd, all vain affecting pleasure,
Jntend thy future good, Celestial treasure.
Contest with sin, still strive, the conquest wear
He that will conquer, patiently must bear.
At such rare Combats, aid from Heaven is sent
Respecting Man, sins danger to prevent,
Dear is the Love of God, in him delight,
Seek Heavenly joys, those comforts infinite.
TO THE RIGHT WORTHY AND NOBLY DISPOSED THOMAS SOAME Esquire, Alderman, and
one of the Burgesses of Parliament for the Honorable City of LONDON.
Sir,
THough a Sranger to your Person, I am no Stranger in my thankful Heart (to
the All-glorious Majesty of Heaven) for such as you: You whose known worth,
and inward Candor, nor frowns, nor Flattery, could ever force from its true
Goodness for the general good. Monster Ingratitude cannot say I flatter;
Witness this Cities approbation, unanimous consent, free choice of you that
are, (the All-guiding hand of Heaven be praised) free from the aspersion, Spots
and stains of this Worlds Vicious and Ambitious Greatness. Let it not then
seem strange, that I (encouraged by your Noble Virtues) have here made bold,
(out of an honest heart) Right worthy Sir, unto your self to Dedicate this
Book. It is a known Maxim to approved Judgments, that Illicita non
prohibere consensus erroris est, which being the full scope of this my
endeavor, intended only for the exaltation of Virtue, detestation of Vice, and
like the Sea-mans Compass to direct souls from the dangerous Passage
indirect. The Scylla and Charybdes Shelfes and Rocks of this unclean and most
uncertain Ocean of the World. This being my intent, (as caveats against sin
not to be cavilled against, but by guilty Persons.) Accept then (virtuous Sir)
this my good will, take it from him, who (leaving you and yours, all your fair
Actions and occasions present to the All-pure God which never leaves his)
remains

Ever devoted to your Worthy Virtues NATHANAEL RICHARDS.

POEMS SACRED AND SATYRICALL.
Prayers Paradise.
ALL-Potent Scatt'rer of Man's o'r rank state,
Thou that do raise the humble, the proud hate
Soule-saving God, joy to the best of men,
Great terror to the damned, guide my Pen,
Head, hand, heart, all, apply my soul to win
Souls to thy glory; let the sense of sin,
(Companion still to misery) affright,
Times scoffing Idiots from the lewd delight
Of soul confounding sin, make us to pray
With ardency of soul, great God of day,
Fashion our wills to thine, let each proud eye,
Humbled with tears, admire thy Majesty.
The spirit of Prayer must amend us all,
(So writes the Churches Atlas, holy Paul,)
We shipwreck else; souls that will Heaven inherit,
Must pray, and pray with confidence of Spirit;
Pray for our King, pray for the blessed event,
Of this our Englands present Parliament:
Have we not cause; does not this Nation know,
War and the Plague so threats our overthrow;
We soon were lost, did not sweet mercy yet,
Protect our Peace? let us not then forget
To fast and pray, (Lord) make us all inclined
To praise thy Name, Eternally to mind
Thy mighty favors, unto this Realm more
Then all the World, for Peace and plenties store;
While neighboring Nations perish by the sword,
Fierce Fire and Famine, wanting the sacred word
To solace souls; this Nation lives at peace,
And might continue did our murmuring cease.
We hear the word preached, have our recreations,
Walking abroad, our peaceful preservations,
Our streets have seen no Rider and his horse
Over whelmed in blood, nor have we seen what is worse
Big-belli'd women ripped, the insants brains
Dashed in their Fathers faces; nor whole lanes
Of Armies in the field wheltering in blood,
Nor thousands famish't in our streets forfood.
Our blessed time of Peace did never spy
Cities a fire, poor people's dismal cry:
Age torn by th'haire o'th'head, Virgins defiled,
Dainty Dames ravished, and the tender child
Stabbed in the Mothers Arms; God grant such sights
May never fill our Land, with like affrights:
Importune Heaven, on God alone rely,
True prayer to God, is what? Nuncius Coeli;
Mercies sweet messenger, that sweetly bears
To Heavens bright Majesty man's trickling tears
Wrapped up in sighs, hearts-griefe, sorrows sad face
Wrinkled with cares for sin, which conquers grace;
What humble soul mounts heavens celestial Air
In up-flying fervent purity of Prayer,
But God sends down a pardon; Age and Youth,
Through ardent prayer, prove the sons of truth.
Fear thou stearne War, Fire, Sword, Times, dear years dearth?
Pray fervently, cease not till Heaven and Earth
Echo the Spirit of thy Supplications,
Tears of contrition, holy meditations:
So shall no Devils ruling in the Air,
Nor difficult passage stop zealous Prayer.
"The want of prayer, proves the souls decay,
"Men cease to prosper, when they cease to pray.
We all are sinners: sin raises such a storm
In our base blood, reason can never reform.
Urge reason to us, it will do no good,
Fervent Prayer only masters flesh and blood.
It Is Clavis coeli, which unlockes Gods treasure,
"Fervent prayer opens and shuts Heaven at pleasure,
The Elements, Fire, Water, Earth, and Air,
Are all at the command of fervent Prayer.
Elijah prayed that sier might descend
From Heaven, and heaven alone did him befriend.
Elijah prayed, it rained not for the space
Of three years and six months on the earths face.
Fervent prayer never did true solace lack;
Moses he prayed, and the Red Sea fled back,
The prayers of the faithful never failed;
Moses and Aarons fervent prayers prevailed
Against Korah, Dathan, and Abirams sin,
Earth opened, swallowed them, with all their kin.
Earnest prayer truly is (Heavens truth to say)
From man to God, from God to man the way.
"Prayer maugre all Earths Villainous entices,
"Makes man at peace with God, at war with vices.
O Text of Truth never to be denide,
Celestial prayer quells Luciferiall Pride.
Cooles raging lust, tames the Malicious,
Envy, Wrath, Gluttony, cures the Covetous,
Heavens in that prayer when (circl'd round with vice)
Man conquers sin, that is Prayers paradise.
Firm Prayer steeres souls to each soule-saving motion,
Sighs, Tears, repentance, and to all devotion,
As the true skill of a Pilote is unknown
But in a Tempest; (or a Captain prone
To noble deeds) his valor is unseene
But in a battle (where the field has been
His mount of Honor) so the rare worth
Of a true Christian, can be never set forth,
Nor ever of th'All-viewing eye discerned,
Till like the Hebrews General he has learned
Heavens pleasing science, the Celestial Art
Of fervent Prayer; that is the true Christians pare.
When the Hearts took with a delight to pray,
Souls clearly see, sinde a compendious way
To know Heaven savingly, to curb offense,
And burn in ravishing joy, truth's Excellence.
Such sweet content, all mortals Mundane wit,
(Humane delights,) can never equal i^
"The fixing of our hearts on heaven by prayer,
"Heales sins deep festering wounds, kills killing care,
Cures the distracted mind, proves souls defense,
Mercies subduer, sacred conference.
O thou Ens Enrium, sempeternall light,
Give me the spirit to pray, to pray aright;
Lest Tempest-tost with cares, thinking to shun
Sins guife, on ruints Rock my soul's undone:
"Pray then, O pray; he that prays willingly,
"Be rich or poor, can never live wickedly.
Prayer is the wing by which the soul does fly
To Heaven; and meditation is the eye
Wherewith we see God: by prayer we talk,
And by our Charity with God we walk.
Souls that will mount, gain a Celistiall Crown,
Must pray with ardency, look up, not down,
Like times too many mumblers that do fall
To pray, on the half knee, or none at all,
Nor desperately like such, as think no sin
To come to Church, till Sermon time begin;
Entering (O most abhorred) so sneakingly,
So rude in reverence, pray so peakingly,
As does amaze religious fortitude,
To see lewd Mortals base ingratitude
To their Redeemer; he that dreads heavens Rod,
Prays ardently to appease the wrath of God.
Else like the sickles edge, or Razor keen,
Heavens wrath works worldlings quick dispatch unseene,
Sharp Vengeance undiscernd full swift does fall,
Leaves not a life uncut; but mowes down all,
All grumbling Nations for their sins excess,
Pride to the poor, and rude unthankfulness,
All Sects, all Schisms, that dare by book maintain,
And for their own base ends, their godless gain,
"Make Scripture fight with Scripture* fatal ill,
"Sanctity save Kingdoms from such cursed skill.
O the deep folly that on man attends*
Our flesh and blood are to our selves salfe friends.
We ask, and pray, but both amiss, and why?
We neither ask nor pray with fervency,
Our minds at random run, this way, and that,
Upon a world of vanities; Idle chat,
Fashions, and fooleries; heaven pardon sin:
We often are out in Prayer, seldom in.
Sin like a whirlewind circles feeble prayer,
Snatches it up, then whirles it into air,
Infections air, whose fatal poison spreads,
Powers down hot vengance, misery on our heads,
Crosses, continual cares, perpetual pain,
Weak Prayer makes bitter still the fruit of gain,
Converts the key of kindness into lust,
Careless prayer makes the life of love unjust,
Dulls noble wisdom, overrules all reason,
To the forgetful souls Eternal Treason.
"We pray to heaven, yet mind not heavenly things,
"O foul ingratitude to the King of Kings.
"Man's mingling prayer with Earths cold cogitation,
"Merits swift vengeance; clothed in black damnation.
Think on thy God then, in thy days of youth,
Search in the Morning of thy years for truth;
Early betimes, before the evil day
Of sin, and Satan, that does every way
Stops man's Colestiall journey, scatters snares
In every place; we are not safe at Prayers:
No sooner man to heaven divine thoughts rease,
But straight the Devil whispers in his ear,
Think on the world, thy wealth, thy poor estate,
Means must be had; think on thy neighbors hate:
Think on revenge, think on thy change, thy crosses,
Thy law-suites, ships at sea, thy land, thy losses;
Away with Prayer^; puzzell not thy brain,
Mind thou what is present, what is to come resraine.
Thus speaks the subtle Fiend, of purpose bent,
To put us out of practice to repent.
Like a false Sexton, he sets back the Clock
To delay time, makes that our stumbling block;
Makes Time our Bawd, with flat'rie to betray,
And put us quite, out of the mind to pray:
With glorious outside, and deceitful riches,
Satan fools mortals, wisest men bewitches.
Note but the whore-like mind of man's condition,
(So generally in all) when they petition
Their earthly King; (Lord) what a stir we keep,
The busy braine's in labor, cannot sleep,
Nor take it is natural rest, the careful mind
Is totally took up, wholly inclined
To give each word his weight; for to relieve
Our wants, to sue for pardon, or repreive,
Profit or gain; then head, hand, heart and all,
Knees that never bend at Hean's high will, can fall
Prostrate in all obsequiousnes for place,
Lofty preferment, and a Princes Grace,
Then tongue and heart both jumpe in one agree,
Mind nothing but his Earthly Majesty;
Beg, kneel, implore, we fervently importune
Pardon for some foul fact, some brittle fortune.
This we can do, we can with hot pursuit
To compass our vain ends, never cease sins suite;
The trot, the amble, and the full cariere,
No speed is wanting, nor no pains too dear
To purchase sins Exchequer, riches store,
Ambitious aims, Times glory, Beauties whore,
This too too many can, and in that way,
Eager like hungry hounds, soon sent sins prey;
But to the King of those Eternal sires
That spangle Heaven, lukewarm in their desires,
"Impudent in all Vice, in baseness bold,
"Christians half coddl'd, neither hot nor cold,
"O Hell of hells; Man to'th' Celestial Race
"Does seldom run, but with a Iade-like pace,
Never considering how the mind that is wrapped
In wilful wickedness, is ever apt.
To pine at Princes, snarle at pious laws,
Scold people on to fight Religions cause.
When truth and all true Christians know Religion
Consists in true obedience, not Rebellion;
"Men that give way to ill, to increase their good,
"Bring famine on a land, fierce fire and blood.
"All villages in a Kingdom, Sin does delude,
"Leaves it a prey to'th' law-lesse Multitude.
In true obedience then, with humble knee,
Eye, head, hand, heart, pray to Eternity.
Throw from thy mind all worldly cares, temptations,
All wandering, idle, vain imaginations.
Abandon flaring pride, close fisted bribes,
And like the Father of twelve potent Tribes,
Tugge with Aimighty God, still strive to win
Pardon for each foul fact, times uggly sin.
"Like Arts rare engin's Excellent's defense,
"Against fires in Cities which (to clear offense)
Raises from Earth so sweet a watery shower,
As slacks the furious flame, extincts her power:
So let the Art of fervent prayer raise
Our watery tears to Heaven, to Heavn'n that paies
In the descent, man's penitent desires,
With plenitude of grace, to quench sins fires.
God made the ear to hear the happiness
We have from him, the tongue still to express
The glory of his name; the eye to see
The works of his divine Integrity.
Eye, head, hand, heart, God the whole man did frame,
All to rejoice in his All-Sacred name.
Happy the soul that prays with sincere sorrow,
Repent to day, defer not till to morrow.
And when you pray, think unto whom you pray;
It Is to the Worlds great builder, Lord of day,
'Mercies bright Majesty, The Almighty strong,
Just grand decider of each poor man's wrong,
That tumbles down the mighty, only can
Make the most Potent Prince, the poorest man;
The peace of Kingdoms in a breath disjoynt,
Spit all Earth's Children on wars Rapiers point;
Turn fruitful fields to iron, burn the grass,
And for our sins, convert the Heavens to brass;
Swell surging seas, the dreadful deepes with waves,
Storms, famine, fire and sword, to dig our graves,
How dare proud mortals then never take to mind
Heav's sacred eye-fight? shall dark deeds so blind
Man's Machivilian mischief, as to think
Raised on Ambitions top, he cannot sink?
He must, he must; bad states-menne'r so big
Fall of themselves in time, break like a twig.
As one nail drives another out of place,
So time cleares truth, drives flat'rie to disgrace:
Flatt'rers are fearful Fiends, bright honors sting,
Serpents, the worst of Traitors to a King;
Court-Eare-wiggs, nimbly wrigling in the Ears
Of greatness, mighty profits, madness, fears,
So painted over, shaddow'd for sound advice,
"A good King cannot knows virtue from vice,
Till Heaven (that brings the darkest deeds to light)
Produce in time the truth, twixt wrong and right.
Man whosoever thou art, take this advice,
It Is Angels counsel, Prayers Paradise.
"Walk after Gods way in the day of light,
"Or end thy journey in the darkest night,
There Is but one univerfall remedy
For all our ills, each souls extremity,
And that is fervent prayer, all must resort
To Prayer, or perish; there is no safe port
(In this worlds Mare Mortuum) for man
To put into, but prays; prayer only can
Powered out in fervency of soul prevent
Plagues, famine, blood, and death, warr's dire event,
Bred by seditious subjects, whose desires
Are still the fuel unto popular fires.
Prayer shall confound, dead all the divellish deeds
Of foreign foes, all home-corrupted seeds:
Dissembling Hypocrites, by hells aid appointed
To stiff truth, and grieve the Lords anointed.
Prayer like to hasty powder sir'd shall choke,
Flame viperous Rebels to a sudden smoke.
Pray then, through fervent prayer imitate
Moses and Jacob, wrestle with blessed fate,
Subdue thy sins, against sinful flesh and blood,
"Importune heaven, and heaven will do thee good.
"Gods promise is, if fervently we pray,
"And use our best endeavors every day
"To fly from sin, resolving to betake us
"To holy means, he never will forsake us.
"Never did any do their fair endeavor
"To pray to God, that ever lost his labor,
"Nay more, if God but see thy inclination
"To pray, he will prevent thy supplication,
Answer thy full desire, e're thou can crave,
Grant that, thy heart did never hope to have:
Witness good heaven it is true; there is no denial,
For I have found th'experimentall trial,
And were for ever like a soul in hell
Worthy to burn; should I forget to tell,
In midst of dangers, how I called on thee,
Merciful God; and thou did set me free.
At home, abroad, at Sea, upon the land,
Here, there, and every where, thou Lord did stand
My sure protector against griefs infinite,
Times flattering ruin, and the worlds despite,
Sickness, sad discontent, when I and care,
Shook hands with sorrows Minion deep despair.
That very hour, in heaviness locked up
Beyond all hope of health; then mercies Cup
I freely tasted; blessed be thy name,
To me my Gracious God, prove still the same,
Circle me round thou All-Bternall health,
Against all enticements, Honor, Beauty, Wealth,
Those fatal slies of sin; which though best men
Do never so much flap off, sly on again:
Arm, a^me good heaven, Times Microcosme in me,
Through Faith, Hope, Love, enable me to be
Truths Champion; Troops of Furies to withstand,
And stave Hells Tempter off, dead sins command.
"Times expert faithful soldier is a Jewel,
"Fit for a King, to fight a Kingdoms Duel.
"Valor and honesty are Princely twins,
"There Is nothing makes a Coward, but his sins.
Lord, let a watchful Centinell within
My weak mortality, so keep out sin,
That when so e're we meet, Morn, Noone, or Night,
I with my good sword Faith, may in thy sight,
Heavens Saint-like Soldier prove, subdue and win
At truths close constant fight, conquest over sin.
Hear me my God, mount thoughts with admiration,
Upon the highest step of contemplation.
Irradiate (Lord) my mind, past sins control
Conari Sancta; Angelize my so ule.
Give what thou do command great God, and then,
Command even what thou will; Amen, Amen.
EArnest prayer, and the committing of sin,
Will never lodge together in one Inn.
For sure if prayer cannot make thee cease
From sin; sins sure to rob thy soul of peace,
And make thee leave off praying; God's all Eye,
Let our petitions then with fervency
Fly unto him, whose Majesty is such,
It comprehends all power; do but touch,
Try, and then trust, petition but his name
In ardency of soul, you le find a flame
All-heav'nly holy, thrill through thy vital blood
To quell corruption, turn all ill to good.
O that the Souls of Mortall's to the life
Would Act this part, subdue sins stormy strife
Through fervent prayer; and in that swift course run,
Firm as the golden taper of the sun
Which hourly sails the Circuit of the Sky,
That, were excelling heavenly harmony.
'Twould make this Globe on Earth whereon we tread,
Times glorious Theater; the rich stage spread
And hung all-round with silver shining stars
Pricked fall of holy thoughts; in them no jarres
Of times discording music dare appear,
The Musick-roome of concord being there;
There Truths fair Actor, where so e're he turns
His penitent Eye, with holy raptures burns,
Sees the All-sole Spectator, Three in one
Seated in gloryes Gallery; where none
But his Omniscient blessed beatitude,
Sits the sole Judge of souls Ingratitude,
Actors, and Action; man's good part, and his ill,
Th'unworthy Actors, dull, imperfect skill
Bred by distemper, gross neglect in studdy,
Careless Rehearsalls, and a skull so muddy,
As never minds th'infinite pains and Art,
Penned, to advance and fit him with a part
That might immortalize; inflame desire,
Ravish his sinne-sicke sense; his soul inspire
With sacred ecstasy; high apprehension,
Seraphicall love, divine affection.
Heavens gracious Actor makes this precious use
Of his fair Part; never turns it to abuse,
Nor wrongs the writer; but amazed with wonder,
As one shot through and through with holy thunder
At pious lines; whose powerful Energie,
(In Noble spirits frustrates misery,)
Tames Pride, cooles lust, makes the wise Actor see
His soul in danger; circl'd with sins, that He,
In all meek Humbleness of soul prepares him,
Not rashly hot (like some that go to swim,)
But takes a time to cool by meditation,
Ponders with sweet celestial affectation
On his soule-pleasing Part, dares not venture
To tread Times Stage; nor unadvised to enter
Till perfect in that part, whose excellence
Gains grace, sins pardon, Mercles Audience.
Then like a bold and able Musketeire
Armed with a world of valor, trampling fear
Under his valiant foot, set's bravely on
The front of danger, where destruction.
In fiery flames, threatens to scourge his error,
With never-failing death; yet scorning terror
He in his good cause, still opposing all,
Horrors and terrors what e're can befall,
Mounted on valors wings never retires,
Still he winnes ground; his ready nimble fires
Play thick upon the foe, add flame on flame,
Undaunted stands, to the honor of his name.
And never forsakes the fury of the fight,
Till conquest Crowns him in his Countries right.
So fares it with Truth's Actor, when his Part
Enters him on the Stage a Pious heart.
Then with clutch'd heaved up hands above his head,
Eyes drowned in Tears, and Arms divinely spread
To meet with mercy, servently begins
So to bewail the whirle-poole of his sins,
That to gain pardon, rid away all fears,
Sighs swim in Sobs, deep groans in floods of tears
Importunes heaven, good Actions ne'rgives ore,
Till he has quit the world, and cleared sins score,
That like to Ariadne crowned with stars,
The soul in glory shines, all ill debarrs.
Admit at first, thou can not frame thy self
For Cares, and Crosses, Lust and worldly pelf
To pray to God aright; yet still endeavor,
Combat with linne; for victory persevere:
What though to pray thou find'st thy self unapt,
Dull, heavy, sad, easy to be intrapt?
Start from the Devil that ensnares thee so,
With sloth's lewd lullaby for endless woe.
Let me beseech thee to be heavenly wise,
Rub drowsy dullness from thy tender eyes,
Retire unto thy chamber, shut the door,
There wringing of thy hands fall down, implore
Heavens sacred aid, on thy dejected knees,
Pray to that glorious Majesty which sees
The depth of darkest secrets; beat thy breast,
Till tears for sin arise never give it rest.
Strike, strike the stony ent'rance of thy heart,
Act to the life, the Publicars true part,
Knock, and knock hard; make l'ertues hammer felt
On thy hearts slinty Anvile; till it melt
To soft compassion; when that spring appears,
Eyes turn to pearly drops, to floods of tears,
Such streaming pearls of pity, being shed
For sin in thee; as shall when thou art dead,
Mount thy triumphing soul on Angels wings
To live for ever; Crowned by the King of Kings:
Great is the power of fervent Prayer, that can
Conquer the All-Creator, ravish man;
Fervent prayer, makes the crooked conscience even;
Prayers, are those scaling laders set to heaven
That lay long siege unto the throne of God,
Surround divinity, keep in his Rod.
And never will depart, nor raise the siege,
Till they compel Natures Celestial Liege
To grant what they do come for; feign would have,
To shield sad souls from the infernal Grave.
THE WORLD.
Vain is this World, this Strumpet World that can
Yield nothing constant; Love 'twixt man and man,
Which next his Maker should be most respected,
Is soonest broke, and most of all neglected,
Misse-led by every vain fantastic toy,
To forget God; bewitched with carnal joy,
Bundles of Banbles, imbecillitie,
Biles of Apparel, Botch Nobility,
Lordship, Ladyships, Fool'ries, and Fashions,
Lust-panting Humors, ten thousand passions.
Rich men, the more to blame, as this Age goes,
Debar Housekeeping to maintain gay Clothes.
Arich Caroach, three hundred pound a Gown,
Thirty pound a Smock, or their wives will frown,
There is no living with them; they must ride,
Where, when, and how they lift in glittering pride,
High flasting burning Braverie, blind eyes,
Flint Hearts, dull Ears, deaf to the poor man's cries.
Such is the dullness of mortality,
And such the worlds cold Hospitalitte.
"Brave Clothes, fall feeding, pride, ease, and laughter,
"Are peoples sins, that breed a peoples slaughter.
"Times maw-wormes, muck-wormes, cancker-wormes of sin.
"Ruins our Peace without, our Peace within.
"Each dustie Magistrate with Brib'rie fed,
"One robs the Living, another robs the dead,
"A third the Arch-theefe plays by cunning stealch,
"Knave Knights, by Patent rob the Commonwealth,
"Join with much, too much ill Injustice, he
"Sodomiticall letcher for a greedy Fee
"Dares license lust, glad if he may prevail
"(Suck wealth from prostitute Harlots,) never fail.
Man's mind, which most his maker should respect,
(With fear and trembling, and that true respect
Belongs to his high Majesty) the net
Of sin so snates, we worth-lesse worms forget
Gods thunder-darting Vengeance, glorious state,
Still forget God, forget to contemplate
With ravishing Love, true Love, pure heart, pure eyes,
That Is the defect, makes hourly mischiefs rise,
"Ambitious Lords attired in Anticke shape,
"Joy in the ways of Lust, Murder, and rape.
"Ladies, with charms, tricks, humors, that they have,
"Abuse their Lords, dispatch 'em to the grave.
"The jealous Husband, mischievous in ill,
"Through vain suspect, his constant wife to kill.
"The carelesse-Clergy-man in his degree
"Satan corrupts; makes for a goldensee
"The greedy Lawyer, (fed by Clients strife)
"Bribed Angels take, for the the true Angel life.
Just Judge, the unjust'dustie Magistrate,
Father the son, the son the Father hate;
Brother, the brother prosecute to death,
Quarrel for toys; stop one another breath.
The World does hour'ly tempt fools worldly wise,
The deceitful Tradesman that seems precise,
And is an arrant Knave; to think the honey,
And only blessed life, still to get money,
Mockes at the poor man's virtue, and in pride,
Styles him a virtuous Fool; thus Knaves deride
The poverty of men, which does as sarre
(In Heavenly wealth) transcend them, as a star
The richest Gemme on Earth; But it is not so
With the World's wealthy worldlings; they say no,
Rich enough, honest enough; all they can
Aims at the outward, not the inward man.
"Poverty made a scosse, a scorn, a wind,
"Gold smothers Virtue, blackest actions blind.
"Gold got in Gods name, with an honest face,
"Comes flow; but in the Devils name apace.
Such is the Worlds condition, Good Men's thrall,
On Parth there is no true comfort, none at all.
The honest minded Scholar shall no'r lack
"Sorrows, nor want of means to break his back.
"The pitiful Soldier in his greatest need
"Has his throat cut; he shall be sure to bleed.
"The fair Gamester, for his mild square play,
"Is soonest cozened, sure to lose every day.
"The faithful Lover often is paid with hate,
"The more in Love, the more unfortunate,
Be rich or poor, in high or low estate,
Pth'mod'rate mean, or fully fortunate,
Unsatiate mankind, ever discontent,
Desires to live, yet never lives content,
In scarcity of corn, for plenty cry,
In plenty, straight forget God instantly.
Such is man's erring soul, which ought to know,
"Life's but a long sad Pilgrimage of woe,
"An Arc of travel, shop of vanity,
"Storehouse of tristes, inhumanity.
"A field of stones, a path of thornie pricks,
"Meadow of Scorpions, Grove of Basilickes.
The World's unquiet rest is all Man's foe,
Dangers attend us where so'e're we go.
Mischievous Deceits, Brawles, Quarrels; Fightings,
False-hearted Neighborhood, base back-bitings.
Friendships, so faithless ripe, full blown with evil,
A friend to day, the next, for gain proves Devil.
The World's condition right; it is slave to sin,
Beware of it; the world's a cunning ginne,
"Twill entrap souls; call then to God for grace,
Let grief for worldly crossesne'r take place,
Never let sorrow run into extremes
Unless for sin; so shall Celestial Beams
Glorify thy soul; make it immortal,
Free it fromills what ever can befall
In this false promising world; this Maze of woe,
Where wretched worldlings know not where to go
To wind them out; such are the various ways
Of life-oppressing years, Months, Weeks and days.
As Prose ill read, abide too much missusing
Or virtuous verse, when Rogues have the perusing,
So fares it with the fair and flourishing line
Of that sweet Heavenly strain, Poesy Divine,
Basely neglected, by the monstre Crew,
"Of Puff-Past-Muddie-Mindes, that pish, and mew,
"Make a wry Close-stoole-face, a squint eyed glance
"At Virtuous verse, (whose sad mischance
"Is to go unregarded) when the crime,
"Of a Lascivious bastard Ballad-rime,
"(If baudy enough) though never so unfit,
"Winns favor, profit, and the praise of wit.
"Read with delight, and much, too much required,
"Coppies sought after, greedily desired,
"When perfect Poetry, ( Music to the soul,
"Truths firm opposer, against crimes filthy foul)
"If read, most read for fashion, small delight,
"No, comfort, no respect, but scornful slight.
"And such is Virtues Foe; the Worlds proud Minion,
"In whom there is no true love, no perfect Union.
O Divine Poesy I lament thy state,
To see thy beauty disproportionate,
So poorly in esteem, there is few I see,
Or none at all, take true delight in thee.
This wanton World, far sooner will approve,
Joy in Pot-Poets lousie Ryming love,
Or want on Ovids strain, to itch the ear,
And stir the blood to Lust; rather then hear
The Sempeternall Aim of Noble verse
Which points at Heaven; and tells us of that sierce
All-threatning Thunderer; he that descries
Our secret deeds; our blackest Actions spies,
At which; amazed my Muse stands wrapped in wonder,
Beggs mercy, mercy, O thou God of Thunder,
Or we shall shipwreck all; All, too too blame,
Far too unmindfull of Gods sacred name,
His blessings day by day; his great mercy,
Long suffering, and excelling safety.
Why should we worms stand precious in Heavens sight
And nor be damned to everlasting-Night
For our foule-erring sins; sins that excell^
Ingratitude to Heaven, picks open Hell.
Hell; that this instant Gapes to seize this world,
Which deserves every moment to be hurld
To endless Flames; but for the Excellence
Of OUR FATHER'S wonderful patience.
O for the Pen of pure perfection,
To Character man's imperfection,
Open the blind excessive sinners Eyes,
(Force tears for sin) make him, himself despise,
Tear open his eyes, that All-amaz'd with Horror,
Trembling, he may behold his dreadful Error
Live; as in sulphurous Flames, see his evil,
See the Grand Devil, and cease to be a Devil.
Holla commanding Empress of my Brain,
Whither thus stings my Muse, divert thy strain.
The Worlds a Rack, Times Tenter-hooke to catch
At minds most honest, makes a man awretch,
Thousands in want, finding no way to cure it,
Hazard the Gallows, rather then endure it.
Misery of Miseri's, when Coin grows scant,
Man's fortunes Football, there is no wot to want,
It dulls brave wits, when nothing else can do it;
Tames, and makes desperate, when Time brings men to it.
Want makes a man turn slave, unto a slave,
Scof't, scorned, and flouted at by every knave,
By every silken sodden-headed Fool,
That never felt Heavens rod, nor Mis'ries school.
Want breaths mischeifs never thought upon,
Makes too many dainty Dames turn wanton.
Want (like a Madman) makes men swear and dice,
Forget their God, turn Virtue into Vice.
Husband and wife, the sister, and the Brother,
Compelled through want, devour one another.
Merchants, Lawyers, yea, some Divines will fall,
When want does soundly gripe, 'twill try 'em all.
And therefore (as an Antidote) be sure,
Strive to please God first; that is the only cure
Against Wolvish want; then let thy present state,
Think on some honest means; 'twill new create
Thy understanding; put thee on away
With rev'rent Soul, on bended knees each day
To serve thy God aright; so he from falling
Proves thy Protector; gives thee a Virtuous calling.
Heaven grant, the honest mind may never know
The fierce assaults of wants; that hell of woe,
Torture of mind, murderer of modesty,
Highway to Theft, Cut-throate of chastity,
The key of whoredom, Bane of that true love,
Which many boast; but few did ever prove.
Many vow Love, for ever to be true,
Yet, when want comes, whores are not more untrue,
How sweetly did that Sacred Psalmist sing,
And run Times true Division on the string
Of Misery, when he of God did crave
Nor want, nor too much wealth, least in the Grave
Of damned Despair, much want might hale him in,
And riches mount him to the highest sin;
Lackey his way to lewdness, to mistrust
Gods mercies; and to practice ways unjust,
A holy fear, seized on that Sacred King
To dread wants dangrous Dart, proud riches sting.
May the good Man, still thirst for mercies Cup,
Clymbe Jacobs sacred Ladder, and mount up
Into a fiery Chariot, burning zeal,
Live a bright Angel, in Heavens commonweal,
Free from this world, whose pomp and bravery,
Is but a Land of Dirt, mere slavery.
Mundus domus ampla malorum, Ac scelerum Patria est.

THE FLESH.
THe Flesh unto the Soul's a bitter Pill,
Sweet gilded poison, Candide over to kill,
Hurrid, Caroacht in Pride, with glittering show
Of swelling pomp, whose sweet effect, is woe,
Fleshly delights begets much misery,
Makes couples married unadvisedly,
Thinking Love tittle tattles, can feed their wishes,
Love soon grows cold, where there is empty dishes.
Of all the sins that are, when nothing can
Ruin the soul; the Flesh prevails with man.
Man's eyes no sooner on devotion wait,
But in steps Carnal concupiscence straight,
She Is at his Elbow still, to itch him on,
Th'unhappie path to his confusion.
Chaste Wives are Saints, women that wantonize,
Witches, all poison, hell is in their eyes,
In which, as in a wilderness of woe,
In striving to get out, on mad men go,
Stark mad, past sense, spite of all books and Schools
Ruin their Fortunes; prove the slaves to Fools
For an alluring minutes trifling joy
Insatiate Licorish longing, a mere toy,
The flesh (false Traitor like) strives to betray
The soul to Hell, as Heavens just castaway.
Fleshly delight in Man, fears want of breath
More then his God; sin, or Eternal death.
When just Plagues come, then sin-sicke sots can tremble,
Make known to all the world, how they dissemble;
Pray with the Lip, (not heart) wrest sacred Text
To serve their own ends first; and then Gods next,
Provide to live, in pestilent Times begin,
Take greater care to fly from death, then sin,
There Is nothing in our Flesh but wickedness,
(...) to live, and obscene wantonness.
O vain desire of mortals, can there be
In flight or Physic crew against heavens decree?
No, no, there is no escape; no way to this:
Man's good life only, meets with mercies kiss.
We forget now that dreadful dismal chance,
The terrible Arrow of Gods vengeance,
When death buried far more, then the earth could swallow,
And no man to the Grave his friend durst follow.
O why should Mortals wish long life to live?
What comfort? what true joy does this live give?
There Is nothing, not one thought that does us good,
But it is strangled straight, by flesh and blood.
Holy Saint Paul, finding the fleshrebell,
Desired to be dissolved, proud flesh to quell:
And Sacred Symeon sung against sins increase;
Lord let thy servant now depart in peace.
Shall such soul sweenting preparations be
Forgotten quite; O blind security,
What is it, we behold in this vain life?
But daily dangers, soule-bewitching strife,
The Flesh is full of dagger; (never quiet)
Among fullfed dishes, and Luxurious diet,
When my Soule-Erring Eyes, staring behold
A dangerous strumpet, flame in glittering gold
(And murdering beauty; sparkling from her Eye
Burning temptation;) then, me thinks I spy
My most apparent mischief, plainly see,
How I never strive to please my God, as she
Strives to please men; such is the flaming pride
Of the vain flesh, it hurts on every side.
There Is nothing constant in us, if to day
Virtue we love, to morrow Vice obey.
What a notorious Coxcombe unto sin,
Lust makes of Man, slave to a whores soft skin.
What Is a delicious Harlot? but a cheater,
A poisoned Marmalad Box, that rots the earer,
A Harlot, Man most fitly may compare
To Quicksilver; whose Mertall (like asnare)
When er'e it meets with gold, does evermore
Mlingle it self; so commonly a whore.
It Is not the Man, but money she respects,
And mingling with the one, she both infects,
Drinks deep in Taverns, Swaggers, Swears, and raves,
Gets gold from fools, to spend it upon knaves.
The chief praise of a good wise does not lie
In outward show; but inward piety:
If Virtue rules her blood, she merits love,
If not, I will assure thee she will prove
Like a deceitful glass; where man may see,
He Is merely cheated in her; O misery,
Man makes lewd women proud with looking at,
And wondrous wanton to, believe that.
The only cure, Lust's raging flames to quench
Is Aqua Lachrymarum; that will stench
The wounds proud women so delight to make
On the poor soul of Man; make him to quake,
Afear'd to stand on that false rock of Ice
Idleness feeder of foul carnal Vice,
Nurse of black thoughts, south-Fogg, which rots the mind
Leapours the soul, and is the Northern wind
The cause of all sins storms; that dangerous flood
Lusts surging Ocean swelling in Man's blood.
O Devil desire of Lust, me, me forsake,
I charge thee hence, by him that made hell quake,
By that Almighty One, in sacred Trine,
All holy spells, and Charms, Magic Divine;
By that sweet Excellent Sacred Purity
(Sister of Angels) Virgin Chastity,
Fly from me all base thoughts, be just mine eyes,
And be your selves; hate wantons Witcheries.
Impendet periculum omnibus.

THE IESVITE.
NOt like that Mass Priest, he whose mouth is crammed
With words that speak all Protestants are damned.
Him nor his slocke, I dare not censure so,
Nor mean to write more then I justly know
To be most true; in which known Path I find,
Counterfeit Catholics, so grossly blind,
They dare outface Heavens Truth, forged lies maintain
To Cloak the cunning Jesuits subtle Brain,
He that does Theefe-like wait for virtues fall,
Lives in perpetual watch, to blow up all.
The President, recorded stands for ever,
In this Realms safety; which hell's Plot can never
Wipe from Rememb'rance; never shall the Evil
Of that close Secretary, to the Devil,
That Jesuit Garnet, live forgot while I,
Have Pen, or Hand, to write his Tragedy,
(That Mine of Murder, Mischiefs Master-vice,
Lodged in the Politicque skull of Avarice)
His desperate Soul was such, he durst to swim,
A Sea of Vice, be rackt in every limme.
All tortures suffer, rather then reveal
The Treason, his Religion bids conceal.
Witness thou Ghost of Garnet, this is true,
He that han'gd, drawn, and quartered, had his due.
To him was known, the powder pitchie Treason,
Never to be forgot, he knew the season
When, where, and how, that sudden bloody blow,
(Black, Hell-bread, Thunder, flaming, overthrow,)
Should have been given, knew the Times short space,
When no soul should have time to pray for Grace,
Or cry, God help; The Treason was so foul,
The Traitors would have damned both body and Soul
If in their power: and every soul in the Air
Tossed up, sent unprepared of heavenly prayer,
With all their sins; O horrid, horrid Act,
All this the Jesuit knew; concealed the fact,
And rather then disclose, least warning give,
King, Prince, and Nobles, not a soul should live,
Here was a Villain; yet I Have known in Spain,
The Traitors death so moan'd, such Credit gain,
(Though here he did, for Treasons just complaint)
There Monster Jesuits, make a Martyred Saint.
Mischievous Mass Priests to his meriting fame,
At the high Altar in a spacious frame,
Advance to him, as to a Saint most blessed,
His Body-mangled Picture, thus expressed: Garnets Picture.
Bare Head, white Beard, Looks sober, in his Gown,
"Him over head, Angels with Laurel Crown.
"About his Neck, a long large Haltertide,
"Hangs, (as befitting such) down the Left side.
"His Belly ripped, blood seeming open straw,
"Holding in his righ hand, his pictured draw.
"Beneath his right side, flames a Heart in fire,
"Bove his left, Limbs quartered, Treasons hire,
"Presented on a Tower; which Pictured story,
Straw-fainted set up to the Arch-Traitors Glory,
Invites each eye, yea all the world to see
Jesuits, Protectors of all Villainy.
"Poys'ning of Princes, held as trifling things,
"With them, it is meritorious to kill Kings.
Can this Religion be, they think it pure,
But man never knew Religion more impure,
Their Church, is but their Cloak, bad deeds to further,
The only sanctuary for blood and murder.
Plots, Practizes, hellish abomination,
Pardons for Treason, holy approbation
Of that ill-Sainted wretch (his cursed fault)
That Father to Faux, the Divill in the vault.
Such Iudas-Iesuites ever Traitors prove
To King, and Prince; disloyal in their love.
"Yet outward fawning seem on bended knee
"Low as the earth; O true hypocrisy,
"Under the mild aspect of Reverence,
"In duty, and submisse obedience,
"With Oily Eloquence, best pleasing Phrase,
"Catching Orations, full of flattering praise,
"When in the heart abides no spot of good,
"All treacherous thoughts; all thirsting after blood,
"The fall of Princes, changes, alteration,
"The Protestants Religion's desolation,
"Such is the Jesuits dive'lish disposition,
"The nature of the Beast, his true condition,
"He that can temporize, by book maintain
"To serve his ends; and glut his God-lesse gain.
"Be what he least seems, cold in devotion,
Envious, at one another Promotion,
"Not lowly minded, but proud Ambitious,
"In tongue a Saint, in heart a slave vicious.
"Preach divine patience, when himself shall be,
"The waspish Image of all Tyranny.
"Spleenative, choll'ricke, and who so offends,
"Is so far off from ever being friends,
All-bee't he seem a Calm, yet if he live,
He Will be revenged, be sure never to forgive,
Such is the Jesuit, such his double Face,
And such his charitable sign of Grace.
He that dares awe his Country, King and State,
Smile, and yet be a villain, all men hate,
Set Princes at debate, befoole the times,
Poison the world, with irreligious Crimes,
Swell Battles, Murders, make whole Kingdoms shake,
Shed Innocent blood, all for Religions sake,
To defend Religion, what Religion's this,
To seem devoute, and do so much amiss?
"Color Religion, with mere gullerie,
"Wrest sacred Text, to maintain Roguerie,
"(As if Religion were a formal Law,
"Religion only to keep fools in awe,)
Defend Controversies; woe to those days,
Woe to such Serpent-snarling Church-Mens ways,
"Sin never triumphs, strikes a more fatal stroke,
"Then when it is cove'rd with Religions Cloak.
That Jesuit, he, who speaks divinely fair,
Yet has a wicked life; I may compare
To fire, stand off, do not come too near it,
You then may safely warm; need not fear it.
But if thou unadvisedly presume,
Approach too nigh, thee it will burn, consume,
So the deceitful Priest, come not near him,
Shun his acquaintance, you need not fear him.
Fly his dissembling sight, his black life spurn,
If lodged within your bosom, he will burn,
With show of holiness burn and scorch,
Waste thee, in thy Estate, like a spent Tortch.
There Is not a Gentleman of means does die,
But with his Heir, the Jesuit presently
Shares in his land; with show of Reverence,
(Winning of Souls) covers concupiscence.
Commits with all he like, any Man's wife,
Makes her believe, it is to preserve his life.
Persuading Letch'rie, with their Ghostly Father,
No sin, but a deed of charity rather.
Sad-sicknesse to prevent, to scowre the veins,
To mundifie, and for to purge the Reins.
Ergo plena Charitatis; An Act
Of mere Commiseration, such a Fact,
As to deny it, (were a damned sin)
Pulls curse on curse, which has for ever binne
Justly inflicted; punishing all those
Repugnant Natures, with the worst of woes,
Despair, assured confusion, dismal horror,
Sudden destruction, Death, infernal terror,
Hell, and the Devil; for that high offense
Of Stubborn refusal, disobedience,
A sin, impossible to be forgiven,
Such is the Jesuits charge; of purpose given,
To please his Lust; makes that, a gainefull trade,
Lies with this Lady, and that Chamber-Maide.
Here gives a Pardon, there denounces Curses,
So betwixt both, sure to pick all their Purses.
The Nimble Slaves Church-knaverie can strip,
And fetch your greatest Lady over the hip.
With a religious show', put tricks upon her,
Rob the believing Fool, first of her honor,
Then pardon Sin; and then he may enthrall,
Rob her of Coin, Plate, Jewels, Smock and all,
Do, and undo, Her Charity's soon drawn
For baudie Jesuits, her best Smock to pawn,
Their thread of Doctrine'mong women spun,
Is to whore all, be she the chastest Nun,
If she deny to yield, Murder and Rape,
Shall Wolfe-like seize that prey, there is no escape,
Such is the Murdering Mind of him we call,
Natures Monster, Priest Jesuitical.
Noli gloriari quod lingua been dicis, Si vita male dicis.

THE DEVIL.
SEarch all the Earth, you every where shall see
Satan most busy; from the Church not free,
The very Pulpit haunts, and being vexed,
Seeks how to put the Preacher from his Text.
Such as teach others, yet themselves neglect,
And with sins Cassocke, hide their own defect;
From Pew, to Pew, unseene; Hell's Fiend does creep,
To dull the Hearers Ears, Ioggs some asleep,
Some to vain prattle, others still to pry,
With wanton looks, for a bewitching Eye,
Some greedily imployes, to spy out fashions,
To glut the humors of proud women's passions,
Makes muddie Mortals, at each other look,
More then on Heaven, or Gods all Sacred Book.
And such is Satan's craft, continual motion,
To draw mankind from heaven, and all devotion.
Tempts some to Hate, Ambition, some to slide
The sliprie sleights of Pomp, unpai'd for pride.
Others to swim the Sea, Lust pleasing vice
Some wet damnation, most men Avarice
Servants to Satan; Satan which does strive,
Man of all heavenly solace to deprive.
God (for our sins) no sooner ang'ry grows,
But straight the roaring, sudden Devil throws
His Paws on us; and like himself begins
(For numbers numberless of desperate sins)
To seize the soul, made an eternal prey,
To burn in Hell; as Heavens just cast away:
Such is the Fate of souls, ensnared within
Satan's command; beware the Twigge of sin,
Least touch will take the Prisoner; Hellish guiles
Prove like the perilous paths of Crocodiles,
Who with their slimie tongues (lickt or'c) prepare
To murder Mortals, by a slip'rie snare.
Man is a Tree, whose root, is certain evil,
Bad deeds the Body, yielding to the Devil.
The Arms, ten proud aspiring discontents,
Breakers of all the ten Commandments.
The Branches are, our pronenesse unto ill,
The Leafes Pleasure, the fair fruit sin, which still
With sweetest show of sweetness tempts us on,
To feed and follow our destruction.
"There is fear above us, fear still beneath us,
"Fear round about, and yet no fear within us:
Satan like Dalilah, suffers not men
For to see danger; is it not fitting then,
By holy violence, we seize the sword
Of the Omnipotents, Omnipotent word
To slaughter sin in us; O shall not we
(That profess Sacred Christianity,)
Conquer our crimes; think on the life to come,
The rising of the dead; the Day of Doom,
That dreadful day; let us then never wink,
At our base follies; never forget to think:
When this vast Orb of Earth shall blasing burn,
And all the world in Funeral flames shall mourn,
Then Heaven and Hell amazing must appear
In two extremes; Joy, and excessive fear.
Heaven, in bright shining All-Eternall Light,
Hell, in the Horror of perpetual Night.
Heaven shall triumph, Hell, tremble, Angels sing,
Gloria in Excelsis, to Heavens high King;
The King of Heaven; Heaven joys perfect solace,
All-Ravishing, glit'ring glist'ring Palace,
Pleasures Paradise, immortal dwelling,
All-pure, excellent, past thought excelling.
Heavens Pavement, are the Stars, in what excess
Shines Heaven, when star-pav'd, with Stars numberless
No thought of want, which mads the thoughts of men,
But plenties fullness, full abound in Heaven.
"There, Virgin Chastity in life oppressed,
"Glitters in Saint-like Glory, lives most blessed.
"The poor Man tossed from wrong, to injury,
"In Heaven finds comfort, firm felicity,
"The wronged Widow, injured fatherless,
"Bright Heaven relieves, gives all their woes redress.
"He, that for ill does good, Heaven will requite,
"Crown his fair soul with comforts infinite.
Is it not fit then, we our sins bewail?
Think still on Heaven? on Heaven that never did fail
The penitent soul, when (alas) distressed,
Naked, forlorn, when most of all oppressed,
Then sends relief; miraculous reliefes,
Such is the love of Heaven; Heaven cures all griefs,
As for Times Wolfe-turn'd ill-affected great-ones,
Close-fisted to the poor, deaf to their groans,
The Villains of this Age, that make profession,
Of a pure life yet live by base oppression,
Hell shall confound their souls, that Den of Horror
(Circl'd with black affright, blew-burning terror)
Shall boil their souls, and bodies to th'black-sweat
Of an infernal poison; and that eat
Still to renew new pains; plagues that excel,
Such are the never-dying pains of hell.
There, painted Pride lives crowned in flaming fire,
Times glorious strumpet, whipped with burning wiere,
Fed is the Lust-provoking Letcher there,
With scorching coals; such as delight to swear,
Swallow the Drunkards ever scalding oil,
There, Vsuters, in Pooles of sulphur boil,
Murder, Rape, Incest, endless torments feel,
The Rack of vengeance, and the burning wheel
Whirled round in blew flames; soule-amazing fear,
"More thignes then tongue can tell, the damned bear.
In burning beds of steel, souls blazing fry,
Tortured with torments, such as never dye;
Cursing the Time of their abused Creation,
Parents, Fate, sin, and their own damnation.
Better, O better never to be borne,
Then with such Terrour-striking torments torn.
Which ^o (...), weep worms of Earth, repent,
Weep, weep for sin, soule-killing sins prevent.
"Seek heaven, shun Hell, fly from the worlds entice,
"Heavens the reward of Virtue, Hell of Vice.
"Perfect repentance makes men bravely die
"That lived not so; fly then Hell's misery.
"Repent, or damn, for sin, weep and weep well,
"Souls that do flout at tears, shall fry in hell.
"The Devil sets his baits in every Angle,
"No Corner's free from him, souls to entangle.
"Therefore in Virtues Path, strive to excel:
"Let firm faith still repulse the Fiend of hell.
Divines may preach else, till their heart strings burst,
The height of sin will mount, live still accursed.
Vbi peccatum, ibi Procella.

Man's Misery.
Man's life is like a Watch, whose Time if still
It Minnits right, distempered by no ill,
It is a rare Piece then; but often we see,
It runs too fast; in Action it is too free.
Sometimes, by wilful providence set back,
Sometimes, by dull neglect it goes too slack,
Beats like a dying panting pulse so slow,
That by and by it stands; and then we know
It Is down, some curious wheel is much amiss,
Or some spring broke, whereby the whole frame is
So far pastrectifying, that it can
Never go right; but like disordered Man,
Mis-spending precious time in godless riot,
Time bars of Heaven, Angels immortal diet.
Youth is a hot, unbridled, wilful folly,
Pick me out one that is Virtuous, truly holy
In this abused life; and you shall find,
Infinite thousands of a Vicious mind.
Age Palsey-strucke ready for deaths dark grave,
Insensible of sin, it all would have
That show of profit brings; though ill got gain,
And threatening heaven in thunder speak, refrain
Bad precepts; it will not do; Truth tells us still,
Age proves Youth's scorn, through examples ill.
Vice leads the silver years to endless blame,
Vain unstay'd youth to beggary, and shame.
It Is Heavens just punishment; an ill lewd life,
In Young and old, meets with eternal strife.
Think then on thy Creator wretched man,
Remember what thou art, thy life a span,
A weak thin thread, spun from the downy wool
Of tender children, to the Aged skull.
From youths rich Scarlet die, Beauties full force,
To the silver Tinsell snow, of a cold Course.
Man is an Actor, and the world the Stage,
Where some do laugh, some weep, some sing, some rage
All in their Parts, during the Stene of breath,
Act follies, scourged by the Tragodian death:
Such is the Fate of souls, ensnared within
Satan's command; beware the twigg of sin,
Least touch will take thee Prisoner; Hellish guiles,
Prove like the perilous paths of Crocodiles,
That with a slimie Tongue lick't over prepares
To murder Mortals; such is Satan's snare.
O why should Mortals wish long life to live,
What comfort? what true joy does this life give?
There Is nothing, not one thought that does us good,
But it is strangled straight by flesh and blood.
The longer life, the more we sin, and fall
From bad to worse, from worse, to worst of all.
"Life loving fortunes, how ye puff men up,
"To hugg their folly, drink damnations Cup!
O that men were far wiser, would but think,
How swelled with pride, they desperately wincke
At their own venom Vices; and yet storm
At others faults; good heaven this sinnereturne,
Or we shall perish; praying for our foes
Is of small use; this causes all our woes.
Rejoice at no man's fall (with foul aspersion)
Although thy foe; but pray for his conversion,
So piety wills; still imitate the best,
Not worst of men; he that lives well, dies blessed.
Observe, what Holy Rritprompts thee to act,
"Pray for thy foes, it is a most pious fact,
If then thine enemy persist in ire,
"Heaven on his head in flames, heaps coals of fire:
The cause, that on our heads just vengance draws,
Springs from our selves; we break Gods sacred Laws,
Yet never mind it; complaints and daily cries
Are much among us still, but no weteyes
For crying sins; daggers of discontent
Stab home, where careless people never repent.
Nothing more dangerous, nor has ever been,
Then to live still, in the Lethargy of sin,
The clouded fight permits us not to Eye
Our own foul faults; nor the Flint heart to spy
It Is rockie substance; many have no sense,
No feeling of their sins large conscience,
Remove the cause betimes; let thou, and I,
Every one strive, offend not with thine eye.
"Fly from the tongues abuse, thy hard hearts terror,
"Or live sins Slave, lost in a mist of error.
Sins Jnfirmitie.
THe Sin of Man's infirmity is known
Best by the consequence, (sad sorrows groan.)
It leaves behind it such a sting within
The Soul; that miserable Man for sin
(Snared with temptations in this worlds wide Hall)
Can never be at rest; but grieve and fall
Out to the Death with his abhord condition,
The guilt of Conscience; and the base fruition
Of his besotted sense; he takes no pleasure
In the worlds wealth; weighing Gods deep displeasure
Still against sin; he never is at quiet,
At Home, abroad, in bed, or at his diet.
There is no health in's flesh, no rest in's bones,
Sin stifles sense, all mirth converts to moanes.
Each comfort proves disconsolate within
That soul, which really is grieved for sin.
Deep swelling sighs, like breaking Seas discover
Heart breaking groans; one grief upon another.
Sin like incessant storms beats on the breast
Of Man's afflicted soul, never at rest,
'Till he has made his peace with Heaven, by so und
And serious humble reconcilement drowned
In streaming tears; such tears, as best express,
For sins infirm; a heart in bitterness.
Learn thou this Lesson, thou whose clouded eyes,
Hides thee from sight of thy infirmities,
Thy Pride, oppression, lust-provoking diet,
Nastie defilements, drunken belching riot,
Which so besweats, sots, and bespots the soul,
As renders it most loathsome, uggly foul
To the Eyes of the All-pure-God; He spies
All our base thoughts, each dark deed, all those lies
The Devil blinds us with, to our abuse;
Under the feigned pretense of an excuse;
Sins Jmpudence.
Sin that was wont in privacy to lurk,
Not daring to be seen dark deeds to work,
Walked still in fear; the mind was never at rest,
Like a poor Man in danger of Arrest.
But now in Triumph like a Drab of State
Branded with impudence; dare walk and prate,
Do deeds of open shame; yet never blush,
Shrink, fear, nor feel Revenge more then a rush,
Shield us from sin, (great God) sin that at first
Poisoned the perfect Man; made all accursed
That glorious Image; made him see his shame,
Poor, naked, need, and loss of his good name.
What ever sorrows on weak man befall,
Public, or private, sin is the cause of all.
Sin dulls the Soul, when Heaven is out of sight,
Man's out of Heart; all virtues loose their light,
Like a besieged City, sin surrounds,
The meadows of the soul, ruins her grounds,
Winds like a subtle River bout the bancks,
So Eats into her sides, as drown's the Ranks
Of Muddy-minded Mortals weak defense,
Walls built on Wood-Piles, to ten confidence.
O the rare Mercy of Almighty God.
How it does daily woe us from the Rod
Of his just vengeance; yet nor love, nor fear,
Not any thing that is good in us appear.
The Prodigal Gull, incapable to know
The worth of wealth; far sooner will bestow
Ten pound upon a Hawke, a Hound, a Whore,
Rather then give ten pence, to cloth the poor,
"The Worldly Churl, whose money is his slave,
"Goes to the Church hears Sermons, seems to have
"Divine discourse, Religion in his talk,
"Devotion, Pity; yet in life does walk
"A full dissembler; Machivell and he,
"Remorselesse monsters, dead in Charitle.
"Deaf to the poor man's-crie, his want of food,
"Urge Scripture to him, that will do no good.
"The spirits of mischeife in their souls reply,
"They Will not be forced to succor boggery.
Let Joseph lie in Chains, and Daniel too,
Shall they for threadbare Charity undo
Their full crammed baggs, abate the curious Pride
Of Wife and Children; dim glorious out^lide,
High hopes; the Worlds applause, sinne-sick wishes,
Banquets by Torch-lights, and blood stirring dishes,
All, to relieve despised poverty?
Wrong their delights, to pity penury?
No, no; they will not be taught where, when, and how
To give their Alms; the Saint to whom they bow
Learnes no such lesson; he so slaves the brain
With the black Text; that for their hell-beed gain,
Worse then the Scythian Thief, or barbarous Turk,
They Will cheat friend, Father; never do good work,
Unless to trumpet forth their Alms, much good,
When there is no Virtue in their venom blood,
Yet to the World appear the scourge of evil,
A very Saint in show, in heart a Devil.
A foul dissembling Fiend incarnate,
That seems precise, thinking the gift of prate,
The prattling, pious seeming show forsooth
Of a pure life, should darken sacred Truth.
Good God, divert their eyes from Hell below
To look on Heaven; force their blind eyes to know
Sin for a while may with a Brazen face
Out-brave poor Virtue, flourish for a space,
Feed hot, and high, swim in the worlds delight,
As if Vice only, were beav'ns Favorite,
Befat in folly, curious scoffs, that dare
Mock at the wrinckled looks of honest care.
Scorn lean Ribb'd Art, all griefs which interlace
The Lines of sorrow writ in Virtues face.
Sin may do this; raised on the lofty style,
Of Prides preferment for a little while.
But if time lend thee years for to observe,
You soon shall see proud sin, ready to sterve,
Blushing for shame, and halting on a crutch
Spotted all over with Biles; loathsome to touch:
"Sweett sins soon fade, vanish like lightnings flash,
"Honors a Bubble, Riches deceitful trash
Circl'd with mischiefs, glittering wantonness,
Dull self-esecured Ease, brittle greatness:
Which like the serpent Dipsas quentchlesse thirst,
Lives never satisfied, until it burst.
"Much wealth, small wit, and far less honesty,
"Preferres the golden Ass to dignity.
Be wise as Cato, just as M^nlius,
Valiant as Scipio, Chaste as Curious;
"Wisdom in rags is spurned at like a rush,
"Folly gains Credit, crept but into Plush.
Be what thou will, wealth forms formality,
Though spung'd with never a one good quality.
Worldlings applaud the Rich, the poor despise,
Speak never so well, so excellently wise,
Best knowledge must be dumb; Wisdoms best Note,
Yields but harsh Music in a Threadbare Coat.
Witness Times poor Philosophers report;
Who being in the Presence at the Court,
Was for his simple weeds of slight regard
Rudely thrust out by the grim-looking Guard;
But shifting clothes, admitted to the Eye
Of State, the King, before whose Majesty,
He not the least of Reverence would bear,
Save Cap and Knee, toth' clothes himself did wear,
Saying, I honor him that honors me,
These my gay Clouts, which brought me King to thee.
This to the sinful World, may Emblem out,
Mortals vain worshipping the Golden Clout
Of him, or her, whose souls uncertain stand
(Fixed in the imperative mood of proud command)
Joys in no other Heaven, but admiration,
Till senseless they forget their first Creation,
Honors vain bubble, Riches deceitful store,
Which never drops penny to the pining poor.
Nor ever harbors thought of Charity
To Wretches, wi^^^t sterv'd with poverty.
While on the adverse part; (Virtue denide)
Vice still is hu^g'd; the world's in love with pride.
O stony hearted sin; on thee to think
Fear turns my Paper black; makes pale my Ink.
Amazeth sense, compells my palsy Pen,
Trembling to write the Impiousnesse of Men,
Whose hate to pity, must to terror turn,
Where tears for sin are wanting, sin shall burn.
Tell me ye Toad-swolne flinty Pharaohs, tell?
Can temporal joys, equal tho pains of Hell:
Treasures, and pleasures, those quick fading streams,
To the poor sleeping soul, are all but dreams.
The bodies beauty, momentary joy,
Which waking finds, Earths glory but a toy:
This for a Maximetake, shun times lewd life,
Cease from extremes in sin, soule-murth'ring strife,
Abhor to Studdy state with greater zeal
Then zeal to Heaven or the souls Commonweal,
Abhor with solemn Oaths perjured to ^^are
And rack the name of Christ, dreadlesse of fear,
Wounding a fresh (with trembling fear I write)
Wonder of Angels, that great God of light,
His wounds with Oaths of wounds, flesh, blood and heart
(Horror of darkness) O blaspheming heart,
Too too much used, among godless souls, which still
Infinite good pay, with infinite ill.
The Penitent Sinner.
LEt others boast their goodness, for my part,
Wretch that I am, I have a sinful heart,
So ti'de and bound, fettered and chained within,
So strong a prison, such a Maze of sin,
That it is as far unlikely for me worm
Ere to wind out, as for to raise a storm,
Or slack a Tempest; works of wonder stand,
Far from thereach of mortals weak command.
None but the hand of God, his special grace,
Can pull me forth the dungeon of disgrace.
And shall I then, in impious ways uneven,
Offend so good a God; defend me Heaven!
Ride thou my soul upon some winged cloud
To'th'Haven of heaven; fly to the sacred shroud
Of sempeternall safety, fly the sight
Of blasing beauty; flaring Earths delight,
Malicious minds, mischievous man's invention,
Fair looks, false hearts, stamped in a soul intention.
Take flight my Soul; fly from the dismal Den
Of this dark Age; the impiousnesse of men,
Fly from the ponderous plummets of black Vice
Which pulls to Hell; help Prince of Paradise.
I saint, I die, sin loades my soul with horror,
The World, the flesh and Devil, all with terror
Hangs on my fettered limbs, Prisoner to care
I live sterv'd, tortured, tempted to despair.
What shall I do, where, whither shall I fly?
Here, there, I know not where, lie down and dye.
Up soul to Heaven, there get a glorious Crown:
I am too weak, too vile, sin pulls me down.
O my unworthiness, my shame, my sin,
When shall I shake thee off? when when begin?
No? will it not be? can I not do the good
I would? must I be ruled by flesh and blood?
Weep, weep poor soul, dissolve hard heart of flint,
Melt, melt thou stony Rock, tears never stint,
Drop Marble mount, drop to a Crimson flood,
Sink my sins, in seas of penitent blood.
While others careless of celestial health,
Greedy like Hell, hunger for worldly wealth,
Preferment, pride, and vainly put their trust
In the forbidden Paths of tempting lust,
In glassie glory, subtle Court behavior
In valor, conquest and monarchall favor;
Whiles souls thus err, O thou the Lord of light,
Make me Heavens Champion, virtues favorite.
Come folded Arms, and you sad eyes, sad heart,
Come soul oppressed with sorrow, play thy part.
Haste to some gloomy Grave, there all alone
On the green mantled earth sigh, sobbe and groan,
Spend precious time with sacted thoughts that be^^es
Heaven in their eyes, true verie^ in their ^eares.
Complain I will to Fortune, not that who^^
Which makes (...) Art and pale faced Wisdom poo^^.
I Will not complain to her, but to that Ens,
Almighty Fortune in divinest sense.
Grovelling on Earth for sin, I Will cast forth groans,
Sighs shall convert to Tears, tears into moanes,
Then will I start from ground, my body raise,
Shoot ine eyes upward, against heaven I Will gaze,
Think on my God, my God whose sacred will
I have abused; my God most just to kill,
Damme soul and body; my rememb rance blot
Out of the book of life; I that forgot
In midst of all vain joys, in temperate health,
Soule-snaring Chamb'rings, lascivious stealth,
All-seeing Heaven, a God so great, so good,
The death of Jesus Christ, my saviors blood,
Slave that I am, where shall I turn mine eye
Unworthy to look up? Heaven hear my cry!
Hear me Eternal Essente, which has made
My soul to pray; send me thy sacred aid.
"On the bright Sunbeams of thy sweet salvation,
"(...) draw up, the dew of my devotion.
Mount soul upon the wings of Charity,
Help Heaven, up heart, fly to Eternity.
Rowze like a towering Falkon in despite
Of Hell and furies, fly to the Makers sight,
Come, come Lord Jesus, O come thou and give
Help to my helplessesoule; I that do live
Like the distressed bird, trapt in a snare
Caught by a lime-twigg flying through the Air;
In which distress for comforts sweet releife,
Poor Innocent, with wings adds woe to grief,
So fares my soul striving sins snare to fly,
Trapt by deceit, lives snared in misery.
My trembling conscience tells me I have been
A very fearful finner, slave to finne,
Of all Men, most unworthy of Salvation
My sins deserve Heavn'ns wrath, hell and damnation,
Yet mercy, mercy Lord, mercy I crave,
Shield my sad soul from the infernal grave,
"Strangle my growing sins in their beginning,
"Demollish (Lord) in me custom in sinning.
"Draw from mine eyes the vain worlds vain entice,
"And ravish me with love of Paradise.
"Busy my thoughts with virtue, make me try
"To live by honest means, or let me die.
Pardon all idle prate, sins rotten talk
Let not my steps tread that accursed walk
Which leads to lewdness; base delights in pleasure,
Desire of Pomp, vain glory, tottering treasure,
Let not my wandering eyes flame in the fire
Of lust-stung looks, nor let the loose desire
Of Beauties Bravery, burn out mine eyes
With senseless gazing; Lord make me to despise
All wanton ways, finnes of ill governed youth,
All wicked customs against thy sacred Truth.
Make me (my God) in hate to impure lives,
Kick at that life, which life of heaven deprives:
Deal not, Lord deal not with me as my merit
Truly deserves; drive out that uggly spirit
Of all uncleanness from my filthy flesh,
My drooping soul with sanctity refresh,
Shrowed me beneath thy sacred Countenance,
Give me thy servant David's repentance,
The Faith of Abraham, holy Jacobs strife,
Blessed Stephens Charity, chaste Joseph's life,
The Patience of Job; Paul's purity,
And soule-afflicted Peter's weeping Eye.
"With holy Tears, (Lord) make me to reject
"The Sin, I impious sinner most affect.
O thou the King of those Eternal fires
That spangles Heaven; good God grant my desires,
Infuse in me thy Grace, or I shall stray,
And so become a fearful Castaway.
I, that am poor, weak, feeble, and too apt,
By the worlds whorish wales to be intrapt,
Beseech thy pardon, forgive my coldness
In serving thee, pardon that damned boldness.
Let Mercy every Evening which does keep
Me, from day-dangers, death-resembling sleep,
Be to my soul a Prayer book to imprint
Tears in mine Eyes; grief in my heart of flint;
Be it so Mighty Maker unto me,
To me and every one, make us to see
And shun sins custom; with thy sacred wings,
Guard us from dangers, blessed King of Kings,
Thou art my only comfort in distress,
Food, raiment, all my cure in heaviness,
My true Physician, in unruly madness,
Soule-ravishing Music in my deepest sadness,
When all the world forsakes me God is kind,
He comfort gives to my disconsolate mind.
O thou the Lord of Thunder, Heaven and Earth,
Merciful maker, thou that did give me breath.
Thou that can muster Angels in the Sky,
To safeguard souls from black impiety,
Thou that do feed, and cloth, and still persever
To give me health; be merciful for ever.
"Lord teach me for to prize the world at naught,
"Upon thy blessedness be all my thought.
"Take from mine eyes, the vain worlds vain entice
"And rayishme with love of Paradise.
"Bless me each Morn, and bless me every Even,
"Bless Wife and Children, bring us all to Heaven
In thy good time; and during life's short space,
Grant us Lord Jesus thy abundant grace.
Graft thy Grace inardly in our hearts, that we
Never like straying sheep, stray Lord from thee.
Hear me Miraculous Majesty, and give
A period to my cares, let me not live
Frustrate of Honest means; O send redress,
Employ my Pen, keep me from Idleness,
From all ill Company, all ways unjust,
Sin, Satan, and the Labyrinth of lust.
Like Joseph, Mighty Maker, make me fly
The tempting Bates of Beauties bravery.
Suffer me Worm unworthy, not in vain
To call on thee; let me some solace gain
Or kneel for ever; happy man were I
To kneel, and pray, and at my Prayers die.
To live for ever; ever more to sing
Glory to thee O God; Heavens glorious King.
O you, that stand on Pinacles of state,
Let not the World deceive you, lest too late,
From off your slipprie height you come in thrall,
To pash your selves in pecces past recall!
Sell not fair Lordships to keep Ladyships,
Nor suck damnation from a Strumpets lips,
Touch not those spells of Sparta, let 'em rot,
When Virtue lives in man, lust is forgot,
One only Iemme, that is all the store I have,
Great of that little, nothing, which shall crave
Of Heavens great Ens, not for my self alone,
But for thee Reader; thee, and every one
Rareness of rare example, and withal
An everlasting sky of Grace to fall
Upon our War on Earth, desiring Heaven,
For ways on Earth are crooked, all unev'n.
O Heavenly Father, glorious Diety,
Pardon, O Pardon my impiety,
I, that have imperfections on my head,
Past Stars in number; or those sands that spread
The Vast Seas bottom; shall not I confess,
How often against God, I desp'rately transgress,
Put off Repentance still from day to day,
Abuse his mighty Patience, still delay
His dread Command; and like a senseless sot,
Unmindful of his mercies; mind them not,
No sooner do I find a good thought take me;
But from that virtue flesh and blood do shake me.
Forgive me, O forgive me thou that art
Heavens universal searcher, cure my heart,
At my dull follies I Will no longer wink,
Sorrow shall be my Pen, sad tears my Incke,
Misery my Paper, whereon I Will write
The sorrows of my soul, my youths delight,
My paths of pleasure, Prodigal expenses,
My Scarlet Crimes, and all my black offenses:
This Book, I Will dedicate unto my heart,
My heart, chief Actor, in sins Tragic part.
My heart, unprincely, Revelling within
My body, that Banqueting house of sin;
There, Chained to 'th Magic Music of free will,
Riots in poisoned pleasure, lewdly ill.
All that belongs to th'body, every part,
(My soul alone excepted) serves my heart,
Best pleased; and best at ease, with pleasures bane,
Most glad, to be most bad; and in that vain
Traitor to Truth; each limb a Mortal foe,
To work my universal overthrow.
O false, false heart, false to thy dearest friend,
Wound me no more; for pittle make an end,
I pity thy black life; nor can forbear,
For thee, to shed many a bleeding tear.
Thou art my foe: and yet to see thee feed,
Fat for Hells Shambles, my poor soul dosbleed;
Bleeds inward, indiscern'd of any eye,
Except my God, and my own misery.
What shall I do? feign would I shun the sin
My frailty most delights to wander in:
And yet I cannot; when I strive against vice
To stand most firm, I Am tript up in a trice.
"O What a misery it is to have a mind
"For to be truly honest; well inclinde,
"And not to be sufferd; such is the state,
"Of my sad bleeding soul unfortunate.
"Field honor's but a Vapor; the sound breast,
"Puts on Church-Armour Faith, and sleights the rest.
"In Love to Virtue and true godly fear,
"Dwells Honor; not in Dart, Bow, Sling or Spear,
Not in vain Beauty, strength, the pride of Wit,
Presuming Riches, Learning, Valor, Credit,
High Birth, Nobility, nor gravitie,
Humanity, nor yet Virginity,
But in the humblesoule whom holy story,
Speaks to maintain God, and the Gospels glory;
The King and Kingdoms safety; Churches peace,
The Virgins right, Widows and fatherless;
These are the noble steps that ever wait,
On Virtues Court; it is the true Prop of state,
Save me, O save me thou Eternal terror,
To damned souls, I do confess each error,
The many thousand sins, unseene, unfelt,
Which long, too long, in my hard heart have dwelt,
To thee, to thee thou everlasting being,
Of an Eternal Majesty; all seeing,
With Penitent heart, I come, I call, I cry,
Pity me wretch, help thou all viewing eye.
My arms are spread, come sempeternall Essence,
Ravish my soul; come blessed Penitence
Give me thousand stabbs, my soul has need,
Of many thousand tears; then let it bleed!
Pierce, pierce my stubborn heart, make that the Inn
Of Grace, which yet, is but the house of sin;
Look down soul saving sacred God of Truth,
Forgive th'infinite follies of my youth,
Shield me Divinity from Satan's ginnes,
Lord lay not to my charge my Parents sins:
Glory of goodness in thy mercy, hear me,
Let hate, Revenge, nor Envy never come near me,
Let neither Pride, nor hope of gain deceive me,
Nor pleasure, nor the want of means bereave me
Of sense; lest senseless wholly I despair
And so become the wretched child of Care.
O sacred savior; give me grace to fly
Delight in sin; I beg it earnestly,
In all my prayers enable me to be
(Blessed Lord Jesus) pleasting unto thee.
Make me to do thy will Lord; make me grow
Great in thy love, thou that do truly know,
Of all Earths blessings unto mortals given,
My sole desire on Earth, is Grace from Heaven,
Grace to be good; grace to avoid hels ginnes,
And grace to grieve, for nothing but my sins,
So shall thy mercy, never forgetful stand,
While I have Tongue, a Pen, a head, a hand.
The Souls Sea fight,
Emperor of Angels; O thou King of Stars,
Man's perfect solace against sins bloody wars,
When I behold with contemplations Eye
The silver spangles of the glorious sky;
Me thinks in that Blew-paper-booke of Heay a
I see the ways of Mortals all Vnev'n,
The wretched soul of Man in every place,
Lives Locally in hell, Wanting thy grace,
Temptation on temptation past control,
Alures the body to betray the soul;
Hells Blacke-Prince Troops of spiries every day,
Invades Man's Sinne-seidg-Soule, Furies display
Infernal Banners, while the Drum of death
Beats a dead March, and e're I can take breath.
Sounds shrill Alarums, hot assaults begin
The souls fierce fight; muffl'd in cloudy sin,
I live beset; Millions of spirits round
Shoot at my soul (...) stand on no firm ground
But tread on Earth, as on a Ball of ice.
I cannot stand, nor stir for sliprie vice.
My Soul's a ship tossed on the mountain seas,
Of this vast world; she never lives at ease,
Her Sails are sighs, her Anchor deep despair,
Her Compass error, her sad Pilot care.
Far off from safetyes shore, floates on the waves
Of fearful billows, Soule-devouting graves,
Rough, blustering stubborn storms, yield no relief
On every shroud, each Tackling hangs a grief,
Death like a dark cloud, besets every place,
Here Rocks of ruin, there Pirates lie in chase,
In every corner mischeifes hour'ly lurk,
Pride fights against us like a furious Turk.
Lust like a Trech'rous Spaniard, murdering French,
Like an infected poisons loathsome stench,
Gluttony like a Germane; drunkenness
Like a Dutch-dun-ker-ker; whose impiousnesse
Styles him the Master Gunner to give fire
To all Sins black Artillery, hells Ire,
Infernal Chaine-short, All Soul murdering strife,
To snke man's weather-beaten ship of life.
Which to gain grace; no sooner weighes Anchor,
Sets fail for safety, but straight Sins canker
The devouring Devil, Pyrate for Hell,
Chasing flies after; and with black Arts spell
Commands to stay; sometimes with beautions forms,
With songs of Sirens sometimes; sometimes storms,
Such pitchy Tempests, to benight the way,
As if the horror of the Latter day;
Frighted the world, so stops the soul from bliffe,
Shoots through and through her; so she steares amiss.
Then as in bloody Sea Fights men may see,
Times sacrifice to valor, no man free
From desperate danger; every one maintains
The terror of the fight (though with their brains
"Dashed in each others face) vital breath
"Lost in a Fighting flame; blood and death
"Ballets, and Batteries, covers the ship all ore
"Her dismal Decks with horror, purple gore,
And scattered limbs; O the sad shreeke the cries,
Here sinckes a Ship, and there another fries
In fiery flames; some to escape present harm
Mount the Maine-Top, some hang on the Yard-Arme,
'Till the pitched Mast becomes a blazing Torch,
Whose up flying flame, when it begins to scortch,
Down, down the poor Souls drop, who (life to save)
Unwilling, willingly make the Sea their Grave,
The deepes their Tombs; so the souls Pinnace
In her spiritual fight, sin dos deface,
Murders our best of thoughts; like raging seas,
Winds, Storms, and Tempests, drive us where they please
The poor afflicted soul, Satan so blinds
It knows not where she is; by whizing winds
Now-tost, toth' top, of all the Azure sky,
Now tumbling as to Hell with frighted Bye,
Her Flag of sins desiance Tempests rent,
Her sails torn all to rags; her maine mast spent
All out of order, tossing too, and fro,
The soul distressed, knows not not which way to go.
With gentle calm; check Satan's black storm Lord,
We shipwreck else; Devils will come abord
Burn with hells Wildfire; flame, ruin, raze,
Blot our souls hope, help minister of grace.
Safetie's in Heaven; in this uncertain life,
Nothing but Hell-bred Quicksands, war and strife,
Soul killing vapors, worldly vanites,
Thick clouds of Vice perpetual miseries!
There is a Voyage to the holy land,
In which the Truth our blessed Card must stand
The Holy Ghost our Pilote to Direct
The Steerage of our Course from sins neglect
To the Haven of Heaven; that happy Port of rest
Salvation's guard, true Cape of comfort blessed,
There Heavens bright Majesty our Savior sweet,
Sits with the hand of mercy for to greet
And waft us to him; O may all that stray
Sailing along the Coast of sorrow pray,
Pray unto him; he will guide their wandering Bark
Tempest-tost hontely in the dreadful dark.
If thou be Sea-sick, call upon him, and he
Shall soon, with healths sweet solace comfort thee,
Rebuke the raging winds, Times blackest storms,
And to a Calm, skie-swelling seas reform.
No Rocks, Gulfes, Sands, nor seas-cloud-kissing waves
Sins dreadful Sea Fights, nor the desperate braves
Of Pirates, none shall hurt; let then thy care
See thy weak Vessel rigged, well Manned with prayer,
And then Launch forth, hoist sails, and when you spy
The Cape of good hope, keep it in thine eye.
Let Holy thoughts deatht-breatning stormers ore'come,
That whatsoever chance there shall become,
The vessel of thy body, being foul,
Make sure to save the Passenger thy soul.
He valiant, only virtuous is that can
Subdue his sins, He Is the true Noble man.
There Is perfect valor, he true glory winnes,
He Is the true soldier that subdues his sins,
Breaks through the Pikes of sin, all Fiends that are
In Hell, or devils ruling in the air,
Forceing his way to Heaven despite all charms,
Enchantments, dead sleeps, all soule-slaying harms,
Wrestling like Jacob constant in his sight,
Mindful of his Majesticke-Makers sight,
To such, belongs the Everlasting Crown
Of Sempeternall glory, true renown.
Which to prepare thee for; cease to neglect
The Almighties sacred service, let respect,
Fear and true reverence to his precious word,
Be to thy Soul Truths Helmet, shield and sword,
Fit to subdue the Fiend, all fiery Darts,
Furies and fiends, Heaven arm thy noble parts,
Soul, Body, Heart, and all strive to fulfill
(The Majesty of Heaven) his divine will.
And like the cunning curious Architect,
Earnest some goodly building to erect,
(Breaking his steep) wholly imployes his mind
On the drawn model, which when he dos find
Exact; his eye dwells ever then upon it,
And his affection never driven from it.
So when to thought we call our Saviors blood,
(That sempeternall Platform of all good)
Shed for our sins; let it for ever dwell
In the Idaea of our minds, so Hell
Stern Death, nor deadly desperate discontent,
Can bar the heavenly heart from's true content!
"Gods Vengeance against sin, his true dislike
Me thinks should move us to repent, and strike
A terror to our souls, force us to see
Man's outward danger, inward misery.
Which like an unresisted roaring Tide
Runs through our veins, apts the base blood to pride
To all the sins that are, or ever were,
O horid ill, have we not cause to fear,
To quake, and tremble, when our dull dead eyes
(Drunk with the poisoned dreggs of sin) never spies
The mischeivous perils, and the black affright;
That hourly wait on the spiritual fight;
Fiends live at Sea, and Furies on the land,
Gluttony for a Corporal dos stand;
Avarice a Pioner, Sloth you will spy,
An idle Gentleman of a Company,
Wraths the Sergeant, Envy the Colors gain,
Lust the Lieutenant is; Pride the Captain.
These in the hearts of every one takes place,
Where Cowardly Souls shuns the blessed means of grace.
Let us for ever then, desist from evil,
Wisdom commands us to desie the Devil.
To combat with our sins oppose temptation,
Fight against Hell, the Devil and damnation.
This for a Caveat take, strive to live well,
Ingratitude to God, finds flames in Hell.
While grace is offered then, watch, fast, and pray,
There Is no prevention in the latter day.
None lives secure, that to his Vice lives friend,
A Vicious life, often makes a Vicious end.
Strengthen me my Creator, make me fight,
Thy holy battle, let not the worlds delight
Dissuade my soul; sweet Jesus for thy merit
Enable me, rowze my dejected spirit,
Vncharme Hells charm; O sacred God untie
My fettered soul; let me not ever lie
Lulled in the lazy lan of deadly sin,
This Minute Sacred Savior, now beginue
To give release; and as thou did provide,
Army of Angels for Eliahs guide,
Who (to secure him girt with Enemies)
Mounted his soul from worldly vanities,
So Heavenly Day Star, blessed Jesus end
This my design; thy holy Angel send
To be my guide, my guard, my sacred spell
Against all Enchantments, Witchcraft, Death and Hell.
So shall my Anthem every Morning be,
Glory of Heaven pity, O pity me.
Pity me Wretch, most wretched, vilely base
Wanting thy sacred aid, spiritual grace.
The only Cure sins raging flames to quentch,
Is Aqua Lacrymarum; that will stench
The wounds proud pomper'd Dames delight to make
On the poor soul of man, make him to quake;
Afeard to stand on that false Rock of Ice
Idleness, feeder of foul Carnal Vice.
Black errors cloud, South Fog which rotts the mind,
Leapours the soul, and is that Northern wind
The cause of all sins storms, it is dangers flood,
Sinnes-surging Ocean, swelling in man's blood.
O Soul alluring sin, me, me forsake,
I charge thee hence, by him that made Hell quake,
By that Almighty One, in sacred Trine,
All holy spells and charms Magic divine,
Sister of Angels Virgins Chastity,
By that Sovle saving sacred purity,
Fly from me all base thoughts; be just mine eyes,
And be your selves, hate wantons witcheries.
The blessing of the Almighty, Lord of Host,
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost
Preserve, be with me, now and for ever when,
My soul is most distressed Amen, Amen.
The Virgins Honor.
I, As a Child, that of it self can do
Nothing, to shield Virginity from woe,
Prostrate on bended Knees with tears I fall
Before thee Lord; O hear, on thee I call.
Pity me wretch, I that am in the prime
Heat of my youth; and the most dang'rons time
Of all my life; beseech thy heavenly aid,
All holy helps; Lord pity me weak Maid.
Lest like the filly fly about the Flame,
I scortch to Cinders; burn out my good name.
Quench, quench the flames of all lewd carnal Motions,
Inordinate desires, all loose affections.
Never let my soul be led away good Lord
By Wanton Company, that no good afford.
Waking or sleeping; O thou King of Kings,
Let the safe pearefull shadow of thy wings
Be my Eternal safety, lest the mines
Of Golden Snares, alter my chaste designs.
By day and night, Lord let thy gracious beams,
Disperse all wandering thoughts, all idle dreams!
My Chastity, is a more precious Jewel
Then I can keep; let me not then be cruel
To my own soul; but, by the more that I,
In the great danger of Temptation lie,
So much the greater, let thy grace preserve
My Virgin Honor; and though I deserve
Thy Vengeance, indignation, and no favor,
Yet for thy Mercies sake, most sacred Savior,
Be thou my Advocate; Lord make me free,
To sue in ferma pauperis under thee.
Angelize thou my soul, to shun the Tract
Of obscene speech; lewd thought, and unclean act.
To thee for ever make me reconciled,
In Body, and Soul, chaste, holy, undefiled.
And through the operation of thy grace,
To spit defiance in sins uggly face.
"Pleasures are poisons to this soul of mine,
"There Is no true joy on Earth, but what is divine.
What shall I do? help Prince of Paradise,
I cannot stand, nor stir for slip'ry Vice.
Quicken me Lord, enable me to pray:
Humble my Mind, my Parents to obey
In all their just commands; and at all times,
Patient to bear reproves, confess my crimes.
Never let me (Lord) be so deprived of grace,
To scoff (like some) their Parents to their face.
Make me in stead of stubborn ways to grieve 'em,
(At their most need) still able to relieve 'em.
Increase good Heaven, the number of their days;
To speak thy glory, and to sing thy praise.
And if thy will e're call me to the state
Of honorable wedlock; let my Mate
Be such a one (good God) with whom I may
Serve thee in peace; and never go astray.
Never let contention, nursed 'twixt Man and Wife,
Disturb the Quiet of my married life.
Married or Single, let me ever be,
Fitted with Prudence, pleasing unto thee.
Make me to shun (great God) sins dangerous shelfe,
That I, apoore Tree, barren in my self
May Bud; and bear such fruits of Faith as may,
My soul emparadice at the Judgment day.
The Single and Marrid Life.
SOme say, the single life, is single care,
Yet sin still Slaves it under Satan's snare,
Soule-burning Beauties-brav'ry, witching folly,
Which mads th'intemprate Brain breeds melancholy,
Delight in dangrous Dice, Drabs, drink, and Riot,
Sin Theife-like robs, the single life of quiet
Hinders the happy Soul from being wed'
To Virtues fair, Chaste, Honest, Humble bed.
O what a sacred sweetness had it been,
Had our first Parents purity shunned sin.
Marriage, that Rich immaculate Robe of honor,
Hadne're been tempted then to base dishonor;
Lust, that does hour'ly slave the single life,
And shunnes the sweets of Wedlock, through base strife.
Had never been thought on then; all had gone well,
Souls never had cause to fear sin, death nor hell.
Marriage was made for Man, ('it is a true Text)
For honor, not dishonor, to be vexed
With deadly strife; adultr'ate fornication,
Unruly Lust, sinne-causing-separation
(Hell to the Bed that is chaste) turning the ease
Of wholesome Marriage, into a disease.
Wedlocks great weighty work, craves sound advice,
Begged at the hands of Heaven; lest cheating Vice,
Puts tricks on fair believing honesty,
To cloak Biggebellies prurient renery.
Marriage requires a solemn Meditation,
Trembling resolve, no sudaine affectation
Vnask't of Heavn'n; the mari'd life must be,
Vnforc'd, Religious, faithful, chaste and free,
Else like Jehorams Match twill prove a curse,
Bad the beginning, but the end far worse.
Learn wisdom by this Truth, be zealous,
Use holy Jobs preservative; be Jealous,
Thou that art Married over all thy ways,
Beauties alurement Natur's ill spent days,
Thy trouble about wealth, greife^ long and large,
Care still to get, Childrens continual charge,
Losses by Servants, sins infirmity
Unquietness of Neighbors; all do cry,
And cry allow; the married life to be,
Man's ent'rance into sad calamity.
The Married life, I fitly may compare
To Heaven or Hell, unto the Earth, or Air,
It Is Heaven where harmless Turtle Mates agree,
But Dismal Hell where Couples faithless be,
Sweet like the dainty wholesome Air to sense,
Where Man and Wife content, shun rude offense.
But where deep discord rules, and proud disdain,
There, like the gaping Tongue-tide Eath for Rain
(Sunburned with sordid Actions, deeds unjust)
They partch to Cinders, fall away to dust:
It Is sins just payment, whose reward is death,
The misery of life, and scourge of breath.
"Wisdom directs the married life to be,
"The peaceful Emblem of true Unity.
"Heaven gives a blessing; makes that love divine
"Where Man and Wife content, draw in a Line:
"A Wife, obeying of her Husbands will,
"Has the rule over him, deserves no ill!
Love, is a worthy Wife, Times precious woman,
Lust a perfidious Harlot, true to no man.
"There is no joy on Earth that can transcend,
"A Husband and a Wife, kind to the end.
"The careful Husband's honest gains no doubt,
"Makes the Good-wife, an honest layer out.
"A Virtuous Wife (free from all lewd expense)
"Is the Husbands joy, his Tower of defense;
"Thus speaks the Text, discretion in a Wife
"Make's fatt the Husbands bones, delights his life.
Tears Triumph.
What Is Honor, Beauty, and the damask skin,
But Dirty dross, balanced with tears for sin,
One trickling tear for sin, gains greater pleasure,
Then a whole Ocean of terrestrial treasure.
"Many can weep, to counterfeits it is given,
"But to weep truly, is the gift of Heaven.
Mirror of Truth, give me the sacred Rays
Of divine knowledge, so to spend my days
In sighs, tears, prayers, that my poor soul may,
Mount to thy glory, at my latter day.
"Happy the man, whose tears adorn the place
"Where he does pray, that is the true sign of grace.
"Tears joined with Prayers, are triumphant Twins,
"Soft wax, hot Iron, to disburthen sins.
"Mingle thy Prayers with tears; tears souls refresh,
"Kills all the wanton Motions of the flesh,
"Tears humble Pride, makes chaste insatiate lust,
" Malice to Mercy turns, turns time unjust
"Detracting Envy into Noble pity,
"Dull Drunkards to be temperate; heavenly wit^y,
"Converts base Avarice from the abuse,
"Of godless gain, to charitable use,
"Tears, Phisicks Gluttony to live content
"With mean course fare; makes mortals penitent.
"Tears lengthens years; to Man's last day tears give,
"Sufficient means conentedly to live,
God that beheld King Hezekiah's tears,
Prolonged his days; added full fifteen years.
Peter, that thrice denide his sacred Lord,
Tears gained his pardon without speaking word:
"O blessed Tears; tears that for sin arise,
"Are glorious Pearls in the Petitidaers eyes.
Weep for thy sins poor soul; it is Heavens advire,
Tears Orient E^arles purchase Paradise.
Shall such Soule-pleading Pearls then I pray
Be flung to Swine? among swine be cast away?
Resolve me thou whose conscience never felt
A tear for sin; O let thy soul but melt
To penitent Pearls; then, then let it tell
The infinite difference, 'twixt Heaven and Hell.
With, and without those ravishing tears; the one
Feels joy, free pardon; but the other none!
Vnpittied plagnes attend the scorneful eye
Never wet for sin; that is endless misery.
When on the adverse part, where souls bewail
Their wretched frailty, God does never fail
To send releife; frees them from all annoy,
"Who sowes in tears shall reap eternal joy.
Tears winnes the soul to God; (raises it up
From Earth to Heaven) drinks deep of mercies Cup,
Applies health's Plaster to the firm sick pulse,
"Tears with God, never suffered a repulse,
We never weep, never devoutly cry,
Never drop a tear for finne, but God stands by.
Puts all our Tears into his Bottle; look
What says the Psalmist? are they not in thy book?
Thou tell my wand'rings (Lord) put thou my tears
Into thy bottle; frustrate sinful fears.
"Tears trembles Hell, pacifies Mortal strife,
"Blotts all our sins out of the book of life,
Ile' cry, says David, to the King of Kings,
Prevailing tears with God, perform all things,
God of the Spirits of all Flesh that can,
Rectify souls; look on me wretched man,
As Holy Paul never ceased for three years,
Night and day constantly to warn with tears
The Elders of Miletum, (them to free
From Satan's subtle temptings) so leeme,
Night and day (Lord) forever, never cease
With tears, to warn, my warring flesh to peace.
"True tears win Heaven, all impious thoughts control
"Tears subdue Sins; make white the spotted soul,
"Perfumes the Body, mortifies lewd sense,
"Calmes stormy cares, and prove the quintessence
"To all our quiet; no anguish, no contention
"Troubles true tears; want is never thought upon
"Nor the worlds wide woe; where a blessed tear
"Is shed for sin, it frights away all fear,
"Gently allayes Earths tempest's that arise
"Through times deceitful riches; beauties Eyes.
Lachryma nunquam patitur repulsam.

Mercies Miracle.
CHRIST'S Setting forth from's Celestial PALACE, Lodged in the Virgins Womb;
From that blessed PLACE, To the Manger went; from Marger to the Cross, From
Cross departed (with his dear Bloods loss) Unto the SEIVLCHER; there made
all even, And so returned, Gloriously Home to HEAVEN. To HEAVEN, from whence
LORD let thy SACRED FIRE, GLISTER upon my SOVLE, whose sole Desire Begges
MERCY for my Sins, makes known to THEE, THOU that have RAVISHED ALL, have
Ravished Me.

VVOnder, of Angels, O thou Flaming Glory,
Great Mercies Miracle, thy Sacred story
Shows thy ne'r-failing Love; it is thy love.
(Thou Lamb of God, celestial Turtle-Dove,)
Thy over liberal love that does restrain
Sodomes just Plague, which thou might justly rain
In blew flames, storms of fire to consume,
Burn up this sinful world, and scortch the plume
Of mortals Pride; souls wilfully misled,
Pampered with Chin-deepe Lust, fulness of bread.
"Man is to Man a Monster-hearted stone,
"With God thet's mercy, but with Man there is none.
God is the worlds miraculous Creater
Holy, just, merciful, Man's glorious Maker.
God into hell, for Pride, the Devils hurld,
Gods Justice drowned, Gods mercy saved the world,
God is all Eye, he brings to open light,
The darkest deeds and secrets of the night,
Man's bell-bread plots against the Innocent,
God still contrives to the Authors punishment.
God is all goodness, Greatness, dear delight,
His anger short, his mercy infinite.
Read the Everlasting Bible, there you will find
His all abundant Excellence inclined
To chide, then smile, long suffering, but sure,
First he begins to strike, and then to cure,
Drownes the rudd world for impious sin; and then
(Never to execute the like again)
The Raine-bowe sends, as a most sacred sign
Of his never failing mercy, love divine!
O Mercy, thy rich thought appears to me,
Times golden spur, to quicken and make free
Dull stupid spirits from their Iade-like pace,
Swiftly to run Virtues celestial race:
Haste soul to heaven, and think when thou do faint,
A stately Pace too solemn for a Saint.
Plough through the dusty ways, the dirt and mire
Of foulest sins, temptations fiercest fire
For Mercies sake; Mercy makes blessed the brain,
Curbs sins delight with contemplations Reine.
Mercies sweet thought, stands the souls sacred spell,
Against all the Thorry Passages of hell.
Adam at first, the second put to death,
The second dying, gave us all new birth.
The Tree of good and bad, and Apple gay,
Brought to the world, to cast us all away.
Yet the sad Tree of shame bare fruit to save,
All that believed from the infernal grave.
And as our Parents first notorious Vice,
Whipped them from out the joys of Paradise,
So from man's crooked sinful ways unev'n
Christ entertaines us, readily to heaven.
Think what a ravishing Act of love was there
Figured toth' life; think think, O Blessed, Dear,
Soule-saving Savior, sacred Purity,
Ravish my soul to tell thy Charity,
Thou sempeternall ravishing Rose-bud,
Who for our sinner was six times did in blood,
Text in such Tragic letters as did show
Men turned to Monsters; the great debt we owe
To his victorious sufferings, that is
Mirror of Majesty, man's only bliss.
Did the forgetful wretch consider when
Hell hast's him on, to some hot sin, and then
Finds no way left to his desire free,
But by a narrow lane where he must see,
That never enough to be lamented loss,
Christ Jesus Tenterd on the bloody Cross,
God on the Rack for our spiritual food
His limbs all over, a Charactor of blood,
All wounded, and now bleeding, crying out,
O thou that bearst', the Christian stamp about
Thy flesh and blood; behold my blood brain,
Was ever grief like mine? sick soul refrain,
Read in my wounded side thy back return,
Thy sordid sins repulse; let thy soul mourn
In showers of sorrow; and to hells disgrace,
Read sins dislike in my storm beaten fate.
Vnbosome Vice; taste from thy soul sins evil,
And with my Scriptum est, silence the devil.
Can careless Christians bear the thought of this
Mercies Memento, in their minds amiss?
No sure; no hellish heart so prone to sin,
But the rich thought of such rare love must win
Man's soul to God; and with right admiration,
(Fixed sirme and often on our Saviors passion)
Force him to hate the sin he liked so well,
And with a loathing kick, send it to hell.
Mercie's rememb'rance like a Curious Lute,
Renders most excellent Masicke, heavenly fruit,
Points out the weary soul the way to Grace;
And spurs us on to the Celestial race.
Invites the penitent mind over clogged with care,
To Heavenly ecstasy spiritual fare.
Merciful God, turn thou man's vain desire
To fear and trembling; let a zealous fire
Flame in the souls of men, let each proud eye,
Humbl'd with tears, admire thy Majesty,
Backward, and forward look, calling to mind,
Those multitudes of Mercies mortall^ find,
Day, N^ght, Time, Tide, miraculously given,
By thy All-sacred hand, Great God of heaven.
As the young Bird then, that does never cease,
Opening the Mouth, until the Damme release
And cures the want it suffers; so should we
With unlocked lips, still pray, that God would free
Our souls from sin, O it is a blessed task,
God never leaves giving, 'till we leave to ask.
Dei misericordia, plenitudo est virtutum.

FAITH.
Nailed to the Cross, there Christ, lost souls to win, Suffered the world's
huge ponderous weight of sin, Insulting Foes reproach, mocks, scoffings,
scorn, His sinews to be Rackt, his Body torn; A kiss betrayed him, and a
perjured lie, Was the reward for all his Purity. Heavens wrath, Hells rage, on
Christ all torments fell, To save our Souls, from those blew flames in Hell.
Christ's whole life was a Martyrdom and Cross, Active and Passive, and his
dear Bloods loss, The Tragic part; the bloody Scene which none But He
himself must Act, and act alone: Christ's Patience, Death And Devils force
did quell, He took the great Leviathan of hell With the Hook of his Cross,
made him his slave, Captived the DEVIL, and subdued the Grave.

FAith makes unseene things seen, Faiths sacred eye
Vn-visore Prides painted hypocrisy,
A resolute Faith forced Abram to consent
To butcher his beloved; to content
His Mighty Maker: Faith has ever been,
The perfect Evidence, of things unseene.
Jacob by Faith obtained his full desire,
Faith stopped the Lions Mouths; Faith quenches fire,
Enoch by Faith from sense of vital breath,
Translated was, that he should never see death.
Faith made Eliah to call down from heaven
Consuming flames, to burn accursed men!
Isreal's great Captain by his Faith did part
Egypts Red Sea, went through with joyful heart.
Joshua by Faith, on Gibeon did command
The golden Taper of the Sun to stand
Still; while he fought the Battle of the Lord,
Faith comes by hearing the All-mighties word.
Women received their dead raised up to life,
Faith conquered Kingomes, and subdues all strife.
Like a safe wind, which to the Seaman sings,
Comfort in midst of all sad cares, Faith bringt,
And breathes into our souls, Truths gentle gaile
(Salvations sweet relief,) to fill the sail
Of Man's storme-beaten vessel; keeps it even,
So sends it home in peace to the land of heaven.
Faith clothes the Soul in a divine attire,
To pass untoucht, through Famine, sword, and fire,
His body feels no pain by fire, or sword,
Whose Faith, is in the bosom of the Lord.
Faith is Saint Peeters walking on the water,
Hope lent him help, and Love was his supporter.
Fides, Signum Christianorum.

HOPE.
Hope follows Faith; when Man is most oppressed, Ready for hell, Hope to the
Soul gives rest. Hope in the Lord, be strong the Psalmist says, Hope
strengthens, comforts and confirms thy faith. Hope is Faiths daughter, Heavens
holy Handmaid still, To overruled unruly desperate will From doing damned
violence, which may, beget the souls Eternal castaway. In midst of hellish
crosses, storms and strife, Hope must our Pilot be to a good life Our Anchor,
Cable: give it then free scope, The sweet's of Grace, are relished by hope: O
my dull spirit, rowze thee, fit not still pond'ring on thy poor Means, though
it be ill, be thankful; thank thy God, and be not hurled To damned despair,
by th'malice of the world. Good luck may go away, but good hope yet, Will
never leave us, if we leave not it.

ARe we so blind, so sotted by the Devil
To receive good at Gods hands; and not evil
With equal thanks? have we for sin deserved
Least good, no? rather worthy to be sterv'd.
Want threats revenge; men's states must needs decline,
When men against the will of heaven repine.
Hope cleares Night-stormes, calmes the tempestuous day'
Afflicted, or not afflicted, let us pray,
Despair not, nor repine; let Virtues scope
In midst of sorrows, perch thy soul on Hope.
Dare Man despair to live the life of Caine
And die the death of Judas; merit pain,
The Damned feel in hell? good heaven defend
Disquietted souls from such a dreadful end.
We all are saved by Hope; if in true sense
We hope for Heavens Eternal Excellence:
Hope's like the Fisher-man's Cork, despair the lead,
Whose ponderous weight no sooner being spread,
But it begins to sink; so man in sin,
Did not hope lift him up still by the Chinne.
Yet neither Faith, nor Hope can enesubfist,
Wanting sweet Charity; she is the list
That comprehends, and is the life of grace,
Love pittles still the poor, seeks the Lords Face,
Spes mea Christo.

CHARITY.
Charity and Pride, both feed the poor, in the Den. Charity to praise God,
Pride to get praise of men: True Charity in midst of dangers winnes Safety:
she covers multitudes of sins. Love is the Chain of Grace, love without spot,
which ties all Virtues, in Loves true-love knot, Three thousand Souls, the
heavenly weeper gained constant till death, by Charity obtained: Not words, but
good works, must man's Faith approve, Charity, ever is the life of love,
Patience Housekeeper, rich and bountiful, No Grimfac'd grumbling giver
slothful: Deal liberally thine Alms, cheerful Aimes-giving, increase Men's
states, decreases no man's living.

TRue Love never Envies this, nor that Man's good,
The low descent, nor High-borne Noble blood,
Never makes hot boast of giving, never braggs,
Nor seeks revenge by Hell-affected Rags,
Surpassing this, or that proud neighbors state,
(Causes of mischeife, malice, and much hate,)
But is all excellent sweetness, noble pity.
Fair Honors soul, clothed in humility!
What Eye on Earth sheads for his sin a tear?
What Ear delights Heavens Holy Word to hear?
What Tongue triumphs to speak in Almighti's praise?
What Heart affected stands to holy ways?
Were not for Charity; she is the Queen,
In whom all Graces of the soul are seen!
Prophesies shall fail, Tongues cease, and knowledge vanish
But Charity never; she from souls can banish
Lust, Averices and Pride, with all the Rabble
Of sins, which make Men truly miserable!
"O, when we want the gift of Charity
"We all are subject to impletie.
"The Devil lays his stumbling blocks within
"Our ways of wickedness, our days of sin,
"Lures us to strumpets, such as Sampson tried,
"To mighty Nabuchadnezers swollen pride,
"Like Acban, and G^bezi, daily He,
"Tempes Man, to covetuous Idolatry;
Snares souls to Envy like accursed Caine,
To Herod's Self-love, Nabals churlishvaine
Sin heapt on sin, all those black souls to stifle,
That think Adult'rie sweet, true love a trifle,
If rich, Heaven wills us from our plenteons store,
To yield Truths cherefull succor to the poor,
And that by sundry Statutes God commands,
Upon the forfeiture of life and Lands,
Confirming still, the poor man to have part
In the Rich man's Estate; if any heart
Dares doubt this Truth; the Scripture must deny,
"None but an ATheist wrongs that piety!
What a large extre^me folly it is to see
Man (like the Wolf for prey) how earnestly,
He hunts for means; as if the only honey,
Of soul and body did consist in monle,
Meat, drink, and clothes; Men sick, still pray for health,
Ready to be undone, for paltry wealth,
Freedom and safety, and with shameless faces,
Forget to beg of God spiritual Graces.
Many men, pray but he the glory winnes,
That prays to be disburthen'd of his sins,
And viewes the poor Man's labor with the eye.
Of sweetreliefe; there is noble Chatitie!
The heart of such a man may sometimes shrink
Under temptations weight, but never finke.
"God makes man here Lord steward of that store
"He deals so chearefully among the poor,
"Gives him the Grace to think, when to his fight
Apoore wretch comes to beg of him a mite,
He might have been that beggar, his estate
Transferred on him, and begging at his gate,
Or in the street in Rags, oppressed with grief
Glad to beseech him for some poor relief:
Wealth's the worlds Witch, desired of most, all know it,
Yet I have read, wise Codrus a poor Poet,
And his Wife Procula, they knew it was
Far greater happiness, their days to passo
After long life unto aquiet end,
Then change their poorness, proudly to ascend
King Ninus Throne; be wondered at and seen
T'out shine Semyramis; wealths wicked Queen.
Thus Heathens learn us Christians what to do,
Greedy desire of wealth, works endless woe!
As wise Ulysses served his Siren Witches,
Passe-by the worlds pelf; seek celestial Riches,
"Be rich or poor, unless a beast thou be,
"Seek Heavenly wealth, or never look heaven to see.
Man backward goes, takes all the care he can,
Not to be godly first, but a rich man,
Takes care for health, long life, Physics the blood
But last of all, least care, to become good.
Clean opposite to the fair rule of Truth,
Truth instructs crooked Age, and stiffe-neckt youth.
First to seek Godliness, Riches and health
Will follow next; godliness is great wealth.
What though the world frown, must we straight repine,
Has not Heaven sent us reason to desine
Twixt good and evil? ought not thou and I,
Every one strive to live contentedly
With our estates? certain it should be so,
Did not sin blind us, did we but truly know,
That which the world so scoffs at, Poverty
God only sends to try our honesty,
Or dishonestie; poverty is sent
"For Virtues trial; Vices punishment:
He that in peace enjoyes the quiet calmes
Of flourishing plenty; yet gives no Alms,
But like insatiate Hell greedy of more,
Belies his wealthy state to rob the poor
Of their just Intrest; disabling himself
(Base miser like) to save his dirty pelf,
Such falsehood, cries for flaming vengeance still
To persecute a Wretch so vile, so ill.
It Is not the Rich, not Poor can plead excuse,
Where want of Charity speaks Man's abuse.
Do thou want ^^^es to give, Truth is thy friend,
Truth at all times instructs thee to extend
'Thy Alms in lib'rall manner; not to pine
In parting with thy pence, for love divine.
Admit thou art unable to disburse
Least pecce of Coin, yet let thy emptypurse,
Be full expressed in a Compassionate groan,
A sigh, a prayer for him that makes his moan,
And in the Holy Name of the most High,
Beggs some relief to succor penury.
God ever stands, more on the givers mind,
Then the gift given; if God but truly find
A cup of water, (in his sacred name)
Given to the poor, God gratifies the same.
"The Widows Mite, one Farthing pleased more
"The Lord of Heaven, then all the Rich Man's store,
"There is no Virtue Constant without love,
"Nor no love perfect but from Heavens above.
Witness Truths sacred Text; Heavens love to Man
Amply expressed in the poor Publican.
His humble Eyes, sighs, cries, and bruised breast,
Forced open the Gates of Mercy, gave him rest.
With Spittle, Clay, least word that did proceed
From Mercies never failing Master freed
The Blind, the Lame, the Sick, the Dead from grave,
Heavens All-Commanding, Maker all can save;
O let us then in holy love betake us
To Christian Charity; Now good God make us
Graciously willing, for thy own sweet sake
(That suffered on the Cross; made hell to quake)
Fashion our wills to thine; Lord, make us know
It is our sins, our sins makes God our Foe.
Vbi Charitas non est Caritas.

VERTVES PYRAMID.
Blessed Blessed, O Blessed, Be that Divinity, Three Sacred Persons GOD in Unity,
WHOSE glorious Ravishing Resurrection, Restored us (lost) to Grace, Oh
PERFCTION! Purify thou my Soul, my Heart, my Mind: Snatch me from Earth, to
Heaven make me inclined, Wholly to Thee, (All worldly Pomp despising) Fix my
THOVGHTS ever, On thy Blessed RISING: Give ME A Sempeternall Reverence, To Thy
All-glorious high Omnipotence. I that am clogged with sin, and wretchedness,
(Desperate thoughts hunting after Worldliness;) Thy blessed Protection crave,
clear the great score, Of all my foul misdeeds, that I no more so great a
sinner prove; Lord let my strife, Against my sins, Raise me from Death to
life. And from the Foot of uggly sins disgrace, Mount, mount, my SOVLE, to
th'Pyramid of GRACE.

Chastity and Lust.
LEwd speech strikes blushes in a Virgins face,
Chastity is ever the Zeal of grace,
^taffe of Devotion, Enemy to Lust,
In death true comfort; the Mark of the Just.
Sister of Angels, and the Virgin Tie
Which cleaves to God, gains sweet Eternity.
When Lust with all her paint, Curles, purles, and pride
(Swelling in pomp) is but a nastie Hide
A most infectious foe; foe to the Purse,
Foe to the Person, and which makes it worse,
The Conscience corrosive, confounding wit,
The minds Canker, souls burning Fever fit.
Mong all enticemcuts, pleasures quassing Boule,
All the sharp combats of a Christian soul,
None feircer then the wars of a Chaste mind;
There Is a continual Fight; which good Men find
Never subdued without wet eyes, true care,
In praying; Why? the victory is rare.
Chastities still, in danger among delights,
As Truth in much talk; Soldiers in fierce sights.
The walls of Chastity once battered down,
Maids loose their Honor, Virtues rich renown.
O Lust, what is thy delight? thy full fruition
Of Pleasure; but the Path way to Perdiiton,
Seandall, dishonor, foul reproach and shame,
Will blast thy being, blot out thy good name.
"O happy is that Man, happy the Maid
"That Is Chaste; clear consciences are never afraid
Of Judgment, Death, and hell; no sad affright,
Tortures the mind that is chaste; there is true delight.
Witness the twofold fear that does belong
To Chastity and Lust; fear to do wrong
And grieve her Husband, is the chaste wises part,
She fears her slack of Love; lest he depart,
Gives no cross words, no angry looks nor sour,
Nor does she seem to lump, to powte, to lowre.
She fears to offend her husband, shunnes all strife
Togaine his Presence; which she loves 'bove life.
But the lewd Harlot, when her Mate's from home,
Fear makes her wish, that he might never come.
Lest his approach unlook't for terrify,
And catch her in her base Adultery.
She Is filled with fear, doubts, starts least creek o'th door,
O it is a dreadful sin to be a Whore.
Beauty in the Face, and Lust within the heart
Kills Soul and Body, ruins every part:
Strike me Eternal Essence with the dart
Of Saint-like Chastity; give me a heart
Of flesh; so chastely pleasing, that poor I
May live in Chastity; a chaste soul die.
Midnights-Meditation.
When I contemplate Heaven, and take no care
For worldly vanities; then my soul how far,
How amorously fair thou art; destroying sins,
" Man's a rich Monarch; then true joy begins,
Never till then; never did any fight
Against sin, but gained unspeakeable delight.
This, when I think upon, and practice too,
Heavens in my eye, want nor the worst of woe
Distracts my senses; but when I root my mind
On this rude world, Virtue is soon struck blind,
Wit, reason, all my senses are confounded,
Devils assault my flesh, my soul is wounded.
Save me, O save me Lord, thy worthless Creature;
Pity the weakness of my Mortal nature,
Forgive all forfeitures my sins have made,
Vows, Promises, protestations never paid.
I promised still to mend, to turn mine eyes*
From sinful wales; yet Heaven knows all were lies.
Shame to my soul; how dare I then look up,
Expect least solace from sweet Mercies Cup?
O I am angry, vexed to the very heart,
I act not thy will Lord, but mine own part.
A sinful Tragic Part which will deface
My soul; help Heaven; send thy restraining Grace,
One Drop of Grace Celestial can refresh
A fainting soul; cleanse Lord my corrupt flesh,
Vn-storme sins sulphurous storm; I burn I fry,
Like the impatient Fish, which violently
(Scorch't to the quick) it is raging heat to tame,
Leaps from the Pan, into the burning flame.
Such is the flaming Torture I endure,
Scorcht for my sins; where shall I fly for cure.
" Want is a Mis'rie, much Wealth a trouble,
" Honor a burden; Beauty but a bubble.
" Pleasure a shadow, advancement dangerous *
" Friendship a false Wind, and disgrace odious.
This world of sin circles my brain with snares;
A thousand distractions, Millions of cares,
Beats on the Anvile of my poor weak head,
(To ruin sense) to strike all good thoughts dead;
Often musing on the Worlds Witch-pleasing pelf,
I thus begin to argue with my self,
Why might not I be Rich? rush, God does see,
This mean estate of mine fitter for me.
Then I collect my Spirits, praise that God
Which keeps me still unscourg'd; restraines the Rod
Of his just Vengeance, that might justly fall
On me, and mine; in Justice ruin all:
"Had I the Worlds possession in my hand,
All Potentates on Earth at my command,
What then? I then; subject to all entices,
Might fill my little-world, with World of Vices.
It is enough I live, and it is too much
That I am fed, or clothed, if I grutch.
My days of sin increase, wax worse and worse,
Whither? O whither shall I direct my course?
Down, down foul flesh, (great God) my self I blame,
I ask thy pardon, asking in his name
That is my Life, the Light, the Way, the Word,
Mercy and Truth; fair Truth which does afford
Mercy to all; only prescribes this task,
That whatsoever Mortal souls do ask
The Father in his Name it shall be done,
To glorify the Father, in the Son.
O infinite sweetness; O Immortal love,
Thou God the Father, that do rule above
The Highest Heavens; Thee in the blessed Name
Of Jesus Christ, (Theanthropos) that came
To save believing souls, I ask, implore,
Pardon, O pardon; out with sins rotten core
Rooted too near my heart; whisper thy fear
Into my soul; let me not only hear
Thy sacred word, but (in the practicke part)
Make perfect use of it; nere let me start
From thee my God; let sad Tears from mine eyes,
And sighs from my heart express my grievancies.
Though I fall foul and fearfully each day,
Lord let me not fall finally away.
And I if needs must fall, let my fall be,
From death to life, from sin to sanctity.
Amor Dei, amorem Deo parit.

The Divine Dream.
Worm that I am; O how shall I begin
To praise that God, that in my sleep against sin
Gave divine warning; sent truths sacred scrole
Which to and fro, hovring in the Air, did role
This way, and that; at last, as if Heavens will
Had so decreed; the waving scrole stood still,
(Much like the golden Taper of the Sun
At the command of Man; the son Nun)
In which me thouht I read, and read it ore,
Peccair no majs; that is, sin no more
Written in Spanish; this seeming sight so strange,
Workt in my dreaming spirit such a change
That startling from my drowsy sleep I cride
To heaven; thus instantly with Tears replied
O sacred Savior, humbly I implore,
Give me the spirit of Grace to sin no more.
For I am blind; sin clouds my sense of seeing
Thy good, my ill; I Am Natures brittle being,
Vexed to the soul; so infinitely oppressed
With sighs and groans, they cannot be expressed.
What shall I do? great Natures miracle,
Thou only wise God, Heavens firm Oracle,
Fashion me to thy will; tip out with the core
Of sin in me; that I may sin no more.
Say to my soul, lest I in soul despair,
"Thy grace sufficient is; Cure Lord my care.
"Speak but the word (at the Centurion said)
"Thy servant shall he healed; Lord be my aid.
"No Rod so sharp, nor no discase so sore,
"But thy good Grace can cure, to sin no more.
Thou Lord by holy Text confirmed do say,
I am the Lord that heales; I Ropeca:
"Thou God the true Physician art that can,
"Be mine, Lord be so; pity me weak man.
God my Physician, and his Grace the Physic
I must not, will not, cannot be sin-sicke.
Nomo loeditur nisi a seipso.

THE DIVINE ECHO, BETWEEN THE GOOD ANGEL, Man in despair, And the DEVIL.
Man. DEath to my Soul, how long must I in vain
Heavens comfort crave? yet endlessely remain.
Fettered in sin? break Heart, give death free scope
And must I then despair? is there no hope?

Angel Hope.


Man. What Soul affected spirit to mine Ear
Eccho's some sweet releife? can hope come near
Sins shackl'd Slave from whom all Verues gone?
What Is to be Hoped for? when all hopes are done?

Angel. Pardon.


Man. How; Pardon, can Pardon raise a wretch
Times reprobate like me? I that can fetch
Nor sigh, nor tear, sins fury to abate,
Can Heaven free such a Soul? so desolate?

Devil. Too late.

Man. Too late indeed; my Sins sick stony heart,
Traitor to Truth; Acts the Tragedian's Part
Of ill so well; I know not what to do,
Frights, terrors, broken sleeps, all speak my woe,
Yet Holy Writ tells me, it is better ever,
Late to repent, then to repent me never.

Devil. Never.

Man. O my horror (never) thou deadly accent,
Art thou from Heaven or Hells cursed dungeon sent
Must my despairing thoughts for ever bend
To Hellish Actions? shall I never amend?

Angel. Amend.


Man. Amend I cannot, gifts of Grace I lack
Like him that wears Heavens Livery on's back
Hells favor in his bosom; wretched I
Will Fate afford no present remedy!

Devil. Die.

Man. My soul must then miscarrie and be damb'c.

Devil. Be damb'd.

Man. Is that the only solace, all the pity
Stern Fate affords poor Man in misery?

Devil. I.

Man. Was my Creation in the Womb of woe
Ordained for Hell? no otherwise then so

Devil. So.

Man. Die then I must; and will, appoint me where.

Devil. Here.

Man. So quick: O true Physician, for to die
I hold it best; and to link suddenly.
Here in this Desert then, where no eye sees,
Express the means to die among these Trees.

Devil. These Trees.

Man. If mong these Trees appoint to me an Altar?

Devil. An Halter.

Man. To be hanged is base, better to drown my self,

Devil. Do, drown thy self.

Man. No no, I will not die so like a Rat,
A Cicken, or a Mouse, a Dog, a Cat,
But like the desperate Statesman I will be
Made nothing by a Dram; poison to me
Is precious balm; I will die by poison.

Devil I, poison.

Man. It Is the true death, best Cure against discontent
The Noble-Mans consumption; my intent
Huggs the conceit; And yet my soul to slay
By touch or taste, is no true Roman way
Can thou not change thy word?

Devil. Thy sword.

Man. Shall my Sword then set free from all the strife
Of Worldly woes? this mockery of life:
Can my sword soon quit me from out this straight?

Devil. Straight.

Man. I tifle time; come forth thou maine sole good,
Thou cure to all my cares; sweet sword in blood
I Will drown thy friendly Blade; it is the best Part
Thou ere can Act, to cleave thy Masters heart.
Fly soul to Air, Flame, Dust, I know not where,
Earth, serve thou me for Coffin and for Beer,

Angel. Forbear.


Man. Who bids forbear? what Potent power commands
My soul to live? my sword and trembling hand
To stop their bloody course? is it in Fate
To alter Man's intent before too late,
Turning swift mischief to that sudden stay
Whom death but even now would make her Prey?

Angel. Pray.


Man. Pray, unto whom? my soul is in a mist,
See see, me thinks the Everlasting Fist
Of Heaven is stretched, waving the Crown of grace
Over my Cursed head, Soul, sinful Face,
Aim accursed; I do deserve the Rod
Of Vengeance, rather then to pray to God
For the least drop of Mercy: No I must
Not dare to pray to him, for he is just.

Angel. Just.


Man. And by his Justice, my impiety
Merits Eternal endless misery,
Sins just reward; O teach me yet the way
Thou Divine Echo; to what place to pray,
From whence implored mercy may be given,
To clear my sins great score, and make all even.

Angel. Heaven.


Man. What words will best he fit, and not betray me,

Angel. Aye-mee.


Man. Despair deteines me back, commands me say
I have no Will; no Mind, no heart to pray
What shall I do? my soul is in a Fever
And in that word despair I shall end ever.

Angel Endeavor.


Man. O sacred sweetness, true Caelestiall wit,
Thou sum of sweetness stamped in sacred writ,
Endeavor, yes, sins strife is the best play,
My soul can Act; God give, heaven I obey.

Angel. Obey.


Cum humi limus, cur non humilimus.

Deaths Masqueing Night.
AS mighty Kings in glorious Masks delight,
Death, (Times Grand-Masquer) had his masqueing Night.
In evr'y Palace, every Nooke Death ranges
Death takes his root from sin, He Is full of changes.
With solemn Pace unseene, Death dos advance
His Sable shaft, to lead the World a dance.
Through Courts, though Armies, the worlds wide Hall,
Controlled of none, Death is the end of all.
Where Is then the Mighty Monarch? where is the glory
Of all his Court? State, Masks, joys tradsitory?
Beauties bright Earth-Bred-Star? whose sparkling eye
Shoots quivers of Love-shafts at Rich Majesty.
Death shall deface, and in the bed of night,
Yield far more cause of terror, then delight.
Where Is then the, wanton glance that seemed to skip
From this Great Lord? to that Great Ladies Lap?
The nymble, Sprightly, Cap'ring, Courtier then
Forgotten lies; there is no dancing when
Devouring Death, stabs with his sable shaft,
Vain is the power of Art; all mundane craft.
The deep Physicians skill, flattering discourse
Of health; Death soon, turns to a dismal course.
Where Is then? the mighty Madams fl^reing Pride?
Oils, Powders, Paintings? all are laid aside.
Gold glittring Glory, Cloth of Silver silk,
Forgetful Feasts, their sinful Baths of Milk
(When many a poor soul sterves, wanting the food)
Of their supurfluous outside) pampered blood
Gurles, Purles, Purfumes, Court complements, visites,
Hot-stirring Dishes, soul bewitching Minutes,
All Pomp on Earth, ambitious mad desires,
Revells and Lust-burnt Midnights unchaste fires.
All are hushed then; Beggars and Kings, all must,
Take a poor lodging in a bed of dust.
Death is a dreadful Antimasque, 'twill fright
The worlds Grand Masquer in his full delight!
Figures and Footings, practiced to intrance
Spectators Eyes, Deaths interposing Dance,
Dissolves to darkness, in a moments space
Ruins proud Pomp; makes pale th'aluing Face
Sparkling in Beanty; deads the hot desire
Of Naked Breasts; Death tames Lusts raging fire,
Wounds without dread or dalliance; Death will strike,
Sou'raignes and subjects, all are to him alike.
To Rich and Poor those that do ill, or well,
Death is the Path, either to Heaven, or Hell.
Deaths dread appearance evermore makes glad
The good; but proves a terror to the bad.
Disjoynts the ablest limbs; Death trembles Pride,
Extincts State-Glories will not be denide
Death is an Archer, Man the Mark to shoot at
Fly where thou will, East, West, this way, or that,
Death follows like a shadow, shoot he will,
Draws sure and home; Death never fails to kill
And yet, none truly minds it; though we know
Time shall decay, we cannot feed nor go
Nor promise life a Minute, men pass to bed,
But ignorant are to rise, alive or dead.
Death by a thousand accidents does meet
Health, Wealth, and Beauty, stabs 'em in the street.
He that least dreams of death, some falling Tyle
Timber, or Stone, does suddenly beguile
Him of his life, yea often, when Man refraines
And seeks to shun it, dashes out his brains,
This learnes us Mortals, during vital breath,
With humble soul to meditate on Death.
The thought of Death aright, prevents the evil
Of Hells Night Theife, and the worlds Noonday Devil
Death's deep remembr'ance rightly understood
Strikes dead delights, lures the lewd mind to good.
Wafts the sin weary soul to think upon
Her ill past life, present affliction.
O sinne-sicke-sinfull Man, fear to do ill
Tremble proud Heart, cross not thy Makers will,
Think on thy end; think on the Day of Doom,
The pains of Hell; Deaths-Masqueing Night will come
Not in the Pomp of Princely merriment,
But the dread fall of souls impenitent,
Ungrateful Souls to God; souls that dare sit
In The scorners seat trusting to wicked wit
More then their Makers wisdom; their conceit
Aims not at Heaven, but to be worldly great.
Pride is their zeal, theie Prayers forgetfulness,
Charity Contempt, their Vivtue wantonness,
Plump high fed Pampered Flesh on whom must wait
Page, Pander, Parasite, preparation, state,
Gold glittering glory, cost, curious diet,
Insatiate pleasure, and vaineglorious Riot.
These are the sins that merit endless shame,
Hells ever burning, never dying flame.
Which to prevent, (Great God) let hate to vice
Dissolve sins Cloud, Becho to Paradise.
Our Saviors sweetness, let us never more,
Lie down to our dishonor like a whore.
Dead to good Counsel; never let dark deeds
Defile the soul; let us root up all the seeds
Of Pride, Lust, Envy, Hatred, and in place,
Plant Wisdom, meek Humility and Grace,
Abhor to study State with greater zeal
Then zeal to Heaven, or the soules-common-weale.
True Penitence gains Heaven, throws sinners down,
To raise them up, to an Immortal Crown.
Cogita de fine infinito, ut vives in infinitum.

FINIS.

