THE EPISTLES OF Mr. ROBERT RICH TO THE Seven Churches, (so called by Him) Viz.
1. To the Roman Catholic. 2. The Episcopal-Protestant. 3. The Presbyterian, in
one Ternary. 4. The Independent, in one Ternary. 5. The Anabaptist, in one
Ternary. 6. The Quaker. 7. The Church of the Firstborn.


Containing his Testimony to God's Approbation of the Good, and Aversation to
the Evil in all Persuasions.

Published by particular direction given by the Author in his lifetime.

Together with an Abstract of a Letter of the Authors, declaring his Gift or
Benevolence sent to each of the said Churches.

London, Printed, And are to be sold by Francis Smith, at the Elephant and
Castle in Cornhil, below the Royal Exchange. 1680.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe Author of these ensuing Epistles, after he arrived at a true understanding
of Things, did not value himself upon the account of that splendour and
magnificence, wherein he formerly appeared upon the Stage of this World: For
though he were born of a worthy Family; had many great and noble Relations;
enjoyed the accession of a comely Personage and Presence; lived in high
Estimation, Opulency, and Credit, in the state and condition of a Merchant in
the City of London for many Years; yet all these things he passes by, in the
Character which he hereafter gives of himself.

For, after he was once truly enlightened, none of them did elate, or lift up
his Mind; nay, he was willing to sacrifice them all to a better prospect, even
a Pisgah-view of the Heavenly Canaan: Hence it was that he chose rather to
suffer Affliction with a despised People, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
for a season. Hence also it came to pass, that as the Work of Conversion is
called a New Birth, ( as if the true Date of our Lives did Commence therefrom)
so our Author over-looked the former part of his Life, ( as I hinted but now)
in the account he gives of himself; neither did it any otherwise affect him,
than with regret and sorrow, for having lived so unfruitfully so long a time.
To eat, drink, and be clothed, and so to walk up and down on the face of the
Earth, (as the manner of most Men is) is but a low, mean, and unprofitable
Life: For then we begin to live profitably, when we come to understand the use
of Life, and when we devote it to the prosecution of those ends for which it
was given us, which are, The Glory of God, the Good of our Neighbor, and the
Salvation of our own, and others Souls.

It pleased God to carry the Author above the Temptations of this World, by
breaking in upon his Soul in a Divine and Heavenly Work, wherewith he was
exercised for some Years.

Having thus changed his Station, and given up his Name to Christ, he was first
engaged in a particular FOrm, amongst the People called Quakers.

The manner how he came to be engaged in that Administration, his carriage
therein, and recession therefrom, cannot be better expressed, than in his own
words, in a Letter of his sent from Barbados (where he for above twenty Years
resided) dated November. 30. 1678.

In the Year 1654, (says he) I became a Quaker; in which Dispensation of John,
I was truly baptized into Repentance and amendment of Life, which blotted out
all my former Sins, and for two Years time, was in the strength of this Baptism
carried with delight both to do and to suffer, even above and beyond my Equals:
All which time I lived after the Mode of that Sect, a severe strict Life, a
Pharisee of Pharisees, till in the Year 1656, when my dear Brother J. N.
suffered for confessing to Christ in the Saints; my love to that Testimony,
made me willing to stand by him in his Sufferings, and to bear his Cross; for
which Testimony, the World, the Powers of Darkness then ruling, my Kindred, and
my Brethren the Quakers, hated me, and sold me into Egypt, by their many false
Reports: Yet there the Lord my God appeared to me; and finding me in my
Innocence, wherewith he had clothed me, has ever since become my exceeding
great Reward.

He being thus in great part disingaged from that particular Form of
Profession, having a deep insight into things, and judging that the whole Body
of Truth was not circumscribed within the Bounds of one particular Persuasion,
but lay scattered and dispersed amongst the Outcasts of Israel, (i.e.) The
several Parties and Opinions, which did all ( though some more mistakingly, and
with less refinedness than others) lay claim to Religion, and to hopes of
Eternal Happiness therein, and hereby attaining a more universal Spirit, he
found freedom in his mind to dive into the several Forms of Professors now
appearing in this, or other Lands, with a design to cull out the Gold, (i.e.)
that which was good in all, and to reject the Dross.

A Work, as requiring a discerning Judgment into things that differ, so apt to
expose the Undertaker to the dislike of most Parties; few, especially in things
of the Mind, being willing to have Errors, Misapprehensions, or Mistakes,
imputed to them.

He that endeavors to interpose himself an Arbiter, or Reconciler, between
Disagreeing Parties, especially in the heat of their Contentions, may receive
blows from both, but thanks from neither, at least, till the Fit be over, and
the Mind retiring to a sedate Recollection, becomes more sensible of, and
thankful for such friendly Interposures.

Our Friend then being engaged in His Thoughts in this Work, and knowing it to
be a Character of pure and undefiled Religion, to visit the Fatherless and
Willows in their distress; finding also, that a particular Spirit was very
predominant among Professors; the Apostle complaining of it in his time, That
all sought their own, and that few did naturally care for the Estate one of
another; insomuch that James makes Beneficence, and doing good to others, the
Symptom of True Faith.

Hence it was, that in his first Address he was willing to visit the Poor of
every Congregation, rather than the Rich; and That he did, by his early
Liberality, transmitting Thirty pounds apiece to the Necessitous and Indigent
of every Party; which, it seems was received by them all, as a Testimony of his
general Love, as by their Acquittances hereafter mentioned may appear.

The manner of transmitting the said Sums, and the distributing of them, as
aforesaid, has bin formerly published in print, in a Letter of R. R. to J. R.
his Friend, an Abstract whereof is here also presented; and in each of the
subsequent Epistles, it is also further hinted, therefore I need say no more of
it in this place.

Having made that fair Introduction, his next Work was, according to his
Promise, to give each Party his words of Advice and Counsel, which are
contained in the ensuing Epistles.

The Differences between each Party are described in the Epistles themselves,
and therefore my labor here, in endeavoring to make out their disagreement,
may be superseded.

One thing more the Publishers hereof think fit to declare, That they account
not themselves responsible for every particular Passage or Notion of the
Author's (especially as it may be distorted, either by weak or malevolent
Spirits) but judge that they have sufficiently discharged their Duty, by
communicating his own Thoughts (according to his desire) to the World.

J. W.
Our Savior says, In his Father's House there are many Mansions; and in the
Christian State there be three Degrees, Incipientis, Preficientis, and
Perfecti; each State may find what is suitable to them to that joy. Capiat qui
Capere potest.

Per R. B. Ph.



An Abstract of a Letter and Directions of Robert Rich, to Mr. John Raynes, for
the distributing of his Benevolence to the Seven Churches in London.
Mr. John Raynes,
THese may inform you, That in the month of December 1666, by the way of
Ireland, we received the sad and deplorable Intelligence of London's
Destruction by Fire, wherewith the Beauty and Glory of that City is (like
Sodom) turned into Ashes; which when I had understood, and thoroughly pondred, I
did impart my thoughts to your Brother Mr. Fr. Raynes, to this effect, viz.
That this Calamity would be so universal and extensive, that multitudes must of
necessity be cast upon great extremities of Want and Misery, and that now was a
fit opportunity for all to hold out a hand of Charity toward their distressed
Brethren: To which purpose I had You upon my Heart, to write unto you when our
Fleet went, (which has bin detained until now) to dispose of the 210 l. in
your hand. Now Sir, as touching your proceedings in this Business of my
Request, that these Seven Churches, with all others, might more fully discern
the mind of my Lord in this figure of Love and Amity to them, I think it meet
to let you know, that I have something already written to each of those Seven
Congregations, (which in the fullness of time may be presented to their view)
Holding forth the Everlasting Gospel of our Lord and Savior Christ in us; the
Saving Health, and universal free Grace of God (ready to be revealed) to all
Nations, Sects and People: Together with a Declaration, or Testimonial of that
dear Love and Unity which my Soul has to all that fear God and work
Righteousness; and not only to such, but likewise to the Rebellious,
Disobedient, and worst of Sinners. Also something I have to offer concerning
the New Creation (God's Workmanship in Christ Jesus) that which mine Eyes have
seen, and Hands have handled of the Word of Life, of things that now are, and
must shortly come to pass, when the Son in Man, the New Birth, shall more
abundantly be revealed, which as yet is a great Mystery to many, and has bin
long hid from Ages and Generations of formal Professors of Godliness, that have
wanted the Power of Love, or Christ Jesus that Spirit, working all their Works
in them and for them, but is now making Himself manifest in all that are born
again of his Spirit, and baptized with that Water of Life which regenerateth
and keeps clean the heart. That Chaste Virgin that only brings forth the
Man-Child, and Second Adam, who is Heir of all Things, and the Savior of All
that believe and follow Him; Who enlightens every one (with the knowledge of
Good) that comes into the World. This is He that was, and now is, and is yet
to come to all succeeding Generations, of whom all the Prophets from Moses
until John bare Record; Allelujah. Whose Day Abraham saw and rejoiced, as do
all that have Christ the Unction in them, who only and alone opens Mysteries,
and does teach to sing the Song of Moses and the Lamb; Allelujah. Whose Star of
old led, as his Spirit does now lead, all the wise in Heart, both to find, and
also to worship him acceptably, according to his Law, Mind, and Will, written
therein; even Him that is the Rock of Ages, whose Body and Blood our Fathers
did (in the Wilderness, as at Jerusalem) taste of; and which we their Children,
that are Heirs of the same promised Spirit, do now eat, and drink, the Bread
from Heaven, which is not carnal, but nourishes the Soul into a Life and
Kingdom that fades not away, but endures for ever. Allelujah.

And now, having (in part) acquainted you with the reason of my intended
Proceedings, my next care is (what I can) to lessen your trouble; to which end
I think it the best way to propound three of each sort of People, chief amongst
them, as Overseers of the rest, Men of good Report, into whose hands the 30 l.
may be delivered (as a sign of my Love) and by them be distributed amongst
those of their way, who are in Need, Sickness, or any other kind of Adversity.

A Note or List of Direction, to Mr. John Raynes, after what manner to dispose
of the 210 l. in his hands.
I. THirty pounds to the Professors of the Roman Catholic Religion. Enquire, I
pray, (on the Exchange) for Mr. Daniel Arthur, or Mr. Thomas Wise, Merchants;
they can inform you who are the chief Confessors and Teachers in Queen
Katharines, or in the Queen Mother's Chapel, and give the Money to three of the
chief of them, (as a sign of my dear Love) entreating them to bestow the said
Money on those that are in Need, Sickness, or any other kind of Adversity
amongst them.

II. Thirty pounds to the Episcopal Protestants, Give to Dr. Thomas Pierce, Dr.
Pearson, Dr. Peter Gunning, Dr. Robert Pory, Dr. Britten, Dr. Dukeson of St.
Clements Danes, to any three of them, or any other three you judge more
convenient, as a sign of my dear love, entreating them, etc.

III. Thirty pounds to the Presbyterian Professors, Give to Doctor Spurstow,
Dr. Manton, Mr. Richard Baxter, Mr. Thomas Case, Mr. Samuel Clark, or any three
of them, or to any three of that way you judge more convenient, as a sign of my
dear love, etc.

IV. Thirty pounds to the Professors of Independency, Give to Dr. Owen, Dr.
Dell, Mr. John Goodwin, Dr. Thomas Goodwin, Mr. Thomas Brooks, Mr. Feak, to any
three of them, or to any other three of that way you judge more convenient, as a
sign, etc.

V. Thirty pounds to the People called Anabaptists, Give to Mr. Thomas Lamb,
Mr. John Rogers, Mr. John Cooper, Mr. Kiffen, Mr. Vavasor Powel, to any three
of them, or to any three of that way you judge more convenient, as a sign, etc.

VI. Thirty pounds to the People called Quakers, Give to Amos Stoddard, Simon
Dring, John Bolton, Samuel Newton, Gerand Roberts, Henry Clark, to any three of
them, or to any other three of that way you judge more convenient, as a sign,
etc.

VII. Thirty pounds to the Church of the First Born, who worship God in Spirit,
and have their Conversations in Heaven, Give to Mr. Robert Bacon, Mr. William
Rawlinson, and to Mr. Blackborow. My request to them is, That they would
receive this 30 l. of you, and therewith provide a Dinner or Supper, which I
chiefly do for the raising of my dear Friend Lazarus, viz. The Love of God,
which has bin long pining away through a tedious famine of Contention and
Strife, even unto Death; and invite to this Entertainment of Joseph's Love, and
as his Passover from the Death of Enmity, to the Life of Love unfeigned, such as
they shall apprehend to be born again into the new Life of Love, so as to have
peace with God therein, and good Will toward each other, (which is a Life and
a World as yet to come to many) who with one Heart and one Soul can meet and
break Bread in the singleness of their hearts; and behold, my Spirit is with
you from the beginning to the end, even with all, or as many as shall meet
together in the Name or Power of Love the Father, and of Love the Son, and in
the pure Innocent, powerful, loving Spirit thereof, even with all that feel the
Joy of the Lord their Strength, or that have Christ Jesus, the Love of God,
shed abroad in their Hearts; all such are but one Bread, which the Father
gives for the Light and Life of the World. O eat and drink abundantly thereof,
my beloved Friends. Allelujah.

After the Receipt of the forenamed Letter, and the Money disposed as was
therein directed, this attempt was made by R. B. toward the Feast of Divine
Love; an Invitation was sent by him to several Persons, to afford their
presence at his House, in order to the end aforesaid. Accordingly several of
the said Persons, on the first of September, in the Year 1668, did there meet,
where after he had spoke something suitable to the occasion, some Entertainment
was made, according to the directions of the foresaid Letter.

One of the Persons invited, being necessarily absent, made his Apology to the
said R. B. in the ensuing Letter.

SIR,

THough Providence had otherwise ordained it, that I could not be present at
the Feast, to which you so friendly and solemnly invited me, yet this is to let
you know, I no way slighted it, though it was but a Type, for I am in my very
Soul a real Friend to all that have a good will to that Catholic Love which
was in the beginning, and will be when all middle walls, that are come in
through Man's fall, are removed. The Lord prepare us all for that Feast of fat
things, that in the Mount of Sion is made ready; that is, the Mount in which
the Lord will destroy the Covering cast over all flesh, into which we enter
after the Consummation of all Types, in celebrating the Passover with our Lord
Jesus in the like death, to which we must be conformed, that so the Vail being
rent, we may enjoy the most holy Things, and inherit the essential Love for
ever. But this is a great Work, and the attaining it the greatest Wonder; To
which the Lord bring us all.

Your true Friend, in the Love of God, T. B.

The several and respective Acquittances given for the Receipt of each Thirty
Pounds.
1. By the Roman Catholics.
REceived the 23d day of December of John Raynes, by the Appointment and Order
of Mr. Robert Rich Senior, of Barbados, the Sum of 30 l. Sterling; which we
promise to dispose of, to such as are in Need, Sickness, or any other
Adversity. We say, received by us,

Tho. Godden, Treasurer of her Majesty's Chapel. G. Stapylton, D.D. Chaplain
in Ordinary to her Majesty. Hen. Latham, Chapl. in Ord. to her Majesty at St.
James's.


2. By the Episcopal-Protestants.
REceived the 14th day of January, 1667, of John Rayns, by the Appointment and
Order of Mr. Robert Rich Senior, of Barbados, the Sum of 30 l. Sterling; which
we promise to dispose of to such as are in Need, Sickness, or any other
Adversity.

Benjamin Whichcot, John Wells, Thomas Grigg.


3. By the Presbyterians.
REceived the 8th day of January 1667, of John Raynes, by the Appointment and
Order of Mr. Robert Rich Senior, of Barbados, the Sum of 30 l. Sterling; which
we promise to dispose of to such as are in Need, Sickness, or any other
Adversity.

Lazarus Seaman, Tho. Manton, Robert Francklin.


4. By the Independents.
REceived the 13th day of January, 1667, of John Raynes, by the Appointment and
Order of Mr. Robert Rich Senior, of Barbados, the Sum of 30 l. Sterling; which
we promise to dispose of according to his Order, to the Poor, and such as are
in Adversity amongst us. We say, received by us,

Thomas Brooks, Matthew Barker, Corn. Helm.


5. By the Anabaptists.
REceived the 15th of January, 1667, of Mr. John Raynes, by Order of Mr. Robert
Rich Senior, of Barbados, the full Sum of 30 l. which he ordered unto us, for
to dispose amongst the Poor and Distressed of the Baptized People. We say,
received as before, per

Thomas Lamb, Hanserd Knollys, Tho. Cooper.


6. By the Quakers.
REceived the 9th of the 11th month, called January, 1667, of John Raynes of
London, Merchant, the Sum of 30 l. by the Order and Appointment of Robert Rich
of Barbados Senior; which he ordered to be disposed of to the Poor amongst us.
We say, received by us,

John Bolton, Amos Stoddart, Gerard Roberts.


7. By the Church of the Firstborn.
REceived the 9th day of December, 1667, of John Raynes, by the Appointment and
Order of Mr. Robert Rich Senior, of Barbados, the Sum of 30 l. which we
promise to endeavor to dispose of according to his Order. We say, received by
us,

Robert Bacon, Will. Rollinson, William Blackbororow.


Memorandum, The several Sums abovementioned, were not all received by the
particular Persons mentioned by the Author in his Order of Directions
aforegoing, partly because the said Persons could not conveniently be spoken
with; and partly also, because liberty was left by him to dispose of it to any
other three of each Class respectively.

A Salutation to the Seven Churches assembled by Order of Mr. Robert Rich at
his Feast of Love. As also a Descant on his Gift to the said Churches.
By J. S. Doctor of Physic.
WHen in Professing Europe, Lust and Pride
Conceived and brought forth, then Religion di'd.
Whence sprang a viperous Brood: amongst the rest,
Strife, War, Division, Falsehood, Interest.
All which our peevish Churchmen did imbibe,
Picking for Self, and not for God, a Tribe.
Thus strung like Beads, Men on their Centers move,
But the true Center of Religion's, LOVE.
It Is pure and undefiled, to Do well:
All beside That, is only Husk and Shell.
Wherein America now supplies our Lacks;
The fairest Preacher dwells amongst the Blacks.
Thus Jonah found both Priests and Confessors,
In a dead time, amongst Heathen Mariners.
Thus Abr'ham, Sarah, (Heads o'th Faithful Sect)
Were taught, reproved by Abimelech.
His Love is greatest now, when we have none;
Like Gideon's Fleece, bedewed from Heaven alone.
And as Heaven's Blessings, Light and Rain do fall;
So is his bounteous Kindness, general.
From Head to Feet the Oil of Aaron came,
The Skirts of's Garment did partake the same.
Thus Holy Jacob on the Tribes let fall
His Goodness round, he blessed them, one and all.
Accept, I pray, this tender Father's Will:
Who sees your Good, and oversees your ill.
1. His general Love you Cath'licks first does bless,
Who show but little, and deserve much less.
His Bounty makes some 'mends for burning Troy;
His Minerals save, where yours do all destroy.
He treats you well, where others wish a Rope;
He sees, with you, God's Image in the Pope.
2. The next akin he deals with, as with the others;
And what does hinder but they may be Brothers?
His Love intends that complete Union be,
Instead of compelled Uniformitie.
And kindly does all Catholic Christians bring,
Not to Christ's Vicar, but to Christ their King.
3. Smec. smites with Horns, and Hoofs, and proves unkind
To Priests before, and Sectaries behind.
He blames all others, and all likewise blame him,
Except this Friend, who takes this course to shame him.
Maugre his Wrath, he will him mercy show,
Though he have courted his own overthrow.
4. The Savoy Sages may behold a Brother,
Who loves them more, than they love one another.
He shows to them his Love in earnest, which
They would accept, were they as Poor as Rich.
Pride, that puffs up, and does reject Love's Power,
Which courts them highly in a golden Shower.
5. You who make sure of Water for a sign,
(Who make your Teachers Merchant, or Divine)
Three's a full number: go on, and approve
The Seal of Faith, and Baptism of true Love.
You young strong Men do much, yet lack you more,
This Friend's kind Heart, to sell, and give to the Poor.
6. The Northern rugged Nature he subdues,
His gentle temper would win on the Jews.
An Heart of Stone such sing'lar Love must own.
A Flint will break upon a Bed of Down.
Come, take your Money, and hereafter say,
James Naylor's Friend directs you the right way.
The Alabaster Box disdained by all,
Was shed in order to Christ's Burial.
This precious Gift incurs like indignation,
Which does forerun his Rule and Coronation.
This Sovereign Oil proclaims those general Passions,
Which will instal him King of Saints and Nations.
His Standard's now set up, and is inscribed,
Peace on the Earth, good Will to every Tribe.
He gains Men's Hearts, and Conquers Sans control:
A little Leaven leaveneth the whole.
That Rich endeavored Lazarus to raise,
Shall then be spoken to's eternal praise.
When Men enlightened shall on Christ's Name call,
From the Sun rising, even to his Fall.
When God shall bless anew His whole Creation,
And Heaven and Earth shall make but one Plantation.
7. You God-like Men, whom he Firstborn does call,
Whose mature Spirits can bear Love to all.
You Are willing God should rule: when he forbears,
You will not pluck up, nor sever Wheat from Tares,
If he says, Grow together. You Will brook this,
That Light and Darkness, Day and Night, are His.
In Wine-bibbers, and those possessed with Devils,
You Will cherish Good, and disincourage Evils.
On Lazarus his Ghost appearing.
FRight not, my Friends! if Lazarus appear,
Dismal and ghastly at this Meeting here.
His Grave-Clothes yet are on, He scarce has Breath,
His Face is wrapped with Monuments of Death.
When he revived, shall have put on his Dress,
When Wine and Oil shall Heart and Face refresh,
Then shall God's Power and Love through The Earth be spread;
All will believe a Preacher from the Dead.
This dark obscure Appearance does fore-run,
A far more glorious Dispensation.
The Chaos this, on which God's Spirit will brood,
Producing Light and Beauty, all that is good.
It Is yet rude Ore, but when t'has past the Mint,
You Will see its Glory, the King's Image in it.
Amongst all the Precious Stones, this is the Gem,
Which cut, and set, makes New Jerusalem.
The Type whereof, at this Solemnity,
May all the invited Guests together see.
When Angels would converse with Mortals, then
They take a Body, talk and walk like Men.
Deposit sense, and lay aside your Clay;
If you would converse with Spirits, be as they.
In mixing Souls, which are immortal bred,
There Is no distinction 'twixt alive and dead.
They soon can meet, what e're the distance be,
Who move much quicker than a twinkling eye.
Thus Spirits meet and greet, that all may know,
Angelick Visions may be here below.
To you in whom 's conceived this Seed of Love,
Let this be the quickening Day, and let it move.
Let Robert Rich your noble Pattern be,
In Hallelujahs be as thick as he.
Jan. 25. 1667/8.
In Obitam and perpetuam memoriam Domini Roberti Rich Evangelistae, Acrostichon
per R. B. Ph.
R Report who can the Truth of this one Man,
O Of's Birth, his Life, his Acts, the Course he ran.
B Born from on High he must be, and his Quill
E Enobled too by God's most Holy Will.
R Rome he dealt justly with, it is not destroyed
T The way that some do think, by Fire and Sword.
R Raised up he was, to the Immortal Life,
I It in all Parties puts an end to Strife.
C Christ is the Universal Light and Love,
H He that from Heaven came, comes as a Dove.
On the Memory of Mr. Robert Rich, who arrived at London from the Barbados,
Sept. 9. last past, and departed this life November. 16. following, 1679.
R Reconciling what he might,
O Oblique things bending unto straight.
B Bounteous to the Indigent,
E Each Sect did taste his good intent.
R Rare Pattern of Humility,
T 'Twere well if such were you and I.
R Researches of the highest kind;
I Inquiries lofty raised his Mind.
C Charioted hence to Heaven Above,
H His Legacies, Light, Peace, and Love.
Mar. 25. 1680. J. W.

Upon the Departure of Mr. Robert Rich, Nov. 16. 1679.
CAn real Christian Love be dead,
'Cause Rich, filled therewith, is buried?
No, no, it lives in Christ our Head,
From whence 'twill all the World o'respread.
He slipped away in such an Age,
When all the Babels are in rage;
And left us yet behind to see,
Most things in great perplexity.
But yet we hope the day draws near,
When healing Love will more appear.
J. L.

Errata. Last Paragraph of the Preface, read, Proficientis, and Perfecti; each
State may herein find what is suitable to them, to their Joy. Page 105. line 13.
for Stars, read Stairs.

To the Chief Bishop of the Roman Catholic Church, his Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Doctors, Priests, Deacons, and all other Ecclesiastical
Orders and Degrees: To all Generals, Provincials, Abbats, Priors, Guardians,
Rectors and Prefects, of whatsoever Religious Orders of the said Church; ROBERT
RICH sends Greeting in our Lord God Everlasting.
TO those of you that are Regenerate, and born again of the Spirit, who are
Members of Christ Jesus, through the sanctification of the Spirit, Elect and
Precious, to you, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied, from God our Father,
and our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Allelujah.

In the Year 1656, feeling the Birth of God in me, by the overshadowing of the
Holy Ghost, wherein I was made a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. Which Holy Spirit wrought so mightily, as
to beget the New Man (Christ Jesus) in me, by whom I had peace with God, and
good will to all his Creation. Which Spirit of Love moved me to send Thirty
Pounds to be distributed amongst the Poor of the Roman Catholic Church, as a
sign of my Love and good Will to them, (which I understood you received in the
same Spirit of loving kindness I sent it); Not as Judas that betrayed his
Master into the hands of Sinners for Thirty pieces of Silver, but from one that
witnesses the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead, whom by my sins I had
(formerly) crucified, and put to open shame; but having repented and amended my
former bad Life, by help of his Holy Spirit of Grace, (Christ in me) I came to
see that those of all Religions that feared God, and acted righteously toward
Men, were accepted of him, and dearly beloved by me; in which Spirit of Love,
the Ground and Pillar of Truth, the End of the Law, and Bond of Perfection, I
found freedom in my self to look into all sorts of Religions; and knowing the
Rock Christ Jesus, on whom all the Holy Men of God are built; and having a
discerning (by God's Grace) between the Precious and the Vile, between him that
serves God in the Spirit of Truth, and him that only pretends to serve him,
but with a false Spirit; in which Spirit of God, I saw the difference between
the true Church of God, and that which is the false Church. In this
Understanding I did read many Books, written, and allowed by the Roman Church,
viz.

The Bible translated out of the Vulgar Latin by St. Jerome; the Old Testament
Printed in two Tomes by the English-College at Doway; and the New Testament
printed at Rhemes; and have weighed and considered the Reasons St. Jerome gives
for translating it out of the Vulgar Latin, rather than out of the Hebrew and
Greek, which were much corrupted, as he says, by Jews and Heretics, etc. And
having purged the Latin Version from Faults committed by Writers, etc. laying
aside all other Latin Editions, which St. Jerome says were in his time almost
innumerable; which Translation out of Vulgar Latin, though in many things
defective, yet in some I find better to agree with the Truth, than that
translated into English out of the Hebrew and Greek. As for Instance;

The Vulgar Latin translates, Isa. 12.3. You shall draw Water in joy out of the
Savior's Fountains. The other, You shall draw Waters out of the Wells of
Salvation.

Psalm. 38.6. the Vulgar Latin says, Doubtless all things are Vanity. The
other, Psalm. 39.5. says, Verily, every Man at his best estate is altogether
vanity; which seems not to be true, for the Regenerate Man, which is born of
the Spirit, and has Christ the New Man in him, is not altogether Vanity, for
Christ is the Eternal and only begotten Son of God, full of Grace, and full of
Truth. Allelujah.

John 1.14. the Vulgar Latin says, The Word was made Flesh and dwelt IN us.
The other, The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt AMONGST us; Which Translation I
apprehend was to gratify those that deny Christ come in the Flesh of the
Sanctified, and so exalt the Flesh of Jesus equal to or above the Spirit, which
dwells in all true Believers. Allelujah.

1 Pet. 1.13. the Vulgar says, Trust perfectly in the Grace which is offered
you in the Revelation of Jesus Christ. The other, Hope to the end for the Grace
that is to be brought unto you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ. This I also
apprehend was to gratify those that say, Revelation is ceased; and also deny
Revelation to continue in the Church of Christ to the end of the World; which
is contrary to Scripture, and the Saints experience. Read Mat. 11.27. Gal.
1.16. 1 Cor. 2.10. Mat. 28.10.

Romans 16.26. the Vulgar Latin says, To the obedience of Faith in all
Gentiles: The other says, Made known to all Nations. This I suppose is also to
gratify those that deny Christ, the true Light that enlightneth every Man that
comes into the World, whom to obey is Eternal Life and Salvation, both to Jew
and Gentile. Allelujah.

Heb. 1.1. The Latin says, God spoke to the Fathers in the Prophets, and last
of all spoke to us IN his Son: The other says, God spoke to the Fathers by the
Prophets, and has in the last days spoken to us BY his Son. Which Translation
is to set up Man, the Letter, to be our Teacher, and to lay aside Christ, the
Word in the Heart, the Saints only Teacher.

Heb. 12.15. The Latin says, Lest any Man be wanting to the Grace of God: The
other, Lest any Man fail of the Grace of God. Which seems to deny that the
Grace of God which brings Salvation (and has appeared to, and in every Man)
to be sufficient to Salvation. And in the Margent, the Latin says, (on that
Text) If we be not good, there is no lack on God's part, who offers his Grace
freely to all; the defect is in our selves, that answer not God's calling by
his Grace. Which I take to be sound Orthodox Doctrine.

Jude 14. The Vulgar Latin has it, Our Lord is come [in] his holy Thousands,
that numberless number, which no Man can number: The other says, The Lord
comes [with] ten thousands of his Saints. Which doubtless is to countenance a
carnal personal appearance of Christ at his second coming, who as he went, a
Cloud received him out of their sight; even so in the like manner shall he
return in a Cloud of Witnesses in his holy Thousands. Allelujah.

Zach. 5.10. The Vulgar Latin has it, And I said to the Angel that spoke [in]
me: The other, I spoke to the Angel that talked [with] me. Which later
Translation most assuredly was to gratify them that deny Christ (God's Angel)
to come in the Flesh of the Sanctified. Allelujah.

1 Pet. 1.3, and 4. The Latin has it; Who according to his great Mercy has
regenerated us into an Inheritance that cannot fade, conserved in the Heavens
[in] you: The other says, Reserved in the Heavens [for] you. This likewise I
apprehend is to gratify that Spirit which denies Christ to be in the Saints,
and Heaven to be there where Christ is, which Spirit I take to be the Spirit of
Antichrist.

I have likewise read and considered the Arguments, Annotations, Tables, and
other helps, for the better understanding of the Text, which I find in Divine
things both useful and profitable. As for Example;

Annotation before the Psalms says, That the whole Sacred Bible is a sealed
Book, and not rightly understood till the Seals be opened by the Key of God's
Spirit: And you say, on Gal. 4.24. The Scriptures, besides the literal Sense,
have a more deep, spiritual, and allegorical Sense, not to be understood but by
the same Spirit that writ them. And you also say, That there is no way to know
Canonical Scriptures but by the Church: Which is a Truth, if you mean the
Spirit of Christ in the Sanctified; which Sanctified are the only true Church
of Christ. You also say, The only difference between the Old and New Testament,
is, that in the Old lies hid the New by an Allegory; Which is a Truth, to him
that has an Ear to hear what the Spirit in the Letter says. Allelujah.

On Romans 4.8. you say, The words Imputed, or Reputed, do not diminish the Truth
of Justice, and that Justice is not reputed to them that are not made Just and
Righteous; Which is also a most real Truth.

On Genesis 22.1. you say, There is as much difference betwixt Christ's Divinity
and his Humanity, as was between Isaac and the Ram, and as is 'twixt Elesh and
Spirit, for what is born of Flesh is Flesh, etc.

The Book Ecclesiasticus, you say, teaches to contemn this present evil World;
and that things Earthly and Sensual are insufficient to give Peace and Rest to
our Souls; and that true Felicity consists not in Natural Knowledge, gotten by
Wit and Natural Industry; nor in Riches, Honor, Pleasures, nor in Authority or
Dominion, nor in any thing that is Sensual or Carnal, but only in the Eternal
and Internal fruition of God in our Souls, which is procured by Free Grace,
which enables us to decline Vices, and to pursue the ways of Virtue, which lead
to Beatitude; all which are Truths most clear and excellent. Allelujah.

Before Leviticus, in which Book (says St. Jerome) all Sacrifices, Aaron 's
Vestments, and the whole Levitical Order (almost every Syllable) breaths forth
Heavenly Sacraments; I say, even as the whole Creation does breath forth God's
Omnipotence, his Grace and loving Kindness to Mankind. Allelujah.

Zach. 1.3. When the Scripture says Convert, etc. we are admonished that we
have Free Will; and when we answer, Convert us, O Lord, to thee, and we shall
be converted, we confess that God's Grace preventeth or enableth us; and when
he commands any good of us, it is either to humble or enable us in the
performance, as James 1.17. Heb. 13.21. which Doctrine is true, for we have no
other free will to good, but what God gives us, in, by, and through his Holy
Spirit of Grace, which appears to and in every Man. Allelujah.

On Gal. 6.16. you say, The New Creature is the true Faith and Work of Grace in
the Hearts of the Faithful, and is the Faith first delivered to and in the
Saints. A Speech most true. Allelujah.

1 Cor. 12.3. you say, No Man can say Jesus is our Lord, but by his Spirit
within us; which enableth us to be obedient to his Commands, and to do the Will
of God here on Earth, as it is in Heaven: for by Christ strengthening us, we
can do all things pleasing to God our Heavenly Father. Allelujah.

On Heb. 12.28. you say, Grace is the only means enabling us to serve and
please God. Tit. 2.11. And that Man's Free Will is begot, and works freely by
Free Grace. Also, you say, Free Will is in Man, for that no Sin can be
committed without consent of Free Will; nor can any Work merit or please God,
but what is wrought in Man by the free Grace of God's Holy Spirit: Thus by
Grace we are saved, not of our selves, it is the free Gift of God to every one.
Allelujah.

You say, Elias is alive, and shall be a forerunner of Christ's second coming.
I say, Elias in Spirit is alive, and now preaches Repentance, and forgiveness
of Sins, to all that amend their Lives according to God's Holy Word, written in
every Man's Heart, (the Volumn of God's Book, wherein his Will is known) that
it may be done here on Earth as in Heaven. Allelujah.

You say also, That Enoch is yet alive, and shall preach in Antichrist's time
with Elias. This is also a Truth, if you speak this of the Spirit of God that
was in Enoch; for as Elias's Spirit, in John the Baptist's Time, preached
Repentance, and forgiveness of Sins, to all that truly repented and forsook
their Sins, (preparing the way for Christ to be begot and born in us); So did
that Spirit of Elias preach Repentance to the Disobedient in the days of Noah.
As in this day the same Spirit of Elias preaches Repentance to all that are
dead in Trespasses and Sins; Even so likewise Enoch, the seventh from Adam, in
Spirit is alive, who shall, and now does, as you say, preach in Antichrist's
time: for Christ, the Word incarnate, the Resurrection and the Life, is now
preaching in the Sanctified, the Resurrection from the Dead, to and in all that
have bin crucified with Christ, and are risen with him from the Death of Sin to
the Life of Righteousness. Allelujah.

Which Word Incarnate, or Word in the Heart, is God's Preacher to all the
World, and is the Gospel of Christ preached for the Obedience of Faith, to and
in all Nations, and all Religions whatsoever, so that all Men may believe, and
by obeying may be saved. Amen. Allelujah. As it is written, Deuteronomy. 30.11, to the
15. with Romans 10.6, to the 9th. Romans 1.5. 2 Cor. 10.5. Heb. 5.9. 1 Pet. 1.22.
Genesis 22.18. Deuteronomy. 13.4. Dan. 7.27. Isa. 1.19. Job 36.11, 12.

You say, Christ in Soul descended into Hell to deliver all just Men: Which is
a Truth, if you mean Christ in Spirit (as he is the Light of the World)
descends into every Man's unclean heart to cleanse and purify it, and so leads
Captivity captive, bringing the Souls of the Faithful (once dead in Trespasses
and Sins) out of Death, out of the Grave, out of Hell, into Abraham's Bosom,
where they sit and sing Allelujah.

You say, Sin is always the cause of Reprobation: Which is also a Truth most
clear, for it is our Sins that separate us from God, and withold good things
from us: And in our Obedience or disobedience to the Word of God in our Hearts,
stands Life and Death, Election and Reprobation; for according to their Works
shall every one receive, whether they do good, or evil. Allelujah.

On Col. 3.9. you say, The New Man is an inherent quality of Justice and
Righteousness in our Souls; and not only an Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, but a Work of God's free Grace, enabling the Faculties of our
Souls, to work freely the thing that is good and righteous: A Truth most clear
and excellent. Allelujah.

2 Cor. 1.5. you say, All the Saints Sufferings and Afflictions are Christ's
Sufferings, by reason of the Conjunction and Union that is betwixt Christ the
Head, and the Sanctified his Members. Allelujah.

You say, Adam was created in Grace and Innocence, which he lost only by
Disobedience, yet by Repentance is saved. And thus it is with all the Sons of
Adam, He that sins against the Light of Christ in his Conscience, eats the
forbidden Fruit, and so sins after the similitude of Adam 's Transgression; and
is not saved out of Transgression, but by Repentance, and laying hold of God's
Spirit of Grace, which obeying, brings through the flaming Sword, or Sword of
the Spirit, that turns every way to cut down Sin and Iniquity in whomsoever it
is found; so that no unclean thing can enter the Kingdom of Heaven, or eat of
the Tree of Life placed in the midst of God's Paradise, (the Hearts of the
Sanctified) Allelujah.

You say, The Church of Christ is Universal, and consists of all Nations: So
say I, (as I am a Priest of God to the Nations, having Christ Jesus in me, my
Priest, my Prophet, and my King) that amongst all Nations, all Sects, and sorts
of Religions, whatsoever they be called, Jews, Barbarians, Heathens, or
Christians, such as walk in the Light of the Lord, wherewith every one is
enlightened, are accepted with him, and they are God's Temple and Church, in
whom he dwells. Allelujah.

You say, The Children of the Church are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; Which
Seed, I say, is Christ, who dwells in the mortal Bodies of the Saints, who
convinces of Sin, and sanctifies them from committing Sin, so that where two
or three are met in his Name, (his Spirit of Grace) there is He in the midst of
them, and thus is He with his Body the Church, to the end of the World.
Allelujah.

Clergy Men, you say, ought not to serve for temporal Rewards, and that they
may not exercise that Holy Function for filthy Lucre: And so say I, that those
that Preach and Pray what is prescribed them by Man for Temporal Rewards, are
not the Ministers of Christ, but Antichrists Ministers: for the Ministers of
Christ, as they receive the Spirit of Grace (Christ the New Covenant, the Word
in the Heart) freely, so they give freely, and not for filthy Lucre, but from a
ready and willing mind, to the saving of Souls, and not for gaining the Fleece.
Allelujah.

You say, Jews shall be converted at the end of the World. I say, As the
Christians are converted, so are the Jews, who receive and obey God's Covenant
of Light, the free Gift of God, the Word in the Heart, the New Covenant, God's
Salvation to the ends of the Earth. Allelujah.

You say, A Conscience guilty of Sin, tormenteth the Sinner. So say I, That the
Light of Christ, wherewith every one is enlightened, being disobeyed, is the
Tormentor and the Condemnation, read John 3.19.

The Mysteries of Christ are (as you say) high things above natural Capacities.
So say I, for the Natural Man perceives not the things of God, which are only
spiritually discerned; Therefore I advise all unregenerate Men (not born again
of the Spirit, which quickneth and creates the New Man in us) in that state,
not to meddle with the things of God (as Vzza, who was smitten of God) for the
Spirit of God only and alone knows and searches the deep things of God; for
no Man knows the Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, but by the Inspiration and
Revelation of God. Allelujah. Read John 3.3. Mat. 11.27. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11.

On 1 Cor. 1.12. you say, Schism is to leave the Spirit of God in his Church,
and adhere too much to Man's teaching, (which is a Truth:) For Man's teaching
leads into Division and Disputes about Words and Forms, Sect against Sect, for
some outward Observation which Man sets up, wherein the Kingdom of God does not
consist; which Disputes have ever proved the Scab of the Church in all Times:
but the Spirit's teaching (every one submitting to the Commands of God, the
Word in the Heart) leads into Unity, Peace, and Rest with God, and one toward
another. Allelujah.

On 1 Cor. 12.13, you say, Christ the Head, and the Church his Members, make
but one Body. So say I, Christ in the Saints, is the one Head, one Body, one
Faith, one Baptism, and the only one true Church of God. Allelujah.

On John 4.12, 13. you say, The Water wherewith Christ baptizeth, is living and
spiritual Water. So say I, That John's Baptism was with material Water, the
which is Man's Baptism, and only cleanses the outward Body, and represents
the inward cleansing; but Christ's Baptism is, as you say, with living Water,
which is with the Holy Ghost and Fire, which cleanses and purifieth the Heart,
Soul, and Spirit of all true Believers. Allelujah.

On Romans 10.5, etc. you say, The Justice of the Law of Moses went no farther
than the saving of the Outward Man. I say, Moses preached Christ, the Law, and
Word in the Heart, the New Covenant; read Deuteronomy. 30.11. and 18.18, 19. Jer.
31.31, 33. with Romans 10.6, etc. Heb. 8.8, etc. the which circumciseth the
Heart, and creates a new Heart, and a new Spirit within; the which redeems and
saves the Soul from Sin, and teaches truly the way to Life everlasting.
Allelujah.

Thus you see I have not only read your Bible, but also considered the
Arguments, Tables, and Marginal-Notes thereupon. Likewise I have read many
other of your Books, written and approved of by the Roman Church, viz.
1. Thomas of Kempis, of the Imitation of Christ. 2. Cardinal Cusanus, his
First, Second, and Third Rule of Perfection, and his Idiot; with others of the
like Divine Nature. 3. The Holy Court, and the Angel of Peace, to all Christian
Princes. By Nicho. Causine. 4. Devout Essays. By Walter Montague Esquire 5.
Charroone of Wisdom. 6. Essays of Lord Michael Montaigne. 7. Fiat Lux; with an
Epistle in Answer to Dr. Owen. 8. The Lost Sheep returned Home. By Dr. Thomas
Vane. 9. Abridgment of Christian Doctrine, by Question and Answer. By H. T.
printed at Doway, 1664. 10. A Manual of Controversies, demonstrating the Truth
of Catholic Religion, by Scriptures, Councils, and Fathers of the first Five
hundred Years; and by common Sense and Reason, etc. By H.T. printed at Doway,
Anno 1654. 11. Dialogues of William Rushworth, printed at Paris, Anno 1648. 12.
Roman Catholic Doctrine, in Answer to Dr. Pierce his Court Sermon. 13. The
Victory of Truth for the Peace of the Church, to the King of Great Britain:
Written by Monsieur de la Militera. Answered by Dr. Bramhall. 14. A Treatise of
the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. By R. T. Anti-Demolin. 15. Heaven Opened, and
the Pains of Purgatory Avoided, by the very great Indulgencies of the two most
Illustrious Arch-Confraternities, the one of our Blessed Lady, called the
Rosary; the other of the Seraphical Father St. Francis, called, The Cords of
the Passion; printed Anno 1663. 16. The last Apology in behalf of the Papists;
and answered in the behalf of the Protestants.
These sixteen Books, with other Historical, as the Council of Trent, Platina,
etc. I have read and considered both pro and con.

The first two of these sixteen Books I have read with great delectation of
Mind, which I apprehend were written by a Divine Spirit, and do recommend them
to all that are partakers of the Divine Nature. Allelujah.

The five next I apprehend to be written by Wise Men, lovers of Wisdom, and
well worth the reading by Men of Knowledge and Understanding.

The last nine I apprehend were written to set forth and to defend the present
Roman Faith and Church, to maintain by Argument and Dispute, That the present
Church of Rome is the only True Church of Christ, and all others that differ
from her are Schismatics and Heretics, good for naught but to be destroyed in
Body and Soul: concerning which, I do most humbly crave leave to examine, by
the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, intending, what I find to proceed
from God's Holy Spirit of Truth, (which are the Things of God) to treasure up
in Joseph's Storehouse; the rest, proceeding from Man unregenerate in the fall,
merely humane, and what was learnt of Man in the Schools, or from the Letter, I
intend to return back again, as your own Money in your own Sacks.

In the first place I must needs commend the Christian Spirit of him that wrote
Fiat Lux, who says, He was bettered by reading Quakers, Anabaptists Books,
etc. which shows him a Man that could receive Truth from any Man, or Sect, try
all things, and I hope, receive and hold fast that which is good in every Man
of all Religions. Further, he says, All Sects, maintaining their own Opinion,
none condescending to others, destroy all Love and Charity; which wanting, no
Religion is any thing worth; but in Charity, Love, and Patience, he says, all
Sects are pleased. Also, he says, Difference for Opinions is neither pious nor
rational. He also says, That none is fit to judge of all Sects, that is of Any;
nor is the Atheist meet. Further, he says, The Spirit of Christ (or Charity,
the Love of God) being departed, all Forms of Religion are but a mere Romance.
He also says, Truth is found in Unity, not in Division. And I say, Till all
come to the Unity of the Spirit, given to every Man to profit with, there can
never be Unity. Also he says, That the Soul of Man is Immortal, Intelligible,
and Rational; and that Moderation, Love, and Charity, is the Image of God in
Man; and that right Reason does not cast away Christ, but is one with him:
Also, Whosoever brings to Unity is blessed, though but an Owl, (or Fool, as the
Spirits Preaching is accounted foolishness by unregenerate Men). Also he says,
All Sects fight against each other till Christ be set up, the Teacher in all.
These and the like I take to be Maxims of Truth, meet to be considered and
received.

In the next place, the Roman Writers assert, The Pope of Rome to be Head of
the Church of Christ here on Earth, and Christ 's Vicar, as being Peter 's
Successor, on whose Person (you say) Christ 's Church is built, proved out of
Matthew. 16.16, 17. To which I make return, and say, That Peter's Person was not
the Rock whereon Christ's Church is built; but the Spirit of God, which
revealed to Peter the things of God, as will most evidently appear by the
Reasons following, viz. First, For that no Man knows the Son but the Father;
neither knows any Man the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals him, Mat. 11.27. Gal. 1.12, 16. 1 Cor. 2.10. 1 Pet. 1.13. So it is
the Revelation of God the Father, gives the Knowledge of God the Son; and it is
the Spirit of Christ in the Saints, revealing the Father and the Son, which is
the Rock whereon Christ's Church is built, against which the Gates of Hell can
never prevail, Matthew. 16.17.

Besides, had the Church bin built on Peter's Person, had it not fallen into
Hell when Peter's Person became Satan, an Adversary to Christ, and against him?
when he savoured more the Things of Man than the things of God? read Mat.
16.23. and this was after Peter's Faith (the Revelation of God) was called the
Rock.

And what became of the Church, and Peter the Rock, when Peter denied and
forswore his Master? Mat. 26.69, etc. Had not then the Church of Christ fallen
into Hell, if Peter's Person had bin the Rock whereon it had bin built? And, I
pray tell me, What think you had become of the Church of Christ, had it bin
built on Peter's Person, when Peter dissembled, and would have brought in the
Old Law, which stood in diverse outward Observations, (wherein the Kingdom of
God does not consist)? And was not this to bring in the first Covenant, and to
deny Christ come in the Flesh, the Second Covenant, Christ the Word in the
Heart, and Revelation of God in Peter before his Fall, which is the Rock God
builds his Church on, against whom the Gates of Hell shall never prevail? but
when a Church savours the Things of Man more than the things of God, the Gates
of Hell will surely prevail against that Church. And this Revelation of God,
was the Rock before Peter's Person was, and before his Fall was, and after his
Fall was, and is that Rock whereon all the People of God stand, and are built
an Habitation through the Spirit for God to dwell in. Allelujah.

And do not you think St. Paul (that great Apostle of the Gentiles) did well in
withstanding and reproving Peter to his Face, even in the face of all the
Congregation, for endeavoring to bring in such a Heresy and Schism into the
Church of Christ, as to withdraw from the believing Gentiles, and so by his
Example, to set up the Observations of the Old Law, which stood in outward
things, which was to deny Christ the New Law, the Word of Grace in the Heart,
God's everlasting Covenant of Light and Life to Jew and Gentile? which
certainly was and is a most pernicious Doctrine, wherewith all the Jews were
drawn from the Faith of Christ; insomuch that Barnabas was also led aside by
their dissimulation. And for those who had run well, and begun in the Spirit,
for them to imagine they ought to be made perfect by the Observation of things
outward and carnal, was a most damnable Heresy (which Peter, and the rest of
the Jews, and Barnabas first begun); to divide the Church of God, the Head from
the Members, was doubtless a great Schism, and falling from the true Faith,
first delivered to the Saints, which stood in the Revelation of Christ the
Spirit's teaching. Allelujah.

When Christ bid Peter, feed my Sheep, you say, Peter received Supremacy over
the rest of the Apostles, and was made General Pastor of the Church. And where
Christ said to Peter, I will give thee the Keys of Heaven; and what thou
bindest in Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and what thou loosest on Earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven. Was Peter's Key, think you, Carnal, or any thing
else but the Revelation of God's Spirit to Peter before his Fall, which surely
is the Key of David, which opens the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, which
no Man can shut? And have not all true Believers (born of the Spirit) the same
Key and Authority to bind and loose, as Peter had? read John 20.22, 23. So that
you see the Power of the Keys, and the feeding Christ's Sheep, stands in
receiving the Holy Ghost, and not in Peter's Person, as Peter himself
afterward confessed; read 1 Pet. 5.2. Acts 20.28. saying to the Disciples,
Feed the Flock of God which is among you, over which the Holy Ghost is
Overseer; not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre-sake, but
voluntarily; and not as Lords over God's Heritage, but as Examples, even as
Christ was to his Followers, who said, Learn of me, for I am meek and humble of
Heart, and ye shall find Rest to your Souls. So Holy Jesus by his Doctrine and
Example, did not give Peter Lordly Supremacy over the rest of his Disciples,
but said otherwise to them that desired Supremacy and Lordship over the rest,
Be not called of Men Masters, nor seek the uppermost Seats at Feasts, nor
greetings in the Marketplace: Seek not Supremacy nor Authority over your
Brethren; for he that would be greatest among you, shall be Servant unto all.
Thus you see Christ gave no Supremacy to Peter, for Supremacy and Lordship is
what the Kings of the Gentiles exercise over one another; and that which Phocas
the Emperor of Rome (who slew his Master Mauricius) gave to Boniface the Third,
i.e. Supremacy for setting him up Emperor. So you see Supremacy is not the
Doctrine of Christ, but the Gift of the Gentiles, Emperors, and Kings. And
though many Graces attended the Church, yet the greatest and supreamest Gifts
and Graces were Humility and Charity. Allelujah.

As I am a Priest to God (having Christ Jesus in me) sent to try what Spirit
governs the World, my hearts desire to the Church of Rome is, That they would
try and examine themselves by the Rule of God's Spirit, whether they stand upon
Christ the Rock, the Revelation of God to Peter, the Foundation whereon all the
Faithful stand and are built, the Rock of Ages throughout all Generations? Or
whether they are built on Peter's Person in his Degeneration and Fall, when he
denied and left the Rock, by savouring and setting up the Things of Man above
the Revelation of God, the only thing needful to make a true Christian?
Allelujah.

I humbly crave leave further to query and ask, Whether the Church of Rome,
affirming Mary (a Creature, espoused to Joseph) to be the Mother of God, who is
infinite, whether this be not Blasphemy? read Mat. 12.47, to 50. Luke 2.48.
John 2.4. and to worship or adore her Image, Similitude, or Picture, whether
this be not a breach of the Second Commandment, and the highest Idolatry,
seeing to worship or adore the Work of Man's hand, is worse Idolatry than to
worship and adore the meanest Creature that God has made?

And you calling the Pope of Rome (a Creature) Head of Christ's Church, is not
this, think you, Blasphemy? And for you to call Bread and Wine (mere Creatures)
after Consecration, the real Body and Blood of Christ, our Creator and Redeemer
(who is the Bread of Life, that came from Heaven) is not this think you also
Blasphemy? and for you thus to adore and worship these Creatures, is not this,
think you, Idolatry?

Likewise to call a Crucifix of Man's making, the Cross of Christ, which is the
Power of God, that crucifies Sin, and the Lust of the Flesh in the Saints, is
not this (think you) a high Crime of Blasphemy? And to worship and adore this
Creature of Man's making, is not this, think you, the highest Idolatry? feeing
you own falling down, adoring, and worshipping, to be all one and the same
thing. And for a Man to make an Altar, and bow to it, is not this the worst
kind of Idolatry, thus to worship a Creature of Man's making more than the
Power of God, Christ, the Word (revealed) in the Heart? Allelujah.

For you to set up Holy Days, and observe Saints Days, is not this (think you)
a Prescription and Imposition of Man, and not by God's Command? and may not we
call all these days of Man's making the Devil's Days (as Jesus called Peter,
Satan, when he savoured more the things of Man than the things of God) rather
than the Saints Days, who served God in the Spirit of Truth every Day? So he
that keeps a Day holy to the Lord does well, but he that keeps a day in
satisfaction of the Flesh, in Chambering and Wantonness, does ill.

I have bin credibly informed, that in Ireland the Roman Catholics keep St.
Patricks and St. Peter's day, with more Debauchery and Drunkenness than any
other day in the Year; and I am sure, in England, Holy Days used to be kept and
celebrated more to the honor of Venus and Bacchus, than to the Service of the
only holy true God. Allelujah.

You say, Christ's Church is Universal, and always visible. I say, Christ's
Church is and ever was invisible to Men unregenerate, who are not born of the
Spirit, (tho never so wise and prudent in natural Things): I pray, where was
the Church visible when Peter denied Christ, and the rest of his Disciples
forsook him and fled? Mat. 26.56. And do not you think that these things were
written for our Example, that we should not follow Man, nor the things of Man
(in the Unregenerate Estate) in the Worship of God, but the gracious holy
Spirit of God in our Selves, which whosoever has not, is no true Christian?
Read Romans 8.9. which Spirit is the Saints only Teacher. Allelujah.

And, I pray, where was the Church of Christ visible, when St. John saw her (as
on Eagles Wings) flee into the Wilderness to save her self from the usurpation
and tyranny of the false Church, for a time, times, and half a time? where she
was seen and known only to God, fed, and nourished by him, not with visible
Bread, but with Bread and Water of Life from Heaven, (the true Flesh and Blood
of Christ) of which the National Visible Church knows nothing, which only
feed upon outward carnal visible Things, such as the Traditions, Prescriptions,
and Impositions of Men prepare for them: So that all this time the True Church
and Spouse of Christ lay hid in the Wilderness, as a mourning Widow, a City
unbuilt, trodden under-foot of the Gentiles, clothed in Sackcloth, whilst the
visible false Church sat as a Queen upon the many Waters: Which Waters, says
St. John, were Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, Tongues, and Kindreds, whereon the
Whore and false Prophets sat, clothed in Purple and Scarlet, and decked with
Gold and precious Stones; in so much that all the World wondered, and worshipped
the Whore and false Prophet, she having a golden Cup in her hand, full of the
abomination of Man's Inventions, which she gave to drink to the Nations, to the
Tongues, even to all the People that received the Mark of the Beast, and Number
of his Name, (what the Civil Magistrate imposed) on whom the Whore and false
Prophet sat: To such she filled of her Cup, and received them within the Pale
of her Church; but for those that refused to drink of her abominable Cup, and
to receive the Mark of the Beast, and Number of his Name, (which Number stands
in things of Man's imposing) against such, the Beast, Whore, and false Prophet,
proclaimed War, and would neither Buy nor Sell with them, but made Laws, and
persecuted the True Church, and Members of Christ, according to those Laws made
by Man, many a thousand even to death. And this came to pass, that the Prophecy
of Daniel might be fulfilled, who saw the Beast, (the Roman Monarch) should
have power to scatter, to destroy, and to make desolate the Holy City, and Holy
People, for a time, times, and half a time; which time is, One thousand two
hundred and sixty days; and taking a Year for a day, is, One thousand two
hundred and sixty Years. He that is wise, and stands in his Lot, (as Daniel
did in the measure of God's Holy Spirit, the Lot of God's Heritage) knows the
meaning of the Spirit in those deep mysterious and hidden Things of God; in
which Spirit it is seen, that the time, times, and half a time is accomplished,
that the Church of Christ is to stay in the Wilderness, who is coming out of
her Wilderness condition, out of her mourning Sackcloth, as a Woman clothed
with the Sun of Righteousness, and a Crown of Stars upon her Head, (the
Faithful, Chosen, and truly Sanctified) and having the Moon (all inferior and
borrowed Lights) under her Feet, where the Citizens of Sion, the New Jerusalem,
have no need of a Candle, (or any teaching of Man) for the Lord God by his
Inspiration is their Light; and they need no other Light, but as the Unction,
the anointing teaches them, and is the true Inward and Infallible Teaching, in
which Light of the Lord God, the Nations, that are saved, walk. Allelujah.

Thus you see when, how, and by whom the Apostasy from the true Faith and
Church of Christ came in, and wherein it still stands, even in savouring (as
Peter did) the things of Man, more than the things of God, the inspiration of
his blessed holy Spirit. Allelujah.

And this Apostasy appeared in the Apostles days, whereof Peter was the
Ringleader, as may be seen Gal. 2.11. when Peter dissembled, and forsook
Christ (his Spirit) the Rock, the True Church and Faith, the Cornerstone, the
sure Foundation of the True Church throughout all Generations, God's Covenant
of Light to all the World, and his Salvation to the Ends of the Earth; his
Talent, and Measure of his Holy Spirit of Grace, given to every one to profit
with; in the which disobeying stands our Condemnation, and in obeying of it
stands our eternal Salvation, our Peace and Rest with God. Allelujah.

Thus by Peter's bad Example, the Church of Christ had like to have bin lost in
the Apostasy, had not St. Paul (that great Apostle of the Gentiles) stood in
the Gap, in withstanding Peter so boldly to his very Face, for this his
dissimulation; which did not only draw away the Jews, but Barnabas. was also
carried away by their dissimulation; by their compelling the Gentiles to live
as did the Jews, they brought a great Schism into the Church, and had like,
even at that time, to have carried the whole Church into the Apostasy, had not
St. Paul withstood them. Which Apostasy afterward came in by observing the Old
Law, and other Heathenish Customs prescribed by Man, rather than the Commands
of God: For did not the Apostasy come in by observing of Days, Months, Times,
and Years; by observing Holy Days, New Mons, and Sabbath Days, (or Sundays, so
called from the Heathens)? read Gal. 4.10. Col. 2.8, 16, 17. Luke 17.20. What
ado was there about the keeping of Easter Day, of outward Circumcision,
Baptism, and Supper? all which were but Figures of the Inward: What Quarreling
and Disputes were there, even in the Apostle's days, about these Matters; and
soon afterward between the Arrians, and those of one Substance, concerning the
Nature and Being of Christ? one Bishop thrusting out another, and killing one
another about these outward Things of Man's setting up; such things wherein the
Kingdom of God is not found, nor the Church of Christ edified, but much Blood
spilt, and Humility, Love, and Charity lost, in these bitter Disputes and
Contests, and all about such beggarly Rudiments as these; which no ways did
benefit the Church, but destroy it, in so much that those called Christians,
were worse than the Heathens in Conversation, and more like their Father the
Devil, than the Children of God, or Brethren of Christ Jesus. Allelujah.

And as the Apostasy increased and waxed strong, by savouring the things of
Man, more than the things of God, then came in the Abomination which made
desolate, the Observation of Christmass-day, Whitsunday, etc. and other Saints
days, both Feasting and Fasting-days; keeping of Lent; prescribing what Meats
should be eaten, and what not. About this time came in also Altars, made with
men's hands, and brought into the Church to worship God withal, which in the Old
Law was but a shadow of Christ in the Saints, the New Law; which Altar and
Tabernacle God pitched in Man, and is God's Workmanship, and not the Work of
Man's hand.

And did not the Apostasy bring in the Seven Sacraments, viz. John's Baptism,
which stood in the outward Element of Water, in the place of Christ's Baptism,
which consists in the operation of the Holy Ghost in the Saints, the which
cleanses from Sin, and begets the New Man, Christ, in them, their Hope and
Glory? Allelujah.

Did not also the Sacrament of the Altar come in with the Apostasy, consisting
of carnal Bread and Wine, which are but Creatures, turned (you say) by the
Priest's Consecration, into the Real Body and Blood of Christ? whereas the Real
Body of Christ is not Carnal nor Elementary, but the true Blood that came from
Heaven, the Blood and Spirit of Christ, the Vine, and is the true Wine that
chears the heart of God and Man? Read Judges 9.13. Matthew. 26.29. John 6, 51,
63. which Bread and Wine, whosoever eats and drinks, shall live for ever,
as it is written, Behold, I stand at the Door, and knock, if any Man hear my
Voice, and open the Door (of the Heart) I will (says Christ) come in to him,
and Sup with him, and he with me. Which Supper is not an outward carnal eating
and drinking, as the false Church supposes, but is a Spiritual eating and
drinking, to receive Christ into our Hearts, and feed on him there, which
nourishes the Soul up into Eternal Life. Allelujah. Read John 6.27, 33, 48,
51, 57, 63. Rev. 3.20.

The other Five Sacraments, as Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Marriage, Extreme
Unction; are these, think you, or the two former, more a Sacrament, Similitude,
or Representation of Christ; than the meanest Animal that God has made? And
where does the Scripture call these, or any one of them, a Sacrament? Is not
Christ the Beginning and End of all God's Works, figured out by a Lion, a Lamb,
yea, by every thing that has Life? (Is he not the Rose of Sharon, and the
Lilly of the Valleys) yea, by things that have no Life; For is not Christ the
Door and Way to God? And may not we as well bow down and worship God in these
things, as in any of these Seven Sacraments? And to fall down and worship, by a
Picture, the Image or Likeness of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, whether thus bowing or worshipping God, through the Work of Man's hands,
be not the highest kind of Idolatry, and contrary to God's Commandment in the
Old Law, and much more contrary to the New, which is, to worship God in the
Spirit of Truth only? Allelujah.

I pray, was it not after the Apostasy came in, that Men built Churches,
calling them the House of God, the Church, and Temple of God? and worshipping
God in these Temples made with hands, (after the Old Law) and in such outward
Observations as Man invented, prescribed, and imposed, in which God is not
found, nor is an outward thing, made by Man, the place of his Habitation? read
Acts 7.48. But it fares with false Christians in the Apostasy, as it did with
false Jews in the Prophet Hosea's Time, read Hos. 8.14. when Israel had
forgotten his Maker, they built Temples, thinking to please God in so doing (as
Christians do); But God dwells not in Temples made with hands: the true
Temple wherein God is pleased to dwell, is the sanctified Heart, as you may
read John 17.21. Isa. 66.2. 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 21.3. 1 John 4.13. And as your
Translation has it, John 1.14. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt in us: Such
are the only true Church of God, in whom Christ dwells bodily, who has now,
as ever he had, a Spiritual Body, and makes the Saints, (by a new Birth) even
in this World, such as he is in Heaven, read 1 John 4.17. Allelujah.

And when came in Prayers in an unknown Tongue? I confess, a Zeal there may be
in such Service, but without knowledge of what men want, or ask, or feeling of
God's Presence, or Faith in what they ask, nor can there be a hope of Return or
Answer from God; so that such Prayers are altogether vain and fruitless, no
better than what the Heathens make, (that know not God) being prescribed (as
yours are) by their Priests and Teachers. A Worship invented by Man (wanting
the assistance of God's Spirit) can never find acceptance with God; for unless
our Prayers proceed from a true repentant Heart, from a new Heart, and a right
Spirit, which God gives every Man to profit with, that truly desires to
forsake Sin, and to have Sin pardoned, all other Prayers prevail nothing with
God, though never so many out of custom, or never so good words prescribed by
Man, proceeding from an unregenerate Heart, not born again of the Spirt of Love
to Truth and Righteousness, as, Lord have Mercy upon us, or, Christ have Mercy
upon us, or never so many Pater Nosters, or Ave Mary's, etc. I say, all such
Prayers, not proceeding from the Spirit, are accounted by God vain Repetitions,
which he abhors; and he accepts no other Prayers but what proceeds from his own
Spirit of Grace, such he accepts, (knowing the meaning of the Spirit) though
uttered by a Sigh or a Groan. Allelujah.

And when came in Holy Water, hallowing material Churches, Baptizing of Bells,
with many other suchlike Jewish and Heathenish Observations, came not these in
with the Apostasy? for in the beginning, (when God's Holy Spirit was the
Teacher, Leader, and Sanctifier of the Faithful) it was not so. And had not you
these from the Jews, or from the Heathens? for among true Christians the
Worship stood not in such outward beggarly Rudiments, but in the Spirit of
Truth, the Law in the Heart, the New Covenant, which circumciseth and purifieth
the Heart. Allelujah. Read John 4.21, 23, 24.

And did not the Name of Most Holy Father the Pope, Christ's Vicar, Peter's
Successor, Universal Bishop, and Peter's Person, the Rook whereon (you say)
Christ's Church is built, came not these in with the Apostasy? And did not the
Apostasy create Lord-Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, made by a carnal Ordinance
of Man, and not by the Holy Ghost, as all the Ministers of Christ ever were?

And when came in forbidding to Marry, and shutting up in Monasteries and
Nunneries that they should not Marry? And were it not better to marry, and live
chaste with a Wife, than to burn in Lust? as I have bin credibly informed by
some Merchants that lived in Portugal, who had such devout Nuns to be their
Mistresses, as acted those abominable things, both by way of writing, and
sending Signs and Tokens of their burning Lusts to their Lovers, as is not fit
to be once named among Christians. And have you not read in Histories, how that
the Pope's Legate, sent into England against married Priests, was himself taken
in Bed with a Harlot? And is it not better, and a less sin, to marry, than to
live in Whoredom, which destroys both Body and Soul? as it is written, Prove.
23.27. Ephesians. 5.5. Heb. 13.4. Rev. 21.8. and 22.15. Also that abundance of
Sculls, and Bones of newborn Children, have bin found in the Motes and Ditches
belonging to Nunneries, when cleansed. And is it not therefore (as St. Paul
says) the Doctrine of Devils that preaches Marriage (which is an Ordinance of
God, and one of your Sacraments) to be sinful? and are not such Doctors, and
Teachers, (think you) guilty of the Abominations committed in those Nunneries,
and polluting of their Neighbor's Marriage Bed by Monks and Friars? etc.

And when came in the Infallibility of the Pope, came it not in with the
Apostasy? And why may not the Pope be as fallible, and fall as Peter did, by
savouring the Things of Man, more than the Revelations of God? And I have read
in Histories, that there have bin many wicked Popes, and sometimes no Pope in
Rome at all, and at other times three Anti-Popes, one against the other,
endeavoring to murder and destroy each other. And did not St. Cyprian and
Pope Stephen excommunicate each other? And, I pray, was not the Church of Rome
without a Head when there was no Pope, as often it happened in several Intervals,
as in Anno 1243. Anno 1272. and Anno 1316. And a Church without a Head cannot
be Christ's Church; nor can any Man, save the New Man, (that is born of the
Spirit) be Head of Christ's Church, whose Members are made of Living Stones,
Elect and Precious; And how can that Body live and subsist, that is without a
Head? And if the Church of Rome have a wicked Pope (as often it happened) for their
Head, that cannot be Christ's Church, for the Head of Christ's Church, and his
Members (the New Man in the Saints) are all Pure, Holy, and Righteous, even as
God the Father is Pure, Holy, and Righteous; and such a Head and Members, as
are not Holy and Pure, is the False Church, the Body of Antichrist, the
Synagogue of Satan, and Children of their Father the Devil, whose Works they
do, who is their Head, and governs them.

And when came in Man's making of Saints, visiting and worshipping their Tombs,
their Relics, and Shrines; such as Thomas of Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury, who was a great Champion for the Clergy, the Church of Rome, and a
great Rbel to his Prince? I pray tell me, Whether any comers to these things
are made the more holy and perfect by the use of them (as appearing to the
Conscience) Or, do they take away the guilt of Sin in the Conscience, whilst
the Witness of God condemns? I say, nothing besides the Grace or Spirit of God
in the Heart, the Blood of Christ, can give Repentance, and sprinkle the
Conscience from dead Works to serve the Living God. Allelujah.

And who brought in pious Frauds, setting forth false Miracles, never truly
wrought, etc. for pious Ends? Is not this Man's Wisdom, a Lie, and contrary to
the Wisdom and Truth of God?

And when came in your Index Expurgatorius, wherein Books are purged or
condemned that set forth the Prince's Right over the Clergy in Temporals; also
expunging out of Ancient Fathers, and Decrees of Councils, what you like not?

Who invented the Mass Book, Invocation, and Prayers to the Saints departed,
for the Living, and for the Dead? Were these things brought into the Church
from the beginning, and by the Command of God, or in the dark night of
Apostasy, by Man's prescription, when the false Church, the Whore, and false
Prophet ruled, after the True Church was fled into the Wilderness, out of the
sight and reach of them that sought to devour her? And can Prayers prevail with
God, that are invented by Man, which do not proceed from the Spirit of God?
which Prayer is heard in all that it asks. But Prayers made by (and
proceeding from) Man in the Fall, in the unregenerate state, are an abomination
to the Lord: for God hears not Sinners, but hears and answers them only, who
(by Christ's mediation in our hearts) truly repent, hate, and forsake their
Sin, and who are Regenerate, and born again of his Spirit, and that pray in the
Power and Demonstration of this Spiritual Birth; such, and only such (though in
a Groan, or Sigh) God the Father hears, answers, and shows Mercy unto,
according as they desire. Allelujah.

And when was Purgatory found out, a Place to purge the Souls of Men that
repent not, but live and die in Trespasses and Sins? Had ye not this from the
Jews, or from Man in the Fall? I declare, and say, as I am a Priest of God in
the New Covenant of Grace, That there is no other Purgatory, (neither in this
World, nor in any other World to come) save the Blood of Christ, the Lamb of
God, slain by Sin ever since the Foundation of the World; even when Cain killed
innocent Abel, then did Christ (who was before Abraham was) suffer in Abel;
which Blood of Christ (the New Covenant) cries for vengeance against and upon
all that spill it, and upon all that crucify the Lord of Life, and such as
resist and quench God's Holy Spirit of Grace in themselves, the only one
Sacrificer and Mediator between God and Man, the Saints only Redeemer,
Sanctifier, and Savior. Allelujah.

And woe be to them from the Lord God, under whose Skirts is found the Blood of
the Souls of the poor Innocent, the Church of Christ, whom he has purchased,
washed, and cleansed with his own Blood, his own Light and Life in themselves,
which the Faithful eat and drink, and is the Blood of Sprinkling, which
speaks better things than did the Blood of Abel, (whose Blood cries for
vengeance against them that spill it): which Blood of Christ, God's Spirit of
Grace, is that which washes and cleanses true Believers from all Sin; and
which Blood redeems up to God, out of the Fall, into Abraham's Bosom, the
Habitation of the Faithful, where God's Honor and Glory dwells. Thus God's
Spirit only is that which purifieth and redeemeth the Soul from all pollution
of Flesh and Spirit. Amen. Allelujah. As it is written, Isa. 1.25. Psalm. 51.7.
Mal. 3.3. Prove. 16.6. 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. 1 John 3.3.

And this I have further to say to the Church of Rome, both to the Clergy and
Laity, That whosoever amongst them has not the Spirit of Christ to wash and
cleanse, and to lead them into Truth and Righteousness, is no true Christian,
no true Member of Christ's Church; nor can be saved, or inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven; as it is written John 3.3. Romans 8.9, 11. 1 Cor. 2.10. and 12.13. 2 Cor.
13.5.

Who made Parish-Churches, supplying them with Parish Priests, (made by a
carnal Ordinance of Man) and set forth Tithes, forcing the payment of them by
carnal Weapons, the Magistrate's Sword, (no Gospel-way of maintenance)? For as
Christ's Ministers receive freely of his fullness, Grace for Grace; so they
give: and where only they sow Spiritual Things, of them they reap Carnal,
without Hire, or for filthy Lucre, much less by force of Man's Law. For most
certainly this forced Maintenance was a thing of Man's Institution, and brought
in by the false Church, the Whore, the false Prophet, riding the Beast (the
Civil Magistrate) in the dark night of Apostasy, after the True Church was fled
into the Wilderness, not seen of Man, but well known of God, and whose Life was
hid in Christ with God. Allelujah.

And when were Indulgences and Pardons brought in by the Pope's Bulls? and when
Limbus Patrum, and Processions on Palm Sunday? etc. Were these things the
Command of God, or the Command of Man? known or practiced by the Primitive
Saints, or came they in in the dark Night of Apostasy, after the True Church
was fled into the Wilderness, yea, or nay?

Who brought in, or when came in the Inquisition, that takes away Men's Lives
for Opinion's sake? Was this Christian like, by God's Command, or by Man's
(think you?)

And was not the Jewish Jubilee brought in by Boniface the third, more to
increase the Riches, and to show the outward Pomp of the Church of Rome, than
by any Command or Example of Christ for the same?

And did not Christ foretell, That many should come in his Name (but not in his
Spirit) false Christ's, and false Prophets, and should deceive many? and those
were they that came in Sheeps clothing, (outwardly seeming holy) but inwardly
were ravenous Wolves, destroying all that differed from them, or refused to
receive their Mark, their outward Superstitions and shows of Holiness; and
though roved from the Spirit of God, yet spoke good words of Truth, by which
they deceived the Hearts of the Simple, and brought in the Old Covenant, which
was but a Type, Figure, and Shadow of the New, (standing in outward
observations) which shadow of the Old, drove out the substance of the New
Covenant (Christ in Spirit); which New Covenant stands in the inward Spiritual
Grace, the Word in the Heart. And was not this bringing in the Old, and setting
up the Old, a denying Christ the New to be come in the Flesh of the Saints, the
new and living Way? So that whosoever comes to God, must come by, through, and
in him, who is the Way, the Truth, and Life of God. Allelujah.

And in this roving from the Spirit, and setting up the Old Law of outward
Observations, consist the many Antichrists St. John saw, who said, You have
heard that Antichrist should come, and now are there many Antichrists: Even all
Man's Prescriptions, and Impositions, not being the Spirit's teachings, are
Antichrists; the many false Spirits, which do not feed, but devour the Flock of
Christ, by bringing in the Old Law, and other beggarly Rudiments and Inventions
of Man's Wisdom, which is the Whore and false Prophet, which serves to no other
end, than to raze out the Revelation of God in the Consciences of Men, to
crucify the Lord of Life, (the Spirit of Christ) in resisting his Spirit of
Grace, and speaking evil of the Spirit, which is the highest Blasphemy, not to
be forgiven in this World, nor in the World to come. Allelujah.

Thus the Universal Church of Rome may know, by examining themselves, whether
they are in the Apostasy, in the fall with Peter? or, whether they are in the
Restoration with Peter, when the Church of Rome was so renowned and guided by
the Spirit and Revelation of God? Or whether led by Traditions, Prescriptions,
and Impositions of Man? and as the Universal Church of Rome may know whether
they are built on Christ, the Rock, Peter's Faith, that never failed, or on
Peter's Person, that so easily fell, (against which the Gates of Hell
prevailed;) even so may every individual Person in the Church of Rome, know
whether they be in the true Faith of Christ, or in the false Faith? for the
true Faith works by Love, purifieth the Heart, and destroys the Works of the
Devil in Men; it works Miracles, it removes Mountains of Sin, crucifieth the
Flesh with its Deeds, and raises the Soul, dead in Trespasses and Sins, out of
the Grave, enabling the Soul to bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit. Thus
wonderfully does Faith in Christ (the Gift of God) work in every one that truly
believes; Read Acts 15.9. Mat. 17.20. Romans 12.3. 1 Cor. 12.9. Heb. 12.2. Mark
16.17. 1 John 3.8. Allelujah.

By this time your selves may answer Dr. Bayley's Challenge, who says, The
Church of Rome was once an excellent flourishing Mother Church. This Church
(says he) could not cease to be such, but she must fall either by Apostasy,
Heresy, or Schism. To which I answer, Christ's Church in Jerusalem and in
Antioch were Mother-Churches before Rome; and in Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus,
Philippe, Colosse, Thessalonica, and the Church among the Hebrews, were all
flourishing Christian Churches, but now not visible as to Man's Eye.

And how was Rome the Mother Church, whilst the Popes kept their Residence in
Avignon for seventy Years together? Nevertheless God knows who are his
amongst them all; for as St. Peter says, Acts 10.34. All of every Nation,
Sect, and People, those that fear God, and work Righteousness, are accepted
with him, whether Jews or Gentiles, Barbarians or Scythians, they are all one
in Christ, the Truth; they that walk in the Truth, walk in Christ Jesus, and
such the Truth makes freely accepted with God. Allelujah.

Though I take not upon me to know, Whether the present Church of Rome are
Members of Christ's Body, whereof himself (the Spirit of the Father) is only
Head; or the Synagogue of Satan, the Children of the Devil their Father, in
whom he rules and guides who do his Work. Yet this I declare, That every one in
themselves may perfectly know whether they belong to the True or False Church,
to God or the Devil. If you do but examine your selves, Whether Christ, the
Word in the Heart, the Revelation of God by the Spirit of Truth, the Light of
Christ, his Spirit of Grace be Head in you, leading you into Truth and
Righteousness, bringing forth the Fruits of the Spirit? which Fruits are
evident: read Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 5.9. Or whether the Spirit of Satan be Head,
leading into Lying, Swearing, Whoredom, Fornication, Adultery, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Strife, Pride, Seditions,
Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revilings, and such like. Now your
own selves, every one in particular, know these things to be Fruits of the
Flesh, proceeding from Man in the Fall, unregenerate, and are Earthly, Sensual,
and Devilish; And know ye not, to whom you yield your selves Servants to obey,
his Servants ye are, whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience to
Righteousness? also, that the Wages of Sin is the death of the Soul; and he
that sows to the Flesh, shall reap Corruption: for if ye live after the
Flesh, your Souls shall die, but if through the Spirit you mortify the Deeds of
the Flesh, you shall live. Finally, my Brethren, whether the Spirit of God that
revealed to Peter the Things of God, be Head in you? or, the Spirit of Satan,
which Ied Peter into the Fall, into the Schism, into Heresy, into the Apostasy,
be Head, which Spirit is the Spirit of Antichrist, the which exalts many
Inventions, his Prescriptions, and Traditions above the Inspiration and
Revelation of God? So try your selves, examine your selves, Know you not, your
own selves, that unless Christ (the Spirit of the Father) be in you, you are
Reprobates, as concerning the true Faith, and cannot think a good Thought, much
less work a good Work? and that it is he (by his Spirit of Grace which is given
to every one to profit withal) that works all good in us, both to will and to
do of his good pleasure; as it is written, Phil. 2.13. Isa. 26.12. Romans 8, 9,
10, 11. 1 Cor. 12.7. 2 Cor. 10, 11. 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Gal. 5.16.22. and 13.5.
And whether the Court of Rome has not used as much worldly Policy to obtain
Sovereignty and Dominion in the Earth, as any Earthly Prince whatsoever? he
that will resolve this Question, let him read the History of the Council of
Trent, and other French Histories, written by Members of the Gallical Church.
And whether with their good Words and fair Speeches, they have not got into the
Hearts and Consciences of simple People, persuading them to believe the Pope to
be Head of the Church, and Vicar of Christ? And when the Net has thus catched
and brought into this Faith, is it not easy to make Merchandice of such Souls,
and also to command their Bodies and Purses, who believe Peter's Key can open
and shut Heaven, when, and to whomsoever Peter's Vicar and Successor pleases?
And what has thus bin got by Peter's Net, has it not bin kept, and added to,
by Man's Carnal Weapons, which are not the Weapons of Christ, nor of his
Apostles nor Followers? read 2 Cor. 10.4. John 18.36. as by woeful experience
many Emperors, Kings, and Princes in Europe have found, to their great loss
both of Blood and Treasure, in pursuing and subduing the Waldenses and
Albigenses, Excommunicated An. 1250; and in acting against John Husse, Jerome
of Prague, John Wickliff, and Sir John Oldcastle; as also against the
Protestants in Germany, Holland, and Flanders, with those Massacred at Paris by
the (then called) Holy League; and since by the inhumane Massacre in Ireland,
1640; even against all those that have adventured to withstand the Pride,
Usurpation, Avarice and Tyranny of the Court of Rome, and that gainsaid such
Doctrines and Practices as were brought in by the Apostasy, contrary to the New
Covenant and Gospel of Christ Jesus, more savouring the things and Institutions
of Man, than the Commands of God.

I have read in Story, That the Pope, as he is Head of the Church, usurps
Authority over the Lives, Estates, and Consciences of Emperors, Kings and
People, to set up and pull down whom he thinks meet; witness the Emperors of
Germany, King John of England, Henry the Third and Fourth of France, and the
Pope's Bull against Queen Elizabeth; and that it is no sin to kill Heretics,
nor to Absolve Subjects from their Oaths to their Sovereign; and therefore they
Commissionate, Indulge, Pardon, and open Heaven Gates to such as are employed
in these Services.

And if you say, Those things were acted and done for advancement of Religion,
(called by you Pious Frauds.) I answer, and say, That he that does evil that
good may come of it, walks not in God's way, but in the Counsel of the ungodly,
and bears not the least similitude or likeness to a True Christian, or the True
Catholic Church of Christ, but carries the Image of the False Church, the
Beast, the Whore, and false Prophet, which leads to the Chambers of Death, and
is not the way to Life Eternal. Allelujah.

And is not this to apostatize, and to fall from the Faith? Was the saying of
Pope Pius the Fifth, That neither Faith nor Oaths are to kept with Infidels,
more like a Christian or a Heathen? And when did Popes undertake to absolve
Subjects from their Oaths to Sovereigns, as Pope Alexander the Third discharged
Thomas Becket? etc. And is it not recorded, how that Popes who swore to
Emperors and Kings, etc. seldom kept their Faith with them? And does not Story
inform, that there have bin many Schisms and Heresies in the Church of Rome,
even in the very Head thereof, Pope against Pope, and Popes against Councils,
and Popes against Emperors and Kings, fighting, destroying, and excommunicating
each other?

Were not Pope Formosus's Orders annulled by his Successors? And what Divisions
have there bin betwixt the Bishops and the Monastic Orders? and what Quarrels
have bin betwixt the Regulars and Seculars in England? as at this day in
France, betwixt the Jansenists and whole Gallican Church, and Theological
Faculty in Paris against the Jesuits, who taught, that the Pope was Infallible,
and could not err, etc. So endeavoring to bring the Church of France in
subjection to the Court of Rome; which thing had it taken effect, would not
only have wrought a great Schism in the Gallican Church, (as it has done in
other Kingdoms) but also bred a great Division in the State, betwixt the King
and his Subjects; in which Division Caesar would have lost much of his due, by
the subtilty and encroachment of the Court of Rome, contrary to Christ's
Example and Commands; read Mat. 22.21. John 18.36. who would have his
Followers, not to mind earthly things, but submit to the Civil Powers, (even in
things contrary to Law) to every Ordinance of Man, in Civil things, for the
Lord's sake, or for Love and Peace sake; as did our blessed Savior, Mat.
17.26, 27. Phil. 2.5. 1 Cor. 2.16. Romans 12.16. with 13.2. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Thus
to follow the Example and Command of Christ, in giving Caesar his due in things
Civil and Temporal; and Caesar, in giving God his due to Rule in the Hearts and
Consciences of his Subjects, in things Spiritual and Eternal, (not imposing
with Carnal Weapons) will most certainly bless the World with much happiness.
Allelujah.

And did not St. Cyprian and Eusebius say, That when the Pastors were got into
Worldly Pomp, and had lost Piety; and when their Chalices were of Gold, they
had but Wooden Priests, in which estate the Gates of Hell prevailed over the
Church? And when Constantine gave much to the Church, whether a Voice from
Heaven was not heard to say, Now is Poison cast into the Church? And whether
all those great Revenues given to the Church by King Pepin, and Charles the
Great, were not re-given by Pope Leo the Eighth to Otho the Emperor? And were
it not better for the Church of God, that Priests should minister freely the
Things of God, as all Christ's Ministers did, and not for Hire, or filthy
Lucre, or compulsive Maintenance, as the World's Ministers (made by Man) do? I
leave to the Witness of God in all to judge.

What Differences have bin betwixt the Bishop of Constantinople, and the Bishop
of Rome? And was not Pope Honorius condemned by a General Council for Heresy?
And have there not bin great Divisions betwixt the Clergy, the Soldiers and
Citizens of Rome, about choosing of Popes? and was not the right for Confirming
Popes, in the Emperors, till Anno 683? And were not Bishops and Priests in the
Primitive Time one and the same, and of like Authority? Whether the Pope be
more Vicar or Lieutenant of Christ, than the Church and People that chose him?
And whether Emperors and Kings did not at first set up Popes, long before Popes
came to be so potent, as to set up Kings and Emperors, and to displace them at
pleasure? Did not Popes get their Dominion over Princes by Policy, Force, and
Excommunications? And when Princes were at Discord one with the other, did not
Popes come to Reign over them by that means? And was it not the Policy of Rome
to engage the Temporal Sword to maintain Spiritual Religion? and when, by this
means, Emperors and Kings grew weak, then were they necessitated to take in
with the Popes, which made Rome grow more strong and powerful, and themselves
weaker and weaker. But when Emperors and Kings shall cease assisting the
Spiritual with their Temporal Swords, whether then the Pope will have more
Authority in Christendom, than now at Constantinople? or than Jack Cade and Wat
Tyler in England, or John of Leyden at Munster? And whether it was wisdom in
Princes to admit the Pope to Rule both Swords, the Temporal and the Spiritual?
And whether this has not bred great troubles in Christendom, the day that is
approaching will make manifest? Lastly, Whether Prescriptions and Impositions
of Popes, Prelates, and other the Clergy, (the People yielding Obedience
thereunto) have not taken away all sense of Conscience toward God, as also of
Christ's Commands in Spirit? And whether this be not to Apostatize from that
Faith once delivered to the Saints? I leave to the Witness of God in every Man
to judge and determine. Allelujah.

Certainly it was a true saying of that good Pope Sylvester, when Constantine
the Emperor endowed the Church with great Riches; Now, said he, is Poison cast
into the Church: Which since has so proved, for what has bin given, and what
themselves have taken by Carnal Weapons, and Worldly Policies, has enabled
them to give greater Troubles to the State Temporal and Civil, than any
Difference merely Worldly and Carnal has caused betwixt Prince and Prince. And
does not this plainly show, that such a State or Church, (as has brought so
great a Curse over God's Creation wherever it has bin received) is not
Christ's Church, whose Church and Kingdom is not of this World? who loved his
Enemies, and came to save Men's Lives, and not to destroy them. So by their
Fruits all Men may know the True Church from the False, the Church of Christ
from Antichrist's Church.

As I am a Priest of God, after the Order of Melchisedeck, (who was of the
Order of the Holy Ghost, and born of the Spirit) without Carnal Father, or
Carnal Mother; I say, as I am a Priest of God, ordained by having Christ Jesus
in me, my Priest, my Prophet, my King, I have something from God, my Father, to
the high and mighty Men of the Earth, in whose hands the Almighty God has
placed the Rule and Government of things Terrestrial, as his Vicegerents in all
the Earth, to them I humbly make this Request; First, That they would look up
unto him who bestowed on them this great Honor and Glory, and acknowledge him
God of Gods, King of Kings, and Lord over all Lords. Allelujah.

Next, that they would seek the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof;
which having found, I most humbly entreat them to adore, worship, and serve the
Lord our God therein and therewith; which Worship only stands in the Spirit of
Truth (the Spirit of Grace given to every one to profit withal); which Worship
the Omnipotent Lord God will accept, and no other Service nor Worship, but what
proceeds from a pure sincere Heart, to the Commands of Christ in Spirit (the
Word in the Heart.) And that none may be ignorant what this Kingdom of God is,
and wherein it does consist, and where it is to be found, I most humbly offer,
and say, The Kingdom of God stands not in any outward Observation of Man's
prescription, but is placed within every Man, a Light to lighten the Gentiles,
and to be God's Salvation to the Ends of the Earth; which Light is called the
Word in the Heart, Christ, the Unction, the Messiah, the Anointed of the Lord;
which God in his great Love to the World has given to, and in every Man a
Talent to profit withal, that so every Man in it might work out his own
Salvation; the which as it is received and obeyed, gives power to repent and
forsake Sin, and leads into Truth and Righteousness; and thereby we become
the Sons of God, being led by his Spirit. This Talent in Scripture is also
called by diverse Names, viz. The Grace of God which appears to and in every
one, teaching those that love his appearance, to deny Ungodliness and worldly
Lusts, etc. It is also called, A Measure of the Spirit, given to every Man to
profit with; also Truth in the inward Parts, the Word in the Heart, Christ, the
New Birth, and New Creature; God's Covenant of Light and Life to all the World,
who is the Light of the World, and does enlighten every one that comes into
the World, and so is God's Salvation to the Ends of the Earth; the way to God
and Godliness, that whosoever believes in him, and follows him faithfully,
shall have Life Everlasting. Allelujah. Read Deuteronomy. 30.11, etc. with Romans 10.6,
etc. Isa. 42.6. and 49.6. and 57.10. and 54.13. and 60.3. Jer. 31.3, etc. with
Heb. 8.8, etc. John 1.9. 1 Cor. 12.7. Tit. 2.11.

And this Light of Life, the Kingdom of God within every Man, is compared to
many things in Scripture; He is the Lamb of God, (not the Pope's Agnus Dei)
that takes away the Sins of the World; the Lord our Righteousness; the Spirit
of Truth, that leads into all Truth: and the one thing only needful is, that we
hear and obey the Spirit of Truth, and our Souls shall live. Allelujah.

This Kingdom of God is likewise compared to a grain of Mustard Seed, sown in
the Heart of every Man by God; the Seed of Abraham, which Seed is Christ, the
Light of the World; also the Kingdom of God is compared to Leaven placed in a
Man's Heart, sufficient to leaven the whole Lump (from the leaven of Malice and
Uncharitableness) into a lump of Truth, and Love to Righteousness; which Leaven
is the Bread from Heaven, which nourishes the Souls of true Believers into
Eternal Life. Allelujah.

Thus you see what the Kingdom of God is, where it is to be found, and the
blessed Effects it produces in all that receive God's Heavenly Gift, and are
found walking therein; and when ye know and feel this Kingdom of God in the
movings thereof to be within you; in the next place, my most humble request and
advice is, That you would thenceforth seek the Righteousness thereof, and walk
in the same all the days of your Life; in which you will find Peace with God,
Joy in your own Spirits, and good Will from and to all Men: but as you do
undervalue this Small Seed, (the true Light and Spirit of Grace, the Gift of
God) and prefer this present evil World (Man's Prescriptions, Traditions, and
Impositions) above it; then a Woe and a Curse from God to your Souls and
Bodies, in your Basket, and in your Store; but walking in the Righteousness of
God's Kingdom, you will know how to give God his due, and to please him in
things Spiritual and Temporal. If you leave the Conscience of your Subjects to
God alone, for him to rule and guide, which is God's due, then will God give to
Caesar his due, viz. the Hearts of his Subjects, to obey their Sovereigns in
all things Temporal, Natural, and Civil; then will Unity and Concord spring up,
Righteousness, Peace, and Love, will kiss each other. And then God will give
his Blessing, bless us in our Bodies, and in our Souls, in our Basket, and in
our Store, in our Wives, and in our Children; in what we eat, and what we
drink, and in whatsoever we set our hands unto, both Prince and People, Rulers
and Ruled, all blessed and happy; and so will all the ends of the Earth fear
the Lord our God, bless and magnify him for ever. Allelujah.

The Contents hereof I most humbly and heartily recommend to your most holy
Father, the Pope of Rome, and his Clergy, (as they will answer it at the Day of
God's Tribunal,) that they communicate these Matters to the Emperor, and to all
other Kings, Rulers and Princes, over whose Souls God (I hope) by his blessed
Spirit of Grace has made them Overseers; who being born of the Spirit, and
having Christ Jesus, the new Man in you, (the only begotten Son of God, the
Father in you) go and preach Him to and in all the World, a Savior to all that
believe in him, and that follow him; who is the Light of the World, and does
enlighten every one that comes into the World. Yet know, that no Man can preach
truly to the converting of Souls, neither can turn any from Darkness to Light,
save those only that are born of the Spirit, and so have Christ, the Word in
their Hearts, as Paul had, and all true Ministers of Christ have. Read, Gal.
1.15, 16. and 2.20. Ephesians. 2.10. Col. 1.27. and 2.6. and 3.16. 2 Cor. 13.5.

Thus learn to know Christ, as all the truly sanctified know him; not after the
Flesh, as he was the Son of Man; nor after the Letter, which kills; but after
the Spirit, which begets Christ, the new Man, in us, who is the only true
Agnus Dei, that takes away the Sins of the World, of all that believe in him,
and that saves his People from their Sins, (as he did the Virgin Mary, Luke
1.47.) giving and increasing Grace in them, working all their Works in them and
for them, perfecting Holiness in all that love his Appearance, which Work of
Grace in our Hearts is our Sanctification, Justification, and Salvation.
Allelujah.

Thus being faithful to God, in administering the things of God, (as you receive
them from him) on God's Name, and in his Strength, go on, and prosper; convert
all Nations to Christ, the Word in the Heart, God's Covenant of Light to all
the World; to Christ, the Rock and Revelation of God to Peter, on which his
Church is built: which Spirit of Grace guided the Church of Rome (when she was
so much renowned) into Truth and Righteousness; which Spirit of Truth gave St.
Peter Repentance, and led him out of his Fall (where the Gates of Hell
prevailed) into all Truth, and made him an able Minister of Christ, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit; in which Spirit he faithfully served his Master, in
feeding his Sheep with Spiritual Food, Christ, the Bread and Water of Life from
Heaven. Allelujah.

And know, that no Man can please God, save Christ, the new Man in the Saints,
who is created after the Image of God in Righteousness and true Holiness. And
the first Step toward Heaven, and true Christianity, is to be born of the
Spirit; for no Man can please God, nor go to Heaven, save he that came from
Heaven, even the Son of God in Man, which always is in Heaven: Read John 3.13.
Also know, that every Motion in Man's Heart to Good, is the Inspiration and
Revelation of God; as every Motion to Evil proceeds from the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil; which Trinity is but one evil Spirit, that rules in the Hearts
of the Children of Disobedience: for of our selves we cannot so much as think a
good Thought; and without Inspiration and Revelation, we can never know God the
Father, nor God the Son, but by the Inspiration of God the Holy Ghost. Nor can
we know or act aright in the things of God, but by the Revelation of his own
Spirit, (a measure whereof is given to every one to profit withal): Nor can we
please God, nor attain Salvation, but as we are born of his Spirit, and led by
his Spirit into Truth and Righteousness; as it is written, Mat. 11.27. John
3.3. and 6.44. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. Gal. 1.15, 16. 1 Pet. 1.13. 1 John 3.24. with 1
Cor. 6.11, 17. and 12.7. 2 Cor. 3.3, 6. Gal. 5.16. Ephesians. 2.22. and 3.16. 1 Pet.
12.11. For the natural unregenerate Man (tho never so knowing in Literature,
and other worldly Knowledge, as to please the Ear and Understanding of a Man)
knows nothing of the things of God, nor understands the Scriptures meaning,
nor Gospel of Christ, nor can he preach it; because these things are only
spiritually discerned. And he that wants this Spirit of God in him, to be his
Prophet, his Priest, his King, to reveal the things of God, to offer Prayers
and Praises to God, and to lead into Truth and Righteousness, is no Minister of
Christ, nor true Christian, neither can such a one ever inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven. Read, Luke 4.18. and 8.10, 24, 45. Romans 10.8. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. 2 Cor.
3.6. and 4.3, 4, 6, 7. Gal. 1.11, 12. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. and 3.8. 1 Pet. 1.11, 12.
With John 3.3. Romans 8.9. 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 John 3.3.

After this manner you having Christ the Bread and Water of Life in you, then
may you feed Christ's Lambs, otherwise not; and your selves being converted and
turned from Darkness to Christ the Light, (in your selves) then you may convert
others, else not: And all that profess themselves to be Ministers of Christ, be
sure you feel God's Spirit to be your Commission, both to begin and carry on
that Work, else all Preaching and Praying will be but vain, and you cannot
profit the People at all, but must lie down in sorrow under all your own
Kingdlings and Conceivings, either from the Letter, or what you have learned
from Man in the Schools, etc. Thus you having Christ the Truth in your selves,
being born of the Spirit, he will teach you to preach Truth, and lead you into
all Truth, to the saving not only of your own Souls, but also of the Souls of
those that hear you. Even so, Amen. Allelujah.

And there is but one thing needful to make the Church of Rome as much renowned
now as ever, which is, That all forsake the Wisdom of the Flesh, and walk in
the Wisdom of the Spirit of Grace, the Word in the Heart, given to every one
(of all Religions) to be their Teacher, and Leader into the Way of Truth and
Righteousness. Allelujah.

Thus there are and have bin in all Ages, and of all Opinions and Religions,
Witnesses of Christ's Birth, who are begotten and born again of the Spirit,
which crucifieth Sin in us; and of his Resurrection, which creates the New Man
in us: in which Body of Christ, (the Spirit of Light which came from Heaven)
the Sanctified arise and ascend into Heaven, and there sit (even whilst their
Mortal Bodies are here on Earth) at the right Hand of God the Father, in the
Unity and Fellowship of Christ the Son, and Blessed Spirit, where are Pleasures
for ever-more. Allelujah. Read Ephesians. 1.3. and 2.6. Heb. 12.22. 1 John 4.17.
Psalm. 16.11. Job 36.12.

In the Unity of which Spirit of Grace, Love, and Charity, I most humbly take
my leave, and in it rest one with all the faithful Seed of Abraham, who are
begot and born again of the Seed and Spirit of God, and led by the same Spirit
into Truth and Righteousness. Allelujah.

In which Spirit of Truth, I remain a Friend to the Universal Catholic Church
of Christ throughout all the whole World, amongst Jews and Gentiles; yea, a
true Friend to the Souls of all Men, whilst I am, and when I am no more.

ROBERT RICH.

To the Episcopal Protestants, the most Reverend Archbishops, the Right
Reverend the Lord Bishops, the Reverend the Priests, Doctors, and Deacons, and
all Degrees of the Clergy and Laity of the Church of England, ROBERT RICH
sends Greeting in our Lord God Everlasting. Allelujah.
TO you that are Regenerate, and born again of the Spirit, and so are initiated
into the Church of Christ, made Members of his Body Spiritual through
sanctification of the Holy Spirit of Grace, they in him, and he in them, made
perfect in one; to them, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied, from God our
Heavenly Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Allelujah.

In the Year 1656, feeling the Birth of God in me, by the overshadowing of the
Holy Ghost, wherein I was made a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven: Which Spirit of Light begot Christ Jesus
the New Man in me; by whom I obtained Reconciliation and Peace with God, and
good will toward all his Creation. Which Spirit of Love moved in me, in the
Year 1666, to send Thirty pounds to be distributed amongst the Poor of the
Episcopal Protestant Church, as a sign of my dear love and good will to them.
Not as Judas that betrayed his Master into the hands of Sinners for thirty
pieces of Silver, but as from one, that witnessed the Resurrection of Christ,
who had bin dead in Trespasses and Sins, whose Soul was raised out of the Grave
of Sin and Death, wherein it had long lain. Thus by the Incarnation or
Indwelling of the Life of Christ Jesus in my mortal Flesh, I came to inherit
Life Eternal, by and through him that is the Regeneration, the Resurrection,
and the Life. Allelujah. By which Spirit of Grace I came to see (what St. Peter
saw) that of all Religions, Those that feared God, and acted Righteously
toward Man, are accepted with him; as it is written, Acts 10.34, 35. Mat.
16.17. Through which Grace I came to understand the great Love of God to the
World; that (in all Ages and Times) he has given and sent his only begotten
Son, his Spirit of Light and Grace, into the World; his Everlasting Covenant of
Light and Life, wherewith he does enlighten every one ( Jew and Gentile) that
comes into the World; that so all Men might be saved by believing in him, and
by following of him, that is the Way, the Truth, and the Life of God: who is
God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth; as you may read, Isa. 42.6. and 49.6.
Deuteronomy. 38.11, to 15. Jer. 31.31, to 35. with Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 9. Heb. 8.8, etc.
2 Cor. 4.4, 6. By which Spirit of Light, Life, and Truth in the Inward Parts,
(the Word in the Heart) moving on the face of my Deep, and shining on my
Tabernacle, (which God pitched in me); I say, I in the same Light found freedom
to look into all manner of Opinions and Religions; even in that Light which
showed me Good from Evil, Right from Wrong, and Truth from Error. In which
Spirit of Light, I read many Books writ by Episcopal Protestants, viz.
something of Bishop Andrews, Bishop Hall; but most of Dr. Jeremy Tailors, Dr.
Hammonds, Dr. Stillingfleets, Dr. Tillotsons, with diverse others of like kind;
Which Books I read with delight, having unity with them, feeling the Spirit of
Love to Truth and Righteousness to be their Dictator; which Spirit of Grace,
taught them to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, to live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present World, which made them honorable in
this World, and glorious in the World to come. Allelujah.

In reading of which Books, I took notice of many worthy and true Sayings, viz.

Dr. Jeremy Tailor in his Great Exampler says, That Christ Jesus is our
Example, in his Birth, Life, and Death. Also (what I have read in Ancient
Fathers) that Disputes amongst Christians, is the scab of the Church, and
destroys Charity, which only edifies. That God's Will and Commandments are made
known in all Men's Spirits, that they may do them. The Word Incarnate is God's
Preacher to all the World. That Christian Religion is nothing else but a
Restorer of the perfect Law of Nature; for God gave Man at first a reasonable
intelligible Nature, both to love and serve him. That Man's Original Sin was to
leave God the Good, and go to the Creature the Evil. Man may keep or break the
Law of Nature, so sin against God, his Neighbor, and Himself. Well-being is,
when right Reason and the Law of Nature is satisfied; and evil Doing, is to
transgress the Law of Nature, or right Reason, this brings guilt of Conscience,
and torments. And in this Obedience to the Law of Nature consists Heaven, and
in Disobedience, Hell. Christian Religion is, to worship God in Spirit and in
Truth, and so to serve our Neighbor. Revelation is both Natural and
Reasonable; so is Self-denial, Death, and Martyrdom, to those that have an Ear
to hear the Spirit's Reason. Self-denial is but confining the Appetite within
the Limits of Nature. The Philosophers were commended of old, for preserving
Reason and Religion in Practice, before the Schoolmen, that fight about
Opions. Jesus his Life was sweet and affable, and for our Example to Life
Eternal. Christ, who dwells within the limits of Love, gives us boldness with
God, and not fear. In Christ are two Natures, the Body but the upper Garment of
the Soul; his Soul was of the same Nature and Substance with ours, in this
inferior to the Angels. One Grace succeeds another, well pressed, and sometimes
running over, till we come to the fullness and stature of Christ Jesus, even
filled with the Spirit which has no measure, but is Infinite and Eternal. God
crowns and accepts his Grace in all Sects, even the most Heathenish, and
accepts that, when in Conscience they worship Idols. Original Sin, or one Sin
committed, makes us more apt for another; so we have no cause to charge Adam,
but our selves only; every one of us is the Adam, the Man of Sin. Obedience
unites to God, and conforms to his Will, the which sanctifies. Isaac offered,
is our Heart and Will offered up to God, which he accepts. Nothing so able to
do Miracles as Love, nor so certainly acceptable. All exterior Acts of
Religion to be guided by our Superior, that is, by God only, for no Man in
Religion is Superior. No act of Corporal Austerity, or External Religion
acceptable to God, unless commanded by him. The first Baptism Appearance, or
Resurrection of Christ, is to kill Sin, or to put off Sin. The second
Resurrection, is to put on Christ, the New Man, and to walk in him. God
requires no more of Man, than to receive and entertain his Grace that appears
to every Man. Though the Son of Man has no where to hide his Head, yet many
Houses to convey his Grace. Grace works Miracles in Saints, as in Christ. When
Faith and Charity meet, then Christians indeed, and in Truth, all else false
and Antichristians. God's House is the sanctified Heart, where he dwells; and
is a House of Prayer for all Nations. Every graceless wicked Man is a Devil. No
Sin has Guilt, but when a Man has Understanding and Abilities to do better.
By the help of the Spirit, it is possible to please God in all things. One may
die for Christ's Name, that will not love his Nature, nor quit one evil Lust
for him, this is false Martyrdom. The law of Love in our Spirits is the Rule of
a Christian, not an outward literal Command, as the Jews had. To exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, is to be clean within, as in
outward Acts. Jews and Turks better than Christians, who transgress Christ's
Law, when they will not Moses's nor Mahomets. The clean Soul of a Christian is
the House of God, and so the House of Prayer, whose Body is his Temple.
Disciples did greater Miracles than Jesus, when Christ was risen in them. Every
Man living in the state of Grace, is a perpetual Miracle; so our Water is
turned into Wine. Christ's Father and Mother are not Carnal but Spiritual.
Adam's Sin, nor our natural Infirmities, not imputed to us; neither are our
actual and malicious Sins our Infirmities. Virtue conduces infinitely to the
length and content of our Lives, and Vice the contrary. It Is a vast Sum that
will pay the Debt of Intemperance and Lust. Though most deny Scripture to be an
Allegory, yet all Men in most things use it so, and it is then rightly used,
when by Inspiration we see the Heavenly through the Earthly, and the Spiritual
through the Carnal.

I also lately read a worthy Treatise, writ by Mr. Edw. Fowler of North-hill in
Bedfordshire, printed Anno 1671, holding forth the Principles of certain
Moderate Divines of the Church of England, in which they declare, That the
design of Christianity is to work real inward Righteousness; and that love to
God and Goodness is the highest Principle; and that true Righteousness is the
New Creature in us; And that John the Baptist, Christ's Forerunner's Work was,
to preach Repentance, and to cleanse and purify the Heart and Soul, ( Mal. 3.1,
3, 4. Acts 10.35. Dan. 9.24.) that Christ may enter in, and bring forth
everlasting Righteousness.

I have likewise read a Sermon, preached before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London, by Mr. John Sharp, upon 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable, etc.
wherein he most excellently sets forth the happiness and profitableness of a
virtuous Religious Life, even in the straitest Paths of Repentance; and putting
off the Old Man, with his Deeds of Darkness, and afterward to put on the New
Man, begot by the Word and Spirit of Grace in the Heart, God's Covenant of
Light to all the World; read Deuteronomy. 30.6, 11, to 15. with Romans 10.6, 8. Jer.
31.31, 32, 33. with Heb. 8.8. Isa. 42.6. and 49.6. Luke 2.30, 31, 32. John 1.4,
9. and 3.16. Romans 12.3. 1 Cor. 12.7. Tit. 2.11. the which teaches and enableth
every one (that will receive him) to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to
live soberly and religiously in this present World; Which certainly (as says
the Preacher) is the most profitable, happy and blessed Life, both for Soul and
Body, imaginable.

Likewise I have read a Sermon, preached before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London, by Mr. Joseph Glanvil, upon 1 Pet. 1.2. See that ye love one another.
Wherein are delivered most excellent Truths, both Catholic and Apostolic; his
desire is, to unite all Persuasions into this Principle of Love; in which Work
my Soul has long traveled. In which Discourse he also says, Love is
extensive to all Mankind; and the more General, the more Christian, and like
God. To love for Opinion sake, that is self-Love; but to love the Principle and
Image of God, as Christ loves the Poor, the Blind, and Ignorant, though his
Enemies, is God-like. Also, that Love is the Image of God, portrayed and
lively drawn on the Regenerate Soul. Love is the Bond of Christian Union, and
when that breaks, all goes into Confusion, both in Church and State. Christ
Reigns, when all unite in the Principle of Love, and a holy Life, which will be
the fall of Antichrist. Virtue and Goodness is to be owned in all Parties and
Opinions; and if they were practiced, it would reconcile all Men to each other.
True Religion is not to fill Heads with Notions and Opinions, but to sow in the
Mind the Seed of Virtue, to direct to govern Passions, and to destroy
Self-will. Christian Love is necessary, but agreement in Opinions is neither
necessary nor possible. In eager and passionate Disputes Charity is always
lost, and Truth seldom or never found. To give evil Names to Dissenters, is
Persecution.

Likewise I have read a Discourse concerning the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and
of our Union and Communion with him, made by Mr. William Sherlock, who wrote an
Answer to some new opinionated Doctors, (as he calls them) which teach, That by
being acquainted with the Person of Christ, and rouling themselves on him, and
believing the History of his Life, Death, and Resurrection; that this Faith
alone is imputed for Righteousness to them, without having any thing that is
good wrought in them by Christ, or they doing any thing that is good and
righteous in themselves. That we are saved by Grace, though we be disobedient
to the Spirit of Grace, (God's Talent given to every one to profit withal).
Also they teach, That God has elected some to Salvation, and others to
Reprobation, without regard had to Man's Obedience, or Disobedience to the
Gospel of Christ Jesus, (which Gospel, is Christ the Word in the Heart, as
says Romans 10.6, 7, 8.) To which, and much more of this nature, Mr. Sherlock
makes answer, That the Person of Christ will never save those whom his Gospel,
(the Word in the Heart) and their own Consciences condemn, who walk contrary to
his Grace, the Spirit of Light. That Christ's Kingdom is erected by conquering
Men's Minds, by his Spirit, to the Obedience of God; such, he pardons their
sins, and raises them unto an immortal Life. For this end God sent his Son
(the Word in the beginning) into the World to destroy the Works of the Devil,
to regenerate and redeem Man to the Obedience of Christ, (the Word.) And that
nothing avails with God but the New Creature, (which is Christ in the Saints)
that came to be our Example and Guide to Heaven, as well as our Mediator and
Advocate; and therefore we must imitate his Life, if we would enjoy the benefit
of his Death and Intercession. God in the first Creation designed all Men for
happiness; and certainly in the second Creation, he would have all Men saved,
and come to the Knowledge of Christ the Truth, (the Word in the Heart) by
yielding Obedience to Christ, his Gospel, and Spirit of Grace. That nothing can
be the happiness of a reasonable Creature, but conformity to the Divine Nature.
That the great Mystery of the Recovery of Mankind out of the Fall, consists
only in repairing the Divine Image. As in the first Creation we were made after
God's Image, so in the second we are renewed (in the Spirit of our Minds) after
his Image; which by Disobedience we lost, and is recovered no other way, than
by obedience. True expressions of Love to Christ, is Obedience to his Laws
(writ in the Heart.) And that the Soul and Mind of a good Man, (or regenerate
Man) is the Palace or Temple of God. That our dying to Sin, is the truest
conformity to Christ's Death; and a living to God (in Obedience to his Spirit
of Grace) is Man's Resurrection to Life Eternal, and makes us true Subjects of
his Kingdom; and this Conformity to Christ's Resurrection, consists in obeying
an immortal Principle of Life. Grace and Truth signify the Gospel of Christ,
and is God's everlasting Covenant of Light and Life to Jew and Gentile; as
says Isa. 42.6. and 49.6. John 1.4, 9. and 16.17. Romans 10.6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 4.3,
4, 6. Tit. 2.11. Christ's Righteousness is not an Imputed Righteousness only,
but Inherent, which begets the New Man in the Sanctified, which is their
Sanctification, Justification, and Salvation. The Righteousness of the Law
consists in an external conformity to the Moral Law; but the Righteousness
which is of Christ, is an Inherent Righteousness, which exceeds the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and consists in the renovation of
our Minds, in governing the Thoughts and Passions, and is therefore called, our
being born again. We are not living Members of Christ, till we sincerely obey
him; and that the only way to please God, and save our Souls, is to follow
Christ (through the Regeneration) who is the Author of Eternal Salvation to
them only that obey him. Fellowship with God, does not consist in transient
Acts, but in a state of Light, Spirit, and Life, in union with Christ,
conforming us into his Nature and Likeness, which makes us the Temple of God,
wherein he delights to dwell.

Dr. Hammond (in his Practical Catechism) says, That Socrates was accounted
the wisest of Men in his time, because he applied his Knowledge to the Moral
part, to the squaring and ordering Men's Lives. Also he says, Gerson (a very
learned and pious Man) defined Divinity to be an effective, not only a
speculative Knowledge: And that the end of Christian Philosophy, is to make Men
better, not more learned; to edify, not to instruct. That the Law written by
God in Man's Heart, is divinely natural, and teaches the whole Duty of Man;
And Man walking in the Light of God's Law, obtains more light and strength of
Grace, but in disobedience to that Light, Man grows dim and weak. The first
Covenant (says the Doctor) was writ on Stone, which we break. The second
Covenant is writ in our Hearts, to sanctify us, and to lead us into Truth and
Righteousness; which Covenant of Grace, Light and Truth, is that which saves
his People (who walk therein) from their Sins. Which second Covenant is
declared and proclaimed, Isa. 42.6. and 49.6. Deuteronomy. 30.11, to 15. with Romans
10.6, 8. Jer. 31.31, to 35. with Heb. 8.8, etc. In this second Covenant of
Grace (says the Doctor) are contained two Promises; First, Of giving more
Grace to them that make use of their former Talent. Secondly, Of crowning them
with Glory that persevere in Grace, Jews and Gentiles; that is, (says the
Doctor) every Man that walks in this second Covenant of Grace shall be saved;
for the Grace of God is that which is given to every Man (as a Talent) to
profit with. This Grace (says the Doctor) obtains three things for us: First,
It gives Repentance, which obtains pardon of Sins past. Secondly, It enables
them that love it, to please God in every thing. Thirdly, At the end of our
Obedience, it crowns us with an eternal weight of Glory.

Dr. Fell (in the Life of Dr. Hammond) says, That exemplary Virtue must
restore the Church. That Obedience to God's requiring, is the best practice.
That Unity of Mind, in that which is good, is the greatest happiness; and that
Sin is to be resisted and rejected in the first Motion.

By all which, it does manifestly appear, That in the Church of England, is
both Vrim and Thummim; not only in their Doctrines, the Light of Truth; but in
their Conversation, (as appears to me) an Innocent, Harmless, Courteous,
Charitable, Holy Life; for which I much honor them, and the Church for their
sakes; and heartily pray, That God will be pleased to send down upon our
Bishops and Curats, and all Congregations committed to their Charge, the
healthful Spirit of his Grace, and pour upon them the continual Dew of his
Blessing, that all they undertake (both in Praying and Preaching) may be begun
and ended in him; to the praise and glory of God our Heavenly Father; to their
own Souls Health, and the Salvation of those that hear them. Even so, Amen.
Allelujah.

As I have consulted several Doctors and Preachers of the Church of England, so
in like manner have I read and considered the Common Prayer Book, and the
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church:
Concerning which I most humbly crave leave to make examination, by the
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles; thereby intending, what I find to
proceed from God's Holy Spirit of Truth, which are the Things of God, to
treasure them up in Joseph's Storehouses; the rest that came in with the long
dark Night of Apostasy, from Man unregenerate in the Fall, merely Humane, being
the Prescriptions, Traditions, and Impositions of Men, not proceeding from the
Inspiration of the Spirit of Truth, I intend to turn back, as your own Money in
your own Sacks.

ALmighty and most Merciful Father, Morning Prayer, etc.
we have erred and strayed, etc. And grant, for Christ his sake, thou will give
us true Repentance, and thy Holy Spirit, that we may hereafter live a sober and
godly Life, etc. God pardons and absolveth all that truly repent, etc. To
day, if you will hear his Voice, (God's Word in your hearts) and obey the same,
ye are the People of his Pasture, and Sheep of his Hands, etc. Vouchsafe, O
Lord, to keep us without sin, etc. All which are sound good words, being prayed
in the demonstration of the Spirit, and in Sincerity, and in Truth.

BLessed be the Lord God, Benedictus Luke 1.68.
etc. who has raised up a mighty Salvation, speaking this of John the Baptist,
who was a burning and shining Light, preaching Repentance, and forgiveness of
Sins, to all them that truly repent; Which Repentance prepares the Way for
Christ, (the Word in the Heart) which Word begets in the Sanctified, Christ,
the New Man in us, which saves his People from their Sins, and leads them into
Life Everlasting. Allelujah. And this wonderful Child (the Birth of God in John
the Baptist) shall he called, the Prophet of the Highest, to give Light to them
that sit in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death; and to guide our Feet into
the Way of Truth, the Way to Peace, and true Happiness. So this Child (the
Birth of God in John, as in Jesus) grew and waxed strong in Spirit, being
filled with the Holy Ghost, (as says Luke 1.15, 67, to the end, and 2.40. with
Luke 1.80.)

Our Father, The Lord's Prayer.
etc. is a most excellent form of words, to those that can in Truth pray it:
Such only that are born of God's Spirit, are God's Children, and dare call God
Father; such are truly blessed and happy, that can always, continually, and
ever-more, pray, God's Will be done, here on Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Allelujah.

O God make clean our Hearts within us, and take not thy Holy Spirit from us.
And such only are true Christians, that have God's Holy Spirit to wash and
cleanse, and to guide into Truth and Righteousness those that have gone astray.

YOu that are born of the Spirit, Nune Dimittis.
and so have Christ Jesus in you, may sing the Song of Old Simeon; Lord now
let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy Word: (Christ the
Word in the Heart, who speaks Peace to all the sanctified People of God) for
mine eyes (the Eye of the Spirit) have seen thy Salvation. Allelujah.

I have also perused the second Collect for Peace; the third Collect for Grace;
the Prayer for the King and Royal Family; the Prayer for the Clergy; the
Absolution, Magnificat, Deus Misereatur, Cantate Domino; Second Collect for
Evening-Prayer; the Litany; the Collects for the second and third Sunday in
Advent; for the Nativity; for St. Stephen 's, St. John 's, and Innocents days;
for the Circumcision; for the first, fifth, and sixth Sunday after Epiphany;
for the first and second Sunday in Lent; for the Sunday before Easter; for Good
Friday; for Easter Even; for Easter day, for the third and fifth Sunday after;
for Ascension day; for Whitfunday; for the 7, 9, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19th Sundays
after Trinity; for Simon and Jude, Philip and Jacob, and All Saints, days.

In which foregoing Prayers, Collects, etc. I take to be words of Truth and
Soberness; and do recommend them to all those that can pray them with a sincere
Heart, in the power and demonstration of the Spirit of Truth. Allelujah.

Yet, as I am a Priest of God, by having Christ Jesus in me, my Priest, my
Prophet, my King, I have somewhat to say and declare to the Heads and Governors
of the Church of England, That none amongst them presume to call or own
themselves Ministers of Christ and his Gospel: for not every one that cries
Lord, Lord, is a true Servant or Minister of Christ, or fit to Teach, Preach,
or Pray in his Name, unless they first be called of God, and baptized into the
same Name, and (assisted by his Holy Spirit) as Aaron was, else none are fit
Ministers of Christ; read Exodus 4.30. and 6.13, 26. and 7.1, 6. and 28.30. Heb.
5.4. And that the Spirit of Christ be their Induction and Commission, what to
Preach, and what to Pray. Let such as are not regenerate, and born anew, take
heed how they meddle with the Things of God, that they touch not Holy Things
with unclean and unsanctified Hearts, and with polluted Hands and Lips, lest
they be smitten of God, as Vzza was; and lest a sorer Judgment attend them
under the Gospel, who run, and are not sent, than did those under the Law.

Thus declaring, I have peace with God, and am clear from the Blood of all Men,
that perish under such Teachers and Ministers, as have not the Spirit of Christ
to teach them, and have no other Commission, than from Man; such cause the
People to err, and go astray, and never can profit the Souls of their Hearers,
but like blind Guides, they lead the Blind, till both fall into Perdition.

I have observed, in reading of our last English Translation of the Bible, that
many material Things might be amended; and that it is better rendered out of the
Vulgar Latin and Greek, than we have it in English. For which, see some places
in my Epistle to the Romanists.

And also Romans 8.29. the Latin and Greek says, That he might be the first born
[in] many Brethren. The English, The first born [amongst] many Brethren. Which
seems to deny Christ to be in the Saints.

Mat. 28.19. the Greek says, Baptising them [into] the Name. The English,
Baptising them [in] the Name. Which Name of God is a strong Tower: whosoever is
baptized thereinto, puts on the Lord Jesus Christ, a Savior from Sin and Evil.
Allelujah.

2 Cor. 5.19. the Latin and Greek says, Has put in us the Word of
Reconciliation. The English, Has committed to us the Word of Reconciliation.
This, I conceive, is for the setting up of Man to be the Preacher, and not
Christ the Word in the Heart.

Romans 1.19. English, Latin, and Greek well translate, all speaking one and the
same thing, viz. That which is to be known of God is manifest, or made known in
Man, even his eternal Power and Godhead in the Heathen.

2 Timothy 3.16. the Latin and old English Bible says, All Scripture inspired of
God, or, given by inspiration, is profitable, etc. The English says, All
Scripture is given by inspiration, etc. The which seems not to be a Truth,
(without a Comment) for there is much written, that is not inspired of God,
even in the Bible it self. In the last Edition are said to be amended (from the
former) many thousand words. And how many Copies (or rather Autographs) of the
New Testament, are now in the Library at Oxford, and all differing one from the
other. St. Hierom says, That in his time, the Original Copies (let the Learned
pardon the Expression) of the Hebrew and Greek, were much corrupted by Jews and
Heretics; therefore he chose the Vulgar Latin ( after he had purged it from
Faults, committed by Writers, etc.) laying aside all other Latin Editions,
which St. Hierom says, were in his time almost innumerable. Thus by reason of
so many false Copies, false Writers, false Translators, and false Interpreters,
arise so many different Sects and Opinions in Christendom; every Master of a
Sect taking his Rule from Scripture, and his own private interpretation
thereupon. So that if you make the Letter of the Scripture the only Rule, it
must needs be crooked and uncertain: But God be praised, and ever magnified,
that has not left Man without a Witness of himself in every one, a Rule most
true and certain, Christ the Word in the Heart, which shines in the dark Heart
of every Man, and is a sure Word of Prophecy, even Truth in the Inward Parts,
to which we do well to take heed, as to a Light that shines in a dark place,
till the Shadows flee away, and the Day Star arise in our Hearts; then shall we
see that it is not any Scripture without us, but the inspiration of the
Almighty (only) that gives to Man an understanding in the things of God, what
is Truth, and what is Error; as it is written, Job 32.8. Joh. 1.4. 2 Pet. 1.19.
compared with Isa. 55.4. and 54.13. 1 John 5.10. and 2.27. So that if you have
Christ the Word in you, you need no other Teacher, but as that Anointed one
teaches, who is the Truth in every one, both Male and Female, Jew and Gentile,
they are all one in Christ Jesus, the Truth. Such as have not Christ Jesus,
God's true and faithful Witness in them, are Reprobates, and can never divide
the Word of Truth aright, nor know Truth from Error; neither have they a Will
or Affection to follow the one, or eschew the other; for Man of himself, not
having Christ in him, can neither think, nor do any thing to please God.

2 Cor. 2.17. The old Translation says, We do not sell the Word for Money. The
last Translation says, We are not as many which corrupt the Word of God. But
such as sell for Money, making Merchandise of the Word and Prayer, corrupt the
Word and Prayer, and are Simon Magus his Ministers, and none of Christ's
Ministers; For as they receive freely, so they give freely. Allelujah.

In one place of the Common Prayer, you say, There is no health in us: In
another you pray quite contrary, That God will not take his Holy Spirit from
us; also, that God would cleanse the Thoughts of our Hearts by the Inspiration
of his Holy Spirit. And you acknowledge, That all the ends of the Earth have
seen the Salvation of God: Also, that God has openly showed his Righteousness
in the sight of all the Heathen. And is not this what the Scriptures say, John
1.9. That Christ, the true Light, enlightneth every one that comes into the
World? And, 1 Cor. 12.7. that a manifestation of the Spirit is given (as a
Talent) to every one to profit with; that thereby every one may work out his
own Salvation if he will. And, Tit. 2.11. that the grace of God that brings
Salvation, has appeared to and in all Men; that none may truly say, there is
no health in us; for there is that Spirit of Grace in every one, which is the
saving Health of all that obey it, and the Condemnation of all that disobey,
despise, reject, and hate it; read John 3.19, etc. So let all Men honor this
Spirit of Light, the Son, as they do honor the Father of Lights. Allelujah.

Our Father.] I observe you often repeat Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
Which Prayer is good for a Disciple of Christ to pray, one that is born of the
Spirit, such have right to call God their Father, and such God owns for his
Children; but those that are unregenerate, who serve the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, whose Works they will do, for such to call the Holy God, Father, is
not this Blasphemy, and a breach of the first Commandment, to take the Name of
God in vain? And for any to teach this Prayer to unsanctified and unholy Men,
Is not this an Abomination that makes desolate? As I am a Priest to God, I do
declare, That all Services, Sacrifices, Prayers, and Acts of Religion, offered
up to God in any kind of Devotion whatsoever, in an unclean, unsanctified,
unregenerate Heart, are an abomination to him: but if any Man be a worshipper
of God, according to his Will (writ in our Hearts) him he hears; read Isa.
66.3. Prove. 15.8. and 28.9. Psalm. 66.18. with John 9.31. Luke 16.15. Rev.
21.17. Seeing God does not hear Sinners, but only hears his Son, his Spirit,
the Word in the Heart, go to him, and in his Son's Name, ask of the Father what
ye want, who hears him, and gives liberally, and upbraideth no Man; ask of
him to create in you a clean Heart, and a right Spirit to be put within you,
who gives his Holy Spirit to them that in sincerity ask it; then shall ye have
a Heart according to God's own Heart, which will do all his Will here on Earth,
as it is done in Heaven. This right Spirit, God's Son within us, works
Miracles in the Saints as in the Son; it raises our Souls out of the Grave of
Trespasses and Sins, to live in his Presence, in Peace, Joy, and Tranquillity,
all the days of our Lives. Amen. Allelujah.

Athanasius his Creed.] Athanasius his Creed is also of great Authority in our
Church, which imposes a necessity of believing the same, on no less terms
than our Eternal Salvation; yet I judge that there are, amongst many useful
Truths, some things asserted in that Creed, which are neither needful to
Salvation, nor can be made good by the Scriptures of Truth, nor yet by Reason
Humane or Divine. First, he says, There is one Person of the Father, another
of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost; and that the belief hereof, as he
expresses it, is absolutely necessary to Salvation. It Is true, the Eternal
God, who fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence, as he is pleased to hold
forth himself in the various manifestations of his absolute Greatness, Wisdom,
and Love to the World; so he is thereby known to us under several Names, and
Appellations, as most proper to those manifestations of himself; for what is
the Father, but God the Eternal Creator of all things, who forms the Light, and
creates the Darkness, and of nothing has made all things to appear in their
order, out of the first Chaos and Darkness of Confusion? And what is the Son,
but the same Eternal God, manifest in Flesh; the Word in the beginning with
God, and was, and is God, the Way, the Truth, the Life, the Covenant of God's
Salvation to the World? This Son (as I conceive) is no distinguished Person
from the Father, but is in Deed, and in Truth, the Everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace; the Word by which the Worlds were made, humbling himself into
humane Nature, to seek out lost Man, and to gather him into a nearer
acquaintance with his God: And what is the Holy Ghost, but the same Eternal
Spirit Witnessing, Quickening, Renewing, Sanctifying, Purifying, Cleansing, and
Comforting the Hearts of the Faithful, where God is pleased to pitch his Tent
and Tabernacle? These are the Three that bear witness in Heaven; and these
Three are one, not divided by personal distinction, but one Individual and
Eternal God, in variety of manifestation. Then, he says, In this Trinity, none
is before nor after another, and none is greater nor less than another: Yet, in
contradiction he says, the Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor created,
but begotten. Certainly he that begets, must be before, and greater than he
that is begotten. For my part I am more charitable than to believe all Men
damned that never heard of Athanasius his Creed; and am well satisfied, that
whosoever believes in Christ (that was, that is, and is to come, God's
Everlasting Covenant of Light and Grace, to Jew and Gentile; and his Salvation
to the ends of the Earth) shall be saved, even all of every Nation that fears
God and works Righteousness. Allelujah.

Infant Baptism.] Concerning Infant Baptism with Water, I may not say it is an
Ordinance of Christ, nor dare I call it Christ's Baptism; neither do I think
there is that virtue in it as is said, That it ingrafts into Christ's Church,
makes a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of
Heaven. And whether those Godfathers, and Godmothers, that undertake,
promise, and vow, on behalf of the Child, That when of Age, he shall forsake
the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of the World, and all the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh; and that he shall keep God's Holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of his life. I say, it would be
inquired into, Whether those Godfathers, and Godmothers, do perform and keep
this Oath, Promise, and Vow, themselves? If not, then why should they undertake
for another, what they perform not themselves? And if I mistake not, it is a
Tenent of the Church of Englands, That we cannot live free from sin so long as
we live in this World. If so, were it not far better never to Swear and Vow,
than afterward to break them? Is not this to add Sin unto Sin, and so bring a
greater condemnation on our selves? As I am a Priest to God, by having Christ
Jesus in me, I declare, That Infant Baptism is no Ordinance of Christ's,
neither is John's Baptism with Water, Christ's Baptism; Christ's Baptism, is to
be baptized into the Name, Nature, and Spirit of God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; which Baptism of the Spirit, is the one Lord, one Faith, and one
Baptism; one God and Father of all, who is above all, through all, and in us
all, that are born of, and baptized with the Spirit of Grace. This Baptism, is
that alone which saves, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost, and not by putting away the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a
good Conscience toward God. And this Baptism of the Spirit (which followed
John's Baptism of Repentance) is that only which can initiate into the Church
of God, make a Child of God, and give an entrance into, and an inheritance in
the Kingdom of Heaven. Allelujah.

And I query, Whether Infant Baptism were not the Invention of Man, rather than
the Command of God, brought in by the false Church (for advantage-sake) in the
long dark night of Apostasy, after that the True Church was fled into the
Wilderness, there fed, and preserved of God, whilst the Whore, the Beast, and
false Prophet ruled; who set up Shadows instead of Christ the Substance, the
Letter above the Spirit, Man's Baptism, which is with Water, instead of
Christ's, by Fire, which is the Holy Ghost? And instead of putting on the Lord
Jesus Christ, the New Man, which is the Saints Righteousness, they put on a
white Linen Surplice, to make them seem outwardly Holy, that inwardly were
full of Sin and Uncleanness; full of Self-love, Hypocrisy, and Pride; full of
Covetousness, Hatred, Malice, and all Uncharitableness. And instead of bowing
at the Name of God, (which is the Command of God, Isa. 45.23.) that every knee
should bow to him, you bow at the Name of a Man, not greater than is Immanuel,
which is the Name God himself gave the Virgin's Birth, Isa. 7.14. who is the
only begotten Son of God in all the Sanctified, that saves his People from
their Sins. And your bowing at the Name of Jesus, rather than at the Name
Immanuel, does it not demonstrate you to be worshippers of Angels, rather than
the true God? And for you to bow down to any Letters, or Syllables, joined into
a Name of God, or Man, is this, think you, to worship God in Spirit and in
Truth, as he requires? And for any to bow down and worship any Thing or Name,
that is not purely God alone, is most certainly Idolatry and false Worship. And
be not ignorant, that the Name of God is (his Power, his Love shed abroad in
our Hearts, his Immanuel) a strong Tower, whereinto the Righteous flee, and are
there in Peace, Rest, and Safety. Allelujah.

Holy Days.] Holy Days, both Fasting Days, and Feasting Days, were they brought
in by the Command of God, or prescribed and imposed by Man? Was not St. Paul
afraid of his Galatians, that he had bestowed his labor on them in vain? who
instead of setting up, and forming of Christ the Day Star in their Hearts, fell
to the observation of Days, and Months, and Times, and Years; setting up of
Meats and Drinks; what to Eat, and when to eat; and what and when to forbear,
respecting of New Moons, and Sabbath Days, one day more holy than another; all
which, in the first Covenant, were but shadows of good Things to come, which
the Saints possess and enjoy in the second Covenant, which is Christ in them,
the end of the first Covenant, their Hope, their Crown, and Glory. Allelujah.

In the fourth Commandment, you pray, That God would incline your hearts to
keep this Law; which is, to keep holy the Seventh day, (according to God's
Command to the Jews): Thus by your Traditions, ye make void the Law of God, and
change the Truth of God into a Lie; and by bringing in the Old Covenant, which
stands in diverse outward Observations, which makes nothing perfect, ye have
thrust out the New Covenant, Christ, the Word in the Heart, the Saints Teacher,
which perfecteth for ever those that are sanctified. Allelujah.

The Lord's Supper.] The Lord's Supper, I humbly declare to be a great Mystery,
not rightly understood by Man in the Fall: It is not Carnal Bread and Wine,
neither Carnal Flesh and Blood, as unregenerate Men apprehend and imagine.
Christ's Words and Works are more Spiritual, than for Carnal Men to understand
them; it is the Spirit that quickneth, and the Inspiration of God alone that
gives to man understanding in the things of God. The true Supper of our Lord
is, when Christ stands at the door of our Hearts and knocks, that we then open
to him, and he comes in to us, and sups with us. This is the right Supper of
our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, who is the First and the Last, the Alpha and
Omega of all our Graces and Mercies. Wherefore, my dear Hearts, Open O ye
Gates, and be lift up ye everlasting Doors, that Christ the King of Glory may
come in, and sup with you. Allelujah.

So the Flesh and Blood, Bread and Wine that comes from Heaven, is Christ's
Spirit of Light, his Body, which he gives for the Life of the World; this is
Meat indeed, and Drink indeed, that feeds and nourishes the Soul up to Eternal
Life; which Cup of the New Testament, is the saving Health of all Nations that
dwell upon the Face of the whole Earth. O my dearly Beloved, take and receive,
eat and drink abundantly of this Cup of Salvation; it is the new Wine in our
Father's Kingdom, a Fountain of Life that can never be drawn dry. Allelujah.

Behold, I show to you a Mystery; the Word in the Heart, the Love of God shed
abroad in our Hearts, is the Leaves of the Tree of Life, St. John speaks of in
the Revelations, given for the healing of the Nations, for the uniting of all
Sects and Opinions in Religion, into the one true Religion, both Jews and
Gentiles, Barbarians and Scythians, as well as Christians of all Sorts or Names
whatsoever, whether called Roman Catholics, Episcopal Protestants,
Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists, Quakers, Seekers, Socinians, Arminians,
or by what other name known or distinguished, even all that fear God, and work
Righteousness, are accepted of him, and dearly Beloved by me, even all that in
sincerity and uprightness of Heart, walk in the Light of Christ Jesus,
wherewith they are enlightened; even so, Amen. Allelujah.

Most Reverend Archbishops, right Reverend the Bishops, with others the
Reverend Doctors and Fathers of our Church, I humbly beg leave of you to
enquire, Whether settling Ministers in Parish Churches, and compelling all to
hear them to Preach and to Pray, first came in by the Command of Christ, and by
his Command so continue? or, came this in in the dark Night of Apostasy, by
Man's command, whilst the false Church, the Whore, and false Prophet ruled,
after the True Church of Christ was fled into the Wilderness?

Tithes.] Also I query, Whether Tithes set out in every Parish Church, were
done by a Command or Law of God, or by a Law of Man? And if you receive them as
from a Command of God to the Levitical Priesthood, then are you to maintain all
the Poor, the Fatherless, and Widows, out of them, that there may not be a
Beggar in England, as there was not in Israel. And if you receive them, as from
a Law of Man, then, Whether a forced Maintenance by Man's Law, be a suitable
and proper Maintenance for the Ministers of Christ Jesus? who receive freely
from him the Things of God, and so they give and dispense freely those Things,
without Money, and without Price, not for filthy Lucre-sake, but of a ready
Mind, and only to them they sow Spiritual Things, of them they reap Carnal; and
not by a Law of Compulsion, but by the Law of Love only, which is Christ's Law
and Command to his Disciples and Followers. Allelujah.

Preaching in Churches.] And whether all the Ministry placed in every Parish to
Preach, and to Pray, are sent of God, as Aaron was? read Exodus 4.5. and 12.15.
Deuteronomy. 4.5. And as all Christ's Ministers are, and ever were, Commissionated,
Assisted, and Instructed by his Holy Spirit, when and what they shall Preach,
and when and what they shall Pray: but it is not so with Ministers made by a
Carnal Commandment of Man, that receive their Commission from Man only. Such
run (with Balaam) after Gifts and Rewards, who preach for Hire, and seek for
Gain from their quarters; such, I declare, are no true Ministers of Christ,
neither can ever any such (as have not Christ in them) profit the Souls of
People at all; for all God's People are taught of him, and great is their
Peace. Allelujah. Does not David say, O God, thou have taught me from my Youth
up? And the Meek God does teach. And Job (who was no Israelite, but an Edomite)
says, He did teach from the Hand of the Lord, and that he was taught by
immediate Revelation and Inspiration of the Almighty. And Isaiah says, That in
God's Mountain, (which is his Spirit) he teaches of his ways, and that all
God's Children are taught of him; and that God had anointed him to Preach,
(which Unction is Truth in the Inward Parts, and no Lie) and teaches the Way
of God truly; which teaching of God's Spirit, is the way to God, wherein no Man
can err, though a Fool. And Jeremiah says, In those days (of the Spirits
teaching) I will make a New Covenant, says the Lord; for I will write my Law
in their Hearts, and put my Spirit in their inward parts; and they shall teach
no more every Man their Neighbor, for they shall all know me, from the least
to the greatest. Allelujah. And Jonah preached what he received from the Mouth
of the Lord, and what the Lord taught him. And Micah, (a true Prophet of the
Lord) says, That (in the time of the Spirit's Reign and Government) the
Mountain of the Lord shall be established on the top of the Mountains, and many
People shall flow to it; and shall say of God, He will there teach us of his
Ways, and we will walk in his Paths; for the Law shall go out of Zion, and the
Word of the Lord from Jerusalem: which Jerusalem and Zion, is no earthly
Building made of Wood and Stone, but the New Jerusalem is the sanctified Heart,
the new Heart, and right Spirit, a City whose Maker and Builder is God, Father
and Mother, Sister and Brother of all God's Children. Allelujah. And did not
John the Baptist (whose Baptism was from Heaven) teach his Disciples how and
what to Preach, and how and what to Pray, saying, As ye go, preach, the Kingdom
of God is at hand? And God the Father taught Holy Jesus his Son, to preach
deliverance to the Captives, (all those that truly repent) the acceptable Year
of the Lord. And as his Father taught him, so taught he his Disciples, saying,
Go ye into the Highways and Hedges, and tell the Blind, the Lame, and the
Halt, even all that are small, and little in their own eyes, all that are heavy
laden with Sin, let such come and buy Eye Salve, buy the sincere Milk of the
Word, without Money, and without Price. And did not Holy Jesus preach often in
the Temple and Synagogues of the Jews? and did he not weep over them, who were
so hard-hearted toward him, that when he would have gathered them together, as
a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, yet they would not be healed nor
covered under the Wings of the Cherubims, that attend the Mercy Seat of God,
from under whose Wings of Grace and Love, arises healing to all that are weary
of their Sins? And Holy Jesus also says, As my Father taught me, I speak and
do; and as his Father taught him, so taught he his Disciples, the New and
Everlasting Covenant, How that (by his Light and Spirit) all God's People
should be taught of the Lord, and that great should be their Peace: and that
those who would be his Disciples, must learn of him, to be low, and meek in
Heart, and to take up the daily Cross to their own Wills; which made him to
deny his own Will, to do the Will of the Father; as you may read Luke 22.42.
John 4.34. and 5.30. and 6.38. Heb. 2.4. and 10.10. Phil. 2.13. And this
Obedience to the Will of the Father, (Christ, the Word in the Heart) is our
Sanctification, Justification, Redemption, and Glorification. Allelujah. And
all such alone as are taught of God, Speak and Preach, as Men having Authority;
and not as do the Scribes and Pharisees, that have nothing else to teach them,
save the dead Letter, and their own Interpretations thereupon. Thus when Jesus
had breathed on his Disciples, and given them the Holy Ghost, he says, Go ye,
and teach all Nations, baptising them into the Name, Nature, and Power of
Christ's Spirit; not with material Water, for that is John's Baptism, but with
Fire, which is the Holy Ghost, the only one true Baptism, which washes and
cleanses the Soul, Regenerates and begets the New Man Christ in us; all such
who have their Hearts and Consciences washed and sprinkled from evil Works, to
serve the Living God, are with faithful Abraham happy and blessed. Allelujah.
Notwithstanding the Disciples had received the first Fruits of the Spirit, yet
they were to go to Jerusalem, and there wait in that Spirit, till they were
endued with a fuller measure of the same Spirit from on High, then they went
forth converting many thousand Souls, turning them from Darkness to Light, from
the power of Satan to the Power of God, his Spirit in themselves; and as they
had received the Spirit freely, so they gave the Spirit; read Act. 2.1, 2, 3,
4. and 33.37, 38, 39, 41. and 19.3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 6.20. 2 Timothy 1.9,
10, 14. Tit. 3.5, 6. In the Power of which Spirit, the Disciples did not only
do the Works and Miracles Jesus did, but greater, when (as Dr. Jeremy Tailor
says) Christ was risen in them. Thus by the foolishness of the Spirit's
Preaching, it pleased God to save those that believe and obey the Word in the
Heart, (as Doctor Tailor says); which Word Incarnate, is God's Preacher to all
the World, and God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth. Allelujah.

Singing Psalms.] Likewise be pleased to consider, Whether the Psalms now sung
in Parish-Churches, (for Matter and Form) be the same sung by the Saints in the
Primitive Times, who sung that they witnessed to be true, with understanding
(of the Spirit) making melody in their Hearts to the Lord? And whether those
that sing, what they cannot witness true in themselves, do not sing lies in
hypocrisy, yea, or nay? And whether any can in Truth sing the 131 Psalm, that
is not born of the same humble, and meek Spirit that was in Christ Jesus? O
Lord, I am not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye;
I do not exercise my self in things that are too high.
But as a Child that weaned is, even from his Mothers Breast;
So have I, Lord, behav'ed my self, in silence and in rest.
And whether any that have not entered into, or gone through the New Birth, can
sing the 17th Psalm? verse 3. Thou have well tried me in the night, and yet
could nothing find
That I have spoken with my tongue, that was not in my mind.
And for the works of wicked Men, and paths perverse and ill,
For love of thy most holy Name, I have refrained still.
Psalm. 42. verse. 3, 4. The tears always are my repast, which from mine eyes do
slide;
When wicked Men cry out so fast, where now is God thy Guide?
Psalm. 102.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And as an hearth my bones are burnt, my heart is
smitten dead;
And withers like the grass, that I forget to eat my bread, etc.
Thus was David Crucified with Christ, and buried with him in Baptism, which
none can truly sing, but those that are partakers with Christ in his Death and
Sufferings. Allelujah.

Also Psalm. 6.2, etc. For I am weak, therefore, O Lord, of mercy me forbear;
And heal me, Lord, for why thou know my bones do quake for fear.
Psalm. 22.14, 15. But I drop down like water shed, my joints in sunder break;
My heart does in my body melt, like wax against the heat, etc.
Psalm. 31.1, 4, 5. O Lord, I put my trust in thee, let nothing work me shame;
As thou art just, deliver me, and set me quite from blame.
The Psalms following can no Man truly sing, but those that are born of the
Spirit, and have Christ the New Birth in them: Such only as are risen with
Christ, can sing the triumphant new Song of Moses and the Lamb, and of Simeon,
and Mary the Virgin. Allelujah. Psalm. 18.4, 6. The pangs of death did compass
me, and bound me every where;
The flowing waves of wickedness did put me in great fear.
I thus beset with pain and grief, did pray to God for grace;
And he forthwith did hear my plaint, out of his holy place.
Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. He brought me forth in open place, whereas I might
be free;
And kept me safe, because he had a favor unto me;
For that I walked in his way, and in his paths have trod;
And have not sinned wickedly against the Lord my God, etc.
Verse 22. But pure, and clean, and incorrupt, appeared before his face;
And did restrain from wickedness, and sin in any case.
Verse. 28, 29. For by thy help, an host of Men, discomfit, Lord, I shall;
By thee I scale and over-leap the strength of any Wall, etc.
Verse. 31, 32, 33, 34. The God that girdeth me with strength, is he that I do
mean;
That all the ways wherein I walk did ever-more keep clean, etc.
He did in order put my hands, to battle, and to fight;
To break in sunder bars of brass, he gave mine arms the might.
Thou teach me thy saving health, thy right hand is my tower;
Thy love and familiarity does still increase my power.
And Verse 38. For thou did gird me with thy strength, to war in such a wise;
That they be all scattered abroad, that up against me rise.
Verse. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46. And still like dust before the wind, I drive
them under feet;
And sweep them out like filthy clay, that sticks in the street.
Thou keep'st me from seditious Folk, that still in strife are led;
And thou do of the Heathen Folk appoint me to be Head, etc.
Verse. 48, 49. And for this cause, O Lord my God, to thee give thanks I shall;
And sing out praises to thy Name, amongst the Gentiles all, etc.
Allelujah.
Psalm 23. to the end. My Shepherd is the living Lord, nothing therefore I need;
In pastures fair, and waters calm, he sets me forth to feed, etc.
Psalm. 4.1, 7, 8, 9. O God that art my Righteousness, Lord hear me when I call;
Thou have set me at liberty, when I was bound in thrall, etc.
Psalm. 42.7, 8. One grief another in does call, as Clouds burst forth their
voice;
The floods of evil that do fall, run over me with noise.
Yet I by day felt thy goodness, and help at all assays;
Likewise by night I did not cease the living God to praise.
Verse 9. I am persuaded thus to say, to him with pure pretense;
O Lord thou art my guide and stay, my rock and sure defense.
Allelujah.
Psalm. 59.16, 17. But I will show thy strength abroad, thy goodness I will
praise;
For thou art my defense, and God, at need in all assays, etc.
Psalm. 119.11. Within my heart and secret thoughts, thy words I have hid still;
That I may not at any time offend thy Godly Will.
Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16. My lips have never feared to preach, and publish day and
night;
The judgments all that did proceed, from thy mouth full of might.
Verse. 22, 55, 56, 57, 67. Lord turn from me rebuke and shame, which wicked men
conspire;
For I have kept thy Covenant, with zeal as hot as fire.
Verse. 105, 167, 168. Even as a Lanthorn to my feet, so does thy Word shine
bright;
And to my paths, wherever I go, it is a flaming light, etc.
Psalm. 130.5, 6. In God I put my whole trust, my soul waits on his will;
For his promise is most just, and I hope therein still, etc.
Psalm. 146.1. My soul, praise thou the Lord always, my God I will confess;
While breath and life prolong my days, my tongue no time shall cease.
Allelujah.


These, and the rest of David's Psalms, are good and excellent to those that
can sing them with David's Spirit; that have within them a clean Heart, and
right Spirit, as David had. Allelujah. But to those that sing them with an
impure, unclean, and unrepenting Heart, all things performed by them, in the
Worship and Service of God, are impure; even their very Prayers and Praises are
Sin. Thus to the Pure, all things are pure, to all such as sing in the movings
and joy of God's Spirit, with understanding, making melody in their hearts to
the Lord. So let Christ, the Word, dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching
and admonishing one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing
with Grace in your Hearts to the Lord; Blessed are the People that are in such
a case, who have Christ the Lord for their God, working all their Works in them
and for them, both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. Allelujah.

I do believe the Church of England, the best constituted National Church in
the World; and adorned with many of her Worthies, the best Learned, and most
sound in Doctrine; and for integrity of Life, and Conversation, most Sweet,
most Humble, Meek, and Charitable; whose Plat-forms of Religion (of all the
National Professions) I judge the most large, and likely to gather together, and
build up into Love and good Works, which is the Sum of all true Christian
Religion, and the End both of the Law and Gospel. Yet as I know there may be
many things amended, some left out, and some added, in the Nine and thirty
Articles, and Common Prayer Book; so I well know, there is that Wisdom and
Understanding in the Church of England, (if called together, to weigh and
consider of these Matters) as will not only correct and amend what is amiss,
but also add those things that may much illustrate Truth, to the Edification
and Salvation of Souls, and to the building up, and uniting several different
persuasions in the Truth, and in Love toward each other, who now at present
are much divided. I do also know, that there are, and ever were, Operations and
Administrations of God in the World, all wrought by one and the same Spirit.

The first Dispensation is, from Adam to Moses; under which Administration, Men
were taught to serve and worship God, by the seven Precepts of Noah, taught
from Father to Son; and such as were sincere and upright hearted in that
Worship, pleased God, and were accepted of him; who requires no more of any,
than what they have, and not what they have not.

The second Administration was from Moses, through the Prophets, unto John the
Baptist; and such are taught by wise Rules taken out of the Law and Prophets,
and need a learned National Ministry, such as are well read in Natural
Philosophy, and in Divinity, to expound and preach to the People those things
that tend to Peace and Godliness, to love God (the Light and Life of our Souls)
above all things Terrestrial, and our Neighbor (which is all mankind) as our
selves: In these two consist the Sum and Substance of all true Religion; but by
no means to preach those things that are Doubtful or Controversal, all that
tends to the dividing of Christ's seamless Coat, and not to unite in the Truth,
but to destroy it. Truth in the inward Parts, is that which all Men of all
Religions agree to, without Dispute; Which Dispute ever was and is (as says
Dr. Tailor) the Scab of the Church, and Bane of all true Religion.

The third and last Administration is from John (the greatest of all Prophets,
born of a Woman, or that stick in Form or outward ward Observations) unto
Christ, the Word in the Heart, who is without form or comeliness, the eternal
and only begotten Son of God before Abraham; he was, and is, and is to come,
without Carnal Father, or Carnal Mother; without beginning of Days, or end of
Life, God's High Priest for ever, after the Order Melchisedeck, which is the
Order of the Holy Ghost; and all such, born of God's Spirit of Grace, having
Christ Jesus in them, are the only Sons and Daughters of God; and need no other
Teacher, save God alone. Allelujah.

I likewise know there are dividings of Names and Opinions in the Church of
England; some receive the Doctrines and Interpretations of Luther and Calvin;
others rather choose Socinus and Arminius for their Guides: Thus is Christ
divided, when in Truth Christ is but one Eternal Universal Spirit of Love,
Light, and Life, in all Men, of all Religions in the World, and God's Salvation
through Him is to the ends of the Earth.

For the sake of those that thus disagree, I have looked into, and considered
the Grounds and Causes of their Divisions.

Luther's Doctrine, I find chiefly to consist; first, Against Indulgences, and
that they were unlawful; against Free Will; against the Pope's Supremacy, and
his Excommunication; against Temporal Possessions of the Clergy; against Merit
of Works, and Monastic Life; against Canonical Obedience, and distinction of
Meats; against Transubstantiation, and Communion under one kind; against the
Mass, and Aurigular Confession; against Absolution, and Purgatory; against
extreme Unction, and five of the Sacraments. He also held, That General
Councils might err; that Antichrist was not a particular Person, but a Spirit,
contrary and against Christ's Spirit; that Faith only justifies, yet Man is
not saved without good Works; that a faithful Man might have assurance of his
Salvation; that the Sacrament did not convey Grace, but was a sign of it; that
to the Faithful Sin is not imputed. And some of his Followers say, That we are
not justified by Faith or Works, but by the essential Righteousness of Christ
dwelling in us. And by Luther's protesting against the Church of Rome in these
Things, first began the Name Protestant.

Calvin's Doctrine I find to consist herein; First, he says, The Scriptures
are a sufficient Rule to Life, and the only Judge of Controversies; that the
Elect only have saving Faith; that Predestination to Life and Death, depends
not in Man's Obedience or Disobedience, but on God's Choice; that the true
Church of God, consists only of the Elect; that the Church and Magistrate may
not make Laws to bind the Conscience in Matters Religious and Divine; that Sins
are inherent in us, though not imputed to us; that Faith is a more excellent
Virtue than Charity; that there is no merit in us; that there is but two
Sacraments, and these can neither justify nor confer Grace.

Socinus's Doctrines, I find chiefly to consist in this; First, That there is
no Origninal Sin in us, derived from Adam; that there is a free will to
Goodness in us; that we may here fulfill the Law of God, if we walk in the Grace
given us to profit with, (as Romans 8.13. Tit. 2.11.) that the Causes of
Predestination are not in God, but in our selves, who obey or disobey the Grace
of God, given as a Talent to every one to work out his own Salvation; that
Christ did not satisfy for us, but gives power by his Grace to satisfy for our
Selves; that there is not a Trinity of Persons in one God; he denies that God
has elected a certain number to Salvation, and reprobated the residue to
eternal Damnation; he denies that God's Justice was satisfied by Christ's
Sufferings, and that God needed no such rigid Satisfaction; that Men are not
made really Righteous, by any imputation from another's Righteousness without,
whilst they are really unrighteous within; he does not believe that Christ
ascended into Heaven with his humane Body of Flesh, Blood, and Bones; but that
Body which he has is more Spiritual and Glorious; he owns the Spirit of Grace
in every Man sufficient (to all that obey and follow it) to lead into Life
Eternal.

Arminius his Doctrines, I find chiefly to be these; First, That God has not
elected some, and reprobated others; that God is just in saving those that
believe and obey his Gospel, and in condemning those only that reject and
disobey it: Which I take to be according to Truth; read John 3.19. Deuteronomy. 30.14,
15, 19. That Men are not made just by Imputative Righteousness only, but
Inherent; that Man is not made Righteous within, by any imputation from
another's Righteousness from without, whilst he is really unrighteous within:
which I take to be sound Doctrine; read Romans 8.9, 10, 11, 13, 14. 2 Cor. 5.17.
and 10.5. and 13.5. Gal. 2.20. Col. 1.27. and 2.6. He affirms, That the Grace
of God is sufficient to lead Men, that obey and follow it, into Eternal Life.
This I take also to be sound Doctrine, agreeable to Truth; read Tit. 2.11. He
says, Christ's Carnal Flesh, Blood, and Bones, is not ascended into Heaven;
read 1 Cor. 15.50. 2 Cor. 5.16. John 3.13. and 6.63. Ephesians. 4.10. That God has
not decreed to leave any Man in the state of Damnation. This also agrees with
the Scriptures; read Prove. 21.15. and 28.18. Isa. 59.2. Jer. 4.14. Ephesians. 2.5.
1 Timothy 2.4. That God affords sufficient means to bring to the knowledge of
Christ, by his Light and Spirit of Grace within every one; read John 1.4, 9. 1
Cor. 12.7. Tit. 2.11. That Christ did not die for the Elect only, but tasted
death for every Man, even his Enemies, by giving his Light and Life unto every
one, as John 1.4, 9. Which Spirit of Grace, if any resist or despise, such
crucify to themselves the Lord of Life afresh. That Original Sin of it self is
not sufficient to condemn Mankind to eternal punishment. This also is a Truth;
read Jer. 31.30. Ezekiel. 18.2, 3, 4. That an unregenerate Man is not totally and
finally dead to Sin, and destitute of spiritual Strength, but that he may (by
God's Grace) hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and live; this also agrees
with Ephesians. 2.1.5. and 5.14. That Grace and Free Will are cooperating Causes in
our Conversion, and that Perseverance is not the effect of Election, but is
attained by virtue of the New Covenant; read Jer. 31.33, etc. Romans 10.6, 8. 2
Cor. 4.6, 7. Heb. 8.8. and 13.5. That there is no Original Sin conveyed from
Adam to his Posterity; read Genesis 4.7. Ezekiel. 18.2, 3, 4. and 33.11, 18. Romans
6.22, 23. That there is free Will to Goodness in us, by God's free Grace; read
Tit. 2.11. That God could justly pardon our Sins, (when by his Grace we repent)
without any other satisfaction, than his own free Mercy and Grace. That God
does not predestinate any to Damnation, but as they obey or disobey his Laws;
read Genesis 22.18. Deuteronomy. 4.30. and 13.4. Job 36.11. Isa. 1.19. Acts 5.32. Heb.
5.9. 1 Pet. 1.2, 22.

I humbly beg pardon that I have presumed to illustrate the Sentiments of the
Arminian Doctrines, with Scriptures; it is, because they have bin much cried
out against as errant Heretics, although upon examination, I find them more
sound in the True Faith, than those that call them so: And by that small
experience I have obtained, both by reading and otherwise, I find and observe,
that those that are indeed the greatest Heretics, cry Heretics first. Thus
the blessed Apostle St. Paul was esteemed an Heretic, when he said, After that
way you call Heresy, do I worship the God of my Fathers. And how was Holy Jesus
cried out against as a Blasphemer, and otherwise, only for preaching the New
Covenant, the Gospel of Christ Jesus; which the Scribes and Pharisees would not
receive, because against their Traditions, and outward observation of the old
Law, which made void the New. And I have known one of late Years much cried out
against as a notorious Heretic and Blasphemer, for preaching up Christ in the
Saints, God's New Covenant, and the Way to Life Eternal. Allelujah.

And certainly there is no greater mark of a false persecuting Church, (as
learned Mr. Joseph Glanvil observes) than to give evil Names to Dissenters in
Matters of Opinion in Religien.

Lastly; I humbly beseech and entreat all that undertake the Cure of Souls,
that they preach nothing, save Christ, and him Crucified; that is to say, His
Spirit of Light crucifying and killing of Sin in us; and Him risen, that is to
say, That we seek (in the Heavenly Spirit) those things that are Heavenly. And
as by God's especial Grace he puts into our Minds those things that be Holy,
Just, and Good; so by his continual help, we may bring the same to good effect,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Allelujah.

And my truly devout, and hearty Prayer to thee, O God of my Salvation, is,
That thou would be pleased to send down upon our Bishops, and Curats, and all
Congregations committed to their Charge, the healthful Spirit of thy Grace: And
that they may truly please t^^e, pour upon them the continual D^^ of thy
Blessing; and so replenish them with thy Heavenly Grace, that both by their
Life and Doctri^^ they may set forth thy Glory, and sit forward the Salvation
of all Men, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Allelujah.

Finally, my Brethren, all you of the Clergy that are the Inheritance of God,
how-ever you are externally dignified or qualified, that have Christ Jesus
(God's High Priest) in you, his blessed and holy Spirit to guide you, it is You
that are truly Reverend in my esteem, and are certainly precious in the sight
of God; Ye are his Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a
Peculiar People, able to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God; the
Word of God dwells plentifully in You, whereby you are made able Ministers of
the New Testament; not of the Letter which kills, but of the Spirit which gives
Life, and ministers Grace to the Hearers. It Is You (reverend and worthy Sirs)
that can hold forth the blessing of Peace and Establishment to the World; and I
am persuaded God has fitted you for such a Work as this, therefore I beseech
you, suffer a word of Exhortation; Be faithful to the Testimony of the Lord,
with which he has inspired you; stand forth in the Name and Power of that
Spirit which dwells in you; lay by all carnal Ends, and self Interests, and
come forth in the nakedness and simplicity of the Love of God, in which you
will breath out the blessing of Peace amongst us. O let not Sion be built up
any longer with Blood, nor her Mourners wander about in the Defarts to seek for
shelter and safety; let the searchings of your Hearts, and the yearnings of
your Bowels, be for the Breaches and Divisions that are among the People of
God. It Is You that the great expectation of many of the Lord's People in this
Nation is now toward: Our Wounds and Breaches in the Circumstantials of
Religion are too wide and extensive for a formal, outward, and literal Ministry
to heal and cement. We have languished in Divisions too long already, under
these Physicians; it is only a Spirit-Ministry, with evidence, demonstration,
and power (that proceeds from an innate Principle of the Love of God shed
abroad in our Hearts) that can compose all our Differences, satisfy all Parties
and Interests, and settle us upon a sure Foundation of Peace, Rest, and
Happiness. If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of
Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies, fulfill ye the
Joy of the People of God in these Nations, that ye come forth with the like
Mind and Spirit in your Ministry amongst us, and in the Power of the same Love,
preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. I know there is wisdom
and largeness enough in the Love of God, to accomplish these noble Ends; and
the witness of this upon your Hearts, must necessarily strengthen your Faith in
this Ministry; for certainly, that Love (so ample) that can redeem the World,
(when and where it is witnessed by the Spirit) will appear large enough to cover
all our Infirmities, abate all our Contentions, and quiet all the Clamours that
abound among us. If thus you can appear, and stand forth this day, as indeed
Priests unto God, and true Ministers of Christ Jesus, you shall worthily be
called, The Healers of our Breaches, and the Restorers of our Paths to dwell
and walk in, with love and pleasantness one toward another. In which Spirit of
Universal Love and good Will, I Rest, a Friend to you, and the Souls of all,
whilst I am, and when I am no more,

R. R.

To all Teachers, Preachers, and Dispensers of the Word and Sacraments, under
the Dispensations of those called Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists,
ROBERT RICH, a Servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto
the Gospel of God; which Gospel was promised and preached by the Holy Men of
God ever since the Foundation of the World was Laid; as in the Scriptures of
Truth you may read, Genesis 3.8, 15. and 12.1, 3. with Gal. 3.8. Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12,
13, 14, 15. Romans 10.6, 8. Jer. 31.31, to 35. with Heb. 8.8, to the end. Isa.
52.7. with Romans 10.15. Isa. 61.1. with Luke 4.18. and 9.6. Mark 16.15. 2 Cor.
4.4, 6. 2 Timothy 1.10. 1 Pet. 1.12, 25. In the power and strength of which Gospel
(the Word in the Heart, or Love of God shed abroad in our Hearts) does R. R.
send Greeting in our Lord God Everlasting. Allelujah.
TO you that are Regenerate and born again of the Spirit, who have Christ
Jesus, the New Man, in you, and are Members of his Body Spiritual, through
Sanctification of the Holy Spirit of Grace, you in him, and he in you, made
perfect in one, to you, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied, from God our
Heavenly Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Allelujah.

In the Year 1656, feeling the Birth of God in me, by the overshadowing of the
Holy Ghost, wherein I was made a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven; which Spirit of Light begat Christ Jesus
the New Man in me, by whom I obtained Reconciliation and Peace with God, and
good will toward his Creation. Which Spirit of Love moved me in the Year 1666,
to send to the People called Presbyterians, Thirty pounds, to be distributed
amongst their Poor, that were in Need, Sickness, or any other kind of Adversity.

The like Sum I also sent to them called Independents: As likewise to those
called Anabaptists, to be distributed to the Poor that were amongst them. Not
as Judas that betrayed his Master into the hands of Sinners for Thirty pieces
of Silver, but from one that witnessed the Resurrection from the Dead; one who
had long crucified the Lord of Life in my Self, and by many and often
Transgressions, had slain the Witness of God, his Holy Spirit of Grace and
Light, which often cried in me, Why will thou die? Return to me, the Light and
Life of the Soul, and thou shall live. At length I hearkened to the Voice of
the Son of God in me; in obedience to which Voice, my Soul came to live; in
whose Life I have Rest, Peace, and Joy, in the Lord my Savior. Allelujah.

Thus by the Incarnation, or indwelling of the Life of Christ Jesus in my
mortal Flesh, I came to inherit Life Eternal, by and through him that is the
Regeneration, the Resurrection, and the Life. Allelujah. By which Spirit of
Grace, and Revelation of Christ in me, I came to see what Peter saw, ( Acts
10.34, 35. Matthew. 16.17.) That of all Nations, and Religions, those that feared
God, and acted righteously toward Man, are accepted with him.

Also by the same Revelation of God's Spirit, I understood the great Love of
God to the World; that in all Ages and Times, he has sent and given his only
begotten Son, his Spirit of Light, to be the Life of the World, his Everlasting
Covenant of Light and Life, wherewith every one is enlightened (both Jew and
Gentile) that comes into the World, that so all Men might be saved by
believing in him, and by following of him, who is the Way, the Truth, the Life;
and God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth. Allelujah. As you may read Isa.
42.6. and 49.6. Deuteronomy. 30.11, to 15. Jer. 31.31, etc. with Romans 10.6, 8. Heb.
8.8, to the end. John 1.4, 9. and 8.12. and 12.46. 2 Cor. 4.4, 6. Which Spirit
of Light, Life, and Truth in the Inward Parts, the Word incarnate in the Heart,
moved on the Face of my Deep, and shining on my Tabernacle; which Tabernacle
God pitched in me, in whose Light I saw Light; which gave me freedom to look
into all manner of Opinions and Religions; which Light opened my Understanding,
so as to know Good from Evil, Right from Wrong, and Truth from Error.

In which Spirit of Light, I read many Books writ by Presbyterians,
Independents, and Baptists; which Three I find so nearly united together, as to
the many Doctrines they place Salvation in, that I join you in one Epistle
together. I confess I find you differing one from another, and amongst your
selves, in Matters of Discipline, and some other few Opinions, wherein the
Kingdom of God does not consist; and which a little Charity and Brotherly Love,
would easily unite and reconcile. I know such, and the like Things you much
contend for, and divide from each other, as did and does the Protestant from
the Papist, the Presbyterian from the Episcopal Protestant; the Independent
from the Presbyterian; the Baptist from the Independent; the Quaker (as Ismael)
has his hand against every one; and all for nothing else, than about Words,
and some outward Observations: so that Christ's seamless Coat (made of
Good Will to all) is much divided, torn, and rent; who is one Spirit of Love to
you all, sent down from the Father of Spirits, a Light to Jew and Gentile, and
to be God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth; Him who is the Eternal Son, and
Heir of God's Kingdom; Him who is come into the World to save Sinners, and to
bless us, by turning every one of us from the evil of our ways. Against him do
the Husbandmen, Gog and Magog, all Sects, though never so different, unite and
join (as Herod and Pilat did) against the Lord's Anointed in the Sanctified,
who is now coming to take his Kingdom, though the Heathen never so much rage
thereat, and shall, must, and will rule and reign in them for ever and ever.
Amen. Allelujah.

I know (by what I have read in your Books) that you Three all agree (as do
many other of the Sects in Christendom) in the Birth of Christ, as he was the
Son of Man, born of a Virgin; that he lived a Holy Life, was crucified, dead,
and buried; that he arose the third day, and ascended into Heaven, with his
Natural Body of Flesh, Blood, and Bones. And that your believing of what Christ
did and suffered here on Earth in his own Person, is your Salvation; which
Faith of yours I humbly crave leave to examine by the Scriptures of Truth. And
as I am a Priest of God to the World, by having Christ Jesus in me, I say, and
declare, That unless ye be born of the Spirit, and have the same Spirit in you
that was in Christ Jesus, to lead into Truth and Righteousness, as it did him,
ye are no true Christians, nor ever can see the Kingdom of God; read John 3.3.
Romans 8.9, etc. 2 Cor. 13.5. And except the Spirit of God's Grace kill Sin in
us, as in him, Christ's Death at Jerusalem will do us but little good; read
Romans 6.4, 5, 8. and 8.6, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 15.31. Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 2.5. Phil.
3.10. Col. 2.13. And as for Christ's Resurrection and Ascension without us,
this will do us no good, unless in the Power of the same Spirit we be raised
with him, to sit down in Heavenly Places together with Christ Jesus; read Romans
6.4, 8, 11. 1 Cor. 6.14. Ephesians. 2.6. Col. 2.12. and 3.1.

I also know and declare, That in the true Christ, are two Natures united in
one Person.

First, As he was the Son of God from all Eternity, and is the Birth of God in
all the Sanctified, He is God blessed for ever.

Secondly, As he was the Son of Man, born of Humane Nature, and of a Reasonable
Soul, subsisting as such, he could do nothing of himself, and denied himself,
and his own Will, and was compassed about with many Infirmities, like unto
other Men, Sin only excepted; read John 5.30. Matthew. 26.39. Heb. 5.2.

As he was the Son of Man, he was but a Creature, having beginning of Days and
end of Life. But as he was the Son of God, he was Alpha and Omega, without
beginning of Days, and end of Life, God's Everlasting Covenant of Light and
Life to the World.

As he was the Son of Man, filled with the Holy Ghost, he had a Body prepared
to do the Will of God here on Earth, as it is in Heaven, (as all that are born
of God have); not only as our Example, but for our Consolation, and Salvation;
and thus it is with all that are born of the Spirit; read 2 Cor. 1.5, 6, 7.
John 13.15. Phil. 3.15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 4.12. James 5.10. 1 Pet. 1.21. So you
see it is the Birth of the Spirit (in all the Sanctified) and not the Humane
Nature, that is the Savior: Not what Jesus did (as he was the Son of Man) at
Jerusalem, in his own Person only, but what he did, and for ever does, in the
Saints, as he was, is, and for ever shall be, one and the same, God's only
begotten Son, the Word in the Heart, his Everlasting Covenant of Light and Life
to Jew and Gentile; and so he is God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth.
Allelujah. Moreover, I would you might understand, That all born of the Spirit,
are born of God, and have the mind and Spirit in them that was in Christ Jesus;
and do the same Works, and greater Works; When (as Dr. Tailor says) Christ is
risen in them: for, are they not the Light of the World, and Salt of the Earth?
walk as Christ walked, and are in this World, as he is in Heaven? read Genesis
5.24. 2 Cor. 6.16. Gal. 5.16. Col. 2.6. 1 John 2.6. 1 Cor. 2.16. Phil. 2.5.
Matthew. 5.14. Gal. 2.20. 1 John 4.17. Mark 16.17, 18. John 14.12. Rev. 1.5, 6.

As Christ by the Spirit of the Father was filled with the Holy Ghost, in which
Spirit the fullness of the Godhead does dwell bodily, of whose fullness is given
to all the Sanctified, Grace for Grace; And as they receive the Spirit of Grace
freely, so they dispense the Word and Spirit of Grace freely: for did not Paul
give the Spirit? read Acts 19.3, to 7. And was not that the Spirit Timothy
received, by the laying on of his hands, called, The Gift of God? 2 Timothy 1.6.
And did not he that ministered the Spirit to the Galatians, give the Spirit to
them? read Gal. 3.5. And did not Paul, by virtue and power of the Spirit's
Administration, convert Thousands, turning them from Darkness to Light, and
from the Power of Satan to the Power of God? And was it not by the virtue of
the same Power of the Spirit, that Peter converted, at one Sermon, about Five
thousand? And was it not the Power of the same Spirit in Christ Jesus, in the
Apostles and their Followers, and in Moses and Aaron, and in all the Prophets
and Men of God, that wrought and did all the Wonders and Miracles ever since
the World began?

And this I do further declare to all the World, as my Opinion, That whosoever
is not born of this Spirit, and led by this Spirit of God, is no true
Christian, nor Minister of Christ; nor ever can profit the People, or convert
Souls to God. I know that a Man void of the Spirit, may, through the Light of
Reason, in the Letter, beget and bring Men into a Sect, and into an Opinion, so
strong, that he may come to die for it, (as we see in the Quakers and Papists,
etc.) yet for the sake of Christ, and his Leadings, will not forsake their
Lusts, nor their own Self-Wills; This is (as Dr. Tailor says) false Martyrdom.

Also I know you Three are all One in many other Opinions; You agree with
Calvin, viz. That the Scriptures are the Word of God, and a sufficient Rule of
Life to measure and try Doctrines and Spirits by, under the Gospel, and the
only Judge of Controversies.

And, as is printed before the Bible, with Marginal Notes, Here is the Spring
where Waters flow, to quench the heat of Sin, etc. Here is the Bread that feeds
the Life, that Death cannot assail, etc. The Fortress of our Faith is here, and
Shield of our Defense, etc. Whereas in truth the Scriptures (without the
Spirit) are but a dead Letter put in the place of Christ, who is the only true
Bread and Water of Life. But instead of Christ in us, the New Creature, the
Word in the Heart, and only Rule of Life, that ends all Controversies, and
leads into Love and Union, even all that walk therein, you place the Dead
Letter, which increases, but never ends Strife and Controversies amongst
Christians. And indeed how can it be, that the Scriptures should ever end
Controversies, seeing there are so many false Copies, and every one differing
from each other, that no Man knows the True? nor do I think there is any
without Error, nor any so false, but that there is much Truth in it.

St. Hierom says, That the Hebrew and Greek Copies, were much perverted by
Jews and Heretics; so that he rather chose the Vulgar Latin, (though many
Faults were committed by Writers in that also); which having amended, he laid
aside all other Latin Versions, which, he says (in his Time) were almost
innumerable. So that I see, in those Primitive Times, there were no True Copies
to be found; and that if you make the Written Scriptures your full Rule, it
will be but a crooked one, such as every Man, by his private Interpretation,
makes as a Nose of Wax to turn every way; and putting that Authority upon the
Scriptures, by making them the Rule of Christian Life, and End of
Controversies, is so far from working this End, that it has broched more
Heresies and false Opinions, than ever were known in the World before these
last and perilous Times. And there can be no recovery out of this Gulf of
Misery, but as Men come to forsake this great Idol the Letter, and putting no
more stress and confidence in it, than in a Declaration of Truth, when first
written and uncorrupted; and that Men return to the Word of God, the Volumn of
God's Book, the Word in the Heart, which never can be corrupted nor changed,
the sure Word of Prophecy, which if a Man obey, will surely lead into Life
Eternal. Allelujah.

And this setting up the Letter above the Spirit, and Man by Carnal Force
making himself Judge thereof, has bin the cause of all the Innocent Blood shed
(upon the account of Religion) from Abel to this day.

Dr. Gell, a pious Man, and well read in the Oriental Tongues, has writ a Book
in Folio, printed Anno 1659, entitled, An Essay toward an amendment of the
last English Translation of the Bible; wherein many Faults are found, and
amended by him. And the Makers of the last Translation, say, in their Preface,
They had amended many thousand Words that were amiss in the former Translation.

Wherefore my Advice is, That all accounted Christians, do avoid vain Jangling
and Disputing about Religion, and the Letter, which eats as a Canker, and is as
a Pest in the Church, and destroys all true Religion, which consists in
brotherly Love and Kindness; which Love edifies, and is the Sum and Substance
both of Law and Gospel. Rather learn to judge and condemn your selves, than your
Brethren; this is the way to have Peace with God, and Unity and Amity one with
another, though of different Opinions and Persuasions. Allelujah.

Likewise with Calvin ye agree, That Predestination to Life and Death, depends
not on Man's Obedience, or Disobedience, but on God's Choice; and that God from
all Eternity elected a certain number to Salvation, and reprobated the residue
to Eternal Damnation.

Which Opinion I take to be greatly inconsistent with the Nature of God, and
most unprofitable to maintain as Doctrinal amongst Men; for God would have all
Men saved, by coming to the Knowledge of the Truth, and by obeying the same. To
which end our most gracious Lord God has so loved the World, as to send his
only begotten Son into the World, the Word in the Heart, that was in the
beginning with God, and is God, his Covenant of Light to the World, and his
Salvation to the ends of the Earth, to enlighten every one that comes into the
World, that all Men (of all Opinions and Religions) might believe in him (that
was before Abraham was); and by following and obeying him, who is the Truth in
every one, all might come to see their Souls redeemed out of Death, and so come
to enjoy Life Eternal, which Life is in his Son Immanuel. Allelujah.

Ye also believe with Calvin; That by Christ's outward Life and Sufferings in
his fleshly Testimony, God's Justice was satisfied for Sins; and Justification
completely wrought for the Elect, not only by forgiving sins past, but reputing
really just, whilst actually sinful.

I apprehend them more sound in the Faith, who believe that Christ cannot so
properly be said to be the Cause, as the Effect, of the Father's Love; for God
so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. And although such
are forgiven, who truly repent, (and that Remission is sealed by Christ's
Blood, the Sacrifice and Blood of Sprinkling on our Consciences) yet Men are
not made Righteous within, by any Imputation from another's Righteousness
without, whilst they are really unrighteous within themselves.

Ye also deny the Light, the Word in the Heart, to be Christ that shines in his
Spiritual Appearance in his People; which is certainly a great Error, and
contrary to Scripture, and the Saints Experience; read John 1.4, 9. and 12.46.
2 Cor. 4.4, 6. Isa. 42.6. and 49.6. and 51.4. John 3.19.

Ye also deny that Christ's Light can lead Men that obey it unto Salvation;
which also is contrary to Scripture, and the Saints Experience; read Job 29.3.
Psalm. 36.9. and 43.3. and 119.105. Joh. 8.12. and 12.36. Rev. 21.23.

Ye also deny the Spirit to be poured out in these Days, as in former Ages; or
that Men ought to wait for the Motions of it, to Preach, Pray, or praise God;
which is also contrary to the Scriptures, and the Saints Experience; read Joel
2.28, 29. Isa. 25.9. and 30.18. and 40.31. Acts 1.4. Luke 2.25. 2 Thessalonians. 3.5.

Thus far all Three agree in one, as concerning the main Points of your Faith
and Religion; but in some things Doctrinal, and concerning Discipline, and
other outward Observations, I know you disagree.

The Presbyterians Rule of Public Worship is, their Directory, put together by
their Synod, which sat 1644, and 45, gathered out of the Scriptures, and
imposed on the People of England by an Act then made. Which Worship, as it was
prescribed and imposed by Man, I query, Whether it be the Worship which God
requires, the which consists in the Spirit of Truth? or is it, think you, more
acceptable to God, than the former Service you threw out, to set up your own
devised Service in the place thereof? And in so doing, whether you did not more
aim at the Fleece, than the saving of Souls, I leave to the Witness of God to
determine in your selves?

And I pray give me liberty further to enquire, Whether the Nation in General
had any benefit by your change of Church Government? And whether Tithes were
not as acceptably retained by you, as by those you thrust out? Besides great
Augmentations given to Preachers by a Law for their Encouragement; and a Law
for treble Damages, from all who (though for Conscience sake) could not pay
the Tithes; and were you less troublesome to such, than those you ejected? or,
were you less persecutive? or, had you more humble, meek, charitable Spirits
than they? to which your own actings may speak and answer.

What Spirit was that which acted Calvin against Servetus? Hugo Grotius (a most
learned Man in all kind of Learning, both Humane and Divine) says, That
Michael Servetus, by the procurement of Calvin, was burnt alive at Geneva; and
for nothing more, than that he differed in some Opinions concerning Galvin's
rigid Predestination, and something concerning the Trinity. And did not this
Spirit of Calvin so act against Luther's Disciples, that they were twice
expelled the Palatinate? And how did this bitter Spirit act in the Synod at
Dort? Were not many learned, pious, and good Men condemned, and afterward
banished and expelled the Land? and all this for some few Opinions, (perhaps
more true than their own.) And was it not this Spirit in others which so
bitterly persecuted those Innocent People, called Quakers, whom they
Imprisoned, Banished, Scourged, Stigmatized, putting them to greater torture,
than if they had killed them outright? And was not this the same Spirit in
them, who, leaving Old England for Conscience Sake, went to New England, where
they persecuted their Innocent Brethren that differed from them in some small
Points, banishing them into the remotest Deserts, where they were murdered by
the Savage Indians? And did they not deal after the same manner with Mr. Samuel
Gorton, Mr. Roger Williams, and others, that went under the Name of
Antinomians, Seekers, Anabaptists, etc.

Lastly, To manifest your Spirit one and the same, from first to last; and to
show that you are no true Members of Christ's Church in this particular, not
being covered with his Spirit of Love to Brethren, and to Enemies, the only
mark of his Disciples; did not you lately hang and take away the lives of five
Innocent Quakers? and Banishing, Whipping, and cutting off Ears, etc. of many
others, who had not broken any just Law, either of God, or Man; only as the
Medes and Persians made a Law against Innocent Daniel and his Brethren; and as
did the Jews against Holy Jesus, who said, They had made a Law, and by that Law
he ought to die; even so did you make a Law against the Quakers, on purpose to
ensnare them, and to take away their Lives. Which Spirit of Persecution, for
Matters of Religion, is most certainly the Spirit of Antichrist, the Whore, and
false Prophet; which Spirit has no agreement in the least measure with Christ
and his Church. And did not you (as you came into Power) all three agree in
this Spirit, to persecute those that differed from you? and more especially
those that had Christ, the Word in the Heart, and preached Christ in the
Spirit, to be the G^ide, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, the Sanctification,
Redemption, and Salvation of God in all the Sanctified, even to the ends of the
Earth. Allelujah.

Although in many things you agree, yet in some small Matters you are divided,
and zealously persecute each other for those things wherein you differ. The
difference between the Presbyterian and the Independent, consists chiefly in
their National Church, and particular Gatherings, which assemble together by a
Covenant made amongst themselves, whereby they are admitted as Members; and
their Children only admitted to Baptism, under the Notion, of the Promise being
made to Believers and their Seed. In the Fundamentals of their Faith no
material difference.

The Anabaptist is distinguished from the Independent Gatherings, by the
difference of the Administration of Water Baptism; the former only admitting
such Subjects to that Ordinance, as are able to render a laudable Confession of
their Faith in God, and also of their holy and just Conversation amongst Men;
and by this Baptism they hold, That such Subjects are initiated into the Church
of Christ, and are from thence-forth esteemed Brethren, and not before. These
also are different from each other among themselves; about General Redemption,
Free Will, Original Sin, falling away totally from Grace, Predestination,
Election, and Reprobation; Herein they Dispute, Quarrel, and Fight each with
other, for and about such things as the Kingdom of God, and Salvation of Men,
are no ways concerned in; but Brotherly Love, the Image of God, and mark of a
true Christian, is utterly lost and defaced.

I have lately read a Book writ by Mr. Richard Baxter, entitled, The Cure of
Church-Divisions, the third Edition, printed 1670: Whose Spirit and Design
therein, I well approve of, and have unity and amity therewith. He is much
against that bitter rending, tearing, devouring Spirit that reigns amongst
Professors, and will not give the same liberty of Conscience to others in
Religious Matters, as they desire for themselves. Also, he says, There be some
seem wise and good themselves, by making others seem foolish and bad; and they
are all for Concord, but it is only on their narrow factious Terms; they are
for Peace, but it is not of the whole Street, but of their House alone; or not
of the whole City, but of their Street alone; He likes not those new-made
multiplied Articles of Religion; these Additions to Christianity, prescribed
and imposed on others: This proud Church Tyranny (says he) I doubt not, is the
great Cause of Schism in the World. Love is not an appearance of my Religion,
but my Religion it self; God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in
God, and God in him: Love is the fulfilling of the Law, the end of the Gospel;
the nature and mark of Christ's Disciples; the Divine Nature; the Sum of
Holiness to the Lord; the proper Note to know, what is the Man, and what his
State? and how far any of his other Acts are acceptable unto God? without
which, if we had all Knowledge and Belief, all Gifts of Utterance, and highest
Profession, we were but as sounding Brass, and as a tinkling Cymbal, etc.
Holiness and Love to God, are but two Names for one Thing. Love to God and to
Man, are like Soul and Body, that are separated no way but by death. Sin is
hardly known in its secret Root, till Men have tasted the bitterness of the
Fruit. In a word, I have long seen that envious Wisdom (whatever it pretends)
is not from Above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish; and that where envy
and strife is, (upon a Religious Account) there is Confusion, and every evil
Work. That which kills Love, kills all Grace and Holiness, and kills
Souls; that which quenches Love, quenches the Spirit, a thousand-fold more
than the restraining of our Gifts of Utterance does. That which banisheth Love,
banisheth God; that which is against Love, is against the Design of Christ in
our Redemption, and therefore may well be called Antichristian; the White Devil
is a Love-killer as well as the Black; he is as mortal an Enemy to Love, who
backbiteth another, and says he is profane, or he is an empty Formalist, or
he is a Lukewarm, temporizing, complying Man-pleaser, as he that says, he is a
peevish factious Hypocrite. Believe it, it is Apostasy to fall from Love, your
Souls die when Love dies. To preach without Love, to any that differ from your
Sect, O what a loathsome Sacrifice is it to the Lord of Love? When the Papists
had murdered so many hundred thousands of the Albigenses and Waldenses, who
would have thought but that they had done their Work? When the French Massacre
had murdered thirty or forty thousand, and dispatched the Leaders of the
Protestant Party, who would have thought that they had but strengthened them?
When the Duke d' Alva had done so much to drown the Belgic Protestants in
Blood, he little thought he was but fortifying them. Queen Mary's Bishops,
little thought that their English Bonefires were but to light Men to see the
mischief and badness of their Cause; and like firing of a Beacon, to call the
Land to take them for the Enemies of Mankind. When the Irish had murdered two
hundred thousand, they little thought that they had but excited the Survivery
to a terrible Revenge. I will come no nearer, but you may easily do it your
selves; If we bite and devour one another, we shall be destroyed one of
another, etc.

These and the like faithful and true Sayings the Book is full of, which are
well worth the reading, with due Consideration had thereon. And as Mr. Baxter
intimates, That he which suffers for his Religion, shows he has the better
Religion than those that cause Sufferings: And our patient Martyrdom and
Suffering by them, may tend at last to open their Eyes, and turn their Hearts,
and save their Souls; for the Blood of Martyrs has ever bin the Seed of the
Church; which Seed has ever increased the number of the Sufferers.

Many other good Instructions, and Directions (both to Ministers and People)
has he in this Book set forth, for uniting (in Love and Amity) different
Persuasions, into one Principle of Love, well worth the taking notice of.

And now, my dear Brethren, as I am a Priest unto God, by having Christ Jesus,
the Eternal Spirit of Truth, in me, I am thereby enabled to hold forth an
Exhortation to all of you, which (in the Bowels of the extensive Love of God
toward you) I earnestly pray you may receive. I know there is amongst you, a
Worthy, Righteous, and Sober People, who I can bear you record, have a Zeal of
God, according to the several Administrations of your outward Forms and
Worships whereby you are distinguished: Nevertheless I have a few things
against you; namely, That you have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ amongst
you, with respect of particular Persons, outward Forms, and carnal
Observations. Hence arise all those Strifes and Contentions, those bitter
Revilings, and evil Censures, that have abounded amongst you, both toward each
other in your divided Forms, and also toward all others that are not concerned
with you, as under your distinct Seize. But I testify and declare to you,
and to the whole World, That if any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature; and
as many as walk according to this Rule of the New Creature, Peace be upon them,
as upon the Israel of God; and in every Nation, Sect, Form, and Opinion, He
that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. It Is neither
here nor there; in this, nor that, neither in the Mountains of Form and Worship
that you have raised to your selves, nor at Jerusalem that God will be now
worshipped; but every where in Spirit and in Truth, is the Worship that he
accepts.

Give therefore the Spirit of God his due Scope and Latitude, to blow where,
when, and how it lists in every Man. It Is the great Controversy that God has
with the World at this day, That he alone may reign in the Consciences of Men,
by the just Measure of his own Light in every one: And till this Royal
Prerogative be settled upon Him, there will never be Peace on the Earth, but Men
shall rend, tear, and devour one another; and those that lead into Captivity,
must themselves go into Captivity: herein will the Patience, Love, and Charity
of the Saints be exercised and increased. Allelujah. Wherefore let your
Moderation be known to all Men; the Lord is at hand. Be not (O be not) found
smiting your fellow Servants in the day of his Appearance! The Spirit of God
(which has sealed you to the day of Redemption) is a tender Spirit, O do not
grieve it in your selves, nor endeavor to quench it in others. If thus you can
come forth amongst Men, you shall be a blessing in your Generation, a Light to
them that sit in darkness, and a Refreshment to the Mourners of Zion, who
languish in the Breaches and Divisions that have bin made upon her Inhabitants.
In which Universal Spirit of Love to Truth and Righteousness, I Rest, a Friend
to you, and the Souls of all Men, in any Sect or Opinion of Religion
whatsoever, whilst I am, and when I am no more,

Robert Rich.

An Epistle for the most pure Amity and Unity in the Spirit of Life and Love of
God, in all sincere-hearted Souls amongst the People called QUAKERS. And as to
them, so unto all, or any other Sort or Sect of People that own and follow the
Light of Christ Jesus, wherewith every one is enlightened, ROBERT RICH sends
Greeting in our Lord God Everlasting. Allelujah.
IN the Year 1666, feeling the Babe of Grace (the Word in the Heart) to wax
strong in the Love of God shed abroad in my Heart, I sent to the Poor of your
People Thirty pounds; which after some of your Leaders had received, (to wit,
John Bolton, Gerad Roberts, and Amos Stoddard) and given under their hands
accordingly, 'twas denied to be received; and about a Year after returned to me
again, with many evil opprobrious Names; which makes me say, That I went to my
Own, but my Own would not receive me, but sold me into Egypt (by their many
false Reports.) And poor Joseph found no greater Enemies than his Brethren
were. Nevertheless the Lord my God did not forsake me, but found me out in the
Innocence wherewith he had clothed me, and appeared to me in all my straits,
and was my Strength, my Joy, and Crown of Glory; and at length brought me forth
of Prison to stand before Princes, assisting and carrying me with much Courage,
and through great Opposition, to bear and finish my Testimony to Christ in the
Saints. And being cast out from my Brethren, the Lord my God took me up, and
became my Teacher, under whose Teachings I felt more of the Love of God, and
increased more in knowledge of the Things of God, than when I sat under the
Teachings of Men; by whose Teachings I grew in Wisdom and in Stature, unto the
Measure of a perfect Man in Christ Jesus; then I came to know, that out of
Egypt God has called his Son, to whom he has given, not only the Heathen, but
the whole World for his Possession and Inheritance. In which Spirit of the Son,
I call to mind the sweet Union and Communion I had with the Quakers, when they
preached Christ the Light in every one that comes into the World, the Way to
God the Father of Lights; which Light sprang up so strongly in my Heart, that
(with St. Paul) it struck me down to the Ground, where I felt the Root of the
Matter in my Self, so that I needed no Man to teach me; but as the Unction,
that small grain of Mustard Seed grew to a great Tree, on whose body did hang
all my Sins, my Weaknesses, and Infirmities; which Seed of the Kingdom begot in
me a new Heart, and placed within me a right Spirit, the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, filled with the Love of God. Allelujah.

In the day when the People called Quakers were small in their own Eyes, I
dearly loved them; who did not only preach Christ the Truth and Light in every
one, but with much boldness and courage, and through great Persecutions,
defended the same, living in much Love and Amity one with another, (which to me
was a most lovely sight to see); till there came to be a difference between J.
N. and George Fox; then G. F. by reason of his Enmity and Self-exaltation,
envied and persecuted J. N. and begat a most bitter wrathful Spirit in all his
Friends against J. N. and all that stood by him in his Sufferings. Thus G. F.
was the Father that begat all those Divisions, Rendings, and Tearings that were
then amongst the Quakers, (and since to this very day); which with great
violence lasted till J. N. took all the blame on himself, and made himself of
no reputation, who was circumcised in Heart and Soul; in which Circumcision he
lived and died, a true Israelite indeed.

But G. F. and his Party continued acting in another manner of Spirit; for I
have seen those pull, hale, and carry out of their Synagogue at the Bull and
Mouth, one Richard Freeman; and the chief in this work was John Bolton, with
diverse others. At this time I perfectly saw, that God had divided in Jacob, and
scattered in Israel; and that a separation was making betwixt the Precious and
the Vile, amongst the Quakers.

And was it not the same bitter persecuting Spirit in G. F. that writ against
J. Perrot's Book, called Unity and Amity? For did not G. F. say, This Book was
writ with Cain 's Spirit? Crying against his Sottishness and Ignorance,
affirming, That a Cloud had compassed him, that he went in the way of the false
Prophets, that his Spirit would give up the Children of God to Persecution.
Further alleging, That J. P. is one of Ham's Stock, and that his gross Lies
proceeded from a devilish hellish Spirit, and that none that are in the least
Truth will believe him; and that he is a Liar and a Deceiver. And the great
Offense G. F. takes at this Book, is, that J. P. owns the Spirit of God's Grace
and Light, to be in Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Seekers, and
others; also, that he has Unity and Amity with all that walk therein; the
which G. F. denying, and calling it a Lie, etc. plainly shows, he is an Enemy
to all that will not bow down to him, and call him Master, or Father of their
Spirits; and that he is turned from the Faith once delivered to the Saints; and
that he is removed to another Gospel than what at first himself had preached;
and also writ against J. P. that he was like a Dog, snarling and biting such as
are in the Life of Truth, and so like a Dog thinks he will die. This and much
more has G. F. writ against J. P. pursuing and hunting him (as Saul did David)
like a Partridg on the Mountains, from Country to Country, from Region to
Region, and from City to City, whithersoever he went, these venomous Arrows
were shot against him.

At this time I perfectly saw a Star fall from Heaven, called Wormwood, or the
Dragon's Tail, with which he drew to the Ground a third part of the Stars of
Heaven; then I saw a War in Heaven, (a Religious War) the Dragon against the
Lamb; Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon and his Angels. Which
bitter Spirit of the Dragon, did write or indite John Bolton's Book, printed
1670, entitled, Judas and his Treachery, etc. In which Book, he says, The
thirty pounds Robert Rich sent to the Poor amongst the Quakers, was the price
of Blood, and Judas his Treachery; That Robert Rich is a Vagabond on the Earth,
one that has not an Habitation in the Living God; That he is a Contender
against God's Blessed and Holy Way, the Way of Life, with whom Robert Bacon is
joined; That they were Idolaters, and judged them to be the Whorish Spirit, and
that the Mystery of Iniquity, in R. R. and R. B. was brought forth to open
view. And all along his Book is full of the like Expressions, not only against
R. R. and R. B. but the same Railing Accusations are also against Innocent J.
N. and J. P. and for no Evil said or done against any one of them, as in their
own Consciences they well know. To all which Railing Accusations, R. R. says,
The Lord rebuke thee.

About the same time another Book was writ against R. R. and R. B. by Ger.
Roberts, Geo. Whitehead, and E. H. entitled, Impudency and Ranterism rebuked;
in which they call the Spirit of R. R. which sent thirty pounds to their Poor,
A drunken ranting Spirit, a fained Love; and the Gift they call Cain's
Sacrifice, Balack's Reward, and Balaam's Wages, Judas's Oblation, and a
Superstitious Idolatrous Gift. Also that R. R. is a wandering Star, a raging
Wave of the Sea; that he is a Sow wallowing in the Mire, a Dog casting up his
Vomit; that he is that Fool, which says in his Heart there is no God; and bray
a Fool in a Mortar, and he will never be the wiser; and that this folly has
bin with him ever since the days of J.N. All this, and much more, for naught
else than for R. R. his Gift to the Poor of their People. Which Language, let
G. F. and his Friends well consider whether it proceeded from the Spirit of the
Lamb that loves Enemies, or from the Dragon that casts his Floods after the
Man-Child to devour him, who is the only begotten of God in the Saints, he must
rule and reign, though G. F. and his Men of War never so much rave and rage? I
say, that the only begotten of God, by the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost in
the Saints, the Virgin Daughter of Sion, whose Name is Immanuel, must surely
rule and reign. Even so, Amen. Allelujah.

What had you against J. N. more than that God had taken away his Judgment from
him, and then led him into the Wilderness, to be tried and tempted by G. F. and
others, and to suffer by that Spirit that then ruled in the Children of
Disobedience, who in all meekness and patience did bear and suffer the enmity
and cruelty of all his Persecutors as a good Example?

And what had you against R. R. more than that he stood by J. N. in his
Sufferings, and for pulling off his Hat at the Command of the Lord, as a sign
of Love to them that understood that sign better, than if he had saluted after
your mode and fashion in giving the Hand: Also that he pulled off his Hat,
which was to testify that the Hat might be made an Idol, both in keeping it on,
and in pulling it off.

And what had you against J. P. more than for owning the Light of Christ in
Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists, Seekers, and others, even in all that
believed in it, and followed it? And is not the Light of Christ in every one,
the Ensign, to gather together all of every Sect and Nation, those that follow
it, into Unity with the Lord, and Amity one with another? And why was G. F. so
bitter against J.P. for declaring, that no such beggarly Element as the Hat off
or on, is any part of God's Worship? And if G. F. must be obeyed in these
things, rather than the Light of Christ in our selves; whether then G. F. and
his prescribed and imposed Forms, be not the greatest Idol that ever was set up
by a Professing People? let the Witness of God in every one be Judge.

I have lately read a Manuscript, subscribed George Fox, writ to all that would
know what those People called Quakers are, and showing their Experiences which
they have seen, and gone through, to Priests and Professors: Which Paper
contains fifty Paragraphs.

In the first and second G. F. says, We thought it a hard thing for Cain to
kill Righteous Abel; but when we looked within our selves, we saw that envious
wrathful Man that slew every appearance of God within, and ready to slay the
Righteous without. Then G. F. goes on, speaks against Adam's Fall, and against
Joseph's Brethren, for selling of him into Egypt, etc. and tells Priests and
Professors, That if they look within, they shall find this Nature in
themselves. And I tell G. F. that he need not go so far to seek this evil
Nature in Priests and Professors. Let him look but within himself, and consider
his own Actings against his Innocent Brethren, and he will find Cain's Nature
there, and Cain's Sin to lie at his own Door, and will know him that sold
Joseph into Egypt, etc. And this Spirit was the Cause of G. F's own Fall, who
was once an Angel of Light, and had a place in Heaven, but is fallen from
thence like Lightning, and is now become an Angel of the Bottomless Pit, where
he rules and governs over all that have not their Names written in the Lambs
Book of Life, continuing their forms of Godliness, their long Preachings, and
long Prayers from the Comprehension of Truth, but not with the Life and Power
thereof; thus ye suffer that Woman Jezebel, which calls her self a Prophetess,
(by good Words and fair Speeches) to seduce and deceive the Innocent amongst
you, keeping them always learning, but can never come to the Knowledge of the
Truth as it is in Jesus, unless they cease from man's Teachings, and come to
the Teachings of God in themselves, which alone truly teaches the way to Life
and Salvation. Allelujah.

I have also read a Testimony from the Brethren, met at London the third Month
1666, subscribed by eleven of your Ministry. Also from a Meeting at Bristol,
the 27th day of the 7th Month 1669, subscribed by 36 Persons. Also from a
Meeting at Ellis Hooks, the 12th of the 4th Month 1677, against John Wilkinson
and John Story, subscribed by 66 of your Ministers. All which in general
contain, very bitter Censures, and high Condemnations against many of your own
People, who have divided from the Body of Friends, (so called by your selves)
wherein you testify, That those engaged in the Spirit of Separation, ought not
to have any Rule or Dominion in the Church of God, whereof the Holy Spirit that
was poured forth upon you, (as you say) has made you Overseers. But your
Fruits will make you more manifest than your Words. Also, That all that are
joined to that Spirit of Separation, who stand not in Unity with your Ministry,
their Judgments ought not to be regarded amongst Friends. And further, You
declare your selves the Witnesses and Ambassadors of the Unchangeable Truth,
and the Elders of the Church of God, who of right (having kept your Habitations
in the Truth) ought to judge of things which differ; and this your Judgment to
stand good and valid amongst Friends against all that oppose it. Also, that if
any pretending to be of your Membership, will not admit to be tried, in case of
Controversy, by the Elders and Members of this your Body, but oppose it, (as
the Judgment of Man) you then testify in the Name of the Lord against them,
that he or she, with all those that countenance these Refusers, are to be
rejected, as joined in one with Infidels and Heathens. These (together with G.
F's Paper in vindication of Prescriptions, dated the 4th Month 1678) imposing
upon the Consciences of Men; as also the particular Invectives against John
Wilkinson and John Story, both importing the same Spirit of Dominion and Rule
over the Conscience, (which is the proper Heritage of God) I have both seen,
well-weighed, and considered; and while I contemplate your present State, by
comparing it with the Principles with which you were first inspired, I cannot
but take up that Lamentation concerning you, which the Prophet of old did
concerning Israel, How is the Mighty fallen? How is the Gold become dim? the
fine Gold, how is it changed? Even the Sea Monsters draw out the Breasts, and
give suck to their young Ones, but the Daughters of my People are become cruel,
like the Ostrich in the Wilderness. O let it be timely considered by you, how
degenerate you are grown from that Love, Meekness, and Simplicity to which you
at first pretended. Are not you the Men that have in your Doctrine exalted the
Measure of God in all Men, as the only Guide and Director, in that to abide,
and by it to be led, and not by any outward Prescriptions or Impositions
whatsoever? And are not you the Men that now not only impose and prescribe on
others, but also condemn and censure your Innocent Brethren as Heathens and
Infidels, because in Conscience they cannot subject themselves under the Yoke
of your Prescriptions? Are you so presumptuous, as to conclude all knowledge and
discerning in the Things of God, and all Spiritual Judgment is given into your
Hands, that you usurp the Keys of the Kingdom, and will let none in, but those
who stand in conformity to your carnal and literal Impositions? Is G. F. and
the Body of his Friends, of greater Authority than Peter, (who was an Elder and
Pillar of the Church?) whom nevertheless Paul withstood, because he did not
walk uprightly according to the Truth of the Gospel, but endeavored to compel
the Gentiles (who had their Law within themselves) to live after the manner and
form of the Jews, whose Law stood much in outward Observation from the Letter,
as does G. F's Comely Order. And are G. F. and his Friends, so bold and daring,
as to condemn the Generation of the Just that went before you in other past
Ages, under their various Dispensations, (and all those Worthies in our present
Time, who cannot own your Practices, or submit to your Precepts) by concluding
them none of the Body of Christ, because noneof your Membership? Is the Body of
Christ now shrunk and narrow'd into G. F's Tribe of Members and Ministry? are
these the Lips only that preserve Knowledge? are you the only Men that fear God
and work Righteousness? and must we forsake the inward Testimony, to ask the
Law from your Mouths? Can any thing be more prodigious and destructive to the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus than this Doctrine? or present it self with
greater horror and amazement to the minds of all rational and sober Men, and
all that truly fear God, than the injunction of a necessary submission to G. F.
and his Tribe of Proselytes, under the penalty of being no otherwise esteemed
than Heathens and Infidels? Do not you in these things apparently cloth your
selves with the Livery and Character of Him who opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or worshipped, by creating a Dominion over your
Brethren, and the movings of God in them, and claiming a Power to judge of all
Differences, prescribing Rules and Orders, and putting Yokes upon the Necks of
your Disciples, to the stifling of their Consciences, wounding their Peace, and
destroying that Liberty wherewith Christ has made them free? If this be the
Spirit which you at present stand in, (as your several forementioned Papers do
plainly import) I dare boldly challenge all that have gone before you, from the
Pope himself downward, to all Sects and Opinions extant in the World, to
produce, if they can, a greater Instance of swelling Sovereignty over the Minds
and Consciences of Men, than you have erected. And certainly had you a Secular
Power but framed and fitted to your Rule, Ecclesiastical Supremacy, the World
would soon feel, that the Finger of your Church Censures, would bear an equal
weight (at least) with the Loins of those Persecutors which have bin your
Predecessors. Now (all this considered) can you in soberness conceive that this
frame of Spirit (in that absolute Dominion which you claim to your selves over
all others) will render you the Healers of our Breaches, and the Restorers of
our Paths of Peace? Can you think that this Arbitrary and Haughty Government,
will invite the Nations and Languages of all Sects and Opinions, to lay hold on
your Skirts, which desire to be led by you, because the Lord is with you? Or do
they not rather with dread and horror behold you, while you so heavily impose
upon others in such Circumstances and Indifferencies, wherein the Kingdom of
God does not consist, and make those Rules and Prescriptions of equal value
with Divine Institutions? Witness the Hat, etc. the outward Garb imposed upon
your Proselytes: Your Set-times when to begin, and when to end your Religious
Exercises (notwithstanding your pretense of the immediate guidance of the
Spirit): Your manner of greeting one another, with many things of the like
Nature. To all which an exact conformity is required, upon the penalty of a
Censure from G. F. and his Eldership.

Now, dear Friends, can you (in the cool of the Day of God upon your Spirits)
believe that this violent and rigid sort of Practice, will render your Feet
beautiful upon the Mountains? or will attract the Hearts of any wise or
ingenuous People toward you? No surely, your experience may otherwise inform
you, that since this violence (of Esau against his Brother Jacob) has appeared
amongst you, the Curse of Babylon has overtaken you, ( Isa. 47.9, to the end)
even the loss of Children and Widowhood, which will certainly come upon you in
their perfection, as the Witness of God arises amongst those that you have so
heavily yoked and burdened with your own invented Prescriptions.

I have done with you, when I have told you, That the Dispensations in which
God administers Himself to the World at this day, do most naturally call for a
more sober, moderate, tender, and loving Spirit amongst Christians, than this
wherein you are exercised. You cannot but observe how the Lord of Hosts is
pleading with the World in the dreadful Manifestations of his Power, (by
Plague, Fire, Sword, etc.) how He turns the Earth up-side down, and makes it
reel to and fro like a Drunkard; and the Foundations of the World are out of
Course, divided and broken, both in their Civil Policies, and Religious
Practices. Fear, the Pit and a Snare, have laid hold on the Inhabitants of the
Earth, there is no Establishment in their Paths, and the way of Peace they know
not: Yea, this is the day of Jacob's Troubles, and for the Divisions of Reuben,
there are great searchings of Heart; God is now pleading in Judgment with the
People that have bin called by his Name, searching Jerusalem with Candles, (
Zeph. 1.12, etc.) and Judgment is already begun at the house of God; He is
about to judge the Spiritual Pride and Exaltation, the Cruelty and Oppression,
the Hypocrisy and Formality that has mingled it self with all the fair and
beautiful Professions of those that have bin called Christians. And what will
you say (my Friends) if in Israel's Skirts be found the Blood of the Souls of
the poor Innocent? ( Jer. 2.34, etc.) Now if this be the proper Work of the
Almighty at this day (as certainly all that are not either blinded with Carnal
Interest, or lulled into a formal Security, must needs acknowledge); Can you yet
be so vainly confident, as to persuade your selves that nothing of this Evil
shall come near your Borders, whilst the Arrows of God's Judgments fly so thick
in the World, and stick so deep in the Hearts and sides of all, both Civil and
Religious Interests? Are you, and your Imposing Tribe, the only Men that must
escape, when the whole World is to be set on Fire, yea, the very Heavens of
Professors are to be burnt up, and nothing to be left alive in us, but what can
lie down in those Flames? Is there nothing, think ye, in or amongst your People
that is for Judgment? Or, is this a time for you to build (and raise a Name to
your selves) when God is destroying? to contend for outward Rule and Dominion
over others, when God is pleading his own Royal Prerogative? to sit in judgment
over the Consciences of your Brethren, when the Judge stands at the Door? Or are
ye so regardless of the prints and footsteps of the Almighty in his present
Providence, that ye say in your Hearts, with that Evil Servant, The Lord
delays his coming? and fall to smiting your fellow Servants with the Tongue and
Fist of Wickedness, wounding and reproaching them with your bitter and severe
Censures, thinking (with the evil Husbandman) therewith to kill and slay the
Heir, the Seed of God in Man, that must rule and reign? Surely (my Friends) the
tempestuous Storms of Wrath and Indignation that you see falling upon the
World, do earnestly call for a more mild and sober Spirit amongst you than
this: Let therefore your Moderation be known to all Men; the Lord is at hand.
If you would be a blessing to the World in your Generation, learn first to judge
and condemn your selves: Cast off your Judging, Censuring, and Imposing Spirit,
and give the Witness of God in every one its just Right, its due Scope and
Latitude, and usurp not Authority over it: Take not upon you to be Lords over
God's Heritage; let the Bowels of your Love and Tenderness be drawn out and
extended toward the measure of God in all Men of every Religion, in
forbearance and forgiveness to the whole World; follow Peace in the Spirit of
Love with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see God. Give
Christ his Prerogative in Spirituals, He must and will have it; Give Caesar his
due in Temporals, who may of undoubted right challeng it. Thus if you can
commend your selves to God and the World, ye shall be the Joy of this
Generation; all good Men will be drawn out in an earnest imitation of your
Purity, while the violent and wicked shall stand mute, and be struck dumb at
your modest Patience and Meekness; you shall never want either inward Peace, or
outward Freedom, but ye shall enter into Peace and Rest in your Beds, each one
walking in his Uprightness. This (my dear Friends) is the Testimony in which I
long to meet you, and which will justly provoke the hearty embraces of

Your true Friend in Love to serve you, R. R.

To the Birth of God in all the Sanctified, the Church of the Firstborn, whose
Names are written in Heaven; who are born again, not of the Will of the Flesh,
but of God's Holy Spirit: You to whom is given the White Stone, and the New
Name, that none knows but he that has it, who as living Stones are laid in the
Walls (not of the Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her Children,
but) of the New Jerusalem that is Above, (in the Heart and Throne of God) which
is Free, and is the Mother of us all. To you, however you are divided, or
wherever ye are lodged, and held in the Clifts of the Rocks, in Dens and
Caves of the Earth, or secret places of the Stars, under all your divided
Tribes, ROBERT RICH sends Greeting in our Lord God Everlasting. Allelujah.
Dear Brethren,
BEing moved in my Spirit, in the Year 1666, to salute the Seed of God, the
Seed of the Promise in all Men, and in particular the Seven Churches of
Christendom; namely, the Roman; the Episcopal Protestant; the Presbyterian; the
Independent; the Baptist; the Quaker; and the Church of the Firstborn; to each
of them I gave Thirty pounds, to be distributed amongst the Poor of their
People, as a sign of my dear Love to the Seed of God in all, which I saw lay
crucified, dead, and buried in some, and in others risen and reigning into Life
that is Eternal. That which principally moved me to this general Salutation,
was, the sad and serious apprehension of the Straits and Limits by which I saw
the Seed of God held in Bondage, and these several sorts of Professors to value
themselves, and also condemn one another, in reference to those Modes and
Methods of Worship and Obedience, in which they are divided and distinguished.
My Salutation intended a cheek to this unkind severity amongst them; and
according to the inward Testimony from God upon my Spirit (if possible) to let
them understand, that our gracious God is no respecter of Persons, Sects, or
Opinions, but of every Nation, those that fear God and work Righteousness, are
accepted of him; and that all those that walk in the Light of the Lord,
wherewith he has enlightened them, are saved. Allelujah.

In the Heavenly Revelation of this Blessed Vision, wherein I felt and found my
self in a through Reconcilement to all Sorts and Sects of Men, I have begun,
and now finished my Epistles to these Seven States of Christians, which I
recommend to the Children of Light, to read and to consider what the Spirit
says to the Churches. And because in the Travels of this Testimony upon the
Soul, I have met with several Celestial Pilgrims journying toward Sion, with
their Faces thitherward, by whose sprinklings, in many of their Books and
Papers, I have bin often refreshed and comforted: I cannot but commend, both
their Names and Labors, to the sober Enquirers after Truth; as well knowing,
that though these Witnesses are dead and gone, yet their Spirits and Testimony
remain, and still speak to us. At this time I read many Books writ by the
Divine Spirit, in which I took great delight, some few whereof I find freedom
to expatiate on.

First, Cebes the Theban Philosopher, his Table writ in Greek, (since
translated into English) who lived Anno Mundi 3553; which Table was hung up in
the Temple of Saturn. This Table consisted of three Parks or Enclosures; at the
Gate of the first stood the shape of an Old Man, called Life's Genius,
(afterward True Instruction) which I understand by interpretation, to
represent the Light and Grace of God, which appears to and in every one. This
Light, or Life's Genius, taught and instructed all how they should lead their
Lives, according to those Rules he directed, both to avoid temptations to Vice,
and to embrace all those Divine Virtues that lead to Beatitude.

I have read the Imitation of Christ, writ by Thomas of Kempis. Also Cardinal
Cusanus, his first, second, and third Rule of Perfection, and his Idiot; with
others of the like Divine Nature, all tending to a Holy Life, by virtue of
Christ's Holy Spirit in us, the only way to Life and Salvation. Allelujah.

I have also read many Divine Works writ by H. N. Jacob Behm, John Saltmarsh,
Dr. Everard, William Sedgwick, William Erbery, Dr. Gill, Dr. Tailor, with
others that were inspired of God, and spoke of the second Coming of Chrit in
the Sanctified, and of that blessed Day which should attend his Appearance.
Allelujah.

I have also read, with much delight, two Books writ by J. N. called, Love to
the Lost, and, A Salutation to the Seed of God in all.

Also one small Book writ by John Perrot, entitled, An Epistle for the most
pure Amity and Unity in the Spirit and Life of God, to all sincere-hearted
Souls.

I have likewise lately read some Prophecies and Predictions of that Holy
Learned Man James Usher, Lord Archbishop of Armagh; who through Inspiration of
God's Spirit, spoke of many things which long after came to pass: that which is
to me most remarkable in that Sheet of Paper is, that he being entreated to
write in brief of Justification and Sanctification, desired he might be
excused; notwithstanding the Person soliciting, through importunity, obtained a
promise: A while after his Promise being claimed, he replied, He had not writ,
yet could not charge himself with breach of Promise, for (said he) I did begin
to write, but when I came to write of Sanctification, that is, of the New
Creature which God forms by his Spirit in every Soul which he does truly
regenerate, I found so little wrought of it in my self, that I could speak of
it, only as a Parrot by rote, without knowledge and understanding, and therefore
durst not proceed any further upon it. Adding, I must tell you, we do not well
understand what Sanctification and the New Birth is; It is no less than for a
Man to be brought to an entire Resignation of his own Will to the Will of God,
and to live in the offering up of his Soul continually in the flames of Love,
as a holy burnt Offering to Christ. And how little (says he) are many of those
that profess Christianity, experimentally acquainted with this Work of
Regeneration in their Souls? Moreover, he desires his Friend to look he be not
found a Worshipper in the outward Court; which outward Court (says he) is the
formal Christian, whose Religion lies in performing the outside Duties of
Christianity, without having an inward Life and Power of Faith and Love uniting
them to Christ; and these God will leave to be trodden down and swept away by
the Gentiles, the Profane that call themselves Christians, but are the
Synagogue of Satan. The Worshippers within the Temple, and before the Altar,
are those that do worship God in Spirit and in Truth, whose Souls are made his
Temples, and he is honored and adored in the most inward Thoughts of their
Hearts; and they Sacrifice their Lusts and vile Affections, yea, and their own
Wills to him, and these God will hide in the hollow of his Hand, and under the
shadow of his Wings, and shall be preserved as a Seed, to partake of that Glory
which shall immediately follow.

I have also lately read two Treatises writ by Sir Henry Vane; First, An
Epistle General to the Mystical Body of Christ on Earth, the Church Universal
in Babylon. The second, The Face of the Times. Wherein he well discovers the
Rise, Progress, and Issue, of the Enmity and Contest between the Seed of the
Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent. He says, That till the Seventh Trump
sound, 1666, the Woman's Seed must suffer; afterward the Seed of the Woman
being risen with Christ, must reign with him; and then the Head of the Serpent
should be bruised. He speaks most excellently of the first and second
Covenant, and of a single and double Portion of the Spirit, of Regeneration and
Restoration into the first Estate in Paradise, which may fall; also of the New
Creation, or Second Birth, (the Seed of God in Man) which endures, and never
will, nor ever can fall. Hallelujah.

He says, The Quakers Principle is, To restore out of the Fall into the first
State, who though they are Angels, yet may fall. He shows how Angels fell, who
through pride oppose all higher Lights than themselves, and that such fallen
Angels become the greatest Enemies to the Birth of Christ in the Saints; which
Spirit is the great Antichrist, the Old Serpent, the Devil, that is to be cast
into the Bottomless-Pit, with all his Angels; who outwardly appear as Angels of
Light, but inwardly they devour the Innocent. This I have seen to be a Truth,
in the bitter contests betwixt G. F. and his Angels, and the self-denying,
humble, meek Spirit that was in J. N. and J. P. and those that suffered with
them, for bearing their Testimony to Christ in the Saints, which is the last,
the most glorious and highest Dispensation ( as says Sir H. V.) now at the
very Doors; a Truth which many can Witness. He further says, The Lamb will
overcome by Sufferings; and that the first sign of Christ's second Coming, is
distress of Nations; that the Potsherds of the Earth dashing one against the
other, will lmake way for Christ's Reign; in which War, none but Hypocrites and
Apostates (which make the outward Court) will suffer, whilst God's People will
be preserved in Peace and Safety. Sir H. V. also says, The Holy City and
Temple measured, are Saints in Power: That the Woman clothed with the Sun, is
Christ's dead Body raised. Vrim and Thummim, (he says) are the two great
Lights, Righteousness and Truth, when they meet in our Hearts. It is (he says)
a fickle and foolish Religion, that depends on the Magistrates Power, either to
set up or pull down. That Believers Rewards in Sufferings, is inward Peace and
Joy in a serene quiet Mind. He was also in his day a great Prophet, (he says)
Israel's Captivity is near an end, at which time the Sons of God shall be made
manifest; so soon as that is come, there will need little other help than the
Grave it self to cast them forth, as the Womb does the Fruit; then shall you
know the Lord is God when he has opened and brought you up out of your Graves;
such will the Lord own visibly for his People, by putting his wonderful Spirit
in them, and then will God's Indignation be poured out upon his Enemies. That
the Nation that has kept the Seed of God in Bondage, himself God will judge
more signally than he did Pharaoh and the Egyptians; in this day shall the
Tabernacle of God in Men be visible. He also says, Doubtless great and
precious Promises are to be accomplished in and upon Believers here on Earth,
to the making of Christ admired in them. That this dark Night and black Shade,
that God has drawn over his work in the midst of us, may be the Ground Color
to some beautiful Piece that he is now exposing to the light. That surely God
has a glorious Design to carry on in the World, even the building of David's
Throne to all Generations. I know a Day of Deliverance for Sion will come, not
with confused noise of the Warrier, and Garments rouling in Blood, but with
burning and fuel of Fire in the Consciences of Men. Men they may fight against,
but this they can never fight against. The Day approaches wherein God will
decide his Controversy with the World, not by outward Might and Power, but by
the Spirit of the Living God. 'Twas an usual saying with him, Come what would,
every thing was upon the right Wheel, in the wise contrivement of God, for the
accomplishing of his Righteous Designs in the World. And speaking to his
Children, says, Regard not the Reproaches that are fallen on your Father, say,
or do Men what they will, Abraham's Faith will find the Blessing Abraham found.
These, and many more of His, as of Others, I take to be true and faithful
Sayings, meet to be considered by all that wait for, and expect Redemption,
Consolation, and Salvation from the God of Israel. Allelujah.

You will not blame me, that I have enlarged upon the Testimonies of these Holy
Men, that have finished their Course, kept the Faith, and are gone before us
into the Eternal Mansions of Glory; who having quitted their Mortal Fabrics,
are flown into the World of hidden Wonders. The Spirits of these Just Men made
perfect, are now upon you, ye are come up to them, and in the harmonious
Fellowship of that Spirit, (which is now one and the same amongst all the
Sanctified,) I have a few words of my inward Breathings to communicate to your
holy Experiences.

In a deep sense thereof, of my endeared Love toward that Royal Seed that
richly dwells in you, I here salute you, and give you to understand, That my
Soul is firmly knit and united to that Principle of Life in which you stand,
bearing your Testimony for the Truth, before God and Man, amongst a crooked and
perverse Generation; who only dwell upon the outside talks and pretenses to
God, Religion and Christianity, but hate even to Blood and Violence, all those
that are the freeborn Seed of the Promise; whose Faith and Obedience stands
not in the Will, Work, or Wisdom of Man, but in the Power and Spirit of God,
mightily working in their Hearts and Consciences, whereby they are indeed
purified, washed, and cleansed from dead Works to serve the Living God. And so
much the more is my Heart inflamed toward you, when I consider you in
refeference,

First, To the Nature of your present Station.

And secondly, To those great Designs that God has prepared you for.

First, For the Nature of your present Station, I behold you (not as Moah, Jer.
48.11, 12, etc. but) as a People standing in a more inward nearness with God;
than the rest of the formal Tribes of Religious Proselytes in the World; a
People that have bin scattered from all your fleshly Comforts and Confidences
in all those Joys, Hopes, Helps, and Establishments, wherein you have trusted,
below God. You have bin led into the Deeps of God's Wonders, while others have
bin only wading in the shallow Streams of a literal and formal Profession: Unto
you it is given to know those Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, which lie hid
from others in dark and obscure Parables; you know that the Son of God is come,
and has given you an understanding to know him that is True, and that ye are
in Him that is True, which is the very God and Eternal Life. You cannot be
deceived with the tinkling Noises, or glittering Baits of, Lo here, or Lo
there, for the Kingdom of God is within you. In a word, there is nothing below
Spirit, Power, and Substance, that can either crown your longing Expectations,
or reward your holy Breathings after Truth, with a plenary and full
satisfaction. Thus as the Lord's Lillies among Thorns, so do you stand among
the formal Daughters, being preserved in your Station, upheld in your
Principles, and as Beacons flaming with the holy Blazes of a free and universal
Love, serve to enlighten the World into the way of Truth, and direct their Feet
into the Paths of that Peace, Amity, Union, Rest, and Security, to which as yet
they are so much estranged.

And this leads me to the other Consideration of the Great Work, and High
Designs which God has prepared you for. And surely glorious Things are spoken
of thee, O thou City of God! You are not only as Mount Sion, beautiful for
Situation, but also the Joy of the whole Earth, for those humble, gentle,
lovely, and pleasant Aspects, by which you shine upon the whole World, with the
inviting and astonishing Charms of a divinely inspired Love and Affection; You
are a People fitted above all others to be a Blessing to the World; the whole
Creation seems to groan and travel in pain, with a longing and languishing
expectation to be delivered into the glorious Liberty wherein Ye stand. O how
has the form and outside of Religion, (mixed with Carnal Interest) exposed
the World to Extremities of Horror and Confusion, as at this day? What
indignity and reproach does indelebly stick upon the Skirts of Profession and
Christianity, through that fiery and mis-guided Zeal, those Feuds and bitter
Animosities, that Strife and Debate, that Blood and Violence which abounds
amongst those that walk under the glorious Names of Gospel-Professors and True
Christians? How insipid, lifeless, and unsavory is the whole state of formal
Profession grown, who while they cry up a Christ that died for them, and
contend for an Historical Faith of his Death and Sufferings, hoping to be saved
by a bare Imputation of a Righteousness wrought without them, and yet know
nothing all this while of any inward change, or renewedness of Mind and Heart;
but totally ignorant of the inward active and real Righteousness, which should
commend them to the World in an healing, saving, comforting, and refreshing
Spirit? And certainly the higher People are advanced in a literal and carnal
Knowledge of God and Christ, the more rough, bitter, and severe will their
temper be toward all others that differ from them in the least Circumstances
of Religion, it being natural to that Knowledge and Wisdom, to swell and puff up
the Mind in the lofty and high conceits of a self-Righteousness, rather than
sweeten and soften the Spirit in that Charity which edifies. Behold, this is
the distracted Station wherein the Children of Form are truly presented (as
Pharaoh's lean Kine) tearing and devouring each other in this day of Wrath: for
now is the Judgment of this World; and what may quench these Flames? what may
quel these Disorders? what may repair these Breaches, or allay these
Distempers, is the main thing that would be most desirable to know?

We see that neither the Prudence of Princes, nor the Policies of Government
(the Prescriptions of the wisest Reformers, nor the best esteemed Regularities
of the most magnified Authors, and reverend Fathers) are capable to accomplish
this Reconciling Work: Nay, the Sacred Oracle of the Scripture it self, is so
far short of obtaining this blessed End, that all different Parties do
endeavor, with the greatest industry imaginable, (by warping and winding the
Text) not only to suit it to the occasion of their present Differences, but
also thereby to justify their mad, blind, and uncharitable Zeal toward each
other: What Remedy then is left us in this Distress? Is there no Balm in
Gilead? Yes certainly, for although the extent of our Wounds and Breaches are
too wide and great for the most ample Wisdom and Righteousness of Man to heal
and cement, there is yet largeness enough in the eternal and universal Love of
God to accomplish this great Work, and to make his Jerusalem a Praise upon the
Earth: And it is (my dear Brethren) by the ample and large manifestations of
this Universal Love, shed abroad in your Hearts, that this great Design of God
must be accomplished; and oh how the Consideration of this Glorious Work, (in
and by you to be brought forth) does draw out my Spirit toward you. Awake,
awake then, put on thy strength, O Sion, put on thy beautiful Garments, O
Jerusalem, thou Holy City; stand forth thou Virgin Daughter, clothed with the
strength of the Divine Majesty, and proclaim the Glory of your Principles, by
the beauty of your Practices to the World. There is Majesty enough in that Love
which fills and feeds your Souls, to confound the Cruelty of all your Opposers,
to shame and astonish the World into silence and stilness; and of this let us
be confident, that how-ever the overflowing Tides of common Calamities (blown
up by the raging breath of formal and carnal Interests) may swell as a Flood
upon the World, yet no Weapon that is formed against Love (to Truth and
Righteousness) shall prosper; the Heathen may rage, and the People may imagine
a vain Thing: The Kings of the Earth may Plot, Conspire, and take Counsel
together against the Lord, and against his Anointed; yet the Lord has set his
King upon his Holy Hill of Zion, and he shall and does Rule and Reign in the
midst of his Enemies: Let it therefore appear to the World, whose Subjects ye
are, whose Banner ye are under, and what Motto it bears, which is, Glory to God
in the Highest, on: Earth Peace, and good Will toward Men. O how beautiful
will those feet be upon the Mountains, which are shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of Peace; How beautiful are thy Feet with Shoes, O Princes
Daughter? Cant. 7.1. How amiable and pleasant will your Lives and Testimonies
be among Men, when you come forth in the largeness of that Love, Meekness, and
Humility, in Forbearance and Forgiveness, which are the proper Ornaments, and
most natural Instances of a true Gospel-Profession? In the Name of God arise
then, and show your selves (in his strength) to be that in Power and Life,
which the World are only in Pretense and Notion; let it be known by the lively
and active demonstrations of the Spirit of God in you, That greater is He that
is in you, than he that is in the World: Your Principles I am sure are more
noble, extensive, and generous; do but draw them forth, and show them to open
view, and you will be a Blessing in your Generation; The several Tribes and
Languages shall fasten on your Skirts, and say, We will go along with you, for
the Lord is amongst you: Nay, even the Kings of the Nations shall shut their
Mouths at this appearance of God in you, Isa. 52.14, 15. For that which had not
bin told them, they shall see, and that which they had not heard, they shall
consider. (As Pharach said of Joseph, Where is there a Man in whom the Spirit
of God is? Genesis 41.38, etc.) Finally, my Brethren, Be strong in the Lord, and
in the Power of his Might; put on the whole Armor of God, for your Work and
your Warfare requires it; and ye know that nothing below that can enable you to
finish this your Testimony: Ye wrestle not against Flesh and Blood; neither are
the Weapons of your Warfare Carnal, but mighty through God, to subdue every
high Thought, and vain Imagination. All those Principalities and Powers, and
those spiritual Wickednesses in high Places, which have captivated the Royal
Seed of the Promise, and exalted themselves against the free Breathings of the
Spirit; These (my dear Friends) are the powerful Enemies, over which ye must be
more than Conquerors through him that loves you; and when in the strength of
this Love you have subdued the World, calmed and quieted that wild and furious
Spirit of Wrath that is let loose among Men, and prepared the way for the
Kingdom of God, and of his Christ, to be established in us, and amongst us;
what remains, but that in a holy denial of your Selves and Services, (your
Gifts and Graces, your Love and Enlargements, your Faith and Patience, your
Sufferings and Perseverances) you offer up the Son of the Promise, and cast
down these your Crowns at the feet of Him that sits upon the Throne, joining in
Consort with the Celestial Quire of Saints and Angels in the Sacred Hymns of
Divine Praises, and Allelujahs; Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power, to
the Lord our God, (Rev. 19.1, to 10.) Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto
thy Name, be the glory of all thy wondrous Works. Sing Zion, shout O ye
Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem. Judges 5.1, to 14. Awake Deborah, awake,
awake, sing to the Lord; Arise Barak, take the Harps of God in your hands, ye
Heavenly Victors; and in your most strenuous Notes, sing aloud with Moses and
the Lamb upon your Crystal fiery Floods: Rev. 15.2, 3, 4. Great and mavelous
are thy Works, Lord God Almighty; Just and true are thy Ways, thou King of
Saints, who will not fear thee, O God, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art
Holy; all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy Judgments are
made manifest. And again, Allelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns, and
is manifest to be All in All, all Unity in all Variety. Thus to ascribe to God
All in all, and to the Creature-Nothing, is the top-Stone of God's Building, to
which we cry, Grace, Grace. Allelujah. For His is the Kingdom, the Power and
the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. Allelujah.

THE END.

